Kiyohiko G Nishimura: Macro-prudential policy framework from an Asian 
perspective 
Speech by Mr Kiyohiko G Nishimura, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the ADBI 
FSA Conference, Tokyo, 30 September 2011. 
Charts to the above speech can be found on the Bank of Japan website. 
 Introduction 
 
In  this  presentation,  I  would  like  to  take  up  several  key  issues  relating  to 
macroeconomic  policy  frameworks  explicitly  taking  account  of  financial markets,  or  macro-
prudential  policies,  especially  from  an  Asian  perspective.  In  particular,  I  ask  following  two 
questions: (1) What methods should we employ to detect intolerable accumulation of risks in 
the  financial  system?  and,  (2)  How  should  we  maintain  financial  stability  in  the  short  run, 
while  improving  efficiency  in  credit  intermediation  functions  to  support  long-term  economic 
growth?  
 
I  will  be  seeking  practical  “best  practice”  answers  to  these  questions,  rather  than 
“optimum solutions” based on a particular theory.1 This practical and somewhat atheoretical 
approach  is  warranted  since  we  are  still  very  much  short  of  having  a  satisfactory 
macroeconomic theory that deals adequately with complex and sometimes violent financial 
markets,  although  there  has  emerged  a  sizable  literature  on  the  relationship  between 
macroeconomic activity and financial markets. 
 
Before trying to answer these inherently difficult questions, it is worth looking back to 
the evolution of the current financial crisis in the United States and Europe, and of that in 
Japan two decades ago. Although much attention has been focused on financial excess as 
typified  by  excessive  leveraging  in  financial  institutions,  I  would  like  to  emphasize  the 
importance of underlying changes in fundamentals, especially demographic factors such as 
population ageing. The latter has particularly important implications for the future in Asia. The 
basic  message  here  is  that  many  of  Asia’s  growing  economies  may  face  problems  in  the 
near future similar to those of developed countries, and it is thus of the utmost importance to 
implement appropriate macro-prudential policy now. 
Section 1. Asia in perspective: financial crisis, its aftermath and fundamentals 
Financial crisis and fundamentals: demographic factors 
 
Although three years have passed since the so-called Lehman Shock, we are still in 
the  process  of  soul-searching;  pursuing  a  better  understanding  of  its  causes  and  the 
appropriate  policy  response  to  it.  Since  Japan  and  a  number  of  Asian  economies  already 
experienced  their  own  financial  crises  in  the  1990s,  we  Asians  may  be  in  a  slightly  better 
position  to  compare  them  and  draw  the  necessary  lessons.  Indeed,  there  are  many 
similarities between the recent crisis in the United States and the eurozone on the one hand, 
and  Japan’s  financial  crisis  since  the  1990s  on  the  other.  In  the  case  of  both  the  US-
                                                 
1  Clark and Large (2011) present ten questions in framing appropriate macro-prudential policy, crystallizing its 
fundamental  and  practical  problems.  In  this  speech,  I  touch  on  only  a  few  of  them,  which  I  think  are  most 
relevant from the Asian perspective. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
eurozone and the “Bubble Era” in Japan, risks were accumulated during the period of high 
growth and low inflation.2 Risks were accumulated particularly in real-estate related sectors.  
 
The recent literature on financial crises has focused mostly on explaining how bubbles 
develop and influence economic activity through leveraging in financial markets.3 Here the 
measures of economy-wide financial activity, such as deviation from the long-run trend of the 
credit-to-GDP  ratio,  are  considered  to  be  informative  and  possible  guides  for  macro-
prudential policy. 
However,  I  would  like  to  emphasize  another  important  background  factor,  that  is, 
 
demographic change in the form of population ageing. Indeed, the “bubble and burst” and 
subsequent  financial  crisis  seemed  to  coincide  roughly  with  the  turning-point  of  population 
pyramids in Japan, the United States, and Europe. Let me show you some telling figures on 
the inverse dependency ratio, which indicates how many people of working age it takes to 
provide for one dependent person.4 The Japanese ratio peaked around 1990, and it was in 
the very next year, 1991, that the Japanese Bubble peaked. The peak of the US ratio was 
between 2005 and 2010, and the peak of the US subprime bubble was 2007 (Fig. 1). The 
economically  troubled  countries  of  the  eurozone  have  a  similar  pattern  to  Japan  and  the 
United  States.  The  ratios  for  Ireland  and  Spain  have  almost  the  same  time  profile;  they 
peaked around 2005, which corresponds to the peak of their property bubbles (Fig. 2). The 
ratio for Greece and Portugal peaked around 2000. The significant point for us here is that 
the financial crisis we have experienced has coincided closely with the turning point in these 
demographic dynamics. 
Asset price bubbles: dancing over the tide of fundamentals 
 
The  “life-cycle”  theory,  or  more  precisely  speaking,  overlapping  generation  models 
suggest that demographic change is one of the most forceful drivers of asset prices. After all, 
assets are a means of saving for the young and dissaving for the old, and thus the numbers 
of the young and the old determine the demand and supply for these assets.5 
 
The recent history of crisis seems to confirm this line of reasoning. In Figure 3, the real 
land  price  in  Japan  (national  average,  for  all  purposes)  is  juxtaposed  with  the  country’s 
inverse  dependency  ratio  from  1955  to  date.  This  figure  shows,  firstly,  that  the  relative 
abundance  of  young  people  coincided  with  sharply  higher  property  prices.  Secondly,  in 
contrast, the relative abundance of old people seems to be leading to lower property prices. 
In the United States also, an increasing reverse dependency ratio coincided with the property 
bubble  (Fig.  4).  After  the  bubble  burst  in  2007,  property  prices  seem  to  have  followed  the 
long run movement of the inverse dependency ratio, although it would be premature to draw 
any conclusions from this at the moment. We see a similar pattern in the Irish and Spanish 
experience (Figs. 5 and 6).  
                                                 
2  The period is known as the “Great Moderation” in the US case. 
3  European Central Bank (2010) and Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2011) provide a concise survey 
of  models  with  macro-financial  linkage  proliferating  recently  in  this  literature.  Bianchi  (2010),  Jeanne  and 
Korinek (2010a, 2010b), and Stein (2011) focus on the credit externalities and pave the way for exploring the 
effects  of  macro-prudential  measures.  In  particular,  Bianchi  (2010)  and  Jeanne  and  Korinek  (2010b)  study 
financial crises in open economies, aiming to provide macro-prudential remedial measures. However, there is 
unfortunately relatively little from an Asian perspective. Exceptions include Hattori et al (2010), and Hahm et al 
(2011). 
I  take  these  figures  from  Nishimura  (2011b),  which  contains  more  figures  about  other  European  countries, 
both core and periphery. 
4 
5  Empirical evidence suggests strongly that this is the case. See Takáts (2010) for property prices, and Liu and 
Spiegel (2011) for equity prices. The Economist (2011) carries a readable account of this issue. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
I am not suggesting that this demographic factor is the sole cause of the asset bubbles 
 
that led to the crisis. There may be other factors, as for example in the case of Greece and 
Portugal, who experienced “bubbles” in their public sectors rather than in asset prices, but 
still faced the crisis. Likewise, there are other countries that underwent similar demographic 
changes, and yet did not fall into crisis. I only want to point out that a favorable demographic 
background (increasing inverse dependency ratio) might be fertile ground for the excessive 
optimism6 that led economic agents in many countries to take a highly leveraged position to 
boost  their  returns.  In  other  words,  asset  bubbles  might  dance  over  the  long-run  tide  of 
demographic  change.7  By  the  same  token,  the  eventual  sharp  reversal  of  the  ratio  made 
resolution of accumulated financial excesses particularly difficult, resulting in the prolonged, 
severe balance-sheet adjustment that followed the crisis, and which is still under way. 
Aftermath: severe balance sheet adjustment under population ageing 
 
In  order  to  determine  the  effect  of  balance  sheet  adjustments  after  the  bursting  of  a 
bubble,  let  me  first  clarify  who  leveraged  during  the  bubble  periods.  In  Japan,  it  was  the 
corporate  sector,  whose  loans-to-GDP  ratio  increased  by  29  percentage  points  in  the  ten 
years  before  the  bubble  burst  in  1991.  In  the  United  States,  it  was  the  household  sector, 
whose housing loans-to-disposable income ratio jumped by 39 percentage points in the ten 
years  before  the  bubble  burst  in  2007.  These  sectors  were  interest-sensitive,  and  thus 
constituted the “transmission gears” of the ordinary monetary transmission mechanism in the 
periods before the bubbles burst. However, after the bubbles burst, these leveraged sectors 
became insensitive to policy rate reduction, because of the acute balance sheet adjustments. 
This  led  to  a  breakdown  in  the  ordinary  monetary  transmission  mechanism.  It  should  be 
noted here that declining property prices greatly aggravated the balance sheet adjustments 
of Japanese corporations and US households.8 
 
In looking to the future, I would like to emphasize that the balance sheet adjustments 
after the bubbles burst in Japan, the U.S. and the eurozone, whether private or public, must 
be carried out, at a time when the population is ageing. This acute balance sheet adjustment 
is unprecedented in our modern history of economic growth. 
Where does Asia stand? 
 
Asian economies and financial systems weathered the recent financial crisis relatively 
well. Their recovery since 2009 has been markedly rapid, and emerging Asia is now a growth 
engine of the global economy. The fiscal situation of emerging Asia is also far more favorable 
than  that  of  many  developed  countries.  Furthermore,  with  the  exception  of  Japan,  Asian 
economies have not yet faced serious problems with population ageing. 
 
Nonetheless, I would like to point out future potential issues and the absolute necessity 
of  a  prudent  approach  now.  Let  me  draw  your  attention  to  the  inverse  dependency  ratio 
figures  for  China  (Fig.  7)  juxtaposed  with  those  for  Japan  and  the  United  States.  The 
Chinese ratio seems still to be rising rapidly, but will peak a bit later than in Euro-American 
countries. The peak will be around 2010–15, after which it will decline as rapidly as it is now 
                                                 
6  Nishimura  and  Ozaki  (2006,  2011)  provide  decision-theoretic  foundation  of  excessive  optimism  and 
pessimism,  showing  that  seemingly-irrational  excessive  optimism  and  pessimism  can  be  analyzed  in  the 
framework of rationality. See also Bracha and Brown (2010). 
7  One possibility is to incorporate the “bubble”, as formulated in Martin and Ventura (2010), into the  detailed 
overlapping generation framework of Braun et al (2009) extended to the multi-country framework, to calibrate 
the  bubble-bust  and  subsequent  balance  sheet  problems  both  national  and  international  perspective.  See 
also, Aoki and Nikolov (2011). 
8  See Nishimura (2011a) for more detail of this balance sheet adjustment. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
rising. The inverse dependency ratios of many other Asian countries have a quite similar time 
profile to that of China, and some are even more pronounced (Fig. 8). 
Section 2. Macro-prudential policy – two “dos” and one “don’t” 
 
The  recent  financial  crisis,  as  well  as  the  Great  Moderation  leading  up  to  the  crisis, 
brought  to  bitter  recognition  the  gap  between  our  macroeconomic  and  micro-prudential 
policies. Thus, macro-prudential policy has come into the spotlight as something that would 
fill this gap. However, we are still very much short of having a satisfactory macroeconomic 
theory  that  deals  adequately  with  complex  and  sometimes  violent  financial  markets. 
Consequently,  the  very  definition  of  macro-prudential  policy  remains  elusive,  even  three 
years  after  the  crisis.  How  are  we  to  draw  the  lines  between  macroeconomic,  macro-
prudential and micro-prudential policies? What indicators are useful in detecting risks? What 
should be the tools of macro-prudential policy? Should capital controls also be considered as 
a  part  of  macro-prudential  policy  tools?  How  are  we  to  achieve  the  appropriate  burden-
sharing among monetary, macro-prudential and micro-prudential policies in order to maintain 
financial stability? Since we do not yet have a satisfactory theory to give clear-cut answers to 
these  questions,  I  will  take  a  more  pragmatic  approach  and  propose  two  “dos”  and  one 
“don’t” for prospective macro-prudential policies.  
2.1. “Do” detect risks in advance – information and intelligence 
 
In order to avoid another crisis and subsequent stagnation, it is critically important for 
policymakers  to  detect  undue  risk  accumulation.  It  should  be  noted  that  information 
propagation always plays a critical role in the inception and transmission of systemic crisis. 
Thus, “information” and “intelligence”, or more precisely speaking, market intelligence, is of 
the utmost importance both for risk detection and for crisis management. Here both bottom-
up and top-down approaches are absolutely necessary. 
Bottom-up information: market intelligence 
 
The  history  of  financial  crises  provides  clear  evidence  that  systemic  crisis  is  often 
ignited  by  the  bankruptcy  not  of  large  firms,  but  of  relatively  small  firms  such  as  Sanyo 
Securities in Japan (1997) and Northern Rock in the United Kingdom (2007) (Fig. 9). This 
reveals  one  crucial  aspect  of  financial  intermediation,  that  is,  information.  Since  financial 
transactions  are  a  collection  of  information  flows,  the  failure  of  a  small  financial  institution 
may  cause  an  immediate  market-wide  liquidity  crisis  or  a  “run”,  if  the  failure  gives  rise  to 
widespread fear or uncertainty in the market.  
 
Thus, both in terms of risk detection and crisis prevention, market intelligence obtained 
through face-to-face contacts and dialogue with market participants is critically important. In 
this  regard,  most  Asian  central  banks  can  boast  of  their  grip  on  individual  institutions’ 
activities and micro information in the market. Nonetheless, the increased sophistication and 
innovation  of  financial  services  makes  risk  detection  increasingly  difficult.  In  some  cases, 
financial  institutions  themselves  do  not  seem  fully  aware  of  the  risks  associated  with  their 
investments and transactions, especially those related to structured products and derivatives. 
Any  complacency  in  terms  of  risk  detection  could  itself  be  another  source  of  risk,  and 
authorities  should  encourage  market  participants  to  continuously  improve  their  risk 
management  skills.  Painstaking  information  gathering,  continuous  updating  and  open-
minded risk assessment are all about market intelligence. 
 
In this regard, macro-prudential measures such as information exchange through the 
publication of the Financial System [Stability] Report (FSR) have the potential to provide new 
ways  of  utilizing  information  and  market  intelligence.  Macro-prudential  policies  can  be 
effective  only  if  they  facilitate  dialogue  and  coordination  between  market  participants  and 
authorities, and also between macro- and micro-policies.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Top-down information: indicators for detecting macro risks and excesses 
 
I would therefore like to turn now to macro risks and excesses and the indicators used 
to detect them. In most cases of “bubble and burst”, the large gyrations of financial markets 
and the economy are driven by psychological swings: Economic entities are likely to become 
excessively  optimistic  in  bubble  periods,  and  excessively  pessimistic  when  those  bubbles 
burst.  In  economic  boom  periods,  such  as  Japan’s  “Bubble  Era”  and  during  the  “Great 
Moderation”,  the  co-existence  of  high  growth  and  low  inflation  may  lead  to  the  illusion  of 
productivity  growth  and  an  expectation  of  continued  low  interest  rates.  Such  optimism  is 
likely  to  induce  a  euphoric  view  of  asset  prices  and  an  under-estimation  of  risks.  One  the 
other  hand,  in  a  prolonged  downturn,  economic  entities  become  excessively  pessimistic, 
leading  to  further  deterioration  of  the  economy,  and  thus  their  pessimism  turns  to  be  self-
fulfilling. In order to avoid excessive accumulation of these risks, it is critically important to 
detect  any  such  extreme  optimism  or  pessimism  behind  the  developments  indicated  by 
various financial data. 
 
For  such  purposes,  we  should  carefully  avoid  becoming  a  hostage  to  any  particular 
form of reasoning or theory. Although some indicators such as credit-to-GDP ratio and the 
deviation  of  real  estate  prices  from  the  trends  may  provide  useful  information,  we  do  not 
have any decisive indicators in this respect. The theory I have perused earlier is valuable in 
explaining what has happened before, but is not so helpful in providing an indication of what 
will  happen  in  the  future.  Every  crisis  may  take  a  different  form.  Excessive  reliance  on 
specific  indicators  might  cause  us  to  miss  important  risks  or  misidentify  nonexistent  risks. 
Moreover,  we  should  take  into  account  a  variant  of  Goodhart’s  law:9  If  a  central  bank 
announces its intention to focus on specific indicators in order to take action to discourage 
risk-taking,  market  participants  might  try  to  take  risks  without  influencing  these  indicators, 
and  these  indicators  might  eventually  lose  their  information  value.  This  problem  would  be 
further intensified if we focused on a narrower range of indicators. 
Thus,  it  would  be  wise  for  policymakers  to  monitor  impartially  a  variety  of  indicators. 
 
Moreover, we need to make full use of market intelligence in order to interpret various data 
comprehensively, since price data themselves may not indicate whether they are in line with 
fundamentals or driven by euphoria. 
Bank of Japan’s framework for detecting risks 
 
Let me now explain the various efforts made by the Bank of Japan in this field. The 
Bank  executes  both  on-site  examinations  and  off-site  daily  monitoring  of  a  wide  range  of 
financial institutions, including securities firms. Through such activities, the Bank, making full 
use  of  market  intelligence,  tries  to  identify  any  signs  of  risk  accumulation.  The  Bank  also 
maintains  close  dialogue  with  market  participants  such  as  the  counterparties  of  market 
operations.  
 
Moreover, the Bank of Japan makes a regular comprehensive risk assessment of the 
overall financial system, analyzing both macro data and micro information, and publishes its 
assessment on financial stability in its semi-annual “Financial System Report”. Moreover, the 
Bank’s  assessments  of  the  risks  in  the  financial  system  are  useful  inputs  to  the  decision-
making of monetary policy in the “Two Perspectives Framework” (discussed later).  
 
The  Bank  of  Japan  is  making  efforts  also  in  terms  of  exploiting  wide-ranging  data, 
macro stress-testing and establishing econometric models incorporating the financial sector, 
which  is  in  line  with  the  efforts  of  other  central  banks.  In  addition,  two  Bank  of  Japan 
economists,  Koichiro  Kamada  and  Kentaro  Nasu,  have  recently  devised  an  innovative 
                                                 
9  See Goodhart (1975) for the original account, and also Goodhart and Tsomocos (2011) for its most recent 
application. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
system  of  Financial  Cycle  Indexes  (FCIXs),  which  are  designed  to  be  early  warning 
indicators.10 These FCIXs are not based on a particular theory, but on the age-old analytic 
tradition  of  economic  trends  and  cycles.  Although  the  jury  is  still  out,  the  performance  of 
FCIXs  seems  to  be  promising:  they  predicted  Japan’s  financial  crisis,  and  warned  of  the 
recent financial crisis about a year in advance (Fig. 10). 
 
From  my  viewpoint,  FCIXs  would  be  useful  tools  for  macro-prudential  policies,  since 
they could provide early warning signals of excessive optimism or pessimism. Indeed, one of 
the most difficult challenges for macro-prudential policy is how to spot excessive optimism or 
pessimism, especially because we do not yet have a credible theoretical framework that can 
be applied for such purposes. In this regard, the FCIX approach may be atheoretical in the 
sense that it does not depend on a particular economic theory, but this is an advantage in 
light of the unsatisfactory state of theory. Owing to such strengths as indicators, FCIXs would 
contribute  to  effective  monitoring  of  the  financial  system  as  a  whole  from  the  macro-
prudential perspective. 
2.2. “Do” avoid pro-cyclicality 
I would now like to refer to another aspect of macro-prudential policy; that is, macro-
Lean against the wind of financial risks: coordination of monetary and macro-
prudential policy 
 
prudential policy as a means to counter procyclicality. 
 
After  detecting  undue  risk  accumulation,  policymakers  would  be  required  to  check 
further  accumulation  of  risks  and  to  discourage  risk-taking.  On  the  other  hand,  if 
policymakers find that market participants have become excessively risk-averse, they would 
be called upon to restore confidence in the market. The basic principles are simple: Don’t be 
so lenient when things are booming, and don’t be so restrictive when things turn sour. Here, 
coordination of monetary and macro-prudential policy is necessary, and very effective. 
 
In this regard, the Bank of Japan is making use of a “Two Perspectives Framework” in 
its  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  The  framework  involves  a  two-step  policy  consideration: 
policy should be guided by the most probable scenario for the future course of the economy 
(first perspective), but at the same time it should incorporate “remote risk factors” that might 
affect the economy adversely if they happen to materialize, even though they may not be in 
the main scenario (second perspective).11 The latter clearly includes systemic financial risks. 
Thus,  when  it  contemplates  monetary  policy,  the  Bank  examines  a  broad  range  of 
information, not only conventional indicators such as inflation, but also financial information 
and market intelligence about risk accumulation. The Bank assesses such information in a 
comprehensive manner, and communicates to the public its assessment of these tail risks.  
 
Needless  to  say,  there  can  be  other  styles  of  communication,  such  as  conveying 
central  banks’  risk  assessment  in  terms  of  changes  in  their  inflation  forecasts  over  a  long 
horizon  within  their  inflation-targeting  frameworks.  There  is  no  clear-cut  answer  as  to  the 
most suitable communication strategy, since the appropriate style of communication depends 
upon the economic and financial structure of the particular jurisdiction. However, there is an 
apparent  need  for  financial  risk  assessment  and  its  communication  to  the  general  public, 
beyond conventional inflation assessment. 
                                                 
10  See the Appendix for a detailed explanation of FCIXs. 
11  See Nishimura (2007) for clarification. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
New regulatory framework and pro-cyclicality issues 
 
Let  me  now  take  up  the  issue  of  the  new  regulatory  framework  and  pro-cyclicality. 
Indeed, one of the regular agenda items of recent international debates is how to address 
pro-cyclicality in financial regulation. The Basel Committee has tried to address this issue in 
Basel III, which incorporates a “capital conservation buffer” and “counter-cyclical buffer”. 
 
Here  implementation  is  the  key.  Should  banks  conceive  of  the  capital  conservation 
buffer as a part of the minimum capital requirement and maintain the buffer regardless of the 
phase of the cycle, the introduction of the buffer might result in the banking sector holding 
more capital than is optimal from the inter-temporal viewpoint.12 In order for Basel III to be an 
optimal regulatory framework, not only from a static but also a dynamic perspective, it should 
be  implemented  appropriately  and  accompanied  by  adequate  supervision.  This  is  all  the 
more true for the counter-cyclical capital buffer. 
 
In a similar vein, we should be aware of the possible side-effects of a newly-introduced 
Systemically  Important  Financial  Institutions  (SIFI)  framework.  Capital  surcharges  for 
“additional loss absorbency” in the SIFI framework may lead to the risk that SIFIs keep more 
capital  than  optimal  on  an  inter-temporal  basis,  which  may  cause  more  acute  credit 
contraction in the midst of a recession. Moreover, there is the confounding factor of possible 
deposit  concentration  in  SIFIs.  In  the  midst  of  Japan’s  financial  crisis,  we  experienced  a 
substantial shift of deposits from small banks to money center banks. If a SIFI framework and 
the capital surcharge make people believe that SIFIs are much safer than non-SIFIs, a SIFI 
framework  might  even  accelerate  the  shift  of  deposits  in  a  stressed  situation,  but  the 
surcharge might discourage SIFIs from fully implementing the credit intermediation functions 
formerly performed by non-SIFIs. Thus, we should carefully examine whether or not newly-
introduced regulatory frameworks will actually counter procyclicality as expected. 
2.3. “Don’t” harm long-term efficiency 
That  having  been  said,  let  me  elaborate  one  “don’t”  of  macro-prudential  policy, 
A new excuse for an old addiction? 
 
especially from a long-term perspective. 
 
Since there is no clear definition of macro-prudential policies or of their policy tools, any 
policy  tool  could  be  justified  as  a  part  of  that  policy.  Thus,  we  have  to  be  careful  of  the 
danger of making macro-prudential policy “a new excuse for an old addiction”, which often 
leads  to  long-term  inefficiency.  Indeed,  most  of  the  tools  often  referred  to  as  “macro-
prudential  policy  tools”,  such  as  ceilings  on  loan-to-value  (LTV)  and  debt-to-income  (DTI) 
ratios in property markets and capital controls in foreign exchange markets, cannot be free 
from  the  risk  of  distorting  asset  allocation  that  leads  to  inefficiency  in  the  long  run.  Thus, 
policymakers  should  be  required  to  examine  carefully  the  consequences  of  each  macro-
prudential policy action from the long-run perspective. Long run consequences often develop 
in a relatively short period of time, when addiction continues. 
SIFI framework and long-term efficiency 
 
It  is  important  to  design  the  SIFI  framework  in  a  manner  compatible  with  incentives. 
One of the root causes of the recent crisis was excessive risk-taking. If the SIFI framework 
encourages  SIFIs  to  pursue  further  the  yield-searching  originate-to-distribute  model  due  to 
                                                 
12  This  is  exactly  the  reason  Basel  III  differentiates  the  capital  conservation  buffer  from  the  minimum  capital 
requirement. The capital conservation buffer and accompanying regulations such as restraining dividends are 
designed to be utilized in a counter-cyclical way. Otherwise, there is no rationale to distinguish between the 
capital conservation buffer and the minimum capital requirement. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
the  need  to  downsize  balance  sheets  while  maintaining  their  return  on  equity,  the  effect 
might rather be to destabilize the financial system. In this regard, I would like to reiterate that 
the  SIFI  framework  should  be  a  comprehensive  package  of  effective  regulation  and 
supervision sustainable in the long run.  
 
Furthermore,  the  SIFI  regulation  will  be  counter-productive  if  it  hinders  SIFIs’  core 
financial intermediation. Since the demand for financial services is largely determined by the 
needs  of  the  real  economy,  any  additional  regulation  imposed  on  SIFIs  will  reduce  their 
financial functions to some extent, or the financial intermediation performed by SIFIs will be 
replaced  by  similar  services  offered  by  other  entities.  Thus,  should  there  be  a  significant 
difference between the regulatory burden imposed on SIFIs and that on non-SIFIs, financial 
transactions might shift to less regulated entities and the risk underlying the financial system 
as a whole might heighten. “Shadow banking” is a typical problem of this kind. 
 
Asia should be well aware of these problems. First, emerging Asia is now at the center 
of global economic growth. To sustain such growth, the need for fund intermediation is also 
likely to increase. Hence, should new financial regulations hinder the core financial function 
at  a  global  level,  the  negative  impact  on  the  real  economy  could  be  all  the  more  serious. 
Second,  some  emerging  Asian  economies,  where  asset  price  hikes  threaten  to  create 
bubbles,  have  already  adopted  macro-prudential  tools  such  as  lowering  the  LTV  and  DTI 
ratios of real estate-related loans. Accordingly, these countries should examine the costs and 
benefits  of  their  macro-prudential  policy  actions,  and  devise  appropriate  and  timely  exit 
policies to avoid long-term inefficiency. 
Section 3. Tail risks and false sense of security of macro-prudential measures 
 
The recent financial crisis (the “financial tsunami”), and the tragic great earthquake in 
Northern Japan (with its gigantic real tsunami), showed vividly that tail risks may materialize 
in our life time, and thus they are not really tail risks anymore. Policy frameworks anticipating 
only “ordinary” shocks within usual economic cycles may not be very effective in mitigating 
the impact of such tail events when they actually materialize. The recent financial crisis in 
particular  has  forced  policymakers  to  review  their  own  policy  frameworks  and  to  examine 
how they could identify tail risks and deal with tail events. 
 
Nonetheless, at this juncture we do not have fully reliable indicators for detecting tail 
risks nor panaceas against the maladies that accompany these tail events. We have to bear 
in  mind  that,  no  matter  how  intellectually-inspiring  policy  makers  may  find  this  new  tool, 
macro-prudential policy can never be a substitute for appropriate macroeconomic policy or 
for  effective  financial  supervision.  Japan’s  experience  of  its  bubble  economy  is  a  good 
example.  Japan  learned  just  how  difficult  it  is  to  control  asset  prices  solely  with  macro-
prudential tools such as an administrative ceiling on bank loans to the real estate sector.13 
 
Thus, in detecting tail risks and tackling tail events, we have to avoid any complacency 
or false sense of security in our macro-prudential policy framework. If we mistakenly believe 
that we could discover excessive risk accumulation through observing specific indicators, or 
that macro-prudential policies could be mightily effective in achieving financial stability, such 
complacency could itself become another source of instability. 
 
Let me illustrate the importance of avoiding a false sense of security, by telling you the 
story of the world’s deepest tsunami breakwater at Kamaishi port in northern Japan (Fig. 11). 
At 1,960 meters long and 63 meters deep, it was celebrated as the deepest breakwater in 
the  world  by  Guinness  World  Records  when  it  was  completed  in  March  2009.  Exactly 
                                                 
13  I explained the inadequacy of macro-prudential policy in Japan in Nishimura (2011c). 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
two years  later,  it  was  shattered  by  the  force  of  a  tsunami  equivalent  to  the  impact  of 
250 Jumbo jets flying at 1,000km/h; the very apotheosis of a real tail event. 
 
With hindsight, we cannot deny that this seemingly indestructible tsunami breakwater, 
and other facilities to ward off possible tsunami threats, gave us a sense of security. It might 
lead us to underestimate the magnitude of the tail risk event of tsunamis and thus to ignore 
the antique stone inscriptions warning of the devastation of tsunamis (Fig. 12). Hundreds of 
these so-called tsunami stones, some more than six centuries old, dot the coast of Japan. 
We now know the true cost of relying on this false sense of security. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
Appendix: the financial cycle indexes 
 
The  Financial  Cycle  Indexes  (FCIXs)  developed  by  Kamada  and  Nasu  (2011),  are 
used to monitor financial stability from the macro-prudential perspective. They are designed 
specifically  as  an  alternative  to  the  early  warning  indicator  introduced  by  Kaminsky  and 
Reinhart (1999).  
 
Kamada and Nasu focus on the Juglar cycle – a cycle with a duration of 7 to 11 years – 
included  in financial  time  series,  according  to  the  result  of  analyzing  the  data  compiled  by 
Laeven and Valencia (2010). The Juglar cycle is extracted from the original time series by 
the  HP-filter-based  band  pass  filter,14  which  consists  of  two  HP  filters  with  different 
smoothness parameters, specifically 
 as defined below:  
 and 
   to extract cycles lasting longer than 7 years;  
 to extract cycles lasting longer than 11 years.  
In both of the above, 
 is the parameter used to adjust the formulae for the frequency 
 
of an original time series. The Juglar cycle lasting 7 to 11 years is given by the difference 
between the two HP trends obtained above.  
 
 
The two financial crises are used to categorize data into leading and lagging indicators.  
(a) January 1990: the triple sell-off in the yen, equity, and bond markets, which is 
considered the beginning of the bursting of the asset-price bubble; and 
(b)  November  1997:  the  bankruptcy  of  Sanyo  Securities,  which  is  considered  the 
start of a series of financial institution bankruptcies 
  
Data  is  called  a  leading  indicator  if  the  Juglar  cycle  extracted  turns  down  before  the 
above two crises, or a lagging indicator if the extracted Juglar cycle turns down after the two 
crises.  
 
indexes.  Kamada  and  Nasu  propose 
three different types of index: type D, C, and B. Here, we explain the type-D leading FCIX, 
which is a diffusion index and constructed as follows:  
FCIXs  comprise 
leading  and 
lagging 
   denotes the Juglar cycle extracted from a leading indicator; 
 its first difference; 
where 
the  number  of  leading  indicators;  and 
positive and –1 if 
  the  index  function,  which  takes  on  +1  if 
 is negative. The type-D lagging FCIX is obtained in a similar fashion.  
 
  is 
                                                 
14  The OECD (2008) has recently adopted the HP-based band pass filter in place of the phase average trend 
(PAT) method to construct its composite leading indicators. The PAT is a traditional method of trend detection 
originally developed by the NBER and is calculated as follows: Deviations from a 75-month centered moving 
average are first calculated; then, the obtained series is divided into expansion and contraction phases and 
the  average  is  calculated  for  each  phase;  a  three-phase  centered  moving  average  is  calculated  and  these 
averages are interpolated. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
FCIXs may not be very sensitive to a revival of financial activity, because they are designed 
to detect signs of financial crisis. As the father of business cycle analysis, Arthur Spiethoff, 
pointed out, the timing of recoveries is often ambiguous, compared with that of crises.  
 
The  Japanese  FCIXs  are  constructed  only  from  monthly,  quarterly,  and  semi-annual 
financial  data  that  can  be  traced  back  at  least  to  the  mid-1980s.  Kamada  and  Nasu  have 
found 8 leading indicators: stock prices of the banking, real estate, and construction sectors; 
the lending attitude of financial institutions; the financial positions of firms; current profit levels 
of firms; housing loans; and commodity prices. Some of the leading indicators are affected by 
global shocks and enable the leading FCIX to detect financial crises prevailing in overseas 
economies.  
 
In  contrast,  Kamada  and  Nasu  have  found  11  lagging  indicators:  corporate  debt; 
household debt; lending interest rates; changes in interest rates on loans; the two monetary 
aggregates, M2 and M3; deposits; land prices nationwide and in large urban areas; as well 
as 3 and 9 year government bond yields. The leading indicators cover mainly balance-sheet 
information, so that the lagging FCIX reflects domestic financial conditions.  
 
In the scheme of Kamada and Nasu, a possible financial crisis is warned of when the 
leading  FCIX  falls  to  the  zero  point.  This  simple  scheme  successfully  forecast  the  BNP 
Paribas shock about one year ahead of its occurrence in August 2007. However, this result 
should  be  interpreted  with  caution,  since  the  index  fails  to  take  into  consideration  the 
uncertainty caused by real-time estimation problems.15 
 
Fig.  10  plots  the  predicted  type-D  leading  FCIX.  It  forecasts  three  financial  crises 
successfully,  falling  to  zero  in  May  1988  (19  months  before  the  triple  sell-off),  in 
February 1997  (8  months  before  the  bankruptcy  of  Sanyo  Securities),  and  in  June  2006 
(14 months before the BNP Paribas shock).  
 
In  Fig.10,  the  predicted  leading  FCIX  takes  positive  values  during  November  1999–
December 2001, reflecting the IT bubble. However, no crisis was observed in Japan during 
this period. To avoid a potential false alert, we have to be able to discern such an “economic 
lull”.  The  lagging  index  is  useful  for  this  purpose.  The  lagging  index  (not  shown  here) 
indicates  that  Japan  remained  in  a  contraction  phase  during  November  1999–April  2004, 
suggesting  that  the  revival  of  the  leading  index  during  November  1999–December  2001 
might be indicative of an economic lull.  
 
Some caveats are in order here. First, although FCIXs make it possible to detect signs 
of impending financial crises, they do not enable one to identify the source, type, or size of 
the crisis. Second, FCIXs do not make obvious the optimal policy measures that should be 
undertaken. With the help of FCIXs, policymakers must monitor financial institutions carefully 
and devise policy measures appropriate for the economic and financial conditions. 
                                                 
15  FCIXs  are  not  immune  to  real-time  estimation  problems,  such  as  the  end-of-sample  and  lagged-data-
publication problems,  which  may cause serious delay  in  warning signals. As a solution, Kamada and Nasu 
propose to predict the Juglar cycle’s turning point, where the growth rate falls to zero, by an inflection point, 
where  acceleration  falls  to  zero  in  real  time  data.  This  is  an  application  of  the  well-known  rule  of  thumb: 
acceleration drops before velocity does. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
Reference 
Aoki, K., and K. Nikolov. 2011. “Bubbles, Banks, and Financial Stability”, paper presented at 
the 2011 International Conference, Bank of Japan.  
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. 2011. “The Transmission Channels between the 
Financial and Real Sectors: a Critical Survey of the Literature”, BCBS Working Papers No 18 
Bianchi,  J.,  2010,  “Credit  Externalities:  Macroeconomic  Effects  and  Policy  Implications”, 
American Economic Review, vol. 100(2), pages 398–402. 
Bracha, A., and D. J. Brown. 2010. “Affective Decision-Making: A Theory of Optimism-Bias”, 
Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper no.1759, Yale University. 
Braun, R. A., D. Ikeda and D. H. Joines. 2009. “The Saving Rate in Japan: Why It Has Fallen 
and Why It Will Remain Low”, International Economic Review, 50 (1), 291–321. 
Clark,  A.,  and  A.  Large.  2011.  “Macroprudential  Policy:  Addressing  the  Things  We  Don’t 
Know”, Occasional Paper no.83, Group of Thirty. 
The Economist. 2011. “Economics focus: Bringing down the house”, September 24th 2011, 
page 94. 
European Central Bank. 2010, Financial Stability Review, December 2010. 
Goodhart,  C.A.E.  1975.  “Monetary  Relationships:  A  View  from  Threadneedle  Street”,  in 
Papers in Monetary Economics, Volume 1, Reserve Bank of Australia. 
Goodhart,  C.  A.  E.  and  Tsomocos,  D.  P.  2011.  “The  Role  of  Default  in  Macroeconomics”, 
Discussion Paper Series 2011–E-23, Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies, Bank of 
Japan. 
Martin,  A.,  and  J.  Ventura.  2010.  “Theoretical  Notes  on  Bubbles  and  the  Current  Crisis”, 
Working Paper, Centre de Recerca en Economia Internacional. 
Hattori,  Masazumi,  Hyun  Song  Shin,  and  W.  Takahashi.  2010.  “A  Financial  System 
Perspective  on  Japan’s  Experience  in  the  1980s”,  presented  at  the  2009  Bank  of  Japan 
International Conference, Revised, Princeton University.  
Hahm,  J.-H.,  H.  S.  Shin,  and  K.  Shin.  2011.  “Non-Core  Bank  Liabilities  and  Financial 
Vulnerability”, Princeton University.  
Jeanne,  O.  and  A.  Korinek,  2010a.  “Managing  Credit  Booms  and  Busts:  A  Pigouvian 
Taxation Approach”, NBER Working Papers 16377. 
Jeanne,  O.  and  A.  Korinek,  2010b.  “Excessive  Volatility  in  Capital  Flows:  A  Pigouvian 
Taxation Approach”, American Economic Review, vol. 100(2), pages 403–07. 
Kamada, K. and K. Nasu. 2011. “The Financial Cycle Indexes for Early Warning Exercise”, 
Working Paper11–E-1, Bank of Japan.  
Kaminsky, G. L., and C. M. Reinhart. 1999. “The Twin Crises: The Causes of Banking and 
Balance-Of-Payments Problems”, American Economic Review, Vol. 89, No. 3, pp. 473–500.  
Laeven, L., and F. Valencia. 2010. “Resolution of Banking Crises: The Good, the Bad, and 
the Ugly”, Working Paper, No. WP/10/146, International Monetary Fund. 
Liu, Z. and M. M. Spiegel. 2011. “Boomer Retirement: Headwinds for U.S. Equity Markets?” 
Economic Letter 2011–26, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. 
Nishimura, K. G. 2007. “The New Policy Framework of the Bank of Japan: Central Banking in 
an Uncertain World”, Asian Economic Papers, 6(3), 132–143. 
Nishimura, K. G. 2011a. “This Time May Truly Be Different: Balance Sheet Adjustment under 
Population Ageing”, speech prepared for the Panel “The Future of Monetary Policy” at the 
2011 American Economic Association Annual Meeting in Denver. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Nishimura, K. G. 2011b. “Population Ageing, Macroeconomic Crisis and Policy Challenges”, 
speech  presented  at  the  at  the  75th  Anniversary  Conference  of  Keynes’  General  Theory, 
University of Cambridge.  
Nishimura, K. G. 2011c. “Macroprudential Lessons from the Financial Crises: A Practitioner’s 
View”, forthcoming in M. Kawai and E. Prasad eds., Asian Perspectives on Financial Sector 
Reforms and Regulation, Brookings Institution Press.  
Nishimura,  K.  G.,  and  H.  Ozaki.  2006.  “An  Axiomatic  Approach  to  ε-contamination”, 
Economic Theory, Economic Theory 27, 333–340. 
Nishimura,  K.  G.,  and  H.  Ozaki.  2011.  “ε-exuberance:  An  axiomatic  approach”,  mimeo.,  
Keio University. 
OECD. 2008. OECD System of Composite Leading Indicators. 
Stein, J., 2011, “Monetary Policy as Financial-Stability Regulation”, forthcoming in Quarterly 
Journal of Economics. 
Takáts,  Előd.  2010.  “Ageing  and  Asset  Prices”,  BIS  Working  Papers  No  318,  Bank  for 
International Settlements.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13
