K C Chakrabarty: Post-crisis – the New Normal 
Keynote address by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at 
the Reserve Bank of India-Bank of France Seminar, Paris, 8 November 2011. 
 Assistance provided by Smt T Karunakaran, Shri T Gopinath and Shri A Gaiha in preparation of this address is 
gratefully acknowledged. 
1. 
The  aftermath  of  the  recent  global  financial  crisis  bears  testimony  to  the  fact  that 
impact  of  the  turmoil  is  severe  and  the  recovery  therefrom  is  protracted,  resulting  in 
significant losses in output and employment for an extended period of time. Even two-years 
after the recent crisis, there are lingering apprehensions that global economy in general and 
advanced economies in particular may suffer double-dip recession. 
2. 
There  is  a  perception  that  advanced  countries  performed  better  during  the  crisis 
management  but  fared  rather  poorly  in  the  post-crisis  phase.  In  other  words,  developed 
economies  won  the  war  in  the  crisis  period,  lost  the  peace  in  the  post-crisis  period.  This 
evolving post-crisis scenario has been described as New Normal.  
Mr.  Mohamad  El-Erain,  the  Chief  of  Pacific  Investment  Management  Company 
3. 
(PIMCO)  coined  the  phase  New  Normal  during  early  2009  fundamentally  to  signify  a 
downward  shift  in  potential  growth  of  advanced  economies  because  of  the  impairment  of 
their  financial  sectors  and  capital  destruction.  The  phrase  captured  the  imagination  of  the 
world and began to be used in varied contexts to broadly underscore regime shifts and hard 
transformation,  embodying  the  characteristics  of  De-leveraging,  De-globalization  and  Re-
regulation, the so-called DDR dynamics. 
4. 
I would like to focus on the aspect of Re-Regulation. 
Re-regulation: the New Normal 
I. 
The  banking  regulation  before  the  crisis,  especially  in  advanced  economies,  was  basically 
minimalist in nature; segmented in scope, done in silos displaying undue faith in the market 
discipline,  devoid  of  any  big-picture  awareness  on  the  part  of  the  supervisors.  The  overall 
framework  came  to  be  known  as  light-touch  regulation  focusing  on  individual  banks  and 
institutions, disregarding the interconnectedness among these entities and the systemic risk 
such  interconnectedness  could  pose  to  the  financial  stability.  The  potential  adverse 
implications of fallacy of composition were completely ignored. 
5. 
In  other  words,  while  the  build-up  of  leverage  and  the  under  pricing  of  credit  risk 
were  recognized  in  advance  of  the  turmoil,  their  impact  was  under-appreciated.  Further, 
there  was  no  globally  coordinated  approach  to  assess  the  implications  of  these  systemic 
risks  and  policy  options  to  address  them.  There  was  also  insufficient  recognition  of  the 
interconnectedness of risks within both regulated and unregulated markets. Reflecting these 
lessons of the crisis, the financial regulatory reforms have been underway spearheaded at 
the international level by the G20, aiming, inter alia, at increasing the resilience of the global 
financial  system.  In  the  process,  the  international  best  practice  trajectory  itself  has  shifted 
upwards with the introduction of Basel III and other initiatives. This is what can be called re-
regulation, the New Normal. 
6. 
institutional arrangement for regulation and another pertaining to regulation itself. 
The  New  Normal  broadly  embodies  two  strands:  one  relating  to  paradigm  shift  in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Institutional arrangements 
7. 
There  is  discernible  trend  of  institutionalization  of  collegial  arrangements  involving 
the  central  bank,  other  regulators  and  the  government,  with  the  broader  responsibility  of 
identifying  threats  to  financial  stability.  In  the  US,  the  Financial  Stability  Oversight  Council 
(FSOC)  is  headed  by  the  Treasury  Secretary  and  comprises  the  Fed  Chairman  and  the 
heads  of  all  the  regulatory  agencies.  New  supervisory  bodies  involving  council  approach 
have been created in the EU. The European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) is chaired by the 
President  of  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  and  is  a  part  of  the  European  System  of 
Financial Supervision which also comprises the three newly created systemic authorities for 
banking, insurance and occupational pensions and for securities markets. 
8. 
The  UK  Financial  Services  Authority  (FSA)  has  been  split  in  two,  as  the  UK 
embraces what is called “twin-peaks” model of financial regulation, where separate entities 
for prudential supervision, and the oversight of consumer protection and market conduct are 
created.  The  prudential  oversight  wing  moved  inside  the  Bank  of  England.  Further,  an 
independent Financial Policy Committee at the Bank, chaired by Governor, Bank of England 
has been set up having the tools and the responsibility to look across the economy at the 
macro issues that may threaten economic and financial stability and take effective action in 
response. Of course this new arrangement may come into being only in 2013. 
Regulatory initiatives 
9. 
Globally,  various  initiatives  to  reform  financial  sector  regulation,  the  New  Normal, 
have been spearheaded by G-20 with the Financial Stability Board (FSB) assuming the role 
of the oversight agency. There is greater appreciation for adherence to Basel Core Principles 
and openness to peer reviews. 
10. 
These  initiatives  have  been  well  documented  and  hence  it  would  suffice  here  to 
mention that the broad contours of the international initiatives on regulatory reforms envisage 
strengthening  the  quality,  consistency  and  transparency  of  regulatory  capital  and  risk 
coverage,  introducing  minimum  liquidity  standards  and  leverage  ratio,  countercyclical 
measures  in  the  form  of  capital  buffers  and  forward  looking  provisioning,  developing  a 
framework for systemically important entities including cross-border resolution arrangements, 
extending  the  regulatory  perimeter  to  unregulated  pools  of  money,  de-risking  the  OTC 
derivatives  trading  through  central  counterparties  and  new  framework  for  regulating 
employee  compensation  within  the  financial  sector.  Further,  there  will  be  an  overlay  of 
macro-prudential regulation by systemic regulator to review macro prudential risks. 
II. 
Challenges of re-regulation 
11. 
Implementation of the New Normal of re-regulation does pose various challenges. 
The collective resolve to reform the regulation of financial sector reflecting the spirit of New 
Normal needs to be maintained as various countries experience varied macro-economic and 
financial conditions post the Pittsburgh Summit in September 2009. This unity of commitment 
is  becoming  hard  to  come  by.  Further,  harmonised  implementation  of  regulatory  policies 
across jurisdictions to address regulatory arbitrage is rendered difficult when their underlying 
business cycles lack synchronization. 
Be that as it may, challenges that EMEs face in implementing the New Normal of re-
12. 
regulation  are  entirely  different,  notwithstanding  in-built  flexibility  for  national  differences  in 
adoption and implementation by way of a “comply or explain” provision. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Emerging market perspective1 
13. 
The  New  Normal  of  Re-regulation  broadly  reflects  the  lessons  of  the  recent  crisis 
and  is  therefore  basically  oriented  towards  ensuring  financial  stability  in  advanced 
economies. Even so, EMEs have to implement it. However, its implementation does entail 
various trade-offs, especially for the EMEs. 
Capital standards 
The Basel III standards for increased bank capital and liquidity will provide a strong 
14. 
anchor for enhancing the resilience of each individual institution to adverse shocks. It forces 
all  lenders,  particularly  the  largest  to  build  up  buffers  of  equity,  cash  and  liquid  assets  to 
protect themselves against unexpected losses or another market crisis. But, they carry cost 
which  may  drive  up  costs  for  their  customers  and  make  many  of  banks’  business  lines 
unprofitable. Banks and Supervisors need to guard against complacency that capital buffers 
could be effective without strong governance risk management and internal controls. 
15. 
As the EMEs have higher capital ratios, the balance sheet of the banks expand on 
the  back  of  growing  credit  to  fund  higher  growth,  and  these  banks  in  EMEs  may  have  to 
mobilize  larger  capital with  cost  implications.  Higher  capital  requirements  arising  out  of  re-
securitisation  and  complex  derivatives  may  have  muted  implications  for  EMEs  because  of 
the  fact  that  such  exposures  are  either  limited  or  not  permitted.  Supervisors  need  to  be 
vigilant that tighter regulation does not drive risk from the banking system into the shadows 
and to less transparent and lightly supervised parts of the financial system. 
Liquidity standards 
16. 
EMEs have not experienced the levels of liquidity stress that advanced economies 
had suffered. Therefore, implementing the liquidity standards requires EMEs to develop the 
capability  to  collect  and  collate  the  relevant  data  accurately  and  granularly,  with  a  view  to 
analysing  and  forecasting  the  liquidity  stress  scenarios  with  reasonable  accuracy  and 
consistent with their own situation. They have however the advantage of drawing upon the 
experience of the developed economies. 
Leverage ratio 
17. 
The  current  proposal  under  consideration  of  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking 
Supervision (BCBS) is to include all on and off balance sheet exposures. Here, an area of 
concern for EMEs could be the treatment of off-balance sheet (OBS) exposure. Most of the 
OBS  exposures  in  EMEs  have  their  footprints  in  the  real  economy,  basically  for  hedging 
purposes, as proprietary trading by banks is limited and/or complex financial products are not 
introduced  in  these  jurisdictions.  Further,  these  contingent  liabilities  do  not  generally 
materialise. On the contrary, in advanced economies, OBS exposures have their footprints 
predominately  in  the  financial  sector,  including  for  speculative  purposes.  Given  this  critical 
differentiation,  credit  conversion  factor  (CCF)  is  crucial.  Higher  CCFs  could  have  adverse 
implications for flow of credit to real sector and capital formation in the EMEs. 
                                                 
1   Material 
this  section 
for 
is  broadly  drawn 
to  Banking  Regulation  and  
Supervision – Think Global, Act Local, the inaugural address by Dr. D. Subbarao, Governor, Reserve Bank of 
India at the FICCI-IBA Conference on “Global Banking: Paradigm Shift” on September 7, 2010 and Emerging 
Market Economies Leading Global Growth, Remarks by Dr. Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor, Reserve Bank of 
India at a panel discussion on “Role of Emerging Economies Going Forward and Key Policy Challenges” at 
the IMF, Washington DC on October 9, 2010. 
from  Post-Crisis  Reforms 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Countercyclical capital buffer 
18. 
Another dimension of the regulatory reform is to align regulation to the credit and 
default cycles. The difficulty for the EMEs is that emerging markets do not have adequate 
history of cycles and hence lack the nuanced understanding of them. Given this, there are 
various  operational  issues  regarding  various  time-varying  regulatory  approaches  under 
consideration,  including  how  and  when  to  build  or  draw-down  capital  buffers  and  how  to 
formulate expected loss-provisioning. 
As  per  the  BCBS  guidance,  credit  to  GDP  ratio  is  the  preferred  buffer  guide  for 
19. 
assessing  banking  sector  conditions  for  buffers.  However,  there  is  a  need  to  draw  a 
distinction:  Assessment  of  credit  aggregates  may  have  different  implications  for  EMEs,  as 
contrasted with those for advanced economies. Growth in bank credit in the EME could be 
due  to  factors  such  as  financial  deepening  from  a  low  base,  structural  shifts  in  supply 
elasticities, rising efficiency of credit markets and perhaps policy initiatives to improve flow of 
credit to sectors like the agriculture and small scale units. 
20. 
The impact of these factors on credit aggregates of the advanced economies is by 
and  large  muted.  Hence,  care  and  caution  needs  to  be  exercised  while  studying  credit 
aggregates for capital buffers. Other related issues with regard to buffers include the optimal 
size  of  the  buffers  and  the  methodology  for  its  determination.  Too  large  a  buffer,  while 
promoting  financial  stability,  may  impound  more  capital  than  warranted  and  hence  could 
have adverse implications for cost and availability of capital for the real sector. If so, what 
does it mean for better price discovery and improving allocative efficiency, given the fact that 
high capital gearing is fundamentally against inter mediation? 
The New Normal and financial inclusion 
21. 
How  does  the  New  Normal  of  re-regulation  impinge  on  EMEs’  efforts  at  financial 
inclusion?  Does  augmenting  financial  stability  through,  inter  alia,  addressing  systemic  risk, 
extending scope of regulation, mitigating procyclicality and strengthening prudential oversight 
comprise financial inclusion as the increased stability come at a price of hiking the cost of 
banking business and thereby taking banking away from the poor? 
This important perspective should not be lost sight of, particularly in EMEs. In EMEs 
22. 
upscaling financial inclusion endeavor to bring the opportunities of cost effective banking to 
the underprivileged and low income groups is essential for banks to play a critical role, going 
forward, as it embodies the potential for augmenting growth prospects in terms of enhancing 
bank savings and financial deepening. 
Comply and explain 
23. 
As enumerated above, the New Normal has in-built flexibility for national differences 
in  adoption  and  implementation  by  way  of  a  “comply  or  explain”  provision.  In  the  event  of 
deviation from the standards of New Normal, EMEs have an additional challenge of effective 
and timely communications with the markets to ensure that the deviation is not mistaken for 
regulatory looseness. 
The New Normal – a few thoughts 
24. 
I  see  The  New  Normal  at  a  fundamental  level,  as  signifying  a  need  for  financial 
systems and regulators to get back to basics .As I see it, the three intertwining strands of the 
new Normal across the globe, are Stability, Financial Inclusion and Consumer protection. 
25. 
The  New  Normal,  at  a  fundamental  level  would  underscore  the  following  aspects: 
Financial  intermediation  should  stand  the  test  of  operational  and  allocative  efficiency, 
manifest  in  the  form  of  lower  intermediation  cost.  Scarce  financial  resources  should  be 
allocated  among  the  competing  sectors  efficiently  with  least  possible  cost,  promoting 
productivity.  Strengthening  and  developing  financial  sector  should  be  subservient  to  the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
needs of the real sector and as such the growth of former has to be in alignment with that of 
the latter. A financial system where the financial sector drives the real sector and growth in 
the  financial  sector  outstrips  regulatory  surveillance  capacity  and  absence  of  supporting 
institutions  to  support  financial  innovation  are  warning  signals  for  regulators.  Hence,  it  is 
imperative to ensure harmonized development of real and financial sectors. There should be 
greater focus on reaching out to the bottom of the Pyramid, as inclusive growth is a viable 
business  option  for  banks  and  leads  to  growth  in  GDP.  This  would  also  mean  improving 
levels  of  financial  education  with  a  bias  towards  simple  rather  than  complex  products, 
particularly in the EMEs. 
26. 
The  financial  crisis  has  put  the  unqualified  faith  in  the  efficient  market  hypothesis 
under question. Financial markets are indeed important, but that should not be construed as 
financial  markets  being right  all  the time.  As  markets  are  susceptible  to  irrational  behavior 
and  driven  by  sentiment  and  herding,  there  is  need  for  proactive  regulation  and  constant 
surveillance of markets. 
27. 
Innovation  drives  growth.  The  backlash  of  the  financial  crisis  should  not  result  in 
stagnation,  or  regulatory  straitjackets  which  thwart  and  stifle  innovation.  Innovation  is 
necessary  for  efficient  allocation  of  resources,  operational  efficiency  and  delivery  of 
economical, cost effective and consumer products and consequently improved productivity. 
This does not mean that financial innovation should be unregulated as it has implications for 
consumer protection and systemic risk. 
28. 
Financial innovation should continue to play a catalytic role in intermediating savings 
for  providing  adequate  levels  of  funding  to  the  real  sector,  thereby  supporting  economic 
growth. However, financial intermediation should not acquire dynamics of its own as it can 
potentially  lead  to  economic  rent  seeking,  rather  than  delivering  valuable  customer  and 
economic benefits. Hence, it is essential that optimal balance is maintained between financial 
innovation  and  regulation.  Collectively,  the  above  four  aspects  of  the  New  Normal  should 
contribute to the promotion of financial stability, financial inclusion and consumer protection. 
III. 
Indian experience 
29. 
India, like most other emerging market economies, was not seriously affected by the 
recent  financial  turmoil  in  developed  economies.  Indian  banking  system,  similar  to  other 
Asian banks, remained profitable, well-capitalised and prudently regulated. Financial stability 
in  India  has  been  achieved  through  perseverance  of  prudential  policies  which  prevent 
institutions  from  excessive  risk  taking,  and  financial  markets  from  becoming  extremely 
volatile and turbulent. 
30. 
In fact, various measures/proposals underpinning the New Normal of Re-Regulation 
have  already  been  brought  into  practice  in  India  even  before  the  crisis.  These  included 
restrictions  on  leverage  for  banking  and  non  banking  institutions,  stringent  liquidity 
requirements,  counter  cyclical  prudential  measures,  not  recognising  in  Tier  I  capital  many 
items  that  are  now  sought  to  be  deducted  internationally,  recognising  profits  from  sale  of 
securitised  assets  to  SPVs  over  the  life  of  the  securities  issued,  not  reckoning  unrealised 
gains in earnings or in Tier I capital. 
31. 
In the above backdrop, the Indian response in the post-crisis period was primarily 
guided  by  the  immediate  imperative  of  containing  the  financial  contagion  from  abroad  and 
carrying forward the process of financial sector reforms in a calibrated manner distilling the 
lessons from the crisis. 
Measures for containing financial contagion 
32. 
The RBI responded to the crisis by providing ample rupee liquidity and comfortable 
forex liquidity to ensure that credit and financial markets functioned normally. To cushion the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
adverse impact of the downturn, various sector-specific counter-cyclical regulatory measures 
involving risk-weights and provisioning were introduced. It also gave regulatory guidance for 
restructuring  of  viable  loan  accounts  for  ensuring  continued  flow  of  credit  to  productive 
sectors of the economy with a view to arresting growth deceleration. 
Financial sector reforms 
33. 
The regulatory measures initiated for furthering financial sector reforms introduced 
in  the  post-crisis  period  aimed  at  institutional  and  market  development  and  strengthening 
resilience of the financial system are as follows:  
Institutional and market development measures 
Securitization market 
34. 
The  RBI  issued  guidelines  on  securitisation  of  standard  assets  in  February  2006. 
These guidelines prohibit originators from booking profits upfront at the time of securitisation. 
Two other features relate to deduction from capital of any credit enhancements provided in 
the first of first loss, and disallowing the release of credit enhancement during the life of the 
credit-enhanced transaction. Further, the revised draft guidelines on securitisation, primarily 
on  minimum  holding  period  and  minimum  retention  requirements,  have  been  issued  in 
September 2011. 
Credit Default Swap 
Drawing from the recommendations of the Internal Group and distilling the lessons 
35. 
of  the  recent  global  financial  crisis,  final  guidelines  were  issued  in  May  2011  for  the 
introduction of plain vanilla OTC single-name CDS for corporate bonds. 
Financial Stability Development Council (FSDC) 
36. 
Financial  Stability  and  Development  Council  (FSDC)  has  been  constituted  with  a 
view to strengthen and institutionalise the mechanism for maintaining financial stability. The 
Council  would  monitor  macro-prudential  supervision  of 
the 
functioning  of  large  financial  conglomerates,  and  address  inter-regulatory  coordination 
issues. 
the  economy, 
including 
Conglomerate structure 
37. 
A  Working  Group  has  recommended  a  roadmap  for  the  introduction  of  holding 
company  structure  in  the  Indian  financial  sector  together  with  the  required  regulatory, 
supervisory and legislative framework with a view to introducing an alternate organizational 
structure for the banks and identified financial conglomerates in India. 
Measures for strengthening resilience of financial system 
Basel II advanced approaches 
38. 
The timetable for the phased adoption of advanced approaches for the computation 
of regulatory capital under the Basel II framework in India has been put in public domain in 
July 2009. Enhancements to Basel II guidelines – New Capital Adequacy Framework – were 
issued in February 2010. These enhancements prescribed increased capital requirements for 
specific risk and liquidity facility for securitisation exposures. It also intended banks to better 
identify and appropriately capture risks in their internal assessments of capital adequacy and 
manage  risks  and  more  granular  disclosure  requirements  for  credit  risk  mitigations  and 
securitised exposures. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The  guidelines  on 
“The  Standardised  Approach 
“Alternative 
39. 
Standardised  Approach  (ASA)”  for  operational  risk  were  issued  in  March  2010.  The 
guidelines on Internal Models Approach (IMA) for VaR-based measurement of exposure to 
market  risk  have  been  issued  in  April  2010.  The  guidelines  on  Advanced  Measurement 
Approach  (AMA)  for  calculating  operational  risk  capital  charge  for  operational  risk  were 
issued in April 2011. Draft guidelines for internal rating based (IRB) approach for credit risk 
were put in public domain on August 11, 2011 for comments. 
(TSA)”  and 
Provisioning buffer 
40. 
With a view to augmenting provisioning buffer in a counter-cyclical manner when the 
banks were making good profits, as a macro-prudential measure, a Provisioning Coverage 
Ratio (PCR) of 70 percent of gross Non Performing Assets with reference the banks’ position 
as on September 30, 2010 was prescribed in April 2011. 
Implementation of Basel III 
As alluded to earlier, distilling the lessons of the crisis, an international endeavour is 
41. 
underway to reform global financial regulation, of special mention is the guidelines known as 
Basel III. Some of the Basel III guidelines relating to capital and liquidity have already been 
issued. The Reserve Bank would adhere to internationally agreed phase-in period (beginning 
January 1, 2013) for implementation of the Basel III framework. 
Supervisory issues 
The  crisis  has  underpinned  the  need  for  more  intense  and  effective  supervision 
42. 
particularly  relating  to  systemically  important  financial  institutions  (SIFIs).  Since  they  have 
their  presence  in  different  segments  of  the  financial  system,  the  level  of  supervision  and 
resources  applied  by  supervisors  must  be  commensurate  with  the  potential  destabilization 
risk  that  such  firms  pose  to  domestic  financial  systems,  and  global  financial  systems. 
Supervisory co-operation across domestic and global financial systems becomes imperative 
in a scenario which requires increased information sharing and concerted action in a crisis. 
Further  impact  of  policy  changes  spurred  by  Basel  III  would  be  critical  in  reducing  the 
probability and impact of a SIFI failure. 
43. 
The  lessons  of  the  crisis  have  shown  that  certain  institutions  failed  for  risks 
embedded in products even though they were assessed by supervisors as highly capitalized 
and highly liquid. This underscores weaknesses in determining capital sufficiency, which has 
both quantitative and a qualitative, aspects and involves a judgmental exercise. The capital 
assessment should be driven by the supervisor’s understanding of the legal, operating, and 
corporate governance structure of the organization and its primary strategies, business lines, 
risk  management  and  internal  control  functions,  which  shape  its  unique  and  distinct  risk 
profile and hence capital requirements. 
44. 
While financial systems cannot be totally risk free, Supervisors need to assess risk 
in  banks’  business  models  and  have  a  reasonably  accurate  assessment  of  the  balance 
between the risk taking capacity of a financial institution and the appropriate level of capital 
available  to  absorb  unexpected  losses  and  intervene  early  when  there  is  an  imbalance. 
Inadequate assessments and imbalances as also delays and unpreparedness for timely and 
decisive  interventions  can  make  the  financial  system  highly  vulnerable  leading  to  potential 
loss of confidence. 
45. 
On the other hand, excessive capital requirements could drive risk to less regulated 
entities which may pose potentially new risks to the system. The crisis revealed, blind spots 
in supervisor’s assessment of bank risks, as under highly stressed and largely unforeseen 
circumstances,  they  were  found  to  be  inadequately  capitalized.  The  timely  and  accurate 
supervisory assessment of capital levels is critical. Given the systemic impact of SIFI failures, 
there is also the need for continuous and intense supervision of SIFIs. Supervisors need to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
have  a  through  the  cycle  mentality  as  times  of  economic  serenity  breeds  complacence. 
Supervisors need to stay hungry and not necessarily foolish. 
46. 
Supervisors also need to have a result oriented approach, focussing on outcome of 
stress tests and risk management processes within banks. They need to review whether they 
are  commensurate  with  their  assessment  of  the  bank’s  risk  profile.  The  lessons  from  the 
financial  crisis  showed  that  considerable  supervisory  attention  was  focussed  on  the 
governance  frameworks  and  processes  in  areas  such  as  risk  management,  credit  risk 
approvals, board oversight, and capital adequacy assessments, without enough analysis to 
confirm  that  the  outputs  of  the  processes,  given  the  business  model  of  the  bank  and  its 
products  in  terms  of  the  risk  profile  and  exposures  were  consistent  with  supervisory 
expectations.  The  crisis  underscored  flaws  in  bank’s  risk  management  practices  and 
insufficient  understanding  by  supervisors  of  the  risks  posed  by  increasing  complexity  of 
products and systems in banks. 
47. 
The use of stress tests tools and its outcomes in understanding areas of risk and 
remedial  action  has  emerged  vital  to  the  re-engineering  processes  in  supervision.  Data 
integrity  and  aggregation  are  key  to  effective  risk  management  for  banks  and  critical  for 
ongoing supervision of SIFIs, as is consolidated supervision. There is also a need for wider 
customer education, and stringent customer suitability and appropriateness policies in place 
while selling structured products. This underscores the importance of a strong governance 
framework and compliance culture in banks. 
Stress testing also forms a critical part of the banks’ Internal Capital Adequacy Assessment 
Processes which are reviewed as  part of the Reserve Bank’s onsite supervision of banks. 
Within the Reserve Bank, the stress testing process – both top down stress testing of the 
entire  banking  system  and  bottoms  up  stress  testing  of  individual  banks  –  have  been  up-
scaled.  
48. 
The  Reserve  Bank  conducts  a  series  of  stress  tests  periodically.  Single  factor 
sensitivity tests assess the impact of a range of stress scenarios on the credit, interest rate, 
foreign exchange rate, equity price and liquidity risks faced by banks and are conducted on 
quarterly basis. To assess the resilience of the system to adverse macroeconomic scenarios, 
stress  testing  analysis  is  carried  out  within  a  macro  stress  testing  framework.  Two  major 
groups of macro testing exercises are conducted: one based on a  multivariate regression, 
and  the  other  based  on  a  vector  autoregressive  (VAR)  model.  While  the  former  allows 
evaluating the impact of a particular macroeconomic variable on the banking system’s NPA 
and capital ratios, the latter reflects the impact of the overall economic stress situation on the 
NPA  ratio  and  bank  capital  through  a  feed-back  effect.  The  macro  stress  tests  are  also 
conducted on a quarterly basis. 
49. 
In  India,  we  have  reviewed  our  supervisory  processes  for  close  and  ongoing 
supervision  of  12  large  banks  which  account  for  nearly  53%  of  the  assets  of  the  banking 
system.  The  Supervisory  Review  of  banks  is  being  taken  up  this  year,  strengthened  with 
lessons  learnt  from  the  pilot  run  of  the  previous  year.  To  further  refine  and  bench  mark 
supervisory policies and processes with international best practices, a Steering Committee 
has  been  set  up  to  examine  the  entire  gamut  of  supervisory  policy,  processes  ,rating 
methodology, etc. 
50. 
Reserve Bank of India recognizes that the quality of supervision of SIFIs would be 
extended  to  other  banks/FIs  on  a  risk  based  approach.  There  is  closer  co-ordination  with 
other  Regulators  and  Supervisors  through  formal  MoUs  and  ongoing  dialogue  through 
informal/formal  channels  and  Supervisory  Colleges,  underscoring  our  appreciation  of  the 
need for close and co-ordinated supervision of large systemically important banks. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
IV. 
Indian Scenario – regulatory framework in India / exchange control 
environment 
51. 
In  the  Indian  context,  large  scale  external  sector  reforms  (exchange  control  and 
other  areas  such  as  trade  policy  {customs/duties})  were  initiated  in  the  aftermath  of  the 
balance of payments crisis faced by India in 1990–91. Till this time the Indian economy was 
largely insulated from the world and was largely a closed economy in so far as cross border 
transactions (specially capital account transactions were concerned). 
Some  of  the  lessons  which  emerged  for  policy  makers  (from  the  BoP  crisis  of  
52. 
1990–91)  were  that  i)  there  were  long  term  benefits  of  opening  the  economy  both  on  the 
current and capital account, albeit in a phased / calibrated manner; ii) official capital flows in 
the  form  of  debt  /  aid  were  unsustainable  in  the  long  run  and  therefore  required  to  be 
replaced  with  private  capital  flows;  and  iii).  public  policy  should  actively  differentiate  and 
provide for preferential treatment between capital flows which are pure equity flows and debt 
flows (with FDI, portfolio flows and debt flows in descending order of preference). 
53. 
The lessons learnt from the BoP crisis of 1990–91 were subsequently instrumental 
in  framing  appropriate  public  policies  for  the  external  sector  (by  the  Government  and  the 
Central Bank). India became fully convertible on the current account in 1994 (barring a few 
quantitative restrictions and a small negative list of transactions {keeping in view larger public 
interests/good} ) and therefore all current account transactions are freely allowed as long as 
they are for bonafide purposes and are routed through normal banking channels. 
54. 
On  the  capital  account  front,  India  has  been  following  a  calibrated  and  gradual 
approach towards full capital account convertibility. This approach is based on the emerging 
macroeconomic  and  macro-prudential  environment  and  broadly  guided  various 
concomitants2/indicators  such  as  i)  Fiscal  Consolidation,  ii)  Monetary  Policy  Objectives, 
iii) Strengthening of the Banking System and, iv) External Sector Indicators (CAD, Adequacy 
of Reserves). 
The  primary  objectives  of  the  extant  exchange  control  regime  in  India3  are 
55. 
facilitating  external  trade  and  payments  and  for  promoting  the  orderly  development  and 
maintenance  of  foreign  exchange  market  in  India.  On  the  capital  account  front  there  has 
been a conscious policy effort to give precedence to equity flows over debt flows as well as 
FDI over portfolio flows. 
56. 
Amongst the emerging market economies, India has a peculiar situation where we 
have  a  persistent  current  account  deficit  which  has  to  be  funded  from  the  capital  account 
surplus.  While  prima  facie  this should  encourage  us  to  move  at  a  faster  pace  towards  full 
capital account convertibility, a detailed analysis shows that increased and uninhibited capital 
inflows  may  (under  certain  circumstances)  be  more  detrimental4  than  beneficial  to  the 
domestic economy as well as the overall BoP position. Thus the nature and amount of capital 
inflows has an important effect on the overall BoP as well as foreign exchange reserves of 
the country and exchange rate policies have to be suitably tweaked to harvest the beneficial 
effects of increased capital inflows while at the same time avoid the ill effects of the same. 
The entire emphasis in our forex management is to reduce reliance on short term flows and 
not using Forex Rate mechanism as a tool to manage monetary policy. 
57. 
In  conclusion,  to  quote  an  African  proverb,  “Smooth  seas  don’t  make  for  good 
sailors”.  The  aftershocks  of  the  crisis  have  made  supervisors  and  regulators  look  inwards 
                                                 
2   Report of the Committee on Fuller capital Account Convertibility, Reserve Bank of India, 2006. 
3   The  Foreign  Exchange  Regulation  Act,  1973  was  replaced  by  the  Foreign  Exchange  Management  Act  in 
1999. 
Increased capital flows can lead to widening of the CAD, appreciation of the domestic currency (exchange rate 
appreciation) as well as the building up of increased inflationary pressures in the domestic economy. 
4  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
and  the  insights  on  deficiencies  in  supervision  and  regulation  is  shaping  many  of  the  key 
initiatives  in  redefining  and  enhancing  effectiveness  of  regulation  and  supervision.  The 
Seminar, I am sure will help in further evolving and strengthening regulation and supervision 
of the financial system even in the most turbulent times.  
I wish the seminar all success. 
El-Erian,  Mohamed  A.  (2010):  Navigating  the  New  Normal  in  Industrial  Countries, 
Financial  Stability  Board,  November 2,  2010,  “Intensity  and  Effectiveness  of  SIFI 
References 
1. 
Per Jacobsson Foundation Lecture, International Monetary Fund (IMF), October 10, 2010. 
2. 
Supervision”. 
3. 
October 3, 2011. 
4. 
Ramadorai, September 2011. 
“Financial Innovation, Regulation and Systemic Risk,” presentation at CAFRAL, Tarun 
“Bankers  versus  Basel”,  Brooke  Masters  and  Tom  Braithwaite,  Financial  Times, 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
