José Manuel González-Páramo: The ECB and the sovereign debt crisis 
Speech  by  Mr  José  Manuel  González-Páramo,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European  Central  Bank,  at  the  XXIV  Moneda  y  Crédito  Symposium,  Madrid,  4  November 
2011. 
 Introduction 
1. 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  and  honour  for  me  to  contribute  to  this  year’s  24th  edition  of  the 
Moneda y Crédito Symposium.  
There is no doubt that advanced economies, not just the euro area, are currently facing a 
period  of  exceptional  economic  and  financial  instability  that  requires  swift,  decisive  and 
credible action by all concerned institutions, each with its own responsibilities.  
On  26  October  the  Heads  of  State  and  Government  of  the  euro  area  agreed  on  a 
comprehensive set of measures to restore confidence and address the current tensions in 
financial markets. These measures include:  
First, an agreement to secure the decline of Greek debt to a level equivalent to 120% of GDP 
by  2020.  This  reduction  will  be  partly  achieved  via  a  voluntary  bond  exchange  involving  a 
50% nominal discount on notional Greek debt held by private investors. Euro area Member 
States will also contribute up to 30 bn euro to the PSI package.  
Second, a new EU-IMF multiannual programme financing up to 100 bn euro will be put in 
place by the end of the year. 
Third, a significant leveraging of existing EFSF resources via two different schemes in order 
to  increase  the  fund’s  ability  to  extend  loans,  finance  bank  recapitalisations  and  conduct 
bond purchases in the primary and secondary markets. I will describe these schemes in a bit 
more detail later on. 
Fourth, a commitment to increase the capital position of banks to 9% of Core Tier 1 by the 
end of June 2012 and to facilitate access to term-funding through a coordinated approach to 
bank liability guarantees at the EU level.  
Fifth,  a  strengthening  of  economic  and  fiscal  coordination  and  surveillance  and  a 
commitment to put in place a set of measures, going beyond and above the recently adopted 
package on economic governance.  
In the period ahead, it is of paramount importance that this agreement is applied rigorously 
and quickly in all its dimensions.  
Against this background, I would like to focus my intervention today – from my perspective as 
a  central  banker  –  on  the  challenging  environment  for  monetary  policy  created  by  the 
ongoing euro area financial and sovereign debt crisis. In the first part of my speech I would 
like  to  recall  some  of  the  main  policy  “failures”  leading  up  to  the  present  crisis  and  briefly 
review the more recent policy actions undertaken by the ECB.  
As the ECB has repeatedly stressed, the main responsibility for resolving this crisis lies with 
governments and the financial sector. Euro area governments’ unwillingness to adapt their 
fiscal and competitiveness policies to the requirements of EMU very much lies at the heart of 
the  current  “sovereign  debt  crisis”.  Excessive  risk-taking  by  an  over-leveraged  and 
inadequately regulated financial sector is, of course, the other source of the present “financial 
turmoil”.  I  will  therefore  focus  the  second  part  of  my  speech  on  a  discussion  of  the  main 
reforms to the governance as well as the supervisory and regulatory frameworks that have 
been undertaken at the European and international level in response to the crisis. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
2. 
Fiscal imbalances and the monetary policy response to the crisis 
Growing fiscal imbalances 
The economic and financial crisis has led to a severe deterioration of public finances across 
European countries. Governments which already had significant fiscal imbalances ahead of 
the crisis exited from the recession with the highest deficit and debt-to-GDP ratios recorded 
in times of peace. The aggregate fiscal balance of the euro area increased from an almost 
balanced budget in 2000 to a deficit of around 6% of GDP in 2010. Furthermore, the euro 
area’s  debt  stood  at  more  than  85%  of  GDP  in  2010.  Similar  developments  were  also 
recorded in other advanced economies, for example the US and Japan, likewise as a result 
of  the  cyclical  contraction  as  well  as  the  adopted  fiscal  stimulus  measures.  However,  it  is 
useful to consider that the consolidated fiscal position of the euro area remains – overall – 
rather more favourable than that of the US and Japan. According to the Commission’s spring 
2011 forecast, the euro area deficit ratio is projected to decline to 3.5% of GDP by 2012 as 
compared to the US and Japan where fiscal deficits are expected to stand at 8.6% and 9.8%, 
respectively,  in  2012.  These  forecasts  are  in  line  with  those  of  the  main  international 
organisations. 
The interaction between government finances and the financial system 
Despite  ongoing  fiscal  consolidation  efforts  across  euro  area  countries,  negative  feedback 
loops between the financial sector and sovereigns are becoming more and more entrenched. 
Although  in  some  countries  it  was  financial  system  stress  that  happened  first  and  later 
weighed on sovereign risk, in others the events took place in reverse order. Regardless of 
the exact chronology of events, since mid-2010 we have progressively begun to see a very 
close interaction between risks associated with the financial system and the sovereign.  
There are several reasons behind the close interplay between these two risks. For a start, 
the burden on governments caused by their implicit and/or explicit guarantees to the banking 
sector, and the need to finance bank re-capitalisations with public funds, has certainly taken 
its  toll  on  public  finances.  In  some  cases  this  burden  was  compounded  by  the  adoption, 
earlier  in  the  crisis,  of  discretionary  fiscal  stimulus  measures  and  the  parallel  decline  in 
government revenues caused by the economic downturn. In countries where the emergence 
of  systemic  risk  originated  in  large  fiscal  imbalances,  the  deterioration  of  public  finances 
weighed negatively on the market pricing of government bonds from these countries. This, in 
turn, had a negative impact on the balance sheets of banks that held these bonds in their 
portfolios.  
The  difficulties  faced  by  some  governments  in  financing  themselves  in  the  market  also 
affected  the  ability  of  banks  from  these  same  countries  to  obtain  financing  in  wholesale 
markets. Rating agencies traditionally link the ratings they give to banks to the ratings of the 
respective  sovereigns.  Moreover,  markets  link  the  interest  rate  at  which  banks  are  able  to 
issue debt in wholesale markets to the interest rate required from the respective sovereign. 
This means that as soon as a government’s rating begins to be downgraded and its funding 
cost begin to rise the same occurs to banks from that country. Even in collateralised funding 
markets, like for example, the interbank repo market, banks have grown increasingly averse 
to  lend  to  banks  who  use  their  own  government’s  bonds  as  collateral  whenever  that 
government is tainted by sovereign risk concerns. 
Against  the  background  of  a  deteriorating  fiscal  situation,  market  confidence  in  the 
sustainability of public finances has been progressively eroded – though not just in the euro 
area – and the growth outlook is now surrounded by downside risks.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Unsustainable government policies and the failure of governance 
But  let  me  be  clear:  Although  the  economic  crisis  significantly  increased  the  burden  on 
government budgets, the true “failures” leading up to the current sovereign debt crisis lie with 
the  unsustainable  fiscal  and  structural  policies  pursued  by  many  of  these  governments 
before the crisis and with the governance system of the euro area.  
The  EU’s  economic  governance  framework  failed  to  prevent  and  correct  unsustainable 
national policies that contributed to the build-up of major imbalances in euro area countries. 
This  applies  in  particular  to  the  weak  implementation  of  policy  recommendations,  the 
inadequacy  of  enforcement  measures  taken  to  discourage  or  correct  deficit  infringements, 
and  the  insufficient  recognition  by  national  policy-makers  of  the  need  to  ensure  mutual 
consistency  between  national  policies  in  a  monetary  union,  especially  with  regard  to  the 
issue of competitiveness. Moreover, as I will elaborate in more detail later on, existing fiscal 
rules have been weakened over time and procedures and measures that were put in place in 
order  to  enhance  economic  policy  coordination  have  not  been  implemented  with  sufficient 
rigour.  
Let  us  not  forget  that  EMU  is  characterised  by  a  high  degree  of  economic  and  financial 
integration among its members, which in normal times is obviously beneficial to all. Yet, in 
times of crisis, close financial integration also means that unsustainable developments in one 
member state can easily spread to other members perceived as vulnerable by the market. 
The crisis has also made policymakers increasingly aware of the need to establish effective 
macro-prudential  surveillance  frameworks  which  can  provide  a  strengthened  systemic 
perspective  to  regulation  and  supervision  and  do  not  neglect  the  interactions  within  the 
financial  system,  and  their  relation  to  the  real  economy.  Against  this  background,  the 
European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB)  was  established  at  the  beginning  of  2011  and 
entrusted with the responsibility for the macro-prudential oversight of the financial system of 
the  European  Union.  In  addition  to  macro-prudential  surveillance,  strengthened  fiscal  and 
macroeconomic  surveillance  remains  essential  for  guarding  against  destabilising  cross-
country spillovers which might stem from a loss of confidence in the sustainability of national 
policies.  
The experience of the last few months has taught us that the possibility of market failures in 
the  financial  sector  can  never  be  ruled  out,  including  self-fulfilling  trend  dynamics  in  the 
pricing of sovereign risk. Market failures are costly in a monetary union due to the potential 
for contagion. The experience of euro area sovereign bond markets in recent years is rather 
telling  in  this  regard.  Prior  to  the  financial  market  tensions  in  autumn  2008,  euro  area 
sovereign bond spreads were clustered in close proximity to each other, in spite of sizeable 
cross-country differences in underlying fiscal and structural positions. This under-pricing of 
sovereign  risk  and,  ultimately,  failure  of  market  discipline  in  a  period  of  tranquillity  quickly 
gave  way  to  an  abrupt  and  disorderly  re-pricing  of  this  same  risk,  without  due  regard  to 
different underlying fiscal and structural positions. The fact that market discipline had been 
rudely  awakened  also  meant  that,  in  this  environment  of  over-pricing  of  risk,  a  protracted 
liquidity  crisis  has  the  potential  to  easily  become  a  systemic  threat  to  solvency  and 
sustainability if left unaddressed.  
The ECB’s response to the crisis 
Central banks around the world, including the ECB, have reacted to the crisis in a swift and 
decisive manner. Before discussing some of the measures the ECB has taken, let me briefly 
discuss some more general principles that underlie the ECB’s policy response.  
The ECB reacted to the financial turmoil in full accordance with both its mandate and with 
key principles of modern central banking practice. First of all, the ECB’s policies were always 
guided by its primary objective, which is to maintain price stability. However, we have learned 
from the financial crisis that while price stability is certainly a necessary condition for financial 
stability, it is not a sufficient one. The materialisation of systemic risk and financial instability 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
triggered deep recessions with great economic costs. These developments carried risks for 
medium-term  price  stability  which  called  for  bold  decisions  by  central  banks  around  the 
world.  
With  regard  to  the  nature  of  the  policy  decisions  we  took,  our  monetary  policy  framework 
distinguishes between monetary policy decisions, on the one hand, and the implementation 
of  the  desired  monetary  policy  stance  through  open  market  operations,  on  the  other.  This 
facilitates the clear distinction between interest rate decisions taken to preserve price stability 
and liquidity measures adopted in the course of implementing this stance. This distinction is 
certainly useful under normal market conditions and has proven to be of great relevance in 
periods of financial turbulence, albeit for somewhat different reasons.  
In  normal  times,  this  so-called  “separation  principle”  allows  the  central  bank  to  fine-tune 
operational  procedures  in  order  to  steer  short-term  interest  rates  very  close  to  the  main 
policy rate, without risking that those adjustments are regarded by observers as changes to 
the  monetary  policy  stance.  In  exceptional  circumstances,  when  severe  distortions  in 
financial markets emerge and the level of uncertainty is higher, a more non-standard liquidity 
management  by  the  central  bank  may  be  needed  to  prevent  dysfunctional  markets  from 
interfering with the effective transmission of the monetary policy stance. These non-standard 
measures  have  to  be  conducted  without  compromising  the  central  bank’s  main  monetary 
policy objective, which in the ECB’s case, is price stability.  
The “non-standard” measures implemented by the ECB have not introduced any distortion 
into the general strategic monetary policy framework of the ECB and did not interfere with the 
aforementioned “separation principle”. On the contrary, “non-standard” measures should be 
seen as complementary to rates policy in times of financial crisis.  
As you know, with the start of the financial crisis in 2007 banks became significantly more 
concerned  about  counterparty  credit  risk  and  liquidity  risk.  As  a  result  banks  also  became 
increasingly reticent to lend to each other in the interbank market. This meant that short-term 
interest  rates  in  the  interbank  market  became  disconnected  from  our  main  policy  rate,  the 
rate  in  our  main  refinancing  operations,  because  many  banks  could  not  access  market 
funding no matter what rate they were willing to pay for it. The ability of the ECB to influence 
financing conditions in the economy by determining short-term money market rates was thus 
seriously hampered. 
In  response  to  this  situation,  from  August  2007  onwards,  the  ECB  started  to  conduct 
additional and special liquidity providing operations with the objective of ensuring that solvent 
banks  did  not  loose  the  ability  to  refinance  themselves  despite  the  fact  that  the  interbank 
market had become dysfunctional. After the collapse of Lehman Brothers in October 2008 
the  ECB  began  to  conduct  these  operations  under  the  fixed-rate  full-allotment  procedure 
which  allowed  banks  to  determine  through  their  own  demand  how  much  liquidity  the 
Eurosystem provided to the interbank market. The list of eligible collateral accepted by the 
ECB in its refinancing operations was also expanded in order to allow banks to increase their 
access  to  our  operations  if  needed.  The  ECB  also  introduced  refinancing  operations  for 
longer maturities, including six month and one year maturities, so as to reduce the need for 
banks  to  roll-over  their  funding  over  short  periods  of  time  in  an  uncertain  liquidity 
environment.  
International cooperation with other major central banks has also allowed the ECB to provide 
liquidity  and  alleviate  tensions  in  funding  markets  for  currencies  other  that  the  euro.  The 
swap arrangements with the US Federal Reserve, for example, have allowed us to conduct 
fixed-rate  full  allotment  tenders  in  US  dollars.  These  operations  became  very  important 
following  the  collapse  of  Lehman.  Demand  in  these  operations  declined  in  the  course  of 
2010.  Following  the  emergence  of  some  signs  of  potential  tensions  in  US  dollar  funding 
markets  in  2011,  as  a  precautionary  measure,  the  ECB  recently  decided  to  re-establish 
84-day fixed-rate full allotment tenders in US dollars, in addition to the 7-days tenders. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
In  2009  the  ECB  launched  one  of  its  most  innovative  non-standard  measures,  our  first 
Covered  Bond  Purchase  Programme  (CBPP1).  Under  this  initiative  the  Eurosystem 
purchased  €60  billion  worth  of  covered  bonds  between  July  2009  and  July  2010.  This 
initiative had four objectives: first, reducing money market term rates; second, easing funding 
conditions  for  credit  institutions  and  enterprises;  third,  encouraging  credit  institutions  to 
maintain  or  expand  their  lending  to  households  and  enterprises;  and,  fourth,  improving 
market  liquidity  in  important  segments  of  private  debt  securities  markets.  The  Eurosystem 
decided to target covered bonds because of the particular importance that this asset class 
has for the financing of banks and the real economy in the euro area. 
CBPP1 was very successful in restarting issuance activity in primary covered bond markets. 
With the recent intensification of the sovereign debt crisis, however, covered bond markets 
have again come under significant pressure. This is why at its meeting on the 6th of October, 
the  Governing  Council  decided  to  launch  a  second  covered  bond  purchase  programme, 
CBPP2,  that  will  consist  of  €40  billion  worth  of  covered  bond  purchases  within  the  year 
starting in November 2011.  
In addition to the aforementioned measures, after euro area sovereign bond markets became 
increasingly  dysfunctional  the  ECB  launched  its  Securities  Markets  Programme  (SMP)  in 
May 2010. The main purpose of this programme is to protect the functioning of the monetary 
policy transmission mechanism by addressing the malfunctioning of certain key government 
and private  bond market segments. A key distinguishing feature of asset purchases made 
under the SMP is that their liquidity impact has been sterilised through the conduct of weekly 
liquidity absorbing operations. There has been no net injection of central bank liquidity to the 
market as a consequence of these operations. The SMP and its objectives therefore remain 
fundamentally different from quantitative easing. 
Overall, the measures implemented in response to the financial crisis helped sustain financial 
intermediation  in  the  euro  area  by  safeguarding  the  refinancing  of  solvent  banks  and 
restoring confidence among financial market participants. This, in turn, helped preserve the 
viability  of  the  banking  system  and  important  segments  of  the  financial  market.  These 
measures  were  instrumental  in  supporting  the  availability  of  credit  for  households  and 
companies,  in  spite  of  the  moderation  in  credit  growth  in  a  number  of  countries,  and, 
ultimately, they also contributed to maintaining price stability. 
3. 
Institutional reforms in the euro area  
Weaknesses in European economic governance  
The success of monetary policy in containing the damage of the financial and sovereign debt 
crisis  should  not  obscure  a  more  fundamental  lesson  that  the  experience  of  the  past  few 
years teaches us: private and public sector imbalances may not only put at risk the longer-
term  sustainability  of  public  finances,  but  also  have  implications  for  financial  stability  and, 
ultimately, monetary policy.  
In Europe we have realised at a high cost that the governance to ensure fiscal soundness 
and macro-economic stability was simply insufficient.  
The fiscal policy framework suffered from weak implementation of the Stability and Growth 
Pact (SGP), in particular after its reform in 2005. This was mainly due to two reasons:  
First, at the national level, incentives for ensuring sound and sustainable fiscal positions have 
been insufficient. Some Member States had already accumulated large fiscal imbalances in 
“good  times”.  The  stability  and  convergence  programmes  were  frequently  poorly  specified 
and  overly  optimistic.  Furthermore,  Member  States  failed  to  adhere  to  medium-term 
budgetary  objectives  and  only  slowly  corrected  excessive  deficits.  Future  budgetary  costs, 
arising  from  ageing  populations,  were  also  not  sufficiently  addressed  with  the  necessary 
reforms. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Second,  at the  European  level,  the  surveillance  framework  was  never  rigorously  enforced. 
Weak peer pressure among Member States translated into a reluctance to attach sufficient 
importance to the joint responsibility for maintaining euro area stability. Allow me to remind 
you  that  in  2003  Germany  and  France  substantially  contributed  to  a  watering  down  of  EU 
budget rules. In 2003, they voted against proceeding with the excessive deficit procedure in 
spite of breaking the 3% fiscal deficit ceiling. The lack of an automatic trigger in case of non-
compliance with the deficit rules left a great deal of discretion for the decision-making bodies 
at the EU level. All participating parties were reluctant to enforce fiscal discipline in line with 
the  rules  and  procedures  foreseen  in  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  In  particular,  financial 
sanctions  that  were  due  to  be  applied  for  cases  of  persistent  failure  to  correct  excessive 
deficits were never applied.  
Apart from the weak fiscal surveillance mechanisms, the economic governance framework 
also  failed  to  prevent  the  emergence  of  large  and  persistent  macroeconomic  imbalances. 
Some Member States experienced inflation rates permanently above the euro area average. 
In  these  countries,  increases  in  wage  costs,  significantly  exceeded  productivity  gains  and 
this, in turn, led to a substantial rise in unit labour costs. As a consequence, competitiveness 
was gradually eroded and risks of adverse spill-over effects from individual countries to the 
euro area as a whole emerged.  
The euro area’s recent governance reforms 
Against  this  background,  on  28  September  2011  the  European  Parliament  approved  new 
legislation aimed at addressing weaknesses in the existing economic governance framework 
for  co-ordinating  fiscal  and  structural  policies.  I  would  like  to  share  with  you  the  ECB’s 
assessment of these reforms.  
Let me say from the outset that the new legislation, consisting of six parts, the so-called “Six-
pack”,  is  certainly  a  step  in  the  right  direction.  The  “Six-pack”  consists  of  four  proposals 
aimed  at  strengthening  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  and  the  budgetary  surveillance 
framework,  and  two  proposals  which  focus  on  monitoring  and  controlling  macroeconomic 
imbalances.  
The key improvements in the EU surveillance framework include: (i) the strengthening of the 
preventive arm of the Stability and Growth Pact, including through the introduction of earlier 
and gradual sanctions and of an expenditure growth benchmark; (ii) making the government 
debt  criterion  of  the  Maastricht  Treaty  operational;  (iii)  a  new  sanctions  mechanism  to 
strengthen  the  enforcement  of  the  rules  for  euro  area  countries,  (iv)  new  minimum 
requirements  for  the  rules  and  procedures  governing  national  budgetary  frameworks  and 
finally (v) the introduction of a new Excessive Imbalances Procedure (EIP) for the prevention 
and correction of macroeconomic imbalances.  
The “Six-pack”, however, falls short of the “quantum leap” that the ECB had long advocated 
for  the  euro  area.  A  major  drawback  is  that  the  new  governance  package  still  leaves  the 
Council  with  too  much  room  to  apply  discretion  when  deciding  on  the  execution  and 
enforcement  of  the  surveillance  procedure.  Another  vital  shortcoming  relates  to  the  large 
amount of exceptions and relevant factors that need to be taken into account when it comes 
to applying the excessive deficit procedure. This creates loopholes and could endanger the 
transparency and therefore the accountability of the fiscal governance framework as a whole.  
Looking ahead, the identification of the necessary reforms has to start from being clear about 
what the ultimate objective is: the need to establish institutional arrangements which provide 
credible incentives for sound fiscal and macroeconomic policies in a monetary union. In my 
view, a more fundamental deepening of fiscal and economic policy surveillance is necessary 
in the long run. This would involve a transfer of sovereignty to the European level of decision 
making, which should have much stronger powers, and would also mean stricter constraints 
on national budget policies.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
This kind of reforms would require a comprehensive change to the EU Treaty but, above all, 
an  adequate  mechanism  to  ensure  their  democratic  legitimacy.  Let  me  outline  the  ideal 
cornerstones  of  such  a  governance  reform.  First,  to  ensure  fiscal  discipline,  all  planned 
deficits of more than 3% of GDP and those in excess of a country’s medium term objective 
would  need  to  be  approved  by  all  euro  area  governments.  Second,  past  fiscal  slippages 
would be automatically corrected in upcoming budgets without any room for discretion via the 
introduction  of  constitutional  rules  similar  to  the  German  “debt  brake”.  Third,  all  Member 
States  would  also  agree  to  implement  fines  and  sanctions  in  a  quasi-automatic  mode. 
Finally,  with  the  introduction  in  2013  of  a  permanent  crisis  resolution  mechanisms,  the 
European Stability Mechanism (ESM) – I shall come back later to a more detailed discussion 
of  the  ESM  –,  those  countries  slipping  over  their  macroeconomic  adjustment  programmes 
would be placed under financial receivership.  
The institutional arrangements at both national and supranational level would also have to be 
strengthened.  At  the  national  level,  independent  budget  offices  would  ensure  reliable 
forecasts  –  a  prerequisite  for  sound  planning  and  implementation  of  budgets.  At  the  euro 
area level this needs to be complemented by an independent entity with a clear mandate and 
a  strong  institutional  framework  to  assess  the  implementation  of  fiscal  rules.  For  instance, 
some form of European Budget Office or “EBO”, which could potentially form the nucleus of 
what  could  become  over  time,  and  in  a  gradual  manner,  a  European  Ministry  of  Finance. 
Strong and independent institutions at the euro area and national levels serve to enhance 
transparency.  They  bring  the  necessary  pressure  to  bear  to  ensure  the  conduct  of  sound 
policies and effectively counteract possible tendencies towards a lenient implementation of 
fiscal rules at the level of individual member states. 
In addition to the “Six-pack” in March 2011 the Heads of State or government of the euro 
area  agreed  on  a  “Euro  Plus  Pact”  to  strengthen  policy  coordination  in  order  to  improve 
competitiveness and convergence. Under this agreement euro area governments commit to 
use a set of common indicators to regularly monitor each others progress in areas such as 
labour-market  reforms,  reforms  to  wage-setting  arrangements  and  reforms  aimed  at 
improving the sustainability of pension, health care and social benefit systems. Governments 
who signed the Euro Plus Pact also committed to translate the rules set out in the Stability 
and  Growth  Pact  into  their  national  legislations.  The  reform  of  article  135  of  the  Spanish 
constitution  in  August  2011,  which  for  the  first  time  introduced  the  principle  of  budgetary 
stability  into  the  fundamental  law  of  the  country,  is  a  positive  example  of  recent  progress 
made in this area. 
The new architecture for financial supervision 
But as I said earlier, in the lead up to the present crisis governments were not the only ones 
to  fail  in  their  responsibilities.  The  functioning  of  our  financial  system  also  proved  to  have 
important shortcomings.  
To  address  these  issues  a  new  EU  architecture  in  the  area  of  financial  supervision  has 
become operational in 2011. Let me recall that the EU institutional framework for  financial 
supervision  is  based  on  two  pillars.  The  first  pillar  is  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board 
(ESRB),  which  is  the  body  responsible  for  macro-prudential  supervision  of  the  whole  EU 
financial  system.  According  to  the  founding  legislation,  the  ESRB  has  to  act  with  the 
logistical, analytical, statistical and administrative support of the ECB. Indeed, over the last 
year the ECB has made a considerable effort to strengthen its analytical tools and models in 
order to support the EU-wide risk assessment of the ESRB. The ESRB has just published its 
first set of policy recommendations concerning lending in foreign currencies.  
The  second  pillar  is  the  European  System  of  Financial  Supervisors,  including  the  national 
supervisory  authorities  and  the  three  European  Supervisory  Authorities  (ESAs):  the 
European  Banking  Authority  (EBA),  the  European  Insurance  and  Occupational  Pensions 
Authority  (EIOPA)  and  the  European  Securities  and  Markets  Authority  (ESMA).  After  an 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
initial  “set-up”  period,  the  three  ESAs  are  already  proving  to  be  effective  in  steering  the 
coordinated efforts of the national supervisory authorities, for instance coordinating EU-wide 
stress tests. 
At  the  global  level,  significant  progress  has  also  been  made  on  banking  supervision.  The 
financial  crisis  clearly  demonstrated  the  need  to  overhaul  and  complement  the  existing 
international  regulatory  frameworks.  Against  this  background,  the  G20  Leaders  called  for 
broad regulatory reforms. As regards banking regulation, key elements of these reforms are 
the  new  international  capital  and  liquidity  frameworks,  which  are  commonly  referred  to  as 
“Basel III”.  
The  new  Basel  III  framework  seeks  to  increase  minimum  capital  requirements  on  banks, 
enhance the ability of the regulatory framework to capture different sets of risks, introduce a 
stricter  definition  of  capital  as  well  as  entirely  new  concepts,  such  as  a  non-risk-based 
leverage  ratios  and  mandatory  liquidity  requirements.  The  implementation  of  Basel  III  is 
expected to increase the resilience of the financial system and reduce the frequency of crises 
in the future. 
The main challenge that lies ahead is the timely and consistent implementation of the new 
Basel  III  framework  at  the  global  level.  The  Basel  Committee  agreed  to  put  in  place  a 
comprehensive and robust review process covering all aspects of Basel III implementation. 
In this context, I very much welcome the fact that the European Commission was one of the 
first,  at  the  international  level,  to  take  the  initiative  in  actively  implementing  Basel  III  by 
issuing a fully-fledged EU capital requirements regulation and directive on 20 July 2011. In 
the  coming  months  the  ECB  will  issue  its  official  Opinion  on  this  regulation  by  the 
Commission. 
With the spill-over of the sovereign debt crisis to the situation of European banks, markets 
have  become  increasingly  worried  about  whether  banks  have  sufficient  capital  buffers  to 
sustain  losses  stemming  from  sovereign  risks.  Market  pressure  for  a  front-loading  of  the 
Basel III requirements has also become manifest. To address some of these concerns, on 
the same day of the 26 October Euro Summit the EBA announced that it will require banks to 
build an additional temporary capital buffer against their sovereign debt exposures to reflect 
current market prices. In addition, as I already mentioned earlier, banks will be required to 
establish  a buffer  such that  their  Core  Tier  1  capital  ratio  reaches  9% by  the  end  of  June 
2012. 
Further progress in financial supervision is also needed in other areas like the oversight of 
the shadow banking system and the treatment of systemically important financial institutions 
(SIFIs). As regards these institutions, I would like to highlight that the efforts at euro-area and 
EU levels to address the financial crisis are supported by the broader coordinated action of 
all G20 countries to reform key elements of financial regulation. In this context, the recent 
G20  meeting  in  Cannes  was  of  crucial  importance,  as  the  G20  leaders  endorsed  a 
comprehensive  framework  to  reduce  the  risks  posed  by  SIFIs,  including  strengthened 
supervision,  key  attributes  of  effective  resolution  regimes,  a  framework  for  cross-border 
cooperation  and  recovery  and  resolution  planning  as  well  as  additional  requirements  to 
absorb  losses  in  the  case  of  those  banks  classified  as  Global  SIFIs.  In  addition  to  these 
initiatives,  initial  recommendations  and  a  work  plan  to  strengthen  the  regulation  and 
oversight of the shadow banking system were also agreed upon.  
The EFSF and ESM  
This  review  of  the  main  institutional,  supervisory  and  regulatory  initiatives  that  have  been 
undertaken  in  response  to  the  crisis  would  not  be  complete  without  also  mentioning  the 
creation of the permanent euro area crisis resolution mechanism.  
As  you  know,  on  July  2013  the  European  Stability  Mechanism  (ESM)  will  take  over  the 
functions that are currently performed by the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) and 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the  European  Financial  Stabilisation  Mechanism  (EFSM).  Both  the  EFSF  and  the  EFSM 
were established in 2010 as temporary arrangements to tackle the urgent need to finance 
governments  in  the  euro  area  that  had  lost  access  to  market  financing  as  a  result  of  the 
sovereign debt crisis.  
The main objective of the future ESM will be to provide financial assistance, subject to strict 
conditionality,  to  euro  area  countries  experiencing  severe  financing  difficulties.  As  with  the 
EFSF,  this  assistance  will  predominantly  take  the  form  of  loans  known  as  ESM  Stability 
Support  (ESS)  loans.  These  loans  will  be  granted  conditional  on  agreement  to  and 
compliance  with  a  strict  macroeconomic  adjustment  programme.  The  maturity  of  the  ESS 
loans will depend on the nature of the imbalances and the beneficiary country’s prospects for 
regaining access to financial markets. The interest rate on the loans, which may  be either 
fixed or variable, will reflect both the funding cost of the ESM and the need to avoid moral 
hazard behaviour by borrower countries. More recently, the Heads of State or Government of 
the  euro  area  and  EU  institutions  have  formally  announced  their  decision  to  entrust  the 
EFSM/ESM with the power to finance the recapitalisation of financial institutions via loans to 
governments, including those of countries not under an EU/IMF programme. The ESM will 
also be able to intervene in the secondary government bond markets on the basis of an ECB 
analysis recognizing the existence of exceptional financial market circumstances and risks to 
financial  stability  and  on  the  basis  of  a  decision  by  mutual  agreement  of  the  EFSF/ESM 
Member States, to avoid contagion. 
As I mentioned at the beginning of my speech, on 26 October the Euro Summit also agreed 
to leverage existing EFSF resources by up to 4 or 5 times. This leveraging will be achieved 
via  two  different  schemes  which  may  be  used  simultaneously.  The  first  is  a  credit 
enhancement  scheme,  through  which  private  investors  will  be  able  to  purchase  risk 
insurance when buying new debt issued by Member States. The second scheme consists of 
the creation of an SPV which will combine resources of the EFSF with those of private and 
public financial institutions and investors.  
The  Eurogroup  will  finalise  the  terms  and  conditions  for  the  implementation  of  these  two 
schemes in November and further cooperation with the IMF will be sought to further enhance 
the resources of the EFSF. 
Conclusion  
4. 
I would like to conclude by highlighting that the financial turmoil and the ongoing sovereign 
debt  crisis  have  reminded  us  how  important  effective  institutions  that  ensure  an  efficient 
adjustment mechanism to economic shocks are. In monetary unions this is even more the 
case  because  countries  share  their  monetary  sovereignty  and  lack  the  possibility  to 
manoeuvre the nominal exchange rate to correct internal and external imbalances.  
The policy lessons for the future are clear: 
First, monetary policy must remain focussed on its key objective of delivering price stability. 
Central banks can best contribute to financial stability, including containing contagion risks, 
by  providing  a  firm  anchor  for  inflation  expectations  as  well  as  by  supplying  the  financial 
system with the necessary liquidity. Monetary policy, however, cannot substitute for the need 
for governments and private agents to deliver on their own responsibilities.  
Second,  euro  area  governments  must  urgently  bring  forward  necessary  structural  reforms 
and  engage  in  sustainable  fiscal  policies  within  a  strengthened  euro  area  governance 
framework.  A  number  of  steps  have  been  undertaken  recently  to  strengthen  economic 
governance. Fiscal policies should, however, be more grounded in a rules-based framework 
with  clear  medium  term  objectives,  similar  to  monetary  policy.  In  this  regard,  the  recent 
adoption of fiscal rules by some euro area countries is clearly an improvement. Moreover, for 
the  agreed  rules  and  sanctions  to  be  fully  credible,  they  should  be  stricter  and  more 
automatic in nature. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
Third,  we  should  not  forget  about  the  financial  sector.  Throughout  the  crisis,  financial 
institutions have benefited from the support of central banks and governments. Now the call 
is  also  on  those  financial  institutions  to  improve  on  shielding  themselves  against  market 
distress and turbulence. In this regard, the reform of financial supervision and regulation is 
crucial. Basel III is a very important step in the right direction, as it should provide for higher 
minimum  capital  requirements  and  better  risk  provisions  by  financial  institutions.  Yet,  the 
regulation  of  the  banking  system  and  financial  markets  has  not  progressed  sufficiently, 
particularly  with  respect  to  the  so-called  shadow  banking  sector  and  the  treatment  of 
systemically important financial institutions (SIFIs).  
Having witnessed the determination shown by European leaders at the last Euro Summit to 
address the main challenges confronting Europe today, I am confident that we will soon be 
able to overcome this crisis. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
