Duvvuri Subbarao: Rejigging the elephant dance 
Text of the Haksar Memorial Lecture by Dr Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor of the Reserve Bank 
of  India,  at  the  Centre  for  Research  in  Rural  &  Industrial  Development,  Chandigarh, 
25 November 2011. 
 1. 
Thank  you  for  inviting  me  to  deliver  this  year’s  Haksar  Memorial  lecture.  It  is  an 
honour  to  which  I  attach  a  lot  of  value.  P.N.  Haksar,  whom  this  series  of  lectures 
commemorates, was an outstanding civil servant, an intellectual power house and a grand 
visionary  who  had  a  profound  impact  on  the  economic  and  political  management  of  the 
country during critical, and often turbulent, times in our post-independence history. 
P.N. Haksar 
2. 
I did not have the pleasure of knowing Shri Haksar personally. By the time I joined 
the  IAS  in  the  early  1970s,  he  was  already  in  the  top  echelons  of  the  Government  with  a 
legendary  reputation  as  a  policy  wonk.  Even  as  I  was  working  in  some  of  the  far  flung 
districts of the country in the early part of my career, we used to hear stories of Shri Haksar’s 
contribution to development policy, first as Principal Secretary to the Prime Minister and later 
as the Deputy Chairman of the Planning Commission. 
3. 
Civil servants tend to specialize in some domain or the other of administration as 
they  rise  to  the  top.  What  is  remarkable  about  Shri  Haksar  is  that  he  straddled  several 
domains – diplomacy, development administration and economic policy management – and 
did  so  like  a  colossus.  He  negotiated  the  strategic  friendship  pact  with  the  former  Soviet 
Union, did the back channel diplomacy for the Shimla Agreement following the Bangladesh 
War, and played a leadership role in the abolition of privy purses to the erstwhile royalty and 
in  the  introduction  of  land  reforms.  From  the  Reserve  Bank  perspective,  his  greatest 
influence has been the part he played in the nationalization of banks in 1969. The merits of 
that  policy  are  still  the  stuff  of  debate;  what  is  clearly  beyond  debate  is  that  bank 
nationalization has dramatically changed the mandate of commercial banks, and indeed of 
the  Reserve  Bank,  by  making  economic  and  social  development  an  intrinsic  part  of  their 
agenda. 
4. 
I  struggled  hard  to  determine  the  topic  for  this  Haksar  Memorial  lecture.  As  the 
Governor of the Reserve Bank, I accept quite a few speaking commitments, and each time I 
tend to focus on a narrow topic, going more for depth rather than breadth. Such a narrow 
focus  will  not  do  justice  to  the  broad  based  expertise  and  wide  domain  knowledge  of  late 
Haksar;  nor  indeed  to  the  far  reaching  influence  he  had  on  the  course  of  economic  and 
political history of India. To appropriately honour his memory, I have decided to take on a 
broader canvas and speak about India’s development challenges. I am conscious that much 
of what I will say will be beyond the domain of the Reserve Bank. At a personal level, I will be 
stepping out of my comfort zone too. The encouragement from Shri Rashpal Malhotra and 
Prof. Sucha Singh Gill made me bold to take on this challenge. 
India growth story 
5. 
India clocked average annual growth of 9 per cent in the five year period 2003–08. 
For a nation that once believed that the Hindu rate of growth was its destiny, this remarkable 
growth  performance  was  cause  for  celebration.  It  was  also  a  trigger  for  setting  off  an 
aspiration for double digit growth. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
 The  India  growth  story  was  thrown  off  track  by  the  global  financial  crisis  which 
6. 
engulfed virtually every country in the world. We recovered from the crisis sooner than other 
countries, but the growth rate is yet to reach the pre-crisis level. There is widespread anxiety 
that we may have got derailed from the high growth trajectory, and a number of questions 
are  being  asked.  Is  our  growth  story  faltering?  Has  India’s  potential  growth  rate  declined 
because of the crisis? Are the growth drivers that worked our way during 2003–08 still intact? 
When  will  we  reach  double  digit  growth,  and  what  indeed  should  we  be  doing  to  achieve 
that? 
Elephants too dance 
7. 
 My simple and single answer to all of the above questions is that the India growth 
story  is  still  credible.  If  the  East  Asians  are  the  tigers,  and  China  the  dragon,  India  is 
commonly “the elephant” – a strong animal with enormous potential but given to a lumbering 
pace. For a world that once believed that an elephant does not have any animal spirit, our 
march up the high growth trajectory proved that an elephant too can dance. But the elephant 
dance got interrupted by the “zoo party” of the global financial crisis, and to get it back on 
course, we need to rejig the dance. 
8. 
 So,  for  India  to  regain  its  growth  momentum  and  indeed  accelerate  it  further,  we 
need to address several challenges. What I propose to do is to outline what in my view are 
the ten most important challenges that we need to address to move up the growth ladder. 
First challenge: raising agricultural production and productivity 
9. 
The first challenge is stepping up agriculture production and productivity. We have, 
of  course,  come  a  long  way  from  the  chronic  food  shortages  of  the  early  years  of 
independence; and even as population increased, we have been able to maintain food self-
sufficiency,  thanks  to  investment  in  irrigation,  improved  farming  practices  and  better 
technologies.  But  in  recent  years,  there  has  been  growing  concern  about  erosion  at  the 
margin  of  food  self-sufficiency.  The  supply-demand  gap  in  the  food  sector  is,  in  part,  a 
problem of success – a consequence of a shift in dietary habits from cereal to protein based 
foods reflecting rising incomes, especially rural incomes. Regardless, our quest for inclusive 
growth will be jeopardized if we are not able to address the root causes of structural food 
inflation. 
10. 
Some analysts argue that agriculture cannot be a concern from an overall growth 
perspective because it accounts for only about 15 per cent of GDP, and that the share will 
further decline as the economy matures. This argument is flawed. Even as its share may be 
small and declining, agriculture still accommodates 53 per cent of the labour force. Besides, 
agriculture has very vital supply demand linkages with other sectors of the economy. Raising 
agricultural production and productivity is, therefore, important for containing price pressures, 
raising rural incomes and making growth more inclusive. 
There  are  several  initiatives  necessary  to  launch  the  second  Green  Revolution  – 
11. 
larger  public  investment,  greater  input  efficiency,  soil  conservation,  improved  farming 
practices, developing resilience to rainfall variations and climate change effects, to name just 
a  few.  And  to  build  forward  and  backward  linkages,  there  is  need  to  invest  in  rural 
infrastructure and the supply chain. We also need to be mindful that land and water costs will 
only  increase  over  time;  and  inclusive  growth  will  push  up  wages  thereby  putting  upward 
pressure on inflation. In a context of rising costs, improving productivity becomes imperative 
to balance the needs of producers for higher prices and the demand of consumers for low 
prices. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Second challenge: expanding employment 
12. 
The second major challenge to making growth inclusive is to expand employment 
opportunities. Even as more people than ever before are in work, there is a sense of crisis 
about  jobs.  That  is  not  surprising  because  unemployment  is  the  most  significant  cause  of 
economic pain in a poor country. 
13. 
Unemployment may be one of our biggest problems, but analyzing the problem is a 
challenge  not  the  least  because  there  are  no  reliable  statistics.  There  is  an  enormous 
amount of unemployment and underemployment in the rural sector but the size and nature of 
the  problem  are  unclear.  Millions  of  people  are  locked  in  low  productivity  jobs  in  the 
unorganized industry and service sectors. India’s high end IT service sector may be dazzling 
the  world  but,  contrary  to  popular  perception,  it  employs  no  more  than  3  million.  So,  the 
problem of jobs is that a lot of people are out of work, and where they have work to do, they 
are performing below their potential. 
14. 
The  recent  National  Sample  Survey  Organization  (NSSO)  data  suggest  that  both 
unemployment rate and employment growth declined during the period 2004/05 to 2009/10. 
This  is  intriguing,  but  has  been  explained  as  a  result  of  a  large  number  of  young  people 
pursuing education resulting in fewer job seekers. This means only a temporary respite, as 
once out of school, these people will add to the labour force. There will be other pressures 
too.  As  agricultural  productivity  goes  up,  it  will  release  millions  of  surplus  labour  who  will 
have to be found jobs outside the farm sector. Also, more women will join the labour force 
and add to the demand for jobs. Putting all these trends together, various estimates suggest 
that India’s labour force will increase by 250–300 million in the next twenty years. 
15. 
Finding productive jobs for such huge numbers is a big challenge, and clearly the 
answer lies in stepping up growth, and importantly, stepping up the employment intensity of 
growth. Where are the jobs going to come from? To examine that, it will be interesting to look 
at the relative shares of different sectors of the economy in GDP and in jobs. The following 
table shows the figures for 2009/10. 
Sectoral shares of GDP and employment 2009/10 
 Share of GDP 
Share of employment 
Agriculture 
Industry 
Services 
(Percentages) 
53 
12 
35 
15 
20 
65 
16. 
The  above  numbers  clearly  underscore  the  need  to  move  people  out  of  low 
productivity  jobs  in  agriculture  to  industry  and  services.  A  portion  of  the  surplus  labour  in 
agriculture could be absorbed in non-farm allied activities. There will be opportunities also in 
the construction sector which is growing, but a major expansion of job opportunities in the 
service sector will not be possible without skill improvement. That will inevitably take time. 
So, much of the burden of job creation falls on the manufacturing sector. 
17. 
For  a  long  time,  it  was  believed  that  India  defied  the  text  book  development 
paradigm  by  leapfrogging  directly  from  agriculture  to  services,  skipping  the  manufacturing 
sector. Our experience clearly demonstrates that such a “leap frog” cannot be sustained. We 
have to heed the text book and look to manufacturing for expanding employment. 
18. 
The  recently  unveiled  National  Manufacturing  Policy  aims  at  raising  the  share  of 
manufacturing in GDP from 16 per cent to 25 per cent and generating additional employment 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
of 100 million by 2022. To exploit the full job potential of this emphasis on manufacturing, we 
need to liberalize our labour laws and employment regulations so that perverse incentives to 
push labour into the unorganized sector are eliminated. 
19. 
My discussion of the challenge of job creation will be incomplete if I do not address 
the issue of “demographic dividend”. The demographic dividend argument, which has gained 
increasing  currency  in  recent  years,  goes  as  follows.  Demographics  are  in  India’s  favour 
because  the  working  age  population  is  growing  faster  than  the  overall  population.  This 
expanding  working  age  population  will  earn,  and  will  save,  thereby  contributing  to  higher 
savings  and  higher  investment,  which  will  lead  to  higher  growth.  Aren’t  we  carrying  this 
“demography  is  destiny”  argument  too  far?  There  is  nothing  inevitable  about  the 
demographic dividend. Demographic dividend will flow if, and only if, we are able to find jobs 
for the growing labour force. 
20. 
expand employment opportunities and improve labour productivity. 
To summarize, the second challenge to sustaining India’s growth momentum is to 
Third challenge: raising productivity 
21. 
Job  expansion  is  one  side  of  the  challenge  to  inclusive  growth.  The  other  side  is 
enhancing  productivity.  Historical  evidence  clearly  demonstrates  a  quantum  jump  in 
productivity as labour moves from the agriculture to the secondary and tertiary sectors. Back 
of the envelope calculations show that at the current stage of our economic development, as 
a worker moves from agriculture to other sectors, his/her productivity increases by nearly a 
factor of five. 
22. 
Productivity  improvement  entails  better  managing  factors  of  production  as  well  as 
factor  productivity.  In  terms  of  factors  of  production,  managing  surplus  labour  in  the  farm 
sector, raising the rate of domestic savings, attracting stable foreign savings, sustainable use 
of  natural  resources  and  managing  the  demand  on  land  from  key  growth  sectors  will  be 
important. 
23. 
Improving factor productivity hinges critically on raising the skill endowment of the 
labour force. The skills gap is no longer just a handicap; it is turning out to be a crisis. For 
example, we want to scale up steel production to 120 MT, and that requires millions of skilled 
people.  Yet  finding  even  a  crane  operator  is  oftentimes  a  challenge.  Even  as  demand  for 
skills  increases,  the  supply  side  response  is  lagging  far  behind.  India  churns  out  350,000 
engineers every year, but barely a quarter of them are employable. We have 7000 ITIs, but 
their curriculums are woefully outdated. 
24. 
There  is  an  incentive  issue  in  skill  training.  Skill  development  is  a  quintessentially 
merit good where the societal cost benefit calculus is higher than the individual cost-benefit 
calculation. The private sector will be reluctant to invest in skills since workers can migrate 
with  their  skills.  This  was  the  understanding  that  prompted  the  Government  to  launch  the 
ambitious  National  Skill  Development  Programme  as  a  PPP  initiative  to  train  500  million 
people by 2022. Several states are also allowing vocational training institutions to be set up 
as PPP initiatives as well as not-for-profit societies. 
25. 
range of areas in order to raise the growth rate as well as the quality of growth. 
To conclude, we need to focus a lot more on improving productivity across a broad 
Fourth challenge: managing urbanization 
26. 
Historically, there has been a strong correlation between urbanization and economic 
growth  across  countries  and  across  time  with  the  causation  possibly  running  both  ways. 
Empirical studies show that middle income countries reach about 50 per cent urbanization 
and high income countries typically have 70–80 per cent urbanization. China’s rapid growth 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
two 
from 
tasks 
therefore,  presents 
Accelerating  growth, 
over the last two decades, for example, ran concurrently with an increase in urbanization rate 
from 32 per cent in 1997 to 50 per cent in 2010 consistent with its low middle income status. 
In India, we are behind on urbanization. In the twenty years since the start of reforms, the 
proportion of urban population increased from 26 per cent in 1991 to just about 31 per cent in 
2011. 
27. 
the  urbanization 
perspective. First, the rate of urbanization has to pick up pace so as to move people up the 
productivity  ladder,  and  second,  we  have  to  manage  the  pressures  of  urbanization 
proactively. 
28. 
The costs of unplanned urbanization are already very visible in terms of the huge 
strains on infrastructure and sanitation, pressure on utilities and inadequate and low quality 
social  service  provision.  Our  cities are  clearly unprepared for  the  influx  of  migrants  on  the 
scale  that  it  is  occurring  and  the  result  is  slums  and  squatter  settlements.  Unplanned 
urbanization has also entailed other problems ranging from crime, law and order, pollution, 
congestion and environmental degradation. 
29. 
Expanding  urban  infrastructure  demands  huge  resources.  Isher  Judge  Ahluwalia 
and  others  have  estimated  that  investment  requirements  for  urban  infrastructure  over  the 
twenty  year  period  2012–2031  would  be  about  40  trillion  which  translates  to  an  annual 
average investment of about $100 per capita. Mobilizing resources of this order is obviously 
a  big  challenge  and  will  call  for  more  effective  taxation,  efficient  project  planning  and 
implementation, innovative urban governance and much greater sensitivity to embracing the 
migrants into the urban ecology. 
Fifth challenge: bridging the infrastructure deficit 
30. 
It is widely acknowledged that infrastructure deficit is by far one of the most binding 
constraints to accelerating growth. Even so, our efforts to bridge the deficit have fallen way 
short of the task. The Eleventh Five Year Plan projected investment in infrastructure of $500 
billion but the final expenditure is likely to fall well short of that. The Twelfth Plan doubles the 
projected investment over the five year period 2012–17 to $1 trillion which means that annual 
investment in infrastructure has to increase from the current level of 6 per cent of GDP to 
over 10 per cent. 
31. 
Given  its  fiscal  compulsions,  the  Government  will  clearly  not  be  able  to  mobilize 
resources  of  this  order.  The  Twelfth  Plan  projections  call  for  50  per  cent  of  the  projected 
investment  to  come  from  the  private  sector  and  much  of  the  project  implementation  to 
happen in the PPP mode. 
32. 
 Infrastructure  investment,  therefore,  poses  three  sub-challenges:  mobilizing  the 
necessary  resources,  reforming  regulations  and  contractual  arrangements  and  efficient 
project planning and execution. 
33. 
Let  me  make  a  comment  here  on  the  Reserve  Bank’s  efforts  to  support 
infrastructure  financing.  Infrastructure  requires  long-term  finance,  and  it  should  ideally  be 
funded by long term sources like insurance and pension funds. Since these markets in India 
are  still  not deep  enough,  the  burden  of  financing  infrastructure  is  falling  on  banks.  Banks 
cannot  expand  lending  for  infrastructure  beyond  a  point  because  of  exposure  risks.  In 
financing  infrastructure,  banks  also  face  an  asset-liability  mismatch  problem  since  their 
liabilities are largely short-term whereas infrastructure funding is typically long-term. 
34. 
In order to support infrastructure financing by banks, the Reserve Bank has relaxed 
regulatory norms to the extent prudential limits would permit. These include higher exposure 
norms  in  respect  of  single  borrowers  and  borrower  groups,  permitting  banks  to  invest  in 
Infrastructure Debt Funds (IDFs) and to enter into take out financing arrangements, relaxing 
regulations  governing  bank  guarantees  for  infrastructure  financing  and  for  financing 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
promoters equity, and creating a separate category of NBFCs specializing in infrastructure 
finance (infrastructure finance companies). 
35. 
Development  of  the  corporate  bond  market  will  go  a  long  way  in  augmenting 
infrastructure financing. Both the Government and the Reserve Bank have taken a number of 
initiatives  to  develop  the  corporate  bond  market  and  some  further  initiatives  are  in  the 
pipeline. Even as these measures to ease the supply side of the corporate bond market are 
important, it is also the case that the corporate bond market remains demand constrained 
suggesting that we need to address the issue from that perspective as well. 
Sixth challenge: improving social sector outcomes 
India’s  human  development  indicators  are  distressing.  As per  the  UNDP’s  Human 
36. 
Development Index (HDI) 2011, we rank 134 out of 187 countries, clearly in the bottom third 
of the league of nations. Even as education and health outcomes have improved over the 
years,  on  many  indicators  such  as  life  expectancy  at  birth,  educational  attainment  and 
nutrition levels, we rank well below average. 
37. 
Historical evidence shows that economic development and social development are 
strongly  correlated  with  the  causation  possibly  running  both  ways.  In  recent  years,  the 
Government has stepped up expenditure on education, health and nutrition, revamped social 
sector programmes and tried to improve the delivery systems. 
38. 
Among  the  many  lacunae  of  our  social  sector  programmes  is  that  we  continue  to 
emphasize  outputs  and  not  outcomes.  For  improving  service  delivery,  we  need  to  spend 
more on the twin merit goods of primary education and basic health. But we also need to 
spend  more  efficiently,  because  better  education  and  health  are  a  function  not  just  of  the 
quantum of expenditure but also of the quality of that expenditure. 
39. 
Let me illustrate this by an example. The Centre and the states in India today spend 
a total of 4 per cent of GDP on education. The goal is to raise this ratio to 6 per cent of GDP. 
That is necessary but not sufficient. Note that countries in our neighbourhood – China and 
Sri Lanka – spend less than 4 per cent of their respective GDPs on education. Yet they have 
literacy levels in the range of 90+ per cent as compared to our 74 per cent. The same goes 
for the health sector too. So, what matters is not just the quantum of expenditure, but also 
the quality of expenditure as measured by outcomes. Just to illustrate, according to a 2010 
report by Pratham, an NGO focused on education, only 17 per cent of children in classes 1 to 
8 in rural areas have the ability to read a word and only 40 per cent are able to recognize 
numbers. 
Seventh challenge: promoting financial inclusion 
40. 
Why  is  financial  inclusion  important?  It  is  important  because  it  is  a  necessary 
condition  for  sustaining  equitable  growth.  There  are  few,  if  any,  instances  of  an  economy 
transiting from an agrarian system to a post-industrial modern society without broad-based 
financial inclusion. As people having comfortable access to financial services, we all know 
from  personal  experience  that  economic  opportunity  is  strongly  intertwined  with  financial 
access. Such access is especially powerful for the poor as it provides them opportunities to 
build  savings,  make  investments  and  avail  credit.  Importantly,  access  to  financial  services 
also  helps  the  poor  insure  themselves  against  income  shocks  and  equips  them  to  meet 
emergencies  such  as  illness,  death  in  the  family  or  loss  of  employment.  Needless  to  add, 
financial inclusion protects the poor from the clutches of the usurious money lenders. 
Apart from helping the poor at the micro level, financial inclusion delivers benefits at 
41. 
the macro level too. By transferring money directly to the bank accounts of the beneficiaries, 
the  Government  can  minimize  the  leakage  in  its  affirmative  action  programmes.  Financial 
inclusion gives access to banks of a large pool of low cost and stable funds which will aid 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
their  asset  liability  management.  Financial  inclusion  is,  therefore,  a  win-win  proposition  for 
the poor, for the banks, for the governments at the Centre and the states and for the national 
economy. 
42. 
Yet the extent of financial exclusion is staggering. Out of the 600,000 habitations in 
the country, less than 30,000 have a commercial bank branch. Just about 40 per cent of the 
population across the country have bank accounts, and this ratio is much lower in the north-
east of the country. The proportion of people having any kind of life insurance cover is as low 
as 10 per cent and proportion having non-life insurance is an abysmally low 0.6 per cent. 
43. 
These statistics, distressing as they are, do not convey the true extent of financial 
exclusion.  Even  where  bank  accounts  are  claimed  to  have  been  opened,  verification  has 
often  shown  that  these  accounts  are  dormant.  Few  conduct  any  banking  transactions  and 
even fewer receive any credit. Millions of people across the country are thereby denied the 
opportunity to harness their earning capacity and entrepreneurial talent, and are condemned 
to marginalization and poverty. 
44. 
Over  the  last  four  years,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  launched  several  initiatives  to 
deepen  financial  inclusion.  Our  goal  is  not  just  that  poor  households  must  have  a  bank 
account, but that the account must be effectively used by them for savings, remittances and 
for  credit.  Our  most  ambitious  initiative  has  been  the  “Business  Correspondent”  model  or 
branchless banking which helps reach banking services to remote villages at a low overhead 
cost. 
45. 
By far the biggest factor inhibiting financial inclusion is that banks continue to see it 
as an obligation and not an opportunity. If banks take a slightly longer term view, they will, I 
am sure, change their perception. Remember that illustration they give in business strategy 
courses. A business executive of a shoe company was sent to a large developing country to 
assess the market potential there. What he saw was millions of people going without shoes. 
He came back and reported to the management that there was no business potential there 
because no one wears shoes. A few months later, a strategist of a rival company went and 
saw  the  same  picture.  He  came  back  and  reported  to  his  management  that  there  is 
tremendous business potential in that country because of the number of shoes they can sell. 
Ultimately, it is a question of mindset. And such a change in mindset is what is necessary to 
make financial inclusion meaningful. 
Eighth challenge: managing globalization 
46. 
Globalization, as measured by the movement of ideas, people, goods, services and 
capital across borders has undoubtedly been one of the defining features of the last twenty-
five years. For countries that believed that geography is destiny, globalization has opened up 
incredible  opportunities,  but  also  exposed  them  to  ruthless  challenges.  If  the  “Great 
Moderation”  in  the  years  before  the  crisis  –  steady  growth  in  advanced  economies  and 
accelerating growth in emerging economies, and low and stable inflation all around the world – 
was  an  indication  of  the  positive  side  of  globalization,  the  devastating  toll  of  the  global 
financial crisis was its negative side. 
47. 
India  too  is  integrating  with  the  world,  more  extensively,  more  deeply,  and  faster 
than we tend to acknowledge. India’s remarkable growth acceleration in the period 2003–08 
is a demonstration of the positive side of globalization. We benefitted from steady growth and 
stability around the world. But on the flip side, the fact that we were affected by the crisis, no 
doubt  by  less  than  other  countries,  is  an  illustration  of  the  negative  side  of  globalization. 
There was dismay, if not despair, that we were affected by the global financial crisis of 2008. 
This is because our expectations were shaped by the Asian crisis a decade ago where we 
came out relatively unscathed. The reason we got hit by the 2008 crisis is that between the 
Asian crisis of the late 1990s and the global financial crisis of 2008, India’s integration with 
the world has deepened as evidenced by the numbers in the table below. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
India’s deepening global integration 
  As percentage of GDP 
1998/99 
2008/09 
20 
44 
41 
112 
(Export+Import)/GDP 
Two way (capital+current flows) / GDP 
 
48. 
 As  may  be  seen,  India’s  two-way  trade  flows  doubled  in  the  ten  year  period  
1998–2008, but the two-way current and capital flows increased by more than two and a half 
times evidencing that India’s trade integration with the world got deeper, but that its financial 
integration got even deeper. 
49. 
 Globalization  as  an  economic  force  is  here  to  stay.  It  is  too  potent  a  force  to  be 
comprehensively reversed, although there may be some short-term blips. As Nayan Chanda 
says  in  his  book,  “Bound  Together:  How  Traders,  Preachers,  Adventurers  and  Warriors 
Shaped Globalization”, globalization was, is, and will always be inevitable. No revolution in 
human  history  has  been  totally  benign.  So  is  it  the  case  with  globalization.  It  comes  with 
benefits and costs. 
50. 
The challenge for us, as indeed for every country in the world, will be to minimize 
the costs and maximize the benefits of globalization. As India further embraces globalization, 
there are many things we should be doing to optimize the cost-benefit calculus. I will cite just 
two examples to illustrate the point. 
51. 
From the macro perspective, we need to manage the “Impossible Trinity”. According 
to  the  “Impossible  Trinity”  theory,  a  country  cannot  simultaneously  have  a  fixed  exchange 
rate, an open capital account and independent monetary policy. Most advanced economies 
give  up  on  the  fixed  exchange  rate  to  gain  policy  leverage  on  the  other  two  parameters. 
Emerging  economies  typically  eschew  corner  solutions  in  favour  of  middle  solutions.  For 
example,  in  India,  our  capital  account  is  partly  open,  we  let  the  exchange  rate  float  and 
intervene  only 
to 
macroeconomic stability, and operate our monetary policy taking into account the impact of 
external  developments  on  our  domestic  situation.  Our  challenge  will  be  to  continue  to 
manage this impossible trinity even as we gradually open up our economy further. 
52. 
Another  dimension  of  the  globalization  challenge  that  I  want  to  illustrate  is 
“innovation”. Innovation has always been, and will always be, the well-spring of growth, but 
its importance increases in a knowledge economy. History has shown that as an economy 
grows,  first  incomes  and  then  wages  rise,  and  it  then  loses  competitiveness  in  labour 
intensive industries forcing it to seek new sources of growth through innovation. Or else, it 
gets locked into what has now come to be called the “middle income trap”. For example, in 
India  we  enjoyed  a  comparative  advantage  in  the  IT  industry  because  of  our  superior 
technical  manpower  and  knowledge  of  English.  But  that  advantage  is  now  threatened  as 
other  countries  are  fast  catching  up.  In  order  to  continue  to  benefit  from  globalization,  we 
need to move up the value chain and the only way that can happen is through innovation. 
53. 
To summarize, given that globalization is inevitable, and India will further embrace 
globalization, we need to harness it to our advantage so that it aids both the quantum and 
quality of our growth. 
the  purpose  of  managing  excess  volatility  and  disruptions 
for 
Ninth challenge: providing a stable and predictable macroeconomic environment 
54. 
That a stable and predictable macroeconomic environment is a necessary condition 
for growth is too obvious to need any reiteration. It is only in such an environment that both 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
savers and investors can make informed decisions so that savings translate efficiently into 
productive investment. Every country that has got into a crisis in the last twenty-five years 
tells a story of excess – an excess carried to an unsustainable level and then an implosion. 
Fast  growth  gained  through  an  excess  can  be  an  allure  because  the  signs  of  instability 
brewing  in  the  underbelly  are  oftentimes  not  visible  in  real  time.  But  when  the  implosion 
inevitably happens, the losses by way of lost growth and welfare can be monumental. 
55. 
I  want  to  emphasize  the  importance  of  a  stable  macroeconomic  environment  by 
referring to two of our big tasks. The first is reduction of fiscal deficits both at the Centre and 
in  the  states  to  stabilize  the  debt-GDP  ratios  at  sustainable  levels.  The  harm  that  fiscal 
irresponsibility  can  cause  is  evident  from  both  our  own  experience  and  that  of  other 
countries. In charting a roadmap for fiscal consolidation, we also need to be mindful of the 
quality of fiscal adjustment – which is to weed out unproductive expenditure and protect, if 
not enhance, growth-promoting expenditure. 
56. 
The second task is to bring inflation down first to 5 per cent, and then even lower, 
consistent with India’s broader integration into the global economy. A high inflation scenario 
makes  both  savers  and  investors  uncertain.  The  current  inflation  we  are  experiencing  is  a 
consequence of both supply shocks and demand pressures. The Reserve Bank’s monetary 
tightening has been aimed at restraining demand and anchoring inflation expectations. This 
has  to  be  supplemented  by  supply  side  responses  to  raise  the  potential  output  of  the 
economy. 
Tenth challenge: good governance 
57. 
I  have  so  far  highlighted  nine  challenges  to  accelerating  our  growth.  Identifying 
these challenges and drawing up plans to address them is the relatively easy part. What is 
infinitely more difficult is the translation of those policies into action. That brings me to the 
final item on my list – the challenge of providing good governance. 
58. 
That  good  governance  is  at  the  very  heart  of  economic  growth  and  poverty 
reduction,  and  even  political  legitimacy,  is  one  of  the  undisputed  lessons  of  development 
experience from around the world over the last 60 years. 
59. 
 In the ultimate analysis, it is the quality of governance that separates success and 
failure  in  economic  development.  Across  countries,  application  of  the  same  policies  in 
roughly similar contexts has produced dramatically different results. In our own country, we 
have seen vast differences across states in development outcomes from out of the same mix 
of development policies. These differences across countries as well as across regions within 
countries,  even  as  they  adopt  similar  policy  packages,  arise  because  of  differences  in 
governance. Indeed research shows that per capita incomes and the quality of governance 
are  strongly  correlated  indicating  a  virtuous  circle  in  which  good  governance  results  in 
economic development.  
Rejig the elephant dance 
60. 
Let me now conclude. I have highlighted ten challenges that we need to address in 
order to accelerate output growth with focus on the quality of growth. I must admit that this 
list is by no means exhaustive, and individual lists can vary both in content and emphasis. I 
hope my list would, at the least, serve as a reference point for thinking through. 
61. 
As people we are understandably eager for our economy to sprint like a tiger rather 
than amble like an elephant. Yet few animals have an elephant’s stamina. And elephants do 
not always amble; they dance too. And when elephants start dancing, they can go on for a 
long long time. But while dancing, an elephant can go off course occasionally. That calls for 
rejigging  the  dance.  As  I  conclude,  my  thoughts  are  on  how  late  Shri  Haksar  might  have 
rejigged the elephant dance. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
