Deepak Mohanty: Economic and Financial developments in Goa  
Speech by Mr Deepak Mohanty, Executive Director of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Goa 
Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Goa, 31 October 2011. 
 The assistance provided by Dr. P.K. Nayak and Shri Suraj. S is acknowledged. 
I  thank  the  Goa  Chamber  of  Commerce  and  Industry  and  Shri  Mangarish  Pai  Raikar  for 
inviting  me  to  address  this  distinguished  gathering.  As  currently  Goa  is  celebrating  the 
Golden Jubilee Year of its Liberation, I thought that the occasion is appropriate to highlight 
the recent economic achievements of the state. 
The scenic state of Goa is the 25th state in the union of states of India. It covers 0.11 per 
cent of the total geographical area of the country and accounts for a similar share of 0.12 per 
cent of national population. However, it has a much larger share of 0.4 per cent of all-India 
net  domestic  product  (NDP).This  explains  why  Goa  is  the  richest  state  in  India  with  a  per 
capita income of almost three times that of the average for the country as a whole. It was 
ranked  the  best  state  by  the  Eleventh  Finance  Commission  for  its  infrastructure.  It  also 
ranked  at  the  top  for  the  best  quality  of  life  in  India  by  the  National  Commission  on 
Population. The India Human Development Report 2011 ranked Goa as fourth in terms of 
overall human development in the country. The lushness of its landscape, geographical and 
ecological  diversity  and  cultural  richness  make  Goa  a  travelers’  paradise.  Notwithstanding 
these achievements, Goa faces several developmental challenges, including in the areas of 
banking and finance. 
It  is  important  to  have  a  well-functioning  financial  system  for  sustainable  economic 
development. While the Reserve Bank has been actively engaged in the development of the 
financial sector, it has stepped up its efforts in recent years to enhance the penetration of the 
formal financial sector and promote financial inclusion with a view to improving the well-being 
of our society. In this regards, the Reserve Bank has been undertaking special initiatives for 
extending the outreach of banking facilities in the state. Against this background, I propose to 
briefly outline the economic and financial structure of the state as well as highlight various 
financial inclusion initiatives taken by the Reserve Bank. In conclusion, I shall present some 
thoughts on policy challenges ahead. 
Macroeconomic structure 
I propose to capture the macroeconomic trends in the decade of 2000s as the information on 
the  net  state  domestic  product  (NSDP)  is  available  up  to  2009–10.  The  last  decade  was 
characterised  by  accelerated  economic  growth  at  the  all-India  level.  While  all-India  NDP 
increased  at  an  annual  average  rate  of  7.1  per  cent  in  the  2000s,  the  net  state  domestic 
product  (NSDP)  of  Goa  increased  at  a  slightly  lower  rate  at  6.6  per  cent  per  annum.  But 
there  was  significant  growth  acceleration  during  the  second  half  of  2000s.  NSDP  growth 
almost doubled from 4.5 per cent per annum in the first half of the 2000s to 8.8 per cent in 
the second half. Importantly, Goa recorded a NSDP growth rate of 12.6 per cent in 2009–10 
– the highest in the decade. At this rate, Goa was among the top five fastest growing states 
in  2009–101  as  compared  with  the  increase  in  all-India  NDP  at  7.6  per  cent.  Having 
registered a high rate of growth, the challenge for Goa is to sustain the growth momentum in 
the current decade (Table 1). 
                                                 
1   The other states are Arunachal Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Mizoram and Gujarat. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The  growth  acceleration  during  the  second  half  of  2000s  was  reflected  in  high  per  capita 
income as well. In 2009–10, real (at 2004–05 prices) per capita income of Goa was much 
higher at Rs.98,807 than the all-India average of Rs. 33,731. In US dollar terms, per capita 
income of Goa increased from US $ 1,217 in 2000–01 to US $ 2,902 in 2009–10. In terms of 
per capita income, Goa is the richest state in India (Table 2). 
  In  terms  of  sectoral  composition  of  NSDP  between  2000–01  and  2009–10,  the  share  of 
agriculture and allied activity declined sharply, which was offset by the rise in the share of 
services  sector  as  the  share  of  industry  remained  steady.  This  is  because  the  agricultural 
sector  witnessed  negligible  growth  during  the  decade  reflecting  stagnant  agricultural 
production, decline  in  fish  catch,  and  falling  output  from  the  forest  sector.  Industrial  sector 
growth was in line with the national average rate. However, the share of industry was much 
higher than the national average making Goa an industrial state. The growth in the services 
sector  has  picked  up  recently,  driven  largely  by  transport,  communication  and  finance. 
Consequently,  the  share  of  the  services  sector  in  NSDP  increased  sharply,  while  that  of 
agriculture declined. The share of industry remained almost unchanged (Table 1).  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Against  the  stereotypical  view  that  Goa  economy  is  being  led  by  tourism  and  mining,  an 
analysis  of  individual  share  of  each  sector  reveals  that  manufacturing  and  communication 
contributed substantially to the growth of the economy (Chart 1). Good infrastructure facilities 
with  a  centrally  located  airport,  a  seaport,  connectivity  by  excellent  road  network  as  also 
other  essential  infrastructure  like  container  freight  station  supported  industrialization. 
Moreover,  the  industrial  policy  followed  by  the  state,  particularly  in  developing  industrial 
clusters/estates  gave  an  additional  boost  to  industry.  The  industrial  activities  encompass 
pharmaceuticals, electrical and automobile accessories. In this context, it may be mentioned 
that according to a recent report by Institute for Competitiveness (the Indian fraction of the 
global  network  of  the  Institute  for  Strategy  and  Competitiveness  at  Harvard  Business 
School), Goa has emerged as the most competitive state in the country with a high income 
and consumption pattern and favourable demographics. 
 Inflation challenges 
Inflation is a major concern not only at the national level but also at the regional level. While 
we articulate monetary policy in terms of the wholesale price index (WPI) inflation, we take 
into account all available price indices both at the aggregate and disaggregate levels. We are 
also sensitive to inflation indicators at the regional level. In our 25th October 2011 monetary 
policy review, we raised the policy repo rate for the 13th time by 25 basis points to 8.5 per 
cent to contain inflation and anchor inflation expectations. There is, however, a need to make 
a concerted effort to address both the demand and supply sides of the inflation problem. On 
the  supply  side,  the  State  Governments  have  an  important  role  to  play  in  strengthening 
infrastructure and enhancing productivity, particularly in agriculture. 
Consumer  price  inflation  in  Goa, measured by consumer price index for industrial workers 
(CPI-IW), was low and almost the same as the national average in the first half of the 2000s. 
However, as growth accelerated in the second half of the 2000s inflation also picked up and 
turned out to be higher than the national average. It was in double digits in 2010–11, though 
since moderated to 9.0 per cent by August 2011 (Table 3). As food has a substantial weight 
in consumer price basket, it is a primary source of inflation. Goa depends on the neighboring 
states for a variety of food items. It will, therefore, be desirable to strengthen the supply chain 
management  which  could  have  a  dampening  impact  on  food  price  inflation.  Moreover, 
greater attention needs to be given for local production of fresh vegetables and protein items 
such as milk, egg, fish and meat. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
 Fiscal scenario 
Fiscal  reform  and  debt  sustainability  of  the  state  level  assume  importance  for  sustained 
economic development. The state has taken a number of steps towards fiscal reforms since 
the mid-2000s: implementation of VAT to replace state sales tax (April 2005), enactment of 
Fiscal Responsibility Legislation (May 2006), New Pension Scheme (August 2005), ceiling on 
guarantees and constitution of Consolidated Sinking Fund and Guarantee Redemption Fund. 
The deficits and debt were maintained at sustainable levels. However, like other States, state 
finances of Goa suffered a setback in 2008–09 and 2009–10 on account of combined impact 
of  macroeconomic  slowdown  and  implementation  of  Sixth  Pay  Commissions  awards. 
Consequently,  revenue  surplus  declined  in  2008–09  and  turned  into  deficit  in  2009–10. 
Further,  the  GFD-GSDP  ratio  increased  from  2.8  per  cent  in  2007–08  to  4.8  per  cent  by 
2009–10. The debt-GSDP ratio, however, improved over this period as growth in debt was 
lower than that in nominal GSDP (Table 4). 
As per the revised estimates, the GFD-GSDP and debt-GSDP ratios are estimated to decline 
further in 2010–11 on account of improvement in revenue account even as capital outlay is 
estimated to be higher. However, the budget estimates of 2011–12 show deterioration. It is, 
therefore, important to focus on revenue generation to finance increasing capital and social 
expenditure for long-term sustainability of fiscal position. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 Socio-economic profile 
The  development  context  of  Goa  is  significantly  different  from  other  States.  Goa  has  the 
highest per capita income in India and also records the highest literacy rates of 87.4 per cent 
(2011) as against the all India average of 74.0 per cent (Table 5). With the urban population 
of  around  50  per  cent, Goa  is  the  most  urbanized  state  after  Delhi.  Goa  being  one  of  the 
states  having  low  birth  rate  and  low  death  rate,  the  working  age  population  has  a  larger 
share in its total population. While the current age profile augurs well for a faster economic 
growth, over the long-term ageing population could be a major challenge. There is, therefore, 
a need for greater attention on health and social security. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
 Financial development 
In  the  context  of  a  very  large  proportion  of  working  age  population,  the  development  of 
financial  sector  could  aid  economic  growth  through  mobilization  of  saving  and  promoting 
investment. The formal financial system in India is dominated by banks and so is the case in 
Goa. In fact, Goa leads in terms of development of banking in India. Over time, the number 
of commercial bank branches in Goa increased steadily from only 5 in 1962 to 459 by end-
June  2011.  There  is  a  state  cooperative  bank  and  7  urban  cooperative  banks  with 
136 branches. With a ratio of 3,180 populations per commercial bank branch as against all-
India average of 13,270, Goa has one of the best banking services in the country. 
The sectoral flow of credit reflects the structure of the economy and the demographics. The 
industrial  sector  accounted  for  the  highest  share  in  credit  followed  by  personal  loans  and 
services. The industrial sector receives maximum credit reflecting continuing industrialization. 
Goa, being one of the prime tourist destinations, the hospitality sector led services sector in 
attracting  credit.  The  high  per  capita  income  level  of  the  population  reflecting  greater 
borrowing  capacity  explains  a  high  share  of  personal  loans  in  the  overall  credit.  However, 
credit flow to agriculture remained low, though 50 per cent of the population was still rural 
(Chart 2). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 While  the  share  of  agriculture  in  NSDP  has  reduced  sharply  over  the  years,  Goa  is  also 
known for its distinct agricultural products such as mangoes, cashew and grapes. A fading 
agriculture  sector  may  not  be  a  sustainable  feature  for  balanced  growth  in  a  long-term 
perspective.  Therefore,  concerted  efforts  need  to  be  made  to  promote  agriculture  in  the 
state. This also requires sustained credit flow to agriculture. The state government has made 
provision  for  subsidized  farm  loans  and  subsidy  for  acquisition  of  agricultural  implements. 
This will also help increase the level of credit-deposit (CD) ratio in the state which is relatively 
low as compared with the all-India level. 
The C-D ratio of the state of around 30 per cent compared with about 75 per cent at the all-
India  level  does  not  appear  commensurate  with  its  high  level  of  economic  development 
(Chart 3). The recorded C-D ratio, however, understates the extent of credit penetration for 
mainly  three  reasons.  First,  major  industries  such  as  pharmaceuticals  and  hotels  source 
credit from their head office locations which are outside the state. Hence, such credit flow 
does not reflect in the C-D ratio of the state. Second, internal cash generation in industries 
such as tourism and iron-ore reduces institutional finance. Third, with a substantial share of 
non-resident deposits, the deposit base is large which imparts a downward bias to the C-D 
ratio of the state. Having said that, there is no undermining the fact that there is scope for 
further credit expansion, particularly to the agriculture and the allied sector. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
 Despite the low incidence of poverty and high literacy, there is uneven distribution of credit 
across the state. Since self-employment accounts for about 32 per cent (NSSO 64th Round) 
of  the  total  employment  in  the  state,  further  credit  penetration  is  required  to  harness  the 
demographic  dividend.  The  credit  inequality  needs  to  be  addressed  through  intensified 
financial inclusion measures. 
Financial inclusion measures 
Financial  inclusion  is  important  for  bringing  the  poor  and  under-privileged  sections  of  the 
society within the banking fold and thereby generating and sustaining equitable growth. Let 
me now turn to the various measures initiated by the Reserve Bank for promoting financial 
inclusion. 
First, the Reserve Bank for long has instituted a mechanism called “priority sector lending” 
through  which  credit  is  channelized  to  certain  preferred  sectors,  which,  inter  alia,  include 
small-scale industry, small businesses and agriculture. In the post-reform period, the priority 
sector  group  has  been  expanded  to  include  advances  to  retail  trade,  educational  loans, 
micro-finance  and  low-cost  housing.  This  has  helped  in  furthering  the  cause  of  financial 
inclusion. 
Second, the Union Finance Minister announced in the Budget 2010–11 that every village in 
the country with over 2000 population must have access to banking services by March 2012. 
In order to operationalise this process, commercial banks have prepared financial inclusion 
plans which have been submitted to the Reserve Bank. As brick-and-mortar branches will not 
be viable in very small centres, the approach is to meet this challenge through the business 
correspondent (BC) model and by leveraging communication technology. Under this model, 
banks  appoint  agents  who  provide  basic  banking  services  at  the  door-step  of  a  client  on 
behalf of the bank. 
Third, the Reserve Bank has asked banks to open no-frills accounts. These accounts have 
no or very low minimum balance requirement and have provisions for small loans by way of 
overdrafts. This is a very convenient account for small depositors, especially in rural areas. 
Fourth, a major impediment for a common person to open bank account is the “Know Your 
Customer” (KYC) norm. The norm has been relaxed for small accounts, viz., deposits up to 
Rs.50,000 and credit up to Rs.1 lakh. A simple introduction by an existing account holder in a 
bank  should  be  adequate  to  open  an  account.  In  this  regard,  Aadhar,  the  Unique 
Identification  Number  (UID)  Project  of  the  Central  Government,  which  aims  at  providing  a 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
unique ID number for everyone in the country, will help the poor to establish their identity to 
meet the banks’ KYC norms. 
Fifth, farmers can get credit from banks conveniently through Kisan Credit Cards (KCCs) and 
General Purpose Credit Cards (GCCs). 
Sixth, while several banking facilities are available, a common person may not be aware of 
them.  Hence,  financial  literacy  becomes  important.  Accordingly,  the  Reserve  Bank  has 
initiated  a  “Project  Financial  Literacy”  with  the  objective  of  disseminating  information 
regarding  the  central  bank  and  general  banking  concepts  to  various  target  groups.  Our 
“Financial Education” website link offers basics of banking, finance and central banking for 
children of all ages. Our website is also available in 13 languages. 
Finally,  there  is  also  a  learning  process  for  the  Reserve  Bank.  We  recognise  that  being 
responsible  for  banking,  we  must  be  sensitive  to  the  needs  of  a  common  person. 
Accordingly,  our  Governor,  Dr.  Subbarao  initiated  the  outreach  programme  last  year  as  a 
part  of  our  Platinum  Jubilee  celebrations.  Under  the  outreach  programme,  the  top 
management of the Reserve Bank visits at least one village in every state and union territory 
with state government officials and commercial banks to give focused attention on financial 
inclusion.  This  has  been  highly  enriching  experience  for  us  to  understand  the  ground 
realities. Accordingly, we have decided to continue these programmes. 
Financial inclusion in Goa 
Let  me  now  turn  to  our  initiatives  for  financial  inclusion  in  Goa.  First,  in  order  to  provide 
banking services through a banking outlet in every village having a population of over 2000, 
by March 2012, 41 villages have been identified for the financial inclusion drive in the State. 
As  on  June  30,  2011,  banking  services  were  provided  in  36  villages  through  Business 
Correspondents (BCs), in 4 villages through mobile vans and in one village through opening 
of  a  branch  outlet.  This  banking  coverage  has  been  achieved  well  ahead  of  the  time. 
Second,  focus  has  now  shifted  for  inclusion  of  villages  with  population  between  1000  and 
2000: 65 such unbanked villages have been identified and allocated among different banks 
for making banking service available. 
Third,  as  of  end  June  2011,  total  1,21,210  no  frill  accounts  (NFA)  were  opened  with 
outstanding deposits of Rs.33 crore, of which 4,930 NFA were credit-linked with Rs.9.3 crore, 
while  4,763  General  Purpose  Credit  Cards  (GCCs)  were  issued  through  NFA  with 
outstanding  credit  of  Rs.  9.3  crore.  Fourth,  in  order  to  strengthen  the  financial  education 
campaign a Financial Literacy & Credit Counseling Centre (FLCC) was opened at Verna, in 
South Goa. Similarly, in order to make the financial inclusion drive more effective, a Rural 
Self  Employment  Training  Institute  (RSETI)  was  also  opened  at  Verna,  in  South  Goa 
providing technical training on self employment ventures. As a success story it may be noted 
that 12 courses were conducted and 230 below poverty line (BPL) beneficiaries were trained 
of which 55 have started gainful employment activities. Fifth, 71 farmers’ clubs and 20 joint 
liability groups (JLGs) were formed by NABARD. Sixth, the recent drive by SLBC to route the 
MGNREGA payments through Smart Cards under IT enabled financial services will further 
strengthen the objective of financial inclusion. 
Policy challenges 
Let me now turn to broader macroeconomic policy challenges. As I mentioned, the Reserve 
Bank  has  initiated  measures  for  further  spread  of  banking  and  promotion  of  financial 
inclusion.  Nevertheless,  to  accelerate  the  pace  of  growth  of  Goa,  I  may  highlight  a  few 
challenges that lie ahead. 
First, initiatives need to be taken to promote sustainable industrial development compatible 
with the unique bio-diversity of the state which, in turn, would generate local employment. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
Second,  investment  in  infrastructure  could  be  scaled  up  through  the  Public-Private 
Partnership model to support industry and services. 
Third,  there  is  a  need  to  increase  agricultural  productivity  and  promote  diversification  in 
agriculture and allied activities. 
Fourth,  as  food  inflation  has  been  a  major  concern  in  the  recent  period,  an  appropriate 
supply chain management and augmentation of production of vegetables and protein items 
at state level will be helpful in addressing supply side inflation pressures. 
Fifth, on the fiscal front, rationalizing the state deficits without compromising on allocation of 
resources  for  the  social  sector  will  be  a  major  challenge.  Therefore,  sustaining  a  higher 
growth  trajectory  becomes  important  for  higher  revenue  generation  to  support  high  capital 
outlays. 
Sixth,  the  high  level  of  literacy  and  human  development  provides  ample  opportunity  for 
further  growth  of  knowledge-based  industries.  However,  for  achieving  this,  Goa  needs  to 
provide  knowledge  workers  on  a  large  scale.  This  entails  strengthening  of  technical  and 
higher education. 
Seventh,  there  is  scope  for  further  credit  penetration.  In  this  regard,  banks  can  explore 
innovative structures of loans with a greater emphasis on group lending to minimize credit 
risk. 
Eighth, in any plan for financial sector development, the physical presence of a bank branch is 
important. Hence, all the stake-holders – banks, state governments and the Reserve Bank – 
need  to  work  in  close  co-ordination  for  increasing  banking  penetration  and  improving  the 
quality of banking services with greater use of technology. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. Goa is the richest state in India with a strong potential as reflected in the 
growth  acceleration  in  the  latter  half  of  the  last  decade.  The  challenge  is  to  sustain  this 
momentum  which  will  require  continued  policy  action  and  greater  access  to  the  formal 
financial sector. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
