Njuguna Ndung’u: Brief overview of the Kenyan banking sector 
Remarks by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the launch of 
the FirstRand Bank Representative Office in Kenya, Nairobi, 2 May 2012. 
 Honourable Njeru Githae, Minister for Finance of the Republic of Kenya;  
Mr. Sizwe Nxasana, the Chief Executive Officer, FirstRand Bank Limited;  
Mr.  Lloyd  Muposhi,  the  Chief  Representative  Officer,  FirstRand  Bank  Limited 
Representative Office in Kenya;  
Distinguished Guests;  
Ladies and Gentlemen:  
It is my great pleasure to join you this evening for the official launch of the FirstRand Bank 
Representative Office in Kenya. At the onset, I wish to acknowledge the presence of Hon. 
Njeru  Githae,  the  Minister  for  Finance  of  the  Republic  of  Kenya.  His  presence  gives  this 
function  the  great  significance  it  deserves.  Further,  I  wish  to  thank  the  Chief  Executive 
Officer, Mr. Sizwe Nxasana, for inviting me to this auspicious occasion. We are glad that the 
FirstRand Bank Ltd has a physical presence in Kenya.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  I  am  delighted  to  note  that  the  Kenyan  Banking  sector  has 
continued  to  attract  a  lot  of  interest  from  international  financial  players.  To  this  end,  the 
number of licensed representative offices of top international banks has steadily grown from 
one (1) in 2008 to four (4) in 2011. Moreover a fifth institution was granted an approval in 
principle on 5th March 2012 to establish a representative office in Kenya. I therefore applaud 
this interest as it anchors well with  Kenya’s Vision 2030 that will make  Kenya the  premier 
regional financial services hub. For this reason, financial development and deepening will be 
strong outcomes.  
Financial  infrastructure  in  Kenya  can  be  considered  complete.  Banks;  Microfinance 
Institutions;  currency  centres;  credit  reference  bureaus;  agency  banking;  risk-based 
supervision  are  indicators  that  the  financial  infrastructure  in  Kenya  is  now  in  place:  with 
banks  rolling  out  branch  networks  across  the  region  supported  by  initiatives  like  agency 
banking  and  an  appropriate  information  sharing  mechanism  allows  the  financial  sector  to 
grow.  Then  the  other  arms  of  Pension,  Securities  and  Insurance  are  moving  in  the  same 
direction.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  It  is  worth  noting  that  the  Kenyan  banking  sector  has  remained 
resilient despite the dynamic macro environment it 3  
operates  in.  This  is  evidenced  by  the  impressive  profit  before  tax  of  Ksh.89.3  billion 
(USD1.08  billion)  for  the  year  ended  December  2011.  This  was  a  20.4%  increase  from 
Ksh.74.3 billion (USD895 million) returned in the same period in 2010. The number of banks 
is growing to create strong banks: mergers will be required, but that is a market outcome.  
Ladies and Gentlemen: I would like to assure the banking sector and other market players 
that  the  Central  Bank  will  continue  to  support  the  market  development  by  providing  an 
enabling environment for growth in the banking sector. Allow me to outline the thrust of the 
initiatives we shall continue to inculcate to ensure the sector operates efficiently, effectively 
and soundly. The initiatives will be anchored on three pillars:  
 
First,  strengthening  Financial  Stability,  Supervisory  and  Regulatory  Framework.  In 
particular, CBK will adopt a consolidated supervision approach to take cognisance 
of the growing pan-African nature of the Kenyan banking sector.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  Second, enhancing Financial Integrity in the Banking Sector so as to ensure that the 
financial  systems  are  safeguarded  against  money  laundering  and  financing  of 
terrorism.  
Third, promoting Financial Inclusion for financial deepening and development in line 
with the aspirations under the Kenyan Vision 2030.  
Distinguished  Guests,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  Finally,  allow  me  once  again  to  applaud 
FirstRand  Bank  Limited  for  establishing  a  physical  presence  in  Kenya  through  a 
representative office. As the Central Bank we are ready to support you as you develop your 
business not only in the Kenyan market but also on the Eastern African side.  
With these remarks, it is now my pleasure to welcome Honourable Njeru Githae, Minister for 
Finance  of  the  Republic  of  Kenya  to  make  his  remarks  and  officially  launch  the 
Representative Office of FirstRand Bank here in Kenya.  
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
