Ipumbu Shiimi: Financial capability and the role of the financial services 
industry – achievements, challenges and opportunities 
Statement  by  Mr  Ipumbu  Shiimi,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Namibia,  at  the  launch  of  the 
Financial Literacy Initiative, Windhoek, 15 March 2012. 
 Director of Ceremonies, 
Honourable Samuel Nuyoma; Governor of Khomas Region 
Honourable Saara Kuugongelwa-Amadhila; Minister of Finance 
Honourable Members of Parliament, 
Dr.  Romeo  Bertolini,  Counsellor  for  Development  Cooperation;  Embassy  of  the  Federal 
Republic of Germany 
Your Worship Elaine Trepper; Mayor of the City of Windhoek 
Members of the Diplomatic Corps, 
Industry Captains 
Members of the Media, 
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen 
Good Morning  
It is my pleasure to join you this morning and to be associated with the official launch of the 
national  Financial  Literacy  Initiative  (F.L.I).  This  event  is  a  remarkable  milestone  in  the 
annals of our financial landscape. The launch and roll-out of the financial literacy program 
here  today  will  serve  as  a  catalyst  for  financial  inclusion  for  all.  I,  therefore,  wish  to 
congratulate  you  Honourable  Minister  and  all  fellow  F.L.I  partner  institutions  for  the 
conceiving of, and embarking on this program.  
The  Bank  of  Namibia  has  had  the  privilege  to  play  a  key  role  in  the  formulation  of  the 
Financial Sector Strategy, whose overarching objective is to elevate the role of the financial 
sector  in  the  economy.  Financial  education  is  an  important  part  of  the  financial  sector 
development Strategy and the Financial Sector Charter adopted by the industry way back in 
2009.  Indeed,  the  financial  literacy  initiative  constitutes  a  transmission  channel  for  the 
expanded participation in the mainstream financial system. I am therefore gratified that this 
initiative  has  kicked-off  at  the  time  when  we  are  preparing  for  the  launch  of  the  Financial 
Sector Strategy.  
Honourable Minister,  
Ladies and gentlemen,  
The  objectives  of  this  initiative  and  the  tasks  ahead  should  be  understood  in  the  wider 
context of the potential role of the financial services sector in the economy. Finance is a key 
catalyst  for  economic  development  and  wealth  creation.  Financial  products  and  services 
such as secure savings and insurance play an important role to absorb changes in income 
during difficult economic times as well as reducing poverty and vulnerability. In fact, secure 
savings is a source of financial security for households and individuals.  
Director of Ceremonies 
A  week  ago,  I  have  had  the  honour  to  officiate  at  the  launch  of  the  findings  of  the  2011 
FinScope Survey. This Survey follows on the similar survey undertaken in 2007 and it is the 
third  such  survey  conducted  in  independent  Namibia.  The  survey  assesses  the  level  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
access  to,  and  use  of  financial  services  by  the  adult  population  as  well  as  the  underlying 
reasons.  For  the  first  time  in  Namibia,  2011  FinScope  also  assessed  the  level  of  financial 
literacy in the country, which is a critical benchmark for planning purposes and, indeed, for 
the execution of the financial literacy initiative.  
The findings of 2011 FinScope Survey reveal an array of progress in expanding the frontiers 
of financial inclusion. Of particular significance is the level of financial inclusion, which is now 
assessed to have increased from 48 percent in 2007 to 69 percent by 2011. Put differently, 
financial exclusion, which stood at an estimated 51.7 percent in 2007, has significantly fallen 
to 31 percent by 2011. This quantum of progress in a space of four years is a result of the 
effectiveness  of  policy  and  concerted  efforts  by  the  financial  services  industry  to  bring 
services  to  the  doorsteps  of  the  previously  unserved  and  underserved.  I  therefore  wish  to 
seize  this  opportunity  to  commend  the  financial  services  industry  for  moving  in  the  right 
direction.  
Honourable Minister,  
Ladies and gentlemen,  
The survey findings also unravel the challenges and opportunities for targeted interventions 
going  forward.  Access  per  se  may  have  improved,  but  the  picture  is  not  entirely  rosy  to 
warrant us to be smiling all the way to our workplaces.  
Relatively high bank fees hit hard low-income earners and discourage formal banking as a 
safe  haven  for  saving  and  other  financial  transactions.  Unbanked  persons  are  especially 
exposed to the vulnerabilities and risks associated with the cash economy and high service 
fees  of  alternative  financial  services.  Still,  about  two-thirds  of  the  population,  that  is 
64 percent, do not have access to insurance. Therefore, we still have a long way to go.  
To  address  some  of  these  challenges,  the  Bank  is  working  closely  with  the  commercial 
banks  for  the  establishment  of  the  basic  bank  account  for  low-income  earners  and  SMEs. 
Among its features, the basic bank account will attract low transactional fees and provide for 
a bundle of free transactional services per month. When finalized, this product innovation is 
expected to improve access to banking for the unbanked as well as cost-effective services 
for low-income clients. We will not stop here, Director of Ceremonies, but will continue to look 
at other bank fees and charges that warrant further attention in line with the Payment System 
Vision 2015, launched some time ago.  
In conclusion, I wish to congratulate you, honourable Minister, for steering this program from 
infancy to fruition. Investment in financial education is an investment in financial stability. It is 
an investment in financial security, quality of life and poverty reduction for the broad majority 
of Namibians.  
I thank you for your kind attention. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
