Njuguna Ndung’u: Shariah-compliant banking and finance in Kenya 
Remarks by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the launch of 
the First Community Bank’s Mutual Fund, Nairobi, 6 March 2012. 
 Ms. Stella Kilonzo, Chief Executive, Capital Markets Authority;  
Mr. Steve Mainda, Chairman, Insurance Regulatory Authority;  
Mr. Hassan Varvani, Chairman, First Community Bank Ltd;  
Mr. Abdullatif Essajee, Managing Director, First Community Bank Ltd;  
Mr. Nathif Adam, Director, First Community Bank Capital;  
All the Excellencies here present;  
Board Members of First Community Bank Ltd here present;  
Distinguished Guests;  
Ladies and Gentlemen:  
I am delighted to be with you this evening at the launch of First Community Bank’s Shariah-
compliant mutual fund and to celebrate the success of Islamic Finance.  
Allow me at the outset to compliment the Board and Management of First Community Bank 
Ltd  for  growing  the  bank  from  a  start-up  operation  in  April  2008,  to  an  institution  now 
boasting  of  deposits  amounting  to  Ksh.7.3  billion  and  assets  of  Ksh.8.4  billion  as  at 
31st January  2012.  Indeed,  First  Community  Bank  Ltd  pioneered  the  establishment  of 
Shariah-compliant banking in Kenya and I am happy to note that the bank has continued to 
keep  up  the  momentum  by  introducing  a  range  of  innovative  Shariah-compliant  products. 
These products will go a long way in deepening Kenya’s financial sector. We can now boast 
of  having  a  full-fledged  Shariah-compliant  financial  infrastructure,  thanks  to  the  effort  of 
Nathif Adam.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  Kenya  has  not  been  left  behind  in  the  world-wide  phenomenal 
growth of Shariah-compliant finance and banking and huge gains have been made since its 
inception. Today, we have two banks that exclusively offer Shariah-compliant products and 
who collectively, command a market share of 1% of the banking sector assets, in less than 
4 years of operations. Having noted the growing interest in Shariah-compliant finance, some 
of the conventional banks have also created specific windows and divisions to enable them 
offer Shariah-compliant products to their customers.  
I  am  encouraged  to  note  that  other  institutions  have  now  stepped  in  to  offer  Shariah-
compliant financial services beyond banking. Takaful Insurance of Africa has been licensed 
by  the  Insurance  Regulatory  Authority  to  offer  Shariah-compliant  insurance  services. 
Although  the  concept  of  “Takaful”  has  been  in  existence  in  the  global  arena  for  several 
decades, this product is now being offered for the very first time by an entity incorporated 
and licensed in Kenya.  
Ladies and Gentlemen: First Community Bank Ltd has again trail-blazed by introducing a 
Shariah-compliant mutual fund. I am informed that the fund will be denominated in Kenya 
Shillings and the aim is to pool funds amounting to Ksh.1 billion. The fund will invest 
principally  in  Sharia-compliant  opportunities  in  Kenya  and  other  countries  in  the  Eastern 
Africa  region  and  may  also  undertake  offshore  investments.  The  bank  intends  to  invest  in 
money  market  instruments,  equity,  structured  investments  and  other  collective  investment 
schemes that are all Shariah-compliant. Indeed, this fund will avail investment opportunities 
to many people, particularly those who could not invest in the available products on account 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
of faith-based or other risk related restrictions. It is a welcome addition to deepening Kenya’s 
nascent  capital  markets.  This  move  is  also  a  positive  step  towards  not  only  attracting 
increased  foreign  direct  investments  into  the  country  and  the  region  at  large,  but  also 
enhancing the capacity of the Kenyan people to harness the available resources for national 
development.  
As you are aware, a key goal of the Government of Kenya, as espoused in Vision 2030 is 
establishing  Kenya  as  a  premier  financial  services  hub  in  the  region  with  a  wide  range  of 
competitive products and services. One of the ways of achieving this goal is ensuring that 
Kenya  becomes  the  gateway  for  Shariah-compliant  financing,  through  establishment  of  an 
enabling environment that supports the development of Shariah-compliant financial services 
and products. To this end, the Central Bank has in the recent past liaised with the Shariah-
compliant banks and established the main challenges that impede the achievements of this 
objective. Some of these impediments are:  
 
Inadequate Shariah-compliant products. For example, the lack of Shariah-compliant 
liquidity instruments places Shariah-compliant banks at a disadvantage compared to 
the conventional banks;  
Uncertainty on the tax treatment of Shariah-compliant financial instruments;  
 
Inadequacy of the requisite human capital with respect to Shariah-compliant finance.  
 
Ladies and gentlemen: The Central Bank is in this regard engaging other relevant arms of 
Government to address these challenges in order to propel Shariah-compliant finance to the 
next level.  
The  future  of  Islamic  Finance  in  Kenya  and  in  the  region  remains  bright.  On  its  part,  the 
Central  Bank  will  continue  to  pursue  policies  that  create  an  enabling  environment  that  will 
eventually culminate in Kenya establishing itself as a regional financial hub as envisaged in 
Vision 2030.  
With these few remarks, I want to wish First Community Bank Ltd as well as the First 
Community Bank Capital (Investment Bank) the best in their future endeavours. The 
Islamic Finance picture is thus complete.  
Thank You 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
