V S Das: Leadership, performance and transformation through personnel 
management 
Inaugural address by Mr V S Das, Executive Director of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
seminar  on  “Leadership,  performance  and  transformation  through  personnel  management” 
held at the Jamnalal Bajaj Institute of Management Studies, Mumbai, 15 July 2012. 
 I thank the students of Jamnalal Bajaj Institute of Management Studies (JBIMS), Mumbai for 
inviting me to this Seminar, aptly titled “The CATALYST”. For me, being here, in my Alma 
Mater,  is  special,  and  being  the  Chief  Guest  today  is  therefore  doubly  special.  I  am  also 
happy to be sharing with you my thoughts on a subject, which has been close to my heart: 
Leadership.  I  remember  having  studied  Transformational  Leadership  and  its  Impact  on 
Organisational Climate and Unit Effectiveness as a part of my MAM programme here several 
years ago. 
Leadership,  Performance  and  Transformation  through  Personnel  Management,  at  a  time 
when near-seismic changes are taking place, especially in our global economy is, to put it 
mildly,  a  difficult  and  daunting  task.  What  I  would  try  today  is  to  aim  at  putting  into 
perspective  the  theme  as  an  integrated  issue  and  prompting  further  reflection  on  this 
significant subject.  
Performance  has  long  been  a focus for  organizations  concerned  with  increasing  efficiency 
and  productivity.  The  management  of  “leadership  capacity”  is,  however,  a  relatively  more 
recent  consideration.  Organizations  across  all  sectors  now  regard  leadership  as  a  key 
enabler  of  organizational  performance  and  competitive  advantage  and  are  investing 
increasingly into leadership development activities. Many have now turned their attention to 
how  best  to  manage  their  leadership  talent  to  ensure  succession,  progression  and  the 
delivery of organizational objectives. 
The  present  global  scenario  is  so  paradoxical,  confusing  and  filled  with  contradictions, 
dilemmas and ambiguities that, as someone put it, “if you’re not confused, you don’t know 
what’s going on”. In these baffling times, predictability and certainty are being replaced by a 
more relational concept of the universe, what was bad yesterday is often considered good 
today and what worked for decades is suddenly old fashioned. There is a rapid questioning 
of what is acceptable and what is not, driven by the values of today’s changed structures. In 
this relativist world, leadership styles too are necessarily relative to imperatives of the time, 
the personality of the leader and the location of the institution in its growth trajectory. 
Recent research in this area suggests that one must look beyond just the personal qualities 
of  a  leader  to  understand  what  leadership  is  all  about.  Scholars  broadly  agree  that  some 
major  variables  involved  in  leadership  include: (a)  the  characteristics  of the  leader; (b) the 
attitudes,  needs  and  other  personal  attributes  of  the  followers;  (c)  characteristics  of  the 
organization or the movement, as the case may be, such as its purpose, its structure as also 
the nature of the tasks to be performed; and (d) the social, economic and political milieu. This 
basically  signifies  that  though  the  leader  may,  indeed,  be  at  the  heart  of  the  leadership 
discourse,  it  is,  in  the  ultimate  analysis,  a  complex  relationship  among  the  aforesaid 
variables. Since by definition each leader is unique, what he or she learns from the interplay 
of these variables and how he or she uses it to shape the future is unique to him or her too. 
Throughout our lives, each of us makes thousands of decisions or judgment calls. Some are 
trivial like what vegetables you will be buying. Some are monumental like whom to marry or 
what career to pursue. How many of these decisions that we make turn out to be good ones? 
More importantly, did we make good decisions on things that really mattered? Our ability to 
exercise  good  judgment  determines  the  quality  of  our  individual  lives.  And,  as  we  rise  to 
positions  of  leadership,  the  importance  and  consequences  of  our  judgment  calls  are 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
individual, 
leadership  capacity,  at 
magnified  exponentially  by  their  increasing  impact  on  the  lives  of  others.  The  cumulative 
effect of leaders’ judgment calls determines the success or failure of their organizations.  
For  many  organizations,  investment  in  leadership  and  leadership  development  remains  a 
leap  of  faith,  informed  through  gut  instinct  and  the  current  rhetoric  on  the  value  and 
significance  of  leadership  in  organizations.  Few  organizations  articulate  a  clear  “theory  of 
action”  that  argues  why  and  how  particular  leadership  development  and  performance 
management  activities  will  enhance 
team  and 
organizational levels, and, in turn, how this contributes towards organizational performance, 
however defined. 
Scholars  have  often  suggested  that  the  effectiveness  of  leadership  development  is 
determined  more  by  “how  you  do  it”  rather  than  “what  you  do”.  Thus,  when  faced  with  a 
proliferation of leadership development tools and initiatives, the effective organization reflects 
on  the  purpose,  principles  and  assumptions  involved  and  how  they  relate  to  current  and 
future  organizational  needs  and  performance  –  opting  for  an  integrated  and  holistic 
approach,  comprising  a “bundle”  of  complementary  practices, rather  than  a  suite  of  poorly 
connected initiatives 
In today’s times, the significance of corporate leadership vis-à-vis corporate performance is, 
perhaps, best illustrated by the relative impact of the global financial crisis on major financial 
institutions. The severity of the crisis has forced academics, regulators and policymakers to 
do some serious rethink on the current financial system. Many have also seen this crisis as a 
failure  of  leadership,  both  on  the  regulatory  and  participant  sides  of the financial  universe. 
Debates  and  discourses  on  the  current  regulatory  architecture  have  also  since  got  more 
intense  and  louder.  Much  as  the  regulatory  issues  have  become  more  and  more  complex 
and nuanced, the role of the leaders in the system has also got increasingly in focus, both for 
future financial stability, as also for efficiency and innovation. 
This, indeed, is a time for transformation. There are, in fact, significant differences between 
change and transformation. Change is the way things will be different, and transformation is 
how  you  move  people  through  the  stages  to  make  change  work.  Change  is  a  shift  in  the 
externals  of  any  situation,  for  example,  setting  up  a  new  programme,  restructuring  a 
business, moving to new location, or a promotion. By contrast, transformation is the mental 
and  emotional  transition  that  people  must  undergo  to  relinquish  old  arrangements  and 
embrace  new  ones.  There  are  other  distinctions  too.  Change  is  made  up  of  events,  while 
transformation is an on-going process. Change is visible and tangible, while transformation is 
a  psychological  process  that  takes  place  inside  people.  Change  can  happen  quickly,  but 
transformation, like any organic process, has its own natural pace. Change is all about the 
outcome we are trying to achieve; transformation is about how we will get there and how we 
will manage things while we are en route. Getting people through the transition is essential if 
the change is actually to work, as planned. 
It is important to ensure that change management strategies are driven by the changes that 
need  to  occur,  but  that  they  do  not  lose  focus  on  the  more  personal  transition  activities 
needed  to  ensure  the  success  of  the  programme.  Transformation  occurs  as  a  result  of  a 
well-orchestrated  and  well-led  change  strategy  and  transition  plan.  The  result  is  a 
metamorphosis to the desired state in which there is a deep seated adoption of the changes 
and  the  associated  values,  principles  and/or  processes.  This  leads  to  an  embedded,  and 
marked,  change 
journey  of  continuous 
improvement.  
in  organizational  culture  and  reinforces  a 
Transformational leadership 
Clearly, transformational leaders have a role to play in the today’s organizations to effectively 
cope  with  the  rapidly  changing  environment.  Transformational  leadership  allows  dramatic 
improvements  in  management  effectiveness.  Transformational  leaders  make  subordinates 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
aware  of  how  important  their  jobs  are  by  providing  feedback  to  the  worker;  enable 
subordinates  become  aware  of  their  own  need  for  personal  growth  and  development;  and 
motivate subordinates to work for the good of the organization, not just themselves. 
Transformational leaders are charismatic and have a vision of how good things can be. They 
are excited and clearly communicate this to subordinates. Transformational leaders openly 
share  information  with  workers.  Everyone  is  aware  of  problems  and  the  need  for  change. 
Transformational  leaders  engage  in  development  of  workers.  These  qualities  make  a 
transformational leader an effective change agent to transform the organization in response 
to the internal and external changes, both current and anticipated. 
Given these aspects of transformational leadership, it can succeed only if people will follow a 
person who inspires them, who has the vision and passion to achieve great things and are 
willing  to  become  enthusiastic  and  energetic.  The  typical  aspects  of  a  transformational 
leadership are: developing the vision, selling the vision, finding the way forward and leading 
the change.  
Thus, the Transformational Leader seeks overtly to transform the organization, and promise 
the followers that they also  will be transformed in some way, perhaps to be more like this 
amazing leader. In some respects, then, the followers are the product of the transformation. 
My dear students! Before I conclude, let me suggest certain important steps to develop your 
Leadership skills:  
• 
Integrity:  Integrity  means  alignment  of  words  and  actions  with  inner  values.  It 
means  sticking  to  these  values  even  when  an  alternative  path  may  be  easier  or 
more advantageous. 
A  leader  with  integrity  can  be  trusted  and  will  be  admired  for  sticking  to  strong 
values. They also act as a powerful model for people to copy, thus building an entire 
organization with powerful and effective cultural values. 
Dedication: Spending whatever time and energy on a task is required to get the job 
done, rather than giving it whatever time you have available. 
Openness:  Openness  means  being  able  to  listen  to  ideas  that  are  outside  one's 
current  mental  models, being  able  to  suspend  judgment  until  after  one  has  heard 
someone else's ideas. 
Creativity: means thinking differently, being able to get outside the box and take a 
new  and  different  viewpoint  on  things.  Creativity  provides  the  ability  to  think 
differently  and  see  things  that  others  have  not  seen,  and  thus  giving  reason  for 
followers to follow 
Magnanimity:  Crediting 
responsibility for failures. 
Humility:  Humility  is  the  opposite  of  arrogance  and  narcissism.  It  means 
recognizing  that  you  are  not  inherently  superior  to  others  and,  consequently,  that 
they are not inferior to you. It does not mean diminishing yourself, nor does it mean 
exalting yourself. Humble leaders do not debase themselves, neither falsely nor due 
to  low  self-esteem.  They  simply  recognize  all  people  as  equal  in  value  and  know 
that their position does not make them a god. 
History books are filled with leaders who are soft-spoken, introverted and quiet. A 
quiet and simple Gandhi or a soft-spoken peanut farmer named jimmy Carter, who 
became  the  President  of  the  United  States  and  won  a  Nobel  Peace  Prize,  have 
been just as effective world leaders as a loud and flamboyant Churchill, or the tough 
leadership style employed Britain’s iron Lady, Margaret Thatcher. 
the  people  with  success  and  accepting  personal 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
 Be a Giver: Leaders are givers. The more you give, the more you get. If you want 
more  love,  respect,  support,  and  compassion  then  give  love,  give  respect,  give 
support,  and  give  compassion.  As  Sir  Winston  Churchill  once  said,  "We  make  a 
living by what we get, we make a life by what we give."  
In conclusion, let me leave you, with four types of knowledge that I feel are imperative for 
weaving together the ideas subsumed in the theme of today’s Seminar: (i) Self-knowledge or 
personal values and goals; (ii) Social Network Knowledge that involves those who surround 
you daily; (iii) Organizational Knowledge that extends to knowing and understanding people 
at all levels at the work-place; and (iv) Contextual Knowledge which engages myriad other 
stakeholders that your organization directly or indirectly works with. 
Finally, you are the future captains of industry and I exhort you to be transformational leaders 
and be the catalysts who will lead your teams and organizations to greater heights. 
I  wish  the  Seminar  all  success  and  compliment  the  MFM  students  for  choosing  a  theme 
which is so relevant today. 
Thank you 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
