Ardian Fullani: South East Europe – pre-requisites for reform 
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the  high-level  seminar 
“South East Europe: pre-requisites for reform”, hosted by the Bank of Albania in collaboration 
with the University of Oxford, Tirana, 14 June 2012. 
 Dear Mr. Minister, 
Dear Governors,  
Dear Ladies and Gentlemen,  
I  would  like  to  thank  you  all  for  your  participation  and  interest  in  sharing  opinions  on  an 
extremely  important  issue  to  all  of  us:  economic  reforms  and  policies  the  countries  of  the 
region need to undertake against a background of an unclear situation in Europe, our main 
trading partner.  
I  would  like  to  thank  in  particular  the  representatives  of  the  University  of  Oxford  and  the 
European  Bank  for  Reconstruction  and  Development,  who  have  worked  closely  with  the 
Bank of Albania in hosting this Conference. This activity today is a follow-up of our joint study 
work with the University of Oxford dedicated to the competitiveness of the Albanian economy 
in a regional and global context, attraction of foreign investment and macro-financial stability 
of our economy.  
Dear guests, 
The  year  2011  and  the  first  part  of  the  current  year  evidenced  that  euro  area  crisis  has 
plunged into its most acute phase. Right at the centre of this crisis, the sovereign debt risk, 
the curtailed ability of the financial system to absorb this risk and the continuous economic 
activity slowdown are spinning in a vicious circle. Against a background of public and private 
sector  deleveraging,  there  are  heightened  concerns  about  public  debt  financing,  cost  and 
sustainability. This phenomenon is a concern not only for the short but also for the long run, 
and moreover, it has spread across a number of euro area member states.  
Developments in global economy, and particularly the European one, in the recent years are 
as  significant  to  the  countries  of  our  region  as  to  Europe  itself.  The  direct  effects  of  this 
situation  on  personal  business  budgets  and  the  economy  in  general  have  been  in  the 
spotlight  of  daily  discussions  of  politicians,  policymakers,  central  bank,  analysts  and  the 
public. The short-term and direct concentration is justifiable in light of the hard time facing our 
economies and taking into account that the euro area is our main trading partner. The short-
term focus and problematic situation have shifted the attention away from long-term policies 
and reforms. 
The fact that  the global  crisis  was  perceived  and  interpreted  with  an  escalating crescendo 
tone is indisputable. It was partly perceived from the moment it first hit and, little by little, it 
transformed from a mortgage crisis into the deepest global crisis since the Great Depression. 
The response to the crisis and the lessons drawn from it followed in a similar fashion. The 
approach  and  extent  of  response  to  the  crisis  was  not  uniform  across  the  countries.  The 
economies  having  fresh  memories  of  the  financial  crises  responded  swiftly  and  more 
strongly. The same can be said for the public and business community in these economies. 
The economies enjoying a favourable fiscal position also faced the crisis without impairing 
their  long-term  fiscal  sustainability.  The  situation  seemed  slightly  more  complex  in  some 
developed European economies. Seeking to find a balance between deleveraging and fiscal 
consolidation,  euro  area  authorities  demanded  setting  up  a  protective  wall  against  the 
possible fire bursting into from the outside. But, as noted, this fire had already burst out and 
was spreading inside the euro area walls; therefore, setting up this “protective wall against 
fire”  was  pointless  at  this  point.  The  European  Union  and  its  institutional  structures,  along 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
with the international financial institutions and partners, are undertaking a number of reforms 
to put this “fire” out. However, it is still unclear how long this “agony” will last and likewise is 
its impact on the euro area and its trading partners.  
The exhaustion of fiscal and monetary policy incentives failed to increase economic activity 
and,  moreover,  it  further  aggravated  the  sovereign  debt  situation  and  financial  stability. 
Consequently, the sovereign debt sustainability and banking system credibility-related issues 
were added to the concerns about economic growth. 
The question facing many countries today has the form of a trade-off between stability and 
sovereignty. Currently, the latter two are intertwined in an endogenous relationship (of mutual 
impact  on  one  another),  in  which  the  multi-dimensional  need  for  stability  (implying  the 
maintenance of price stability, macroeconomic stability, financial and fiscal stability) requires 
taking balancing measures. The latter have considerable social costs in the short run. Social 
discontent  against  them  and  the  governments  proposing  them  erodes  the  credibility  of 
reforms and the authorities, increasing, in turn, the sovereign debt risk. 
Euro  area,  and  particularly  its  Southern  members,  are  facing  a  concern,  whose  solution 
bears  consequences  with  economic  and  political  implications  for  the  future  of  all  member 
states  and  the  common  currency.  The  reforms  and  policies  undertaken  by  euro  area 
authorities, individually or in a concerted manner, have important and direct implications for 
our economies.  
Experience  to  date  has  shown  that  our  partners  and  their  large  banks  have  adopted  an 
approach that maximizes their benefits as “owners”. Consequently, their decision-making is 
entirely conditioned by the fear of loss of stability and sovereignty that associates the current 
concerns  of  the  economy  and  the  parent  bank.  This  has  pushed  these  countries  to  take 
biased  measures  against  our  economies,  risk  rating  investment  in  our  countries  at  100%. 
This decision-making, which is directly linked to the events taking place within the euro area, 
has practically transferred the issue of stability versus sovereignty in our economies. These 
policies represent a negative phenomenon, which contradicts the positive and stabilizing role 
that our partners have been playing so far in South East European economies and societies.  
The  countries  of  our  region  have  in  the  last  20  years  undertaken  numerous  structural, 
political and economic reforms, in view of consolidating the democratic state, the rule of law 
based on principles of market economy and supported by a consolidated financial system. 
These reforms have enhanced the credibility and independence of public institutions and, in 
particular, the central bank’s role and independence. They were not guided by the wish and 
goal to join Europe, but rather to build a society similar to the European one. By achieving 
economic,  political  and  social  convergence  in  these  countries,  each  of  them  hopes  to 
become a worthy partner to the developed Europe, and adopt the euro as the final phase of 
this  transformation  process.  From  this  viewpoint,  the  European  integration  process, 
European  Commission  and  the  euro  became  powerful  external  anchors  for  each  SEE 
country.  
Current  developments  have  diminished  the  anchoring  role  of  the  EU  and  the  euro. 
Consequently,  the  European  Commission  and  all  European  decision-making  authorities 
should,  in  the  future,  pay  greater  attention  to  the  characteristics  of  countries  and  regions 
aspiring to EU membership, and engage in closer cooperation with the respective national 
authorities. 
It is, however, important to emphasize an evident and indisputable fact to all of us: external 
factors  cannot  safeguard  long-term  stability  if  internal  anchors  are  missing.  The  current 
situation  in  Europe  shows  that  the  integration  process  does  not  prove  to  be  a  sufficient 
anchor, be it both inside and outside the euro area, as long as the internal economic and 
political choices are not stable in the long run.  
This  conclusion  underlines  the  role  and  importance  of  internal  anchors  as  warrantors  for 
macro-financial  stability  and  continuation  of  structural  reforms  that  have  brought  our 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
economies to this point. These anchors are strong arguments in the hands of the public at 
large to  exert  pressure on  public  institutions,  and  to formulate  and  implement  policies  that 
guarantee long-term stability and sovereignty.  
Unfortunately, as I stated earlier, these anchors are currently being jeopardized by internal 
factors.  Driven  by  short-term  perceived  benefits  vis-à-vis  the  real  costs  of  the  correction 
process, the public, the business community, syndicates and stakeholders ask for short-term 
concessions  from  the  institutions,  and  particularly  from  the  central  bank.  Judging  on  the 
benefits,  they  require  shifting  the  focus  from  the  objectives  and  traditional  instruments  our 
institutions have been mandated for. These short-term perceived benefits, seemingly, have 
the potential to offer a right and moral solution to sovereignty versus stability, but they bear 
the risk of causing the loss of both in the long run.   
Political and institutional factors have not addressed yet some important concerns identified 
by the Bank of Albania to have caused financial stability-related concerns and decelerated 
economic growth  in  Albania.  I  refer  here  to collateral  execution,  lowering  of  perceived  risk 
arising  from  the  severe  political  situation  and  lack  of  consensus,  deceleration  of  reforms 
required by the European Commission and receiving EU candidate country status, severity of 
political warfare, and use of the economy and the situation for political gain.  
Lastly, the Bank of Albania notes that the Albanian economy remains under the pressure of 
market developments in our main trading partners and their economic and financial policies. 
The measures taken by our trading partners to enhance confidence in their financial systems 
and  adjust  the  macro-financial  imbalances  hamper  monetary  policy  transmission  in  the 
economy. They heighten public concern and undermine its confidence in the future. These 
are  the  very  reasons  preventing  the  banking  system  to  finance  the  economy  and  the 
government  at  lower  interest  rates  and,  consequently,  the  central  bank’s  monetary  policy 
transmission to easing the monetary and financial conditions.  
What is currently happening represents higher risk premium in the countries of the region for 
all the reasons referred to earlier, rather than an increase in real interest rates. Concluding, I 
would like to clarify that central banks should make their utmost to preserve the frail macro-
financial balances and bolster public confidence in institutions and the financial system.   
In this context, the Bank of Albania, as to date, will continue to foster macroeconomic and 
financial  stability  in  Albania.  This  is  our  major  obligation  arising  from  the  Constitution  and 
relevant laws. We are committed to meeting this obligation with dedication and meticulousity. 
We are fully focused on these two major objectives, just like a good captain focusing on the 
horizon, rather than on the hands laid on the ship’s wheel. 
The Bank of Albania believes that, by guaranteeing these two vital pillars to the stability and 
prosperity  of  the  economy,  we  have  provided  the  best  contribution  to  achieving  higher 
economic growth.  
On  the  other  hand,  this  would  create  an  attractive  surrounding  for  absorbing  and 
accommodating foreign investment, and allowing the entry of new capital into the economy, 
which is vital to support the country’s economic activity and its credibility in the region and 
beyond.  
The Bank of Albania is committed to guaranteeing a sound banking system and efficient in 
channelling  public  savings  into  the  economy.  We  will  continue  to  carry  out  our  periodic 
examinations to guarantee the banking system’s stability. Sufficient capitalisation and capital 
quality remain our primary objective. I would like to guarantee the system that the Bank of 
Albania will take all the measures to supply with liquidity, while increasing the pressure for 
higher credit volume and improved quality.  
Dear guests,  
I invite you to actively participate in today’s debate and discussions on issues that have been 
and will remain the focus and our common interest in the future. I invite you all to contribute, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
through presentations and discussions, to setting objectives our region will face in the future 
and solving the current challenges.   
Thank you for your attention!  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
