Ben S Bernanke: The economic outlook and the federal budget situation 
Testimony  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  System,  before  the  Committee  on  the  Budget,  US  House  of  Representatives, 
Washington DC, 2 February 2012. 
 Chairman Ryan, Vice Chairman Garrett, Ranking Member Van Hollen, and other members of 
the Committee, I appreciate this opportunity to discuss my views on the economic outlook, 
monetary policy, and the challenges facing federal fiscal policymakers.  
The economic outlook 
Over the past two and a half years, the U.S. economy has been gradually recovering from 
the  recent  deep  recession.  While  conditions  have  certainly  improved  over  this  period,  the 
pace  of  the  recovery  has  been  frustratingly  slow,  particularly  from  the  perspective  of  the 
millions  of  workers  who  remain  unemployed  or  underemployed.  Moreover,  the  sluggish 
expansion  has  left  the  economy  vulnerable  to  shocks.  Indeed,  last  year,  supply  chain 
disruptions stemming  from  the  earthquake  in  Japan,  a  surge  in  the  prices  of  oil  and  other 
commodities,  and  spillovers  from  the  European  debt  crisis  risked  derailing  the  recovery. 
Fortunately,  over  the  past  few  months,  indicators  of  spending,  production,  and  job  market 
activity have shown some signs of improvement; and, in economic projections just released, 
Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) participants indicated that they expect somewhat 
stronger growth this year than in 2011. The outlook remains uncertain, however, and close 
monitoring of economic developments will remain necessary.  
As is often the case, the ability and willingness of households to spend will be an important 
determinant  of  the  pace  at  which  the  economy  expands  in  coming  quarters.  Although  real 
consumer  spending  rose  moderately  last  quarter,  households  continue  to  face  significant 
headwinds.  Notably,  real  household  income  and  wealth  stagnated  in  2011,  and  access  to 
credit remained tight for many potential borrowers. Consumer sentiment has improved from 
the  summer’s  depressed  levels  but  remains  at  levels  that  are  still  quite  low  by  historical 
standards.  
Household spending will depend heavily on developments in the labor market. Overall, the 
jobs  situation  does  appear  to  have  improved  modestly  over  the  past  year:  Private  payroll 
employment increased by about 160,000 jobs per month in 2011, the unemployment rate fell 
by  about  1  percentage  point,  and  new  claims  for  unemployment  insurance  declined 
somewhat. Nevertheless, as shown by indicators like the rate of unemployment and the ratio 
of employment to population, we still have a long way to go before the labor market can be 
said to be operating normally. Particularly troubling is the unusually high level of long-term 
unemployment: More than 40 percent of the unemployed have been jobless for more than six 
months, roughly double the fraction during the economic expansion of the previous decade.  
Uncertain job prospects, along with tight mortgage credit conditions, continue to hold back 
the demand for housing. Although low interest rates on conventional mortgages and the drop 
in  home  prices  in  recent  years  have  greatly  improved  the  affordability  of  housing,  both 
residential sales and construction remain depressed. A persistent excess supply of vacant 
homes,  largely  stemming  from  foreclosures,  is  keeping  downward  pressure  on  prices  and 
limiting the demand for new construction.  
In contrast to the household sector, the business sector has been a relative bright spot in the 
current recovery.  Manufacturing production has increased 15 percent since its trough, and 
capital spending by businesses has expanded briskly over the past two years, driven in part 
by the need to replace aging equipment and software. Moreover, many U.S. firms, notably in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
manufacturing but also in services, have benefited from strong demand from foreign markets 
over the past few years.  
More  recently,  the  pace  of  growth  in  business  investment  has  slowed,  likely  reflecting 
concerns about both the domestic outlook and developments in Europe. However, there are 
signs  that  these  concerns  are  abating  somewhat.  If  business  confidence  continues  to 
improve, U.S. firms should be well positioned to increase both capital spending and hiring: 
Larger  businesses  are  still  able  to  obtain  credit  at  historically  low  interest  rates,  and 
corporate balance sheets are strong. And, though many smaller businesses continue to face 
difficulties in obtaining credit, surveys indicate that credit conditions have begun to improve 
modestly for those firms as well.  
Globally, economic activity appears to be slowing, restrained in part by spillovers from fiscal 
and financial developments in Europe. The combination of high debt levels and weak growth 
prospects  in  a  number  of  European  countries  has  raised  significant  concerns  about  their 
fiscal  situations,  leading  to  substantial  increases  in  sovereign  borrowing  costs,  concerns 
about  the  health  of  European  banks,  and  associated  reductions  in  confidence  and  the 
availability of credit in the euro area. Resolving these problems will require concerted action 
on  the  part  of  European  authorities.  They  are  working  hard  to  address  their  fiscal  and 
financial  challenges.  Nonetheless,  risks  remain  that  developments  in  Europe  or  elsewhere 
may  unfold  unfavorably  and  could  worsen  economic  prospects  here  at  home.  We  are  in 
frequent  contact  with  European  authorities,  and  we  will  continue  to  monitor  the  situation 
closely and take every available step to protect the U.S. financial system and the economy.  
Let me now turn to a discussion of inflation. As we had anticipated, overall consumer price 
inflation moderated considerably over the course of 2011. In the first half of the year, a surge 
in the prices of gasoline and food – along with some pass-through of these higher prices to 
other goods and services – had pushed consumer inflation higher. Around the same time, 
supply  disruptions  associated  with  the  disaster  in  Japan  put  upward  pressure  on  motor 
vehicle prices. As expected, however, the impetus from these influences faded in the second 
half of the year, leading inflation to decline from an annual rate of about 3–1/2 percent in the 
first half of 2011 to about 1–1/2 percent in the second half – close to its average pace in the 
preceding two years. In an environment of well-anchored inflation expectations, more-stable 
commodity prices, and substantial slack in labor and product markets, we expect inflation to 
remain subdued.  
Against that backdrop, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) decided last week to 
maintain  its  highly  accommodative  stance  of  monetary  policy.  In  particular,  the  Committee 
decided to continue its program to extend the average maturity of its securities holdings, to 
maintain its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments on its portfolio of securities, and 
to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to 1/4 percent. The Committee now 
anticipates  that  economic  conditions  are  likely  to  warrant  exceptionally  low  levels  of  the 
federal funds rate at least through late 2014.  
As  part  of  our  ongoing  effort  to  increase  the  transparency  and  predictability  of  monetary 
policy,  following  its  January  meeting  the  FOMC  released  a  statement  intended  to  provide 
greater clarity about the Committee’s longer-term goals and policy strategy.1 The statement 
begins by emphasizing the Federal Reserve’s firm commitment to pursue its congressional 
mandate to foster stable prices and maximum employment. To clarify how it seeks to achieve 
these objectives, the FOMC stated its collective view that inflation at the rate of 2 percent, as 
measured by the annual change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, is 
most  consistent  over  the  longer  run  with  the  Federal  Reserve’s  statutory  mandate;  and  it 
indicated that the central tendency of FOMC participants’ current estimates of the longer-run 
                                                 
1  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  (2012),  “Federal  Reserve  Issues  FOMC  Statement  of 
Longer-Run Goals and Policy Strategy,” press release, January 25. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
normal  rate  of  unemployment  is  between  5.2  and  6.0  percent.  The  statement  noted  that 
these  statutory  objectives  are  generally  complementary,  but  when  they  are  not,  the 
Committee  will  take  a  balanced  approach  in  its  efforts  to  return  both  inflation  and 
employment to their desired levels.  
Fiscal policy challenges 
In the remainder of my remarks, I would like to briefly discuss the fiscal challenges facing 
your  Committee  and  the  country.  The  federal  budget  deficit  widened  appreciably  with  the 
onset  of  the  recent  recession,  and  it  has  averaged  around  9  percent  of  gross  domestic 
product (GDP) over the past three fiscal years. This exceptional increase in the deficit has 
mostly  reflected  the  automatic  cyclical  response  of  revenues  and  spending  to  a  weak 
economy as well as the fiscal actions taken to ease the recession and aid the recovery. As 
the economy continues to expand and stimulus policies are phased out, the budget deficit 
should narrow over the next few years.  
Unfortunately,  even  after  economic  conditions  have  returned  to  normal,  the  nation  will  still 
face  a  sizable  structural  budget  gap  if  current  budget  policies  continue.  Using  information 
from  the  recent  budget  outlook  by  the  Congressional  Budget  Office,  one  can  construct  a 
projection for the federal deficit assuming that most expiring tax provisions are extended and 
that  Medicare’s  physician  payment  rates  are  held  at  their  current  level.  Under  these 
assumptions, the budget deficit would be more than 4 percent of GDP in fiscal year 2017, 
assuming that the economy is then close to full employment.2 Of even greater concern is that 
longer-run projections, based on plausible assumptions about the evolution of the economy 
and  budget  under  current  policies,  show  the  structural  budget  gap  increasing  significantly 
further over time and the ratio of outstanding federal debt to GDP rising rapidly. This dynamic 
is clearly unsustainable.  
These structural fiscal imbalances did not emerge overnight. To a significant extent, they are 
the result of an aging population and, especially, fast-rising health-care costs, both of which 
have been predicted for decades. Notably, the Congressional Budget Office projects that net 
federal outlays for health-care entitlements – which were about 5 percent of GDP in fiscal 
2011 – could rise to more than 9 percent of GDP by 2035.3 Although we have been warned 
about  such  developments  for  many  years,  the  time  when  projections  become  reality  is 
coming closer.  
Having a large and increasing level of government debt relative to national income runs the 
risk  of  serious  economic  consequences.  Over  the  longer  term,  the  current  trajectory  of 
federal  debt  threatens  to  crowd  out  private  capital  formation  and  thus  reduce  productivity 
growth. To the extent that increasing debt is financed by borrowing from abroad, a growing 
share  of  our  future  income  would  be  devoted  to  interest  payments  on  foreign-held  federal 
debt.  High  levels  of  debt  also  impair  the  ability  of  policymakers  to  respond  effectively  to 
future economic shocks and other adverse events.  
                                                 
2  The  Congressional  Budget  Office  (CBO)  reported  an  “alternative  fiscal  scenario”  (Table  1–7,  p.  22)  that 
assumed that most expiring tax cuts and the Medicare “doc fix” would be extended and also that the automatic 
spending reductions required by the Budget Control Act (BCA) would not take effect; under this scenario the 
deficit would be about 5 percent of GDP in fiscal 2017. If the automatic spending cuts from the BCA, however, 
are assumed to be put in place (the effects of which are shown in Table 1–6, p. 18) then the deficit would be 
more  than  4  percent  in  fiscal  2017.  See  Congressional  Budget  Office  (2012),  The  Budget  and  Economic 
Outlook: Fiscal Years 2012 to 2022. Washington: Congressional Budget Office, January. 
3  This projection is under the alternative fiscal scenario developed by the Congressional Budget Office, which 
assumes  most  current  policies  are  extended.  See  Congressional  Budget  Office  (2011).  The  Long-Term 
Budget Outlook. Washington: Congressional Budget Office. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Even the prospect of unsustainable deficits has costs, including an increased possibility of a 
sudden fiscal crisis. As we have seen in a number of countries recently, interest rates can 
soar quickly if investors lose confidence in the ability of a government to manage its fiscal 
policy.  Although  historical  experience  and  economic  theory  do  not  indicate  the  exact 
threshold at which the perceived risks associated with the U.S. public debt would increase 
markedly, we can be sure that, without corrective action, our fiscal trajectory will move the 
nation ever closer to that point.  
To  achieve  economic  and  financial  stability,  U.S.  fiscal  policy  must  be  placed  on  a 
sustainable  path  that  ensures  that  debt  relative  to  national  income  is  at  least  stable  or, 
preferably, declining over time. Attaining this goal should be a top priority.  
Even as fiscal policymakers address the urgent issue of fiscal sustainability, they should take 
care not to unnecessarily impede the current economic recovery. Fortunately, the two goals 
of  achieving  long-term  fiscal  sustainability  and  avoiding  additional  fiscal  headwinds  for  the 
current  recovery  are  fully  compatible  –  indeed,  they  are  mutually  reinforcing.  On  the  one 
hand,  a  more  robust  recovery  will  lead  to  lower  deficits  and  debt  in coming  years.  On  the 
other hand, a plan that clearly and credibly puts fiscal policy on a path to sustainability could 
help keep longer-term interest rates low and improve household and business confidence, 
thereby supporting improved economic performance today.  
Fiscal policymakers can also promote stronger economic performance in the medium term 
through  the  careful  design  of  tax  policies  and  spending  programs.  To  the  fullest  extent 
possible, our nation’s tax and spending policies should increase incentives to work and save, 
encourage  investments  in  the  skills  of  our  workforce,  stimulate  private  capital  formation, 
promote  research  and  development,  and  provide  necessary  public  infrastructure.  Although 
we  cannot  expect  our  economy  to  grow  its  way  out  of  our  fiscal  imbalances,  a  more 
productive economy will ease the tradeoffs that we face and increase the likelihood that we 
leave a healthy economy to our children and grandchildren.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
