Benoît Cœuré: The importance of money markets 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at  the  Morgan  Stanley  16th  Annual  Global  Investment  seminar,  Tourrettes,  Provence, 
16 June 2012. 
 I  wish  to  thank  Marie  Hoerova  for  her  contribution  to  this  speech.  I  remain  solely  responsible  for  the  opinions 
contained herein. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure for me to speak at this Morgan Stanley Global Investment Seminar. 
In my remarks today, I would like to share with you some concerns about the present state of 
the euro area money markets, which are characterised by segmentation between cash-rich 
and cash-poor banks and a fragmentation along national lines. I would also like to offer some 
thoughts on how proper money market functioning can be restored. 
As you know, money markets around the world came under severe stress during the recent 
financial  crisis  and  in  the  subsequent  sovereign  debt  crisis,  with  interest  rate  spreads 
jumping to unprecedented levels and market activity declining significantly in many market 
segments. In my remarks today, I’ll first consider the functioning of money markets before the 
crisis  and  their  malfunctioning  during  the  crisis,  highlighting  specifics  of  the  euro  area’s 
situation compared with that of the US.  
Tensions  in  the  money  markets  led  banks  to  seek  to  replace  money  market  funding  with 
central  bank  funding.  Central  banks  have,  since  the  beginning  of  the  financial  crisis, 
increasingly  become  intermediaries  for  interbank  transactions,  as  witnessed  by  the  steep 
increase in the size of their balance sheets. 
These developments give rise to the following questions. First, if central banks are providing 
funding to banks in crisis times, when money markets are malfunctioning, why don’t they also 
do  so  in  normal  times?  In  other  words,  what  useful  functions  do  decentralised  money 
markets  perform?  I  will  argue  that  these  markets  are  essential  to  ensure  price  discovery, 
information aggregation and peer monitoring. 
Given  these  important  benefits,  a  second  question  that  arises  is,  how  can  the  proper 
functioning  of  money  markets  be  restored?  I’ll  discuss  policies  that  can  help  to  revitalise 
money markets in the euro area later on. Such policies must be directed towards reducing 
counterparty  risk  concerns.  This  can  be  achieved  by  restoring  adequate  capital  ratios  and 
reducing  the  heterogeneity  in  the  capitalisation  of  banks,  as  well  as  taking  decisive  steps 
towards a banking union. In the end, lending is an act of trust and there is no alternative but 
to restore full confidence in the soundness of bank and government finance. 
Secured and unsecured money markets: the US and the euro area experience 
Money  markets  are  vital  funding  markets  for  financial  institutions.  I  would  like  to  highlight 
some  key  developments  across  various  money  market  segments  from  the  onset  of  the 
financial crisis to its most critical point in the autumn of 2008, and the trends that have been 
observed since then. While my main focus will be on the euro area, I will allude to some US 
developments as well, not only because the crisis had its origins in the US sub-prime market, 
but  also  to  underscore  the  importance  of  the  different  structural  characteristics  of  the  two 
financial  systems  in  determining  which  money  market  trends  affected  banks’  access  to 
funding most. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The start of the financial crisis in the summer of 2007 was triggered by a sudden re-pricing in 
the US sub-prime mortgage market, on account of risks not being properly reflected in the 
price of the related instruments, in particular mortgage-backed securities and collateralised 
debt  obligations.  A  market-wide  reassessment  of  financial  risk  led  to  sharp  increases  in 
premia and spreads across credit markets. 
Opacity in banks’ balance sheets, coupled with uncertainty about the real valuation of their 
assets,  led  to  acute  tensions  in  the  markets  for  credit  instruments.  The  crisis  became 
systemic  when  these  tensions  spread  to  money  markets  worldwide  in  early  August  2007. 
Some banks were facing direct exposures to “toxic” sub-prime assets; others needed liquidity 
to be able to honour committed credit lines to so-called conduits, bank-sponsored investment 
funds. These off-balance sheet entities, a part of the large shadow banking sector in the US, 
became unable to roll over short-term financing in the US asset-backed commercial paper 
market  (ABCP)  amid  great  uncertainty  about  asset  valuations.1  These  events  reinforced 
each other and generated uncertainty about both the solvency and liquidity of money market 
participants,  as  the  extent  of  sub-prime  exposures  was  unknown  and  counterparties  could 
not distinguish good banks from bad.2 
Longer-term unsecured money markets, the most heavily exposed to counterparty credit risk, 
showed  signs  of  stress,  as  signalled  by  the  spread  between  the  three-month  unsecured 
interbank rate (Libor for the US and Euribor for the euro area) and the overnight index swap 
in three months’ time (OIS), a standard measure of tensions in unsecured markets.3 Chart 1 
shows the spread for the euro area (red line) and the US (blue line) from January 2007 to the 
first week of June 2012. The spreads had been fairly stable at around five (euro area) and 
eight (US) basis points before August 2007. After the crisis erupted, two “regime shifts” could 
be seen for both the euro area and the US. First, in August 2007, the spreads jumped and 
remained mostly elevated at above 50 basis points. Second, after the Lehman collapse in 
autumn 2008, the spreads reached all-time highs of 186 and 365 basis points for the euro 
area and the US, respectively. 
In addition, there were indications that liquidity was no longer flowing from cash-rich banks to 
cash-poor banks. Towards the end of September 2008, euro area banks with a surplus of 
liquidity  seemed  to  prefer  to  “hoard”  liquidity  by  depositing  excess  funds  with  the 
Eurosystem,  rather  than  lending  it  through  the  market  to  banks  with  a  liquidity  shortage. 
Banks facing a shortage demanded high amounts of liquidity from the ECB. Chart 2 shows 
the amounts of liquidity deposited by banks with the Eurosystem (blue bars, daily averages 
per  week  in  billions  of  euro),  together  with  the  Euribor-OIS  spread  (red  line).  While  the 
amounts  deposited  with  the  Eurosystem  rose  dramatically  (also  reflecting  an  increased 
liquidity provision by the ECB in response to market tensions),4 the average daily volume in 
the overnight unsecured interbank market in the euro area almost halved by late September 
2008, suggesting that even the very short-term money markets were coming under stress.5 
                                                 
1   Covitz  et  al.  (2012)  document  “runs”  on  ABCP  programs  during  the  second  half  of  2007  in  the  US;  see 
D. M. Covitz,  N.  Liang  and  G.  Suarez,  “The  Evolution  of  a  Financial  Crisis:  Collapse  of  the  Asset-Backed 
Commercial Paper Market”, Journal of Finance, forthcoming. 
2   The  effects  of  asymmetric  information  and  counterparty  credit  risk  on  the  interbank  market  functioning  are 
analysed in F. Heider, M. Hoerova and C. Holthausen, “Liquidity hoarding and interbank market spreads: The 
role of counterparty risk”, ECB Working Paper No 1126, 2009. 
3   The  OIS  is  a  measure  of  what  the  market  expects  the  overnight  unsecured  rate  to  be  over  a  three-month 
period. Since interest rate expectations are present in both variables, the difference between EURIBOR (or 
LIBOR) and OIS reflects other factors, such as liquidity effects and credit risk. 
4   A rise from a daily average of €0.09 billion in the week starting 1 September 2008 to €169 billion in the week 
starting 29 September 2008. 
5   At the onset of the crisis in August 2007, the overnight interbank market actually saw an increase in volume. 
The  average  daily  volume  was  €41  billion  in  the  year  prior  to  9  August  2007.  It  increased  by  27%,  to 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The  US  overnight  unsecured  interbank  market  also  showed  growing  counterparty  risk 
concerns following the Lehman bankruptcy, with poorly performing banks seeing an increase 
in the interest rates on their interbank loans.6 
To prevent market-wide liquidity problems from turning into solvency problems for individual 
institutions, the Eurosystem introduced, as of October 2008, a fixed-rate full allotment regime 
in its refinancing operations, offering unlimited liquidity to banks at predictable cost against 
an expanded set of eligible collateral. This led to an excess supply of central bank liquidity, 
relative to the liquidity needs of the banking sector. The rise in the liquidity deposited with the 
Eurosystem after October 2008 (Chart 2) was a direct consequence of this new regime and a 
symptom  of  a  malfunctioning  money  market.  Let  me  add  that  many  banks  deposit  their 
excess liquidity back with the Eurosystem as a result of a simple accounting identity; by itself 
this does not necessarily imply that banks are not injecting liquidity into the economy. 
Since the onset of the crisis, the key money market trends affecting bank funding patterns 
were, for the US, the tensions in the secured markets (known as a “run on repo”) and, for the 
euro  area,  a  shift  from  unsecured  towards  secured  funding,  as  well  as  a  fragmentation  of 
money markets along national lines, further exacerbated by the emergence of the sovereign 
debt crisis. 
The  “run  on  repo”  has  been  often  seen  as  playing  a  key  role  in  the  collapse  of  the  US 
shadow banking sector. This was a major cause for concern as the size of the US shadow 
banking sector, measured by the total amount of its assets, was comparable with that of the 
traditional,  regulated  banking  system.7  Tensions  in  the  secured  markets  manifested 
themselves  in  increased  haircuts  across  collateral  types.  Recent  empirical  evidence 
suggests that most of the increase occurred on private sector securities, while haircuts on 
government  bonds,  which  constitute  the  bulk  of  assets  used  as  collateral  in  repo 
transactions,  increased  only  modestly.8  However,  some  key  dealer  banks  with  large 
exposures to private sector securities were heavily affected by the contraction in repo. As a 
result, these institutions reduced lending to other players in the shadow banking system.  
The  shadow  banking  system  in  the  euro  area  is  less  important  than  in  the  US,  as  it 
constitutes less than half of the total assets of the banking sector. (Assets held by shadow 
banking-related  sectors  in  the  euro  area  were  estimated  to  amount  to  €10.8  trillion  in  the 
second quarter of 2011).9 A major fraction of intermediation in money markets occurs at the 
interbank level. Still, interbank markets in the euro area came under severe stress because 
of  weaknesses  in  parts  of  the  banking  system:  in  some  countries  banks  were  heavily 
exposed  to  real  estate  and  housing  bubbles;  in  other  countries  banks  suffered  from 
sovereign risk exposure. 
                                                                                                                                                      
€52 billion between 9 August 2007 and 26 September 2008. This increase could reflect a shift towards more 
short-term financing in the interbank market. See Heider et al. (2009) cited above for details. 
6   See G. Afonso, A. Kovner, and A. Schoar, “Stressed, Not Frozen: The Federal Funds Market in the Financial 
Crisis”, Journal of Finance, Vol. 66, No. 4, 2011. 
7   For details, see K. Bakk-Simon, S. Borgioli, C. Giron, H. S. Hempell, A. Maddaloni, F. Recine, and S. Rosati, 
“Shadow banking sector in the euro area: An overview”, ECB Occasional Paper No 133, 2012. 
8   Krishnamurthy et al. (2012) report that a full-scale “run on repo” did not seem to have occurred (unlike in the 
ABCP  market).  See  A.  Krishnamurthy,  S.  Nagel  and  D.  Orlov,  “Sizing  Up  Repo”,  NBER  Working  Paper 
No 17768,  2012.  This  contrasts  with  previous  studies,  for  example,  G.  Gorton  and  A.  Metrick,  “Securitised 
Banking and the Run on Repo,” Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming. 
9   See  Bakk-Simon  et  al.  (2012)  cited  above.  The  shadow  banking  aggregate  corresponds  to  a  sector 
comprising the other financial intermediaries (OFI) sector plus money market funds (MMFs) minus investment 
funds other than MMFs. The OFI sector comprises all financial institutions other than those included in the 
monetary financial institutions (MFIs) and the insurance corporations and pension funds. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Let me provide some evidence of key trends in euro area money markets with a series of 
charts.10  
Stress  in  the  unsecured  money  market  segment  continued  beyond  2008,  with  a  reduced 
turnover and preference for lending at shorter maturities, which carry relatively less risk for 
the lender (Chart 3). More generally, the share of interbank liabilities in the total assets of 
monetary  financial  institutions  (MFIs)  domiciled  in  the  euro  area  has  exhibited  a  declining 
trend since the fourth quarter of 2008 (Chart 4). The levels are still below those observed in 
the pre-crisis period. 
The  euro  repo  market  also  experienced  tightening  conditions  in  2008,  characterised  by 
declining volumes, the exclusion of some securities from the pool of eligible collateral, as well 
as  the  exclusion  of  some  counterparties  by  means  of  larger  haircuts  and  margin 
requirements. After a drop in 2008, volumes started increasing from 2009 onwards, reflecting 
to some extent a shift from unsecured to secured funding, which gives lending banks more 
protection against counterparty credit risk.11  
Before the crisis, financial markets in the euro area were integrating rapidly. According to the 
financial  integration  indicators  developed  by  the  ECB,  euro  area  money  markets  achieved 
the  fastest  and  most  complete  integration.12  However,  as  liquidity  dried  up  in  the  money 
markets, a tendency for a “home bias” in interbank lending arose. This tendency intensified 
with the onset of the sovereign debt crisis for banks domiciled in fiscally strained euro area 
countries. The nationally based government support schemes may have contributed to this 
phenomenon. 
Chart  5  shows  that,  after  a  steady  decline  since  the  end  of  2004,  the  share  of  domestic 
interbank liabilities in total interbank liabilities in the euro area started rising in the first half of 
2008.  The  unweighted  average  of  the  shares  across  euro  area  countries  then  stabilised 
around  the  same  levels,  while  the  weighted  average  (driven  by  the  largest  countries) 
continued along an upward path. With regard to cross-border euro area interbank liabilities 
(that  is,  interbank  liabilities  coming  from  other  euro  area  countries),  after  a  fall  in  the  last 
quarter of 2008, the share remained broadly stable (Chart 6). 
At the same time, dispersion in banks’ access to funding increased considerably in the euro 
area,  with  banks  domiciled  in  countries  under  sovereign  strains  facing  severe  constraints 
even in obtaining secured funding. These trends led to an increased reliance by a part of the 
banking  system  on  central  bank  funding.  Chart  7  shows  that,  at  the  end  of  2008,  the 
Eurosystem’s  funding  (as  a  share  of  total  deposit  liabilities)  to  banks  in  some  euro  area 
countries increased markedly. After a mild improvement in euro area money market activity 
in the second half of 2010, increased borrowing from the Eurosystem was observed again in 
mid-2011,  owing  to  the  intensified  sovereign  debt  crisis.  At  the  end  of  the  first  quarter  of 
2012, average recourse to central bank funding by euro area banks in respect of total deposit 
liabilities stood at over 5%, slightly higher than the level observed after the Lehman collapse, 
with a very wide dispersion across euro area countries. 
Central  bank  intermediation  of  interbank  funds  was  necessary  to  ensure  a  smooth 
transmission  of  monetary  policy  across  the  euro  area  and  to  avoid  a  major  credit  crunch. 
However, it may have come at the cost of crowding out some market activity. It may take a 
long  time  before  secured,  and  particularly  unsecured,  money  market  segments  begin  to 
function normally again. More importantly, money market transactions will not come back if 
the fundamental causes are not addressed. 
                                                 
10   For a detailed account of changes in the funding patterns of euro area banks see “Changes in bank financing 
patterns”, European Central Bank, April 2012. 
11   See the report “Changes in bank financing patterns” cited above. 
12   The full set of the indicators can be found in the ECB’s annual report “Financial Integration in Europe”. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Importance of money markets 
I  now  turn  to  the  more  general  question  of  why  well-functioning,  decentralised  money 
markets  are  a  crucial  component  of  the  financial  system.  Three  factors  explain  the 
importance of money markets: their contribution to market efficiency and market discipline; 
their impact on financial stability and on financing conditions in the economy at large; and 
their role as an initial link in the chain of monetary policy transmission. 
Deep and liquid money markets, not unlike other markets in the economy, play an important 
part  in  information  aggregation  and  price  discovery.  Indeed,  money  market  rates,  such  as 
Euribor  and  Libor,  provide  benchmark  rates  for  the  pricing  of  fixed-income  securities  and 
loan contracts throughout the economy. 
Moreover, interbank money markets play a significant role in providing incentives for banks 
to conduct business in a safe and sound manner, thus ensuring market discipline. 
Specifically,  in  the  unsecured  money  markets,  where  loans  are  uncollateralised,  interbank 
lenders are directly exposed to losses if the interbank loan is not repaid. This gives lenders 
incentives to collect information about borrowers and to monitor them over the lifetime of the 
interbank  loan,  making  the  loan  repayment  more  probable.  Therefore,  unsecured  money 
markets play a key peer monitoring role.13 The information banks acquire about each other 
may not be readily available to regulatory authorities and central banks.14  
In the secured money markets, lenders mitigate credit risk exposure by requiring borrowers 
to post collateral, and by imposing haircuts on collateral values. While attenuated credit risk 
concerns may make it easier for borrowing banks to obtain credit, secured funding comes at 
the cost of acquiring and holding collateral, as well as relatively weaker incentives for lending 
banks to conduct monitoring. 
Developments  in  money  markets  can  have  profound  implications  for  financial  stability  and 
the functioning of the entire economy, for they affect the financing conditions faced by non-
financial  corporations  and  households.  Being  an  essential  source  of  bank  funding,  money 
markets have a significant impact on the size of the balance sheet of financial institutions and 
the  amount  of  credit  they  can  extend.  As  such,  money  markets  can  contribute  to  pro-
cyclicality  and  the  so-called  leverage  cycles:  at  times  of  generalised  optimism,  high  asset 
valuation, low haircuts and abundant liquidity in money markets can lead to higher leverage 
and credit expansion, whereas when bad shocks hit the economy asset prices drop, haircuts 
increase and liquidity can dry up.15  
                                                 
13   Rochet and Tirole (1996) emphasise the role of interbank peer monitoring in reducing borrowers’ moral hazard 
and their excessive risk-taking ex post; see J.-C. Rochet and J. Tirole, “Interbank Lending and Systemic Risk,” 
Journal  of  Money,  Credit  and  Banking,  Vol.  28,  No.  4,  1996.  Hoerova  and  Monnet  (2011)  view  market 
discipline in the unsecured money markets as a provision of ex ante incentives to mitigate risk of borrowers’ 
investments; see M. Hoerova and C. Monnet, “Money market discipline and central bank lending,” presented 
at  the  workshop  on  the  “Post-crisis  design  of  the  operational  framework”,  European  Central  Bank,  October 
2011. 
14   Money markets were among the first to respond to the arrival of bad news about the US sub-prime mortgage 
market, with rising interest rates and/or unwillingness to roll over maturing debt. When perceived risk and the 
distribution  of  risk  in  the  financial  system  suddenly  increase,  the  incentives  of  money  market  lenders  to 
monitor  their  borrowers  intensify,  resulting  in  adjustments  in  the  price  and  quantity  of  credit  granted. 
Conversely, when risk is perceived to be low and relatively homogeneous, borrowers get refinanced easily. 
Smooth money market functioning in the run-up to the crisis was aided by generalised optimism and low risk 
aversion in markets, driven inter alia by a benign macroeconomic environment, ample liquidity in the financial 
system  due  to  a  “savings  glut”  and  accommodative  monetary  policy,  as  well  as  agency  problems  in  the 
financial sector. 
15   See J. Geanakoplos, “Solving the Present Crisis and Managing the Leverage Cycle”, Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York Economic Policy Review, August 2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
If liquidity dries up, it can force banks to de-leverage, thus affecting the supply of bank credit, 
or  to  acquire  liquidity  by  liquidating  or  selling  assets.  Asset  liquidation  can  impose 
externalities  on  other  players  in  the  financial  system  through,  for  example,  fire  sales  and 
financial contagion.16  
From the monetary policy perspective, money markets play a central role in monetary policy 
transmission in the euro area. This is because the euro area financial system is largely bank-
based  and  interbank  money  market  interest  rates  represent  the  marginal  cost  of  funding 
bank  loans.  When  money  markets  function  normally,  the  ECB  can  influence  the  longer-
maturity rates, which are relevant for determining bank lending rates, by steering very short-
term  money  market  rates  to  keep  them  close  to  its  official  rates.  A  smooth  functioning  of 
money  markets  therefore  guarantees  that  the  impulse  of  monetary  policy  is  transmitted 
across the financial system and to the real economy without impairments. 
Revitalising money markets in the euro area 
Given  the  significance  of  well-functioning  money  markets,  their  revival  is  essential  for  the 
euro  area.  Revamping  money  markets  calls  for  a  reversal  of  the  aforementioned  adverse 
trends of low and fragmented money market activity, and the resulting increased reliance on 
liquidity provision by the ECB. As these trends are driven by counterparty risk concerns in 
the  banking  system,  restoring  proper  money  market  functioning  and  integration  among 
different jurisdictions requires restoring confidence in banks’ health. It also requires banking 
and  market  supervisors  to  resist  the  temptation  to  ring-fence  liquidity  and  capital  within 
national  boundaries.  This  is  a  classic  problem  of  collective  action:  uncoordinated  national 
reactions  to  heightened  uncertainty  could  be  collectively  lethal  to  the  single  market  for 
capital.  
Two  sets  of  actions  seem  to  be  key  in  tackling  these  concerns  at  their  root:  one  set  to 
strengthen bank balance sheets and another set of actions to break the self-reinforcing loop 
between bank and sovereign debt risks and move to truly unified European supervision. 
To  strengthen  bank  balance  sheets,  first,  adequate  capital  ratios  must  be  reached  in  the 
banking system. The EBA Capital Exercise, with EU banks being expected to reach a core 
Tier 1 capital ratio of 9% by the end of this month, will be an important milestone. Regulators 
should  then  make  sure  that  the  subsequent  transition  to  the  Basel  III  framework  does  not 
result in a weakening of the capital buffers. The heterogeneity of capital ratios must also be 
reduced.  The  median  core  Tier  1  capital  ratio  of  large  euro  area  banks  is  not  significantly 
lower  than  that  of  their  global  counterparts.  However,  the  variation  in  this  ratio  across 
institutions is substantially wider in the euro area, introducing asymmetries in banks’ access 
to funding and funding costs. 
Second, leverage in the euro area banking system must be reduced. The aggregate leverage 
(asset-to-equity) ratio of large euro area banks remains comparatively high by international 
and historical standards.17 
The  adverse  feedback  loop  between  banks  and  sovereigns,  in  which  doubts  about  the 
solvency of the sovereigns feed doubts about the solvency of the banks, and vice versa, will 
be broken more readily by the establishment of a true banking union. 
                                                 
16   See,  for  example,  V.  Acharya  and  S.  Viswanathan,  “Leverage,  Moral  Hazard  and  Liquidity”,  Journal  of 
Finance,  Vol.  66,  No  1,  2011;  F.  Allen  and  D.  Gale,  “Financial  Contagion”,  Journal  of  Political  Economy, 
Vol. 108,  No.  1,  2000;  and  M.  Brunnermeier  and  L.  H.  Pedersen,  “Market  Liquidity  and  Funding  Liquidity”, 
Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 22, No 6, 2009. 
17   For more information on the deleveraging process in the euro area banking system, see Special Feature A, 
Financial Stability Review, ECB, June 2012. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
This should include the creation of a pan-euro area deposit insurance fund and a pan-euro 
area bank resolution framework, supported by a single supervisory system with centralised 
decision-making. If the European Stability Mechanism could inject capital directly into banks, 
with strong conditionality and control, this would also help to break the bank-sovereign loop. 
These  new  institutions  would  mitigate  counterparty  risk  and  promote  a  truly  integrated 
approach to banking supervision. In addition, they would foster the integration of the banking 
system not only at the money market level, but also at the retail level: the emergence of truly 
pan-European  banking  institutions,  provided  they  are  properly  controlled,  would  attenuate 
asymmetric shocks within Member States and favour risk-sharing. 
Depending  on  how  they  are  devised,  some  features  of  such  a  banking  union,  such  as  a 
single euro area deposit insurance or a single resolution fund to wind down failed banks, may 
result  in  additional  sharing  of  fiscal  risk  among  euro  area  countries.  These  mechanisms 
should  come  with  the  appropriate  parliamentary  controls.  There  should  be  no  sharing  of 
fiscal risks without democratic decision-making and accountability. 
Money market functioning will also be affected by the incoming regulation. I have in mind in 
particular the new set of liquidity standards proposed by the Basel Committee,18 the moving 
of over-the-counter derivatives trading towards central counterparties (CCPs) and the reform 
of the shadow banking sector. The aim of the current regulatory reforms is to establish an 
incentive-compatible regulatory framework as well as to encourage banks to adopt business 
models that allow them to limit their risks and fulfil the regulatory requirements without relying 
excessively on central banks as liquidity providers. 
In respect of liquidity, the Basel Committee proposed in December 2010 two new standards: 
the liquidity coverage ratio (LCR), which aims to ensure that banks hold sufficient high-quality 
liquid  assets  to  withstand  an  acute  stress  scenario  lasting  one  month;  and  the  net  stable 
funding  ratio  (NSFR),  which  aims  to  address  banks’  longer-term  structural  liquidity 
mismatches  by  requiring  a  minimum  amount  of  stable  funding  (based  on  the  liquidity 
characteristics  of  banks’  assets)  over  a  one-year  period.  It  is  important  that  the  regulation 
does  not  hamper  the  functioning  of  funding  markets.  This  applies  in  particular  to  the 
calibration  of  the  run-off  rates  for  interbank  funding  and  to  the  asymmetrical  treatment  of 
liquidity facilities extended to financial firms. 
The  regulators’  welcome  push  to  move  over-the-counter  derivatives  towards  CCPs,  which 
aims to limit counterparty risk and promote greater netting efficiency and transparency, may 
also  have  an  effect  on  both  the  unsecured  and  secured  money  market  segments.  This  is 
because such a move will lead to an increased need for high-quality collateral.19 However, 
the  supply  of  safe  assets  is  finite  and  the  pool  of  “good”  collateral  is  dwindling  as  the 
creditworthiness of certain sovereigns is questioned by market participants. The more good 
collateral is pledged to the CCPs, the less is left to use in the secured money market, and the 
fewer  assets  are  available  to  other  creditors  in  the  event  of  default,  making  it  difficult  to 
obtain unsecured refinancing. This strengthens the need to find ways to identify or produce 
new assets that can be used as collateral and to mitigate the pro-cyclical consequences of 
credit ratings and of market valuation. 
Lastly,  money  market  functioning  may  be  affected  by  the  ongoing  discussions  on  the 
regulation  of  the  shadow  banking  sector,  some  parts  of  which  provide  funding  to  the 
                                                 
18   Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, “Basel III: A global regulatory framework for more resilient banks 
and banking systems”, December 2010 (revised version of June 2011). 
19   The higher demand can be driven by a number of factors including a current under-collateralisation of over-
the-counter  transactions,  reduced  re-hypothetication  of  collateral  and  CCPs  only  accepting  relatively  high 
quality collateral. Estimates of the demand for extra collateral vary. A recent report by Morgan Stanley and 
Oliver Wyman estimates the demand at USD 500–800 billion. Singh (2009) estimates the costs to be around 
USD 200 billion (see M. Singh, “Collateral, Netting and Systemic Risk in the OTC Derivatives Market”, IMF 
Working Paper WP/10/99, 2009). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
traditional, regulated banking system. For example, there is some evidence that US money 
market  funds  (MMFs)  provide  sizeable  US  dollar  funding  to  European  banks.20  In  this 
context,  the  changes  in  the  US  regulation  on  MMFs,  which  sets  shorter  maturity  limits  for 
securities held by MMFs and other liquidity requirements, may have a lasting effect on the 
US dollar funding conditions for European banks. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude.  
The  importance  of  money  markets  for  monetary  and  financial  stability  and  for  lending 
conditions  in  the  economy  calls  for  careful  monitoring  of  recent  money  market  trends  to 
assess which trends are temporary and which are more structural, induced inter alia by the 
current regulatory overhaul. Restoring proper market functioning requires a series of actions 
to rebuild confidence in the creditworthiness of banks and governments, as well as the taking 
of decisive steps towards a banking union. 
Thank you for your attention. 
                                                 
20   See Bakk-Simon et al. (2012) cited above. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  9
   10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   11
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
