Benoît Cœuré: Challenges to the single monetary policy and the 
European Central Bank’s response 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the Institut d’études politiques, Paris, 20 September 2012. 
 Ladies and gentlemen,1 
It is a great pleasure for me to speak here today at Sciences Po Paris.  
9 August this year was the fifth anniversary of the start of the financial crisis. The past few 
years  have  been  times  of  hardship,  financial  turbulence  and  risks.  At  the  same  time,  the 
crisis has exposed weaknesses in the framework of the economic and monetary union and 
provided  an  impetus  to  strengthen  its foundations  and  to  begin  the  process  of  bringing  all 
euro area countries back to a more sustainable fiscal and macroeconomic path.  
The crisis has also brought challenges and opportunities for monetary policy, which is going 
to be the focus of my remarks today. Let me elaborate on two of them. 
The first challenge I will describe is that after Lehman’s collapse central banks had to combat 
exceptional threats to price stability arising from financial instability and recessionary forces. 
At that time their standard tool of monetary policy – changes to the short-term interest rate 
–  was  losing  traction  due  to  the  dislocation  in  the  financial  system.  Central  banks  had  to 
quickly learn that this situation required switching from normal operating mode, based simply 
on setting short-term interest rates, to crisis mode, aimed at sidestepping the obstacles to the 
standard  channels  of  monetary  policy  transmission.  This  experience  has  given  us  an 
opportunity to deepen our understanding of monetary policy and, in particular, to reject the 
textbook dichotomy that either the central bank is able to rely on the “interest rate channel” 
for the transmission of its intentions, or else the economy is condemned to lasting instability. 
It is now clear that additional channels and conduits are available. 
The  second  challenge  I  want  to  discuss  is  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  and  the  associated 
fragmentation of credit markets across national borders. Starting in 2010, the financial crisis 
began to unfold in the euro area by turning into a debt crisis for some sovereign issuers. This 
quickly  spilled  across  markets  and  countries.  And  more  recently,  it  was  exacerbated  by 
investors’ fears of the reversibility of the euro. The challenge faced by monetary policy in this 
environment is enormous and is testing the ability of the ECB to act as the central bank of a 
single  monetary  area  with  17  fiscal  jurisdictions.  It  has  been  increasingly  challenging  to 
preserve the singleness of the monetary policy and to ensure the proper transmission of the 
policy stance to the real economy throughout the currency area. To address this situation, 
the ECB has taken a number of non-standard measures, and two weeks ago it announced 
the  modalities  for  undertaking  Outright  Monetary  Transactions  in  secondary  markets  for 
sovereign bonds in the euro area. I will describe the rationale for this decision and argue that 
it is a key element to ensure a lasting “monetary dominance” in the euro area, compliant with 
the Treaties.  
Channels of monetary policy in normal times and crisis times  
In normal times, monetary policy works primarily through inter-temporal financial arbitrage. In 
the  Eurosystem,  this  arbitrage  covers  two  different  time  dimensions.  There  is  the  weekly 
arbitrage  cycle,  through  which  the  volume  of  central  bank  liquidity  is  reallocated  across 
                                                
1  
I  would  like  to  thank  Roberto  Motto,  Stefano  Nardelli,  and  Massimo  Rostagno  for  their  contributions  to  the 
speech. I remain solely responsible for the opinions expressed herein. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
banks  trading  in  the  money  market  in  the  period  between  two  consecutive  weekly 
Eurosystem main refinancing operations (MROs). The reason for this reallocation is that – as 
a matter of routine, at least – the Eurosystem provides reserves at weekly intervals. While 
the banking sector’s need for reserves in the aggregate may not change significantly within a 
week, the cash needs of individual banks do fluctuate at higher frequencies, probably daily.2 
So  banks  with  liquidity  deficits  in  the  infra-weekly  period  need  to  borrow  from  banks  with 
liquidity surpluses. The price at which these trades of liquid reserves between banks occur, 
i.e. the overnight interest rate (of which a euro area average, the EONIA, is computed and 
published every day by  the ECB), is influenced by expectations of the cost of Eurosystem 
credit – the so-called MRO rate – at the next weekly monetary policy operation. A short-term 
inter-temporal  arbitrage  calculus  anchors  the  overnight  interest  rate  applied  on  the  credit 
transaction between banks that need liquidity and banks that have a liquidity surplus.3  
The second dimension of the inter-temporal calculus has a longer horizon and a wider scope 
of application across asset classes. Banks can borrow short in the money market or from the 
Eurosystem and decide to engage in term lending to other banks or to their customers. Bank 
customers, in turn, can use bank liquidity to finance consumption or the acquisition of capital. 
It is important to note that all of these money transactions in the broader economy involve 
traders weighing the costs of their borrowing against the return opportunities on their asset 
acquisition at different points in time, where the horizon is typically longer than a week. But, 
again, as banks borrowing from the Eurosystem are the source of this liquidity propagation 
pattern,  and  banks’  financial  calculus  is  based  on  their  anticipations  of  the  interest  rate 
settings by the Eurosystem in the future, such anticipations anchor the pricing of credit in the 
broader economy. 
We call this “the interest rate channel” of monetary policy decisions. In normal times, when 
risk  factors  are  contained  and  can  be  diversified  away,  the  interest  rate  channel,  working 
through inter-temporal arbitrage, is the prime conduit of monetary policy (see slide 2). It sets 
the  floor  for  term  borrowing  costs.  Parsing  longer-term  yields  into  two  components  –  the 
average level of the short-term policy interest rate expected over the term to maturity of the 
asset, and the risk premia – expectations of monetary policy pin down the first component. 
The  mechanism  through  which  this  occurs  is  the  inter-temporal  financial  arbitrage  I  just 
described. Term and liquidity premia are the additional returns that investors demand as a 
compensation for their reluctance to bear interest rate risk over long-duration assets, and for 
their decision to forgo liquidity services – I am abstracting here from credit risk, to which I will 
return later. 
When markets are properly functioning, non-depository institutions – dealers, hedge funds, 
investment banks – provide  immediacy by offering lenders and borrowers their capacity to 
take  positions  on  both  sides  of  the  market.  Their  ready  availability  to  take  positions  as 
lenders and borrowers supports market liquidity, namely the ease  with  which a lender can 
liquidate  a  position  before  maturity. When  market  liquidity  is  secure,  lenders  are  willing  to 
engage  in  finance,  trades  in  long-duration  assets  are  active  and  the  liquidity  premia  are 
contained. And, most importantly, they are steady. With a steady premium, the expectations 
                                                
2  There are two reasons for idiosyncratic fluctuations of reserve demand by individual banks. The first reason is 
associated  with  cash  withdrawals  and  cash  deposits  by  customers  and  from  bank  transfer  payments 
intermediated by the Eurosystem – in its function as the clearing institution of the most important interbank 
payments  system  in  the  euro  area.  The  other  reason  is  that  not  all  banks  participate  in  the  Eurosystem 
liquidity-providing operations, but prefer to cover their needs for reserves primarily in the interbank market. For 
example, in normal times, of the 1,700 banks that were eligible for Eurosystem monetary policy operations, 
less than 500 used to participate in liquidity allotments. 
In a Eurosystem environment, the short-term inter-temporal calculus finds another anchor: the need for banks 
to fulfil their reserve requirements over a monthly maintenance period. In normal times, this is accomplished 
smoothly throughout the monthly period, again via an inter-temporal substitution of liquidity balances by each 
individual bank. 
3  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
of the short-term rates become the driving factor in the pricing of long-dated securities, and 
monetary policy acquires a potent handle on the economy. 
In  August  2007,  a  sudden  re-pricing  in  the  US  sub-prime  mortgage  market  changed  this 
world. The close and predictable relationship between the expected path of policy rates and 
market  rates  broke  down  because  the  liquidity  premia  widened  and  became  volatile.  The 
elevation  of  market  premia  was  especially  pronounced  in  the  spread  between  the 
three-month EURIBOR and the expected three-month path of the overnight rate (see slide 
3).  Banks  recognised  a  substantial  counterparty  risk  in  lending  to  each  other,  given  that 
interbank  lending  was  generally  unsecured.  But,  even  if  collateral  was  taken,  the  ability  to 
liquidate it at a reasonable price was severely impaired in an environment of widespread fear 
and  uncertainty.  Bank  positions  in  the  interbank  market  can  be  highly  persistent.  Large 
diversified  banks  tend  to  be  borrowers  and  smaller,  regional  banks  lenders.  When  the 
financial turmoil erupted, persistent borrowers endured a sharp and sustained jump in their 
funding costs and many of them had no access to markets at all.  
When  Lehman  Brothers  finally  filed  for  bankruptcy  in  mid-September  2008,  widespread 
financial panic broke out. The paralysis of transactions spread beyond the money markets, 
where it had been more or less confined for a year. Outside the money market, dealers play 
a critical role guaranteeing market liquidity. But in order to be able to take positions on both 
sides of the market, they need to finance their securities positions via collateralised funding. 
For that, they need their own capital, which they can use to pay for the margins required by 
those who lend them securities. When confidence evaporates, margins increase and dealers’ 
capital is eroded, so that their ability to trade as buyers is restricted. Markets lose a critical 
actor, assets become less liquid, and the value of assets declines further. Having tasted the 
forbidden  fruit  of  excess  risk-taking,  financial  institutions  were  cast  out  of  the  paradise  of 
seamless financial markets. 
In a financial crisis of these proportions, “outside money” – an asset that is not a liability for 
anybody  else  than  a  central  bank  –  becomes  the  sole  trustworthy  store  of  value.4  Only  a 
central  bank,  the  monopoly  provider  of  outside  money,  can  respond  to  the  scrambles  for 
liquidity.  
The  ECB  injected  its  funding  capacity  into  a  market  vacuum  left  wide  open  by  bank 
retrenchment, dealer defaults and investor panic. In these conditions, inter-temporal financial 
arbitrage  –  of  the  type  I  described  above  –  becomes  impaired.  The  power  of  banks  and 
dealers to engage in or finance inter-temporal trades of liquidity balances is degraded. So the 
main conduit of monetary policy – which depends on those trades – is lost. 
The  ECB  had  to  open  a  new  channel,  the  “liquidity  channel”,  to  get  round  the  roadblocks 
facing  the  interest  rate  channel  (see  slide  4).  More  precisely,  the  ECB  acted  in  two 
dimensions. It sought to alleviate the difficulties experienced by banks in getting liquidity from 
the  interbank  market,  which  was  putting  pressure  on  the  assets  side  of  banks’  balance 
sheets  and  increasing  the  risks  of  hindering  credit  supply.  At  the  same  time,  it  sought  to 
restore  the  normal  pass-through  from  short-term  money  market  (lending)  rates  to  other 
market and bank interest rates.  
As far as impairments to banks’ funding are concerned, the ECB addressed banks’ funding 
uncertainty  by  fully  accommodating  liquidity  needs  at  a  fixed  interest  rate  (the  ECB  main 
refinancing  rate),  while  simultaneously  lengthening  the  maturity  of  refinancing  operations: 
from  three  to  six  months  and  twelve  months,  and  more  recently  two  operations  with  a 
three-year maturity. This has allowed an alleviation of the funding constraints of the banking 
system. In this way, a substantial change in the term structure of liquidity has taken place. 
While  before  the  crisis  about  three-quarters  of  outstanding  liquidity  had  a  maturity  of  one 
                                                
4   See Holmström, B. and Tirole, J., (2011), Inside and Outside Liquidity, MIT Press. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
week and the rest three months (i.e. an average maturity of 15–20 days), the current average 
maturity is 28 months (see slide 5).  
The expansion of the ECB collateralised monetary policy operations, together with the more 
widespread collateralisation of financial transactions, has raised the fear of encumbrance of 
bank assets. This risk has not materialised as the list of eligible collateral has been expanded 
to  enable  banks  to  take  full  advantage  of  the  ECB  full-allotment  policy,  while  rigorously 
applying  risk  control  measures  to  mitigate  liquidity,  market  and  credit  risk.  But  as  higher 
haircuts  erode  the  refinancing  power  of  encumbered  assets,  there  must  be  an  asymptotic 
limit  to  the  ability  of  the  central  bank  to  provide  outside  money  without  endangering  its 
creditworthiness,  on  which  confidence  in  the  currency  rests.  The  notion  that  central  banks 
have  an  unlimited  capacity  to  create  money  is  an  illusion  and  thus  cannot  be  used  as  an 
excuse not to reform the economy. 
Overall, the policy measures taken on several fronts were able to stem the risk of a credit 
flow fallout with related adverse implications for price stability. In particular, the role of bank 
credit  in  financing  the  private  sector  has  been  preserved,  supported  by  an  increased 
recourse to debt markets especially by large firms (see slide 6). 
The sovereign debt crisis and fragmentation of credit markets across national borders 
My  discussion  so  far  has  focused  on  term  and  liquidity  premia,  which  have  taken  centre 
stage  since  the  very  beginning  of  the  financial  crisis.  Starting  in  May  2010,  the  crisis  was 
marked by a new phenomenon, until then little known in euro area: the emergence of large 
and variable credit risk premia in the pricing of supposedly risk-free securities issued by euro 
area governments. This has led to questions about the creditworthiness of some sovereign 
issuers and to a fully-fledged sovereign debt crisis.  
This new phase of the crisis has taken on several dimensions. The first and most noticeable 
one has been the large sell-off of government debt issued by sovereigns in precarious fiscal 
positions  (see  slide  7).  Markets  have  increased  their  scrutiny  of  the  fiscal  and  structural 
conditions  of  Member  States  (the  “fundamentals”)  and  assessed  them  with  an  increasing 
degree of risk aversion. At times, markets have also overreacted to national news and to the 
political debate at euro area level, with yields subsequently displaying little mean reversion.  
Fragmentation of credit market across national borders 
The second dimension of the debt crisis has been a fragmentation of credit markets across 
national borders, affecting both banks and the private non-financial sector – in addition to the 
fragmentation  experienced  in  government  debt  markets.  The  tight  link  between  sovereign 
and  bank  creditworthiness  is  clearly  visible  in  the  high  degree  of  correlation  between 
sovereign  CDS  premia  and  bank  CDS  premia  within  the  same  jurisdiction  (see  slide  8). 
Causality runs both ways: banks’ rising funding costs reflect the risk associated with banks’ 
holdings of bonds issued by their own sovereign; and sovereign risk is exacerbated by the 
contingent liabilities coming from the perception that the government will have to intervene to 
rescue the domestic financial system. This creates a self-reinforcing loop between bank and 
sovereign risks, with doubts about the solvency of the sovereigns feeding doubts about the 
solvency  of  the  banks,  and  vice  versa.  Such  dynamics  are  much  weaker  in  euro  area 
countries  considered  by  markets  as  financially  solid.  In  the  US  –  an  example  of  a 
well-integrated fiscal and financial union, with a shock-absorbing capacity at the federal level, 
credible discipline at state level and a centralised mechanism to supervise and resolve banks 
–  there  is  no  correlation  between  bank  and  sovereign  CDS  premia.  With  hindsight,  the 
“original sins” of Economic and Monetary Union, an otherwise carefully thought-through and 
consistent project, were weak fiscal institutions, tolerance of economic imbalances and the 
lack of an integrated mechanism to supervise and resolve banks. 
As a matter of fact, financial fragmentation has led to a “two-gear” monetary union, in which 
the marginal cost of borrowing for banks varies according to the jurisdiction.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
1. 
2. 
Banks  belonging  to  jurisdictions  considered  by  markets  as  financially  sound  can 
generally  access  the  interbank  money  market  and  get  overnight  financing  at  the 
EONIA rate, which is currently as low as 0.10%.  
Banks  in  jurisdictions  where  risks  and  uncertainty  are  elevated  generally  have 
limited access to the interbank money market and rely to a large extent on central 
bank liquidity, charged at the MRO rate, currently 0.75%.  
The  distressed  funding  conditions  faced  by  banks  in  some  parts  of  the  euro  area, 
compounded by expectations of a worsening macroeconomic outlook, have in turn resulted 
in fragmented credit conditions for households and firms, again along national borders. For 
one thing, credit supply standards applied by banks in their lending to the real economy have 
diverged  across  euro  area  countries.  A  similar  message  comes  from  the  cross-country 
comparison  of  bank  lending  rates.  The  75  basis  point  cut  in  the  ECB  main  policy  rate 
implemented  in  late  2011  has  been  accompanied  by  little  reaction  or  even  an  increase  of 
lending rates in countries under stress, whereas there has been a complete pass-through in 
euro area countries considered by the markets as financially solid (see slide 9).  
Self-fulfilling equilibria driven by break-up fears 
The third, and most recent, dimension of the debt crisis has taken the form of investor fears 
of a break-up of the currency union. Whereas exchange rate risk across euro area countries 
should have disappeared permanently with the creation of the single currency in 1999, there 
have  been  signs,  especially  over  the  summer,  that  investors  have  started  pricing  in 
redenomination  risk.  Investors  require  a  compensation  for  the  risk  that  the  euro  might  not 
remain the irreversible currency of the euro area – at least in its current composition.  
Although it is difficult to disentangle redenomination premia from other sources of risks – and 
it requires econometric analysis – the inversion of the slope of the term structure of sovereign 
bond  spreads5  observed  in  early  summer  2012,  for  instance,  for  Spain  and  Italy  was 
consistent with expectations of imminent break-up risks. Market fears of a high probability of 
not  paying  back  in full, or  of  equivalently  to  repaying  in  a  different,  lower-valued  currency, 
command high spreads. If the probability of this event concentrates over the short horizon, 
then the cumulative default probability for longer horizons (bounded overall by 100%) cannot 
rise much further, and inversion of the spread curve necessarily follows.  
Redenomination premia share some similarities with exchange rate premia that were driven 
out of control in the early 1990s by speculative  attacks against the legacy currencies. The 
early  symptoms  –  inverted  sovereign  yield  curves,  at  least  for  some  contries  –  were  the 
same. And the potential of such attacks is known to generate self-fulfilling prophecies.  
In early summer 2012 this situation had two main implications. One was for fiscal policy: it 
needs to deliver sound fundamentals as the only way to lastingly overcome the crisis; but, at 
the same time, there can be no viable fiscal adjustment that can ensure sustainability if the 
interest  rate  faced  by  the  fiscal  authority  keeps  rising  and  there  are  severe  distortions  in 
government bond markets. The second implication was for monetary policy: the central bank 
cannot fulfil its mandate to maintain price stability if its policy intentions are not transmitted 
correctly to the real economy through the chain which forms the basis for monetary policy 
transmission;  but,  at  the  same  time,  the  central  bank  cannot  fulfil  its  mandate  to  maintain 
price stability if the fiscal authority does not fully honour its obligation to pay back its liabilities 
under all circumstances.  
                                                
5  To  remove  the  influence  of  market  expectations  about  future  policy  rates,  it  is  useful  to  focus  on  the  term 
structure  in  terms  of  spreads  between  sovereign  bond  yields  of  a  given  euro  area  country  and  benchmark 
yields – which can be represented by the OIS curve or the term structure of German Bunds. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
How to make these apparently conflicting instances compatible? And how to overcome the 
deadlock? 
The ECB policy response: Outright Monetary Transactions  
Guidance  to  answer  these  questions  can  be  derived  from  the  Maastricht  Treaty  and  the 
conceptual  apparatus  developed  in  the  context  of  the  economic  literature  on  monetary  vs. 
fiscal  dominance.  These  insights  have  made  clear  that,  from  an  institutional  design 
perspective, central bank independence and a clear focus on price stability6 are necessary 
but  not  sufficient  to  ensure  that  the  central  bank  can  provide  a  regime  of  low  and  stable 
inflation under all circumstances – in the economic jargon, ensuring “monetary dominance”. 
Maintaining  price  stability  also  requires  appropriate  fiscal  policy.  To  borrow  from  Leeper’s 
terminology,7  this  means  that  an  “active”  monetary  policy  –  namely  a  monetary  policy  that 
actively engages in the setting of its policy interest rate instrument independently and in the 
exclusive pursuit of its objective of price stability – must be accompanied by “passive” fiscal 
policy.  A  passive  fiscal  policy  means  that  the  fiscal  authority  must  be  ready  and  willing  to 
adjust its policy stance (revenues and primary spending) in such a way as to stabilise its debt 
at any level of the interest rate that the central bank may choose. Or, to put it another way, 
borrowing from Woodford’s terminology,8 fiscal policy needs to be “Ricardian”.9  
Although the Treaty shows an awareness of the need for consistency between monetary and 
fiscal policy, in the sense described above, to ensure lasting stability, it did not foresee that 
fiscal policy could go off track to an extent that requires dedicated institutions and policies 
able to provide financial assistance, against conditionality, in order to restore sustainability 
and preserve financial stability in the euro area. The creation of the EFSF/ESM in charge of 
providing  support  to  euro  area  Member  States  in  difficulties  and  enforcing  appropriate 
conditionality  has  filled  this  gap.  It  provides  the  euro  area  with  a  means  to  restore 
“Ricardianess”, thereby minimising the risk of “fiscal dominance”.  
Against  this  background,  it  is  easy  to  understand  the  ECB’s  decision  on  6  September  to 
undertake  Outright  Monetary  Transactions  (OMTs)  in  secondary  markets  for  sovereign 
bonds in the euro area, and to understand the specific framework within which they will be 
implemented.  The  aim  of  OMTs  is  to  preserve  the  singleness  of  monetary  policy  and  to 
ensure the proper transmission of the monetary policy stance to the real economy throughout 
the  euro  area.  OMTs  are  intended  to  provide  the  ECB  with  a  tool  to  address  severe 
distortions in government bond markets which originate from, in particular, unfounded fears 
on the part of investors of the reversibility of the euro. Effectively, OMTs represent a means 
to  rule  out  destructive  self-fulfilling  prophecies  that  would  force  the  economy  into  a 
sub-optimal  equilibrium  (with  elevated 
interest  rates,  adjustments  made  impossible, 
ultimately leading to default and currency redenomination).10 Meanwhile, OMTs preserve the 
incentives for governments to enforce the economic and fiscal adjustments which will prove 
                                                
6  On  the  importance  of  central  bank  independence  and  credibility  as  a  means  to  address  possible 
inconsistencies  between  monetary  and  fiscal  policy,  see,  T.  Sargent  and  N.  Wallace  (1981),  “Some 
Unpleasant Monetarist Arithmetic”, Quarterly Review, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Fall. 
7   See,  E.  Leeper  (1991),  “Equilibria  under  ‘active’  and  ‘passive’  monetary  and  fiscal  policies”,  Journal  of 
Monetary Economics 27, 129–147. 
8   See, M. Woodford (2001), “Fiscal requirements for price stability”, NBER Working Paper No. 8072. 
9 
“Ricardian equivalence” implies that forward-looking agents internalise the fact that the government budget will 
always  be  adjusted  to  neutralise  fiscal  disturbances.  However,  only  a  “Ricardian”  fiscal  policy  has  this 
property. 
10  O. Jeanne has shown that elevated yields could make inflation more, rather than less likely, due to lack of 
fiscal  adjustment.  See  O.  Jeanne,  (2012),  “Fiscal  challenges  to  monetary  dominance  in  the  euro  area:  A 
theoretical perspective”, Banque de France Financial Stability Review, No. 16, pp. 143–150. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
necessary to steer the economy towards the “good” equilibrium. As a consequence, OMTs 
can  succeed  only  if  action  is  taken  by  governments,  at  national  and  at euro  area  level,  to 
restore long-term growth and bridge fiscal and economic imbalances. 
The framework for OMTs is based on six main elements (see slide 10).  
First,  strict  and  effective  conditionality.  A  necessary  condition  for  initiating  OMTs  is  that  a 
Member State activates an appropriate EFSF/ESM programme, which envisages strict and 
effective conditionality spanning the fiscal, macroeconomic, structural and financial spheres. 
And the design of conditionality and the monitoring of such a programme can largely benefit 
from the involvement of the IMF. This is however not sufficient. The country also needs to 
maintain (at least some) market access. And this is signalled by the reference the ECB has 
made to the need for the EFSF/ESM programme to include the possibility of primary market 
purchases. In addition, and most importantly, the Governing Council maintains full discretion 
to initiate OMTs, focusing its assessment exclusively on monetary policy considerations.  
The  second  main  element  on  which  the  framework  for  OMTs  is  based  is  a  built-in  exit 
strategy. OMTs will be terminated when one of the following conditions materialises. OMTs 
are no longer warranted due to threats to price stability; the aim of OMTs has been achieved; 
there  is  non-compliance  with  the  conditionality  established  in  the  EFSF/ESM  programme. 
This announced rules-based approach represents a way to address time inconsistency.  
Third, OMTs will focus on the shorter part of the yield curve, and in particular on sovereign 
bonds with a maturity of between one and three years. This underscores the monetary policy 
nature of such outright transactions, the principle of which was foreseen in the ECB Statute. 
And it buttresses the OMTs’ aim to address reversibility premia  which, as I argued above, 
have tended to manifest themselves at the short end of the term structure, while addressing 
the  fact  that  credit  risk  embedded  in  longer-term  yields  should  reflect  the  credibility  of 
countries’ economic and financial adjustment programmes. 
Fourth, there are no ex ante quantitative limits on the size of OMTs. This makes clear that 
the ECB is committed to do whatever it takes, within its mandate, to preserve the solidity and 
irreversibility of the currency. 
Fifth,  the  ECB  accepts  the  same  (pari  passu)  treatment  as  private  or  other  creditors  with 
respect to bonds purchased in the context of OMTs.  
Finally,  the  liquidity  created  through  OMTs  will  be  fully  sterilised.  This  reflects  the  role  of 
OMTs in counteracting destructive self-fulfilling equilibria rather than altering the aggregate 
liquidity stance.  
The main features  of the framework for  OMTs outlined  here  address  by  design  also  three 
concerns  or  questions  sometimes  voiced  in  relation  to  outright  purchases  of  government 
bonds by a central bank.  
The  first  concern  can  be  summed  up  in  two  questions:  are  OMTs  a  form  of  monetary 
financing of governments and will inflation be unleashed? The answer to both questions is: 
No. In fact, quite the opposite. OMTs will be conducive to the monetary authority restoring its 
power to control credit conditions in the euro area and, through that channel, inflation in the 
medium term.  It  thus  creates  the  conditions for a  transition from  a regime  of  undisciplined 
fiscal policies – from a “non-Ricardian” or “active” fiscal policy, using the terminology of the 
economic  literature  referred  to  above  –  to  a  regime  where  fiscal  policy  respects  its 
inter-temporal obligations – it becomes “Ricardian”, or “passive”. This means that monetary 
policy  has  regained  its  pre-eminence  in  determining  credit  conditions  and  inflation.  This 
renewed  assignment  of  tasks  pushes  back  fiscal  dominance  and  affirms  monetary 
dominance.  
The second concern can be formulated in terms of the question: will OMTs bring large risks 
to the central bank’s balance sheet? The answer again is: no. OMTs establish a second type 
of  interaction:  between  the  central  bank,  real  money  investors  and  households  and  firms, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
which  save  and  borrow  to  finance  real  economic  activity.  To  the  extent  that  break-up  and 
reversibility premia are squeezed out of bond pricing, real money investors will return to the 
euro  area  securities  market,  and  the  prices  of  securities  will  again  better  reflect  the 
fundamentals.  Households  and  firms  will  benefit  from  restored  credit  conditions.  And  the 
associated  widespread  reassessment  of  risks  will  make  market  portfolios  and  the  central 
bank portfolios grow in value. Ultimately, strict and effective conditionality could be seen as 
acting as a credit enhancement of all euro area portfolios.  
The third question is whether OMTs are a form of quantitative easing (QE). The answer is: 
no. First of all, QE is meant to ease the general credit conditions which are considered by the 
central bank to have become tight in a situation in which the short-term interest rate cannot 
be  reduced  further.  OMTs  are  meant  instead  to  restore  homogeneous  credit  conditions 
throughout the euro area, but not necessarily to ease credit conditions in the aggregate. In 
the euro area as a region, there are currently no clear signs of deflation fears (see slide 11) 
that would justify QE. In addition, the channels of transmission are different. QE is expected 
to act on risk premia (primarily term premia) by subtracting long-duration securities from the 
market  and replacing them  with  base  money,  which  has  a  very  short  duration. This  would 
reduce term premia and bid up the price of long-dated securities. The aim of OMTs however 
is  not  to  create  an  excess  demand  for  duration  in  the  market,  but  to  counteract 
redenomination risk and squeeze redenomination premia out of bond prices. In fact, OMTs 
focus  on  relatively  short  maturities,  where  premia  associated  with  break-up  risk  are  most 
evident.  Finally,  QE  would  need  to  be  tailored  to  the  specificities  of  the  euro  area,  where 
two-thirds of the external financing of non-financial corporations is extended by banks and 
which does not have access to actively traded credit markets. 
Conclusions 
Let me conclude. The effectiveness of monetary policy relies on the control of monetary and 
credit conditions. This ability has been severely tested by the crisis. Some of the challenges 
faced by the ECB have been common to other central banks. The threat to the viability of the 
interest  rate  channel,  and  the  consequent  need  to  devise  alternative  (“non-standard”) 
measures exploiting other channels of transmission, is a prominent example. The crisis has 
taught us that the liquidity channel exploited by monetary policy in the euro area can be very 
powerful.  It  has  allowed  the  ECB  to  maintain  the  flow  of  credit  to  the  real  economy  and 
ensure price stability even in face of the soaring liquidity and funding risks experienced by 
banks during the crisis.  
Other  challenges  faced  by  the  ECB  have  taken  a  specific  form  in  the  euro  area  and  thus 
been  somewhat  different  from  those  experienced  by  central  banks  elsewhere.  The  most 
obvious one is the sovereign debt crisis, with the associated fragmentation of credit markets 
across  national  borders and  more  recently  the  break-up fears. The  destructive  potential  of 
these  developments  is  enormous.  This  has  led  the  ECB  to  recently  announce  its  Outright 
Monetary Transactions in secondary markets for sovereign bonds as a means to safeguard 
the  monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism  in  all  countries  of  the  euro  area  and  to 
counteract self-fulfilling prophecies. The design of OMTs has been inspired by the desire to 
affirm in a lasting manner “monetary dominance”, in compliance with the principles enshrined 
in the Maastricht Treaty.  
Going  forward,  the  ECB  remains  committed  to  do  whatever  it  takes  to  comply  with  its 
mandate of maintaining price stability in the euro area. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
 10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
 12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
 14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
 16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 17 
 18 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 19 
 20 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 21 
