Andreas Dombret: Systemic risk analysis and crisis prevention 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank,  at  the  high-level  Eurosystem  seminar  with  central  banks  and  monetary 
agencies of the Gulf Cooperation Council, Abu Dhabi, 19 January 2012. 
 Systemic risk analysis and the Sybilline books 
1. 
Dear colleagues, 
Referring  to  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  in  Europe  the  Minister  of  Finance  of  Poland,  Jacek 
Rostowski, mentioned that the negotiations remind him of the story of the purchase of the 
Sibylline  Books  in  Ancient  Rome.  Those  books  contained  prophecies  which  were  not  an 
exact forecast of future events but had to be understood as an aid to finding measures to 
prevent and manage a devastating disaster. 
The  last  king  of  Ancient  Rome,  the  legendary  Tarquinius  Superbus,  was  eager  to  acquire 
those nine Sibylline Books. But the price that Sibyl, the prophetess, demanded struck him as 
too high, and the king declined to buy them. Either offended or shrewd, Sibyl burned three of 
the nine books and offered him the remaining six books for the same price as before. But 
Tarquinius again turned down the offer. So the prophetess burned three more books, again 
offering the remaining three books for the original price. This time, Tarquinius accepted the 
terms, and the books found their way into the Temple of Jupiter. 
The  books  got  lost  in  more  recent  times.  But  the  questions  remain:  What  advice  did  the 
books  would  have  had  for  modern  policymakers?  What  kind  of  systemic  analysis  is 
presented there?  
First Sybilline book: Reducing complexity 
2. 
Modern systemic risk analysis consists of many tools. Central banks, supervisory authorities 
as  well  as  national  and  international  bodies  of  macroprudential  supervision  such  as  the 
European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB)  and  the  Financial  Supervision  Board  (FSB)  apply 
these tools. Such tools start with the collection and description of a wide set of indicators, 
most of them giving concurrent signals with regard to financial stability. In a further step it is 
tried to extract those indicators with predictive power, which is rather difficult, conceptually as 
well  as  statistically.  Other  tools  are  designed  to  condense  the  information  into  risk 
dashboards,  colour  coded  systems  or  web  diagrams  to  present  an  overview  of  the  highly 
complex  picture.  More  sophisticated  methods  include  stress  tests  to  study  the  effects  of 
different  scenarios  and  specified  econometric  models  capturing  potentially  destabilising 
feedback loops and systemic effects. 
Clearly, these tools are important and helpful in preventing and managing systemic risks. But 
are they sufficient? 
This  seems  questionable  given  the  high  level  of  complexity  that  has  arisen  in  globally 
integrated  financial  markets.  This  complexity  leads  to  non-linear  dynamics  in  the  system 
which are very difficult to handle both for the risk management of financial institutions and for 
supervisors.  
The  complexity  is  also  characterised  by  a  phenomenon  known  as  “Knightian  uncertainty”, 
named after the famous Chicago economist Frank Knight. Knight argued: “There are known 
knowns; there are things we know we know. We also know there are known unknowns; that 
is  to  say  we  know  there  are  some  things  we  do  not  know.  But  there  are  also  unknown 
unknowns – the ones we don’t know we don’t know.” 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
from 
this  system  were  broadly 
ignored  or  underestimated. 
Let me illustrate this theory. Prior to the financial crisis a shadow banking system emerged 
which found itself at the centre of the crisis a few years later. This shadow banking system 
has  aspects  of  “known  unknowns”  and  “unknown  unknowns”.  As  a  consequence,  risks 
stemming 
International 
macroprudential bodies like the ESRB and the FSB are trying to fill this gap with knowledge, 
but progress in this area is made at a snail’s pace due to the lack of data.  
Even if we are successful in the end we cannot be sure we have identified all relevant risks, 
because “unknown unknowns” could also exist in another area of the financial system which 
we  do  not  observe.  In  my  view,  therefore,  complexity  reduction  might  be  an  effective 
instrument for preventing systemic crises. I can imagine that advice such as this could have 
been found in the lost Sibylline Books. 
Again, let us be specific. There are a lot of regulatory target variables which involve the use 
of  complex  risk-adjusting  methods.  For  example,  the  core  capital  ratio  is  the  ratio  of  core 
capital  to  risk-weighted  assets.  But  the  models  used  for  adjusting  the  risk  did  not  perform 
perfectly and underestimated the true risks stemming from CDOs.  
As a result, financial institutions were undercapitalised when Lehman became insolvent. If, in 
addition,  we  had  had  a  robust  target  such  as  a  leverage  ratio  which  is  not  risk-adjusted, 
financial  institutions  would  have  been  better  prepared  on  the  eve  of  Lehman.  Moreover, 
according to the concept of RWAs, government bonds have zero weights. With a risk-robust 
measure institutions would also have been better prepared for sovereign crises. The point is 
that  such  robust  targets  are  independent  of  risk  assessment  errors  and  provide  additional 
buffers to absorb risks stemming from the “known unknowns” and “unknown unknowns”.  
Another  example  of  how  complexity  reduction  can  help  prevent  crisis  is  standardisation  of 
financial products. In the past, OTC contracts were created with unknown and very hard-to-
handle,  non-normal  probability  distributions  of  random  variables  –  which  means  creating 
“known unknowns” via terms of contracts with potentially destabilising effects on the financial 
system. 
 Second and third Sybilline Book: Communicating risk analysis 
3. 
The second message we might have found in the Sibylline Books is this: “Be aware that risk 
analysis has to be carefully communicated. Sometimes policy backups are necessary.” 
The example of stress testing immediately leads us to the third message of Sibylline Books. 
In a setting in which financial analysis is communicated to the public it is important to find the 
balance  between  making  realistic  assumptions  about  scenarios  and  avoiding  devastating 
self-fulfilling prophecies of the markets. Moreover, if stress tests detect capital needs private 
and  public  recapitalisation  has  to  be  announced  and  implemented,  thereby  preventing 
market uncertainty. In a systemic crisis recapitalisation has to be a part of a comprehensive 
package including public aid for banks. This aid helps to restore confidence in the wholesale 
markets,  to  overcome  funding  problems  and  ultimately  to  mitigate  excessive  deleveraging 
pressure.  
Fourth and fifth Sybilline Book: Building up institutions and credibility 
4. 
The fourth message contained in the Sibylline Books could be: “Systemic risk analysis needs 
an  appropriate  institutional  set-up”.  As  in  Ancient  Rome,  where  the  Sibylline  Books  were 
treasured  by  the  priests  of  the  Temple  of  Jupiter,  modern-day  risk  analysis  needs  an 
institutional framework. The EU has solved this problem by delegating systemic risk analysis 
to the ESRB which can issue official warnings and recommendations. Other EU bodies and 
the  national  authorities  are  responsible  for  implementing  policy  measures.  Central  banks 
have  an  important  role  to  play  here  given  their  analysis  competence  and  expertise.  But 
monetary policy instruments are not in the first instance financial stability policy instruments. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Therefore,  the  institutional  set  up  is  not  simply  a  matter  of  organisation  but  essentially  a 
matter of credibility of the institutions involved. 
So  the  fifth  Sibylline  message  might  be  this:  “The  risk  analysis  credibility  of  the  various 
bodies  needs  to  be  built  up”.  In  practical  terms  for  the  ESRB  this  means  finding  the  right 
balance in issuing warnings and recommendations. Too few warnings  entail the danger of 
missing systemic risks. Conversely, too many warnings could be missed by the addressees.  
Sixth and seventh Sybilline Book: Taking into account the global economy 
5. 
The  sixth  message  of  the  Sibylline  Books  might  read  as  follows:  “Be  aware  of  relevant 
developments outside your own region.”  
Financial  stability  is  a  systemic  and  a  global  phenomenon.  And  as  is  well  known  global 
imbalances play an important role. The savings glut is seeking safe and high yield assets. 
And global players can help to solve the current crisis in Europe. 
Sometimes, international investors ask me, “Why should we buy bonds from sovereigns in 
crisis  if  their  European  partners  are  unwilling  to  do  so  to  a  larger  extent?”  My  answer  is 
“Look, the European partners have to be aware of moral hazard implications, because they 
are players in the European political game,” the game, which is reminding us of the story of 
the  purchase  of  the  Sybilline  books.  Investors  outside  Europe  need  not  take  into  account 
moral  hazard  implications.  They  can  and  should  buy  such  bonds  because  they  have 
confidence in the long-term sustainability of the fiscal position of the countries in question, 
and because they are interested in portfolio diversification.  
Progress in the various countries can be seen in Ireland, for example, but also in Italy, where 
the  new  government  is  going  to  implement  fiscal  measures.  They  can  build  on  what  is 
essentially  a  sound  economy.  Therefore,  my  seventh  and  last  message  is  this:  “European 
sovereigns deserve more confidence than markets are currently willing to give them.”  
These  are  seven  of  the  possible  messages  of  the  lost  or  burned  Sibylline  Books.  The 
remaining messages may be “known unknowns” or “unknows unknowns”. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
