Prasarn Trairatvorakul: Bank of Thailand’s policy direction in 2012 
Speech  by  Dr  Prasarn  Trairatvorakul,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the  Bank  of 
Thailand, Bangkok, 27 January 2012. 
 Good afternoon, honorable guests and members of the press, 
2012 is a special year because it is the Bank of Thailand’s (BOT) 70th anniversary, a mark of 
extensive experience for an institution. Faced with numerous challenges to monetary policy 
and  financial  institutions  policy  implementation,  the  BOT  has  through  the  past  70  years 
upheld  the  institutional  value  that  our  policies  must  be  based  on  sound  principles,  yet 
embracing enough flexibility to accommodate the changing environment. Our ultimate goal is 
to promote Thailand’s long-term economic and financial stability. 
Our policy direction in 2012 will continue to reaffirm our long-held determination to strengthen 
the  country’s  economic  resiliency  and  the  well-being  of  the  Thai  people.  Notwithstanding 
short-term economic obstacles that have weighed on current sentiments, the Thai economy’s 
main challenge has remained the same since my address last year. This major challenge is 
how  we  all  can  become  more  proactive  since  idleness  during  a  time  of  rising  competition 
could easily cause us to fall behind. As such, all parties should always be ready to improve 
oneself and to prepare for uncertainties that may occur in the future. In this same spirit, the 
BOT has modified our strategy to fit the changing environment and is willing to work with all 
parties to ensure that the Thai economy can continually expand in line with its potential. 
Policy implementation in 2011 
Looking back at 2011, the BOT implemented our monetary policy to ensure stability against 
the backdrop of robust economic expansion in the first three quarters of the year. Thus, we 
continued to normalize the policy rate, as I had stated in last year’s policy statement. After 
the economy was hit hard by the flood crisis amid the stagnating global economy in the final 
quarter,  the  BOT  policy  was  adapted  to  the  changing  circumstances,  evidenced  by  the 
Monetary Policy Committee’s (MPC) decision to lower the policy rate in the last meeting of 
the year. 
Throughout  last  year,  the  BOT  also  paid  particular  attention  to  policies  that  facilitate 
businesses  in  normal  times  and  in  crisis  times.  These  included  policies  that  ensure  the 
exchange rate movements consistent with the underlying economic fundamentals and that its 
volatility remained manageable by Thai businesses. Moreover, our policy on financial sector 
regulation and supervision has ensured that Thai financial institutions maintain their status as 
a  credible  and  efficient  financial  intermediary  and  able  to  meet  private  sector  demands. 
These efforts included encouraging financial institutions to rationalize their transaction fees 
structure, introducing digital cheque-imaging system, and relaxing certain measures related 
to financial institutions to alleviate financial burdens of flood-affected victims. 
Economic conditions and challenges for 2012 
The path towards the future is not a smooth one. Ongoing challenges from the past and new 
challenges  will  increase  obstacles  for  the  Thai  economy.  Domestic  issues  still  remain  an 
important  hurdle  while  emerging  external  issues  have  created  new  challenges.  These 
challenges  are  inherent  parts  of  the  mega  trends,  which  include  the  crisis  facing  western 
economies and advancing regional economic integration. 
Currently, Thailand appears to be at a transitional gateway of these mega-trends, where the 
future looks blurry. The persistent economic slowdown plaguing the advanced economies of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
United States and Europe leading up to sovereign debt crisis and continued financial system 
stresses  do  not  yet  have  a  clear  resolution  in  place.  Many  observers,  however,  view  that 
after this transitional gateway, Asia will be under the spotlight with China as the new leader, 
leading  the  economic  expansion  for  other  countries  in  the  region.  Despite  this  optimism, 
countries in Asia cannot afford to relax, sit back, and enjoy the ride, as economic volatility 
could  arise  intermittently  via  trade  and  financial  channels  from  western  economies.  The 
degree  of  such  impact  depends  on  how  well  each  economy  is  prepared  for  the  potential 
disruption. 
Another  aspect  of  the  transitional  gateway  is  the  ASEAN  Economic  Community  (AEC)  in 
2015.  This  regional  integration  will  bring  not  only  changes  in  the  regional  investment  and 
trade landscape, but also changes in people’s attitude as an ASEAN citizen where travel and 
contact  will  become  more  frequent.  Nonetheless,  we  should  not  view  AEC  as  the  final 
destination, but rather a stepping stone towards enhancing economic resiliency in the region 
by creating a single ASEAN market and production base. This would help foster value-added 
characteristics of the Thai economy and increase opportunities for our people, businesses, 
and everything else that will bring about a better standard of living for all. 
The two mega-trends I have outlined, when combined with the flood crisis at the end of last 
year,  mean 
improve 
competitiveness. In particular, public investment in effective natural resources management 
system and improved governance of public administration will serve as an important driving 
force for sustainable economic growth. 
that  Thailand  needs 
to  quickly  upgrade 
infrastructure 
to 
Evolution of economic activities in line with the changing environment 
While  the  immediate  obstacles  may  have  changed,  the  overall  challenges  that  have 
remained require all parties to formulate a strategic framework and policy space, to enable 
the Thai economy to stride pass the transitional gateway smoothly. 
For the public sector, the implementation of policy that promotes investment and enhances 
competitiveness  effectively  relating  to  infrastructure,  education,  and  governance  such  as 
reducing corruption and improving political resiliency would be an important impetus to boost 
Thailand’s  position  in  the  competitiveness  race.  This  is  because  public  investment  attracts 
further investment from both private investors and foreign investors, the so-called crowding-
in effect. 
For the private sector, the search for new markets, improvements of production efficiencies, 
creation of value-added goods and services, and effective risk management are things that 
the private sector can do to prepare for new challenges. I also encourage the private sector 
to learn more about the complexity and risks of various financial products to be able to use 
them effectively for their businesses. This will help businesses to reduce cost and increase 
competitiveness, as well as allow the financial sector to play a bigger supporting role for the 
real sector. 
For the financial sector, strengthening internal organization and promoting financial system 
efficiency will be the main factors that allow financial institutions to become more competitive. 
This  will  also  increase  the  efficiency  of  business  transactions  as  well  as confidence  in  the 
financial system. 
Policy address 
Like all policymakers, the BOT faces not only the challenge of policy making but also that of 
communicating the policy choice to the general public. It is often the case that there is a gap 
between  public  expectation  of  near-term  results  and  what  the  BOT  aims  to  deliver:  a  firm 
foundation for the long-term, the results of which may not be seen for years to come. Upon 
assessing  the  changing  global  environment,  risks  and  social  dynamics  together,  the  BOT 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
remains  resolute  in  our  commitment  to  preserve  Thailand’s  economic  resiliency  and 
sustainable  growth  path.  This  can  only  be  possible  through  a  common  vision  among  all 
stakeholders,  for  that  would  allow  for  policy  integration  and  the  creation  of  financial 
environment that would foster equitable progress and welfare. 
Monetary policy and exchange rate policy 
With  regard  to  the  implementation  of  monetary  policy,  the  BOT  will  continue  to  safeguard 
economic  stability  mindful  of  the  economic  cycle,  especially  the  risks  arising  from  global 
economy. This year, inflationary risks look to moderate from last year. Therefore, monetary 
policy  can  shift  focus  to  the  promotion  of  private  sector’s  growth  and  ability  to  cope  with 
elevated uncertainties as a result of more volatile global environment. 
At the same time, exchange rate management will remain adhered to the principle of flexible 
movement in line with economic fundamentals. Along with that, the BOT will continue to push 
forward  the  “Capital  Account  Liberalization  Master  Plan”  to  allow  Thai  entrepreneurs  and 
retail investors more flexibility to manage overseas investment. It is hoped that, under this 
master plan, foreign exchange regulations will be streamlined to help reduce the cost for Thai 
investment  abroad  as  well  as  develop  domestic  financial  markets.  Initiatives  on  promoting 
outbound investment will include expanding investor types and ceiling limits, relaxing existing 
rules and regulations, and increasing flexibility for risk management. Nevertheless, the BOT 
will maintain adequate safety valves in line with varying emergency scenarios. In this regard, 
we expect to organize a public hearing on the “Capital Account Liberalization Master Plan” to 
gather inputs from all key stakeholders. 
Financial institutions policy 
For  financial  institutions  policy,  the  BOT  aims  to  increase  the  competitiveness  of  financial 
institutions  while  ensuring  continued  systemic  soundness,  promoting  efficient 
risk 
management, and ensuring their desirable role as effective financial intermediaries. 
To  increase  the  competitiveness  of  financial  institutions,  the  BOT  seeks  to  improve  the 
financial system infrastructure, such as developing the payment systems to promote efficient 
business dealings and to prepare for cross-border transactions involving regional currencies. 
We also work toward raising the standard of Thai financial institutions to become Qualified 
ASEAN Banks (QAB), which is a standard used within the region to allow qualified financial 
institutions  to  expand  their  business  within  the  region.  The  BOT  has  already  formulated 
action plans for all of these aforementioned initiatives, and plan to accelerate implementation 
in tandem with Asia’s growth and regional economic integration. 
Ensuring  financial  institutions’  role  as  effective  financial  intermediaries  will  help  promote 
inclusive growth, which would lessen unequal access to financial services. To this end, the 
BOT will ensure that financial institutions provide quality financial services that meet various 
needs at a fair price especially for risk hedging instruments. 
Along  with  greater  provision  of  financial  services,  better  consumer  protection  to  create 
financial  immunity  for  financial  services  users  also  tops  our  priority.  To  help  consumers 
understand available products to better choose one that suits their needs, the BOT has set 
up  the  Financial  Consumer  Protection  Center  (FCPC).  This  center  currently  provides  one-
touch service through the hotline number 1213. The center also offers financial education to 
the public. 
Conclusion 
I  would  like  to  reiterate  that  the  Bank  of  Thailand’s  policy  direction  for  2012  will  focus  on 
making the Thai economy more resilient and improve the people’s standard of living. For us 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
to achieve this goal, the BOT will adhere to our economic and financial stability mandates 
while  reaching  out  to  other  public  policy  dimensions  to  promote  a  common  vision  of  all 
policymakers  to  achieve  a  more  competitive  Thai  economy.  This  common  vision  must 
however  reflect  the  desired  policy  result  based  on  real  needs  of  the  people.  Through 
outreach  and  humility,  we  will  also  engage  more  with  our  stakeholders  in  pursuit  of 
Thailand’s  sustainable  economic  wellbeing  so  that  Thailand  can  cross  the  transitional 
gateway and stand on the world stage with strength and stability. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
