Anand Sinha: Indian banking – journey into the future 
Remarks  by  Mr  Anand  Sinha,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  Bancon-
2011,  organized  by  the  Indian  Bankers  Association  and  Indian  Overseas  Bank,  Chennai, 
6 November 2011. 
Inputs provided by Ms. Anupam Sonal are gratefully acknowledged 
 1. 
Shri  M  D  Mallya,  Chairman,  Indian  Banks’  Association  and  Shri  M  Narendra, 
Chairman,  Indian  Overseas  Bank,  the  joint  organizers  of  this  mega  event  of  the  Indian 
banking industry and other delegates. A very good evening! It is an honour for me to be here 
today  to  deliver  the  valedictory  address  of  this  Conference  which  has  come  to  signify  an 
annual confluence of banking minds for serious deliberations. These conferences give us all 
an opportunity to reflect on the latest developments in the banking space and chart the future 
course of action. In the current phase following the crisis, the environment has become so 
fluid  and  dynamic  that  bankers  need  to  be  in  a  constant  state  of  awareness  and 
preparedness to face the new challenges and also to adjust to the fast changing regulatory 
landscape. 
2. 
The Conference, over the span of three days, as I see from the program schedule, 
has covered a wide range of important issues such as financial inclusion, wholesale banking, 
technology,  consumer  experience,  etc.  I  am  sure  these  discussions  have  triggered  new 
thought  processes  and  opened  new  vistas  for  us  to  go  back  and  chalk  out  the 
implementation strategy for making Indian banking more efficient, resilient and socially more 
relevant. 
3. 
As per the IBA-FICCI-BCG Report (August 2011), “India’s Gross Domestic Product 
(GDP) growth will make the Indian banking industry the third largest in asset size in the world 
by 2025”. However, being largest is not enough – being efficient is what we have to strive for. 
The Indian economy has been growing fast and the GDP growth rate had averaged 8.8 per 
cent in the last 5 years preceding the crisis. Despite a subsequent slowdown, India’s GDP is 
still  growing  at  a  reasonably  fast  pace.  The  Indian  banking  sector  will,  as  such,  need  to 
match up to the requirements of a fast growing economy including the likely acceleration in 
the Credit to GDP ratio. Added to this is the demographic dividend with its myriad challenges 
and  opportunities.  There  is  thus  a  huge  responsibility  on,  and  opportunity  for,  the  Indian 
banking sector going ahead. 
4. 
Being responsible is no longer a choice for banks. Commercially profit is a laudable 
objective but we have to remember that balancing the interest of all stakeholders, included 
and yet to be included, is the only socially optimal choice which will ensure long term survival 
and growth. Casino banking has no future. In this context, let me quote from the review by 
Financial Times of Satyajit Das’s book “Traders, Guns and Money” – “This makes fascinating 
reading ….. old fashioned financiers will read it and weep …”. 
Achievements of the Indian banking system 
II. 
5. 
There  has  been  appreciation  for  India  for  weathering  the  financial  crisis  relatively 
unscathed. Much of it hinged on the sound and resilient banking system in the country. The 
foundation  for  the  banking  sector  resilience  was  laid  with  the  introduction  of  the  financial 
sector reforms in 1991 with focus on prudential regulation and increased competition. These 
reforms resulted in a comprehensive transformation of the banking sector. The reforms had a 
major impact on the overall efficiency and stability of the banking system. The outreach of 
banks increased in terms of branch / ATM presence. The balance sheets and overall banking 
business  also  grew  in  size.  The  financial  performance  and  efficiency  of  Indian  banks 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
improved with increased competition, as reflected in their profitability, net interest margins, 
ROA  and  ROE.  The  capital  position  improved  significantly,  and  banks  were  able  to  bring 
down their non-performing assets sharply. This reform phase also witnessed increased use 
of technology which in turn, helped improve customer service. 
6. 
While financial stability is not an explicitly stated objective under the Reserve Bank’s 
statute (RBI Act, 1934), various measures were undertaken from time to time to strengthen 
financial stability in the system which covered a wide arena. The approach has evolved from 
past experiences and a constant interaction between the micro level supervisory processes 
and macroeconomic assessments. In the Indian context, the multiple indicator approach to 
monetary policy as well as prudent financial sector management together with a synergetic 
approach through close coordination between RBI and other financial sector regulators has 
ensured  financial  stability.  Some  of  the  other  policy  measures  include  Capital  Account 
management,  management  of  systemic 
interconnectedness,  strengthening  prudential 
framework, initiatives for improving the financial market infrastructure, etc. Systemic issues 
arising  out  of  interconnectedness  among  banks  and  between  banks  and  Non  Banking 
Financial  Companies  (NBFCs  –  our  shadow  banks)  and  from  common  exposures  were 
addressed  by,  among  other  measures,  putting  prudential  limits  on  aggregate  interbank 
liabilities as a proportion of banks’ Net Worth, restricting access to uncollateralized funding 
market to banks and Primary Dealers with caps on both borrowing and lending, increasingly 
subjecting  NBFCs  to  more  stringent  prudential  regulations  as  also  restricting  banks’ 
exposure  to  NBFCs  to  contain  regulatory  arbitrage.  The  other  noticeable  aspect  regarding 
policy measures has been the innovative use of countercyclical policies to address the pro-
cyclicality  issues.  The  countercyclical  policies  were  introduced  as  early  as  2004  by  using 
time varying sectoral risk weights and provisioning, though RBI had used them sporadically 
even earlier. These unconventional measures taken in response to emerging risks are now 
widely  acknowledged  to  have  played  a  significant  role  in  protecting  the  Indian  financial 
system from key vulnerabilities. 
7. 
We have, thus, much to be satisfied about, as we have come a long way since the 
1991  reforms.  Even  as  we  rejoice  in  our  achievements  and  success,  we  must  have  the 
humility to acknowledge that much more needs to be achieved in our pursuit of excellence. 
So let us look at the road ahead. 
Indian banking – The road ahead 
III. 
Future  is  always  uncertain  but  coming  times  look  more  uncertain  than  ever.  I  am 
8. 
reminded of a quip “The trouble with our times is that the future is not what it used to be”. 
There are plenty of “Known Unknowns and Unknown Unknowns”. The future holds a lot of 
opportunities as well as challenges for all of us. The Conference would have already focused 
on the opportunities and how to make most of them. Let me list out a few challenges that 
await us in the future. 
9. 
three broad categories viz. 
A. 
B. 
C.  
Challenges in coping up with the emerging regulatory and supervisory framework 
Challenges in meeting the specific needs of the economy and 
Challenges in fixing the fault lines in the system. 
For elaborating on the challenges that lie ahead of us. I would categorise them into 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
A. 
Challenges in coping up with the Emerging Regulatory and Supervisory 
Framework 
(i) 
Implementation of advanced approaches under Basel II 
10. 
The  implementation  of  the  advanced  approaches  under  Basel  II  poses  several 
challenges  for  banks  and  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  alike.  The  standardized  approaches 
have already been implemented in India and all the commercial banks have migrated to the 
standardized  approach  under  Basel  II  framework  as  of  March  2009.  Migration  to  the 
Advanced  Approaches  is  important  for  larger  banks  because  it  involves  adoption  of  more 
sophisticated risk management systems. Moreover, there are reputational issues too if large 
banks continue with standardized approaches. However, the implementation of the advanced 
approaches  raises  several  issues  relating  to  development  of  human  resource  skills, 
technology  upgradation,  branch  interconnectivity,  availability  and  management  of  historical 
data, robustness of risk management systems, etc. Though RBI has set an indicative time 
schedule  for  implementation  of  the  Advanced  Approaches,  banks’  response  has  not  been 
encouraging so far. It is high time for larger banks to seriously upgrade their systems and 
skill sets and migrate to the Advanced Approaches. 
(ii) 
Migration to Basel III 
Capital 
(a) 
11. 
Basel  II  was  designed  because  its  predecessor  i.e.  Basel  I  was  considered  risk 
insensitive and too preliminary to cope up with the rapid developments in the financial sector 
resulting in substantial regulatory arbitrage. The basic purpose of Basel II was to leverage on 
the risk management systems of internationally active banks and use that for enhanced risk 
management  architecture  and,  in  the  process,  have  better  measurement  of  capital 
requirements.  It  is  ironical  that  when  the  crisis  took  place,  Basel  II  was  either  not 
implemented or just implemented in the jurisdictions. And yet we have had to leapfrog and go 
in for enhancements under Basel II.5 and Basel III. Under Basel III, an assessment of Indian 
banks in terms of capital requirements has revealed that, notwithstanding some issues with a 
few individual banks, the system, as a whole, is very well capitalized and the transition to the 
revised  capital  norms  of  overall  capital  adequacy,  Tier  I  component  or  equity  component 
would be smooth. The stress point, however, would be that banks will be required to adjust 
the unamortized portion of Pension and Gratuity liabilities in the opening balance sheet on 
April 1, 2013 on transition to IFRS. 
12. 
Going  forward,  the  capital  requirement  on  account  of  increased  coverage  of  risks 
would  not  be  so  material  for  Indian  banks  as  either  those  activities  are  not  allowed 
(i.e. re-securitisation) or their magnitude is quite small (i.e. trading book).  
13. 
However, capital requirements, including equity, would be substantial for supporting 
the high GDP growth and the fact that Credit to GDP ratio, which is currently quite modest at 
about 55 per cent, is bound to increase substantially on account of structural changes in the 
economy  i.e.  Financial  Inclusion  program,  increase  in  loan  requirements  from  more  credit 
intensive sectors such as manufacturing, infrastructure, etc. 
14. 
The large equity needs, though over an extended time frame, would put downward 
pressure on the banks’ RoE. While the higher capital requirements would bring down risks in 
the banking sector and eventually investors would recognize the lower risks and be willing to 
settle for a lower ROE, in the short term, the only answer is raising productivity. 
15. 
RBI and banks would be estimating the capital requirements under Basel III once 
our guidelines for implementation of Basel III are finalized. While implementing Basel III, our 
dilemma is (a) where our capital regulations are more stringent, should we continue with the 
more stringent norms? and (b) should we adhere to the extended timetable or step up the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
implementation schedule, given the fact that the banking system would be comfortable at the 
starting point i.e. at transition? 
16. 
Other areas that need strengthening include securitization related regulation, market 
risk management tools and improvement to the Supervisory Review and Evaluation Process 
of Pillar II of Basel II as per the Basel III enhancements.  
Liquidity management 
(b) 
The Financial Stability Report (FSR) of the Reserve Bank of India for the half year 
17. 
ended  June  2011  has  expressed  concerns  over  growing  reliance  of  banks  on  wholesale 
funding/  market  borrowing  to  fund  assets.  One  reason  for  such  reliance  could  be  the  low 
growth of deposits not commensurate with the credit growth. Such reliance, however, could 
prove disastrous as evidenced during the crisis as the wholesale funding sources can dry up 
quickly. Banks, therefore, have to factor this in their liquidity management. There, however, 
remains an issue under Basel III about the extent to which SLR holdings can be taken into 
consideration  for  the  purpose  of  calculating  the  liquidity  ratios.  As  the  SLR  holdings  are 
required to be maintained on an ongoing basis, these would technically not be reckoned for 
liquidity purposes. However, it may be reasonable to reckon, under stress conditions, at least 
a part of the SLR holdings in calculating the liquidity ratio, as the SLR holdings are primarily 
government  bonds  against  which  the  Reserve  Bank  provides  liquidity.  Further,  the  major 
challenge for Indian banks in implementing the liquidity standards is to develop the capability 
to collect the relevant data accurately and granularly and also to formulate and predict the 
liquidity  stress  scenarios  with  reasonable  accuracy  and  consistency.  Given  that  Indian 
markets  have  not  experienced  the  levels  of  stress  that  global  markets  were  subjected  to, 
predicting stress scenarios is going to require a qualitative judgemental call. 
Shadow banking system – greater consistency in regulation 
(iii) 
18. 
Another important regulatory challenge is ensuring “greater consistency in regulation 
of  similar  instruments  and  institutions  performing  similar  activity”  to  prevent  or  contain 
regulatory  arbitrage.  In  the  case  of  systemically  important  non-deposit  taking  NBFCs 
(NBFCs-ND-SI),  a  gradually  calibrated  regulatory  framework  in  the  form  of  capital 
requirements,  exposure  norms,  liquidity  management,  asset  liability  management  and 
reporting  requirements  has  been  extended,  which  has  limited  the  space  for  regulatory 
arbitrage as also their capacity to leverage. Given the increasing significance of the sector, 
the  supervisory  regime  for  the systemically important NBFCs will need to be strengthened 
further  for  a  more  robust  assessment  of  the  underlying  risks.  A  Working  Group  under  the 
former Deputy Governor, Ms. Usha Thorat on NBFCs has, inter alia, examined the issues 
related to the regulatory gaps and arbitrage opportunities that exist in the system, and has 
given  recommendations  for  addressing  these  issues  as  well  as  for  enhanced  disclosure 
requirements and improved supervisory practices, etc. 
Other issues 
(iv) 
19. 
The Indian banking system has a modest leverage which provides comfort. The RBI 
has also been enhancing and fine-tuning its supervisory processes on an ongoing basis and 
based  on  the  evolving  financial  scenario.  A  revised  framework  for  monitoring  of  financial 
conglomerates  has  been  rolled  out  since  2009.  The  Financial  Stability  and  Development 
Council  (FSDC)  has  also  been  activated  under  the  aegis  of  the  Government  of  India  for 
system  level  monitoring  of  build-up  of  risks  and  instability,  specifically,  risks  emanating  
from  the  Systemically  Important  Financial  Institutions  (SIFIs)  including  the  financial 
conglomerates.  This  is  also  expected  to  enhance  coordination  among  the  financial 
regulators.  However,  enterprise  wise 
to  be 
implemented / strengthened in the financial conglomerates and SIFIs. 
risk  management  processes  need 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Structural changes 
(v) 
Financial innovation 
(a) 
20. 
The crisis has also raised the issue of financial stability vis-à-vis financial innovation 
– in other words, the question of the “social optimality” of financial innovations. One of the 
main reasons why India escaped the adverse impact of the crisis was a calibrated approach 
to  financial  innovation.  However,  we  as  regulators  and  supervisors  need  to  guard  against 
stifling financial innovation while at the same time remain cautious about the objective and 
purpose behind the new and complex financial products that are proposed or introduced by 
the industry. This is particularly relevant for a country like India as its resilience in the face of 
heavy  financial  turbulence  can  be  quite  limited  and  as  no  social  safety  nets  are  available. 
These  concerns  shape  RBI’s  approach  to  financial  innovation.  Banks  have  to  be  cautious 
about the “social usefulness” of new products and should have appropriate controls in place 
to ensure against mis-selling through robust “suitability and appropriateness” checks. Several 
far-reaching measures have been taken recently in terms of allowing new products such as 
Interest Rate Futures, Currency Futures, and Repo in corporate bonds, etc. Such products 
are  new  for  the  Indian  market  and  an  assessment  of  their  impact  on  other  markets, 
institutional  behaviour  and  system  as  a  whole  is  critical.  Going  forward,  a  key  focus  area 
must be designing of robust market infrastructure and strengthening the systemic monitoring 
framework for these new markets. 
Financial holding companies 
(b) 
21. 
During  the  last  decade,  India  has  witnessed  growth  and  evolution  of  financial 
institutions  into  large  financial  conglomerates  expanding  their  presence  in  multiple  non-
banking  financial  activities.  In  this  backdrop,  the  issue  of  the  nature  of  corporate  form 
adopted by financial groups in India has acquired relevance from two distinct, though inter-
related,  perspectives  –  one,  efficient  corporate  management  within  the  groups  addressing 
the issues of growth, risk management and capital requirements of the Group; and two, the 
degree  of  regulatory  comfort  with  different  models,  particularly  in  regard  to  the  concerns 
relating to contagion risks. 
22. 
A Working Group set up by the Reserve Bank in this connection has recommended 
pursuing  Financial  Holding  Company  (FHC)  model  as  the  preferred  model,  as  it  enables, 
inter alia, de-risking the banks to a certain extent from the perspective of “holding out” risks 
of  the  Group  and  freeing  the  bank  management  from  the  responsibility  of  managing  the 
subsidiaries and other affiliates. This structure also facilitates better regulatory oversight and 
neater resolution. There are, however, numerous challenges in implementing the FHC model 
in  India.  The  implementation  of  this  model  would  require  a  new  legislative  framework, 
providing the right incentives to the existing financial conglomerates through appropriate tax 
treatment  and  resolution  of  strategic  and  public  policy  issues  in  the  case  of  public  sector 
banks. 
the  key 
takeaways  of 
Changing banking landscape: subsidiarisation of banks 
One  of 
the  global  crisis 
(c) 
the  appreciation  and 
23. 
acknowledgement  of  the  benefits  of  subsidiarisation  vis-à-vis  branch  presence  of  foreign 
banks. Reserve Bank has already taken steps in the direction of encouraging foreign bank 
presence in subsidiary form. The draft paper put out in this regard has suggested making the 
subsidiary  route  more  attractive  by  providing  near  national  treatment  to  the  wholly  owned 
subsidiaries  of  foreign  banks.  Presence  of  foreign  banks  in  subsidiary  form  will  generate 
greater competition for the Indian banks as this route will open up nearly equal opportunity to 
foreign banks in business expansion within India.  
is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Adoption of IFRS 
(d) 
24.  
There  are  certain  issues  that  need  to  be  addressed  in  implementing  the 
convergence with the IFRSs. First, the very crucial IFRS 9 relating to Financial Instruments is 
still evolving and the final standard is unlikely to be available soon. Thereafter, the Institute 
for Chartered Accountants (ICAI) will need to promulgate the converged standard for India. 
This  presents  a  moving  target  given  the  short  time  available  for  convergence  with  IFRS. 
Converging to the standards would require considerable skill upgradation and modification in 
the IT systems of banks. The Reserve Bank has constituted a Working Group to address the 
implementation 
the 
convergence.  
formulation  of  operational  guidelines 
issues  and 
facilitate 
for 
Revamping financial legislation 
(e) 
25.  
Evolution of legislative framework is an interesting area. Laws are made keeping in 
mind  the  prevailing  circumstances.  However,  if  the  circumstances  change,  the  legal 
framework can become inadequate. This is more so in the financial world because the pace 
of change is very fast. Currently in the financial sector, we have about 60 Acts and multiple 
rules  and  regulations.  The  incremental  changes  made  to  these  Acts  over  a  period  have 
made the laws ambiguous and complex. Government has taken an initiative by setting up a 
Financial  Sector  Legislative  Reforms  Commission  (FSLRC)  which  seeks  to  rewrite  and 
streamline  the  financial  sector  laws,  rules  and  regulations  to  bring  them  in  harmony  with 
India’s fast growing financial sector. 
Challenges in meeting the specific needs of the economy 
B. 
26. 
Indian economy is one of the fastest growing economies of the world. The economy 
with its varied geography and demography has specific requirements in order to traverse to 
the next orbit and attain its full potential. Banks have to gear up to meet such requirements 
by  redesigning  their  business  strategies.  A  few  of  the  most  important  requirements  of  the 
economy  are  (i)  Financial  Inclusion  (FI),  (ii)  Infrastructure  Financing  and  (iii)  Financing  of 
housing and real estate. 
Financial inclusion (FI) 
(i) 
27. 
It is estimated that despite the widespread expansion of the banking sector, about 
40% Indians still lack access to even the simplest kind of formal financial services. Such an 
extent of financial exclusion can severely retard the Indian growth story, both by blocking a 
major portion of the Indian population from participating in the economic mainstream and by, 
possibly, generating social tensions. As such, moving towards Universal Financial Inclusion 
is both a national commitment and a policy priority. RBI and the Government of India have 
taken  several  initiatives  in  this  direction  such  as  mandating  opening  of  “no  frills”  accounts 
coupled with provision of small overdraft facility, introduction of a General Credit Card (GCC), 
relaxation of KYC norms for small value accounts, allowing general permission for opening 
branches in Tier 2 to Tier 6 centres with population of less than 1,00,000, allowing use of 
Business  Facilitator  (BF)  and  Business  Correspondent  (BC)  models,  etc.  in  providing 
financial and banking services. Despite some improvement as a result of these initiatives in 
recent years, real financial inclusion still eludes us and major challenges remain. First of all, 
in  the  absence  of  a  proper  assessment  of  the  extent  of  financial  exclusion,  initiation  of 
appropriate  policy  responses  is  difficult.  There  is,  therefore,  a  need  to  conduct  specific 
survey  or  expand  the  scope  of  the  decadal  census  for  gathering  information  relating  to 
financial  inclusion  /  exclusion.  Then,  there  is  the  issue  of  high  operating  cost  of  small 
transactions and difficulties in reaching out to far flung areas. Most importantly, banks need 
to perceive Financial Inclusion as a profitable, commercially viable business and not as an 
obligation. This can be attained through product innovation, use of technology for lowering 
cost of transaction and cross selling of products and services after thoroughly understanding 
the  rural  markets.  Mobile  banking  has  tremendous  potential  in  this  respect.  Effective 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
leverage of Information and Communications Technology (ICT) solutions, duly simplified, and 
use  of  products  such  as  smart  cards,  biometric  handheld  devices,  mobile  and  basic  level 
ATMs, etc. can aid cost reduction. Cultural and attitudinal changes at grassroots, especially 
at  the  level  of  branches  are  needed  to  impart  organizational  resilience  and  flexibility. 
Financial literacy and credit counselling will create the right conditions for financial inclusion.  
28. 
There  is  also  a  need  to  improve  the  absorptive  capacity  of  financial  services  by 
providing basic infrastructure such as health, water, sanitation and education which can lead 
to faster income growth and increase in non-farm based activities in rural areas and lead to 
increase in demand for credit. Systems of reward and recognition for the personnel initiating, 
ideating, innovating and successfully executing new products and services in the rural areas 
would  also  give  financial  inclusion  the  much  desired  fillip.  Ours  is  a  bank  led  model  for 
financial  inclusion  because  in  our  view  only  banks  can  provide  a  comprehensive  inclusion 
programme  –  deposit  and  loan  products  and  remittance  facilities.  Hence  banks  bear  very 
large responsibility in making the financial inclusion programme a success. 
Infrastructure financing  
(ii) 
29. 
India’s infrastructural financing needs are not only huge but also vital. The targeted 
annual spend on infrastructure during 2007–12 is about USD 500 bn which is estimated to 
double in the next five year plan (USD 1 trillion during 2012–17). Shortfall in infrastructure 
financing, according to an estimate, would cost about 4% of GDP every year1 which is too 
costly for a growing country like India. Banks, traditionally, have been the major source of 
infrastructure  financing  and  their  exposure  to  infrastructure  is  already  high  at  17  per  cent. 
Infrastructure projects involving long term funding plans have, however, severe implications 
for the asset liability management at banks. There are some alternatives to bank financing 
such  as  development  of  corporate  bond  markets,  Infrastructure  Debt  Funds  etc.  The 
challenge before banks in the fast evolving landscape is to realign their position in meeting 
the infrastructure finance needs, at the same time, however, not significantly increasing their 
risks.  Take-out  financing  could  be  one  option  in  achieving  this  balancing  act.  Government 
and RBI have recently come out with a structure for Infrastructure Debt Funds (IDFs) which 
would facilitate take-out financing, development of the corporate bond market etc. 
Financing of housing and real estate 
(iii) 
30. 
Financing of housing and real estate is another challenging area for banks. With a 
high  rate  of  population  growth,  coupled  with  increased  urbanization  and  growing  incomes, 
there  is  a  tremendous  business  opportunity  for  banks  to  participate  in  this  segment.  The 
emergence of demand for housing finance is expected to be the key driver of bank credit in 
future. However, real estate, owing to its imperfection in terms of information asymmetry and 
opacity,  poses  great  challenges  and  banks  need  to  tread  with  utmost  caution  and  should 
avoid falling prey to irrational exuberance. Real estate is highly sensitive and prone to easy 
build up of bubbles, which could be mistaken for growth momentum. The global crisis bears 
a striking testimony to the disastrous impact the excesses in real estate sector could pose to 
the financial system and banks have to resist the lure of quick but risky returns. 
C. 
Challenges in correcting the fault lines 
Asset quality 
(i) 
31. 
Non-performing Assets (NPA) have caused some concerns. While the rise in NPAs 
could partially be attributed to the adverse impact of the global financial crisis, the aggressive 
lending stance of banks during the preceding boom period as also inadequate due diligence 
                                                 
1 
Indian Infrastructure – going beyond sound bites – City of London (2010). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
and  laxity  in  monitoring  of  the  loan  accounts  are  also  responsible  for  deterioration  in  the 
asset quality. This has been so, especially in case of retail loans. While the gross NPA ratio 
declined  from  3.30  %  at  end  March  2006  to  2.25%  at  end  March  2011,  mainly  due  to  a 
commensurate increase in gross advances; the absolute amount of gross NPAs increased 
by Rs.46,669 crore (an increase of 91%) during FY 2005–06 to FY 2010–11. As such, the 
NPA  stock  has  risen  consistently.  Slippage  ratio  of  the  banking  system,  defined  as  fresh 
accretion to gross NPAs to opening balance of gross standard advances, which had shown a 
declining trend from FY 2005–06 (1.9%) to FY 2007–08 (1.8%), abruptly increased to 2.18% 
in FY 2008–09 and 2.21% in FY 2009–10. At system level, new accretion to NPAs has been 
much  faster  than  the  reduction  in  existing  NPAs  due  to  lower  levels  of  upgradation  and 
recoveries. Also, despite write-offs, gross NPAs have continued to rise significantly. 
32. 
system during the period March 2006 through March 2011. 
 
The table below tracks the movement of stock of gross and net NPAs of the banking 
  
33. 
It  may  be  comforting  to  take  refuge  under  net  NPA  figures  but  the  comfort  is 
misplaced.  Banks  need  to,  not  only  utilize  effectively,  the  various  measures  such  as  CDR 
mechanism,  One  Time  Settlement  schemes,  Debt  Recovery  Tribunals,  provisions  of  the 
SARFAESI  ACT  etc.  put  in  place  by  RBI  and  the  Government  of  India  for  resolution  and 
recovery of bad loans but also have to strengthen their due diligence, credit appraisal and 
post  sanction  loan  monitoring  systems  to  minimize  and  mitigate  the  problem  of  increasing 
NPAs.  Overall  economic  growth  in  the  last  decade  or  so,  coupled  with  higher  disposable 
incomes have led to an exponential growth in retail spending. As the efforts directed towards 
financial inclusion take off, the bankable population will see further rise. This would require 
that delinquency risks and quality of portfolio are carefully managed by banks. Adherence to 
the provisioning requirement, building countercyclical provisions and holding countercyclical 
capital  buffers  in  good  times  can,  to  some  extent,  insulate  banks  from  excessive  default 
stress during crisis situations. 
Consolidation 
(ii) 
34. 
 Mergers and acquisitions (M&A) as a means of inorganic growth are increasingly 
being  used  the  world  over  to  undertake  restructuring  of  leading  business  enterprises.  It  is 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
followed as a part of the strategy to achieve a larger size and faster growth in market share 
and reach, and to become more competitive through economies of scale and scope. India 
does  not  have  larger  banks  to  finance  its  huge  infrastructural  needs  and  large  industrial 
projects.  The  structure  of  the  banking  system  as  recommended  by  the  Narasimham 
Committee  II  consisting,  along  with  medium  sized  and  smaller  banks,  of  a  few  large 
international  banks,  would  not  only  meet  the  financing  needs  of  infrastructure  and  large 
projects  and  provide  the  economies  of  scale  and  scope  but  also  leverage  the  country’s 
image as a financial destination and enable Indian banks to compete globally in terms of fund 
mobilisation, credit disbursal, investment and rendering of financial services. This could be 
attained  through  consolidation.  However,  while  encouraging  /  promoting  the  consolidation 
route, the need for competition within the domestic banking sector should not be overlooked 
nor  the  risks  and  challenges  that  emanate  from  the  presence  and  operations  of  large 
systemically  important  financial  institutions  be  ignored.  While  nobody  knows  what  the 
optimum  size  in  terms  of  largeness  is,  one  thing  which  is  very  clear  is  that  banks  should 
refrain from, and regulatory dispensation should not permit, building complex structures.  
Corporate governance deficit  
(iii) 
35. 
Several studies have highlighted the direct relationship between good governance 
standards and the performance and efficiency of an entity. This is all the more true in respect 
of banks, which, in their fiduciary capacity deal with public money on one hand and on the 
other, enjoy government /central bank support due to their centrality in the overall financial 
system.  The  recent  crisis  has  also  amply  demonstrated  how  weak  governance  framework 
contributed to the build up to the crisis through excessive risk taking. Transactions in risky 
and complex products which were barely understood, neither by the financial entities nor the 
customers, was another contributing factor. While over the last one decade, the governance 
requirements  have  been  considerably  enhanced  in  India,  good  governance  has  to  be  a 
continuous  and  ongoing  process.  In  India  we  had  the  “derivatives”  episode  recently  which 
was a case of inadequate application of “suitability and appropriateness” requirements and, 
consequently,  was  a  case  of  governance  deficit.  As  such  the  Board  of  Directors  and  the 
senior  management  have  a  great  oversight  responsibility  in  ensuring  that  the  respective 
banks  lay  down  robust  compliance  culture  and  corporate  governance  framework  which  is 
reviewed periodically for its efficacy and efficiency.  
Information asymmetry 
(iv) 
36. 
Information  asymmetry  in  a  multiple  banking  scenario  is  a  serious  issue.  A 
framework for pooling and sharing of credit information amongst banks had been put in place 
so  as  to  enable  banks  to  streamline  their  credit  appraisal  framework  and  also  to  instil 
discipline  among  the  defaulting  borrowers.  The  utility  of  such  data,  however,  hinges 
inexorably, on its integrity and timeliness. Lapses in sharing of information defeats the very 
purpose  of  such  arrangements.  Unfortunately  this  arrangement  has  not  worked.  Banks 
should  strive  to  make  this  work.  Hopefully  with  licenses  granted  for  additional  Credit 
Information  Companies,  we  expect  the  system  to  evolve  a  robust  information  sharing 
arrangement and further the development of the banking system.  
Product pricing  
(v) 
37. 
Costing  of  banking  products  is  an  issue  which  has  largely  been  escaping  serious 
debate.  Proper  and  fair  pricing  of  risks  and  of  banking  products  is  essential  from  risk 
management and customer service perspectives. It can also enhance competition resulting 
in  passing  of  the  benefits  of  such  increased  competition  in  terms  of  lower  costs  to  the 
ultimate customer. The challenge before banks is to make the best use of technology and 
innovation  to  bring  down  the  intermediation  costs  while  protecting  their  bottom  lines.  The 
issue of fairness to all classes of customers is also a very important issue. Today, there are a 
lot of complaints from customers about lack of fairness in floating rate products. Banks need 
to be sensitive to that. To deal with this issue, RBI would be setting up a Working Group as 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
announced in the recent Monetary Policy to look into the appropriate methodology for pricing 
of credit.  
(vi) 
Customer service  
38. 
Banking is predominantly a customer oriented business and good customer service 
is  the  key  to  banks’  growth  and  stability.  With  enhanced  competition  amongst  banks, 
customer service becomes the sole differentiating factor to be leveraged to stay relevant and 
to forge ahead in the business. However, in pursuit of returns and profits, customer service is 
often  ignored  if  not  totally  forgotten.  As  the  customer  awareness  grows,  banks  would  be 
required to gear up for providing more efficient and at the same time, cost effective services 
leveraging the technological capabilities. Customer retention is going to be the key factor for 
banks, going ahead.  
39. 
Recognising  the  need  for  revisiting  the  issue  of  customer  service  in  banks,  a 
Committee  (Chairman:  Shri M.  Damodaran)  was  constituted  by  the  Reserve  Bank  in  May 
2010.  The  Committee  looked  into  the  banking  services  rendered  to  retail  and  small 
customers  and  pensioners,  structure  and  efficacy  of  the  existing  grievance  redressal 
mechanism, the functioning of Banking Ombudsman Scheme, and possibility of leveraging 
technology for better customer service and has recommended steps for improvement. The 
recommendations and the public comments received thereon are being examined by RBI for 
implementation.  Meanwhile,  in  the  recently  concluded  Ombudsman  Conference,  10  action 
points were identified, which are essential to protect the rights of the customers. 
(vii) 
Know Your Customer (KYC)  
40. 
Money laundering is a growing menace and it not only poses serious threat to the 
stability and integrity of the financial system but also to the sovereignty and safety of nations 
worldwide.  In  the  coming  days,  challenges  before  banks  would  primarily  lie  in  saving 
themselves from the growing threat of money laundering. In India, PMLA was passed in 2002 
and it has been aligned with the FATF recommendations in 2009. Further, India has become 
a member of FATF in 2010. Banks are being extensively sensitized about money laundering 
and  KYC  norms.  KYC  discipline  assumes  critical  importance  especially  in  the  light  of  our 
concerted efforts to widen the reach of banking as part of financial inclusion initiatives. Banks 
have to ensure a very high degree of KYC compliance and a very robust AML regime. Once 
these standards are achieved, a unified KYC for banking system could be thought of.  
increasing 
the  current  dynamic  business  scenario  of 
Risk management, technology and HR development 
In  view  of 
(viii) 
41. 
financial 
sophistication  and  innovative  financial  tools,  banks  are  faced  with  complex  risks.  Thus, 
robust  enterprise  wide  risk  managements  systems  are  the  fundamental  requirement  for 
banks  to  be  able  to  survive  in  the  long  run.  Banks  with  proper  risk  management  systems 
would not only gain competitive advantage but would also add value to the shareholders and 
other  stakeholders.  Banks,  therefore,  have  to  endeavor  for  integrated  risk  management 
systems,  both  within  the  bank  and  also  across  the  group.  Such  an  integrated  risk 
management  architecture  would  be  currently  difficult  due  to  the  disconnect  between 
businesses, risk managers and IT systems across the organizations in their existing set-up. 
Indian banks have achieved most of the computerization under the Core Banking Solution 
(CBS).  This  may  not,  however,  prepare  them  adequately  for  the  necessary  MIS  and 
analytical  tools  for  risk  management.  In  order  to  upgrade  the  risk  management  systems, 
banks need to upgrade their technology proportionately so that the MIS and the analytical 
tools  for  risk  management  are  available.  This  will  entail  large  investments  in  technology 
particularly for those banks who have to migrate to the advanced approaches under Basel II. 
42. 
Further, with the explosive growth of the internet, mobile and wireless tools, the way 
both the economy and business are conducted today has been revolutionized and as such, 
the  technological  needs  of  banks  are  not  confined  to  only  risk  management  requirements. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The need for technological innovation in the context of financial inclusion is of high priority. 
Technology  has  evolved  as  the  integrator  and  holds  the  key  to  the  future  success  of  any 
corporate entity and more so for the banks. Speed, accuracy and quality in operations and 
delivery mechanism as also cost efficiency are some of the known benefits that would accrue 
to  both:  banks  and  their  customers.  However,  enhanced  usage  of  technology  also  poses 
severe challenges for banks both, in terms of keeping pace with the fast growing /changing 
technological  demands  so  as  to  maintain  an  edge  on  the  profitability,  delivery  and  quality 
fronts as also with regard to the recognition, understanding, management and mitigation of 
risks inherent in the use of technology. 
43. 
The Reserve Bank of India, on its part, has taken several initiatives in this direction 
which  include  formulation  of  the  IT  Vision  document  2011–17  which  sets  the  priorities  for 
commercial banks for moving forward from the core banking solutions to enhanced use of IT 
in areas like MIS, regulatory reporting, overall risk management, financial inclusion, customer 
relationship  management  and  enhancing  automated  data  flow  within  banks  and  to  RBI 
without  any  manual  intervention,  etc.  Measures  are  afoot  to  setup  Next  Generation  RTGS 
(NG-RTGS) system taking into account the latest developments in the areas of technology, 
messaging and networking, etc. 
44. 
On the part of banks, there is an imperative need for a three-pronged action agenda, 
viz.,  first,  technology  upgradation  coupled  with  its  integration  with  the  overall  business 
strategy  to  achieve  an  edge  in  respect  of  services  provided  to  their  constituents,  better 
housekeeping, optimizing the use of funds and building up of MIS for decision making, better 
management of assets & liabilities and the risks assumed which in turn have a direct impact 
on the balance sheets. Second, a more dynamic and challenging work culture to meet the 
demands  of  customer  relationships,  product  differentiation,  brand  values,  reputation, 
corporate  governance  and  regulatory  prescriptions.  Third,  focus  on  internal  controls,  risk 
mitigation systems and business continuity plans to effectively mitigate possible operational 
risks arising out of adoption of technology which could have a potential bearing on the overall 
financial stability.  
Conclusion 
45. 
Let me conclude by quoting “Tomorrow belongs to people who prepare for it today”. 
I am sure that we all draw lessons from our past and prepare ourselves for the challenges 
that the future holds for us. 
I once again thank the Bancon for this wonderful opportunity for sharing my thoughts with 
you. 
I wish you all the very best for the interesting times in future.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
