Carlos da Silva Costa: Systemic risk – too-important-to-ignore 
Address by Mr Carlos da Silva Costa, Governor of the Bank of Portugal, at the Portuguese 
Banking  Association  Conference  “Systemic  Risk  –  Too-Important-to-Ignore  –  Opening 
session” Lisbon, 3 February 2012. 
 Introductory remarks 
I. 
Ladies and gentlemen, good morning. It is a pleasure to be here. 
Let me start by congratulating the Portuguese Banking Association for bringing together such 
an impressive panel of speakers and for having selected the most topical of all themes. 
Systemic risk has been brought to the spotlight as the international financial crisis unfolded, 
and is currently one of the buzzwords in the financial industry and regulatory community. 
What exactly is systemic risk? 
It’s a complex concept which is still evolving, as you will understand after the presentations 
from the eminent experts who will be speaking to you today. 
Just  to  give  a  flavour  of  what  is  at  stake,  I  will  say  that,  in  the  context  of  the  economic 
environment,  systemic  risk  is  the  threat  that  certain  developments  may  disrupt  the 
functioning  of  the  financial  system,  impairing  its  ability  to  perform  its  basic  functions,  and 
thereby triggering losses in economic activity. 
To make it easier to understand the concept, let me recall an analogy that has been used to 
illustrate the notion of systemic risk. 
Let us suppose the financial system is a forest, populated with many different kinds of plants, 
be it large oaks or small bushes. If we want to preserve the integrity of this eco-system and 
prevent it from being destroyed by fire, it is essential to monitor the risk of a fire starting. If a 
fire should start, it will inevitably destroy a certain part of the forest and some trees will be 
lost. In that case, what is absolutely crucial is to prevent the fire from spreading, or else the 
whole forest would be at risk, causing serious damage to the community which depends on 
its resources for survival. 
The financial crisis has made it clear that vulnerabilities may develop in the financial system 
even if individual players or instruments appear sound. Indeed, huge risks may emerge from 
the  complex  interactions  between  the  individual  players  and  instruments,  the  institutional 
framework  and the broader macroeconomic environment. Detecting this type of  underlying 
vulnerability requires a “top-down”  approach to complement the “bottom-up” supervision of 
the  financial  system’s  individual  components.  This  is  the  focus  of  “macro-prudential 
supervision” as it is known. To quote Jose Viñals, who is speaking later this morning, what is 
needed is “to see both the forest and the trees”. 
Europe  has  been  the  epicentre  of  the  crisis  in  the  past  two  years.  Three  European  Union 
Member States – Greece, Ireland and Portugal – lost access to market financing, and had to 
negotiate  financial  assistance  packages  with  the  European  Union  and  the  International 
Monetary Fund. In recent months, the interplay between public finance and financial sector 
fragilities intensified and contagion spread to other euro area economies. 
The  systemic  crisis  affecting  the  euro  area  is  threatening  one  of  Europe’s  greatest 
achievements – the single currency. Market pressure is no longer about unsound policies, or 
unsustainable debt paths. Taken together, the fundamentals of the euro area are  stronger 
than  those  of  the  US  or  Japan.  However,  the  crisis  has  brought  to  the  forefront  severe 
inconsistencies in the governance model, internal organisation and instruments available to 
manage the single currency. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The  initial  response  of  European  leaders  has  been  slow  and  hesitant,  but  in  the  past  few 
months, important steps have been taken towards a more balanced EMU governance model 
and effective “firewalls”. Decisive implementation of the new procedures and mechanisms is 
still necessary to reassure markets on the irreversibility of the euro. Failure is not an option: 
we  would  risk  irreversible  damage  to  the  foundations  of  the  European  Union  itself,  with 
unpredictable geopolitical consequences. 
My intention is not to look into the past, and discuss how we got here. The root causes of the 
global crisis, the euro crisis and the Portuguese crisis have been discussed at length, and I 
believe the diagnosis is now widely shared. What I would like to do today is two things: 
 
First, I would like to present and explain the Banco de Portugal strategy to secure 
financial  stability  in  the  context  of  the  Portuguese  economy’s  adjustment  and  the 
euro area systemic crisis. 
Secondly, I would like to comment briefly on how the Portuguese banking system is 
responding to the new environment. 
 A strategy for securing financial stability in Portugal 
II.  
Financial stability is a public good and the stability of the Portuguese financial system is a 
core objective of Banco de Portugal. 
Banks  are  the  main  actors  in  converting  savings  into  financing,  through  their  business  of 
transforming  maturities  and  liquidity  and  promoting  scale.  A  strong  and  reliable  banking 
system  is  thus  absolutely  critical  to  the  successful  adjustment  and  transformation  of  the 
Portuguese economy. 
The  Portuguese  banking  system  has  shown  considerable  resilience  throughout  the 
international  financial  crisis  –  a  resilience  that  can  largely  be  explained  by  its  negligible 
exposure  to  toxic  assets  and  the  absence  of  a  real  estate  bubble  in  the  Portuguese 
economy.  However,  banks  entered  the  crisis  in  a  highly  leveraged  position,  depending 
heavily on wholesale markets for funding. As a result, they were hard hit by the change in 
markets’ perceptions regarding the sustainability of debt levels in the economy. 
As  the  international  financial  crisis  unfolded  into  a  sovereign  debt  crisis  affecting  the  euro 
area’s  most  vulnerable  economies,  banks  found  it  increasingly  difficult  to  obtain  market 
financing and had to rely heavily on Eurosystem funding. 
Banco  de  Portugal  responded  promptly  to  the  worsening  conditions  by  putting  in  place  a 
comprehensive strategy to increase the resilience of the banking system. This strategy was 
later  integrated  and  developed  in  the  context  of  the  Economic  and  Financial  Assistance 
Programme negotiated with the European Union and the IMF. 
Financial stability is – alongside fiscal consolidation and structural reform – a key dimension 
of the adjustment programme. The aim is to ensure a gradual and orderly deleveraging that 
does not jeopardise the financing of the economy’s productive sector.  
The strategy to increase the financial system’s resilience rests on four pillars:  
 
 
 
 
I believe it is worth looking into each of these four dimensions in some detail. 
First, strengthening banks’ capital base;  
Second, protecting the system’s liquidity;  
Third, enhancing the monitoring and supervision of the banking sector;  
And, fourth, improving the regulatory framework. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Strengthening solvency 
1. 
Let me start with bank capitalisation. 
In  line  with  international  regulatory  trends,  Banco  de  Portugal  has  introduced  several 
measures to strengthen the banking system’s solvency. 
In September 2010, banks were advised to deleverage through the sale of non-core or non-
strategic assets, thereby also improving solvency levels and increasing liquidity. 
In January 2011, banks were advised not to pay dividends, so as to improve their own funds. 
A similar recommendation was issued in January 2012. 
In early April 2011, banks were required to achieve a minimum Core Tier 1 ratio of 8 per cent 
by the end of 2011. 
In  late  May  2011,  under  the  adjustment  programme,  the  Core  Tier  1  ratio  target  was 
increased to 9 per cent. A minimum Core Tier 1 ratio target of 10 per cent by the end of 2012 
was  also  set.  These  measures  involve  bringing  key  Basle  III  recommendations  forward 
considerably. 
A €12 billion bank solvency support facility is available under the programme to provide for 
situations  where  banks  prove  unable  to  meet  the  required  capital  levels  on  the  basis  of 
market solutions. This powerful backstop mechanism provides full assurance that solvency 
targets will be met. 
Protecting the system’s liquidity 
2.  
Let me now comment on our strategy to protect liquidity and promote deleveraging. 
The gradual deleveraging of the banking system has been a concern since the early stages 
of the financial crisis, as it became clear that previous leverage levels would not be possible 
for some banking groups in the new market paradigm. Banco de Portugal started to monitor 
Portuguese  banks’  leverage  ratios  more  closely  in  pursuit  of  a  medium-term  convergence 
towards a more sustainable and stable financing structure. Recommendations were issued 
whenever  leverage  was  considered  excessive.  Also,  as  mentioned,  in  September  2010 
banks were advised to deleverage through the sale of non-core or non-strategic assets. 
In the context of the adjustment programme, banks have to adapt their business models and 
reduce  the  current  high  dependence  on  wholesale  funding.  In  this  context,  the  loan-to-
deposit ratio is to decline from a peak of almost 170% in June 2010 to about 120% by the 
end  of  the  programme  in  2014.  The  pace  and  composition  of  the  deleveraging  process 
needs  to  be  consistent  with  the  programme’s  macroeconomic  scenario  and  should  not 
jeopardise the provision of adequate levels of credit to the economy. 
The  programme  provides  for  safeguards  to  ensure  sufficient  liquidity  in  the  system.  In 
particular,  the  maximum  amount  of  government  guarantees  for  uncovered  bank  bonds  – 
bonds that banks may  use to obtain financing from the ECB, subject to approval from the 
Governing Council – was increased from €20 billion to €35 billion. 
Enhancing banking sector monitoring and supervision 
3.  
I’d like to mention four lines of action in relation to banking sector monitoring and supervision: 
 
 
 
 
The special on-site inspections programme;  
The new framework for assessing banks’ solvency and liquidity;  
The new non-performing loans ratio;  
Capacity-building to enhance Banco de Portugal’s supervisory function. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
A  comprehensive  programme  of  on-site  inspections  of  the  banks’  asset  quality  was 
undertaken with the assistance of external auditing firms. The programme was overseen by a 
Steering Committee chaired by Banco de Portugal, which included representatives from the 
IMF, the ECB, the European Commission and other European supervisory authorities. The 
programme  covered  the  eight  largest  banking  groups,  representing  more  than  83%  of  the 
banking sector assets. 
The first phase of the inspections programme  was concluded in early December. The aim 
was to assess the banks’ valuation of credit portfolios and the calculation of credit risk capital 
requirements,  as  of  30  June  2011.  This  “point-in-time”  analysis  confirmed  that  the 
Portuguese banking system had adequate capital and dispelled the concerns expressed by 
many  analysts  regarding  the  reliability  of  banks’  balance  sheet  figures.  Corrections  to  the 
impairments  reported  by  banks  represent  less than  0.5%  of  the  assessed  exposures.  The 
global impact on the aggregate Tier 1 ratio of the eight participating banks involved a minor 
revision  of  this  ratio  –  from  9.1%  to  8.8%,  remaining  above  the  minimum  8%  that  was 
required for June last year. 
The second, and final, phase of the Special Inspections Programme is currently in progress, 
and  should  be  completed  during  the  first  quarter  of  2012.  The  aim  is  to  complement  the 
point-in-time  analysis  with  a  forward-looking  perspective  by  assessing  the  parameters  and 
methodologies used by the banks in stress test exercises. 
Regarding  the  programme’s  monitoring  of  solvency  and  liquidity  targets,  I  should  mention 
that the eight major banking groups are now required to submit quarterly funding and capital 
plans  to  Banco  de  Portugal.  These  plans  are  then  evaluated  using  a  new  solvency  and 
deleveraging assessment framework, which was developed and implemented by Banco de 
Portugal. 
Indicators  of  credit  quality  have  also  been  improved.  A  new,  more  transparent,  non-
performing loans ratio, aligned with international practice, is now reported by banks and has 
been  published  by  Banco  de  Portugal  since  September  2011.  The  new  ratio  is  more 
comprehensive than that of overdue credit (which had been the indicator used before) as it 
considers the possibility of debtors with payments in arrears continuing to fail to meet their 
credit commitments. 
Last, but certainly not least, Banco de Portugal is seeking a continuous improvement in the 
efficacy  of  its  supervisory  functions.  In  this  context,  let  me  refer  to  four  relevant 
developments: 
 
involving 
the  Board  and 
the  senior  management  of 
Firstly,  we  adapted  our  internal  structure  by  reorganising  the  supervisory  function 
into  three  more  focused  departments  –  concerned,  respectively,  with  behavioural 
supervision,  prudential  supervision  and  legal  enforcement.  An  interdepartmental 
committee, 
relevant 
departments,  was  also  set  up  for  the  purpose  of  financial  stability  monitoring  and 
macro-prudential supervision; 
Secondly, we are recruiting specialist bank supervisors; 
Thirdly, we are developing a project, in cooperation with a university, to offer training 
focused on risk management and control; 
Finally,  our  Financial  Stability  Report  is  now  published  twice  a  year,  instead  of 
annually. 
  Improving the regulatory framework 
4.  
The fourth pillar of our financial stability strategy concerns the regulatory framework. 
In this regard, I should mention three pieces of legislation, which have either been approved, 
or are at the final stages of adoption. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The  framework  law  for  bank  access  to  public  capital  was  amended  by  Law  No  4/2012  of 
11 January. The aim is to ensure that injections of public capital into banks will be temporary 
and  subject  to  strict  conditions,  to  protect  taxpayers’  money  and  to  minimise  distortions  in 
competition.  An  important  point  to  make  is  that,  as  long  as  banks  abide  by  their 
commitments, private management is preserved through the limited voting rights allocated to 
shares acquired by the State. 
A new framework for early intervention, resolution and deposit insurance is at the final stages 
of  adoption,  reinforcing  Banco  de  Portugal’s  powers  in  situations  of  financial  distress.  The 
idea  is  to  provide  for  two  different  categories  of  supervisory  intervention  into  credit 
institutions: corrective early intervention and resolution. The type of intervention will depend 
on the severity of the problem, which will also determine the tools that Banco de Portugal 
may use. 
The insolvency law is also being amended with a view to facilitating the early rescue of viable 
firms. The new draft law was submitted to Parliament at the end of December and should be 
approved soon. 
In addition to the three new pieces of legislation that I just alluded to, Banco de Portugal has 
also  worked  on  promoting  more  robust  internal  governance  arrangements  in  credit 
institutions, namely by issuing regulations on internal controls and, more specifically, on the 
remuneration  and  compensation  policies.  The  aim  is  to  align  the  internal  incentives  within 
credit  institutions  and  to  enhance  the  resilience  of  their  control  mechanisms,  in  order  to 
prevent excessive risk-taking. 
The Portuguese banking system: recent developments and prospects 
III.  
Having described the main elements of our strategy to secure financial stability, let me now 
take a few minutes to comment briefly upon how the banking sector is performing in the new 
context. 
In  a  nutshell,  the  main  message  is  that  Portuguese  banks  have  been  strengthening  their 
capital  base  and  reducing  their  funding  imbalances  in  spite  of  extremely  adverse  external 
conditions and declining profitability. 
I mentioned a while ago that the banking sector has shown impressive resilience throughout 
the international financial crisis. Indeed, the Core Tier 1 ratio – the ratio of a bank’s higher 
quality capital to its risk-weighted assets – increased steadily from 6.8% at the end of 2008 to 
8.5%  in  September  2011.  Banks’  financial  robustness  improved  due  to  a  considerable 
strengthening of the capital base: the cumulative increase of the Core Tier 1 capital in the 
banking system was 28.6% over the period, with risk-weighted assets increasing by 2.8%. 
All but two of the main banks are expected to have met the 9% target by the end of 2011. In 
the remaining two cases, the Core Tier 1 ratio stood slightly below 9% and the target will be 
met in the first quarter of 2012. Banks were capitalised through market-based solutions, a 
clear indication of the Portuguese banking system’s overall financial strength. 
The strengthening of the banks’ capital position will continue into 2012. Current capital needs 
arise  from  the  combined  effect  of  more  demanding  capital  requirements  in  the  adjustment 
programme (a Core Tier 1 ratio of 10% by the end of 2012) and three additional factors: 
 
The  recommendation  made  last  December  by  the  European  Banking  Authority 
(EBA),  aimed  at  creating  a  temporary  buffer  for  sovereign  exposures  in  the  main 
European banks; 
The results of the Special Inspections Programme (SIP) on the valuation of banks’ 
assets; 
And the impact of the partial transfer of banks’ pension funds to social security. 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
The  EBA’s  recommendation  must  be  followed  by  June  2012.  The  prudential  impact  of 
impairment corrections following the Special Inspections Programme and the pension funds’ 
transfer was deferred until June 2012, in line with the EBA timetable and as agreed in the 
second review of the Economic and Financial Assistance Programme. 
Banks  are  encouraged  to  find  market-based  solutions  to  strengthen  their  capital  positions. 
However, in the event that not all capital needs can be met from private sources, public funds 
are  available  from  the  back-stop  facility  created  under  the  programme,  with  amounts 
available that comfortably exceed the estimated capital needs. 
Deleveraging also proceeded as planned in 2011. The loan-to-deposit ratio stood at 146% in 
September 2011, declining by more than 20 p.p. from its June 2010 peak. The decline in the 
transformation  ratio  resulted  both  from  higher  deposits  and  sizeable  asset  sales,  both 
domestic  and  foreign.  While  remaining  at  historically  high  levels,  financing  from  the 
Eurosystem stabilised, whereas it increased for euro area banks as a whole. 
Deposits  have  been  quite  resilient,  increasing  8  per  cent  year-on-year  in  November  2011. 
Higher  resident  customers’  deposits,  particularly  households,  more  than  compensated  the 
decline  in  non-residents’  deposits.  Households  have  been  adjusting  their  portfolios  in  a 
context  of  growing  risk  aversion  and  higher  relative  remuneration  of  deposits.  Even  if  a 
slowdown of deposits is to be expected, their resilience is a clear indication of the public’s 
trust in the domestic banking system. 
Credit  granted  by  resident  banks  is  declining,  partially  reflecting  the  deleveraging  of  the 
private  sector.  The  composition  of  loans  granted  to  non-financial  corporations  raises 
concerns. Indeed, the decline in loans is concentrated in the segment of small and medium-
sized  enterprises.  In  contrast,  loans  to  both  state-owned  enterprises  and  to  the  largest 
private sector corporations have been increasing, as these corporations are replacing credit 
previously obtained abroad with loans taken from Portugal-based institutions. 
Looking forward, it is crucial that, as deleveraging proceeds, banks continue to provide an 
adequate level of financing to the most productive sectors and firms in the economy. Banks’ 
deleveraging strategies should therefore continue to focus on the sale of non-strategic assets 
as  well  the  sale  of  credit;  an  increased  use  of  stable  sources  of  financing;  and  the 
reinforcement  of  capital.  It  is  also  critical  to  meet  the  fiscal  consolidation  targets  and 
successfully  restructure  the  state-owned  enterprises  sector  to  avoid  crowding-out  credit  to 
the productive sector. 
Of  course,  it  is  not  all  good  news.  As  expected,  the  unfavourable  economic  and  financial 
environment has taken a toll on banks’ profitability. However, the negative results announced 
for 2011 should be examined closely, to disentangle current results and one-off factors. 
Indeed,  results  in  2011  were  significantly  affected  by  non-recurrent  factors  such  as  the 
impact on banks’ balance sheets of the transfer of pension funds to social security and the 
corrections arising from the Special On-Site Inspections Programme. These “one-off” effects 
penalised  results  in  2011,  but  imply  more  robust  balance  sheets  going  forward.  If  we  put 
aside these one-off effects, we see that banks’ profitability remained positive even if at low 
level. 
Concluding remarks 
IV.  
Let  me  conclude  by  reiterating  that  Portuguese  banks  are  now  more  capitalised,  more 
transparent  and  less  leveraged  than  a  year  ago.  Monitoring  and  supervision  were 
significantly enhanced and the regulatory environment is much improved. 
The  financial  assistance  programme’s  financial  stability  measures  and  targets  are  well  on 
track.  This  said,  the  challenge  remains  huge  and  there  is  no  room  for  complacency. 
Combining mounting capital needs with deleveraging requirements, while at the same time 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
preventing a harmful credit contraction in the economy is no easy task – a task that requires 
a fine balance between “science and art” in policy-making. 
One point that needs to be absolutely clear is that the business model that prevailed before 
the  crisis  –  based  on  the  expansion  of  credit  sustained  by  large-scale  cheap  wholesale 
funding – is no longer viable. The financial landscape that will emerge once the dust finally 
settles  will  demand  less  leveraged  and  more  strongly  capitalised  business  models  in 
banking. 
This paradigm shift is underway and is embedded in the international initiatives for regulatory 
reform. 
In  this  setting,  Portuguese  banks  will  need  to  face  two  key  challenges,  which  are  hurting 
efficiency levels: 
 
 
A lower transformation ratio;  
And narrower margins, reflecting the combined effect of a large share of mortgage 
credit contracted at very low spreads and more expensive funding. 
A comprehensive answer to these challenges will probably require a combination of better 
resource utilisation, leading to lower costs; the use of new instruments to reduce the weight 
of cheap mortgage credit; and finding strategic investors with access to market funding. 
I  am  confident  that  banks  will  find  the  best  strategies  to  address  these  challenges  and  to 
further strengthen the competitiveness of the banking sector. 
I will not take more of your time. To close, I would stress that the financial crisis has taught 
us many lessons and brought about fundamental changes in the functioning of the financial 
system.  Banking  supervisors  around  the  world  are  working  to  bolster  the  resilience  of  the 
financial system. It is my strong belief that Portugal is in the front line of these efforts. It is 
also my conviction that Banco de Portugal is today much better equipped “to see both the 
forest and the trees”, and to act decisively if a fire should start. 
Thank you. 
Lisbon, 3 February 2012 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
