Mark Carney: Globalisation, financial stability and employment 
Remarks by Mr Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of Canada and Chairman of the Financial 
Stability Board, to the Canadian Auto Workers (CAW), Toronto, Ontario, 22 August 2012. 
 the 
recession  demonstrated 
financial  crisis  and  ensuing  global 
Introduction 
Thank you, Ken Lewenza for the invitation to be here today. You said last December that you 
would write to me to make sure you “get at least a couple of years as CAW National President, 
without having to face another world crisis.” The least I could do is show up to discuss how we 
are doing to fulfill such an entirely reasonable request. 
The  global  financial  crisis  has  had  a  devastating  impact.  In  the  wake  of  Lehman’s  demise, 
global  trade  fell  10  per  cent  and  industrial  production  18  per  cent.  Canadian  manufacturing 
output dropped about 20 per cent and auto production 70 per cent. Twenty-eight million jobs 
were  lost  worldwide,  including  at  its  peak,  430,000  here  in  Canada.  Your  membership  was 
particularly hard hit, with reverberations that continue today. 
The 
fundamental 
interconnectedness of the global economy. When built on bedrock, interconnections of trade 
and  investment  create  jobs  and  prosperity,  including  the  $400  billion  in  goods  exports  in 
industries represented by your members. 
However, when built on sand, as was the case for too much of financial activity pre-Lehman, 
the global economy can transmit instability, uncertainty and unemployment. 
I  want  to  discuss  today  what  we  can  do  to  build  the  foundations  for  the  right  kind  of 
globalisation, so that you can concentrate on creating prosperity for your families and fellow 
Canadians. Some of this is the direct responsibility of central banks; some is the work of the 
international  policy-makers  at  the  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB).  And  some  is  your 
responsibility: to continue to help grow flexible, productive companies that can succeed in a 
fiercely competitive global marketplace. 
Securing financial stability for jobs and growth 
Let me start with what policy-makers can do to ensure that businesses can get the capital they 
need  to  invest  and  hire,  and further,  that  we  do  not  experience  a  sudden  shock  in  Canada 
from events abroad. 
Building resilient financial institutions 
Achieving a stronger global banking system is the overriding priority. This means more capital. 
Before the crisis, international banks operated with $50 of assets for every dollar of capital. 
With only a 2 per cent decline in the value of their assets, banks saw their capital wiped out. 
Not  far  off  from  your  description,  Ken,  of  having  “no  money  in  the  vault”  to  back  up  their 
loans.1  
In  response,  international  regulators  have  increased  the  minimum  amount  of  capital  banks 
must hold by about five times and are making the largest, most complex firms hold even more. 
In addition, we have added a safety belt imported from Canada with a simple, but effective, 
leverage standard. This protects the system from risks we think are low but in fact are not. 
                                                
1  Canadian Auto Workers (CWA) President Ken Lewenza speech to the CAW Council, p. 6, December 2, 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Ending too-big-to-fail 
These  measures  have  lowered  the  probability  of  failure,  but  since  failures  will  still  happen, 
their impact must be reduced, which is one of the reasons to focus on ending “too-big-to-fail.” 
We  must  address,  once  and  for  all,  the  unfairness  of  a  system  that  privatises  gains  and 
socialises  losses.  By  restoring  capitalism  to  the  capitalists,  discipline  in  the  system  will 
increase and, with time, systemic risks will be reduced. In addition, the knowledge that major 
firms  in  markets  far  away  can  fail,  without  meaningful  consequences  at  home,  will  restore 
confidence in an open global system and allow Ken and all of us to focus on our day jobs. 
To ensure that bondholders, shareholders and management – rather than taxpayers – bear 
the  brunt  of  losses,  all  FSB  member  countries  have  committed  to  have  in  place  a  bail-in 
authority  and  will  have  specific  plans  by  the  end  of  this  year  to  recover  or,  if  necessary, 
resolve these firms. 
The  framework  for  systemic  institutions  is  now  being  extended  to  domestic  banks,  global 
insurers,  and  key  shadow  banks,  such  as  hedge  funds.  When  implemented,  greater 
supervisory intensity and higher loss absorbency will ensure that the financial system is never 
again beholden to the fate of a single firm or group of firms. 
Creating continuously open markets 
An important element of ending too-big-to-fail is ensuring that key markets can withstand the 
failure of firms. Creating continuously open core markets requires changes to the plumbing of 
derivative and repo markets, along with better data and tracking of exposures. 
Moving from shadow banking to market-based finance 
Finally, the FSB is working to strengthen the oversight and regulation of shadow banking so 
that it is a source of competition (to promote efficiency) and diversity (to promote resilience) to 
the regulated sector. This will require changes to how money-market funds are managed, the 
terms of securitisation and, most importantly, how links between the regulated banking sector 
and shadow banks are managed. 
Let  me  give  a  Canadian  example  of  why  this  is  important.  In  the  summer  of  2007,  the 
Canadian  non-bank  ABCP  market  froze  (Chart  1).  As  a  consequence,  auto  leasing 
disappeared almost overnight (Chart 2). 
Prior  to  this  point,  about  40  per  cent  of  cars  in  Canada  had  been  purchased  with  a  lease. 
Canadian  banks  stepped  into  the  breach  helping  to  ensure  that  Canadian  auto  demand 
dramatically  outperformed  American  demand.  Now  we  need  to  rebuild securitization  so  that 
Canadian consumers have low-cost financial alternatives. 
These reforms will make a huge difference – if they are implemented. Canada learned during 
the last crisis that having our own house in order is not enough. We need others to raise their 
game. That is why the FSB is increasingly focused on timely and consistent implementation of 
agreed reforms. We will identify those who drag their feet or bend the rules and hold them to 
account. 
Recent developments in Canadian labour markets 
Globally, workers felt the brunt of the financial crisis. 
Yet, given its severity, Canada’s labour market has performed well, both in absolute terms and 
relative  to  other  advanced  economies.  All  of  the  jobs  lost  in  the  recession  have  been 
recovered and a further 304,000 jobs have been created (Chart 3). Since the trough, the vast 
majority of these jobs have been full-time and in the private sector. Nearly all new jobs are in 
industries that pay above-average wages. 
2 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 After peaking at 8.7 per cent in August 2009, Canada’s unemployment rate has fallen to its 
current level of 7.3 per cent. While it has not yet returned to its pre-crisis low, this is in part 
because  our  working-age  population  has  continued  to  grow  and  potential  workers  have 
continued to look for work. 
This  stands  in  stark  contrast  to the  situation  in  the  United  States,  where  a  large  number of 
workers  have  become  discouraged  and  left  the  labour  market.  Over  40  per  cent  of 
unemployed U.S. workers are long-term unemployed (compared with 18 per cent of Canada’s 
unemployed workers). And the American unemployment rate stands 1 percentage point above 
Canada’s (and a full 2 percentage points when measured on a like-for-like basis). 
While Canada’s labour market has performed better than most other G-7 economies, we all 
know  there  is  still  slack  (Chart  4).  The  participation  rate  has  not  fully  recovered  and  the 
percentage of involuntary part-time workers has risen about 5 percentage points (Chart 5). In 
addition, wage growth has been moderate and is expected to remain so. 
This is one reason why monetary policy has been so exceptionally accommodative for so long. 
Interest  rates  have  been  at  or  near  historic  lows  since  the  crisis  began.  Adjusted  for 
CPI inflation,  the  policy  real  interest  rate  has  been  negative,  on  average,  since  the  end  of 
2008.  With  a  well-functioning  financial  system,  the  Bank  has  provided  exceptional  policy 
stimulus to our economy, consistent with growing activity and employment and consistent with 
achieving our inflation target. 
Longer-term trends 
Any  analysis  of  recent  employment  performance  should  consider  the  broader  context  of  an 
evolving workplace in the global economy. 
First,  the  share  of  employment  in  manufacturing  has  steadily  declined  across  advanced 
economies, falling from 25 per cent to 14 per cent in the three decades leading up to the crisis. 
Even  in  Germany,  the  share  of  employment  fell  from  32  per  cent  to  19  per  cent  over  this 
period. In this context, Canada’s record is about average, with a decline from 18 per cent three 
decades  ago  to  about  10  per  cent  today  (Chart  6).  In  part,  this  reflects  the  substitution  of 
capital for labour, such as the increased use of robotics on assembly lines. It also reflects the 
changing nature of globalisation. 
In  both  goods  and  services,  the  current  wave  of  globalisation  is  changing  the  nature  of 
production and the demand for labour. In the first wave of globalisation at the turn of the last 
century, the combination of sharp falls in transportation costs and large economies of scale in 
factories promoted the concentration of production and manufacturing employment. 
In the current wave, which began in the late 1980s, huge advances in communications and 
computing technologies have dramatically lowered the costs of coordination across stages of 
production.  This  has  promoted  the  distribution  of  these  stages  to  the  most  cost-effective 
locations.  One  consequence  has  been  a  shift  of  fabrication  jobs  to  low-wage  locations  in 
emerging markets. Even in services, complex tasks, such as professional and health services, 
are  now  being  separated  into  their  higher-value-added  and  routine  components,  leading  to 
outsourcing and job displacement. 
With  companies  increasingly  part  of  global  supply  chains,  competitive  advantage  will 
increasingly  be  concentrated  in  stages  of  production  (such  as  engineering  and  design  or 
fabrication) rather than specific sectors (such as aerospace or automobiles). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
In general, these trends mean that the demand for unskilled workers in advanced economies 
is  falling  relative  to  that  for  skilled  workers.  Some  estimates  show  that  by  the  end  of  this 
decade,  there  will  be  a  shortage  of  18  million  skilled  workers  and  a  surplus  of  35  million 
unskilled workers across advanced countries.2  
These broad shifts in the demand for and supply of labour are contributing to rising inequality. 
Over  the  past  20-plus  years,  incomes  in  Canada  have  increased  nearly  twice  as  fast  for 
earners  in  the  top  10  per  cent  as for those  in  the  lowest  10  per  cent. The  share  of  the  top 
1 per cent is now the third highest among member-countries of the Organization for Economic 
Co-operation and Development (OECD) after the United States and the United Kingdom.3 The 
last  time  inequality  in  the  United  States  was  this  severe  was  during  the  1920s.  Moreover, 
labour’s  share  of  national  income  is  now  at  its  lowest  level  in  half  a  century  across  most 
advanced economies, including Canada. When income inequality is measured using the Gini 
coefficient,  the  most  widely-used  metric  of  income  inequality,  Canada  falls  in  the  middle  of 
OECD countries. 
We all need to recognise that the durable, high-paying manufacturing jobs of the future will be 
located in companies that invest to equip and train their workers and that are fully engaged in 
the global economy. 
Macroeconomic context 
A  strategy  to  grow  good  jobs  in  this  environment  must  also  take  into  account  the  global 
economic transformation currently under way. 
It starts by recognising the limits of relying on our home market. In the immediate aftermath of 
the crisis, the broad economic strategy in Canada has been to grow domestic demand and to 
encourage Canadian businesses to retool and reorient to the new global economy. 
Stimulative monetary and fiscal policies proved highly effective in supporting a robust growth 
in  domestic  demand,  particularly  household  expenditures.  For  example,  after  falling  almost 
20 per  cent  in  the  recession,  Canadian  auto  sales  rebounded  strongly  and  now  are  slightly 
less than 4 per cent above their pre-recession level. 
As effective as it has been, the limits of this growth model are becoming clear. In particular, we 
cannot grow indefinitely by relying on Canadian households increasing their borrowing relative 
to income. In the decade leading up to the recession, Canadians tapped the wealth in their 
homes to finance up to one-fifth of consumption growth. Housing activity is now near a record 
share of GDP, and there are increasing signs of overbuilding and overvaluation in segments of 
the real estate market. 
In  response,  the  federal  government  has  instituted  four  prudent  and  timely  tightenings  of 
mortgage  insurance  terms.  OSFI  has  introduced  tougher  underwriting  standards  for 
home-equity loans and enhanced supervisory scrutiny. Monetary policy has remained focused 
on  the  inflation  target,  although  under  flexible  inflation  targeting  the  Bank  of  Canada  is 
prepared to support regulatory efforts, if necessary, and consistent with price stability over the 
medium term, to ensure balanced and sustainable growth.4  
                                                
2  R. Dobbs et al., “The World at Work: Jobs, Pay, and Skills for 3.5 Billion People,” McKinsey Global Institute, 
June 2012. 
3  This share grew from 9 per cent in 1990 to 13 per cent in 2007 (United States: 18 per cent; United Kingdom: 
14 per  cent).  See  S.  Matthews  (2011),  “Trends  in  Top  Incomes  and  Their  Tax  Policy  Implications,”  OECD 
Taxation Working Papers, No. 4, OECD Publishing, 2011. 
4  Bank of Canada, “Renewal of the Inflation-Control Target: Background Information – November 2011.” 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Even though desirable, eliminating the household sector’s net financial deficit will eventually 
leave  a  noticeable  $50  billion  gap  in  our  economy  over  two  years.  This  gap  can  only  be 
sustainably filled by additional exports and business investment. 
But investment for what purpose and exports to where? 
The  U.S.  economy  is  experiencing  the  slowest  recovery  since  the  Great  Depression  as  the 
repair of bank, household and government balance sheets slows growth. The only good news 
is that some progress is being made. 
U.S. banks have substantially increased their capital (common equity to total assets is up by 
more  than  25  per  cent).  American  households  have  recovered  more  than  two-thirds  of  the 
$16 trillion fall in their net worth in the aftermath of the crisis, though we estimate that it will 
take several more years for households to make up the balance. 
Despite this, total debt in America has barely fallen from its peak of 250 per cent of GDP – a 
level last seen in the Great Depression.5 This is because U.S. government debt has increased 
$4 for every $1 reduction of household debt. Such treading water will persist for some time 
since private domestic demand is still not sufficiently robust to outweigh an aggressive fiscal 
tightening. 
The  Bank  expects  the  U.S.  expansion  to  average  2.5  per  cent  over  the  next  few  years 
(compared to 3 per cent in the decade prior to the crisis). 
Bottom line, the U.S. economy is not what it used to be. With less capital investment and more 
structural unemployment, even once the U.S. economy recovers its cyclical losses, the Bank 
estimates that it will remain over $1 trillion smaller in 2015 than we had projected prior to the 
crisis. Already, U.S. weakness means that Canadian exports are $30 billion lower than they 
would normally be at this stage in the cycle. 
Given  our  dependence  on  the  U.S.  market,  our  exports  are  still  below  their  pre-recession 
peak.  More  broadly,  with  only  9  per  cent  of  our  exports  going  to  the  fast-growing 
emerging-market economies, our export performance has been the second worst in the G-20 
over the past decade. Since 2000, our share of the world goods export market has fallen from 
about 4.5 per cent to 2.7 per cent. 
Some blame this on the persistent strength of the Canadian dollar. While there is some truth in 
that, it is not the most important reason. Over the past decade, our poor export performance 
has been explained two-thirds by market structure and one-third by competitiveness. Of the 
latter, about two-thirds is the currency while the rest is labour costs and productivity.6 So, net, 
our strong currency explains only about 20 per cent of our poor export performance. 
In short, our underperformance prior to the crisis was more a reflection of who we traded with 
than how effectively we did it. We are overexposed to the United States and underexposed to 
faster-growing emerging markets. 
Recommended response 
To find and compete in new markets will require a concerted, multi-year effort of workers, firms 
and governments. 
                                                
5  This excludes the debt of the financial sector. 
6  Caveat:  relative  unit  labour  costs  vis-à-vis  the  United  States  are  a  useful  proxy  to  assess  Canadian 
competitiveness. They might not tell the whole story, however. For instance, they might not adequately capture 
the further opening of world trade to emerging and developing economies (e.g., China joining WTO in 2001). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
First, we need an aggressive, emerging-market-focused trade strategy. That is why Canada is 
in a series of bilateral trade discussions with countries such as India, and will participate in the 
multilateral  negotiations  of  the  Trans-Pacific  Partnership  involving  a  number  of  Asian 
countries. It is not just that emerging-market economies now account for one-half of all import 
growth, but it is also that they are essential to secure our positions in global supply chains. 
Second, as the CAW has long recognised, the quality of our workforce is one of our greatest 
strengths – one in which we must continuously invest. With technology and trade transforming 
the workplace, the need to improve skills across the spectrum of work has never been greater. 
Both workers and management must continuously improve in order to take full advantage of 
new technology by making changes to design, marketing and processes. 
Third,  we  need  to  maintain  an  open  and  resilient financial  system  that at  a  minimum fulfills 
Ken’s wish not to be at the mercy of “global bankers...[who] have learned nothing from the last 
crisis.”7  More  broadly,  we  need  a  system  that  provides  sustainably  low-cost  financing  to 
businesses  and  consumers  in  the  real  economy  so  that  we  can  grow  output,  jobs  and 
incomes. 
Conclusion 
The global environment remains challenging. In recent months, there has been a widespread 
slowing  of  activity  across  advanced  and  emerging  economies. Europe  has  slid  back  into 
recession and its crisis, while contained, remains acute. The U.S. economy continues to grow 
modestly,  restrained  by  ongoing  deleveraging  and  considerable  uncertainty  surrounding  the 
fiscal cliff and the European situation. 
While these global headwinds are restraining Canadian economic activity and there are some 
short-term  special  factors  weighing  on  growth,  current  underlying  momentum  is  at  a  pace 
roughly  in  line  with  the  growth  of  the  economy’s  production  potential.  Economic  growth  is 
expected to pick up through 2013. Consumption and business investment are expected to be 
the  primary  drivers  of  this  moderate  growth,  reflecting  very  stimulative  domestic  financial 
conditions. While Canadian exports are projected to improve, they are likely to remain below 
their pre-recession peak until the beginning of 2014. This reflects weak foreign demand and 
ongoing competitiveness challenges, including the persistent strength of the Canadian dollar. 
As  the  Bank  noted  in  its  most  recent  interest  rate  announcement,  to  the  extent  that  the 
economic expansion in  Canada continues and the current excess supply  in the economy is 
gradually  absorbed,  some  modest  withdrawal  of  the  present  considerable  monetary  policy 
stimulus may become appropriate, consistent with achieving the 2 per cent inflation target over 
the  medium  term.  The  timing  and  degree  of  any  such  withdrawal  will  be  weighed  carefully 
against domestic and global economic developments. 
In  a  volatile  global  environment,  we  need  to  plan  for  the  long  term.  We  cannot  devalue 
ourselves to prosperity or cut ourselves off from the world and hope to rely on ever-increasing 
borrowing by Canadian consumers. 
All of us – labour, business and governments – need to build on Canada’s advantages: 
• 
• 
• 
sound fiscal and monetary policy; 
a resilient financial sector; 
domestic inefficiencies that can be eliminated to boost employment and profit; 
                                                
7  Canadian Auto Workers (CWA) President Ken Lewenza speech to the CAW Council, p. 5, December 2, 2011. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 under-exploited opportunities in the most dynamic economies in the world; and, most 
importantly, 
a highly trained, dedicated and productive workforce, eager to learn new skills. 
• 
At the FSB, we will concentrate on designing and implementing a series of financial reforms 
that  ensures  the  financial  system  supports  the  real  economy  so  that  businesses  can  invest 
and  hire  and  Canadian  workers,  including  their  leaders,  can  plan  for  the  future  with 
confidence. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  8 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
   10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
