Duvvuri Subbarao: Indian payment and settlement systems responsible 
innovation and regulation 
Keynote  address  by  Dr  Duvvuri  Subbarao,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
IDRBT  (Institute 
in  Banking  Technology)  Banking 
Technology Awards Function, Hyderabad, 3 August 2012. 
for  Development  and  Research 
 1. 
edition of the IDRBT Banking Technology Awards function.  
First  of  all,  my  thanks  to  the  management  of  IDRBT  for  inviting  me  to  this  eighth 
Financial innovation in the context of the crisis 
2. 
We are gathered here today to recognise and celebrate financial innovation. If we 
take a long sweep of history, there is no doubt that innovation has contributed to enhancing 
the quantum, quality and reach of financial intermediation. In recent years though, financial 
innovation has become a contentious issue. Unbridled financial innovation and the failure of 
regulators to  check  that  are  also  being  cited  as  among the  culprits for  the  global  financial 
crisis.  
3. 
Quite understandably, the crisis has triggered a number of questions about financial 
innovation.  Is  all  financial  innovation  for  the  good?  Are  there  good  and  bad  innovations? 
What determines if an innovation is good or bad – the innovation itself or the way it is used? 
Who  is  to  determine  if an  innovation  is  good  or  bad?  Do  regulators  have  the  wisdom  and 
competence to regulate without stifling value adding innovation? 
4. 
These questions are subject matter of a vigorous debate among financial markets 
and financial sector regulators. Even as this is largely work in progress, the objective of all 
this effort is clear – to make both innovators and regulators more responsible.  
5. 
Is this talk about responsibility just a homily? I believe it is more than that. Let me 
explain.  Innovations,  we  know,  are  not  driven  by  altruism;  they  are  motivated  by  private 
profit. If there is no private profit, there will be no innovation. In theory, as Adam Smith had 
propounded over two centuries ago, this is no bad thing. Individual pursuit of profit, driven by 
selfishness, can indeed lead to collectively optimal outcomes. The important condition for this 
to  happen  though  is  that  markets  must  be  competitive  and  efficient.  But  markets  fail,  and 
financial  markets  fail  more  notoriously  than  other  markets  for  a  variety  of  reasons  – 
information asymmetry, moral hazard, adverse selection, externalities etc.  
6. 
Possibly the only  way to mitigate the risks of market failure in respect of financial 
innovation is regulation. And herein comes responsibility. Innovators must be responsible for 
the way they use their innovations. Regulators must be responsible for ensuring that financial 
stability  and  consumer  interest  are  not  compromised  by  the  innovations.  This  sort  of 
responsibility demands competence, foresight and wisdom on both sides. 
Payment and settlement systems 
Responsible  innovation  and  regulation  is  the  topic  I  want  to  address  today. 
7. 
“Responsibility” should be the thrust of innovation in all segments of financial markets and 
responsibility  should  be  the  credo  governing  regulation  across  all  dimensions  of  financial 
regulation. Today, though, I will focus on a narrower segment – responsible innovation and 
regulation in payment and settlement systems.  
8. 
This  choice  of  payment  and  settlement  systems  is  informed  by  three  motivations. 
First,  payment  and  settlement  systems  have  witnessed  by  far  the  most  game  changing 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
technology  based 
innovations, especially in the matter of furthering financial inclusion. Second, innovations in 
payment and settlement systems have been both market based and technology based, and 
illustrate  how 
innovations  can  be  mainstreamed.  Mainstreaming 
technology  based  innovation  is  particularly  relevant  at  this  platform  because  that  is  the 
mandate of IDRBT. 
9. 
Third, and most remarkably, during the depth of the financial crisis in 2008/09, when 
virtually all financial systems and all financial markets went into near collapse, the payment 
and  settlement  systems  worldwide  remained  stable.  What  would  have  happened  if  the 
payment and settlement systems too had seized up? Even to imagine that is frightening. 
RBI as a responsible regulator 
10. 
The  Reserve  Bank  is  deeply  conscious  of  being  a  responsible  regulator.  We 
interpret this responsibility as follows. We must encourage financial innovation but only such 
innovation that improves the efficiency of financial intermediation and therefore contributes to 
the  real  sector.  We  must  ensure  that  as  innovations  are  rolled  out  into  actual  financial 
transactions,  they  do  not  erode  financial  stability.  We  must  be  especially  sensitive  to 
consumer protection. And uniquely, because of our developmental role, we must ensure that 
financial innovation furthers financial inclusion.  
11. 
Responsible regulation here means providing a stable, predictable and contestable 
regulatory framework that encourages innovation, emphasizes safety, security, efficiency and 
accessibility, and aids the orderly growth of the payment and settlement systems. As you are 
aware, the Payment and Settlement System (PSS) Act, 2007 designates the Reserve Bank 
as the statutory regulator of the payment and settlement systems in the country. But even 
before  becoming  the  statutory  regulator,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  been  engaged  in 
modernizing  the  payment  and  settlement  systems;  and  even  as  we  are  the  statutory 
regulator today, we continue to take the lead in facilitating innovation.  
12. 
of payment and settlement systems: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
RBI’s role in modernizing payment systems  
RBI’s approach to responsible regulation  
RBI’s role as facilitator of innovation  
Having set that context, I now want to address three specific sub-topics in the area 
RBIs role in modernising payment systems 
13. 
modernization of the payment and settlement infrastructure of the country. 
So, let me turn to the first sub-topic – the role played by the Reserve Bank in the 
Paper based clearing 
14. 
The Reserve Bank kickstarted the modernisation of the paper based system in the 
mid-80s with the introduction of MICR technology in the four metros. Today MICR technology 
is  used  at  66  centres  across  the  country.  Besides,  more  than  1100  smaller  centres  have 
been  brought  under  a  uniform  computerised  clearing  package  –  the  “Express  Cheque 
Clearing  System”  –  to  enable  the  required  level  of  interoperability  across  all  the  clearing 
houses.  Leveraging  on  the  core-banking  infrastructure  of  banks,  we  introduced  “Speed 
Clearing” in 2008 to facilitate collection of outstation cheques on a local basis.  
15. 
Another major initiative has been the Cheque Truncation System (CTS) which was 
operationalised in the National Capital Region of Delhi in 2008. CTS, as many of you know, 
is  an  image  based  cheque  clearing  system  obviating  the  need  for  physical  movement  of 
cheques.  A  further  technological  improvement  of  the  regular  CTS  environment  is  the  grid 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
based  CTS.  The  grid  based  CTS  encompasses  multiple  clearing  locations  spread  across 
several states facilitating the processing and clearing of cheques of all the banks under that 
particular  grid.  The  National  Payments  Corporation  of  India  (NPCI),  the  umbrella  retail 
payments  organization  set  up  by  banks,  has  since  operationalized  a  grid  based  CTS  in 
Chennai in 2011.  
Electronic payment systems 
Even as it was modernizing paper based transactions, the Reserve Bank was also 
16. 
simultaneously  working  on  retail  electronic  payment  systems  such  as  Electronic  Clearing 
Service  (ECS)  for  bulk  payment  transactions  (credit  as  well  as  debit)  and  an  Electronic 
Funds  Transfer  (EFT)  system. The  localised  ECS  has  today  metamorphosed  into  an  ECS 
suite of products: (i) a localised ECS catering to the bank branches of a local clearing house; 
(ii)  a  Regional  ECS  covering  all  the  bank  branches  of  a  state  or  several  states  as  in  the 
North-east;  and  (iii)  a  national  ECS  covering  the  entire  country.  Alongside,  the  EFT  has 
evolved  into  the  pan-India  NEFT.  Together,  these  two  products  have  revolutionised  the 
electronic retail payments market landscape in the country. 
Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) 
17. 
The  paper  based  and  electronic  systems  that  I  just  talked  about  were  both  retail 
payment systems. As an economy grows, the volume of large value payment transactions 
increases.  For  complementarity  across  the  system,  it  then  becomes  important  to  extend 
modernization  to  the  large  value  payment  systems  as  well.  Towards  this  endeavour,  the 
Reserve Bank introduced the RTGS system in March 2004 for settling gross inter-bank and 
customer transactions of values over  200,000. When we started off the RTGS in 2004, the 
gross  daily  turnover  was  just  about  5  billion.  Today,  the  average  gross  daily  turnover  is 
nearly  2.5 trillion, an expansion by a factor of 500. Similarly, the volume of transactions that 
stood  at  just  a  few  thousand  on  average  per  day  when  we  started  the  RTGS  has  today 
increased to well over 200,000 per day. We are now focusing on graduating to the Next-Gen 
RTGS  system  with  enhanced  liquidity  saving  features  and  faster  and  higher  processing 
capabilities. 
RBI’s approach to responsible regulation  
Having indicated what the Reserve Bank has done to modernize the payment and 
18. 
settlement systems, let me now move on to RBI’s approach towards being a “Responsible 
Regulator”  in  this  area.  As  I  said  earlier,  the  Payment  and  Settlement  Systems  Act,  2007 
accorded statutory regulatory powers to the Reserve Bank. Even as we are the regulator, we 
continue to be the large value payments system operator given the systemic and financial 
stability issues involved. But our effort is now focused more towards encouraging banks and 
authorized private entities to increasingly take over the retail payment space. I will tell you 
about a few important things we have done in that direction.  
Think global, act local 
19. 
The Reserve Bank’s strategy has been quintessentially “think global, act local”. For 
example, in the roll out of the retail payment systems – both paper based and electronic – we 
followed a decentralized approach. As technology improved and as banks moved on to core 
banking platforms, we shifted to aggregation and consolidation of the decentralized systems 
to exploit economies of scale. The shift to grid based CTS, and in the case of retail electronic 
payments, the NECS and the NEFT systems are illustrative of this.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Recognising the role of non-banks 
20. 
Recognising  that  non-banks  can  provide  innovative  payment  products  and  foster 
competitiveness  in  the  market,  the  Reserve  Bank  authorised  non-banks  to  enter  the  retail 
payment space. At the same time, we took care to ensure that the non-banks which come in 
adhere to KYC/AML guidelines and follow the prescribed guidelines for customer protection 
and customer service. For example, even as non-banks specialise in payment services and 
products, the settlement domain remains with the banks, and the outstanding balances are 
required to be kept in an escrow (trust) account so as to insure against bankruptcy.  
21. 
Recently, the Reserve Bank has allowed entry for non-banks into another payment 
space  –  ATMs.  Although  there  has  been  a  steady  year-on-year  25  per  cent  growth  in  the 
number of ATMs in the country, their penetration as measured by the number of ATMs per 
million population is still very low when compared to other emerging markets. To increase the 
deployment of ATMs, especially in the smaller centres, non-bank entities are now permitted 
to  set  up,  own  and  operate  ATMs,  styled  as  “White  Label  ATMs”  (WLA).  Accordingly,  the 
regulatory guidelines prescribe a proportion of ATMs to be necessarily installed in Tier III to 
Tier  VI  centres  (towns/villages  with  population  of  less  than  50000),  thereby  extending 
anytime, anywhere banking facility to a wider segment of population. Since this initiative will 
bring  in  less  literate  and  less  empowered  population  into  the  ambit  of  ATMs,  we  have 
expressly stipulated that, even as the WLA is set up by an NBFC, the primary responsibility 
for  redressing  the  grievances  of  customers  relating  to  failed  transactions  and  for  cash 
management remains with the sponsoring bank. 
Promoting safety and security of payment instruments 
22. 
We  have  implemented  several  measures  to  improve  “hygiene  factors”  such  as 
safety  and  security  of  payment  transactions.  The  security  of  online  card  transactions  has 
been strengthened with the implementation of additional factor of authentication. With effect 
from July, 2011, an online alert for all card transactions has become mandatory. Similarly, to 
protect card present transactions, we issued directions to banks and other stakeholders to 
initiate measures to strengthen the security and fraud risk management practices, merchant 
sourcing,  and  to  issue  EMV  (Europay-MasterCard-VISA)  chip  card  and  PIN  to  customers 
who have evidenced at least one purchase using their debit/credit card in a foreign location.  
23. 
The  Reserve  Bank  will  soon  need  to  take  a  decision  on  the  choice  between 
migrating to EVM cards with chip and pin and an Aadhaar based biometric authentication. 
The chip and pin is an  established and tested technology, but is relatively expensive. The 
Aadhar based option is cheaper, but the robustness of this technology is as yet unproven. If 
indeed we are finally able to marry Aadhaar into the cards, we would be achieving the same 
level of security available in chip and pin model at a much lower cost. Our other initiatives 
include  implementing  CTS2010  standards  to  promote  safety  in  paper  clearing  and  to 
immobilize the cash retraction facility in ATMs to prevent frauds.  
Customer centric regulation 
24. 
By  far  the  largest  number  of  complaints  we  receive  in  the  Central  Office  of  the 
Reserve Bank as well as at our ombudsman offices across the country are about failed ATM 
transactions.  RBI  has mandated  that  in  case  of a  dispute,  the  disputed  amount  should  be 
credited to the customer’s account within seven days, failing which the customer’s bank is 
liable to pay compensation to her at the rate of  100 per day from the date of the complaint, 
provided the complaint is filed within 30 days from the date of the failed transaction. 
25. 
Debit cards can potentially be a  win-win option by enhancing convenience for the 
customer and improving business for the merchant. Disappointingly, the penetration of debit 
cards  has  been  shallow.  One  disincentive  is  the  business  cost  to  merchants.  So  far,  the 
Merchant Discount Rate (MDR) for debit and credit cards has been uniform in India. Given 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
that  a  debit  card  is  a  secured  product  while  a  credit  card  is  part  of  the  unsecured  credit 
product  portfolio,  the  Reserve  Bank  decided  to  introduce  a  differential  MDR  for  debit  card 
transactions. Under this recently announced policy, the MDR for usage of debit cards should 
not  exceed  0.75  per  cent  of  the  transaction  value  for  transactions  upto  2000,  and  not 
exceed 1 per cent for transactions above  2000.  
26. 
Why is this regulatory intervention to reduce the MDR important? For an emerging 
market  with  limited  payment  system  acceptance  infrastructure  like  PoS  machines,  a  lower 
MDR would encourage even smaller merchants to accept card payments since the outgo in 
terms of the fee payable by them to the acquiring bank (the bank which has installed the PoS 
machine) would be relatively small. In the case of developed countries where the acceptance 
ecosystem  is  already  in  place,  MDR  is  not  an  issue  and  only  the  interchange  fee  as 
determined by the network operator has come under regulatory purview.  
27. 
In  an  effort  to  facilitate  domestic  person-to-person  fund  transfer  for  migrant 
population who do not have access to banking facilities because of inability to meet the KYC 
requirements, three schemes have been rolled out: (i) cash pay out scheme; (ii) cash pay-in 
scheme; and (iii) card to card transfers. The first two schemes facilitate fund transfers with a 
bank account either at the remitting end or at the beneficiary end. These guidelines aid the 
underprivileged  who  do  not  have  a  bank  account  for  whatever  reason,  to  get  an  access 
nevertheless,  to  the  formal  banking  channel  to  send  and  receive  remittances  safely  and 
inexpensively.  There  are  no  reliable  estimates  of  what  it  costs  to  remit  money  through 
informal  channels,  especially  to  and  from  remote  locations;  however,  anecdotal  evidence 
suggests that informal channel remittances can cost several multiples of costs through the 
banking system.  
RBI as facilitator of innovation in payment systems 
Let  me  now  move  on  to  our  third  role  –  as  facilitator  of  innovation  in  payment 
28. 
systems.  Responsible  regulation  must  also  involve  facilitating  value  adding  innovation.  Let 
me give an account of what we have done towards this endeavour. 
Calibrated approach towards introduction of new payment products 
29. 
The last few years have witnessed a remarkable growth in new payment products 
and access channels viz. debit cards and credit cards issued by banks, and prepaid cards 
that can be issued by both banks and non-banks. The safety and efficiency of the access 
channels  viz.  ATMs,  PoS,  E-commerce  and  M-commerce  have  been  instrumental  in  the 
popularization of these alternate payment products.  
30. 
RBI recognizes the potency of prepaid payment instruments to be cash substitutes. 
This was an area where regulation followed innovation. Since the guidelines were issued in 
2009,  prepaid  payment  instruments  have  been  gaining  popularity.  Noticing  their  growing 
popularity, we tweaked the policy on a dynamic basis to further facilitate the issuance and 
acceptance  of  these  alternate  payment  products.  Under  the  recently  introduced  Domestic 
Money Transfer guidelines, while no cash-out is still permitted in respect of semi-closed pre-
paid  payment  instruments  issued  by  non-banks,  they  can  now  be  utilised  for  transferring 
money to other semi closed cards or into bank accounts. 
In October 2008, the Reserve Bank put out operating guidelines on mobile banking 
31. 
for  banks.  Only  banks  which  are  licensed  and  supervised  in  India  and  have  a  physical 
presence  in  India,  are  permitted  to  offer  mobile  banking,  after  obtaining  the  necessary 
permission from the Reserve Bank. The guidelines focus on systems for security and inter-
bank transfer arrangements through Reserve Bank’s authorized systems. On the technology 
front, the  objective  is  to  promote  inter-operable standards so  as  to facilitate fund  transfers 
from  one  account  to  another  in  the  same  bank  or  in  another  bank  on  a  real  time  basis 
irrespective of the mobile network of the customer. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Aadhaar initiative in payment systems 
32. 
Aadhaar  has  been  recognised  as  an  alternate  authentication  mechanism  in  the 
payment  systems.  Aadhaar  based  payment  products  have  already  been  designed  and 
introduced. 
33. 
Aadhaar  Enabled  Payment  Systems  (AEPS)  is  a  payment  system  aligned  with 
UIDAI’s plan to utilize the UID number for routing all government benefit transfer payments to 
beneficiaries. AEPS is a bank led model which allows online financial inclusion transaction at 
a  PoS  (MicroATM)  through  the  Business  Correspondent  of  a  bank  using  the  Aadhaar 
authentication.  
34. 
Aadhaar Payment Bridge System (APBS) is a centralised electronic benefit transfer 
system which will facilitate disbursement of government benefits to the bank accounts of the 
beneficiaries linked to their Aadhaar numbers. Such electronic transfers will enable efficient 
and  secure  disbursement  of  benefits  to  the  intended  beneficiaries  and  will  help  the 
Government  in  reducing  the  administrative  costs  of  the  various  schemes  as  well  as  the 
leakages in the transfers. This will also further financial inclusion by bringing the beneficiary 
households into the banking fold.  
Mobile financial services 
35. 
Around the world, the delivery of payment services through the mobile has followed 
two models viz. bank-led model as in India, South Africa and the Philippines, or non-bank led 
as  in  Kenya  and  again  in  the  Philippines.  Why  did  we  opt  for  a  bank-led  mobile  banking 
model? For several reasons. First, mobile payment systems can provide only a remittance 
facility; they cannot provide other benefits under financial inclusion such as overdrafts, credit 
and  micro-insurance.  Also,  banks  are  heavily  regulated  and  this  allows  us  to  address 
concerns  about  KYC/AML  as  also  customer  service. With  mobile  payment  companies,  we 
have neither similar regulatory authority nor comfort. Third, entry into the banking space has 
to  be  on  open,  transparent  and  contestable  criteria. We  cannot  allow  privileged  access  to 
mobile  operators  into  commercial  banking  through  the  mobile  route.  Accordingly,  we  have 
consciously pursued the bank led mobile banking model.  
36. 
As  of  June,  2012,  50  banks  were  providing  mobile  banking  services  with  an 
aggregate  customer  base  of  14.75  million.  Both  the  volume  and  value  of  mobile  banking 
transactions are witnessing a remarkable growth. As of June 2012, a year-on-year growth in 
terms of volume was 143 percent while that in terms of value was 213 percent. 
37. 
The Interbank Mobile Payment Service (IMPS) launched by the NPCI in November 
2010 is expected to give a further boost to the growth of mobile payments. The IMPS is a 
unique 24x7 inter-bank electronic funds transfer system which provides instantaneous credit 
to the beneficiaries which, I am told, is the first of its kind in the world. Currently, the IMPS is 
at  a  nascent  stage  with  limited  volume  of  transactions  and  settlement  values,  but  several 
enhancements  currently  under  way,  are  expected  to  increase  the  volume  and  value 
substantially.  
Focus on central clearing 
38. 
India  has  preferred  a  central  clearing  arrangement  for  large  value  interbank 
transactions  wherever  feasible.  The  Reserve  Bank’s tryst  with  central  clearing  started  with 
the setting up of the Clearing Corporation of India Limited (CCIL) in 2001. CCIL offers central 
counterparty clearing and settlement arrangements for transactions in government securities, 
forex  segment  and  CBLO.  Settlement  through  the  CCP  arrangement  has  reduced  the 
associated risk, cost and time in the completion of the settlement. Quite early on, the CCP 
arrangement instituted netting in forex transactions. This proved to be particularly valuable in 
the depth of the crisis when, even as liquidity lines had virtually dried up, banks in India did 
not face any liquidity and funding shortages.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Institution building 
39. 
The Reserve Bank is proud of its record as an institution builder. This has been the 
case in the area of payment and settlement systems too where we built robust institutional 
structure  as  part  of  responsible  financial  regulation.  We  promoted  the  CCIL  for  central 
clearing  and  trade  warehousing  in  large  value  payment  systems, the IDRBT for  promoting 
development  and  research  in  banking  technology  and  NPCI  to  act  as  an  umbrella 
organisation for retail payment systems. We all know, of course, that the opacity around the 
volumes, value and counterparties to the OTC contracts was one of the main causes of the 
global financial crisis. To mitigate this, in India, we prescribed, as early as 2007, that OTC 
derivative trades (IRS trades) should be reported to the data warehouse, the CCIL. India was 
possibly the first country to do this, and notably we did this even before the crisis. We have 
now permitted CCIL to act as a trade repository for CDS and foreign currency derivatives. 
The INFINET network and the Structured Financial Messaging Solution have been rolled out 
by IDRBT at the behest of the Reserve Bank. These were pioneering efforts at networking 
the industry and providing an alternate domestic solution for the transmission and exchange 
of domestic financial messages.  
Taking stock 
I have so far discussed the Reserve Bank’s role in payment and settlement systems 
40. 
in three modes – in modernizing them, as the regulator and as a facilitator. What has been 
the result of all this effort?  
41. 
The  large  value  payment  systems  have  mostly  shifted  to  the  electronic  mode, 
possibly because of the regulatory fiat. Disappointingly, retail payment systems continue to 
be paper centric and electronic systems have not penetrated deep enough. When compared 
with  other  emerging  markets  like  Brazil,  Mexico  and  Russia,  the  value  of  banknotes  and 
coins  in  circulation  in  India,  at  12  per  cent  of  GDP,  is  high.  The  number  of  non-cash 
transactions  per  person  in  India  stands  at  just  6  per  year,  which  again  is  very  low  in 
comparison with other emerging economies.  
42. 
Why is this so? Let us look at some important reasons.  
Slow pace of infrastructure building 
43. 
In  proportional  terms,  India  has  one  of  the  lowest  numbers  of  ATMs  and  PoS 
terminals – just 63 ATMs and 497 PoS per million population. Only a small fraction of the 
10 million  plus  retailers  in  India  have  card  payment  acceptance  infrastructure.  Though  the 
usage  of  mobile  banking  and  internet  banking  is  growing,  a  significant  percentage  of 
customer base is not covered.  
44. 
Expanding  the  acceptance  infrastructure  such  as  ATMs,  PoS  terminals,  micro-
ATMs, handheld devices etc. into smaller towns and villages is very much required to give an 
impetus  to  electronic  payments.  The  recent  policy  initiative  on  white  labeled  ATMs  is 
expected to go a long way in increasing the acceptance network.  
45. 
Developing and expanding payment infrastructure, as we all know, has associated 
upfront  costs.  A  question  in  this  context  is  whether  each  institution  should  set  up  its  own 
dedicated  infrastructure  or  whether  there  are  economies  of  scale  in  setting  up  shared 
infrastructure  and  competing  for  business  based  on  that  shared  infrastructure.  A  good 
example  of  sharing  infrastructure  while  competing  for  market  share  is  the  mobile  industry. 
While  infrastructure  in  the form  of towers  is  shared, the mobile  network  operators  (MNOs) 
compete  aggressively  for  protecting  and  increasing  their  market  share.  Innovation  is,  of 
course, a splendid competitive weapon, but it is sometimes best fostered by collaboration.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
Limited product innovation 
46. 
Limited  product  innovation  is  another  factor  behind  the  tepid  growth  of  retail 
payment  systems.  While  the  private  non-bank  entities  including  MNOs  have  been  in  the 
forefront of introducing pre-paid payment instruments including mobile wallets, the market is 
yet to deepen. For example, there are innovative products like paypal  Virtual Account and 
Google  Wallets  etc.  which  are  becoming  popular  in  e-commerce  because  they  are 
convenient, safe and efficient. Why has something similar not developed in India?  
47. 
The  question  in  this  context  is  whether  RBI’s  regulation  of  payment  systems  is 
acting  as  an  entry  barrier.  Are  RBI’s  regulations  governing  payment  systems  too  complex 
and demanding? Experience shows that that is not the case. Since the PSS Act came into 
operation 2007, RBI has granted authorization to 41 entities to operate payment systems. In 
framing and operating the guidelines, we have been guided by the need to develop payment 
systems in the country while safeguarding safety and security. In introducing new products, 
we have adopted a consultative approach and routinely seek feedback from the stakeholders 
before taking a regulatory decision. We are open minded and receptive to new ideas. What 
all this means is that we need to probe further to understand what is inhibiting innovation in 
the  Indian  payment  systems  –  is  it  that  the  regulatory  environment  is  still  not  conducive 
enough, or is the market not able to appreciate the future business promise?  
Lack of initiative by banks? 
48. 
A related question is: are banks taking the easy way out by being content with the 
measures  initiated  by  the  regulator,  and  following,  rather  than  leading  the  effort  towards 
electronification  of  payments?  A typical  illustration  of  this  is that  while  all  banks  are  active 
card issuers, very few are card acquirers. Is this because card issuance is a lot easier than 
enrolling  merchants  and  putting  in  place  the  PoS  infrastructure?  How  should  RBI,  as  the 
regulator, respond to this? Should we mandate that for a certain number of cards issued, the 
issuing bank should have a prescribed proportion of PoS terminals as well? If the cost of a 
PoS  terminal  is  an  impediment,  should  the  banks  not  think  of  alternatives?  There  are 
alternatives such as a mobile PoS which could be cheaper to deploy and easier to service.  
Conclusion 
49. 
Let me now conclude. I started with the broader debate on financial innovation and 
regulation, on how the crisis has renewed that debate, and how the response to that debate 
is crystallizing in the form of greater sensitivity to responsibility on the part of both innovators 
and regulators. I then moved on to the narrow area of payment and settlement systems and 
spoke  on  the  role  played  by  RBI  in  modernizing  payment  systems  and  in  facilitating 
innovation. I spoke about how we try to be a responsible regulator, encouraging innovation, 
but  at  the  same  time  ensuring  that  innovations  add  real  value  and  do  not  compromise 
financial stability or customer interest.  
50. 
Payment  and  settlement  systems  is  a  fast  growing  area,  witnessing  rapid 
innovations, spurred by market forces as well as technology. We need to bring in the best 
practices and products of the world to India but we should adapt them to our environment 
and  conditions.  In  particular,  we  should  focus  on  reducing  costs  and  improving  “literacy” 
about payment products and systems. And as we shift from a largely cash based economy to 
a less cash based economy, we need to grapple with the monetary policy implications of this 
transition.  
51. 
As a professional, forward looking institution, the Reserve Bank has put out in the 
public  domain  a  vision  document  on  the  road  map  for  the  evolution  of  payment  and 
settlement  systems  in  India  for  the  period  2012–15.  The  document  reinforces  the 
commitment  of  the  Reserve  Bank  to  continue  to  ensure  that  all  payment  and  settlement 
systems  in  the  country  are  safe,  efficient,  interoperable,  authorised  and  accessible,  while 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
also furthering financial inclusion and compliance with international standards. The goal is to 
proactively shift from cash to electronic payment systems.  
52. 
I  have  spoken  today  about  RBI  as  a  responsible  regulator  in  the  narrow  area  of 
payment and settlement systems. You all know that the Reserve Bank’s regulatory mandate 
is  wide,  extending  to  banks,  non-banks  and  significant  segments  of  the  financial  markets. 
This consciousness about responsibility straddles our entire regulatory mandate.  
53. 
The financial sector is forever in a flux, and the challenge for regulators is to keep 
pace with those rapid changes. Regulators should be knowledgeable, and this means they 
should  realize  that  they  are  always  on  a  learning  curve.  Regulators  should  encourage 
innovators to push the envelope, but should always ensure that the envelope remains sturdy 
and strong.  
Glossary of acronyms 
AEPS 
APBS 
AML 
ATM  
CBLO 
CCIL  
CCP  
CDS 
CTS  
ECS  
EFT 
EMV 
GDP 
IDRBT  
IMPS  
INFINET 
IRS 
KYC  
MDR 
MICR  
MNO  
NECS  
NEFT  
NPCI  
OTC  
PIN 
PoS  
Aadhaar Enabled Payment System 
Aadhaar Payment Bridge System 
Anti Money Laundering 
Automated Teller Machine  
Collaterlised Borrowing and Lending Obligation 
Clearing Corporation of India Ltd.  
Central Counterparty  
Credit Default Swap 
Cheque Truncation System  
Electronic Clearing Services  
Electronic Funds Transfer 
Europay-MasterCard-VISA 
Gross Domestic Product 
Institute for Development and Research in Banking Technology  
Interbank Mobile Payment System  
Indian Financial Network 
Interest Rate Swaps 
Know Your Customer  
Merchant Discount Rate 
Magnetic Ink Character Recognition  
Mobile Network Operator 
National Electronic Clearing Services  
National Electronic Funds Transfer System  
National Payments Corporation of India Ltd.  
Over the Counter  
Personal Identification Number 
Point of Sale  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
Payment and Settlement Systems Act 
Real Time Gross Settlement System  
Unique Identification 
Unique Identification Authority of India 
White Label ATM 
PSS Act 
RTGS  
UID 
UIDAI 
WLA 
 
 
 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
