H R Khan: Understanding psychology for responsible financial 
behaviour 
Inaugural address by Shri H R Khan, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
Interdisciplinary  Seminar  on  Psychonomics  –  Understanding  the  Psychology  of  Financial 
Behavior organised by Maharshi Dayanand College of Arts, Science & Commerce, Mumbai, 
6 February 2012. 
 The speaker acknowledges the contribution of Shri. Anand Shankar, Shri Sittikantha Pattanaik and Shri. Surajit 
Bose in preparation of the address. 
1. 
I thank the organizers of the Golden Jubilee celebrations of the Maharshi Dayanand 
College  of  Arts,  Science  &  Commerce,  Mumbai  for  inviting  me  to  deliver  the 
inaugural  address  at  this  important  seminar.  The  Interdisciplinary  Seminar  on 
Psychonomics: Understanding the Psychology behind Financial Behaviour is indeed 
a very topical subject and especially when the world is realizing the significance of 
the import of human psychology in the economic behaviour of the markets. It is not 
often that one gets an opportunity to share thoughts with an enthusiastic group of 
students and faculty with diverse educational backgrounds and put forth views on 
psychology  in  order  to  explain  economics.  Today,  particularly  in  the  context  of 
recent  financial  crisis,  it  is  well-accepted  that  psychology  does  influence  many 
economic decisions which defy pure economic theories.  
As we all know, during the classical period, economics had an established link with 
psychology. For example, Adam Smith, who is considered as father of economics, in 
his work on The Theory of Moral Sentiments, had described psychological principles 
of  individual  behaviour.  Jeremy  Bentham,  founding  father  of  modern  utilitarism 
ideas,  wrote  extensively  on 
the  psychological  aspects  of  utility.  Overtime, 
economists,  however,  began  to  distance  themselves  from  psychology  as  they 
sought  to  reshape  the  discipline  as  a  natural  science.  By  mid-20th  century, 
psychology  lost  its  linkages  with  economics.  In  the  1950s,  Herbert  Simons 
challenged some of the traits of standard economic model of human behaviour, i.e., 
unbounded  rationality,  unbounded  will-power  and  unbounded  selfishness.  He 
questioned the idea that people have unlimited information processing capabilities. 
Rather he propounded the idea of “bounded rationality” to suggest a more realistic 
conception of problem solving ability of human beings. It was also suggested that 
human beings struggle to analyse problems objectively as they view them through a 
“frame”  of  personal  experience  often  shaped  by  social  and  cultural  bias.  In  mid 
1960s,  Ward  Edwards,  Amos  Tversky  and  Daniel  Kahneman  began  to  compare 
their  cognitive  models  of  decision  making  under  risk  and  uncertainty  to  economic 
models of rational behaviour and this led to resurgence of psychology in economics. 
The  recent  global  financial  crisis  caused  severe  damages  to  many  economies 
across the globe. Governments and Central Banks had to step in to bailout many 
financial  institutions  to  protect  the  systemic  stability.  Greed  and  fear  played  a  big 
role  in  the  way  markets  behaved  much  against  the  lines  predicted  by  the 
mathematical  models.  The  behavioural  economics  do  succeed  in  explaining  the 
recent market distortions driven by these two human traits. The greed for huge gains 
drove  financial  engineers  to  innovate  and  sell  complex  financial  products  to 
unsophisticated investors. As the crisis unfolded stock market reacted sharply and 
stopped  rallying.  Fear  then  took  over  and  accentuated  the  sell-off  instead  of 
encouraging investments at lower prices. I do not intend to dwell on these areas in 
detail but what I intend to highlight during my brief presentation is to focus on some 
of the facets of interconnectedness of psychology with economics and how human 
2. 
3. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
behaviour  and  emotions  impact  economic  decisions.  I  would  also  attempt  to  put 
forth  some  of  the  findings  of  behavioral  finance  talking  along  the  contours  of 
mainstream and behavioural economics. 
Sociology and psychology underpin economics 
4. 
As  we  know,  in  the  field  of  behavioural  economics,  insights  are  drawn  from 
psychology and sociology to arrive at explanations for economic phenomena. The 
main  departure  of  behavioral  economics  from  its  mainstream  counterpart  is  that 
behavioral economics questions the basic tenets of mainstream economics, i.e., the 
assumption  of  fully  rational  agents  with  purely  self-centered  preferences.  Once 
these assumptions are relaxed, we are able to answer a lot many questions that do 
not  have  clear  cut  answers  in  mainstream  economics.  Behavioral  economics  is  a 
truly  fascinating  field  and  it  has  been  increasingly  incorporated  within  the 
mainstream framework.  
Shifts in behaviour of economic agents 
5. 
A  large  part  of  the  thinking  in  finance  during  the  1970s  was  dominated  by  the 
efficient market hypothesis which stated that markets are always right, decisions of 
millions of rational investors make the markets the best judge of value of financial 
products and that price of financial products contains the best possible information 
about the fundamentals. In this connection, one can refer to Justin Fox, who, in his 
book  titled  The  Myth  of  the  Rational  Market:  A  History  of  Risk,  Reward,  and 
Delusion  on  Wall  Street  has  eloquently  traced  the  origins  of  the  irrationality  of 
efficient market hypothesis and has explained the events leading to the crumbling of 
the  myth  of  efficient  markets.  As  we  know,  with  passage  of  time,  anomalies  in 
financial markets and in the behavior economic agents began to crop up. With this 
there was a growing disquiet over models being used to capture real world events. 
This gave rise to the search for newer paradigms of thinking so as to explain the 
behavior  of  economic  agents  which  differed  from  what  was  predicted  by  standard 
economic  or  finance  theory.  This  alternative  paradigm  explores  the  psychological 
models of decision making in contrast to mathematical models and the irrationality of 
the markets. The new ideas focus on how investors over-react or under-react and 
end up making irrational decisions based on imperfect data. One such anomaly was 
the increased and persistent volatility in the stock markets in the developed world. 
Much  of  this  volatility  was  unaccounted  for.  Some  observers  have,  hence, 
concluded  that  prices  do  not  necessarily  change  due  to  changes  in  fundamentals 
but due to “animal spirits” and mass psychology as well.  
Understanding speculative build up 
Price-price feedback loop 
6. 
Another  anomaly  that  caught  the  attention  of  academics  was  the  bouts  of 
speculative increase in price of stocks. Speculative build-up of prices could lead to 
expectation  of  further  increase  in  prices  and  this  in  turn  may  cause  further  price 
increase  which  is  a  departure  from  standard  theory.  Of  course,  high  prices  not 
supported by fundamentals cannot stay high forever. Once the euphoria dies down, 
prices fall. This phenomenon has come to be called the price-price feedback loop.  
These feedback loops have long existed and were, for example, experienced during 
the Tulip mania in Holland during the 1600s, the stock market boom in the early part 
of 2000s and the housing bubble in the US which mainly contributed to the recent 
BIS central bankers’ speeches
7. 
2 
 global financial crisis. A negative feedback loop, i.e., one causing prices to fall could 
also operate in a similar manner. Professor Robert Shiller points out that even with 
the feedback loop working it is difficult to find discussions in standard text books. It 
is possible that people may match increase in price of stocks with previous events 
leading to a dynamic feedback loop even though fundamentals may not warrant any 
significant change in prices.  
Biased self-attribution 
8. 
Feedback  loops  can  be  explained  with  yet  another  principle  of  psychology  called 
“biased self-attribution”. Individuals may attribute, often misplaced, good happenings 
to their own ability while bad happenings are passed off as outcomes of bad luck or 
sabotage. In traditional finance theory, it is possible to argue that large number of 
sophisticated  investors  offset  the  effects  of  behavior  of  the  non-sophisticated 
investors,  thereby  making  markets  efficient.  For  instance,  when  irrational  optimist 
investors  buy  stocks  the  sophisticated  investor  sells  stocks  and  vice  versa. 
However, this behavior of sophisticated investors need not always lead to efficient 
markets. It is possible that sophisticated investors increase the effects of the actions 
of irrational investors, for instance, by buying stock ahead of irrational investors in 
anticipation of price increases. This leads to prices of stock being away from their 
fundamental value, i.e., mispricing. 
Arbitrage of asymmetric information 
9. 
10. 
It  is  seen  that  mispricing  happens  in  securities  for  which  information  is  sparse  or 
comes too slowly. Stocks may be mispriced for long periods of time due to a number 
of  reasons  and  investors  trade  on  information  which  they  believe  is  superior  to 
information available with anyone else. These could be forecasts or stock specific 
news.  However,  it  is  possible  that  sometimes  even  the  sophisticated  investors 
interpret the information incorrectly. It is also possible that overconfident investors 
are  able  to  take  advantage  of  liquidity  traders  before  rational  investors,  thereby 
earning  higher  returns  than  rational  investors.  Mispricing  can  also  persist  for  long 
periods  of  time  due  to  other  happenings.  For  instance,  if  an  investor  identifies  a 
return pattern statistically, it is difficult for him to know whether other investors have 
identified  and  acted  upon  that  pattern  or  not.  Therefore,  uncertainty  can  lead  the 
prices to be away from the true value for long periods of time. In a related point, it is 
also  possible  to  see  why  there  may  be  limits  to  arbitrage  due  to  risks  and  costs 
associated with exploiting the arbitrage opportunity.  
Let us think of a situation in which irrational investors are bearish on a certain stock. 
This will cause the price of that stock to fall. Standard theory will have us believe 
that rational investors will sense an opportunity and buy the stock at the lower price 
shorting a similar stock to hedge the position. Thus, buying of the stock will take the 
price back to its fundamental value. This exposition of the dynamics of price change 
is based on the assumption that every mispricing creates an immediate opportunity 
to make riskless profits. This may, however, not be the case. There may be risks 
and  costs  that  dissuade  taking  advantage  of  arbitrage  opportunities.  Illustratively, 
even when the stock price is down due to unwarranted pessimism, rational investors 
may still face more downside risks to price due to adverse news about the company. 
Risks  to  stock  prices  also  arise  due  to  the  presence  of  noise  traders  who  could 
compel rational traders to liquidate their positions too quickly. In addition, there are 
transaction  costs  involved  in  the  process  of  taking  advantage  of  arbitrage 
opportunities. These costs could be prohibitively high sometimes and, hence, could 
deter arbitrage.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Impact of level of knowledge on the decision making process 
11. 
In the context of how level of knowledge influences the decision making process, let 
us  examine  the  question  whether  we  always  include  all  factors  affecting  the 
happening of an event into account before making a decision. Standard economic 
theory  predicts  that  all  factors  are  considered  and  that  decision  is  optimal.  In 
practice,  however,  it  appears  that  we  do  not.  Evidence  from  psychology  suggests 
that  due  to  the  lack  of  time  and  cognitive  resources,  the  brain  develops  rules  of 
thumb to analyze the problems, i.e., people depend on heuristics. This works well 
when applied in appropriate settings; however, applying them in scenarios different 
from  what  was  initially  intended  creates  biases.  One  assumption  of  mainstream 
economics  is  that  errors  are  independent  across  individuals  in  the  sense  that  the 
errors of one individual are not affected by or affect the errors of another individual. 
In the modern world, humans are faced with many decisions at the same time and 
with cognitive power being limited, heuristics are used to decide. There is obviously 
no  guarantee  that  these  decisions  will  be  optimal  even  though  one  could  spend 
more energy to make the optimal decision. 
The halo effect 
12. 
Very often in our lives we tend to appreciate one trait of another person so much 
that we overlook the other, sometimes, undesirable traits. This is because of what 
has  come  to  be  called  the  “halo  effect”.  This  effect  can  be  used  to  analyze  the 
mispricing of stocks. Admittedly, in markets that are efficient, stocks could be good 
in terms of growth prospects; however, this trait of the stock says nothing about the 
future risk adjusted returns. Similarly, at times investors are unduly influenced by the 
halo effect of “eminent” people or people with “star value” inducted into the boards of 
companies. Thus, if this is the case, it is possible that stocks of certain companies 
that are growing could be consistently mispriced.  
The mental accounts 
13. 
Let  me  now  briefly  turn  to  the  concept  of  mental  accounting.  It  is  a  process  of 
coding, categorizing and evaluating economic outcomes. For instance, people are 
known to make notional mental accounts, i.e., accounts for education of children or 
savings, etc. Even within investment accounts, there is a safe account designed to 
provide for the “rainy days” and one account that is typically the risk taking account 
designed  to  make  money  grow  faster.  However,  theoretically,  speaking  money 
should be fungible across accounts because money in one account is as good as 
money  in  some  other  account.  In  practice,  however,  money  is  not  found  to  be 
fungible  across  accounts.  For  instance,  fall  in  value  of  investment  from  the  safe 
account  causes  more  pain  than  an  equivalent fall  in  value  in  the  other  risk  taking 
accounts. Another interesting example popularly quoted is that due to risk aversion 
trait, people tend to hold on to loss making stocks and sell profit making stocks. In 
effect, people try to reduce loss and hence end up keeping loss making stocks for 
longer. 
Bracketing 
14. 
Another issue of mental accounting is the concept of broad and narrow bracketing. 
Many of us here may have noticed the getting a taxi on a rainy day is particularly 
difficult. One would think that there would be more people willing to travel by taxis on 
a  rainy  day  than  on  a  non-rainy  day,  thereby  giving  taxi  drivers  incentive  to  work 
more and, hence, earn more. However, it is possible that taxi drivers focus on the 
income from a day, i.e., the concept of narrow bracketing but not on the income over 
a  longer  period  of  time,  i.e.,  the  concept  of  broad  bracketing.  On  rainy  days,  the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
16. 
Emotions and expectations in economic decision making 
15. 
income for the narrow bracketing is achieved more easily as the targeted earnings 
are achieved for the day early. Hence, many taxi drives take rest earlier than usual, 
thereby  aggravating  the  problem  of  finding  taxis  on  rainy  days  and  also  depriving 
them of higher earnings on such days.  
for  economic  policy.  Papers  presented  at 
Most  theories  in  economics  focus  on  debates  without  the  involvement  of  any 
emotions. I am sure you will agree with me that many of the decisions that we take 
are  based  on  or  influenced  by  our  emotions.  Besides,  there  is  also  evidence  to 
prove that people are influenced by their current tastes and habits when predicting 
futures  tastes.  Individuals  in  the  framework  of  mainstream  economics  are  said  to 
know the entire time path of the costs and benefits of their actions. In the event that 
when  they  do  something  that  may  not  be  completely  rational,  say  addiction  to 
alcohol,  they  are  treated  as  taking  rational  decisions.  We  know  one  reason  why 
people below poverty line never move up the ladder is that often they spend large 
portion of their meagre incomes on wasteful habits of consuming alcohol/tobacco or 
spending  on  social  events  although  they  know  such  habits  would  only  aggravate 
their  current  economic  problems.  Behavioural  economics  explains  why  such 
addictions happen. It is thus possible that people underestimate the effect of current 
consumption  on  future  consumption  and  may  under  appreciate  the  formation  of  a 
habit. 
Behavioral economics also throws useful insights for policy makers. Researchers at 
the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Boston  are  engaged  in  studying  the  implications  of 
behavioral  economics 
the  2007 
conference  on  behavioral  economics  at  the  Boston  Fed  shed  light  on  the  role  of 
emotions  and  the  idea  of  fairness  on  economic  decisions.  Evidence  on  how 
emotions  like  anger  and  regret  affect  the  price  setting  decision  of  firms  and  the 
purchasing decisions of firms. The idea of fairness also has implications for labour 
market outcomes. Evidence also suggested that it was difficult for US consumers to 
formulate and executive saving plans. This obviously has immense implications for 
policy  makers  and  policy  making.  Many  commentators  were  of  the  opinion  that 
complex  sub-prime  assets  were  sold  to  unsophisticated  borrowers  who  did  not 
understand the contracts fully. Findings presented at the conference also suggested 
that less than fully rational investors could affect housing prices. If prices are always 
expected to continue their past trend among the irrational investors then house price 
bubbles  were  more  likely  to  form  and  macroeconomic  stabilization  could  be  more 
difficult.  This  in  fact  actually  happened  in  the  US.  Insights  were  given  on  how 
behavioral  economics  could  help  central  banks  communicate  economic  policies. 
Another  important  aspect  from  the  point  of  view  of  central  banks  is  that 
expectations,  not  rational  but  adaptive,  play  an  important  role  in  influencing  the 
actual inflation path. For instance, if workers believe that inflation will be higher in 
the future period then they may demand higher wages which could in turn feed into 
the  headline  inflation  through  wage  push  effect.  This  has  been  evident  in  India  in 
recent years as not only inflation expectations have been high in double digits, even 
the extent of increases in wages in both rural and urban areas has been higher than 
the actual inflation levels. Generally, in a weak growth environment or a condition of 
moderating  demand,  wage  push  spiral  may  not  be  sustained  for  long.  Anti-
inflationary  monetary  policy,  that  remains  committed  to  containment  of  inflation  till 
the impact of moderating demand on inflation and wage demand becomes visible, 
could work in containing inflation expectations. For anchoring inflation expectations, 
therefore,  balancing  the  growth-inflation  mix,  timing  of  policy  actions,  and  clear 
communication from central bank on its intent and commitment to inflation becomes 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
critical.  Beyond  this  what  further  needs  to  be  done  to  anchor  the  inflation 
expectations could be an interesting subject for further exploration. 
Concluding thoughts 
17. 
18. 
19. 
the  products 
in  mis-selling 
In  the  mainstream  framework,  all  of  us  would  be  individuals  maximizing  utility  to 
one’s self irrespective of the utility of others around us. We do, however, care about 
the welfare and consumption of people around us, i.e., our family and friends. Even 
when  we  move  away  from  the  close  circle  of  family  and  friends,  we  do  not 
necessarily always act in self centered ways.  
In contrast, as was evident during the recent crisis in the financial markets, finance 
and  economics  were  being  practised  by  set  of  people  who  had  a  totally  different 
mind-set, often conditioned for self-interest and greed. They were more mechanical 
in nature, probably due to the fact they specialized in science and technology and 
with less or no inputs from humanities during their course of education. They had 
thus  no  compunction 
to  unsophisticated 
investors/borrowers,  thereby  sowing  seeds  of  disaster  for  the  households  and  the 
economy. This, however, does not absolve them of the unethical behaviour leading 
to selfish gains at the cost of deeper structural damages to the system and harmful 
social  consequences  arising  out  of  irresponsible  financial  behaviour  as  we  have 
seen in the recent financial crisis. Hence, there could be a case for conditioning of 
all those who join finance professions by way of value based education and socially 
relevant experiences during their college days. 
To sum up, all of us could use the findings of behavioral economics in our daily lives 
as well as in policy making. The important lesson of life is that we should not evolve 
into insensitive individuals who care only for short term monetary gains by putting at 
stake ethics and moral values, thereby disrupting the financial system and causing 
huge  social  and  economic  damages.  Hence,  educational  institutions  like  yours 
should play an important role in creating human capabilities which are conditioned 
by  individual  morality  and  social  ethics  aimed  at  responsible  financial  behaviour. 
With this I intend to conclude and hope that this important seminar will highlight and 
throw up interesting ideas for policy makers and practioners.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
