Yandraduth Googoolye: Small and medium-sized enterprises in 
Mauritius 
Address by Mr Yandraduth Googoolye, First Deputy Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, on 
the  occasion  of  the  signing  of  an  agreement  for  a  Line  of  Credit  to  the  Mauritius  Leasing 
Company  Limited  by 
financing,  Caudan, 
19 December 2011. 
Investment  Bank 
the  European 
for  SME 
 Ladies and Gentlemen  
It is a great honour for me to be among you for this memorable event and I welcome this 
opportunity to address this forum on a subject that has been much talked about lately, both 
at the national and international level.  
SMEs  have  played  a  key  role  in  providing  the  necessary  impetus  to  the  advancement  of 
some of the world’s economies like the United States, China, Japan, Taiwan, Korea, Hong 
Kong as well as many countries in Europe. Ninety-nine per cent of all European businesses 
are in fact SMEs. They provide 2 out of 3 of the private sector jobs and contribute to more 
than  half  of  the  total  value  added  created  by  businesses  in  the  European  Union.  In  some 
countries, such as the UK, Governments have entered into an agreement with major banks 
to determine how much they will lend to SMEs.  
In  South  Africa,  SMEs  are  said  to  contribute  40%  of  GDP  and  40%  of  employment 
opportunities. There are currently over 100 million SMEs in Africa and this figure is deemed 
to  grow  even  more.  India  and  countries  in  South  America  have  been  concentrating  their 
efforts in developing the SME sector. In developing countries, SMEs serve as a useful bridge 
between the informal economy of family enterprises and the formalised corporate sector. As 
such, most policymakers deem the health of the SME sector to be highly important for an 
economy Mauritius is not an exception to this. I believe that SMEs are critical for our future 
economic  prosperity  given  that  it  has  been  placed  on  the  national  agenda  by  the 
Government.  Indeed,  the  Government  of  Mauritius  has  endeavoured  to  bolster  the 
SME sector  by  providing  various  incentives,  including  industrial  space  and  special  grants 
amongst  other  measures.  Some  of  the  former  SMEs  are  now  big  players  in  the  Mauritian 
corporate landscape.  
A  survey  conducted  by  Statistics  Mauritius  in  2007  revealed  that  there  were  around 
92,000 SMEs which provided employment to some 209,000 individuals. These numbers are 
estimated to have reached 94,000 and 250,000, respectively, in 2010. SME jobs represent 
around  46%  of  total  employment  in  the  economy  and  are  mainly  concentrated  in  the 
“Wholesale  and  Retail  Trade”.  SMEs’  contribution  to  Gross  Domestic  Product  amounts  to 
nearly  37%  or  Rs120  billion.  Estimates  based  on  latest  figures  suggest  that  SME  exports 
might represent around 20 to 25% of total exports.  
With a view to further support the sector, the Honourable Vice-Prime Minister and Minister of 
Finance and Economic Development had announced in the Budget Speech 2012, that the 
banking sector would extend credit facilities to SMEs for an amount of Rs3 billion over the 
next three years at 3 percentage points above the prevailing Key Repo Rate.  
Credit facilities granted to the SMEs at end-September 2011 amounted to about Rs16 billion. 
Following  the  announcement  in  the  Budget  Speech  2012,  fourteen  banks  have  been 
earmarked to grant credit facilities to the SMEs effective 1 December 2011. From that date 
up to 14 December, 59 applications for facilities by way of loans and overdrafts have been 
received for an aggregate amount of Rs99 million. The number of applications received for 
loans was equal to that of overdrafts. However, the amount applied for loan facilities doubled 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
to  promote 
the  scheme  by 
that  of  overdrafts.  Out  of  the  total  applications  received  for  Rs99  million,  an  amount  of 
Rs17 million has been sanctioned.  
Since  the  announcement  of  the  budgetary  measure,  banks  have  promptly  taken  various 
steps 
inter  alia  setting  up  SME  desks,  assigning  a 
team/department to promulgate the scheme, informing SME customers of the various SME 
products through letters, communiques, website and advertisement, and personally visiting 
SME customers to promote key products.  
Financing the productive capacity of the economy is critical to long-term economic success. 
While large businesses have easier access to finance including capital markets, SMEs are 
heavily  dependent  on  the  banking  system.  Today,  it  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  note  that 
Non-Bank Deposit Taking Institutions are also participating in the development of the SME 
sector in Mauritius. I value this initiative of the Mauritius Leasing Company Limited to support 
the sector through a line of credit of EUR5 million funded by the European Investment Bank 
(EIB) with the aim of providing leasing facilities to SMEs.  
The EIB, the European Union’s long-term lending institution, has been a long-time strategic 
partner in the development of the Mauritian economy. Since 1975, it has provided more than 
EUR300 million for the financing projects in the country. We welcome the support of the EIB 
once  more  and  appreciate  that  it  has  recognised  the  importance  of  SMEs  and  their 
contribution  to  the  Mauritian  economy  as  has  been  rightly  pointed  out  by  the  EIB  Vice 
President,  Mr  Sakellaris,  responsible  for  Africa,  Caribbean  and  Pacific  lending  operations: 
“The European Investment Bank recognises the essential economic role played by small and 
medium sized companies. We are pleased to be able to continue to facilitate private sector 
investment in Mauritius through a valuable relationship with the Mauritius Leasing Company 
Limited.”1 
The Mauritius Leasing Company Limited was the first leasing company to be established in 
1987. Since then, it has developed into an innovative and competitive company leading in 
various  fields.  Indeed,  it  was  the  first  leasing  company  to  be  granted  a  deposit  taking 
business licence by the Bank of Mauritius in September 1995, the first leasing company to 
issue debenture stocks and the first leasing company to be listed on the Stock Exchange of 
Mauritius. With total assets of over Rs3 billion and market share of 25% of the leasing sector, 
the company has recently embarked on Islamic Financing being the first leasing company to 
offer Ijara Financing. Today, another milestone has been achieved with the signing of the line 
of credit of EUR5 million with the EIB.  
I have no doubt that this agreement will give an impetus to the SME sector in Mauritius and 
will  encourage  an  entrepreneurship  culture  that  will  drive  the  future  of  our  economy. 
However, it is worth pointing out that financing SMEs is different as market information on 
family  and  smaller  businesses  is  not  as  robust  and  efficient  as  it  is  for  larger  businesses. 
Credit  providers  must  have  effective  risk  management  practices  in  place  together  with  an 
understanding of the nature of business of the small entrepreneur to be able to service the 
sector in an effective manner. A deep customer relationship and strong knowledge of small 
businesses are fundamental for the success of the SME sector.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  let  me  end  by  quoting  the  words  of  the  Honourable  Vice-Prime 
Minister and Minister of Finance and Economic Development in his Budget Speech 2012: “In 
times of crisis SMEs are the most vulnerable. And in a world of rising competition they have 
to  struggle  to  stay  relevant  and  profitable.  Yet  when  they  do  succeed,  they  can  make  an 
irreplaceable contribution to the economy”.  
Thank you. 
                                                 
1   Joint Communiqué issued by the Mauritius Leasing Company Limited and the European Investment Bank on 
19 December 2011. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
