Jens Weidmann: The financial assistance can only buy time but does not 
address the root causes of the crisis  
Interview with Dr Jens Weidmann, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, in Corriere della 
Sera  (IT),  Público  (PT),  Kathimerini  (EL),  El  País  (ES),  conducted  by  Ms  Marika  de  Feo, 
Ms Ana Rita Faria, Messrs Tom Ellis and Claudi Pérez and published on 15 June 2012. 
The interview was conducted in English. 
 Do you think 100 billion is enough to rescue Spain, given the path of the recession 
and the link between banks and sovereign bonds? 
I generally don’t speculate about numbers. Regarding the assessment of financing needs, I 
am  relying  on  the  IMF  and  the  external  evaluators.  For  what  we  know  now,  the  amount 
discussed  seems  to  contain  a  sufficient  safety  margin.  The  decision  by  the  Spanish 
government  is  an  important  one  because  it  reduces  uncertainty  about  the  solvency  of 
Spanish banks; it thereby contributes to the stabilisation of financial markets. I also welcome 
the  fact  that  the  Spanish  government  no  longer  hopes  for  financial  support  that  comes 
without conditionality. Conditionality should be a core element of any financial aid. 
In the last two years Spain has applied reforms in labour market, pensions, financial 
system, cuts in the expenditure and tax increases. What’s next? What are the reforms 
you have in mind? 
The key message is that the banking system is a mirror image of the economy. It reflects the 
situation  of  public  finances  through  the  link  with  sovereign  bonds.  It  also  reflects  the 
competitiveness of the economy and imbalances that have built up in the past, such as the 
bubble in the real estate sector. An encompassing solution comprises reforms and solutions 
in various areas. Particular challenges are transparency and control of budget execution in 
regions,  and  addressing  the  segmentation  of  the  labour  market.  Together  with  the  labour 
market reforms already announced, this could give new hope to unemployed youth. 
But the Spanish Government is talking about exactly the opposite: that there is only 
conditionality with banks. What will be the real conditionality of the rescue for Spain? 
Because  of  the  interconnectedness  of  the  different  policy  areas,  I  think  that  conditionality 
should  be  broad.  The  impression  that  this  is  a  rescue  with  no  conditionality  outside  the 
financial system is already eroding the commitment to the terms of the existing programmes. 
Is there the risk that other countries, like Ireland or Portugal, could ask for the same 
conditions and adjustments? 
That’s  exactly  the  key  problem.  There  is  a  discussion  about  relaxing  the  conditionality 
emerging in Ireland and Portugal, and also in Greece this debate is gaining new traction. But 
foot-dragging on addressing the structural problems will perpetuate the crisis, and the market 
reaction reflects this concern. 
Why not change those principles and make a softer adjustment? 
Once more, the financial assistance can only buy time but does not address the root causes 
of the crisis. It is like a painkiller. If you do not ensure that you cure the illness you will be 
worse off once the effect wears off. I would also doubt that public support for the necessary 
reforms increases if they are spread even more over time, not to mention public support in 
the countries guaranteeing the rescue mechanism. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
In Greece, there’s a lot of debate on the need to renegotiate parts of the program. Is 
there space to make some changes? 
The  key  point  is  that  there  is  an  agreement  that  all  involved  parties  including  the  Greek 
government have signed. If the agreements were now seen as being open to renegotiation, 
then for instance the Portuguese prime minister would have difficulties facing his parliament 
and  explaining  that  he  is  to  implement  reforms.  I  think  that  would  be  a  very  dangerous 
strategy. It would harm those countries that are implementing reforms very quietly. 
Greece  is  usually  described  as  a  special  case.  Could  that  be  so  in  this  case,  in  a 
positive sense, allowing Greece to adjust the program? 
Greece is already receiving special treatment. Adjustment will be spread over a much longer 
time.  Greece  benefitted  from  an  exceptional  debt  relief.  You  see,  Greece  got  much  more 
support  than  any  other  country.  Relaxing  this  already  softened  framework  even  further 
cannot be an option. 
One of the leaders of the two parties that could win says that the Greek government 
would request a total change of the program. What response would a unilateral move 
from Greece create? 
Who will be elected in Greece is a democratic decision that we all have to accept. But also 
the newly elected Greek government is bound by existing agreements. If it unilaterally opted 
out of the programme, it would mean that in my view the basis for more financial help will no 
longer  be  given.  Greece  would  have  taken  its  decision  but  would  also  have  to  bear  the 
consequences. We will all be affected, but my assessment is that Greece will be worse off 
than everybody else. 
Have you prepared any contingency plans for a Greek exit? 
I  don’t  talk  about  contingency  plans.  I  will  just  reiterate  what  I  have  already  said.  The 
repercussions  of  such  a  decision  in  Greece  would  certainly  be  worse  for  Greece  than  for 
everybody  else.  The  result  of  potential  contagion  effects  cannot  be  that  one  accepts 
whatever a government has unilaterally decided. 
Would a decision from a new Greek government not to fulfil all the agreements mean 
an exit of Greece from the Eurozone? 
It certainly has the potential to escalate to such a situation. 
So, if they don’t fulfil the agreement, this leads to an exit? 
Not fulfilling the agreement leads to the end of funding. And this may have repercussions on 
their chances of remaining in the euro. 
Looking back, do you feel that the introduction of the euro in Greece was a mistake? 
You certainly remember the very controversial debate at that time, with some scepticism in 
Germany. But it was definitely a mistake that Greece did not make wise use of the benefits of 
our common currency. The progress observed especially in public finances in the run-up to 
EMU proved treacherous. 
Some  say  that  Greece  can  go  bankrupt,  but  stay  in  the  euro.  How  does  the 
Bundesbank view such a scenario ? 
The fact of the matter is only Greece can decide on leaving the euro, despite this not being 
foreseen in the EU treaty. As I said before, it will be very difficult for an insolvent country that 
is cut off from financial support to remain in the EMU. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
But if Greece leaves the euro, what happens to Portugal and the whole euro area? Isn’t 
that a bigger risk than continuing to finance Greece without conditionality and having 
the risk of the Portuguese government asking for the same? 
I think we agree that both risks are substantial. Of course, I don’t want to speculate about 
any country leaving the Eurozone; we haven’t seen this yet and this would be a very grave 
event.  And  that’s  why  I’m  counting  on  the  Greek  government  to  stick  to  its  agreements. 
That’s my preference. 
And which are the other risks? 
One major risk is that the stability foundation of the monetary union, that we have agreed on 
and  enshrined  in  the  articles  of  the  EU  treaty,  will  erode  further.  This  has  the  potential  to 
undermine the confidence in the solidity of the monetary union. And it would put monetary 
policy under pressure even more to inflate away the problems. Already now several voices 
are asking the ECB to break its rules and bail out with no conditionality. 
Does the European Union have enough firewalls in place to deal with a Greek exit? 
I  don’t  want  to  speculate  about  a  Greek  exit.  The  firewalls  we  have  been  building  and 
strengthening are there to prevent contagion effects. And I will not be a party to the endless 
debate  on  their  size.  In  any  case,  we  must  not  allow  ourselves  to  be  blackmailed  by  a 
country because of the contagion effects. 
Is there a good scenario and a bad scenario for Greece? 
Again,  my  preferred  scenario  is  that  the  Greek  government  recognises  the  importance  of 
fulfilling its obligations and implements what has been decided. It is the goals which should 
be  non-negotiable,  not  the  means  by  which  you  achieve  them.  If  Greece,  say,  found  an 
alternative way to provide a certain amount of revenues, other than the one that has been 
agreed, there would certainly be room for flexibility. 
Is a one year extension of the program acceptable? 
That’s a political decision that would have detrimental consequences for the Union at large. 
Regarding  Portugal, it seems  to  have the image  of the  good  student  in  the  bailouts 
program,  but  it’s  also  an  hostage  from  what  happens  in  Greece  and  Spain.  What 
message would you leave to the Portuguese government? 
The  key  message  from  Portugal  and  Ireland  is  that  adjustment  programmes  work.  The 
reforms  that  have  been  implemented  there  have  contributed  to  reducing  unit  labour  costs 
and  stopped  the  decline  in  competitiveness.  We  also  see  the  first  benefits  of  this  in  the 
current account deficit. And according to our forecasts, growth should pick up again in these 
countries. No serious forecast sees a downward spiral that doesn’t end anywhere. 
There are already talks about a second bailout to Portugal, because the country may 
not be able to return to markets next year. How do you regard this? 
We are dealing with a crisis of confidence, and lost confidence cannot be regained overnight. 
But the important message is that Portugal is on the right track. 
But isn’t the whole of the euro at stake?  
Confidence has also been lost in the functioning of monetary union as a whole. This brings 
us back to the debate about whether we want to return to the Maastricht framework, which 
relies on national fiscal policies that are responsible only for themselves, or whether we want 
to take a quantum leap forward, regarding integration. We cannot say that, on the one hand, 
we rely on national fiscal policies and on the other hand, we progressively communitise risk 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
without control, thereby undermining the existing legal framework. In the end, it’s always a 
question of the balance between common liability and control. 
You’re saying that, if there is control, we can have Eurobonds? 
I’m saying that common liabilities are only compatible with a completely different framework, 
and  this  framework  would  have  to  be  proven  to  ensure  fiscal  discipline  and  sound 
macroeconomic fundamentals. You can’t take the third step before the first. 
But who controls? Is the fiscal compact enough? 
Of  course,  it’s  not  enough.  The  Bundesbank  welcomed  the  fiscal  compact  because  it 
strengthens  existing  rules.  But  it  is  not  tantamount  to  abandoning  sovereignty.  For  me,  a 
fiscal union is something where you cut into the budgetary rights of parliaments, at least if 
rules  are  violated.  And  we  see  how  difficult  it  is  to  abandon  fiscal  autonomy:  even  under 
enormous pressure it is very hard, for instance for Spain, to subject itself to conditionality. It’s 
perceived as a matter of national pride. 
What do you mean exactly by common liabilities? 
We already have common liabilities through the rescue mechanism. If you wanted to extend 
it – be it via Eurobonds, be it via a banking union – this would mutualise liabilities to an extent 
that is no longer covered by the EU treaties and national constitutions. When we really want 
to advance towards a political union, we have to acknowledge that this is a completely new 
setting and that means that we would all have to give up substantial national sovereignty. It 
means that you have a central level that can interfere directly with your budget, your taxes, to 
enforce the agreements. We have to honestly ask ourselves: are we ready to give up that 
much national sovereignty? 
Would the Germans accept this? 
At least according to the polls, the public in Germany would be more willing to embark on 
more political integration than in most of the other countries. The latest Pew research poll 
shows that in Germany, 58% are in favour of more political integration. In other countries, the 
mood is more negative, especially in those that are asking most loudly for communitisation of 
risks and liabilities, like Italy, Spain or France. We have to be honest in this debate. It will 
take years and years. We would have to change the EU treaties, we would have to change 
our  constitutions,  even  in  the  sense  of  having  a  referendum,  for  instance  in  the  case  of 
Germany. 
Would they rather go back to the D-Mark? 
No, the German public is clearly committed to a stable common currency. 
But  in  the  periphery  the  house  is  burning.  And  some  are  asking  what  is  the  ECB 
doing? Why can’t it be a lender of last resort? 
The ECB has already gone a long way towards preventing an escalation of the situation. It 
has  cut  interest  rates.  It  continues  to  provide  almost  unlimited  liquidity  at  very  generous 
terms and decided several non-standard measures. By doing so, it has stretched its mandate 
considerably.  If  it  acted  as  a  lender  of  last  resort  to  governments  this  would  redistribute 
solvency risks among national taxpayers, for which there is no democratic legitimacy, and is 
hence strictly forbidden in the EU treaties. 
Do you consider that Spain hesitated too long before asking for help? 
I  think  the  Spanish  government  hesitated,  hoping  that  there  would  be  other  means  of 
financing with no conditionality attached. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Are you afraid of hyperinflation? 
It  is  not  a question  of German  “Angst”  of  hyperinflation,  it’s  the  lesson of  our  more  recent 
European  history  in  the  1970s  and  1980s  when  countries  like  Italy,  Spain  and  France 
experienced intolerably high inflation rates. I don’t want to reopen the debate with our Italian 
friends on the marriage between the Bank of Italy and the government until 1981. But I think 
this was clearly not a system to serve as a role model for Europe’s future. All these calls for 
monetary financing, for the central bank to step in as the only actor able to do something, 
would take us back to the 1970s. 
But if a price stability mandate, there is an other mandate of financial stability because 
there’s no financial stability in Europe. 
There is a clear pecking order. The overriding goal of the Eurosystem is to maintain price 
stability, and in the long run this is the best contribution we can make to financial stability. But 
as I said, the Eurosystem has also contributed to preventing an escalation of the crisis in the 
sense  that  we  cut  interest  rates  to  historical  lows,  provided  almost  unlimited  liquidity  to 
banks, and decided on numerous non-standard measures. The problem is that if politicians 
have the feeling they can pass their responsibility on to somebody else, then they will choose 
the easy way out. And this undermines the independence of central banks. 
How do you asses President Obama’s emphasis on the need for growth and a more 
expansive policy? 
We have to recognise that the recession we are seeing in many countries is the result of a 
lack of confidence in public finances in combination with an erosion of their competitiveness. 
There  is  no  easy  way  out,  unless  you  address  the  root  causes  of  these  problems.  And 
addressing  this  situation  by  adding  further  debt  through  fiscal  stimulus  is  certainly  not  the 
solution. 
Is the US totally wrong? 
Sometimes  one  has  the  impression  that  all  of  a  sudden  some  realised  the  importance  of 
growth.  But  the  adjustment  programmes  are  all  centred  around  growth.  We  have  to  be 
honest  in  this  debate.  What  the  protagonists  of  this  discussion  mean  is  publicly  financed 
stimulus  packages.  And  this  is  something  different.  Perhaps  it  will  lead  to  a  short-lived 
expansion. But it will aggravate our problems in the future, because it will create additional 
debt,  and  there  are  already  doubts  about  debt  sustainability.  Credit-financed  excessive 
demand  was  part  of  the  problem,  for  example  when  we  talk  about  the  housing  boom  in 
Spain. 
What about the growth compact. The Chancellor has spoken about it. 
Our  problem  in  Europe  is  raising  the  growth  potential.  If  we  debate  a  growth  compact  it 
should  be  focussed  on  long-term  growth  and  therefore  on  structural  reforms.  This  is  also 
what Mrs. Merkel has in mind. 
And what about project bonds? 
To do what? 
For infrastructure, for example. 
For infrastructure? I am not convinced that Spain and other countries suffer from a lack of 
infrastructure.  What  I  am  missing  is  an  adequate  analysis.  If  there  is  an  impediment  to 
investment,  for  instance  in  Greece,  it  is  rather  too  much  red  tape  and  an  inefficient  tax 
system. I don’t believe in further stimulus programmes to cushion the adjustment process. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
But why not? We have 25% unemployment in some countries. 
To give a perspective to the younger generation, you have to tackle the roots of the problem. 
Spain,  for  instance,  had  double-digit  unemployment  rates  before  the  housing  boom.  It’s 
about the structure of the economy, not about some temporary stimulus. 
But you don’t have only one country in recession, but many countries and actually the 
whole euro area. So how can we look for growth in the long run? 
But  look  at  Portugal’s  forecast,  for  instance.  It  is  forecast  to  have  a  positive  growth  rate 
without any further stimulus. 
We can discuss if that is realistic. In Greece and elsewhere, forecasts are changing to 
the worse. 
Some  effects from  the reforms that  have  been  implemented  are  already  showing  –  in  unit 
labour  costs,  in  competitiveness,  in  export  growth.  I  would  not  endanger  this  by  deviating 
now from the course and jeopardise the confidence in the long overdue policy change. 
On  Italy,  are  you  satisfied  about  the  way  it  is  tackling  the  reforms?  And  trying  to 
improve the situation, when there is a negative 0.8% growth rate, and getting worse 
and worse. Do you also see improvements there? 
Mario  Monti  embarked on  important  reforms  just  a few  months  ago.  Now  they  have  to  be 
forcefully implemented. It will of course take time before they bear fruit. 
Is it time for an exit strategy of the ECB? 
We have to think about an exit, we have to know how to exit, but certainly this not the time to 
start an exit. 
Is it the time for additional measures, maybe? 
What for? 
If the conditions get worse these days? 
We never precommit, but I cannot see how more liquidity would change the situation, given 
that the liquidity lent out to Spanish banks ends up in Germany. 
The programme to buy government bonds is excluded? 
The programme is inactive. As you can see, we are not in the market anymore. It is no secret 
that  I  am  sceptical  about  this  instrument.  Take  Greece,  for  example.  We  are  the  largest 
holder of Greek debt. Did it help? 
How long should the ECB provide liquidity to the Greek banks? 
Our statutes say that we provide liquidity to solvent banks against adequate collateral. 
Then, if the economic situation is going to worsen, would you accept cutting the rates 
further, or is the 1% boundary a sort of a taboo because you might go into a liquidity 
trap? 
You  have  seen  that  we  have  very  few  taboos  in  the  Eurosystem,  but  again,  we  never 
precommit. Financial market instability stems from political uncertainty about the programme 
execution in Greece, about the future of the monetary union in more general terms, and that 
is not something you can fix with a rate cut. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
But the euro would nominally devalue and this would help European exports. 
We don’t have an exchange rate target. Our goal is price stability. And what helps exports 
are the structural reforms countries are implementing, not an artificial price decrease through 
the exchange rate. So, our goal at the Eurosystem is not to foster exports by manipulating 
the exchange rate. 
What could Germany do to help rebalance the Euro area? 
A rebalancing is already taking place: the current account surplus has halved from 2007 to 
2011, and what we are seeing now is to some extent a reversal of the pre-crisis situation. In 
the  first  decade  of  monetary  union,  Germany  embarked  on  structural  reforms  and  wage 
moderation.  Now  in  Germany  we  have  above-average  growth  rates,  employment  is  the 
highest we’ve ever seen, and effective wages are increasing faster than in the past 20 years. 
This will translate into purchasing power and help rebalance the current account. But we are 
not  living  on  an  island.  Our  main  competitors  –  like  the  US  and  China  or  other  emerging 
economies – are outside the euro area, so that it is very important that Europe as a whole 
becomes more competitive. 
Are you not afraid of a very high inflation of 5–6% and high wage increases? 
In the short term we may even see declining inflation rates because of falling energy prices. 
If  Germany’s  economy  continues  to  gather  steam,  we  might  see  above-average  inflation 
rates  as  we  have  seen  below-average  rates  in  the  past.  But  we  are  talking  about  decimal 
points here. In the Governing Council we ensure price stability for the euro area as a whole. 
This  precludes  runaway  inflation  in  Germany  as  the  German  economy  accounts  for  the 
biggest share of the euro area aggregate. 
Apart  from  the  political  union  there  is  a  banking  union  which  is  waiting  to  be 
discussed at the end of June. What do you think of the three points: a paneuropean 
supervision,  a  deposit  guarantee  fund  and  a  banking  restructuring  fund?  The 
Commission has put forward a proposal, are you satisfied with this proposal? 
I welcome the bank resolution proposal of the Commission which still needs a lot of debate, 
because  it  is  very  technical  and  very  complicated.  But  over  and  above  that,  there  are  the 
issues  of  common  regulation  and  common  supervision;  and  there  are two  elements  which 
imply common liabilities: a common deposit insurance scheme and a common restructuring 
fund. These are areas in which we currently have a national fiscal responsibility. If we were 
to mutualise liabilities in these areas, we  would  face the same questions regarding liability 
and control as in a fiscal union. 
But not for now? 
There is the question of balance between control and liability. And the liability side, when it 
comes to figures, is impressive: if you think about insuring the deposits, those numbers are 
well beyond what we decided for the European rescue mechanisms. This is really a big step 
and that’s why we have to have centralised control and then we can talk about the liabilities. I 
don’t think you can really separate the banking union from the rest, especially as long as the 
banks  are  the  biggest  holders  of  government  debt. We  have  to  make  sure  that  through  a 
banking  union  we  don’t  introduce  through  the  back  door  a  sort  of  Eurobond  system, 
guaranteeing the banks and in this way funding governments. So you need strong rules to 
prevent  this.  Another  related  question  is  would  supervision  really  be  better  if  it  were 
centralised? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
But also central bankers say that there is a need to break the vicious circle between 
the sovereign and the banks. And one way to do it is to have a common supervision, 
because, e.g., the supervision in Spain didn’t discover the risks of 100 billions euros 
in the banks. 
I  agree,  the  nexus  between  the  sovereign  and  the  banks  could  be  broken  by  a  banking 
union. But again, this is not a quick fix, as it requires similar legal changes to a fiscal union, 
because you take on a considerable amount of common liabilities. And this would interfere 
greatly  with  the  national  sovereignty  and  the  rights  of  national  parliaments.  That’s  why  it 
requires fundamental change and won’t come overnight. Nobody would guarantee 11 trillion 
euro of deposits without having the insurance that at the end there is control. 
What about using the gold reserves of each central bank to guarantee the deposits? 
Our  gold  reserves  are  currency  reserves.  They  are  independently  managed  by  the 
Bundesbank  and  the  other  Eurosystem  central  banks.  And  as  far  as  the  Bundesbank  is 
concerned,  we  have  absolutely  no  intention  of  contributing  to  an  insurance  scheme. 
Moreover, this is not possible for legal reasons. 
But we need a common guarantee for bank deposits. 
I see no way to do this now. Eventually, each parliament would have to assume liability for 
deposits  in  all  of  Europe.  If  some  of  these  risks  materialise,  this  would  jeopardise  the 
possibility of national parliaments to control their budget. If you don’t have safeguards that 
the risks are under control, this would be a reckless undertaking. 
The  “wise  economists”  in  Germany  launched  the  idea  of  a  European  Tilgungsfond 
(amortisation fund), which met the enthusiasm of the European Union. What do you 
think of it? 
It  doesn’t  change  our  assessment  that  it  is  legally  not  feasible  and  that  it  inverts  the 
sequencing of liability and control. In practice, it backs the guarantee for all debt over 60% of 
GDP, assuming that everybody sticks to the rules and pays back his part of the debt later on. 
But we have seen in the past how flexibly our rules were interpreted. And I think mutualising 
debt  by  only  hoping  the  rules  are  adhered  to  is  very  dangerous.  All  this  requires 
constitutional change. 
But Germany cannot be completely isolated from the rest of the Eurozone. 
We carry the largest burden of the rescue packages, which all benefit from Germany’s AAA 
rating. So Germany is the stability anchor and without it, it wouldn’t work. And it is assumed 
that it is Germany’s responsibility to do that. So it is all too easy to say that Germany always 
says “no”. That’s why it is unjust to say that Germany doesn’t play a constructive role.  
But the problems between Germany and France on the interpretation of how to go on, 
can endanger the euro? 
Well,  first  of  all  let’s  wait  for  the  electoral  noise  to  fade.  And  then  we  will  see  how  the 
collaboration really works. My point is that you have to be realistic about the solutions. And if 
you  only  talk  about  Eurobonds  without  talking  about  control,  then  this  will  just  distract 
attention. If France were to start a debate about giving up national sovereignty, this would 
really  move  the  debate  forward.  The  German  government  is  now  pushing  for  fiscal  union, 
trying to find a solution. I would very much welcome it if President Hollande faced this debate 
and discussed both common liability and giving up sovereignty – and the path towards this 
new political union. But just asking for Eurobonds doesn’t get us anywhere. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
In order for the Greek debt to be sustainable, economists say that there will need to be 
a haircut of the official sector too. 
The peak of the Greek debt is still to come and it will take a very long time to bring it finally to 
a sustainable status. But here I have to rely on the debt sustainability analysis that has been 
carried out by the Troika. 
Economists say behind Spain there is Italy, we have to stop contagion, so that’s why 
everybody is happy that Spain agreed to ask for help. Now do you think that Europe is 
going  towards  a  more  stable  time,  so  that  the  Greek  elections  won’t  have  such  an 
impact? 
I don’t believe in the next-in-line theory. Every country is different and if you look at the data 
for Italy, there are very significant differences. For instance, Italy is close to a fiscal primary 
surplus. I’m sceptical about the fixation on the Greek election as if it were the only issue. But 
it determines how the Union deals with a country that fails to live up to its commitments. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
