Jean-Pierre Danthine: Reconciling price and financial stability 
Speech by Mr Jean-Pierre Danthine, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss National 
Bank, at the University of Zurich, Zurich, 24 January 2012. 
 I would like to thank Pierre Monnin, Anna Faber and Adriel Jost for their invaluable support in drafting 
this paper. I also thank Rita Kobel, Peter Kuster, Reto Nyfeller, Dewet Moser and Angelo Ranaldo for 
their insightful comments. 
It is a great pleasure for me to be with you today at the University of Zurich to discuss an 
issue  that  the  recent  financial  crisis  has  exposed  as  a  major  challenge  to  central  banks; 
namely  how  they  can  best  contribute  to  ensuring  financial  stability  while  pursuing  price 
stability as a primary mandate.1 Before I do this, however, let me say a few words on another 
dimension  of  stability:  institutional  stability.  As  you  are  all  aware,  the  Swiss  National  Bank 
(SNB) recently experienced an unfortunate event which has few, if any, historical precedents. 
On  a  personal  level,  I  deeply  regret  the  resignation  of  Philipp  Hildebrand,  under  whose 
leadership  the  SNB  steered  Swiss  monetary  policy  over  the  last  two  years.  On  an 
institutional level, however, I would like to stress that the SNB’s institutional strength is the 
result of teamwork, not only between the board members, but across the Bank as a whole. 
The SNB’s culture is one of excellence and of service. It is the product of a long history and 
many  generations  of  leaders.  It  remains  as  strong  as  ever.  Despite  the  difficult  conditions 
and  the  unusual  challenges  that  have  characterized  the  last  two  years,  all  important 
monetary policy decisions have been reached by consensus, a consensus which emerged 
from in-depth and intensive analyses and discussions. The current course of Swiss monetary 
policy,  particularly  the  decision  to  introduce  a  minimum  exchange  rate,  is  the  result  of  a 
deep-rooted consensus of this kind. The SNB will thus continue to enforce the minimum rate 
with  the  utmost  determination  and  remains  prepared  to  buy  foreign  currency  in  unlimited 
quantities. The Swiss franc is still highly valued, but it should depreciate further in the future.  
Let me now return to my topic. I will start by presenting general pre-crisis assessments of the 
state  of  monetary  policy  and  will  then  examine  how  central  banks’  policies  may  have 
contributed  to  the  financial  crisis.  After  considering  these  issues,  I  will  be  in  position  to 
assess the alternative courses of action available to central banks in general, and the SNB in 
particular,  to  derive  principles  for  a  future  in  which  financial  and  price  stability  are  better 
reconciled with one another. 
The Great Moderation: a success of monetary policy? 
I. 
Let me start by considering the state of many developed economies, to include Switzerland, 
before the onset of the crisis. In contrast with the episodes of high inflation which prevailed in 
the 1970’s, rates of inflation were subsequently stable and low for some twenty years. This 
period, which is commonly referred to as the “Great Moderation”, was also characterized by 
low real GDP volatility and low interest rates. Slide 1 illustrates these developments in the 
cases of the United States and Switzerland in this period. 
Though  there  is  no  definitive  analysis  of  the  causes  of  the  “Great  Moderation”,  monetary 
policy  is  regularly  cited  as  a  contributing  factor.2  This  accords  well  with  observations  that 
                                                 
1  This order of priorities is in line with the National Bank Act, article 5, which clearly states that “ensuring price 
stability” is the SNB’s primary goal while it should also “contribute to the stability of the financial system”. 
2  Other commonly cited causes are: i) financial deepening resulting from developments in the financial markets 
in  the  1980–90’s  such  as  options,  hedging  tools,  etc.;  ii)  less  and  more  stable  government  regulation  and 
taxation; iii) luck. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
major progress had been made in identifying the determinants of inflation, understanding the 
importance  of  central  bank  independence  and  therefore  in  improving  the  conduct  of 
monetary policy. At the methodological level, these developments are generally linked to the 
concept of “inflation-targeting”3 and summarized in a class of macroeconomic models, which 
Marvin  Goodfriend  and  Robert  King4  have  named  “the  New  Neoclassical  Synthesis”.  This 
label tells of an approach that combined key elements of Keynesian and classical thinking. 
While  the  new  models  made  conditional  forecasting  possible  and  permitted  scientifically 
appropriate policy evaluations, they only included primitive financial sectors. In their current 
state,  they  therefore  cannot  address  issues  of  financial  stability  or  the  link  between  low 
interest rates and financial excesses.  
The recent financial crisis: are central banks the culprits? 
II. 
The recent financial crisis has thrown the positive pre-crisis perceptions of modern monetary 
policy into question. Indeed, many analysts now attribute a certain degree of responsibility for 
the  financial  crisis  to  central  banks,  in  sharp  contrast  with  the  typically  benevolent 
assessment  of  their  contributions  to  the  “Great  Moderation”.  Two  main  lines  of  argument 
support  claims  that  central  banks were  contributed  to  the crisis,  as  Slide  2  illustrates.  The 
first is that the precepts of the “inflation-targeting” paradigm were misapplied and that these 
policy errors have contributed to, or have directly caused, the crisis. The second is that the 
paradigm itself is deficient, or at least incomplete. Indeed, even when central banks conduct 
monetary  policy  optimally,  according  to  the  “inflation-targeting”  mantra,  it  is  a  mistake  for 
them  not  to  recognise  that  a  long  period  of  low  interest  rates  may  encourage  financial 
intermediaries to take increased risks with negative consequences for systemic stability.  
One clear proponent of the first argument is John B. Taylor. Taylor has argued that the Federal 
Reserve contributed to the crisis by setting interest rates too low prior to 2007. Although price 
stability was achieved, monetary policy in the United States was, in his view, inappropriately 
conducted, given the level of inflation and the size of the output gap, as attested by significant 
deviations from the “Taylor rule”, a benchmark he first proposed in 1993.5 
The “Taylor rule” recommends that central banks systematically adjust nominal interest rates 
in response to macroeconomic developments and inflation movements, but, between 2002 
and 2005, they were lower than the “Taylor rule” advised, as Slide 3 illustrates. According to 
Taylor,6 monetary policy may have been too expansionary, certainly in the United States and 
the Euro area. Taylor even suggests that, if central banks had set higher interest rates in this 
period,  the  subsequent  housing  bubble  and  the  global  financial  crisis  might  have  been 
avoided.7 According to this view, the crisis stemmed from a misapplication of the “inflation-
targeting”  precept.  The  underlying  models  may  be  unable  to  explain  why  an  excessively 
accommodative policy would lead to a financial crisis. The episode does not, however, imply 
that  the  entire  monetary  policy  paradigm  has  to  be  revisited,  nor  that  financial  stability  is 
incompatible with price stability. 
                                                 
3  The SNB does not describe its approach as “inflation targeting” as it differs somewhat from classic “inflation 
targeting”. See http://www.snb.ch/en/iabout/monpol for further details. 
4  Goodfriend and King (1997). 
5  Taylor (1993). 
6 
Interpretations of the “Taylor rule” can be ambiguous. Interestingly, the formula produces quite different results 
depending on whether it includes core or headline inflation and how the output gap is measured. It also omits 
factors  such  as  widening  credit  spreads,  the  role  of  time-varying  parameters  and  the  risk  of  deflation, 
particularly between 2002 and 2004. See, for example, Bernanke (2010) and Kohn (2007). 
7  Taylor (2009). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Slide  4  illustrates  the  “supply  shock”  hypothesis.  Here,  the  crux  of  the  argument  is  that 
monetary policy was too expansionary because the impact of supply shocks on prices was 
underestimated. This, in turn, prompted miscalculations of the output gap. As one can see, in 
the  United  Kingdom  and  in  Switzerland,  the  prices  of  those  goods  which  were  most 
influenced  by  imports  increased  far  more  slowly  than  those  of  services,  which  were  less 
import-dependent. One plausible explanation for this is that the availability of cheap imports 
from Asia (or Eastern Europe) acted as a positive supply shock, thus reducing the relative 
price  of  imports.  If  the  supply  shock  had  been  temporary,  it  would  have  provoked  lower 
transitory inflation and the optimal monetary policy response would have been to do nothing, 
except  to  let  the  economic  forces  at  play  re-establish  an  equilibrium  and  normal  inflation 
levels.8 In recent decades, however, the pressures associated with globalization have borne 
greater resemblance to a permanent series of shocks. As these shocks were interpreted as 
temporary,  they  were  disregarded  from  a  policy  perspective,  which,  it  is  argued,  caused 
monetary policies to be excessively expansionary. 
Both  of  these  views  suggest  that  central  banks  could  have  potentially  helped  prevent  the 
crisis  by  setting  higher  interest  rates  and  that  they  should  have  done  so  if  the  “inflation-
targeting”  precepts  had  been  fully  understood  and  optimally  followed.  In  both  cases, 
however, the underlying models would have predicted that such policy failures would have 
prompted overproduction and excessive rates of inflation, rather than a financial crisis. 
The  third  hypothesis  I  would  like  to discuss  is  the  theory  of  the  “risk-taking  channel”.  This 
newer line of argument is that, even if monetary policy was optimally conducted before the 
crisis,  the  prevailing  low  interest  rates  provided  fertile  ground  for  miscalculation  and 
excessive risk-taking by financial intermediaries, thus contributing to the crisis. According to 
this view, the “inflation-targeting” paradigm itself is deficient in the sense that it does not take 
into account the negative externality of a policy exclusively aimed at price stability imposes 
on financial stability. In Claudio Borio and Haibin Zhu’s9 terms, “changes in policy rates have 
an  impact  on  either  risk  perception  or  risk-tolerance  and  hence  on  the  degree  of  risk  in 
portfolios, on the pricing of assets, and on the price and the non-price terms of the extension 
of funding”. In other words, a long period of low interest rates drives financial intermediaries 
to take increased risks. Empirically, there is a growing body of evidence to indicate that  a 
channel of this kind exists.10 
There are three main versions of the “risk-taking channel”. Every one of them suggests that, 
while  low  interest  rates  might  be  the  natural  consequence  of  price  stability,  they  may 
ultimately compromise financial stability. The first hypothesis, is that hedge-fund and wealth 
managers, who tend to be paid according to the nominal returns on their investments, might 
be prone to taking additional, possibly excessive, risks when interest rates are low and, as a 
result,  they  might  receive  lower  levels  of  compensation.11  To  the  best  of  my  knowledge, 
empirical studies which support or dismiss this claim have been yet to be carried out.  
The second hypothesis12 is that low interest rates increase the value of the collateral backing 
up  loans.  Banks  thus  have  less  incentive  to  monitor  their  clients’  loans.13  This  view  is 
empirically better documented, but the supporting evidence is ambiguous.14 
                                                 
8  Bean (2006). 
9  Borio and Zhu (2008). 
10  See, for example, Altunbas, Gambacorta and Marqués-Ibáñez (2010). 
11  Rajan (2005) 
12  Dell’Ariccia, Laeven and Marquez (2010) 
13  Note  that  this  theory  closely  resembles  Ben  Bernanke  and  Mark  Gertler’s  “financial  accelerator”  model. 
However, in this model the increase in collateral value prompts investors to borrow more whereas in the model 
of the “risk-taking channel”, increased collateral value induces banks to monitor their existing loans less. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Finally, the third hypothesis is that banks with access to cheaper external funding increase 
their  leverage  to  achieve  higher  returns  on  equity.  This  change  in  banks’  balance  sheet 
structure tends to make the banking sector more fragile. There is some evidence to support 
this argument. For example, Slide 5 reports the results of simulating how banks in the United 
States  adjust  their  external  funding  to  changes  in  monetary  policy.  It  suggests  that  when 
central banks increase interest rates, banks significantly decrease their external funding for 
the next two years or so.15 
The “Taylor rule”, the “supply shock” hypothesis and the “risk-taking channel” theory all have 
one common feature. Every one of them acknowledges the possibility that interest rates may 
have been too low prior to the crisis, though their proponents may disagree as to whether, or 
to what extent, this was the result of a policy or paradigm failure. There is also consensus 
that  this  may  have  contributed  to  the  financial  instability  that  followed,  although  only  the 
theory of the “risk-taking channel” clearly suggests how this would have come about.  
III. 
“Leaning against the wind”: an unfavourable trade-off between financial 
stability and output growth 
If interest rates were indeed too low in the pre-crisis years, it would appear that by raising 
them central banks could have helped avoid, or at least contain, the crisis. When this calls for 
deviations from otherwise optimal policy, one talks of “leaning against the wind”. In economic 
upturns,  this  would  involve  central  banks  setting  higher  interest  rates  than  would  be 
necessary to achieve price stability alone. The objective would be to avoid the overvaluation 
of assets, to constrain excessively risky behaviour on the part of financial intermediaries and 
hence to prevent bubbles from emerging, or at least to reduce their size.  
In  contrast,  Alan  Greenspan  was  widely  credited  for  supporting  a  “clean  up  after  bubbles” 
approach.  This  basically  involves  central  banks  actively  sustaining  the  economy  after  an 
asset price bubble has burst, rather than using monetary policy to try to prevent the bubble 
from  developing  in  the  first  place.  The  rationale  for  this  approach  is  that  it  is  more  cost-
effective  overall,  as  bubbles  are  very  hard  to  identify.  Erroneously  implemented  “leaning 
against  the  wind”  policies  could  well  impose  significant  economic  costs  with  no  real 
subsequent benefit. 
The huge cost of the recent financial crisis has decreased the weight of such objections to 
“leaning  against  the  wind”.  It  is  therefore  important  to  further  examine  the  potential  of  a 
preventive policy. Charles Bean et al16 strive to estimate the impact a “leaning against the 
wind” would have had on asset prices and real output in the recent financial crisis. The charts 
in Slide 6 show the simulated impact on credit, real estate prices and GDP growth of a policy 
which  would  push  US  interest  rates  200  basis  points  higher  than  were  actually  observed 
between  2003  to  2006.  The  slide illustrates  that  the  simulated  policy would  probably  have 
kept real house prices some 7.5 percent lower than they were at their peak. The simulated 
policy would probably also have prompted a significant drop in cumulative real GDP growth, 
estimated at about 3.3 percent. These higher interest rates would, however, only have had a 
limited impact on credit growth, i.e. they would theoretically have reduced a 30 percent credit 
growth to around 27 percent. As a result, it is not clear that the simulated policy could have 
significantly  reduced  the  probability  of  a  real  estate  bubble  developing.  Another  study  of 
                                                                                                                                                      
14  See,  for  example,  Buch,  Eickmeier  and  Prieto  (2011).  This  study  of  the  US  market  between  1997–2008 
suggests that looser monetary policy or unexpected house price decreases prompt small domestic banks to 
increase  their  exposure  to  risk.  The  same  conditions  seemingly  cause  foreign  banks  to  reduce  their  risk 
exposure, however, while large domestic banks retain the same levels. 
15  Angeloni, Faia and Lo Duca (2010). 
16  Bean et al. (2010). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
OECD  countries  by  Katrin  Assenmacher-Wesche  and  Stefan  Gerlach,17  estimates  that,  to 
obtain  a  10%  decrease  in  property  prices,  central  banks  would  have  to  sacrifice  between 
2.3 and 4.0 percentage points of real GDP growth. In turn, Christian Hott and Pierre Monnin18 
estimate that house prices were overvalued by some 25 percentage points in the US in 2005 
and by approximately 50 percentage points in the UK in 2006. Together, these two studies 
suggest  that  a  drop  of  between  9  and  10  percentage  points  of  real  GDP  in  the  US  and 
between 11.5 and 20.0 percentage points in the UK would have been necessary to totally 
erase the two countries real estate bubbles. These results highlight the unfavourable trade-
off between financial stability and output growth when “leaning against the wind” is the only 
instrument available to address the former. They also strongly suggest that, even if central 
banks had optimally followed the “inflation-targeting” principles (or the “Taylor rule”) ahead of 
the crisis, the higher interest rates that would have resulted would not have been sufficient to 
prevent the emergence of a bubble and the ensuing financial crisis.  
How might systemic risk be reduced? 
IV. 
The  unfavourable  trade-off  I  have  just  highlighted  provides  a  powerful  incentive  to  explore 
the potential of alternative instruments. This is where “macro-prudential tools” come into play. 
These tools focus on directly addressing the vulnerabilities to which the financial system as a 
whole is exposed. Their strength is that they target the problem directly at the root. Slide 7 
summarizes  the  two  main  dimensions  of  systemic  risk:  the  “structural”  dimension,  which 
covers the possible risks associated with individual institutions whose failure would endanger 
the  entire  system;  the  “cyclical”  dimension  refers  to  systemic  risks  which  are  not  directly 
linked  to  an  individual  institution,  but  which  stem  from  financial  institutions’  collective 
responses to business or financial fluctuations and adverse shocks. “Structural tools” strive 
to  reduce  the  impact  of  institutional  failure  by  strengthening  individual  institutions.  Their 
potential utility is often cited with regard to institutions which are considered “too big to fail” or 
“too interconnected to be liquidated” and whose failure would impact the entire system. 
“Countercyclical  tools”  aim  to  address  the  cyclical  dimension  of  risk  by  reducing  feedback 
loops. As Slide 8 shows, these are designed to counter problems associated with the actions 
of  individual  financial  institutions,  which  can  lead  them  all to  act  in  the  same  way  after  an 
initial shock, thus amplifying the initial movements of the markets and leading to a new wave 
of similar reactions.19 This is because individual financial institutions tend to react to a shock 
by shedding risks, either because it is rational to do so or because regulation oblige them to 
do  so.  If  the  system  is  not  designed  with  the  explicit  aim  of  stopping  such  movements,  a 
negative  cycle  can  set  in  with  dangerous  consequences  for  individual  institutions  and  the 
system as a whole. 
Countercyclical  measures  are  intended  to  modulate,  reduce  and  potentially  prevent  such 
instability. The aim of “capital buffers” is to ensure that, in good times, banks acquire capital 
base  that  is  well  above  the  minimum.  The  buffers  can  then  be  released  in  more  difficult 
times,  allowing  financial  institutions  to  absorb  substantial  asset  price  falls  before  legal 
constraints  become  binding.  They  should  thus  help  avoid  the  mentioned  pro-cyclical 
behaviour that typically leads to so-called “fire sales”. 
What is appealing in theory is not necessarily easy to implement in practice. Few doubt that 
there are challenges to defining and calibrating the indicators used to determine when capital 
buffers should be triggered, and by how much. However, to quote Borio, “while calibration is 
                                                 
17  Assenmacher-Wesche and Gerlach (2010). 
18  Hott and Monnin (2008). 
19  For examples of models which illustrate downward spirals, please refer to Markus Brunnermeier and Lasse 
Pedersen (2009), Stephen Morris and Hyun Song Shin (2004). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
not straightforward, the difficulties can be overstated”.20 To support his claim, Borio notes that 
traditional monetary policy also confronts such challenges when interest rates are set on the 
basis of indicators, such as output gaps or natural interest rates which are unobservable and 
difficult to measure accurately. It is however commonly accepted that central banks have, to 
a large extent, surmounted these difficulties. 
Of course, countercyclical buffers cannot be implemented without inflicting some costs to the 
economy, but the trade-off involved seems significantly more favourable than is the case with 
“leaning  against  the  wind”  policies.  A  2011  study  by  the  Bank  of  International  Settlements 
estimates  that,  by  reducing  the  probability  of  a  severe  crisis,  the  benefit  of  countercyclical 
buffers is on average 10 times higher than their costs in terms of real output growth per year. 
The Swiss case 
V. 
Every central bank in the world faces its versions of the challenges I have mentioned. The 
Swiss National Bank is no exception. Indeed, the SNB’s position is particularly challenging as 
the  Swiss  economy  is  small  and  open,  which  potentially  makes  it  more  vulnerable  to  any 
negative  fall-out  which  may  stem  from  the  trade-off  associated  with  policies  which  “lean-
against-the  wind”.  As  the  current  situation  of  the  Swiss  economy  makes  all  too  clear,  the 
impact  of  a  high  interest  rate  policy  on  the  exchange  rate  would  surely  increase  the 
associated output loss. It is therefore crucial that the Swiss authorities implement the most 
cost-effective measures to counter the financial excesses which may lead to a crisis.  
Indeed,  the  Swiss  authorities  are  currently  pursuing  a  comprehensive  agenda  of  macro-
prudential measures. From a structural perspective, in 2011 the Swiss Parliament passed a 
package  of  measures  aimed  at  reducing  the  systemic  impact  of  potential  failure  of  those 
institutions classed as “too big to fail”. These banks will now be asked to retain extra capital 
reserves. They will also be required to improve their liquidity positions, diversify their risks 
and  propose  a  scheme  by  which  they  will  ensure  the  continuation  of  their  systemically 
important  functions,  should  they  find  themselves  in  financial  difficulty.  This  new  regulatory 
regime  will  come  into  force  on  1st  January  2013,  pending  approval  of  the  associated 
directives by Parliament. Second, after a round of consultations that just ended, the Federal 
Council is soon expected to decide upon a proposal to introduce a new risk-weighting system 
for  mortgage-related  assets.  From  a  cyclical  perspective,  a  proposal  to  ensure  that  banks 
implement  countercyclical  capital  buffers  was  part  of  the  recent  consultations  and  is  also 
pending approval by the Federal Council. The proposal foresees that the ultimate decision to 
activate  or  modify  the  capital  buffer  requirement  will  lie  with  the  Federal  Council.  This 
decision will be made on the basis of the SNB’s proposal and the FINMA’s response to it. 
Finally, in order to enhance the SNB’s capacity to assess the stability of the financial system 
and  to  take  appropriate  measures,  the  Bank  has  also  called  for  improved  access  to 
information on financial institutions. 
Conclusion 
VI. 
The  preceding  discussion  has,  I  hope,  clarified  some  of  the  complex  interactions  between 
price and financial stability. Within the Swiss legal framework, I am convinced that the central 
bank has been given an appropriate mandate. In order of priority, the SNB must ensure price 
stability,  while  taking  due  account  of  the  developments  of  the  economy.  It  must  also 
contribute to the stability of the financial system. One important lesson to emerge from the 
analysis of the recent crisis is that an interest rate policy cannot be the sole, or even the main 
instrument, used to promote financial stability. It is imperative that central banks be endowed 
                                                 
20  Borio (2011). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
with alternative “macro-prudential” instruments. This assessment is not only the product of 
careful  application  of  the  “Tinbergen  principle”,  according  to  which  one  needs  as  many 
instruments  as  one  has  objectives.  On  a  deeper  level,  this  conclusion  is  based  on  the 
recognition that, from a welfare perspective, a “leaning against the wind” policy would clearly 
be dominated, by instruments which target the root causes of those problems generated by 
excessive risk-taking in times of low interest rates. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
   8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   9
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches
 10 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   11
References 
Altunbas, Yener, Leonardo Gambacorta and David Marqués-Ibáñez. 2010. Does monetary 
policy affect risk-taking. European Central Bank Working Paper, No. 1166, 11 March 2010. 
Angeloni,  Ignazio,  Ester  Faia  and  Marco  Lo  Duca.  Monetary  policy  and  risk-taking.  2010. 
Bruegel Working Paper 2010/00, February 2010. 
Assenmacher-Wesche,  Katrin  and  Stefan  Gerlach.  2010.  Monetary  policy  and  financial 
imbalances:  facts  and  fiction.  Economic  Policy,  Volume  25,  Issue  63,  Pages  437–482, 
July 2010. 
Bean, Charles, Matthias Paustian, Adrian Penalver and Tim Taylor. 2010. Monetary policy 
after the fall. Paper presented by Mr. Charles Bean, Deputy Governor of the Bank of England 
at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Annual Conference, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, 
28 August 2010. 
Bean, Charles. 2006. Impact of globalisation on monetary policy: commentary. Proceedings. 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. pp. 307–313. 
Bernanke,  Ben.  S.  2010.  Monetary  policy  and  the  housing  bubble.  Speech  at  the  Annual 
Meeting of the American Economic Association, Atlanta, Georgia. 3 January 2010. 
Borio, Claudio. 2011. Anchoring countercyclical buffers: the role of credit aggregates. Bank 
for International Settlement Working Paper, No. 355, November 2011. 
Borio, Claudio and Haibin Zhu. 2008. Capital regulation, risk-taking and monetary policy: a 
missing link in the transmission mechanism? Bank for International Settlements. BIS Working 
Papers. No. 268, December 2008. 
Brunnermeier, Markus and Lasse Pedersen. 2009. Market liquidity and funding liquidity. The 
Review of Financial Studies, 22, pp. 2201–2238. 
Buch, Claudia M., Sandra Eickmeier and Esteban Prieto. 2011. In search for yield? Survey 
based evidence on bank risk taking. Paper provided by the Deutsche Bundesbank Research 
Centre. Discussion Paper Series I, Economic Studies, number 2011, 10. 
Danielsson, Jon, Hyun Song Shin and Jean-Pierre Zigrand. 2011. Endogenous and systemic 
risk. First version, July 2010. This version, August 2011. 
Dell’Ariccia, Giovanni, Luc Laeven and Robert Marquez. 2010. Monetary policy, leverage and 
bank risk-taking. IMF Working Papers 10/276, International Monetary Fund. 1 December 2010. 
Hott,  Christian  and  Pierre  Monnin.  2008.  Fundamental  real  estate  prices:  an  empirical 
estimation  with  international  data.  The  Journal  of  Real  Estate  Finance  and  Economics. 
Springer, vol. 36(4), pp. 427–450, May.  
Goodfriend, Marvin and Robert G. King. 1997. The new neoclassical synthesis and the role 
of monetary policy in Ben S. Bernanke and Julio J. Rotemberg, eds., NBER Macroeconomics 
Annual 1997, Cambridge, Massachussetts, MIT Press, pp. 231–83.  
Kohn,  Donald  L.  2007.  Financial  stability:  preventing  and  managing  crises.  Speech  by  the 
Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System at the Exchequer 
Club Luncheon. Washington DC, 21 February, 2007. 
Morris,  Stephen  and  Hyun  Song  Shin.  2004.  Coordination  risk  and  the  price  of  debt. 
European Economic Review. Elsevier, vol. 48(1), pp. 133–153, February.  
Rajan,  Raguhuram  G.  2005.  Has  financial  development  made  the  world  riskier?  NBER 
Working Papers. No. 11728. National Bureau of Economics Research, Inc. 
Taylor,  John  B.  1993.  Discretion  versus  policy  rules  in  practice.  Carnegie-Rochester 
Conference Series on Public Policy 39, pp. 195–214. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Taylor, John B. 2009. The financial crisis and the policy responses: an empirical analysis of 
what  went  wrong.  NBER  Working  Paper  14631,  National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research, 
Cambridge, MA, January 2009. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13
