Duvvuri Subbarao: Of economics, policy and development 
Remarks by Dr Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Release 
Function  of  Dr I G  Patel’s  book  “Of  economics,  policy  and  development”,  Mumbai, 
16 July 2012. 
 There  are  many  privileges  of  being  the  Governor.  Among  them  is  releasing  the  books  by 
former Governors. It is a privilege to which I attach a lot of value, something which I prize. 
Newton 
Because the occasion demands it, I must repeat what I said at the Reserve Bank’s Platinum 
Jubilee. 
Those  of  you  who  have  had  some  exposure  to the  history  of  science  would  know  that  Sir 
Isaac Newton was an intellectually arrogant man. When his friend and rival, Robert Hooke 
wrote to him, applauding him for his law of gravity, Newton, for all his arrogance, wrote back 
with uncharacteristic humility: 
“If  I  have  been  able  to  see  a  little  further,  it  is  because  I  am  standing  on  the 
shoulders of giants.” 
That is a statement I can relate to. As the Governor of the Reserve Bank in these exciting 
times, I owe an intellectual debt of gratitude to all the extraordinary men who led this great 
institution  through  several  challenges,  and  made  a  mark  in  the  economic  history  of  India. 
Among the most distinguished of them is Dr. I.G. Patel. I am proud and privileged to be in the 
same lineage as him. 
Special occasion 
I did not know Dr. Patel personally. He was already in the top echelons of the Government 
when I joined the civil service; when he was the Governor of the Reserve Bank I was a junior 
officer  in  the  Government  of  Andhra  Pradesh.  Much  to  my  loss,  our  paths  never  crossed. 
This  association  with  late  Dr.  Patel,  of  releasing  his  book,  posthumously  –  vicarious,  as  it 
may be – is therefore very special for me. 
OUP 
I want to thank Oxford University Press for giving me this privilege. 
Ms. Alaknanda Patel 
Those of you who have known Mrs. Alaknanda Patel will, of course, relive some memories, 
through  interaction  with  her  today.  Over  the  last  few  years,  I  have  developed  a  close 
friendship with her. I have always been impressed by her intelligence, charm, vivaciousness; 
and have been touched by how much she loves all of us in the Reserve Bank and the efforts 
she makes to maintain her bond with the Reserve Bank even after all these years. 
Alaknanda, your presence here means a lot to all of us in the Reserve Bank. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The book 
This  book  “Of  Economics,  Policy  and  Development”  is  a  collection  of  largely  unpublished 
papers by Dr. Patel. 
• 
finance, 
trade,  balance  of  payments,  economic  development  and 
They cover a wide canvas 
Money, 
international political economy issues.  
They cover a wide time span 
Articles written when he was a young economist at the IMF to articles and papers 
written after Dr. Patel evolved as one of leading public intellectuals of the country. 
They span a vast intellectual spectrum 
̶ 
̶ 
Papers with deep academic orientation  
Articles with profound practical policy implications  
  What is common across all of the articles/papers regardless of the topic is deep scholarship, 
sharp intellect and above all an abiding concern for public interest. 
Ideas and issues resonate even today 
What has struck me as I browsed through the book is that several of the ideas and issues 
that  Dr.  Patel  addressed  resonate  even  in  today’s  context,  both  at  home  and  around  the 
world.  
I will comment on some of the ideas that he raised. 
Monetary policy 
I. 
In one of the articles, Dr. Patel reviews the evolution of monetary policy in the post-war years 
compared to the pre-war years. He writes: 
“The  supreme  test  of  monetary  policy  lies  in  its  ability  to  control  the  supply  of 
money  in  such  a  way  that  growth  in  prices  is  checked  without  retarding  the 
growth in production.” 
The essence of that sentence is that checking growth in prices without retarding production; 
that is the quintessential growth versus inflation debate that is playing out even today. 
A relevant question in this context is the following: 
“To what extent is the Reserve Bank acting consistent with Dr. Patel’s dictum of 
controlling prices without hurting production?” 
By  far  the  most  strident  criticism  against  the  Reserve  Bank  has  been  that  even  after 
persistent  and  prolonged  tightening  of  monetary  policy  –  by  raising  interest  rate  13  times 
– we have not been able to restrain inflation. On the other hand, we stifled growth. 
So  the  question  is  has  the  Reserve  Bank  failed  in  following  the  dictum  that  Dr.  Patel 
prescribed? 
I don’t believe so. 
In fact I will argue that the Reserve Bank’s action is fully consistent with Dr. Patel’s dictum of 
trying to protect growth with price stability. 
Let me explain.  
• 
Inflation is inimical to growth. There cannot be much disagreement on that.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Low  and  stable  inflation  is  an  essential  pre-condition  for  securing  medium-term 
growth.  Only  in  a  situation  of  price  stability  can  consumers  and  investors  make 
informed decisions.  
The Reserve Bank's monetary stance has been aimed at restraining demand and at 
managing inflation expectations. 
Admittedly,  monetary  tightening  has  resulted  in  some  sacrifice  of  growth  in  the 
short-term. That is an inevitable price to pay for price stability. But the sacrifice in 
growth is only in the short-term. In the medium-term, there is no trade-off between 
growth and inflation. 
Philips curve 
Another  facet  of  this  growth-inflation  debate  that  has  played  out  in  the  recent  period  has 
been the growth-inflation trade-off in the context of the Philips curve. 
• 
The  argument  is  that  we  can  raise  growth  by  tolerating  higher  inflation.  This  is 
misguided. 
Relationship between growth and inflation is non-linear. 
There is a threshold level of inflation. 
Below the threshold, may be, there is a trade-off between growth and inflation. 
Above  the  threshold,  there  is  no  trade-off  between  growth  and  inflation,  higher 
inflation actually leads to loss of growth. With WPI inflation at 7.25 per cent and CPI 
inflation in double digits, we are way above the threshold. 
What  is  the  threshold  level  of  inflation?  That  maybe  around  5  per  cent.  Inflation 
today is above the threshold. 
  Dr. Patel’s dictum about maintaining growth with price stability is the quintessential objective 
of monetary policy. 
• 
That  is  something  that  we  are  deeply  conscious  of  and  that  is  something  we  are 
adhering to in the Reserve Bank even today.  
Communication challenges 
II. 
The  second  issue  I  want  to  talk  about  is  communication  challenges.  There  is  a  paper  by 
Dr. Patel and I quote a sentence from the paper: 
“Apart  from  communicating  its  own  slant  on  national  and  international  trends, 
there are three special areas which need attention. The first is the glamorous but 
elusive  area  of  what  the  Central  Bank  communicates  and  how  it  does  so  in 
relation to its specific responsibility for monetary and foreign exchange policy; the 
second is communication on issues in regard to its regulatory functions; and the 
last is communication with the government of the day, including Parliament.”  
Oxymoron 
I am deeply struck by this statement by Dr. Patel. Not so much by the content, not so much 
by the context, but by the fact that Dr. Patel chose to say it at all. Because in the time that 
Dr. Patel wrote this communication by central banks was an oxymoron. 
As Dr. Patel himself admits: 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
“I belong to an age when central bank governors, like children, were supposed to 
be seen, not heard. Although they were allowed to smile in public, they  had to 
emulate Mona Lisa and maintain an aura of mystery.” 
How is the Reserve Bank today going to be evaluated on the basis of Dr. Patel’s exhortation 
to be more meaningfully communicative. 
Alan Greenspan – the doyen of communication! 
It  would  be  blasphemous  to  speak  about  central  bank  communication  without  first  paying 
tribute to the doyen of communication – Alan Greenspan. So let me get on with it. 
I  will  not  of  course  tell  you  the  joke  about  his  marriage  proposal  to  his  future  wife.  That’s 
hackneyed. 
Greenspan is notoriously famous for transforming central bank communication to an art form. 
In 1987 shortly after he took over as Chairman of the Federal Reserve, he said, “Since I’ve 
become  a  central  banker  I’ve  learned  to mumble  with  great  incoherence.  If I  seem  unduly 
clear to you, you must have misunderstood what I said.” 
After nearly 15 years on the job, in October 2001, Greenspan took a complete U turn saying 
that, “Openness is more than just useful in shaping better economic performance. Openness 
is  an  obligation  of  a  central  bank  in  a  free  and  democratic  society.  Transparency  of  our 
activities is the means by which we make ourselves accountable to our fellow citizens to aid 
them in judging whether we are worthy of that task”. 
IG Patel – prescient 
By  commenting  on  communication,  much  before  central  bank  communication  became  an 
intellectually fashionable issue, Dr. Patel had been remarkably prescient. 
Let me comment on contemporary perspectives on communication policy. 
Why is central bank communication important? 
Over the last two decades, central banks have moved towards clearer communication and 
greater transparency. This has been driven by several motivations. 
First  and  foremost,  central  banks  have  realized  that  open  and  transparent  communication 
enhances policy effectiveness by way of achieving expected outcomes. This shift in central 
bank theology from deliberate obscurity to greater transparency actually reflects a shift in the 
theory of monetary policy. 
Robert Lucas 
Up until the early 1990s, monetary policy was strongly influenced by Nobel Laureate Robert 
Lucas’ argument that monetary policy affected real variables, like growth, only if the policy 
changes were unanticipated. This encouraged obscurity over openness and clarity. However, 
lost  in  the  debate  after  Lucas’  statement  was  the  message  that  monetary  policy  always 
affected nominal variables like inflation, even if fully anticipated. 
Two Nobel Laureates 
In  the  1980s,  two  economists,  also  Nobel  winners,  Finn  Kydland  and  Ed  Prescott,  argued 
that fully transparent rules rather than discretionary policy were more efficient and credible. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
This was the beginning of the push towards rules over discretion and greater central bank 
transparency. 
Change in US Fed 
The most eloquent illustration of this shift from obscurity towards transparency is the change 
in the communication strategy of the US Fed. It is hard to imagine from today’s perspective, 
but prior to 1994, the US Fed did not disclose the Fed Funds Rate; the market was supposed 
to  infer  the  rate  from  the  timing,  sequencing  and  magnitude  of  the  FED's  open  market 
operations. 
In sharp contrast, today the Fed not only announces the rate but also gives a clear indication 
of future policy trajectory. 
Communication as policy – extended period 
Sometimes, communication, instead of being a vehicle for policy, becomes the policy itself. 
Drawing  yet  again  from  the  US  experience  during  the  crisis,  the  Fed  realized  that  its 
repeated announcement of keeping rates low ‘for an extended period’ led markets to reach a 
certain  inference  on  what  “extended  period”  could  mean.  In  this  context,  some  policy 
analysts  argued  that  a  step  that  the  Fed  should  modify  the  language  of  the  statement  to 
communicate to investors that it anticipates keeping the target Federal Funds rate low for a 
longer period than what the markets were factoring it to be. In fact, the Fed did just that – by 
saying explicitly that the low interest rate regime will last into 2014, much more specific that 
what the market wanted. 
Yet  another  factor  that  has  motivated  central  banks  into  placing  larger  emphasis  on 
communication is their hard earned autonomy in the years before the crisis. Central banks 
have  increasingly  embraced  more  open  communication  to  counter  the  criticism  that  an 
autonomous  central  bank  comprising  unelected  decision  makers  was  inconsistent  with  a 
democratic structure. 
Communication in Reserve Bank 
In the Reserve Bank, we have tried to improve communication not only on monetary policy 
but  across  the  entire  spectrum  of  our  mandate.  We  have  make  efforts  to  demystify  the 
Reserve Bank. 
We continue to make explicit efforts to improve the communication of the Reserve Bank. 
i. 
ii. 
Streamlined the policy documents 
Forward guidance – manage the risk that market does not ignore the conditionality 
and interpret the guidance on an irrevocable commitment. 
Post-policy press conferences and interviews 
Teleconference with analysts 
Dissemination through our regional offices  
On all areas, even extending beyond monetary policy, we put out Discussion papers 
– New Bank licences – Most extensive communication exercise. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
Dilemmas in communication 
It  is  not  as  if  more  communication  is  better  communication.  Even  as  central  banks  are 
becoming more communicative, they are struggling with dilemmas: 
i. 
What do we tell? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
How do we tell? 
How much do we tell? 
ii. 
iii. 
Dictum  to  central  banks  used  to  be  what  mothers  across  cultures  and  across  time  have 
always told their children – 
“If you can’t say anything nice, don’t say anything at all.” 
But the drive for transparency has changed that. Now the dictum is: “hold back information 
only if it is absolutely necessary to hold it back.” 
It is a struggle that we fight every day. 
For example, the Financial Stability Reports – 
• 
• 
• 
That is a challenge that we in the Reserve Bank contend with, not about what to disclose but 
about how much to disclose and in what form to say it. 
True picture of the financial sector  
But that could trigger a disruptive reaction and even panic  
A situation that could be managed and contained can implode  
Responsibility of the Governor to Speak Up 
III. 
I will now talk about the responsibility of the Governor. I quote from Dr. Patel: 
“But  the  point  is,  when  such  vital  questions  arise,  the  Governor  cannot just  be 
inactive.  He  is  a  public  servant  with  loyalty  to  the  country  and  the  Constitution 
– not just to a government in transit. And yet, he cannot behave as if every issue 
is of great import. He has to choose his ground and be discreet above all. Without 
offending  the  government  he  can  start  a  debate  and  steer  the  argument  in  a 
certain  direction.  His  ultimate  defense  is  democracy  and  the  tradition  of  free 
debate.”  
In short what Dr. Patel said was, don’t nitpick. Pick your battles. Once you have picked your 
battles, fight those battles valiantly. 
I  want  to  pay  a  tribute  to  all  my  predecessor  Governors  who  have  followed  this  dictum. 
Several  important  reform  measures  in  the  country  and  policy  initiatives  owe  their  origin 
through  the  debates  generated  by  the  Governors.  Of  course,  they  are  articulating  the 
institutional wisdom of the Reserve Bank. 
Over  the  last  four  years  we  have  tried  to  raise  a  number  of  issues  in  the  public  domain 
because we believed that they needed to be debated: 
• 
• 
role and responsibility of the Reserve Bank for financial stability. 
the importance of protecting the independence of the central bank and indeed of all 
regulators.  
the importance of being earnest about fiscal responsibility. 
setting exemplary standards for corporate governance. 
• 
• 
Government and the Reserve Bank are not adversaries. They share common goals. I think 
some  disagreement  is  natural.  There  are  disagreements  with  the  Government,  there  are 
disagreements  between  the  Government  and  regulators  and  public  policy  institutions.  We 
know  that  wisdom  arises  out  of  disagreement  and  debate.  What  we  need  is  a  wise 
mechanism for distilling wisdom out of this disagreement. 
Dr. Patel rightly says that the ultimate defence for the Governor and of course the Reserve 
Bank is democracy and tradition of free debate. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Central banks render accountability – particularly important because central bank officials are 
unelected and therefore have no electoral mandate. We take decisions that affect the entire 
country. So we must be sensitive to render accountability for our actions and the results of 
those actions. 
Advising the Advisers 
IV. 
The final point I want to talk on is advising the advisers. There is a short piece in the book, it 
is  actually  a  book  review  that  Dr.  Patel  wrote  about  Government  advisers.  That  struck  a 
chord with me. 
It  is  about  role  and  responsibility  of  government  economists  and  their  influence  on  public 
policy. Particularly important because Dr. Patel was among the first of economic advisers in 
the Government. 
Dictum to economists in government has always been: “focus on objective analysis and give 
competent, unbiased and professional advice. Do not worry about political feasibility.” 
What  struck  me  while  reading  this  is  that  this  is  precisely  the  value  system  taught  to  civil 
servants: 
• 
Your job is to advise the political executive on policy and to implement that policy 
diligently.  
You shouldn’t be biased by politics  
Indeed you shouldn’t be biased by any extraneous consideration  
Give your professional advice and let the political executive decide  
• 
• 
• 
With over 35 years experience as a civil servant, I am beginning to be sceptical about this 
paradigm. Is it not too strait jacketed? 
Should  the  civil  servant  limit  himself  to  giving  objective  advice  or  should  he  also  be 
concerned about its feasibility? 
If the civil servant suggests options that are totally infeasible, they are not adding value. They 
are only making life more difficult for the political executive. 
New  theory  –  you  give  honest,  dispassionate  advice.  But  in  doing  so,  be  sensitive  to  the 
democratic feasibility of the solution you suggest. 
I am not saying that civil servants should be politicised or be less than honest. Only saying 
that they should suggest practical, workable, democratically feasible solutions. 
Question in the context of Dr. Patel’s piece is 
• 
Is  the  code  of  conduct  for  government  economists  any  different  from  that  for 
bureaucrats? 
In  other  words,  should  government  economists  also  tailor  their  advice  based  on 
feasibility,  or  leave  that  to  be  determined  by  the  bureaucracy  and  the  political 
executives? 
 Conclusion 
I have commented on a few issues raised by Dr. Patel 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
the objective of monetary policy 
communication challenges of central banks 
responsibility of the Governor to generate public debate on vital public policy issues 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
iv. 
the code of conduct for government advisers  
These articles have been written over a long period – 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
World has changed 
World views have changed 
India has changed 
The Reserve Bank has changed 
Economics has changed 
Value system 
What has not changed in all this flux is the value system that must guide public servants. 
It is that value system that Dr. I.G. Patel embodied in full. 
The Reserve Bank is proud of the legacy left behind by Dr. Patel and is delighted to renew its 
association with him through this book launch. 
Congratulations to the editors 
Dr. Deena Khatkhate 
Dr. Y.V. Reddy 
Thanks once again to Mrs. Patel and Oxford University Press for this opportunity. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
