Ivan Iskrov: Association of Banks in Bulgaria – 20 years 
Congratulatory address by Mr Ivan Iskrov, Governor of the Bulgarian National Bank, to the 
Association of Banks in Bulgaria on the occasion of the 20th Anniversary of the Association’s 
Foundation, Sofia, 3 April 2012. 
 Mr. President, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Dear colleagues and friends, 
It  is  a  great  honour  and  a  pleasure  for  me  to  be  here  today  commemorating  with  you  the 
20th Anniversary of the guild of the banking profession – the Association of Banks in Bulgaria. 
This is a perfect opportunity to congratulate the Association for the long way it successfully 
traversed, and along which it established itself as one of the most reputed trade associations 
in the Republic of Bulgaria. All these years the Association consistently assisted its members 
in pursuing their banking business and protecting their interests, all the while standing as a 
stable  and constructive  partner  of  the  central  bank,  as  the banking  regulatory  authority,  of 
other government authorities, and of the representatives of the business. 
Therefore,  we  the  members  of  the  BNB  Governing  Council  are  all  pleased  to  attend  this 
occasion  as  a  proof  of  the  respect  cherished  by  the  central  bank’s  management  for  your 
work and professional achievements! 
Behind the ABB’s history stands the individual road of achievements, but also of challenges, 
of each one of the Association’s members. As an anniversary usually brings up both a tally of 
what was done in the past, and wishes for the future, I will try to have some measure of both 
in my congratulatory address to you. 
Practicing  our  profession  involves  our  capability  to  serve  society  and  help  the  Bulgarian 
economy.  Because,  as  we  are  all  very  well  aware,  banks  have  high  responsibilities  in  a 
market  economy  –  the  ongoing  technological  innovation,  developing  and  offering  new 
products  and  services, as  well  as  the  predictability  and stability  of  banks  are  a mandatory 
prerequisite for economic prosperity. From my first day as a BNB Governor to this very day, I 
have  never  stopped  reiterating  and  instilling  the  idea  that  this  responsibility  requires  the 
individual efforts of each one of us to be governed by a long-term goal – let’s call it a sense 
of mission – which goes beyond the specific financial or market considerations of the current 
day. It is exactly a jubilee like today’s that reminds us of the historic horizons behind the daily 
statistics, balance sheets or income statements, which ultimately mark the road of new and 
democratic Bulgaria. 
Speaking of history, exactly the current crisis stirs the need to examine the past. It is often 
said  about  this  crisis  that  it  has  been  the  biggest  one  globally  in  the  recent  decades. 
Although we are in the fourth year after the collapse of Lehman Brothers, which triggered the 
turmoil on the global financial markets, the ripples of which we still evidence, the Bulgarian 
banking sector continues to stand out with its stability and predictability. 
Irrespective  of  the  unfavourable  general  economic  situation,  the  banks  in  this  country 
demonstrated  flexibility  and  operational  efficiency,  enabling  them  to  preserve  significant 
capital and liquidity buffers. Although loan portfolio quality deteriorated (as of end-2011 the 
share  of  bad  loans  was  14.93%),  the  banking  sector  continues  to  have  at  its  disposal 
adequate  degree  of  provisioning  and  capital  protection.  The  sum  of  loan  impairment 
according  to  the  International  Financial  Reporting  Standards,  specific  provisions  for  credit 
risk  and  capital  surplus  (i.e.  the  capital  in  the  system  in  excess  of  the  required  regulatory 
minimum)  amounts  to  103%  of  the  gross  amount  of  bad  loans.  Notwithstanding  the 
considerable increase of provisioning costs in the recent three years, the banking system has 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
never stopped generating positive financial results which increase the capital buffer. And in 
the  cases  of  shortage  or  lack  of  profit  in  an  institution,  the  BNB  exercised  supervisory 
pressure  on  shareholders  to  invest  additional  capital.  Today  our  banking  sector  enjoys 
extremely  high  indicators  (including  compared  to  international  practices)  of  liquidity 
(25.87% as of February this year) and capital adequacy (17.53% as of December last year, 
including 15.74% Tier 1 capital adequacy), without counting a single lev of public funds in 
calculating these ratios, at that. 
Bulgaria  remained  one  of  the  few  EU  member  states,  where  not  a  single  credit  institution 
needed to be rescued with taxpayers’ money. Banks in this country not only could never be 
blamed for the economic downturn and have not been a source of systemic risks but just the 
opposite – they continue to be one of the main pillars of the macroeconomic and financial 
stability in the country. 
As  a  logical  outcome,  the  stability  of  the  banks  in  Bulgaria  has  won  the  confidence  of 
domestic depositors – by the end of February the deposits of households increased year on 
year  by  13.2%.  Owing  to  this,  an  important  structural  trend  is  noticeably  confirmed  – 
gradually  and  with  no  significant  upward  pressure  on  the  interest  rates  on  deposits,  the 
dependence  on  attracted  resources  from  external  sources  has  been  reduced  to  an 
acceptable  minimum.  For  example,  at  the  end  of  February  around  12%  of  total  attracted 
resources  were  from  foreign  parent  banks,  compared  to  almost  one  fourth  at  the  end  of 
2008). 
When  we  look  back  we  realise  that  the  current  state  of  the  banking  system  in  Bulgaria  is 
largely due to what was done over the years immediately preceding the global crisis. Instilling 
a prudent behaviour in the banks in that period through BNB’s conservative and anti-cyclical 
supervisory  policies,  regardless  of  the  pursuit  of  market  shares  and  profits,  equipped  the 
banks for the ensuing crisis with solid liquid and capital buffers. 
This prudent behaviour of the banks and the BNB during the economic boom, however, also 
had  its  origins  further  back  in  history.  It  followed  the  well-learnt  lessons  from  a  still  earlier 
period – the great financial and banking crisis in the mid-1990s.  
We  will  leave  it  to  researchers  into  Bulgaria’s  modern  economic  history  to  mark  out  the 
different stages – such as for instance the initial point at the onset of transition characterized 
by  a  huge  state  ownership  in  the  banks  and  the  hectic  emergence  of  a  great  number  of 
private  banks  amidst  a  just-forming  banking  supervision  and  regulations;  the  state’s 
interference in the credit processes and banks’ decapitalisation in the mid-1990s; the sector 
gradually freeing itself from political dependence; the privatisation and foreign capital inflow 
(mainly from EU countries); the development of modern regulations and the building up of 
supervisory  experience.  However,  even  now  we  could  sum  up,  and  it  would  not  at  all  be 
far-fetched, that the history of modern banking is the best part of Bulgaria’s history of socio-
economic transition after the changes that took place in 1989. 
Today Bulgaria has a modern and sound banking system.  
Still,  a  responsible  behaviour  implies  the  need  of  not  only  recognising  what  has  been 
achieved, but preserving it too. Because the banking sector in Bulgaria has played a major 
role  for  the  overall  economic  growth  after  the  stabilisation  and  the  introduction  of  the 
currency board regime in 1997. The average annual real rate of GDP growth in Bulgaria in 
the period 1998–2011 stood at 4% and the real cumulative growth in the same period was 
63.5%. At the same time, the added value posted by the sector, classified by the national 
statistics as “finance and insurance”, boasted an average annual real growth of 13.3%, and 
cumulatively  for  the  same  period  –  a  notable  384.9%.  All  that  time,  around  1/6  of  the 
country’s  GDP  growth  was  contributed  by  this  sector,  which  is  largely  dominated  and 
represented by the banks. 
Besides being a factor of economic growth, the banking system has played a significant role 
for  attracting  foreign  direct  investments  to  Bulgaria.  A  total  of  BGN  76.6  billion  in  foreign 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
direct investments inflow was registered over the period from 1998 to 2011, of which over 
1/6 (BGN 11.9 billion) were direct investments in the banking sector in particular. 
Not lastly, the banking sector accounts for a large part of the “brightest” share in Bulgaria’s 
economy. The role of banks in Bulgaria should not be considered in isolation from the fact 
that  they  are  among  the  biggest  and  most  immaculate  employers.  In  2011  the  number  of 
full-time  employees  in  the  banking  system  reached  33  677  at  year-end.  With  the  BGN 
77.6 million  in  tax  costs  and  BGN  722.8  million  in  personnel  costs  paid  in  2011  only,  for 
example, the banking sector ranks among the largest taxpayers and contributors to the social 
security system in Bulgaria. Please note that these numbers do not even take into account 
the contribution by the central bank. 
Therefore,  all  that  is  good  for  the  banking  system  and  allows  it  to  perform  its  traditional 
functions, is also good for the Bulgarian economy. Our country can ill afford to do without the 
banks’  considerable  positive  contribution  to  economic  growth  –  which  will  be  the  effect, 
unfortunately, if the policymakers succumbed to certain populist sentiments that have been 
promoted recently by some figures who would use every occasion to come onto the media 
stage.  There  is  no  reason  for  the  banks  in  Bulgaria  to  be  additionally  burdened  by 
ill-considered administrative regulations and the related costs. Quite the contrary, the weight 
of  such  additional  burden  would  turn  back  as  a  boomerang  against  the  interests  of  our 
society and the Bulgarian economy in general. 
The  nihilistic  attitudes  to  our  own  achievements  in  the  past  hold  back  enterprise  and  the 
ability to plan for the future. That slows down the economy. Simply not knowing one’s own 
economic history, however, could lead to making decisions with very adverse implications. 
Therefore, the best we could wish ourselves for the future with regard to the sector and the 
economy  as  a  whole  is  that  in  the  future  the  public  interference  in  the  banking  area  in 
Bulgaria continues mainly within the confines of prudential and conservative regulations and 
supervisory practices.  
Undermining the good name of the sector is a no-win strategy as this would limit and make 
the services offered by  banks costlier, which would eventually harm customers and thwart 
economic growth. In this context, please allow me to also quote the call of the Head of State 
who,  following  his  meeting  with  the  BNB  Governing  Council  in  February,  summed  up  the 
situation in a fine and very pragmatic way: “The State should continue to work for the good 
reputation of our banking system, which is a precondition for more favourable lending and is 
of benefit to people”. 
Looking ahead now, we need to stress that coping well in these times of crisis so far does 
not mean that we can afford to be less watchful or less precise in our next steps. This year, 
too, will be rich in new challenges. Based on the current projections for a recession in the 
euro  area,  we  expect  that  the  growth  rate  of  the  Bulgarian  economy  would  slow  down  to 
about 0.7% in 2012, and this would have a direct impact on the potential of banks in Bulgaria 
to generate incomes from sources of their own. The weak demand for new loans is facing 
banks with a double challenge. On the one hand, it will be difficult for them to accumulate 
new  buffers  from  profits;  and  on  the  other  hand,  the  existing  classified  assets  will  go  on 
putting pressure on the available reserves. While seeking new business opportunities, you 
should very carefully approach the question of capital planning. Because you are well aware 
that the BNB makes no compromises with safety. 
The  President  of  the  Republic  of  Bulgaria  is  present  today,  so  I  am  tempted  to  take 
advantage  and  draw  the  attention  of  the  responsible  State  institutions  to  some  significant 
gaps in the commercial legislation. Legal and subjective obstacles get in the way of reducing 
the share of non-performing loans. Bulgaria is no exception among the countries of Central 
and Eastern Europe where the winding-up and insolvency proceedings, as well as the sale of 
the  collateral,  are  relatively  more  sluggish.  Regretfully,  in  Bulgaria  the  cases  of  unethical 
debtors taking advantage of some weaknesses of the existing insolvency proceedings, which 
allow  them  to  manipulate  the  initial  date  of  insolvency  and  nullify  the  pieces  of  collateral 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
pledged  after  that  date,  are  becoming  more  and  more  frequent.  The  problems  with  the 
insolvency and winding-up court proceedings in the corporate sector inhibit the rehabilitation 
of banks’ books (i.e. that part of banks’ balance sheet assets which has been hit the hardest 
during  the  crisis).  This  prolongs  the  procedures  and  increases  the  costs  for  managing  the 
so-called “bad loans”, which negatively affects banks’ capacity to take new credit risk at an 
acceptable cost. Hampering the lending processes in turn impedes the economic growth in 
the country, and hence – employment and people’s living standards.  
Since  one  of  the  banks’  major  tasks  still  is  to  strengthen  their  loan  portfolios,  the  slower 
growth  rate  of  the  economy  and  the  slower  improvement  in  the  economic  profile  of  some 
categories of clients would force banks to look for new niches for business. This may lead to 
greater specialisation in certain types of services and to more intense competition for every 
new client. I would like to point out that the increased competition does not exclude the need 
for you to keep up a high level of correctness in your relations with one another and with your 
clients. 
While the bank services market is getting saturated, consumers’ awareness is being raised. 
The  stronger  competition  in  the  banking  sector  also  promotes  new  approaches  in  the 
dealings  with  clients1.  One  possible  room  for  competition  between  credit  institutions  is,  for 
instance,  the  transparency  and  predictability  of  structuring,  and  especially  of  pricing,  their 
products  and  services.  One  should  work  more  for  the  benefit  of  clients,  adopting  a  more 
individual  approach  to  those  facing  difficulties,  summing  up  and  analysing  the  experience 
gained  and  drawing  conclusions  that  could  be  put  to  good  use  in  new  and  better  banking 
practices. The happy client is the cheapest advertising for the bank. 
The work done in each of the above problematic areas allows for a more active presence  
– at an expert level and in the public area – both of the individual banks’ representatives and 
of  the  ABB  as  their  legitimate  and  highly  reputable  association.  With  its  twenty  years  of 
experience the ABB is now mature enough to stop looking on itself only as an intra-branch 
organisation  and  to  “open  up”  so  as  to  actively  and  publicly  uphold  the  views  of  the 
Association members and their loyal clients. 
I will finish by assuring you that we at the BNB will also continue to work invariably for the 
financial stability of Bulgaria and to enable the banking system to support the growth of the 
Bulgarian economy. You know that a considerable part of our activity is done in a way that is 
invisible to the public, including outside the country where the BNB participates in numerous 
bodies  and  working  initiatives  of  the  EU  and  the  ECB.  An  example  of  this  is  the  issue  of 
financial transaction tax – an ill-advised concept which has turned out to suit politicians with 
populist leanings in Europe. For over two years the BNB has been defending with firmness 
and argumentation the position that this tax would be detrimental to both the EU economy 
and the Bulgarian economy. Luckily, just a few days ago (at the informal ECOFIN meeting in 
Copenhagen on 30 and 31 March) some of the biggest EU countries, like Germany, which 
had most ardently insisted on introducing a financial transaction tax, practically gave up on 
that  idea  because  reaching  an  agreement  in  the  entire  EU  proved  impossible.  This  is  an 
example of how Bulgaria can and should stand up for its own national economic interests, 
opposing (and even forming situational “coalitions”), if necessary, the large countries in the 
EU which as a rule pass their own interests as interests of the entire EU. The BNB is also a 
constructive opponent of the Bulgarian institutions when it sees that rash proposals are being 
put  forward  that  may  have  an  adverse  effect  on  the  stability  and  economic  growth  in  the 
country. 
                                                 
1 
I dislike the phrase “financial services consumer” because it brings to my mind associations with expending, 
eating or consuming (in the negative sense) without any efforts made and one-off, and this phrase does not 
consider  the  interest  of  the  counterparty  who  is  implicitly  unethical.  Whereas  “client”  implies  reciprocity, 
discretion and a long-term relationship. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Thus, what has been achieved so far gives us confidence in ourselves and optimism about 
the future of the banking sector in Bulgaria. Despite all the difficulties, the banks in Bulgaria 
bear  responsibility  not  only  for  going  forward  as  sustainable  and  successful  business 
enterprises,  but  also  for  taking  their  clients  and  the  whole  economy  through  the  times  of 
crises.  We  do  hope  that  in  the  coming  years  the  banking  community’s  voice  of  common 
sense will be heard by the State institutions, businesses and society at large. Because we 
have  learnt  from  experience  that  a  well-functioning  banking  system  is  a  necessary 
pre-condition for the economic prosperity of our home country. 
Dear colleagues, happy anniversary!  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
