Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Participation of Japanese financial institutions in 
Malaysia 
Speech by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the Launch of 
Bank of Tokyo Mitsubishi (M) Berhad Penang Branch, Penang, 13 July 2012. 
 The speech was read by Assistant Governor, Mr Donald Joshua Jaganathan. 
In  these  highly  uncertain  economic  times,  several  of  the  developed  economies  are 
challenged  to  bring  about  growth  and  job  creation  while  addressing  several  fundamental 
weaknesses  in  their  economies  and  financial  systems.  While  emerging  economies  have 
been affected by these developments, most are still on a positive growth path. 
Asia, in this environment, continues to be an important growth centre in the global economy. 
While  growth  may  have  moderated,  it  has  still  remained  at  levels  that  have  sustained  job 
creation. Much of this growth is driven by domestic demand and the increased connectivity 
among  the  emerging  economies  in  the  region.  Economic  flexibility  and  strong  financial 
systems  have  supported  this  trend.  In  Malaysia,  while  the  slower  external  demand  has 
affected our growth, strong domestic demand and our close economic linkages in the region 
have continued to underpin our steady growth path. 
The Malaysian financial system has long had a tradition of the participation of foreign owned 
banking  institutions.  A  number  of  foreign  owned  banking  institutions  began  their  foothold 
here in Penang over a hundred years ago. This was due to Penang’s role then as a main 
entreport for the export of its hinterland commodities of rubber and tin. At that time, Penang 
had  become  a  centre  of  banking  in  Malaysia.  Therefore  the  oldest  bank  in  Malaysia  first 
opened its doors in Penang in 1875, then known as the Chartered Bank of India, Australia 
and China to cater to the financial requirements of early European traders. A number of other 
major banks also followed suit and established their operations in Penang to serve the large 
number  of  international  traders  who  engaged  and  participated  in  Penang’s  vibrant  trade 
activities. While Malaysia’s financial centre has shifted to Kuala Lumpur, the importance of 
Penang  as  a  major  economic  contributor  to  Malaysia’s  economy  remains  significant.  Most 
financial  institutions  have  large  branches  here  in  Penang  with  sizeable  operations.  The 
opening  of  the  Bank  of  Tokyo  Mitsubishi’s  branch  here  today  demonstrates  not  only  the 
continued expansion of Malaysian financial system, but that this expansion is well supported 
by a fundamentally stable economy that continues to perform during these most challenging 
of times. 
The  decision  of  Bank  of  Tokyo  Mitsubishi  to  set  up  its  newest  branch  will  not  only  be 
supported  by  the  large  presence  of  Japanese  customers  but  the  continued  ongoing 
investment  activity  here  in  Malaysia’s  northern  region. We  also  recognise  the  in-roads  the 
bank has made in the area of Islamic finance by way of offering new financial products and 
services including to international customers. 
Malaysia  warmly  welcomes  the  continued  participation  of  Japanese  financial  institutions  in 
both  the  domestic  financial  sector  and  in  the  Labuan  International  Business  and  Financial 
Centre.  As  at  June  2012,  there  are  now  4  commercial  banks,  4  insurance  companies, 
1 reinsurance  company  and  1  joint-venture  takaful  operator  from  Japan,  operating  in 
Malaysia.  Through  this  participation,  the  Malaysian  financial  system  has  greatly  benefited 
from Japanese investments through the transfer of expertise, knowledge and technology as 
well as through enhanced economic interlinkages. 
On  this  note,  I  wish  to  congratulate  Bank  of  Tokyo  Mitsubishi  (Malaysia)  Berhad  on  this 
occasion of the commencing of their operations here. I also wish the management and staff 
of the Penang branch every success in its endeavours and look forward to its contribution to 
our economy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
