Anand Sinha: Small is still beautiful and competitive – reflections on the 
growth of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) in India 
Address by Mr Anand Sinha, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the National 
Conference on “Enhancing Competitiveness with MSME linkages”, organised by the Indian 
Chamber of Commerce, Kolkata, 12 July 2012. 
 Inputs  provided  by  Ms  L  Vadera,  Dr  Singala  Subbaiah  Mr  Brij  Raj  and  Mr  Jayakumar  Yarasi  are  gratefully 
acknowledged.  
Mr. Partha Chatterjee, Hon’ble Minister in Charge, Department of Commerce and Industries, 
Government  of  West  Bengal,  Dr.  Manas  Ranjan  Bhunia,  Hon’ble  Minister  in  Charge, 
Department of Micro and Small Scale Enterprises and Textiles, Government of West Bengal, 
Dr.  Rajeev  Singh,  Director  General,  Indian  Chamber  of  Commerce,  Kolkata,  and  other 
distinguished invitees. I am indeed happy to be a part of this national conference. 
This  conference  is  very  timely  for  several  reasons.  First,  macroeconomic  and  financial 
stability  is  being  pursued  all  over  the  world  including  India,  following  the  Global  Financial 
Crisis.  Recovery  from  recessions  following  financial  crises  takes  much  longer  due  to  the 
overhang  of  debt  because  high  leverage  is  almost  invariably  the  cause  of  all  the  financial 
crises. Hence, the pace of recovery from the current crisis is very slow and uncertain. In this 
scenario, a strengthened and more resilient Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME) 
sector  would  aid  in  economic  recovery  and  add  greater  stability  to  the  system.  Second, 
inclusive growth is being accorded very high priority and is being assiduously pursued by the 
policy  makers  through  financial  inclusion,  financial  literacy  and  consumer  protection 
initiatives. MSMEs are not only envisaged to be major beneficiaries of these efforts but are 
also expected to facilitate financial inclusion from the demand side. Third, the deterioration in 
trade balance of the country requires urgent focus on exports. MSMEs have a critical role to 
play in enhancing our export competitiveness given their very significant share in exports.  
Several initiatives were taken over the years, by the Government of India and the Reserve 
Bank to enable the growth of MSMEs in recognition of their role in the overall development of 
the  economy.  I  would  classify  these  measures  into  three  broad  categories  –  institutional 
measures, policy support measures and measures enabling monitoring of the performance. 
Creation of institutions such as Industrial Development Bank of India (IDBI), Small Industries 
Development  Bank  of  India  (SIDBI),  National  Bank  for  Agriculture  and  Rural  Development 
(NABARD),  Export  Import  Bank  of  India  (EXIM  Bank),  State  Finance  Corporation  (SFC)s, 
State  Industrial  Development  Corporation  (SIDC)s,  National  Small  Industries  Corporation 
(NSIC), etc. has enabled necessary institutional support to MSMEs for meeting their credit 
needs. Inclusion of credit to MSMEs as part of the priority sector lending, policy package for 
stepping up credit flow to the SME sector in 2005, revised Credit Guarantee Scheme for the 
Micro  and  Small  enterprises  (MSEs),  Performance  and  Credit  Rating  Scheme  for  the 
manufacturing MSEs, MSE Cluster Development Programme and financial inclusion policies 
in the more recent past, have created the enabling policies for growth of MSMEs. Monitoring 
of credit flow to MSMEs from banks through off-site returns, onsite inspections and in fora 
such as SLBC etc. has put in place a strong monitoring mechanism to ensure increased flow 
of credit to MSMEs. 
During 2011–12, the Government of India has taken a number of measures to revitalize the 
MSME  sector  such  as  (i)  approval  of  the  public  procurement  policy  that  envisages 
procurement of a minimum of 20% of annual purchases of goods and services from Micro 
and Small enterprises by the Central Ministries/Departments/PSUs, which includes 4% (20% 
of  20%)  procurement 
from  Micro  and  Small  Enterprises  owned  by  scheduled 
caste/scheduled  tribe  (SC/ST)  entrepreneurs  (ii)  permission  to  set  up  stock  exchange/ 
trading platform for SMEs by recognized stock exchanges (iii) conducting skill development 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
programmes  for  4.78  lakh  persons  in  2011–12  (with  a  target  of  increasing  it  to  5.72  lakh 
persons  for  2012–13)  for  development  of  self  employment  opportunities  as  well  as  wage 
employment  opportunities  in  the  country  and  (iv)  adoption  of  cluster  approach  as  a  key 
strategy for enhancing the productivity and competitiveness as well as capacity building of 
MSEs in the country. 
The above measures have, certainly, provided an enabling environment and have facilitated 
the growth of MSMEs. I, however, believe that we have, so far, realized only a very small 
proportion of the vast potential of MSMEs. The latent and untapped potential of MSMEs, if 
nurtured  properly,  could  well  contribute  to  greater  employment  generation  and  higher 
economic growth of the country. 
Let  me,  therefore,  focus  the  rest  of  my  talk  on  the  role  of  MSMEs  in  our  economic 
development, issues in their development, policy response and the future agenda. 
Significance of the MSMEs 
I. 
I  cannot  over-emphasise  the  importance  of  MSMEs.  Way  back  in  1973,  British  economist 
E. F. Schumacher in his award winning book, “Small Is Beautiful: Economics As If People 
Mattered  ”  advanced  the  argument  that  it  is  the  small  and  appropriate  technologies  that 
empower people more. The Economic Survey, 2011–12 has stated “MSME is a dynamic and 
vibrant sector that nurtures entrepreneurial talent besides meeting social objectives including 
that  of  providing  employment  to  millions  of  people  across  the  country”  (pp:  217).  MSMEs 
constitute  the  dominant  form  of  business  organization  even  across  the  world  and  are  the 
major  providers  of  employment.  In  the  US,  for  instance,  small  businesses  employ  roughly 
one-half  of  all  Americans  and  account  for  about  60  per  cent  of  gross  job  creation1.  In  the 
OECD economies, SMEs and micro enterprises account for over 95 % of firms, 60–70% of 
employment, 55 % of GDP and a significant share of new jobs. 
In India, the MSME sector was projected to employ about 732 lakh persons in over 311 lakh 
enterprises  throughout  the  country  in  the  year  2010–11  and  is  next  only  to  agriculture  in 
employment  generation.  In  terms  of  output,  MSMEs  produce  more  than  6000  products 
ranging from machinery and equipment, to apparels to food products to furniture and account 
for 45 per cent of the manufacturing output and 40 per cent of the total exports of the country. 
MSE’s contribution to GDP has been on the increasing trend and was about 8.7 per cent in 
2008–09  (latest  available  figures).  Another  remarkable  feature  of  the  sector  was  that  it 
maintained a higher rate of growth vis-à-vis the overall industrial sector, consistently, during 
the  years  2004–08.  From  the  inclusive  growth  perspective,  it  is  to  be  emphasised  that  the 
labour-capital ratio of MSMEs is much higher compared to the larger industries.  
(Source: MSME Annual Report 2011–12) 
                                                  
1 
“Restoring the Flow of Credit to Small Businesses” – Remarks by Ben S Bernanke (Jul, 2010) 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Another  noteworthy  feature  of  MSME  sector  in  India  is  that  about  45.2  per  cent  of  the 
enterprises are located in rural areas, thus offering a great potential for rural development 
and  for  reducing  the  strain  on  urban  infrastructure.  The  fact  that  MSMEs  are  widely 
dispersed across the country also makes them highly important from a regional development 
perspective and as a means to promote balanced and equitable growth all over the country.  
Entrepreneurial  development,  I  would  say,  is  the  other  major  contribution  of  the  MSME 
sector. By encouraging entrepreneurs to take up projects that begin as just ideas, MSMEs 
enable realization of dreams. Microsoft, which is a software giant today, started off as a small 
business, as a dream developed by a young student with the help of family and friends. Our 
own Infosys is another example. We would be having many such seeds of ideas around, but 
unless they are nurtured with timely inputs in the form of credit, infrastructure and enabling 
policies, these seeds would remain unfructified. An enabling environment which encourages 
and nurtures such initiatives not only helps in realization of entrepreneurial dreams but also, 
more importantly, provides employment to many others, encourages other entrepreneurs to 
dream  big  and,  in  the  process,  benefits  the  economy  with  improved  productivity,  higher 
employment and enhanced competitiveness. 
The MSME sector in India is highly heterogeneous in terms of the size of the enterprises, 
variety of products and services and the levels of technology employed. Of the total number 
of registered MSMEs estimated at 15.64 lakh, a significant portion (94.9 per cent) are micro 
enterprises  while  small  and  medium  segment  enterprises  account  for  4.9  per  cent  and 
0.2 per cent respectively. While one end of the MSME spectrum comprises highly innovative 
and high growth enterprises, more than 90% of the MSMEs are small and unregistered, with 
a large number of them established in the unorganized sector.  
With so much of diversity amongst MSMEs in organisational structure, business segments, 
technological preparedness and geographical presence, the policy approach targeted at the 
development of the sector becomes so much challenging. Given their immense potential to 
bring about economic development, regional equality and general upliftment of population, it 
is, however, imperative that we squarely address the problems of the sector. 
 What ails MSMEs? 
low  production  capacity; 
II. 
There  are  many  factors  attributed  to  be  hindering  the  development  of  MSMEs.  They  are 
broadly financing, infrastructure, Government policies (taxes and regulation), marketing and 
technology. I recall a survey conducted some time back which ranked the constraints in this 
order – Finance, Marketing, Technology, Infrastructure, Government policies. As that study 
was dated, I am not sure what would be the order now. However, the finance related issues 
continue to be a major concern for MSMEs. 
Non-finance issues plaguing MSMEs include: difficulties in procurement of raw materials at 
competitive  prices; 
inadequate 
infrastructure  facilities;  lack  of  access  to  modern  technology;  constraints  on  modernization 
and expansion and lack of access to global markets.  
Owing to their small size, the MSMEs often find it difficult to achieve economies of scale and 
fail  to  capture  market  opportunities  which  require  large  production  facilities.  Further,  their 
small  size  hinders  the  internalization  of  functions  such  as  market  research,  technology 
innovation and market intelligence which impedes their productivity. However, it is not that 
their small size is always disadvantageous. MSMEs are agile and flexible and can leverage 
on these qualities to capitalise on their innovative ideas. While big enterprises have their own 
benefits  in  terms  of  their  size,  the  small  enterprises  should  use  their  small  size  to  their 
advantage. Of the three generic strategies formulated by Michael Porter, arguably the world’s 
best  strategy  thinker,  Cost  Leadership  is  generally  pursued  by  the  firms  that  enjoy  the 
benefits  of  economies  of  scale.  MSMEs,  on  the  other  hand,  can  adopt  Focusing  and/or 
Differentiation strategies to develop competitive advantage. 
lack  of  skilled  manpower; 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Financing gap 
III. 
Let  me  now  focus  on  the  financing  related  issues  faced  by  MSMEs.  Small  businesses 
generally rely on multiple sources of financing ranging from internal sources viz., personal 
funds and funds from friends, to external sources, both formal and informal, which include 
financing  from  banks,  NBFCs,  Venture  Capital  Funds  and  Angel  Funds  etc.  Recourse  to 
various financing sources depends upon the growth stage of the enterprise, the quantum of 
funds required, the maturity of the financial market and the policy environment. The Fourth 
Census  of  MSME  sector  revealed  that  only  5.18%  of  the  units  (both  registered  and 
unregistered) had availed of finance through institutional sources. While 2.05% had finance 
from non-institutional sources, the majority of units i.e. 92.77%, had no finance or depended 
on self finance.  
This  suggests  that  despite  best  efforts,  the  credit  flow  to  MSMEs  from  the  institutional 
sources is not commensurate with the economic activity undertaken by the MSMEs. Banks, 
on their part, lend a reasonable share of their credit to MSEs. As at the end of March 2012, 
the total outstanding credit provided by all Scheduled Commercial Banks (SCBs) to the micro 
and small sector (MSE) stood at Rs.5,242 billion as against Rs.4,785 billion in March 2011 
and Rs. 3,623 billion in March 2010. Credit to MSEs has, as a percentage of the Adjusted 
Net Bank Credit of Public Sector Banks, increased from 9.5% in 2005 to 14.8% in 2011.  
(Source: MSME Annual Report 2011–12) 
 Banks’ concerns in lending to MSMEs 
There are concerns that banks face while lending to smaller enterprises. Credit information 
about a small enterprise is not as easily available, as it is for a larger firm, and it is not cost 
effective  for  the  lender  to  collect  information  on  all  small  enterprises.  Nor  have  the  small 
enterprises adequate collaterals to offer. The lenders, therefore, either refrain from lending or 
load the cost of information asymmetry into the lending rates. Another important factor is that 
risk  assessment  of  smaller  enterprises  requires  a  separate  set  of  tool  as  against  the 
conventional  tools,  the  absence  of  which  is  likely  to  dissuade  banks  from  such  lending. 
Further, smaller enterprises, in many instances, revolve around a single entrepreneur – key 
man  –  and  lack  good  succession  planning  which  discourages  creditors  to  lend  to  such 
enterprises. 
Policy initiatives 
IV. 
Recognizing  the  important  role  played  by  MSMEs  in  economic  development  and  their 
sizeable contribution to employment and GDP, and realizing that financial access is critical 
for  MSMEs’  growth  and  development,  Government  and  Reserve  Bank  of  India  have 
undertaken a lot of supporting initiatives. Let me very briefly touch upon a few of them. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
With an objective of ensuring provision of banking services in all parts of the country, banks 
were advised to draw up a roadmap to provide banking services through a banking outlet in 
every unbanked village having a population of over 2,000 by March 2012. The Reserve Bank 
advised banks that such banking services need not necessarily be extended through a brick 
and mortar branch but could be provided also through Business Correspondents with the aid 
of  any  of  the  various  forms  of  Information  and  Communication  Technology  (ICT)  –  based 
models. A total of 74,414 such unbanked villages have been identified and allotted to various 
banks through State Level Bankers Committees (SLBCs). As at the end of March 2012, as 
reported by the State Level Bankers’ Committees of various states/Union Territories, banking 
outlets have been opened in 74,199 (97.7 per cent) villages across the various States in the 
country. This comprises of 2,493 branches, 69,374 business correspondents and 2,332 other 
modes like rural ATMs, mobile vans etc. The expanded banking coverage is envisaged to 
provide greater access to MSMEs operating in hitherto unbanked areas to avail of financial 
services. 
Further, based on the recommendations of the Working Group (Chairman: Shri V.K. Sharma, 
Executive  Director,  RBI)  constituted  by  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  to  review  the  Credit 
Guarantee  Scheme  (CGS)  of  the  Credit  Guarantee  Fund  Trust  for  Micro  and  Small 
Enterprises  (CGTMSE),  the  limit  for  collateral  free  loans  to  the  MSEs  has  been  increased 
from  the  level  of  Rs.  5  lakh  to  Rs.10  lakh  and  has  been  made  mandatory  for  banks.  The 
Working  Group  has  also  made  recommendations  regarding  increase  in  the  extent  of 
guarantee  cover,  absorption  of  guarantee  fees  for  the  collateral  free  loans  by  CGTMSE 
subject to certain conditions, simplification of procedure for filing claims with CGTMSE and 
increasing  awareness  about  the  scheme.  CGTMSE,  which  is  the  implementing  agency  for 
Credit  Guarantee  Scheme,  has  been  advised 
the 
recommendations.  The  implementation  should  result  in  enhanced  usage  of  the  Guarantee 
Scheme and facilitate increase in quality and quantity of credit to MSEs, leading, eventually, 
to sustainable and inclusive growth. 
Timely detection of sickness is critical for any enterprise as any delay in this regard impinges 
on the revival prospects of sick, but potentially viable, units. In order to speed up the process 
for identification of a unit as sick, a proposal for modifying the extant definition of sickness, in 
line with the recommendations of the Working Group on Rehabilitation of sick SMEs set up 
by  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  is  under  consideration  of  the  Government  of  India  and  the 
Reserve Bank of India.  
All Scheduled Commercial Banks have also been advised to review and put in place MSE 
Loan policy, Restructuring / rehabilitation policy and Non-discretionary One Time Settlement 
Scheme  for  recovery  of  non-performing  loans,  duly  approved  by  their  Board  of  Directors. 
Banks were advised in December 2009 to give wide publicity to the Non-discretionary One 
Time Settlement Scheme by placing it on their bank’s web-site and through other possible 
modes of dissemination.  
To address the complaints received from various industry Associations/Chambers that banks 
are  not  acknowledging  their  loan  applications,  all  banks  have  been  mandated  to 
acknowledge all loan applications, submitted manually or online, by their MSME borrowers 
and ensure that a running serial number is recorded on the application form as well as on the 
acknowledgement receipt.  
On  the  issues  of  alternate  sources  of  credit,  dedicated  exchange  for  MSMEs,  marketing, 
technology  up-gradation  and  infrastructure,  the  PM’s  Task  Force  has  made  several 
recommendations to address the bottlenecks. The implementation of the recommendations 
in a time bound manner is being monitored by the Government of India.  
Cleaner production polices help MSMEs to enhance energy efficiency, reduce emissions and 
increase profitability in the long run. Recovery of valuable by-products and increased access 
to  new  markets,  supply  chains  and  financing,  etc.,  are  other  benefits  of  such  cleaner 
implementation  of 
to  expedite 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
production  measures.  Institutions  such  as  SIDBI  are  offering  loans  for  energy  efficient 
projects, in this regard. MSMEs can consider making increasing use of such facilities. 
The  new  National  Manufacturing  Policy  announced  last  year  acknowledges  the  fact  that 
technology up-gradation is the only and the fastest way to be able to compete globally and 
ensure sustainable growth in the manufacturing sector. The policy proposes to establish a 
Technology  Acquisition  and  Development  Fund  that  will  address  the  concerns  across 
industries. It provides part-reimbursement for technology acquisition.  
In addition to these measures, the Reserve Bank of India has issued several instructions to 
commercial banks to enhance credit delivery and ensure timely and adequate flow of credit 
to the employment intensive MSME sector.  
V. 
Way forward 
Risk rating and pricing 
Credit  ratings  provide  lenders  with  the  information  about  borrowers’  creditworthiness  and 
enable them to take more efficient credit decisions. Borrowers with high credit ratings benefit 
by way of favourable borrowing terms such as lower collateral requirements, reduced interest 
rates, simplified lending norms and faster access to credit by banks and financial institutions. 
Reliable credit ratings, thus, facilitate availability of credit more easily and at fair cost. Ratings 
can also serve as a powerful self-improvement tool for SMEs and help them strengthen and 
fine-tune their operations. It is, however, generally observed that a vast population of MSMEs 
still  remains  unrated.  With  a  view  to  encourage  entities  to  get  themselves  rated,  part 
reimbursement  of  rating  fees  is  also  being  provided  through  National  Small  Industries 
Corporation (NSIC). MSMEs should seriously consider the benefits of credit rating and get 
themselves rated. Industry bodies may play an active role in educating MSMEs on the need 
and benefits of ratings. 
Access to capital 
Equity 
Equity forms an important constituent of MSME’s financing avenues given the peculiarity of 
their  business  model.  Most  MSMEs,  particularly  the  knowledge  based  enterprises,  which, 
when starting off, have negative cash flows and no collateral and, therefore, find it difficult to 
access  debt  capital  or  bank  financing.  Venture  /Risk  capital  is  often  a  more  appropriate 
financing  instrument  for  high-growth-potential  and  start-up  SMEs.  Firms  typically  look  for 
venture  capital  to  provide  them  with  the  financing  they  need,  to  expand,  break  into  new 
markets and grow faster. Thus, the ability of MSMEs (especially those involving innovations 
and new technologies) to access alternative sources of capital like angel funds/risk capital 
needs  to  be  enhanced  considerably  to  encourage  and  develop  entrepreneurship.  In  the 
Union Budget 2012–13 the Finance Minister has announced to set up a Rs.50 billion India 
Opportunities  Venture  Fund  with  SIDBI  to  enhance  the  availability  of  equity  to  the  MSME 
sector.  Based  on  the  recommendations  of  the  PM’s  Task  Force  on  MSMEs,  the  Bombay 
Stock  Exchange  and  the  National Stock  Exchange  have  also  set up a  separate dedicated 
exchange / platforms for listing and trading of shares of SMEs making it easier for them to 
raise equity capital.  
Debt 
For efficient capital structure decisions, an optimum mix of equity and debt is very important. 
Concerted  efforts  are  being  made  by  the  regulators  and  policy  makers  to  develop  the 
corporate bond market in view of its strategic role in helping the corporates raise domestic 
debt  capital  in  an  efficient,  transparent  and  faster  way.  As  the  corporate  bond  market 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
develops, we can expect innovations which would facilitate MSMEs to raising debt in a cost 
efficient manner.  
Factoring services 
Timely  payments  from  customers  will  help  SMEs  in  reducing  their  working  capital 
requirements leading to lower interest costs, improved profitability and a positive impact on 
the long-term health and sustainability of India’s SME sector. Delays in settlement of dues 
adversely affect the recycling of funds and business operations of the SME units. A study of 
5000  SMEs  by  CRISIL  shows  that  high  quantum  of  receivables  is  an  endemic  problem 
across industry sectors and geographies in the SME space. Smaller SMEs, perhaps due to 
their lower bargaining power, are in a more disadvantageous position with weaker receivable 
positions. The CRISIL study estimates that SMEs can enhance profits by at least 15% if they 
receive payments on time from their large corporate customers. 
It is, therefore, critical to ensure that the small entities are able to raise liquidity against their 
receivables. This problem can be institutionally tackled by factoring which provides liquidity to 
SMEs against their receivables and can be an alternative source of working capital. World 
over, factoring is a preferred route of accessing working capital for SMEs and even larger 
organisations. Some banks and financial institutions in India have already launched factoring 
services and I would urge more banks to offer such services, particularly for the MSMEs. To 
provide a legislative framework for factoring services, the Parliament has recently passed the 
Factoring  Regulation  Bill  that  would  address  delays  in  payment  and  liquidity  problems  of 
micro and small enterprises. 
Innovative credit schemes for MSMEs 
The  efforts  of  the  Ministry  of  Small  and  Medium  Enterprises,  SIDBI,  Government  of  India, 
state governments and the RBI notwithstanding, there continues to be a significant demand-
supply  mismatch  in  financing  MSMEs  on  account  of  perceived  high  credit  risk  involved  in 
financing such entities. Given the growing requirements of the sector, the need of the hour is 
to introduce innovative credit schemes for MSMEs such as supply-chain financing, whereby 
MSMEs  can  access  short-term  credit  against  the  supplies  while  they  await  payment.  This 
would  ease  the  working  capital  requirements  of  MSMEs  to  a  considerable  extent  and 
facilitate smoother operations. 
Products such as equipment lease finance can address the need for term finance, whereas 
products such as receivables financing, bills discounting, reverse factoring etc., could provide 
working  capital  finance.  Continued  financial  innovation  suiting  the  specific  needs  of  the 
sector  would  increase  the  financing  options  for  MSMEs  and  reduce  the  costs,  thereby 
allowing these entities to achieve their full potential.  
Access to technology 
Technology  is  a  game  changer.  It  has  the  potential  to  cut  down  operating  costs,  enhance 
efficiency  and  also  open  up  new  markets  and  opportunities  for  MSMEs.  MSMEs  should 
seriously  consider  taking  full  advantage  of  technology  so  as  to  remain  competitive  and 
viable. In fact, innovation and technology are the two tools MSMEs have with them that need 
to  be  capitalized  fully  to  compete  with  firms  much  larger  in  size.  SMEs  will  have  to 
continuously  strive  to  incorporate  the  latest  technology  into  their  production  processes  as 
well  as  in  their  marketing  and  management  functions,  to  cut  costs,  gain  efficiency  and 
consistency.  
Technology,  however,  does  not  come  free.  The  high  costs  of  installing  and  maintaining 
information  systems  and  recruiting  the  skilled  workforce  to  operate  them  would  be  of  a 
concern  to  many  smaller  firms.  The  new  concepts  such  as  cloud  computing  which  enable 
collaborative  sharing  of  resources,  facilitate  even  smaller  firms  to  leverage  on  advanced 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
technologies. Such arrangements also free up critical resources of MSMEs which could be 
used  for  focusing  on  core  activities.  MSMEs,  therefore,  need  to  be  updated  on  the  latest 
technological  developments.  They  should  develop  necessary  skills 
to  adopt  new 
technologies, while at the same time they should be cognizant of the risks that lurk behind 
such opportunities and the need to manage such risks. 
Skilled manpower and managerial talent 
Human  resource  development  issues  are  fundamental  in  improving  SME  competitiveness. 
Empirical studies show that human capital is a significant determinant of growth. The ability 
of  SMEs  to  adjust  to  the  competitive  pressures  that  come  with  trade  liberalization  and 
globalization  will  depend  on  the  level  of  skills  available  domestically.  In  fact,  there  are 
instances  where  lenders  have  reckoned  the  management  skills  as  an  innovative  form  of 
collateral  for  loans.  The  Government  of  India  and  various  State  governments  have  been 
implementing a number of schemes and programs over the years for skill development. The 
Rural  Self  Employment  Training  Institutes  (RSETIs)  are  also  working  in  this  direction.  The 
human capital issues for MSMEs include enhancing the managerial qualities of the MSME 
promoters and building skilled workforce for enhanced productivity. Several institutions such 
as National Institute of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (NIMSME) provide the training 
and capacity building support that is very crucial to MSMEs. 
However, given the growing requirements of the MSME sector and the huge “demographic 
capital”  we  possess,  significant  efforts  are  still  needed  to  enhance  the  skill  and 
entrepreneurship development. My thoughts on this important area are: (i) In addition to the 
initiatives  taken  by  Government  agencies,  the  industry,  through  a  process  of  training  and 
handholding, has to contribute to building up a large base of appropriately skilled workforce 
available  for  employment  in  MSMEs.  (ii)   There  should  be  training  programmes  by  the 
industry associations to upgrade the skills of the workers and to acquaint them with the skills 
compatible  with  the  new  technology  and  (iii)   entrepreneurship  training  in  school  curricula 
should  be  incorporated  to  enable  the  young  minds  develop  the  orientation  and  mindset  to 
become entrepreneurs later in their careers. As the cliché goes “If you give a man a fish you 
feed him for a day. If you teach a man to fish you feed him for a lifetime”.  
Risk management and governance 
From  a  balance  sheet  perspective,  risk  is  defined  as  the  probability  of  actual  cash  flows 
falling below the projected cash flows. Some estimate that 90% of small business failures are 
caused  by  poor  cash  flows.  Anticipating  the  cash  flow  problems  and  developing  the 
necessary coping skills to manage these shortfalls should be at the core of risk management 
strategy for MSMEs. Given the heightened volatility in recent times, MSMEs are increasingly 
exposed to various other risks such as interest rate risk and currency risks. MSMEs need to 
manage these risks to remain viable.  
The  MSMEs  need  to  understand  with  appropriate  support  from  the  capacity  building 
institutions in the form of seminars and workshops, the importance of corporate governance 
and its linkages with risk management. A small enterprise that Infosys was way back, could 
grow into a leading international firm today, thanks partly to its sound governance framework. 
Investors  would  often  lower  the  cost  of  their  lending  when  the  governance  structures  are 
sound,  leading  to  cost  competitiveness  of  the  MSMEs.  Therefore,  to  become  globally 
competitive,  going  forward,  it  is  imperative  that  our  MSMEs  develop  their  skills  in  risk 
management and governance so as to have a sound Risk Governance. 
Competing for growth (not survival) 
Management guru, late C.K. Prahlad produced two seminal works, viz.,  Competing for the 
Future  and  Fortune  at  the  Bottom  of  the  Pyramid.  I  would  like  to  say  that  both  are  very 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
relevant  for  MSMEs  today.  Let  me  elaborate.  Inclusive  growth  strategies  such  as  the 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS) are going to 
enhance the capacity and willingness of the rural population to increase their consumption. 
This will increase the “Fortune at the Bottom of the Pyramid ” i.e., purchasing power of the 
lower strata of the society. MSMEs, being nimble footed and in proximity to the bottom of the 
pyramid are bound to benefit from this increased consumption. 
At the international level, MSMEs may have to face global competition, but the opportunities 
for  growth  are  immense  only  if  MSMEs  are  focused  on  quality  and  use  appropriate 
technologies. As I mentioned earlier, innovative ways of financing the working capital needs 
of MSMEs is another important aspect to help them grow and compete.  
Role of MSME associations 
The Chambers of Commerce and MSME Associations in our country can play a pivotal role 
in facilitating finance for MSMEs through various pro-active measures. These institutions can 
also  create  greater  awareness  among  their  MSME  members  about  credit  facilities  from 
banks,  NBFCs  and  financial  institutions,  benefits  of  credit  rating,  alternate  finance  options 
such as venture capital / angel funding, factoring, bills discounting, recently launched SME 
Exchange / platform, etc. in addition to engaging with policymakers and organising training / 
capacity building programmes.  
Concluding thoughts 
Let  me  now  conclude  by  stating  that  MSMEs  play  a  very  critical  role  in  the  economic 
development given their contribution in employment generation, export competitiveness and, 
more importantly, entrepreneurial development. As MSMEs are spread across the length and 
breadth of the country and have a strong presence in rural areas, their growth also leads to 
more  balanced  and  sustainable  development  and  eases  pressure  on  urban  infrastructure. 
Given  the  present  state  of  economy,  MSMEs  can  play  a  very  critical  role  in  renewing  our 
export competitiveness and boost economic recovery. For these reasons, I would emphasise 
that building a robust and resilient MSME sector is imperative need of the hour.  
The  extent  of  financial  exclusion  in  the  MSME  sector  is  very  high.  As  only  5  to  10%  of 
MSMEs are covered by institutional funding, there is a need to bridge the huge gap through 
enabling policies. Banks and financial institutions need to support the MSMEs in their need 
for finance. Some of them could grow into large corporates and potential MNCs in future. The 
Reserve Bank of India is endeavouring to support the MSME sector by providing an enabling 
policy  environment  and  I  urge  all  the  banks  and  financial  institutions  to  implement  our 
guidelines  in  both  letter  and  spirit  to  increase  the  credit  flow  to  this  vital  sector.  MSME 
Associations  and  Chambers  of  Commerce  also  have  an  important  role  to  play  in  this 
formidable  task  of  building  a  robust  MSME  sector.  On  their  part,  the  MSMEs  should  be 
responsible borrowers, should use the bank credit in a judicious manner and take advantage 
of the business opportunities both within and outside the country. They should improve their 
governance  and  risk  management  practices,  maintain  proper  books  of  accounts,  submit 
correct information to banks and all authorities, and make their operations more efficient and 
productive  to  get  easier  access  to  finance  from  banks  and  other  investors.  With  the 
concerted  efforts  of  all  the  stakeholders  I  am  sanguine  that  MSME  sector  would  become 
more competitive and efficient and offer greater contribution to economic development. 
I congratulate the Indian Chamber of Commerce for organizing this important conference and 
I wish the deliberations all success. 
Thank You. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
References 
Allen, et al (2008), Financial System Capacities of India and China, Working Paper.  
Global Partnership for Financial Inclusion (GPFI) website, Sub-Group on SME Finance, G20. 
G20  Seoul  Summit  (October  2010),  Scaling-Up  SME  Access  to  Financial  Services  in  the 
Developing World. 
ISB  Insight  Volume  9  Issue  3  “SME  Financing  Challenges:  Building  Alternative  Finance 
Options”. 
MSME Annual Report 2011–12, Government of India, Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium 
Enterprises. 
OECD background document for the Workshop on “Enhancing the Competitiveness of SMEs 
through Innovation” at the Bologna conference, Italy, 2000. 
Paper on Prospects and Challenges of SME’s in India, by Bharath.P, Naveen Rajesh, Moras. 
A.J. Institute of Management (AJIM) Mangalore. 
Report of the PM’s Task Force on MSMEs, January 2010 (Chairman: Shri T.K.A.Nair). 
Report  of 
Dr.K.C.Chakrabarty). 
SMEs in India: Issues and possibilities in times of Globalization by Keshab Das. 
The US Agency for International Development – Report on Development of Strategy Options 
for SME Financial Literacy, April 2009, for the South African market of SME’s.  
the  Working  Group  on  Rehabilitation  of  sick  SMEs 
(Chairman: 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
