Norman T L Chan: New round of countercyclical prudential measures for 
property mortgage lending 
Address by Mr Norman T L Chan, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, to 
the media, Hong Kong, 14 September 2012. 
 I  am  going  to  announce  a  new  round  of  countercyclical  prudential  measures  for 
1.  
property mortgage lending. 
2.  
Since  the  introduction  of  the  fourth  round  of  tightening  measures  for  property 
mortgage  loans  by  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority  (HKMA)  in  June  2011,  the  local 
property  market  quieted  down  somewhat  –  but  for  just  about  seven  months.  The  property 
market began to heat up again in February 2012, with significant increase both in transaction 
volume  and  prices.  Cumulative  growth  in  property  prices  was  as  much  as  13%  compared 
with the beginning of this year. 
3.  
The  evolution  of  the  property  market  cycle  in  Hong  Kong  is  affected  by  many 
factors,  including  the  external  environment.  With  the  third  round  of  quantitative  easing 
announced by the US Federal Reserve last night, there can be more capital inflows through 
the  US  banking  system  into  the  emerging  markets.  Moreover,  Europe  has  earned  some 
respite from its debt crisis following the announcement by the European Central Bank of its 
bond-buying  programme  and  related  judgment  by  Germany’s  Constitutional  Court.  So  the 
sentiment in financial markets is likely to stay calmer for a while. Against this background, the 
risk brought by the continued heating up of the Hong Kong property market on the banking 
sector will rise again. To enhance risk management of banks, the HKMA has just issued a 
set of guidelines to banks, requiring them to tighten the underwriting criteria for mortgages 
where borrowers already have one or more properties under mortgage. 
4.  
Under these new measures, when handling new applications for mortgage loans for 
residential, industrial or commercial properties from borrowers who already have one or more 
properties under mortgage, banks must adopt the following three requirements: 
First: for  mortgage  loans  assessed  based  on  the  debt  servicing  ability  of  a  mortgage 
applicant, the maximum debt servicing ratio (DSR) shall be lowered from the current 50% by 
10 percentage points to 40%. Accordingly, the maximum stressed DSR shall also be lowered 
correspondingly from the current 60% by 10 percentage points to 50%. 
However,  an  applicant  with  just  one  property  with  outstanding  mortgage  loan  will  not  be 
affected by this new measure if the new mortgage loan is for self-occupied purpose, or for 
the replacement of an existing property. 
Second: for mortgage loans assessed based on the net worth of a mortgage applicant, the 
maximum loan-to-value (LTV) ratio shall be lowered from the current 40% by 10 percentage 
points to 30%.  
Third: for mortgage applicants whose principal income is derived from outside Hong Kong, 
the applicable maximum LTV ratio shall be lowered by 20 percentage points, instead of the 
current 10 percentage points. 
5.  
Based  on  the  experience  in  Hong  Kong,  borrowers  with  multiple  outstanding 
mortgage loans have higher level of indebtedness and leverage. During property market and 
economic downturns, the chance of default for this group of borrowers can be significantly 
higher  than  those  with  only  one  property  under  mortgage.  In  view  of  this,  the  HKMA 
considers  it  necessary  to  require  banks  to  further  tighten  the  underwriting  criteria  for 
mortgage loans to borrowers with multiple property mortgages to reduce the risk of banks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Mr  Arthur  Yuen,  our  Deputy  Chief  Executive,  will  explain  the  details  of  these 
6.  
Besides,  the  HKMA  notices  a  recent  trend  of  lengthening  average  tenor  of  new 
mortgage loans. The average tenor for new mortgage loans now is 25 years, which is three 
years longer than that of 22 years in 2009. Some banks have extended the maximum tenor 
to even 40 years. Prolonged loan tenors will not only increase credit risk of banks, but may 
also  weaken  the  ability  of  borrowers  to  withstand  interest  rate  risk.  In  particular,  when 
mortgage rates return to more normal levels, borrowers with a loan that already stretches to 
30 or even 40 years simply cannot seek to reduce their monthly instalment payment burden 
by extending the tenor, and may therefore face financial difficulty. Therefore the HKMA has 
now required banks to set the ceiling for the maximum loan tenor for all new mortgage loans 
to not more than 30 years. 
7.  
The above measures take effect immediately. However, loan applications in respect 
of  property  transactions  with  provisional  sale  and  purchase  agreements  signed  today  or 
earlier will not be affected.  
8.  
measures later. 
9.  
When introducing measures to tighten the underwriting criteria for mortgage loans, 
the  HKMA  has  always  strived  to  strike  a  balance  to  minimise  the  impact  on  end-users, 
particularly  first-time  homebuyers.  Although  we  have  already  introduced  five  rounds  of 
prudential  measures  on  mortgage  lending,  we  have  sought  to  ensure  that  purchasers  of 
residential properties at a value of HK$6 million or below for self-occupied purpose would still 
be eligible for a maximum LTV ratio of 70%. In addition, purchasers who meet the eligibility 
requirements  will  be  able  to  apply  for  mortgage  loans  of  up  to  90%  LTV  ratio  under  the 
mortgage  insurance  arrangements.  According  to  figures  provided  by  the  Hong  Kong 
Mortgage Corporation Limited, the value of properties involving mortgage loans with a 90% 
LTV ratio averages at around HK$3.2 million. Therefore, I believe that the measures of the 
HKMA will have minimal impact on first-time homebuyers. 
10.  
Changes in the property market cycle are affected by a host of internal and external 
factors,  including  land  supply,  interest  rate  movements,  changes  in  household  income  as 
well as economic and financial market developments in Europe and the US. In view of the 
highly uncertain internal and external environments, the HKMA will continue to monitor the 
market situation closely and introduce appropriate measures in response to changes in the 
property market cycle to safeguard banking stability. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
