YV Reddy: Society, economic policies, and the financial sector 
The  Per  Jacobsson  Foundation  Lecture  2012  by  Dr  YV  Reddy,  Emeritus  Professor, 
University  of  Hyderabad  and  former  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  Basel, 
Switzerland, 24 June 2012. 
Please see the remarks by José de Gregorio and Ignazio Visco related to this lecture. 
 Chairman, esteemed panellists, and distinguished participants,  
I am grateful to the Per Jacobsson Foundation, in particular Chairman Ortiz, for conferring on 
me the honour of delivering the Per Jacobsson Foundation Lecture for 2012. I did not have 
the good fortune to meet Per Jacobsson, so my familiarity with him is primarily through the 
references made to him in the second volume of the history of the Reserve Bank of India. He 
came  across  as  a  forceful  personality,  who  had  an  excellent  grasp  of  India’s  economic 
policies and problems (Balachandran, 1988; p. 641). He  was obviously a forthright person 
with  impressive  foresight.  I  am  wondering  what  Per  Jacobsson  would  say  if  he  were  to 
comment on recent developments in the financial sector.  
The future of finance, and in particular saving it from a popular backlash against the global 
financial crisis and related crisis-management policies, has rightly become a matter of great 
concern. There is broad agreement that finance has, as in the past, the potential to do good, 
which  should  be  harnessed  by  all.  However,  it  is  essential  to  minimise  its  potential  to  do 
harm. In the commendable search for good finance, central bankers have not merely a stake 
but also have a legitimate role to play. From central banker’s point of view, there are several 
issues in this search for good finance for the future, but there are three inter-related issues 
that  I  want  to  comment  on  today:  (a)  how  to  ensure  that  the  financial  sector  serves  the 
society  better;  (b)  how  to  integrate  financial  sector  policies  better  with  national  economic 
policies; and (c) how to ensure that the financial industry functions as a means and not as an 
end in itself?  
Major issues confronting the finance industry were articulated by Sir Andrew Crockett in this 
forum last year (Crockett, 2011). The presentation today is in many ways a supplement to it. 
Sir Andrew has made an enormous contribution to the global community of central bankers 
and I would like to dedicate this address to Sir Andrew.  
This  presentation  considers  many  issues  raised  on  the  future  of  finance  (e.g.,  Ferguson, 
2009, Sheng, 2009; Chittenden, 2010; Roubini & Mihm, 2010; Turner & others, 2010; Pringle 
and  Jones,  2011;  CAFRAL-BIS,  2011;  Blanchard  &  others,  2012;  Shiller,  2012).  My 
reflections  are  moulded  by  not  only  a  decade  in  central  banking  but  also  many  years  in 
macroeconomic  management  in  federal  government  and  the  Bretton  Woods  Twins,  in 
addition to a much longer period at provincial and local levels of government dealing directly 
with  the  public.  Keeping  in  view  the  composition  of  today’s  audience  and  the  key  role  of 
central  banks  in  finance,  I  will  be  exploring  select  themes  of  operational  significance  to 
central banks at the present juncture.  
Society and finance 
An assessment of the impact of the recent global financial crisis on the trust and confidence 
of society in the financial sector is a useful starting point when considering ways of restoring 
the  trust.  A  major  reason  for  the  erosion  of  trust  may  be  a  sense  that  there  has  been  a 
comprehensive  capture  of  regulation  of  the  financial  sector  by  the  finance  industry, 
particularly  in  the  leading  advanced  economies.  A  demonstrable  commitment  to  provide 
reasonable access to essential financial services to all segments of society would reinforce 
the assertion that finance serves the larger community. This approach, which may broadly be 
  1
described as inclusive finance, goes beyond the current concerns with providing consumer 
protection and ensuring systemic stability.  
Restoring trust 
It is true that the Occupy Wall Street movement directed at the financial sector has petered 
out. This may signify a lack of popular support for the movement, or equally it may signify a 
lack of hope that things will change or that better alternatives are on the horizon. A society’s 
trust and confidence in finance, like in any other sector, is derived partly from formal laws, 
regulations  and  procedures,  and  partly  on  the  manner  in  which  they  are  implemented, 
through both formal and informal channels. Trust is, therefore, difficult to measure, but on the 
basis  of  surveys  conducted  and  anecdotes  reported  in  the  media,  there  appears  to  be  an 
erosion  of  trust  in  the  financial  sector  as  a  whole,  and  banking  in  particular,  in  advanced 
economies. The perceptions of such an erosion of trust, however, differ.  
What are the plausible reasons for the erosion of trust in some jurisdictions? We can only 
speculate.  
First,  large  sections  of  the  population  have  been  affected  by  the  financial  crisis,  and  they 
consider themselves innocent victims of the crisis in financial sector. In particular, they feel 
that those involved in the financial sector have enjoyed disproportionate gains and shifted the 
pains of adjustment to the rest of the population.  
Second,  in  the  discharge  of  semi-fiduciary  functions  that  are  critical  to  the  integrity  of 
financial  markets,  such  as  fixation  of  LIBOR  and  credit  rating,  the  major  global  players  in 
financial markets discredited themselves by resorting to questionable practices.  
Third,  when  several  irregularities  in  the  functioning  of  large  financial  intermediaries  were 
found, the regulators reacted to the wrong-doing by imposing penalties. The public at large 
was  often  left  in  the  dark  about  the  details  of  the  malfeasance  and  the  losses  they  had 
suffered.  
Fourth, the shareholders in a few large financial conglomerates are actively questioning the 
remuneration  of  senior  management  in  some  cases.  This  is  unprecedented,  reflecting  the 
loss of trust by shareholders in the management of financial firms.  
Fifth, although public policies provided liquidity, extended bail-outs in some cases, and in a 
few cases tax breaks, the much needed credit from the financial sector to the economies is 
not forthcoming, even after accounting for the muted demand for credit.  
Finally,  there  is  resistance  from  finance  industry  leaders  to  suggestions  for  strengthening 
regulations. In advanced economies, operational details of important reforms in the banking 
sector, shadow banking activities and innovations in financial markets are yet to take a final 
shape. There is, perhaps, what may be described as unionisation of global capital against 
attempts by public policies to regulate the financial sector effectively.  
It is also possible to argue that erosion of trust, if any, may be temporary, as seen in the past 
when the financial sector faced crises. It is also possible that central bankers have no tools 
for  managing  society’s  trust  except  by  delivering  their  mandate  through  price  stability  and 
financial  stability  consistent  with  maintaining  employment  and  growth.  But  it  is  undeniable 
that maintaining trust and confidence in finance is essential for the good of society at large.  
My  submission  is  that  the  mandate  for  maintaining  financial  stability,  which  often  rests 
primarily on central banks, has two related dimensions, namely the avoidance of disruptions 
in  the  functioning  of  the  financial  system  and  (more  positively)  the  promotion  of  trust  and 
confidence in the system. If there is any wing of public policy authority that has a stake in 
building  such  trust,  it  is  the  central  bank.  Hence,  the  central  bank  should  be  watchful  of 
developments related to trust in their jurisdictions and take a conscious decision whether to 
monitor  and  act,  as  necessary,  to  ensure  continued  trust  and  confidence  in  the  financial 
sector.  
2 
 Comprehensive regulatory capture 
As noted earlier, the decline of trust and confidence is partly the result of the perception that 
there  has  been  a  comprehensive  regulatory  capture.  While  the  popular  explanations  for 
market failure relate to incentives, and possibly greed, the regulators’ failures are generally 
attributed  to  misplaced  faith  in  the  self  correcting  powers  of  markets,  a  lack  of  skills  in 
regulatory  agencies  and  capture  by  vested  interests.  Such  a  capture  can  be  described  as 
comprehensive, particularly in the countries that were most affected during the crisis, in the 
sense that it was not restricted to the economic concept of regulatory capture, but extended 
to the overall public policy relating to financial sector.  
What could be the reasons for this?  
First,  the  political  leadership  has  a  short-term  horizon,  and  financial  markets  also  have  a 
short-term horizon. This creates a natural tendency for their priorities to converge. Available 
evidence  shows  that  financial  contributions  to  political  activity  from  the  financial  sector  in 
many  affected  countries  increased  significantly  in  recent  years.  Moreover,  large  global 
financial conglomerates seem to be in a position to influence not only political governance 
but also corporate governance, to suit their own interests.  
Second,  regulators,  as  part  of  their  public  consultation  process,  often  depend  on  the 
regulated for consultation, which is a feature common in most industries. But the dominant 
market  shares  of  the  few  giants  in  the  finance  industry,  combined  with  the  characteristic 
externalities  of  finance,  make  a  difference  to  the  process  and  outcomes.  In  the  past,  the 
excessive  deregulation  of  the  financial  sector  was  often  designed  to  a  significant  extent 
based on the advice of the interested market participants themselves.  
Third,  in  cases  where  academics  are  advising  on  the  design  of  reforms,  they  are  often 
finance  experts,  sometimes  engaged  with  market  participants  in  remunerated  advisory  or 
consulting  capacities.  A  large  part  of  economic  research  on  regulation  is  funded  by  the 
financial sector. In fact, most of the analysis of macroeconomic trends available in the public 
domain is from economists employed by large financial conglomerates. There may be, as a 
result of several of these factors, a tilt in favour of the financial sector in media coverage too.  
Fourth, in many countries, the finance industry offers prospects of highly paid jobs for those 
employed in the regulatory agencies and Treasuries or Ministries of Finance.  
Finally,  finance  and  its  regulatory  framework  are  somewhat  intangible  and  difficult  for  a 
common  person  to  fully  understand.  Hence  interested  groups  can  tilt  the  intended  policy 
changes  in  their  favour  by  presenting  their  initiatives  to  shift  equilibria  between  competing 
considerations as mere technical issues.  
It is possible to argue that capture of regulators is inevitable, and that a case can therefore 
be  made  in  favour  of  reducing  formal  regulation,  and  encouraging  self  regulation  and 
promoting  principles-based  regulation.  On  the  contrary,  there  is  a  widespread  feeling  that 
those were the very prescriptions that brought about the global financial crisis. The biggest 
challenge  for  the  future  of  finance  lies,  therefore,  in  designing  governance  practices  that 
avoid the dangers of comprehensive regulatory capture.  
I would, however, hasten to add that public policy failures cannot at the same time be wished 
away  by  placing  undue  blame  on  regulatory  capture.  It  is  evident  that  public  authorities  in 
major  financial  centres  genuinely  believed  that  the  financial  system,  even  in  its  complex 
evolution, was contributing to the public good. But this faith ex post proved to be misplaced. 
Professor  Levine  observes  that  the  absence  of  an  informed,  expertly  staffed  and 
independent  institution  that  evaluates  financial  regulation  from  the  public  perspective  is  a 
critical  defect  in  the  governance  of  financial  regulation  (Levine,  2012).  He  suggests 
establishing  a  body  that  would  submit  a  periodic  report  to  the  legislative  and  executive 
branches of government assessing the impact of financial regulation on the public. The body 
would be politically independent, independent of financial markets and staffed with experts, 
  3
while  having  no  official  power  over  the  central  bank  or  other  regulatory  bodies.  This  may 
sound utopian, but is worth trying in the present day turbulent market environment.  
Consideration  may  also  be  given  to  the  formulation  of  a  “fair  practice  code”  for  finance 
professionals,  regulators  and  academia,  extending  the  idea  mooted  by  the  American 
Economic  Association  on  a  Code  of  Ethics.  A  similar  approach  has  been  suggested  by 
Professor Shiller in the context of financial innovation supporting the stewardship of society’s 
assets. He observes that “the best way to do this is to build good moral behaviour into the 
culture  of  Wall  Street  through  the  creation  and  observance  of  best  practices  in  its  various 
professions  −  CEOs,  traders,  accountants,  investment  bankers,  lawyers,  philanthropists” 
(Shiller, 2012, p. xi). However, experience suggests that there are limits to the effectiveness 
of  such  codes.  In  fact,  ethical  behaviour  can  be  felt  and  understood,  but  it  is  difficult  to 
formulate it fully in a code intended for day-to-day organisational purposes. Moral behaviour, 
in  the  final  analysis,  is  a  matter  of  individual  choice.  But  what  best  practices  can  do  is  to 
exemplify the inherent morality in the individual.  
My  submission  is  that  serious  consideration  should  be  given  to  evolving  trustworthy 
institutional structures and adoption of best practices to re-assure the public that the scope 
for comprehensive regulatory capture is being minimised. These assurances could be further 
reinforced  through  improving  the  public  image  of  central  banks  and,  in  particular,  of  the 
Governors.  
Inclusive finance 
Inclusive finance implies that the objective of financial sector regulation should be as much 
about protecting consumers as ensuring the availability of essential financial services to all 
sections  of  society,  keeping  in  mind  the  expectations  and  needs  of  the  common  person. 
Emphasis on financial literacy by central banks has been advocated to enable consumers to 
take advantage of competitive efficiency. However, the issue is not one of financial literacy 
but of the behavioural patterns of common people dealing with finance. In this regard, it has 
been rightly observed: “By properly deploying both incentives and nudges, we can improve 
our ability to improve people’s lives, and help solve many of society’s major problems. And 
we  can  do  so  while  still  insisting  on  everyone’s  freedom  to  choose”  (Thaler  and  Sunstein, 
2008,  p.  8).  It  is  useful  to  provide  a  default  option  of  financial  products  for  those  large 
sections of society that have neither the inclination nor the tools to make those choices. It 
could be argued that a competitive financial system which is well-regulated, keeping in view 
the  needs  for  stability  and  consumer  protection,  would  automatically  ensure  inclusive 
finance.  Experience  so  far  does  not  support  such  a  view.  Public  policy  in  relation  to  the 
financial  sector  therefore  needs  to  consider  the  expectations  of  large  sections  of  the 
community, typically those of a common person. They are bound to be different depending 
on the society, but a few broad generalisations may be attempted.  
First,  common  people  need  a  place  to  keep  financial  savings  in  safe  custody  (e.g.,  wives 
often  need  to  keep  them  safe  from  wayward  husbands  in  rural  areas  in  developing 
countries).  They  should  be  able  to  place  and  withdraw  such  savings  with  ease  and  at 
minimal  cost.  While  a  range  of  instruments  with  a  host  of  risk-reward  profiles  may  be 
provided by the financial sector, access to one safe and simple instrument is essential for a 
common  person.  Often,  this  is  a  deposit  in  a  recognised  deposit  taking  institution, 
traditionally  a  retail  bank-branch  in  the  neighbourhood.  The  edifice  of  trust  in  the  financial 
system, including leverage, is built primarily at this level.  
Second, reasonable demand for credit for smoothing consumption between days/periods of 
income  and  of  expenditure  has  to  be  met  by  the  financial  system  at  a  reasonable  cost. 
Smoothing of consumption may also be longer-term, including over lifetimes.  
Third, remittances or payments may have to be made within families over different locations 
or  for  various  other  purposes,  and  such  services  should  be  available  and  accessible  at 
affordable cost. These services are often a monopoly of the officially recognised or regulated 
4 
 banking  or  payment  system,  and  hence  regulators  need  to  accept  some  responsibility  for 
delivery of such services.  
Finally,  from  a  common  person’s  point  of  view,  public  policy  should  ensure  the  easy 
availability  of  simple-to-understand  instruments  in  credit,  capital  and  insurance  markets. 
Consumer  protection  is  important  in  the  financial  sector,  but  ensuring  the  supply  of 
simple-to-understand products should be an obligation of regulators; it is an essential step to 
gain the trust of the common person.  
In some advanced economies, regulators are already paying attention to excessive charges 
on  retail  financial  services,  in  particular  credit  cards.  Experience  in  some  developing 
countries  indicates  that  the  involvement  of  public  policy  in  expanding  coverage  of  finance 
among the general public has had a beneficial impact. It is true that public policy experience 
with  subsidised  credit  in  some  developing  economies,  and  with  housing  credit  in  some 
advanced  economies,  has  not  been  good.  But  inclusive  finance  emphasises  affordable 
access to simple products, and not excessive leverage or at the cost of prudence. Inclusive 
finance is not a substitute for the primacy of fiscal policy with regard to social welfare.  
My  submission  is  that  we  are  in  a  world  of  expanded  mandates  for  central  banks,  and 
inclusive finance should not be excluded from such mandates. Perhaps central banks could 
satisfy  themselves  and  the  society  at  large  that,  between  the  markets  and  regulations, 
finance is serving the minimum needs of most common people while maintaining efficiency 
and stability. That would be the cornerstone for restoring trust and confidence in the financial 
sector. Central banks could explore avenues for using technology and financial innovations 
that meet the needs of common people.  
Economic policies and the financial sector 
Experience  with  the  crisis  has  brought  into  focus  three  inter-connected  complexities  that 
have to be continuously addressed by the financial sector. These are: the balance between 
state  and  market  as  appropriate  to  the  financial  sector;  the  balance  between  real  and 
financial  sectors,  where  the  latter  should  enable  the  real  sector  to  perform;  and  finally, 
balancing the conduct of macroeconomic policy at the national level with the dynamics of the 
global macroeconomic environment. Public policy is conducted at the national level, but at 
the same time, globalisation of economies, often driven by technology, is a reality, and the 
global  macroeconomic  environment  is  an  outcome  of  national  policies  in  a  framework  of 
nebulous  global  governance  arrangements.  The  challenge  for  national  central  banks  is  to 
find  space  for  the  conduct  of  their  own  policies  in  an  increasingly  inter-dependent  global 
economy.  
Macroeconomic policies and the financial sector 
It is tempting to debate the pros and cons of developments in the financial sector without full 
recognition of the macroeconomic environment and of the functioning of product and factor 
markets. The right balance between free markets and appropriate financial sector regulation 
is ideally explored in the light of the significant role of macroeconomic policies in maximising 
benefits and minimising costs of the financial sector to development and welfare. During the 
“Great Moderation”, low and stable inflation was attributed to the success of monetary policy, 
ignoring  the  impact  of  the  globalisation  of  trade  and,  to  some  extent,  immigration  in  some 
economies.  There  was  admittedly  a  spillover  effect  of  monetary  policies  on  stability  in  the 
financial  sector.  There  is  a  realisation  that,  ideally,  countercyclical  monetary  and  fiscal 
policies should supplement countercyclical policies in the regulation of the financial sector in 
a variety of ways to ensure financial stability. For instance, consideration is being given to 
taxation  of  the  financial  sector,  on  institutions  and  on  transactions,  as  a  supplement  to 
regulation of the financial sector in the interest of stability, and possibly growth and equity. 
Further, policies relating to management of public debt have a bearing on the functioning of 
  5
the financial sector. For example, financial sector entities, particularly banks, either as part of 
portfolio management or through statutory pre-emption, hold significant government debt as 
assets. There is a recognition that large swings in capital flows could have an adverse impact 
on the financial sector. There is also awareness of the potential use of prudential regulation 
to  manage  capital  accounts.  Persistent  and  unsustainable  current  account  deficits  or 
surpluses may have the potential for destabilising the financial sector.  
The  macro  policy  framework  at  the  national  level,  which  is  admittedly  critical  for  good 
finance, is determined by the sovereign with legitimacy and accountability to its citizens. But 
macro policies at the national level have to take account of the deep and growing linkages 
between national economies and the global economy. An important issue, therefore, is the 
scope and limits for international coordination of national economic policies.  
It  is  instructive  therefore  to  briefly  analyse  the  evolution  and  efficacy  of  the  most  recent 
efforts at global coordination of the macroeconomic environment through the mechanisms of 
Summits of the G20. The initial stage of coordination through the G20 Summits was to avoid 
collapse  in  the  financial  system  and  to  moderate  the  slide  in  the  global  economy  through 
macroeconomic  responses,  in  both  monetary  and  fiscal  areas.  There  were  simultaneous 
actions.  The  uneven  recovery  that  followed  led  to  differences  in  short-run  policy  actions 
among countries, but this was recognised as inevitable under the circumstances. However, 
there was an effort to identify long-term structural issues and attempt to address them. There 
was some agreement in very broad terms, but differences persist on the sources of global 
imbalances and the appropriate correctives at the national level.  
More  recently,  country  specific  commitments  to  correct  some  imbalances  have  been 
attempted, but differences on the measurement of needed correctives and the timeliness of 
actions are stark. A possible reason for these differences is that short-term motivations at the 
national level seem to run counter to the longer-term interests of the global economy. There 
are unmistakable signs of diminishing returns from the G20, despite initial achievements and 
the promise of greater coherence in future.  
One positive development has been that the democratic deficit at the level of global financial 
architecture  has  been  somewhat  narrowed.  But  there  is,  as  yet,  no  coherent  global 
macroeconomic  policy.  The  global  macroeconomic  environment  is  the  result  of  the 
interaction  between  macro  policies  at  the  national  level  and  national  markets  that  are  at 
different  stages  of  development  and  that  have  differing  degrees  of  integration  into  global 
markets.  
It  is  true  that  successful  arrangements  for  global  coordination  while  retaining  space  for 
national public policies are working well in certain sectors, such as aviation, telecoms and the 
internet.  But  they  seem  to  get  into  difficulties  in  regard  to  macroeconomic  policies  and 
finance. Clearly, there is a need to explore why global agreements work reasonably well in 
some sectors, leading to acceptable and assured outcomes, while when it comes to macro 
policies and finance such agreements appear difficult to arrive at – and what we can learn 
from them.  
Global finance and global governance 
The  basic  assumption  underlying  the  benefits  of  globalised  finance  is  the  existence  of 
competitive  efficiency  in  global  financial  markets.  The  assumption  can  be,  and  has  been, 
questioned on several well-known grounds, namely: the lack of a sound international reserve 
currency system; the absence of credible lender of last resort facilities at the global level; and 
the  dominance  of  a  handful  of  rating  agencies  and  accounting  firms  without  adequate 
evidence  of  market  discipline  or  effective  rules  for  their  functioning.  The  leading  rating 
agencies  and  accounting  firms,  along  with  few  leading  business  news  agencies,  have 
continuous  dealings  with  each  other,  which  tends  to  reinforce  the  exercise  of  their 
oligopolistic  power  over  markets.  Further,  operations  of  international  banks/conglomerates 
specialising  in  cross-border  flows,  combining  traditional  banking  and  risky  investment 
6 
 banking  operations,  have  close  business  and  operational  links  with  rating  agencies, 
accounting firms, etc. The concentration of global financial power in a few entities with close 
mutual connections has considerable potential to undermine competitive forces.  
In assessing the competitive efficiency of global financial markets, it may be useful to make a 
distinction  between  the  role  of  multinational  banks  which  have  subsidiaries  or  branches  in 
different countries but predominantly operate in domestic markets, and that of international 
banks  which  specialise  in  cross-border  financial  activities,  especially  flows  on  capital 
accounts, both short-term and long-term. Experience has shown that multinational structures 
that relied less on wholesale funding and forex swap markets have been less vulnerable to 
crises.  International  banks  are  able  to  operate  across  different  financial  markets  and 
countries  with  significant  divergence  in  fiscal  regimes  as  well  as  regulatory  regimes.  They 
have often been found to deal in financial flows of suspect legality in one country, though not 
always in both countries involved. International banks have the opportunity and incentive to 
conduct  operations  involving  tax  avoidance.  Because  of  these  operations,  international 
banks  enjoy  significant  influence  over  the  political  economy  in  several  countries.  In  the 
prevailing environment of global financial markets, some large global financial conglomerates 
are larger and, perhaps, more powerful than some of the central banks.  
It  is  clear  from  the  experience  of  the  euro  area  that,  in  effect,  the  sovereign  becomes  the 
source of extraordinary intervention as the ultimate risk bearer in times of crisis. The problem 
arises  when  the  sovereign’s  capacity  for  such  intervention  is  constrained  by  globalisation: 
this may be beneficial in many respects, but it could undermine the capacity of the sovereign 
to  tackle  the  financial  sector  problems  that  arise.  The  conduct  of  fiscal  policy  itself  is 
dominated  by  consideration  of  the  view  of  global  financial  markets  on  the  sovereign’s 
solvency  and  its  capacity  to  support  the  financial  sector  under  distress.  Extraordinary 
intervention by the sovereign and related fiscal measures are thus subject to the credit rating 
agencies’ appraisal of their solvency (Sen, 2012). These considerations may have a bearing 
on the conduct of both financial sector regulation and macro policies at the national level.  
In brief, my submission is that the prospects for credible and acceptable global governance 
arrangements  to  ensure  a  workable  global  economic  policy  and  environment  within  which 
global finance could contribute to growth and stability, do not appear very bright. I am not 
addressing  a  more  fundamental  issue:  whether  global  economic  governance,  ensuring 
common economic policies for all nations, would eliminate the benefits of diversity. Too much 
global policy coordination might lead to the universalisation of risks of policy mistakes. The 
main contention is that good finance is essentially a function of good economic policies, and 
such  good  policies  are  primarily  national,  though  significantly  impacted  by  the  global 
macroeconomic  environment  –  which,  as  already  mentioned,  is  not  a  product  of  design. 
Approaches to regulation of the financial sector will, therefore, continue to be national, in a 
global environment that is not necessarily favourable.  
Regulation of the financial sector 
There is a recognition that policies relating to regulation of the financial sector must optimise 
the  benefits  of  the  financial  sector  while  minimising  the  costs  or  risks  associated  with  it. 
There  are  several  dimensions  to  striking  this  balance,  which  this  august  audience  is  well 
aware of and involved with. I selected three themes for consideration today: the optimal level 
of  financialisation,  appropriate  innovation  in  the  financial  sector,  and  the  effectiveness  of 
financial sector regulation.  
Optimal Financialisation 
Not long ago, many countries recognised the costs of excessive regulation of finance and of 
financial repression. More recent events seem to indicate that excess financialisation of an 
economy  may  also  contribute  to  the  crises.  It  may  be  that  finance  is  good  for  economic 
  7
development over a certain period, but only if practised in moderation. The idea of optimal 
financialisation  seems  to  have  been  accepted  implicitly  by  the  financial  sector  reform 
measures  being  contemplated  in  many  advanced  economies.  At  the  same  time,  several 
developing  and  emerging  economies  are  considering  measures  to  develop  the  financial 
sector, in particular financial markets. In their quest for optimal financialisation, the countries 
that are attempting further deregulation and development of financial markets would benefit 
from  an  understanding  of  how  excess  financialisation  manifests  itself.  However,  the 
manifestation of excessive financialisation may not be confined to finance, and may extend 
to commodity markets, corporates and households.  
The financialisation of commodity markets happens both by virtue of deregulation of trade in 
commodity  market  exchanges  and  by  virtue  of  the  excessive  liquidity  that  happens  to  be 
readily available. The correctives in public policy with regard to excessive financialisation of 
commodity markets may be at times beyond the scope of financial sector regulation.  
During  recent  years,  there  has  been  a  significant  financialisation  of  household  budgets, 
particularly  in  advanced  economies.  The  changes  in  demand  for  certain  goods  are  often 
dependent on credit conditions. Future cash flows are often determined by the market value 
of pension funds and other sources of social security over a lifetime. It is not clear whether 
limiting the leverage of financial intermediaries would by itself constrain the excess leverage 
in household budgets.  
There has also been financialisation of corporates. Corporates are not only exposed to the 
financial markets in relation to their underlying operations in terms of what they produce or 
sell, but also in terms of treasury operations.  
This  excessive  financialisation  occurred  in  many  advanced  economies  for  other  reasons. 
Incentives  were  created  to  multiply  the  transactions  in  the  financial  sector  in  the  form  of 
income  from  commissions  related  to  transactions.  Further,  complexity  was  introduced  with 
regard  to  some  of  these  innovations,  often  to  undermine  the  regulatory  prescriptions 
regarding transparency or capital adequacy, or to mislead the counterparty. Shadow banking 
enabled  undermining  of  regulatory  prescriptions.  Most  recent  initiatives  with  regard  to 
reforms in regulation address these issues.  
For  many  developing  and  emerging  economies,  who  are  progressing  on  the  path  towards 
optimal  financialisation,  it  is  necessary  to  avoid  excessive  financialisation,  and  more 
importantly  to  explore  the  impact  of  finance  on  growth,  ideally  on  the  basis  of  empirical 
evidence.  Research  has  associated  higher  growth  with  the  development  of  the  financial 
sector,  but  more  recent  evidence  on  trade-offs  between  growth  in  the  real  sector  and  the 
financial sector is equivocal. The experience of Asian emerging economies so far indicates 
that  the  beneficial  effects  of  deregulated  finance  relative  to  free  trade  may  be  overstated. 
Further,  institutional  rigidities  and  the  state  of  factor  and  product  markets  vary  between 
countries, and they do interact with level of financialisation. 
This  subject  is  explored  in  a  recent  paper  titled  “Reassessing  the  impact  of  finance  on 
growth”  (Cecchetti  &  Kharroubi,  2012).  The  paper  investigates  how  financial  development 
affects  growth  at  both  the  country  and  the  industry  level.  The  paper  shows,  based  on  a 
sample  of  developed  and  emerging  economies,  that  the  level  of  financial  development  is 
good only up to a point, after which it becomes a drag on growth. It also shows that a fast 
growing financial sector can be detrimental to aggregate productivity growth. This is a line of 
enquiry which should be further explored to arrive at what constitutes the optimum level of 
financialisation.  
A  recent  Working  Paper  of  the  International  Monetary  Fund  entitled  “Too  much  finance?” 
seems to confirm some of the broad conclusions of the BIS Paper I referred to (Arcand et al, 
2012). Let me summarise the main findings.  
First, there is a positive and robust correlation between financial depth and economic growth 
in countries with small and intermediate financial sector. Second, beyond a threshold there is 
8 
 a  negative  effect  of  financial  sector;  that  threshold  is  when  credit  to  the  private  sector 
reaches 100% of GDP. Third, the negative effect is not confined to crisis periods, but extends 
to  tranquil  conditions  also,  possibly  leading  to  misallocation  of  resources.  Fourth,  it  is 
possible but not clear that bank lending and asset based lending components of credit will 
have positive effects. Finally, analysis suggests that there are several countries for which a 
smaller financial sector would be desirable. 
The global financial crisis also brought into focus the downside of excess debt, but then the 
issue  is:  what  is  excess  debt?  Debt  sustainability  in  terms  of  sovereign  debt  has  been 
analysed  extensively  in  the  past,  but  the  issue  is  the  real  effects  of  debt  –  not  only  of 
sovereign debt but also other elements of the national economy. This has been explored by 
an  interesting  paper  which  poses  the  question,  “When  does  debt  go  from  good  to  bad?” 
Using  a  data  set  of  OECD  countries  over  thirty  years,  it  concludes  that  the  threshold  is 
around 85% of GDP for government debt, 90% for corporate debt, and 85% for household 
debt  (Cecchetti,  Mohanty  and  Zampolli,  2011).  The  subject  should  be  researched  further, 
since the issue of excess debt is closely related to excess financialisation, and the thresholds 
for excess debt may be lower for developing and emerging economies than for the advanced 
economies.  
Excessive  financialisation  can  also  occur  due  to  public  policy  failures  in  achieving 
socioeconomic  development,  resulting  in  the  passing  of  an  undue  burden  to  the  financial 
sector  in  the  form  of  generating  a  range  of  quasi-fiscal  activities.  Improvements  in  overall 
governance structures and efficiency in the provision of public services can also contribute to 
limiting excessive financialisation outside the fiscal ambit.  
My submission is that more research is needed on what constitutes optimum financialisation 
and  leverage,  which  could  be  different  for  developing  and  emerging  economies  than  for 
advanced economies, despite signs of some convergence in macroeconomic and financial 
sector issues. In any case, the direction of public policy relating to the financial sector in the 
near future will be characterised by increasing financialisation in some countries which have 
less developed finance, and restraining financialisation in others where it has gone too far.  
Appropriate innovation in the financial sector  
Operationally,  an  important  issue  is  the  point  at  which  an  innovation  requires  regulators’ 
attention. Should it be before introduction in the market, or after receiving complaints from an 
affected party? Or should it rely on monitoring of every innovation and assessing suo motu 
whether there are harmful effects? Often, many innovations look attractive in the short run 
because risks are back-loaded on some and rewards are front loaded on others. In finance, 
pressure  on  regulators  to  regulate  is  also  back  loaded,  and  is  often  too  late.  Different 
industries have different approaches and tools to regulate, and the point at which regulators’ 
jurisdiction  is  activated  varies  across  industries.  For  example,  in  pharmaceuticals,  the 
regulator  has  to  approve  ex-ante,  while  in  regard  to  restrictive  trade  practices  it  may  be 
ex-post.  
In many industries, regulations address issues relating to innovations. For example, in the 
pharmaceutical industry, considerable experimentation is demanded and ex-ante approvals 
are  required  for  marketing.  In  engineering  systems,  the  consistency  of  innovations  with 
network in which they are to be applied is often required to be certified, by either an industry 
body  or  the  regulator.  In  many  others,  innovations  are  left  to  the  market  test,  unless  they 
happen  to  have  ex-post,  negative  effects,  in  which  case  public  policy  may  consider 
intervening.  In  brief,  there  are  several  industries  which  have  been  subject  to  different 
systems of regulation, and they have stood the test of time. The financial sector should be 
able  to  draw  lessons  from  such  experiences,  recognising  the  unique  characteristics  of  the 
financial sector. Such lessons will also help in differentiating between technological, process 
and product innovations.  
  9
Markets  are,  indeed,  a  source  of  many  innovations,  but  there  are  examples  in  many 
industries where the public sector has been active in promoting innovations. There is merit in 
central banks encouraging innovations in the financial sector that have the potential to serve 
the public. I agree with Chairman Ben Bernanke when he said, referring to striking the right 
balance  between  consumer  protection  and  responsible  innovation,  “our  goal  should  be  a 
financial  system  in  which  innovation  leads  to  higher  levels  of  economic  welfare  for  people 
and communities at all income levels” (Bernanke, 2009).  
My submission is that central banks in particular, and regulators in general, could be more 
proactive in promoting and incentivising appropriate innovations in the financial sector, and 
drawing  on  the  experience  of  other  industries  may  be  of  considerable  value  in  evolving 
policies towards financial innovations.  
Effectiveness of regulation 
There  is  considerable  agreement  that  better  and  more  effective  regulation  is  of  vital 
importance to the financial sector, and that more regulation is not necessarily better. At the 
same time, the experience with self regulation, principles-based regulation, and the use of 
internally  generated  models  of  risk  management  have  proved  to  be  sub-optimal.  Hence, 
there  is  a  need  to  consider  mechanisms  to  make  regulation  more  effective,  to  limit 
unnecessary  regulatory  burdens  or  to  contain  the  cost  of  compliance  with  regulators’ 
prescriptions. I wish to explore some practical ways of enhancing effectiveness.  
A possible reason for deficiencies in regulation in the pre-crisis period may have been the 
loss of information as part of a process of deregulation and a lack of mechanisms to monitor 
events in the fast changing world of finance. Regulatory effectiveness can be improved by 
enhancing  the  monitoring  of  transactions,  and  analysing  them  rigorously.  No  doubt, 
technology  enables  market  participants  to  operate  in  a  fraction  of  seconds,  but  the  same 
technology is available for regulators too, to collect information, monitor and analyse in an 
equally  fast  manner.  Modern  technology  minimises  the  costs  of  reporting  and,  to  some 
extent, analysis by regulators. Close monitoring by regulators may enhance compliance with 
regulations and help in fine tuning the regulatory prescriptions on on-going and timely basis.  
In  debates  relating  to  public  policy on  public  utilities,  issues  of  regulation,  competition  and 
ownership  were  considered  in  an  integrated  manner.  That  used  to  apply  to  the  finance 
industry also, before deregulation and privatisation became the preferred policies. The global 
financial crisis is leading to a serious reconsideration of the extent, nature and effectiveness 
of  regulation.  There  may  be  merit  in  considering,  in  an  integrated  fashion,  appropriate 
regulation and its effectiveness in relation to competition and public ownership.  
First, there is a recognition of the danger of “too big to fail” and “too powerful to regulate” 
financial  conglomerates.  Resolution  regimes  and  the  adoption  of  living  wills  are  being 
considered to address this issue. It is often argued that it is difficult to unbundle them in a 
non-disruptive  fashion.  Under  the  circumstances,  the  option  of  public  ownership  of  those 
too-big-to-fail  institutions  could  also  be  reopened,  keeping  in  view  the  advantages  of 
diversity.  Second,  the  crisis  necessitated  an  increase  in  public  sector  ownership  in  the 
banking industry, mainly due to large bail-outs. The exit from this unintended expansion in 
state ownership of banks ought to consider the costs and benefits of options that may include 
divestment  or  continuing  with  state  ownership  along  with  appropriate  participation  in 
management. Third, a case for an approximate mix of public sector and private sector banks 
in a financial system could be examined. Such a mixed model for the structure of the banking 
sector or financial sector in general would lend stability through diversity. Differing priorities 
and  practices  enabled  public  sector  institutions  to  retain  a  public  sector  character  and  not 
merely to replicate the functioning of private sector counterparts. The problem of information 
asymmetry may be moderated if public sector banks co-exist, assuming that they have fewer 
incentives to withhold information from regulators, and are often subject to legislation relating 
to the right to information. It is not necessary that a bank or a non bank financial entity should 
10 
 the  need 
temptation 
to  politicise  public  sector  banking  may  persist,  but 
be owned entirely by government or only by private shareholders. A variety of combinations 
of public and private ownership and control can be considered.  
In  revisiting  the  issue  of  regulation  in  conjunction  with  competition  and  ownership,  it  is 
necessary  to  recognise  the  lessons  from  public  sector  banking  in  the  1970s  and  1980s, 
particularly  in  developing  and  emerging  market  economies.  The  problems  in  the  past  with 
public  sector  banking  were  on  due  to  financial  repression  attributable  to  macroeconomic 
policies,  the  lack  of  appropriate  global  standards  of  regulation,  the  existence  of  monopoly 
status,  and  technological  obsolescence,  in  addition  to  standards  of  governance  in  public 
systems in general, and public ownership in particular. In the context of the global financial 
crisis, the practices of some entities that were virtually public sector, such as Freddie Mac 
and Fannie Mae, do not provide reassurance that public sector character would in itself be 
benign. Experiences with some banks in the public sector in Europe may also be instructive. 
The 
for 
professionalisation  in  the  public  sector  should  not  be  underestimated.  The  new  realities 
consequent  upon  the  crisis  indicate  the  potential  for  a  redefined  role  for  public  sector 
financial institutions, provided that the experience prior to deregulation and privatisation, as 
well as select cases related to the global financial crisis, are also kept in mind.  
The  use  of  fiscal  and  related  instruments  to  supplement  regulatory  effectiveness  could  be 
considered in earnest. Information generated for purposes of taxation is likely to be of great 
practical  use  for  regulators  in  monitoring  financial  sector  activities.  Levying  financial 
transaction  taxes  could  be  considered,  with  rates  that  discriminate  against  excessive 
speculation. The cross-border activities of financial intermediation could be brought within the 
tax  net,  and  thus  the  regulatory  ambit,  by  adopting  the  issuance  principle  (financial 
institutions  located  outside  the  country  would  be  obliged  to  pay  the  tax  if  they  traded 
securities originally issued within the country) and the residence principle (instruments issued 
outside  the  country  but  subsequently  traded  by  at  least  one  institution  within  the  country 
would be liable). Further, evasion could be discouraged by adopting the example of stamp 
duty  in  United  Kingdom,  and  of  Brazil,  where  non-payment  of  the  tax  makes  legal 
enforcement of such contracts difficult.  
There is also significant merit in considering anti-avoidance rules in taxation for regulation of 
the  financial  sector  as  well.  Thus,  if  the  sole  purpose  of  an  instrument  or  institution  in  the 
financial  sector  is  to  avoid  a  regulation,  such  transactions  can  be  considered  void  for  the 
purposes of regulation. Thus, a distinction can be made in financial sector regulation, as in 
the case of taxation, between planning, avoidance and evasion. Above all, taxation and the 
use  of  information  thus  acquired  for  regulation  of  financial  sector  would  considerably 
enhance the effectiveness of both fiscal and financial management.  
Concluding remarks  
I  believe  that  society  expects  central  banks  to  ensure  trust  and  confidence  in  money  and 
finance, and hopes that they avoid the pitfalls of capture, while the common person seeks 
inclusive finance. It is not easy for central banks to deliver all this, but they should not ignore 
society’s expectations.  
In these efforts, central banks need to preserve space for public policy at the national level 
consistent  with  their  obligations  to  the  global  economy.  The  financial  sector  may  draw 
lessons from global coordination in other industries, especially in managing networks.  
Global  trends  in  financial  sector  regulation  may  see  simultaneous  re-regulation  in  some 
countries  and  deregulation  in  others.  Innovations,  by  definition,  are  difficult  to  put  into 
preconceived straitjackets, and a disaggregated contextual approach would be appropriate. 
Above  all,  better  regulation  warrants  effective  regulation.  Consideration  of  regulation, 
competition and ownership in an integrated manner, enhanced monitoring of financial market 
activities and the use of fiscal tools to supplement regulation could be helpful in this regard.  
  11
Friends, society has put its trust in central banks. Central banks have to ensure that bank 
managements and the financial sector in general serve the masses, and not merely the elite 
or the financially active. In the ultimate analysis, central banks are trustees, agents to look 
after the interests of the masses.  
References 
Arcand, Jean-Louis, Enrico Berkes and Ugo Panizza (2012) “Too Much Finance?” International 
Monetary Fund, WP/12/161. June. www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/wp/2012/wp12161.pdf.  
Balachandran,  G  (1988):  The  Reserve  Bank  of  India  1951–1967  (Volume  2),  Mumbai: 
Reserve Bank of India – Oxford University Press. 
Bernanke,  Ben  S.  (2009):  “Financial  Innovation  and  Consumer  Protection”,  Speech  at  the 
Federal  Reserve  System’s  Sixth  Biennial  Community  Affairs  Research  Conference, 
Washington, D.C. on April 17, 2009, available at http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/ 
bernanke20090417a.htm. 
Blanchard, Olivier, David Romer, Michael Spence, and Joseph Stiglitz (2012): In the Wake of 
the Crisis, Cambridge Massachusetts: MIT Press.  
CAFRAL-BIS  (2011):  Proceedings  of  a  Conference  on  “Financial  Sector  Regulation  for 
Growth, Equity and Stability in the Post Crisis World”, Conference jointly organised by the 
Centre  for  Advanced  Financial  Learning  and  Research  (CAFRAL)  and  BIS  in  Mumbai  on 
November 15–16, 2011. 
Cecchetti,  Stephen  and  Enisse  Kharroubi  (2012):  “Reassessing  the  impact  of  finance  on 
growth”, Paper presented at the Second International Research Conference, organised by the 
Reserve Bank of India, February 1–2, 2012, available at http://sirc.rbi.org.in/downloads/4Cecchetti.pdf.  
Cecchetti, Stephen, Madhusudan Mohanty and Fabrizio Zampolli (2011): “The real effects of 
debt”, BIS Working Papers No. 352. http://www.bis.org/publ/work352.htm.  
Chittenden, Oliver (ed.) (2010): The Future of Money, London: Virgin Books. 
Crockett, Andrew (2011): “What financial system for the 21st century?”, Per Jacobsson lecture 
delivered on 26 June 2011, available at http://www.bis.org/events/agm2011/sp110626.htm. 
Ferguson, Niall (2009): The Ascent of Money, (Afterword: The Descent of Money), London: 
Penguin Books. 
Levine,  Ross  (2012):  “The  Governance  of  Financial  Regulation:  Reform  Lessons  from  the 
Recent Crisis”, International Review of Finance, 12:1, pp 39–56. 
Pringle,  Robert  and  Claire  Jones  (2011):  The  Future  of  Central  Banking,  London:  Central 
Banking Publications. 
Roubini,  Nouriel  and  Stephen  Mihm  (2010):  Crisis  Economics  –  A  Crash  Course  in  the 
Future of Finance, London: Penguin Books. 
Sen,  Amartya  (2012):  “Europe’s  Crisis  –  of  Democracy”,  op  ed  in  the  Business  Standard, 
25 May, 2012. 
Sheng, Andrew (2009): From Asian to Global Financial Crisis, Cambridge University Press.  
Shiller,  Robert  J  (2012):  Finance  and  the  Good  Society,  Princeton:  Princeton  University 
Press. 
Thaler,  Richard  and  Cass  R  Sunstein  (2008):  Nudge:  Improving  Decisions  About  Health, 
Wealth and Happiness, New Haven: Yale University Press. 
Turner, Adair and others (2010): The Future of Finance: The LSE Report, London, London 
School of Economics and Political Science. 
12 
 