Patrick Honohan: Financial sector developments and architecture in 
Ireland – a constantly changing landscape 
Address by Mr Patrick Honohan, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, at the launch of the 
book  “Bank  architecture  in  Dublin  –  a  history  to  c  1940”  by  Dr  Michael  O’Neill,  Dublin, 
7 February 2012. 
 Bank  buildings  in  the  19th  and  20th  Centuries  were  everywhere  designed  to  project 
confidence.  As  Michael  O’Neill  observes  in  this  delightful  book,  the  grand  bank  buildings 
which represent such an important component of Victorian Dublin were establishments “built 
as statements of intent...like churches, they suggest permanence, stability, longevity”.  
It  is  easy  of  course  to  make  the  contrast  between  the  solid  designs  and  structures  of  the 
older buildings with the more recent business models of their occupants. We all know which 
has proven more firm and has stood the test of time better.  
Consider the austere approach of the Bank of Ireland – the central bank of its day – in its 
early  years  in  the  1800s.  Apparently  there  were  problems  of  punctuality,  even  among  the 
Directors. According to another classic Irish book on banking in the past, F.G. Hall’s 1949 
history  of  that  bank  (cited  by  Michael  not  least  for  its  nice  architectural  chapter  on  the 
Parliament House across from us here in Foster Place), the Directors were fined 1s 1d for 
being 15 minutes late for a meeting; the Governor was fined 2s 8½d. The fine increased with 
the  degree  of  lateness.  And,  in  contrast  to  the  trusting  ways  of  latterday  bankers,  each 
Director  was  required  to  deposit  5  Guineas  in  advance  from  which  the  fines  would  be 
deducted. I wonder how many here can guess why such an odd amount as 2s 8½d? (Almost 
certainly it reflects the exchange rate of the time: 13 Irish pence equalled 12 English pence, 
so an English half-crown would meet the fine).  
It’s  easy  to  be  nostalgic  about  the  past  but  in  reality,  whatever  about  the  buildings  they 
occupied,  financial  institutions  were  probably  no  more  popular  then  than  they  are  now. 
Victorian  banks  were  conservative  and  mostly  profitable.  They  generally  charged  more  for 
borrowing in Ireland than the British banks, and seem to have upped the spread shortly after 
Independence, just to be on the safe side, I suppose. Over time they tended to collect more 
by way of deposits than they used in lending. The surplus was placed in the London money 
market. Times have changed.  
As  Michael  reminds  us  in  this  book,  the  industrial  structure  of  banking  was  very  stable  in 
Ireland for a century or more. With the shift towards joint stock, deposit-based banking, the 
private  banks  faded  away  and  just  seven  firms,  which  became  known  as  the  “Associated 
Banks”  dominated  the  scene.  Each  had  its  Dublin  head  office  in  the  Dame  Street/College 
Green area and we are standing in one of them, that of the Royal Bank, today. The Royal 
was – like the Hibernian – a Dublin-based bank, one of those which decided it could survive 
despite  being  precluded  from  issuing  its  own  banknotes  by  the  existence  of  the  Bank  of 
Ireland’s  monopoly.  Others  began  with  headquarters  in  Belfast  (Ulster  Bank  and  Northern 
Bank)  or  London  (the  Provincial  and  the  National);  and  the  Munster  and  Leinster  had  its 
origins in Cork. Each of the banks had its own cultural and social make-up, which explains 
why Daniel O’Connell crops up as promoter or supporter of three of them, though he is most 
associated with the National Bank. I was surprised a few years ago when visiting the main 
London office of the Royal Bank of Scotland to find a full length portrait of Daniel O’Connell in 
a prominent position at the top of the grand staircase. Tracing through the genealogy of the 
component  banks  of  that  group  I  realised  that  the  portrait  must  have  come  from  the  old 
National  Bank  which  sold  its  UK  offices  to  Williams  and  Glyn  in  the  1960s,  which  in  turn 
became part of the NatWest Group subsequently acquired by RBS. Continuity and tradition 
long remained the watchword.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The 19th Century saw a transformation in the design of banking halls, and Michael gives an 
illuminating  account  of  the  key  elements.  Illumination  was  indeed  a  major  goal  of  the 
architects  as  they  sought  to  bring  light  into  the  interiors  through  devices  such  as  the 
clerestory – another echo of Church architecture emphasised by Michael.  
Although many of the buildings are no longer used by the banks that built them, if you look 
closely enough in this neighbourhood, original bank names spring out at you from facades. 
The  National  Irish  Bank  on  Dame  Street  carries  the  name  “Hibernian,  1824”  (in  this  case 
there  is  no continuity,  as  the  Hibernian  became  part  of  Bank  of  Ireland,  whereas NIB  is  a 
descendant of Northern Bank); “Provincial Bank Chambers” clearly inscribed over a door at 
the Westin Hotel in College Street reminds us where one forerunner of AIB used to be. And 
other less evident architectural and decorative details are signalled by Michael to the reader 
such as the former branch of the National in Rathmines with its “carved tympana with an Irish 
harp charged shield, placed between wolfhounds rampant.”  
The  main  banks  moved  their  headquarters  out  of  the  College  Green/Dame  Street  area  in 
the1960s and 1970s. Bank of Ireland moved to Baggot Street in the 1970s and AIB moved 
its head office to Ballsbridge in 1979, just as the Central Bank tower block on Dame Street 
was  being  completed.  This  reflected  greater  centralisation  of  the  business  decisions  and 
processing in headquarters leading to the need for larger central offices.  
The  prominent  situation  occupied  by  bank  branches  in  the  city  has  lent  them  a  particular 
allure for other merchants and traders. Over the last decade particularly, sales of many bank 
branches have resulted in major changes in usage.  
Just a few yards from where we are this evening in Foster Place is the original home of the 
Currency Commission – the forerunner of the Central Bank and indeed the first headquarters 
of the Central Bank of Ireland. I heard a wit saying that things have not changed much since 
the Central Bank moved out as the building now houses a waxworks.  
The Central Bank’s tower in Dame St. was suitably large enough to accommodate all its staff 
until membership of the euro and the concentration of financial regulation (beyond banking) 
under the Central Bank umbrella in the early 2000s.  
A  further  rapid  expansion  in  Central  Bank  staff  has  come  about  since  the  financial  crisis, 
reflecting in large part a rethink of the degree of intrusiveness and detailed supervision that is 
seen to be necessary for prudential purposes. This applies not just to the local banks. It may 
not be widely recognised that Ireland, through what is no longer formally called the IFSC, is 
the 15th largest international financial centre in the world according to tabulations by the IMF. 
No wonder it needs substantial staff resources to be sufficiently regulated. In this case it is 
not just a question of doing enough, but of being seen to do enough. Regulation is a public 
service both to the customers of financial firms and to the firms themselves, as well as, of 
course, a protection against losses that could fall on the State. Given what has happened 
elsewhere, any doubt over the quality of supervision and the degree to which international 
standards  are  being  enforced  on  financial  firms  in  the  IFSC  would  adversely  affect  the 
functioning  of  that  sector.  Of  course  the  cost  of  regulation  is  also  a  factor  in  industrial 
location; inefficient regulation can therefore be as useless as no regulation.  
Now the Central Bank’s almost 1400 staff are a multiple of what can be accommodated in 
the  Dame  Street  building,  and  of  course  we  can’t  imagine  adding  floors  to  the  already 
notoriously over-high building. Staff in fact are now scattered across six locations as far apart 
as  Spencer  Dock  and  the  top  of  Harcourt  Street  (in  addition,  of  course  to  the  Currency 
Centre in Sandyford).  
As you have heard, the Central Bank is currently looking for a new home in the city. No firm 
decision has been taken, but it looks as if the clock is ticking for our occupancy of the Dame 
Street tower. We won’t go suddenly, and we won’t board it up. There could be scope to retain 
some  central  banking  activities  here  for  a  number  of  years,  if  it  takes  that  long  before  a 
suitable purchaser emerges. We have some ideas here and are open to others.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
A new development on Dame Street has been the arrival of the Occupy Movement. While 
not  everyone  is  happy  with  their  being  there,  several  people  have  said  to  me  that  their 
presence symbolises, albeit in a rather ambiguous and even incoherent way, the feelings of 
a large part of society in regard to what has gone wrong in the financial sector and with the 
banks. We don’t welcome their presence, but – as long as no-one is harmed or put in danger 
by them – we are not at present inclined to take action to have them moved away.  
All of this serves to remind us that the financial landscape in which we live – and transact – 
changes all the time. This publication provides us with an insight into the development of a 
fine  architectural  tradition.  And  valuably  it  chronicles  how  the  evolution  of  trade  and 
commerce  has  left  its  mark  through  the  bank  architecture  around  the  city.  I  would  like  to 
congratulate Michael and the City Council on a fine publication.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
