Jens Weidmann: 55 years for stability 
Interview  with  Dr  Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  and  Helmut 
Schlesinger,  former  Bundesbank  President,  published  in  the  staff  magazine  of  the 
Bundesbank on 27 July 2012. 
 Mr  Schlesinger,  our  interview  is  also  an  attempt  to  explain  how  the  Bundesbank’s 
stability  culture  has  evolved. Independence and  the  objective  of  price  stability  were 
already enshrined in the Bundesbank Act of 1957. 
Schlesinger: Actually, it was the establishment of the Bank deutscher Länder earlier which 
had helped the stability culture to develop. The money issued in 1948 was quickly put to the 
test: in 1950, during the Korean War. The prices of commodities and other imports shot up, 
and the public was in a state of major panic and unrest. Many began hoarding again; we had 
been going hungry just one and a half years earlier. At the time, I was involved in a study for 
the ifo Institute and was in contact with the Ministry of Economics. I know that experts there 
were already looking into the reintroduction of price freezes and ration cards for food, which 
we had already seen during and after the war. 
What did the Bank deutscher Länder do? 
Schlesinger: It did something that seems absolutely inconceivable nowadays: it set a limit 
for credit expansion in order to attempt to scale back the volume of money. This enabled the 
Bank  deutscher  Länder  to  stabilise  the  D-Mark  over  the  course  of  1951  and  restore 
confidence in the value of the currency. This lay the proper groundwork – for the success of 
the  currency  reform,  the  abolition  of  rationing  and  price  controls,  and  the  stability  of  the 
currency. This allowed the upswing to get started. 
Was BdL management in agreement on the stability policy course from the beginning? 
Schlesinger:  Privy  Councillor Wilhelm  Vocke,  who  was  President  of  the  Bank  at  the  time 
and is regarded as the founder of the Bundesbank’s reputation, was very strict. His influence 
on the Central Bank Council was strong and often endured only under barely audible protest. 
I remember that in 1956 Vocke was asked to comment before a parliamentary committee on 
the introduction of the index-linked pension. His only sentence was: “I believe it would be a 
danger  to  stability  to  introduce  the  index-linked  pension.”  Coming  from  him,  that  had  to 
suffice. 
However, there were also opposing movements within the Bundesbank, such as when 
deciding in 1960 for or against revaluation of the D-Mark. 
Schlesinger: During the 1950s, it gradually became clear that the exchange rate of DM4.20 
to the US dollar set by the Allies was too favourable to Germany. We had an undervalued 
currency  and  considerable  balance  of  payments  surpluses,  with  implications  for  monetary 
policy: in a system of fixed exchange rates, the Bundesbank had to keep buying up foreign 
currency in order to keep the exchange rate stable. It was thus involuntarily creating central 
bank money. Ludwig Erhard, the Economics Minister, therefore wanted a revaluation ... 
... against which there was considerable opposition! 
Schlesinger: Along with Chancellor Konrad Adenauer, the Federal Association of German 
Industry  and  the  German  banks,  the  Bundesbank  and  its  President,  Karl  Blessing,  were 
officially opposed to a revaluation, as they feared that this would weaken the export industry. 
However,  there  were  also  proponents  of  revaluation  at the  Bundesbank,  yet their  opinions 
did  not  become  public,  with  a  few  exceptions:  The  then-new  Vice-President  of  the  Land 
Central  Bank  of  Lower  Saxony,  Heinrich  Irmler,  came  out  in favour  of a  revaluation  in  the 
Land Central Bank’s annual report, which caused a major hubbub in Frankfurt. However, I 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
would like to add one thing: over the decades, there were no further tensions within the Bank 
with regard to its stability orientation ... 
Weidmann: … and that has been the case to this day. Despite all our various qualifications 
and  tasks,  within  the  Bank,  there  is  a  shared  vision  and  a  clear  commitment  to  monetary 
stability.  This  is  unique  for  such  an  institution  and  has  also  made  the  Bank  an  attractive 
option for people applying to work for us. The public good of maintaining price stability and 
thus contributing to the common good is a major incentive for many. 
Mr  Weidmann,  how  did  you  yourself  see  the  Bundesbank,  say,  while  you  were  at 
university? 
Weidmann:  In  1987  I  was  studying  in  France.  The  Banque  de  France  was  not  yet 
independent at the time. That is when I first clearly saw the differences in outlook concerning 
the  role  of,  and  oversight  over,  the  central  bank.  I  myself  had  pretty  much  “inhaled”  the 
Bundesbank’s  role;  my  French  student  friends,  however,  could  not  possibly  imagine  a 
government institution performing a key sovereign task and still being outside parliamentary 
control. Two very different world  views  were colliding. They have continued to do so in all 
political debates – essentially, up to the present day. 
Where can you identify this? 
Weidmann: I recently gave an interview to the French daily newspaper “Le Monde”. Many 
readers  responded  to  the  substantive  positioning,  some  positively,  some  negatively. 
However,  some responded  along the  lines  of “Why  is  he meddling  in the  political  debate? 
He’s only a central bank governor, a “civil servant” who actually shouldn’t be saying anything 
on the matter. 
It was also the crisis of the European Monetary System (EMS) in 1992 and 1993 which 
showed just how different ideas of the central bank’s role within Europe were in those 
days. 
Schlesinger:  German  reunification  meant  that  we  were  in  a  difficult  position  in  1990.  The 
politically determined conversion rate of the East German mark caused a massive increase 
in  the  money  stock  to  a  size  considerably  larger  than  was  justified  by  the  former  GDR’s 
potential  output. 
the 
competitiveness of East German businesses. We had an inflation rate in excess of four per 
cent and needed to tighten monetary policy in Germany. We succeeded, too; however, our 
increase in interest rates did not sit well with some of our fellow members of the EMS. They 
would rather have lowered rates, but could not do so owing to their currencies’ peg to the 
D-Mark.  The  proper  action  would  have  been  to  adjust  the  central  rates:  in  other  words, 
realignment. 
What was the reason for that not happening? 
Schlesinger:  The  finance  ministers  seemed  not  to  be  listening.  During  the  decisive 
negotiations, the central bankers were seated at the margins; that was the role assigned to 
them.  Norman  Lamont,  the  UK  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  and  chairman  of  the  Ecofin 
Council,  then  tried  to  force  Germany  to  lower  its  interest  rates.  He  demanded  that  I 
personally – not the Central Bank Council – lower interest rates that following Monday. I then 
had  to  explain  to  him,  first,  that  it  was  not  possible,  and  second,  we  would  not  do  that 
anyway.  The  following  weeks  saw  very  strong  interventions  against  the  Italian  lira,  the 
Portuguese escudo and the Spanish peseta, and in the end, also against the pound sterling. 
Instead of realigning, the UK dropped out of the EMS. The result was a depreciation which 
was twice as large as it would have been in a realignment. These were the tensions inherent 
in the EMS and its narrow exchange rate bands ... 
... which ultimately led to the bands being enlarged to 15 per cent in August 1993. 
Weidmann: I can very well remember where I was when I heard the news: in New York City. 
On Times Square I saw a large digital billboard with a ticker announcing the news. That was 
increased  quickly,  which  obliterated 
In  addition,  wages  were 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
a  crucial  turning  point  for  me.  The  way  I  had  perceived  it,  the  path  towards  European 
Integration  had  up  until  then  always  been  pointing  in  one  direction:  towards  greater 
integration. However, the tensions in the system were now patently obvious. 
Schlesinger: At all events, with these bands, proposed by France upon our advice, the EMS 
functioned smoothly up until the introduction of the euro. 
In 1990, the Bundesbank wrote that the participants in economic and monetary union 
would be inextricably linked to one another “come what may” and that such a union 
would  be  an  “irrevocable  joint  and  several  community  which,  in  the  light  of  past 
experience, requires a more far-reaching association, in the form of a comprehensive 
political union, if it is to remain durable”. 
Weidmann: The assessment at that time merely reflected the Bank’s long-held position. As 
early  as  1963,  President  Karl  Blessing  had  stated  that  the  introduction  of  monetary  union 
should be conditional on political union. The Bank’s stance has not only been consistent over 
time but has, in fact, taken on even greater relevance in a dramatic way owing to the recent 
crisis in the euro area. 
Political union did not feature in the Maastricht Treaty at the end of 1991.How did the 
Central Bank Council react to this? 
Schlesinger: When I took office as President of the Deutsche Bundesbank in the summer of 
1991, Chancellor Helmut Kohl was still in favour of political union. However, the decision to 
implement monetary union by no later than 1999 was taken just four months later. This was a 
clear  defeat  for  us.  There  is  no  other  way  of  putting  it.  We  had  assumed  that  the  Treaty 
would be concluded with a definition of the entry criteria, but without a fixed date being set. 
Weidmann: It is interesting that we are having a similar discussion now in connection with 
the  banking  union.  Here,  too,  some  quarters  are  evidently  seeking  a  far-reaching  joint 
solution, but without imposing stricter rules on the other policy areas that are also affected. A 
genuine  European  banking  supervision  can  indeed  form  a  major  component  of  closer 
integration within monetary union. However, such an institutional reorganisation of banking 
supervision  also  has  to  be  integrated  –  into  a  comprehensive  reform  of  the  supervisory 
regulatory  framework  and  of  the  respective  national  scope  for  economic  and  fiscal  policy. 
Otherwise, too great a burden will be placed on banking supervision. 
What is crucial for political union is the willingness to hand over national sovereignty. 
Does such a willingness actually exist within the EU? 
Schlesinger:  This  question  always  takes  me  back  to  the  start  of  European  unification.  At 
that time, the main objective was quite a different one – namely, to ensure that there would 
never  again  be  a  war  in  Europe.  The  plan  for  a  common  European  army  was  ultimately 
blocked by France, even though the loss of sovereignty involved would have been easy to 
implement.  It  is  actually  hard  to  envisage  how  a  loss  of  monetary  sovereignty  could  be 
achieved in the absence of a unified state. 
Weidmann:  Seeing  how  reluctant  some  countries  are  to  relinquish  their  fiscal  policy 
autonomy – even in return for financial assistance – it is hard to imagine political union being 
achieved in the foreseeable future. 
Mr Schlesinger, should the Bundesbank have fought more strongly against monetary 
union without a political counterweight in the 1990s? 
Schlesinger: All of our demands were fulfilled. But I think we all underestimated just how 
wide the gulf is in the mindset not only of the political class but also in terms of public opinion 
in the individual countries concerning the objectives of fiscal policy. I would like to refer you 
to  a  chapter  by  Rudolf  Richter  in  the  publication  marking  the  50th  anniversary  of  the 
Deutsche Mark (Note: Fifty Years of the Deutsche Mark: Central Bank and the Currency in 
Germany  since  1948).  He  writes  that  the  culture  of  stability  in  Germany  has  been  able  to 
develop  only  because  it  has  had  the  full  backing  of  the  general  public.  If  you  look  at  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Maastricht  Treaty,  the  relevant  criteria  are  there.  But  you  won’t  find  any  reference  to  the 
member states having to have the same culture of stability. 
Weidmann: Political efforts to use the central bank for policy purposes exist in all countries. 
However, the public’s stance on this is probably the crucial factor. 
Is there a lack of political will? 
Weidmann: The founding fathers  of  the  EU  treaties  evidently  took  a  sceptical  view  of  the 
political will, and it is precisely for this reason that they made the central bank independent in 
order to protect it from a lack of or a conflict of political will. But the central bank must use 
and  maintain  this  protection.  Furthermore,  it  should  be  aware  that  this  independence  also 
requires  it to  respect  and  not  overstep  its  own  mandate.  Mr  Schlesinger’s  examples  show 
that what is politically desirable and what is economically prudent have often not matched up. 
Whether we’re talking about interest rates or some sort of non-standard measures, in the end 
it always comes down to the central bank being instrumentalised for fiscal policy objectives. 
However, policymakers thereby overestimate the central bank’s possibilities and expect too 
much of it by assuming that it can be used not only for price stability, but also for promoting 
growth,  reducing  unemployment  and  stabilising  the  banking  system.  This  pattern  occurs 
again  and  again;  this  time  it  is  perhaps  even  more  pronounced  than  in  the  past  because 
there is increased doubt among the general public about policymakers’ ability to act, and the 
central bank is seen as the sole institution that is capable of doing something. In this respect, 
the central bank is perhaps under even more pressure than in the past – even though you, 
Mr  Schlesinger,  are  better  able  to  judge  this  as  you  have  witnessed  all  of  these  periods. 
Furthermore, in Europe we are faced with some quite different ways of looking at the central 
bank’s role – not only in politics, but also in the media and on the part of the general public. If 
a central bank also has to work against public opinion, things get difficult. 
Today it is even harder for the Bundesbank to assert its influence as it is just one of 
17 central banks in the Eurosystem. What impact does this have on your work? 
Weidmann:  Even  though  what  you  say  is  correct  in  terms  of  shares  of  voting  rights,  I 
certainly would not say that we are “just” one of 17 central banks. We are the largest and 
most important central bank in the Eurosystem and we have a greater say than many other 
central  banks  in  the  Eurosystem.  This  means  that  we  have  a  different  role.  We  are  the 
central bank that is most active in the public debate on the future of monetary union. This is 
also how some of my colleagues expect it to be. 
Recently, the day after a public hearing before the Budget Committee of the German 
Bundestag,  the  headline  in  the  Bild  newspaper  read  “Bundesbank  is  softening  the 
euro”.  Did  this  discussion  on  inflation  in  the  press,  which  was  conducted  in  great 
depth  and  lasted  for  several  days,  harm  the  Bundesbank’s  status  as  an  “anchor  of 
stability”? 
Weidmann:  Well,  I  have  not  received  any  complaint  from  Mr  Schlesinger  about  that.  He 
knew that this headline had no substance. For those acquainted with the Bundesbank it was 
immediately clear that nothing of any substance was being reported. Of course, it pains me 
to see how frivolously fears are being aroused, particularly at a time when people are already 
very  uncertain.  At  the  public  hearing,  the  Bundesbank  referred  in  terms  of  substance  to 
something quite trivial: if Germany, which was once the “sick man” of Europe, is now taking 
the  lead  in  Europe  economically  –  and  the  economic  situation  has  now  been  reversed 
compared with the first few years of monetary union – then this will, naturally, also have an 
impact  on  the  inflation  rate.  However,  it  is  positions  after  the  decimal  point  that  will  be 
affected by this, and next year we shall in any case first of all see prices cooling off. Parallel 
to  this,  there  was  another,  almost  absurd  debate  about  strengthening  the  peripheral 
countries by weakening Germany’s competitiveness. This came about from the belief that the 
peripheral  countries  are  at  risk  from  deflation.  However,  if  these  countries  go  through 
adjustment processes which result in decreases in wages and prices, then this constitutes 
one-off shifts in the wage and price structure and not deflation. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Therefore, Germany does not have to accept inflation rates which broadly unmoor inflation 
expectations merely to ensure that the average euro-area inflation rate remains just below 
two  per  cent.  Yet  this  is  exactly  what  some  in  the  United  States  and  United  Kingdom  are 
calling for.  
It is often said that Germany has benefitted from monetary union and it therefore has a 
duty to help. 
Weidmann: I think that argument is incorrect. First, counting up the for and against of who 
has  benefited  to  what  extent  from  monetary  union  is  not  helpful.  A  stable  single  currency 
benefits all member states – some perhaps more than others, but that, too, can change over 
time. After all, Germany was certainly not considered to be a winner during the first few years 
of  monetary  union.  Second,  when  monetary  union  was  established,  we  agreed  on  a  legal 
framework which has to be respected: a single monetary policy ensures price stability and 
each member state is responsible for its own fiscal policy. This is precisely what is expressed 
in the “no bail-out” clause. And third: Germany is already providing large-scale assistance for 
the peripheral countries, not least as an anchor of stability and as a guarantor of the rescue 
packages.  
Mr Weidmann, in your opinion, what are the biggest challenges that the Bundesbank 
is facing now and in the coming years? 
Weidmann: The crisis requires all our energies. We shall continue to use all of our resources 
at all levels to stand up for the positions we believe in and to ensure that the monetary union 
remains a stability union. We shall take on new tasks in the field of financial stability, which 
we  shall  have  to  breathe  life  into.  I  am  thinking  here,  in  particular,  of  the  national 
macroprudential  mandate,  in  which  the  Bundesbank  is  taking  a  prominent  role.  For  me 
personally,  it  is  a  quite  particular  concern  that  we  continue  our  progress  to  a  culture  of 
openness at the Bundesbank. The staff have already experienced the first elements of this 
new  culture  through  “Weidmann  direkt”  and  “Zu  Mittag  mit  …”.  I  have  found  this  direct 
contact with members of staff to be very inspiring and useful. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
