Jean-Pierre Danthine: Taming the financial cycle 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Pierre  Danthine,  Vice  Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss 
National Bank, at the 30th SUERF Colloquium, Zurich, 5 September 2012. 
 Introduction 
The global financial crisis has been weighing heavily on the world economy since 2007. The 
crisis  was  severe.  In  most  advanced  countries,  the  recovery  has  been  weak  in  historical 
comparison. Many of these economies are struggling hard to regain the jobs lost during the 
last four years (slide 1).1 
The crisis originated in the bursting of a house price bubble driven by an excessive credit 
expansion  in  the  US,  which  eventually  pushed  the  global  financial  system  to  the  brink  of 
collapse. In some countries, such as Spain or Ireland, the crisis was further compounded by 
the  bursting  of their  own  housing  bubbles.  In  this  regard,  the  current  crisis  is  an  excellent 
example. Historical evidence shows that the macroeconomic cost of an asset price bubble 
that bursts is particularly severe when the property market is affected. Moreover, such events 
tend  to  be  more  costly  when  the  bubble  is  financed  through  credit  and  when  leveraged 
financial institutions are directly involved.2 
Switzerland has been less affected by the recent crisis and has recovered more quickly from 
it. There is no room for complacency, however. The recovery has been boosted by a thriving 
housing  market  and  strong  credit  growth.  In  the  wake  of  this,  the  medium-term  risk  to 
financial stability has been increasing. The dismal consequences of the recent global crisis 
as  well  as  of  our  own  housing  market  crisis  experience  in  the  early  1990s  are  stark 
reminders that we should not take any chances in this regard. We must ensure that a similar 
crisis does not materialise in our country again. 
How can we improve our ability to contain risks to system-wide stability knowing that, in case 
of  adverse  shocks,  these  risks  can  materialise  with  devastating  consequences  for  the 
broader economy? 
In the first part of my speech, I argue that what is referred to as a macroprudential approach 
to  financial  regulation  is  an  important  missing  link  in  our  quest  for  a  more  comprehensive 
financial stability framework. It provides the necessary complement to sound microprudential 
regulation  and  supervision  as  well  as  to  a  monetary  policy  that  focuses  primarily  on  price 
stability. 
I argue, in the second part of my speech, that the case for macroprudential policies applies 
strongly  in  Switzerland.  Against  a  background  of  persistently  strong  growth  in  the  Swiss 
credit  and  property  markets,  the  availability  of  a  new  macroprudential  instrument,  a 
countercyclical  capital  buffer  (CCB),  is  an  important  step  forward.  I  will  describe  the  key 
features of this important new instrument. 
                                                
1 
In  the  US,  for  instance,  it  is  already  three  years  since  the  recession  ended,  in  technical  terms.  Economic 
growth has settled at a modest 2% on average and only about a third of the jobs chopped during the downturn 
have been restored (approx. 2.5 million, compared to 7.5 million). Even worse, growth in the euro area has 
now all but come to a halt, and the currency union is faced with increasing unemployment.  
2  Crowe et al (2011). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
How to deal with systemic risk: The case for macroprudential regulation 
Let me proceed straight to the key problem at hand: the issue of systemic risk in financial 
markets. 
In  general  terms,  systemic  risk  arises  because  an  optimising  financial  institution  does  not 
fully account for the cost that its behaviour imposes on other financial institutions. That is, at 
heart, systemic risk originates in a negative externality imposed by individual financial firms 
on the system. The underlying sources of systemic risk can be either structural or cyclical. 
The  structural  dimension  of  systemic  risk  is  linked  to  spillovers  associated  with  three  key 
properties of modern banking: high leverage, limited liability and interconnectedness. 
On its own, high leverage implies a higher risk of insolvency. Combined with limited liability, 
high leverage often leads to excessive risk-taking. This is because, with limited liability, the 
diverse  set  of  stakeholders  (managers,  owners,  creditors)  benefits  from  the  upside  of 
risk-taking but does not fully bear the cost when these risks materialise. As a consequence, 
there are strong incentives to leverage the balance sheet beyond the level which would be 
chosen if the individual stakeholders were fully exposed to the associated increase in the risk 
of default. 
This  problem  of  socially  excessive  risk-taking  is  particularly  damaging  in  the  case  of  large 
interconnected  institutions  whose  failure  would  endanger  other  institutions,  with  adverse 
consequences for the broader economy. Finally, the issue is further exacerbated if an implicit 
or explicit guarantee of state support is extended to such institutions. The chain of distorted 
incentives which has just been described, and, in particular, the moral hazard issue implied 
by  the  guarantee  of  state  support,  is  now  well  recognised  and  is  being  addressed 
energetically by the various regulators.3 
The second source of systemic risk has a cyclical dimension (slide 2). This is the aspect on 
which I would like to focus today. Here, systemic risk arises from the procyclicality of financial 
agents’ behaviour, leading to the amplification of financial cycles.4 Procyclicality can arise, for 
instance,  from  the  tendency  to  underprice  risk  during  booms  and  to  overprice  it  in 
downswings. Sometimes exacerbated by regulatory requirements, it causes agents to take 
similar actions in case of an adverse shock, namely to dispose of risky assets when prices 
fall.  While  this  behaviour  may  be  individually  rational,  the  outcome  can  be  socially 
devastating. Indeed this collective reaction tends to amplify an initial price movement, thus 
leading to another round of asset selling, in particular if the boom is mainly financed through 
credit. A financial system facing such strains is forced to retrench further from risk-taking and 
eventually  from  credit  intermediation,  leading  –  in  extreme  cases  –  to  an  outright  credit 
crunch. 
How to deal with systemic risk – the traditional approach 
While  these  arguments  are  not  profoundly  new,  the  policy  consensus  before  the  current 
crisis  was  dominated  by  a  reluctance  to  address  systemic  risk  issues  directly.  This 
consensus was based on two key arguments. 
First, it was largely assumed that securing the solidity of individual financial institutions would 
also  grant  system-wide  stability  and  thus  that  regulation  at  the  level  of  individual 
firms  –  micro-regulation  –  would  suffice.  The  crisis  has  shown  that  this  view  is  clearly 
questionable.  As  just  described,  risk  in  a  financial  system  can  arise  quasi  endogenously, 
even if individual financial institutions appear to be robust. 
                                                
3   For more details, namely on ways to address TBTF issues, cf. Danthine (2011). 
4  Bank of England (2011). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The second critical element of the pre-crisis policy consensus is known as the “Greenspan 
Doctrine”.  This  states  that  pricking  an  asset  price  bubble  is  in  general  more  costly  than 
cleaning up after the bubble has burst. The foundation of this doctrine is that it is simply too 
difficult to identify ex ante when a bubble is forming. Specifically, it is inherently difficult to 
disentangle situations where a credit or asset-price boom is justified by fundamentals from 
those where it is based on misplaced expectations and is thus a threat to financial stability. 
As a result, an attempt to prick a bubble may lead to an intervention that puts a halt to “a 
good boom” which would have pushed the economy towards a higher level of development. 
The  cost  of  such  unwarranted  interventions  in  the  form  of  foregone  growth  could  be 
substantial.5 
How to deal with the cyclical dimension of systemic risk – a macroprudential approach 
The immense cost of the global crisis has led to a thorough rethinking of this traditional view 
on  financial  regulation  and  macroeconomic  policy.  For  instance,  estimates  have  been 
provided  suggesting  that  the  cumulated  output  loss  incurred  by  the  recent  crisis  could 
amount  to  90%  of  2009  world  GDP.6  Naturally  enough,  the  afore-mentioned  approach  of 
“benign  neglect”  is  no  longer  seen  as  an  acceptable  way  to  deal  with  potential  excesses 
building up through the financial cycle. 
Given that the cost of inaction when imbalances develop in the credit market can be huge, a 
more precautionary approach is indispensable (slide 3). In general, its goal should be, first, to 
enhance the resilience of the financial system to adverse shocks, and second – to the extent 
possible – to try and preventively contain the build-up of systemic risk. This is the thrust of 
the  macroprudential  approach.  For  instance,  in order to  address  the root  cause  of  cyclical 
systemic  risk  directly,  the  goal  of  this  approach  should  be  to  reduce  the  procyclicality  of 
financial agents’ behaviour. 
Can  we  hope  to  achieve  this  with  monetary  policy  instruments,  or  do  we  need  new 
specifically designed instruments? 
Monetary  policy  comes  to  mind  since  it  is  conceivable  that  we  might  use  the  interest  rate 
instrument more aggressively in the face of mounting cyclical excesses in the credit and real 
estate markets. Raising interest rates in the case of a credit boom – leaning against the wind 
– is a natural response, as the higher market borrowing rates would exert a dampening effect 
on credit demand and – eventually – on real estate prices.7 
Using  the  interest  rate  to  contain  asset  price  growth  would,  however,  regularly  lead  to 
deviations from the interest rate path that would be optimally justified by the pursuit of the 
price stability mandate. This is an illustration of the well-known principle according to which 
the number of policy tools should equal the number of policy goals. 
At  a  more  practical  level,  empirical  evidence  suggests  that  the  interest  rate  may  be  an 
inefficient tool when used single-handedly for the purpose of dampening the financial cycle. 
That  is,  containing  a  boom  may  require  very  large  interest  rate  movements,  leading  to 
commensurate output losses.8 
In sum, while interest rate policy may at times be counted on to support efforts to contain 
financial stability risks, it is unlikely to suffice as the main, or sole, instrument in doing so. 
                                                
5   Blinder and Reis (2005). 
6  Haldane (2010); Calculations based on former banking crises suggest that, on average, about 10% of GDP is 
lost  initially  (peak-to-trough)  and  that  the  cumulated  (longer-term)  cost  may  have  added  up  to  20–100%  of 
pre-crisis GDP (BCBS (2010)). 
7   White (2009). 
8   Danthine (2012). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Thus the deployment of specific macroprudential instruments, targeted directly at the specific 
source of systemic risk, seems appropriate. There are several potential candidates – ranging 
from  capital  and  liquidity  oriented  tools,  to  taxation  or  outright  bans  on  certain  financial 
activities.9 Ex ante it is difficult to single out the best instrument, independently of the context 
and the targeted source of systemic risk. 
I will abstain from an in-depth discussion of the catalogue of proposed tools and rather focus 
on a practical case study, namely the macroprudential instrument introduced in Switzerland 
earlier this year, the countercyclical capital buffer (CCB). 
the 
last 
three  years.  As  a  consequence, 
Macroprudential regulation in Switzerland 
Why do we need this instrument? 
In Switzerland, the indications of a gradual build-up of cyclical imbalances in the mortgage 
and real estate markets have become increasingly evident over the past few years (slide 4). 
In the last three years, yearly growth rates of mortgage lending and real estate prices have 
amounted to about 5% on average.10 These numbers may not be spectacular compared to 
the  double-digit  growth  rates  often  observed  during  later  build-up  stages  of  a  bubble. 
However,  these  growth  rates  are  atypically  high  when  compared  to  the  below  average 
economic  growth  observed  during 
the 
mortgage-lending-to-GDP ratio has reached historical heights while, in some segments and 
regions,  residential  real  estate  prices  exceed  levels  that  can  be  justified  by  fundamental 
factors such as demographics or income. 
Given these developments, Switzerland is facing an increasing risk, both of defaults in the 
mortgage  market  and  a  sizable  correction  in  property  prices,  either  of  which  might  impair 
financial stability in the medium term. Specifically, an adverse shock – such as rising interest 
rates,  lower  growth  or  increasing  unemployment  –  would  leave  some  borrowers  unable  to 
service their loans, increasing the possibility and number of defaults, and ultimately leading 
to a vicious feedback loop of falling property prices and impaired balance sheets throughout 
the banking sector. 
At the same time, Switzerland currently serves as perfect example for the afore-mentioned 
argument that the interest rate is unlikely to suffice as instrument to ensure financial stability 
(slide 5). Notably, it is clear that the current exchange rate situation invalidates the interest 
rate as an available instrument to dampen the persistently strong growth in credit volumes. 
At present, the interest rates required for monetary policy objectives differ considerably from 
those required for financial stability policy objectives. This perfectly demonstrates the need 
for  specific  instruments  to  be  able  to  address  both  policy  objectives  –  financial  and  price 
stability – simultaneously. 
Against  this  background,  the  Federal  Council  announced  a  package  of  measures  in  June 
2012 addressing these risks in the mortgage and real estate markets. 
In addition to the CCB, this package consists of a structural revision of capital requirements 
for residential mortgage lending as well as a revision of the banking industry’s self-regulation 
guidelines.  The  first  of  these  measures  consists  of  a  permanent  increase  in  the 
risk-weighting11  for  the  loan  tranche  exceeding  the  80%  loan-to-value  ratio.  The  second 
                                                
9   Taxonomy  as  proposed  in  De  Nicolò  et  al  (2012).  For  an  overview  on  macroprudential  instruments  and 
international experiences, cf. CGFS (2010). 
10   Over the past three years, annual real growth amounts to, on average, 4.4% (houses) and 5.5% (apartments). 
Annual real mortgage growth over the past three years amounts to, on average, 4.8%. 
11   The risk-weighting is increased from 75% to 100%. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
measure requires a 100% risk-weighting for new mortgage loans which do not meet tighter 
minimum requirements stipulated in the banks’ revised self-regulation guidelines.12 
The CCB, for its part, is a pre-emptive measure that allows authorities to temporarily raise 
capital  requirements  in  the  banking  system  as  imbalances  in  the  credit  market  develop. 
When activated, banks will be required to gradually build up an additional capital buffer of up 
to  2.5%  of  total  domestic  risk-weighted  assets  during  the  upswing  in  the  credit  cycle.  The 
CCB  requirement  is  a  supplement  to  other  capital  requirements.  Once  risks  have 
materialised, or if the intensity of risk is subsiding, the capital buffer generated from the CCB 
is released, either immediately or gradually. 
The key features of the CCB 
The CCB combines several key features that directly address the problem of cyclical risks to 
financial stability. 
In  particular,  when  activated,  the  CCB  should  help  reduce  the  amplitude  and  the 
consequences  of  imbalances for financial  stability.  The  CCB  should  increase  resilience  by 
ensuring that an additional buffer of capital is built up gradually during the boom, a buffer that 
can then be released to cushion losses in an eventual downturn. It thus limits the threat of 
vicious fire-sale spirals. Moreover, by increasing the relative cost of providing credit, the CCB 
should help to lean against the build-up of excesses. 
In addition, the buffer is designed in such a way that it can be implemented on a broad basis 
or can target specific segments of the credit market only. Currently, for instance, signs of a 
build-up of excesses in the Swiss credit market merely relate to the domestic mortgage and 
residential  real  estate  markets. Thus,  if  the  buffer  were  to  be  activated,  it  would  be  aimed 
solely at this segment of the credit market. 
Not  least,  a  CCB  is  one  of  the  key  components  of  the  reforms  of  international  financial 
regulation (Basel III framework). It will be introduced by most countries within the next few 
years. In this context, criticism has been raised that an early introduction of the CCB would 
cause competitive disadvantages for the Swiss financial sector in international comparison. 
For various reasons, this criticism is invalid. First, the CCB will be activated only if deemed 
necessary; most of the time, it is likely to remain turned off. Second, if activated, the CCB 
would  be  applicable  to  Swiss  banks  and  to  subsidiaries  of  foreign  banks  in  Switzerland, 
ensuring  a  level  playing  field.  Third,  given  the  geographical  diversification  of  the  two  big 
banks, an activation of the CCB focused on domestic risk-weighted assets would not have a 
material impact on these banks’ overall capital situation. Finally, by contributing to financial 
stability  and  hence  reducing  the  risk  of  domestic  banking  crises,  the  CCB  should  help 
increase  the  overall  long-term  attractiveness  and  competitiveness  of  the  Swiss  financial 
sector. 
How the CCB works 
Let me now address four key questions pertaining to the functionality of the CCB; and, for 
that matter, of any macroprudential instrument targeted at containing the cyclical dimension 
of systemic risk. 
First, how do we know that imbalances have reached a level such that an activation of the 
CCB is warranted? 
                                                
12   These minimum requirements are twofold: First, at least 10% of the value of the collateral must be provided in 
equity  from  sources  other  than  borrower’s  pension  assets.  Second,  the  mortgage  debt  on  residential 
properties  has  to  be  repaid  such  that  it  amounts  to  no  more  than  two-thirds  of  the  collateral  value  after 
20 years. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
As mentioned earlier, identifying unsustainable developments in asset and credit markets is 
inherently difficult. Thus, the aim cannot, and should not, be to surgically prick bubbles or to 
fine tune asset-price or credit market developments. 
It is easier, however, although not trivial, to identify situations of intensified financial stability 
risk. In such cases, taking precautionary action is fully justified. The question should thus be 
rephrased as “How can we identify that the build-up of risk is approaching a critical stage?” 
International  evidence  suggests  a  palette  of  quantitative  early  warning  indicators  that  are 
reliable with respect to predicting banking crises and financial instability. For instance, real 
estate boom-bust cycles are particularly damaging when associated with increased leverage 
in both the real and financial sectors. To obtain a more accurate picture of the intensity of 
systemic risk, a combination of indicators should be monitored simultaneously.13 
In this spirit, the Swiss approach relies on a combination of indicators to assess whether, and 
to what extent, the activation, adjustment or deactivation of the CCB is warranted.14 These 
indicators  have  been  chosen  based  on  their  past  performance  as  early  warning  indicators 
both for Switzerland and internationally (slide 6). 
Still, a purely mechanical response to financial stability risk depicted by a set of indicators, 
while  providing  a  certain  degree  of  transparency,  is  risky.  For  instance,  it  would  leave  no 
room for considering the influence of developments not captured by these indicators. As a 
consequence, an element of discretion should be embedded in the decision to activate the 
CCB, or not, at a given point in time.15 
The current situation provides a good example: The medium-term risks to financial stability 
remain  high,  with  imbalances  in  certain  segments  persisting.  Some  recent  data  releases, 
however,  indicate  a  possible  slowdown  in  momentum  in  Swiss  mortgage  and  real  estate 
markets during the second quarter of 2012. In addition, the effect on credit momentum of the 
other measures announced by the Federal Council in June 2012, namely the revision of the 
risk-weighting and the self-regulation rules, remains to be seen.16 Taking these issues into 
consideration, the SNB decided in August 2012 not to issue an immediate proposal to the 
Federal Council for activation of the CCB. It will reassess the situation regularly. 
The second key question pertaining to the functioning of the CCB is whether it is an effective 
instrument to strengthen the resilience of the financial system and thus help to limit negative 
spillovers (slide 7). 
The  impact  of  higher  capital  ratios  and  more  provisions  on  the  resilience  of  banks  is 
self-evident.  This  is  also  the  case  from  a  system-wide  perspective.  To  assess  the 
effectiveness  of  the  CCB  in  strengthening  resilience,  we  can  draw  some  lessons  from 
historical  experience,  namely  the  Swiss  real  estate  crisis  in  the  early  1990s.  Internal 
calculations suggest that, had the proposed CCB regime been in place in the run-up to that 
crisis, the resilience of the system as a whole would have increased significantly. From an 
aggregate  perspective,  this  additional  capital  would  have  absorbed  a  large  portion  of  the 
losses that were reported as a result of the crisis. 
The  third  key  question  is:  To  what  extent  the  CCB  is  able  to  contain  the  build-up  of 
excesses? 
                                                
13   IMF (2011), Drehmann et al (2011). 
14   Namely, domestic mortgage volume indicators and domestic residential real estate price indicators. 
15   For a detailed description of this principle of “guided discretion”, cf. SNB (2012). 
16   Both measures are designed to have a dampening effect on house prices and mortgage volume momentum. 
The former will be effective from January 2013, the latter already from July 2012 with a transition period until 
November 2012. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
the  CCB 
is  activated, 
Here,  international  empirical  evidence  suggests  that  tighter  capital  requirements  have,  on 
average, a dampening impact on credit volume. This impact of tighter capital on lending is 
greater  when  the  implementation  period  is  shorter.17  Moreover,  the  increase  in  capital 
requirements may lead to a significant reduction in the likelihood of a systemic crisis.18 
Expectations  concerning  the  effectiveness  of  leaning  against  the  credit  cycle  must  remain 
realistic,  however.  There  is  no  guarantee  that  activating  the  CCB  will  fully  eliminate  future 
imbalances in the Swiss mortgage and real estate markets. Inherent uncertainty regarding 
the strength of its impact and hence the appropriate calibration remains. Moreover, if banks 
hold  significant  capital  cushions  even  before 
the  desired 
countercyclical effect on credit growth may be weakened. We can note, however, that even if 
the CCB has no effect on aggregate credit growth, it will nonetheless be useful if lending is 
shifted  from  relatively  weak  banks  (constrained  by  the  CCB)  to  more  resilient  banks 
(benefitting from a sufficient capital buffer). 
Let us now turn to the fourth question pertaining to the functioning of the CCB: How does it 
perform with respect to potential side-effects? 
The most important concern in this regard is that, if the CCB generates capital constraints at 
some banks, these banks will need to decide which sector to keep lending to. It may seem 
reasonable  that  institutions  will  prefer  to keep  lending  to the  booming sector,  while  cutting 
back on lending to other sectors. 
The  design  of  the  CCB  takes  such  undesired  side-effects  into  account.  In  particular,  the 
sectoral approach alleviates this problem to some extent. By increasing the cost of granting 
credit to a given sector (real estate lending) relative to others, it should discourage lending to 
the  former  as  it  is  “penalised”  in  terms  of  higher  capital  requirements.  And,  thanks  to  its 
dynamic  nature,  the  CCB  can  be  flexibly  adjusted,  should  it  still  have  undesired 
consequences in other segments of the credit market. 
Conclusion 
To  sum  up,  the  global  crisis  has  clearly  stressed  the  need  for  a  more  comprehensive 
approach to financial stability. The potential cost of a systemic crisis is significant. Remaining 
idle is no alternative. We must insist on addressing systemic risk issues head-on. This is the 
intent of macroprudential instruments. 
In  Switzerland,  financial  stability  risk  is  currently  building  up,  driven  by  persistently  strong 
momentum in the mortgage and real estate markets. Against this background, the availability 
of a tool such as the CCB is a significant step forward. The CCB is a “soft”, incentive-oriented 
instrument  based  on  the  principle  of  prudence.  It  can  and  will  be  used  in  a  balanced  and 
flexible way to deal with specific cyclical risks to financial stability. 
References 
Bank of England 2011: Instruments of macroprudential policy. A discussion paper. 
BCBS 2010: An assessment of the long-term economic impact of the new regulatory 
framework. 
BIS  2010:  Assessing  the  Macroeconomic  Impact  of  the  Transition  to  Stronger  Capital  and 
Liquidity Requirements. Final Report by the Macroeconomic Assessment Group established 
by the Financial Stability Board and the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. 
                                                
17   BCBS (2010) and BIS (2010). These estimates suggest that the median impact of increasing capital ratios by 
1pp is a 1–2% reduction in lending. 
18   BCBS (2010). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
Blinder, Alan S. and Reis 2005: Understanding the Greenspan Standard. Prepared for the 
Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City  symposium,  The  Greenspan  Era:  Lessons  for  the 
Future, Jackson Hole, 25–27 August 2005. 
CGFS  2010:  Macroprudential  Instruments  and  Frameworks:  A  Stocktaking  of  Issues  and 
Experiences. 
Crowe, Christopher et al 2011: Policies for Macrofinancial Stability. Options to Deal with Real 
Estate Booms. IMF Staff Discussion Note, SDN/11/02. 
Danthine, Jean-Pierre 2012: Reconciling Price stability and Financial Stability. Speech held 
at the Alumni Conference, University of Zurich, 24 January 2012. 
Danthine,  Jean-Pierre  2011:  After  the  crisis:  improving  incentives  in  the  financial  sector. 
Speech  held  at  the  Founding  event  of  the  School  of  Finance,  University  of  St.  Gallen, 
20 May 2011. 
De Nicolò, Gianni et al 2012: Externalities and Macroprudential Policy. IMF Staff Discussion 
Note, SDN/12/05. 
Drehmann,  Mathias  et  al  2011:  Anchoring  countercyclical  capital  buffers:  the  role  of  credit 
aggregates. BIS Working Papers No 355. 
Haldane,  Andrew  G.  2010:  The  $100  billion  question.  Comments  at  the  Institute  of 
Regulation & Risk, Hong Kong, 30 March 2010. 
IMF 2011: Global Financial Stability Report 2011. Grappling with Crisis Legacies. 
Swiss  National  Bank  2012:  Implementing  the  countercyclical  capital  buffer  in  Switzerland. 
Concretising the Swiss National Bank’s role. Fact sheet, June 2012. 
White,  William  2009:  Should  Monetary  Policy  “Lean  or  Clean?”  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
Dallas Working Paper No. 34. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  9 
  10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
  12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
 14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
