Mario Draghi: Hearing at the Committee on Economic and Monetary 
Affairs of the European Parliament 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  a 
hearing  before  the  Committee  on  Economic  and  Monetary  Affairs  of  the  European 
Parliament, Brussels, 25 April 2012. 
 Madam Chair, 
Honourable members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, 
It is a pleasure to be back here in Parliament and in front of your Committee for our regular 
exchange of views. 
Accolgo  con  soddisfazione  l’esito  delle  riunioni  di  primavera  di  aumentare  le  risorse  del 
Fondo monetario internazionale (FMI) di 430 miliardi di dollari. L’area dell’euro ha fatto la sua 
parte  accrescendo  le  proprie  protezioni  e  impegnandosi  a  fornire  al  FMI  un  importo 
aggiuntivo di 150 miliardi di euro. Sono lieto che ora altri azionisti del Fondo si siano offerti di 
prestare il proprio contributo per incrementarne le risorse. 
Il  est  maintenant  d’une  importance  cruciale  que  le  Mécanisme  de  Stabilité  européen  soit 
entièrement opérationnel. La BCE peut fournir son soutien à cet égard. Naturellement, même 
avec un pare-feu important en place, les pays de la zone euro doivent continuer à mettre en 
œuvre les ajustements budgétaires et structurels qui s’imposent. 
Wie üblich, werde ich zuerst auf die aktuelle wirtschaftliche Lage im Eurogebiet eingehen. 
Danach werde ich mich den Themen zuwenden, die Sie vorgeschlagen haben: Bewertung 
der  Sondermaßnahmen  der  EZB  und  Bewertung  der  wirtschaftlichen  Ungleichgewichte  in 
der Währungsunion.  
Economic and monetary developments 
Let  me  first  focus  on  economic  and  monetary  developments  in  the  euro  area  since  our 
previous meeting on 19 December last year.  
Available indicators for the first quarter of 2012 broadly confirm a stabilisation in economic 
activity at a low level. Latest developments in survey data are mixed, highlighting prevailing 
uncertainty.  Looking  ahead,  growth  should  be  supported  by  foreign  demand,  the  very  low 
short-term interest rates as well as our non-standard measures. At the same time, downside 
risks relate in particular to a renewed intensification of tensions in euro area sovereign debt 
markets  and  their  potential  spillover  to  the  real  economy.  Further  increases  in  commodity 
prices may also hamper economic activity. 
Euro area annual inflation was 2.7% in March, unchanged from the previous three months. 
Inflation is likely to stay above 2% in the course of this year, because of recent increases in 
energy prices and indirect taxes. The Governing Council continues to expect annual inflation 
rates to fall below 2% in early 2013.  
Looking  forward,  in  an  environment  of  modest  growth  in  the  euro  area  and  well-anchored 
inflation expectations, underlying price pressures should remain modest. Risks to the outlook 
for  price  developments  are  broadly  balanced.  Upside  risks  could  stem  from  higher  than 
expected oil prices and further indirect tax increases; downside risks could arise from weaker 
than expected economic activity.  
Let me stress that the Governing Council will pay particular attention to any signs of pass-
through from higher energy prices to wages, profits and general price-setting. It is essential 
that  medium-term  inflation  expectations  for  the  euro  area  economy  continue  to  be  firmly 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
anchored  in  line  with  the  Governing  Council’s aim  of  maintaining  inflation  rates  below,  but 
close to, 2% over the medium term.  
The  monetary  analysis,  in  particular  the  subdued  pace  of  underlying  money  growth, 
confirms  the  prospect  of  price  developments  remaining  in  line  with  price  stability  over  the 
policy-relevant  horizon.  Money  and  credit  data  up  to  February  point  to  a  stabilisation  of 
financial conditions. At the same time, the demand for credit remains weak in the light of still 
subdued  economic  activity  and  the  continuing  process  of  balance  sheet  adjustment  in 
non-financial sectors.  
I consider it of crucial importance that banks strengthen their resilience further, including by 
retaining  earnings  and  by  retaining  bonus  payments.  The  soundness  of  banks’  balance 
sheets  will  be  a  key  factor  in  facilitating  both  an  appropriate  provision  of  credit  to  the 
economy and the normalisation of their funding channels.  
The effectiveness of the ECB’s recent non-standard measures 
I  would  now  like  to  turn  to  the  effectiveness  of  the  latest  Eurosystem  non-standard 
monetary policy measures, in particular the long-term refinancing operations (LTROs). 
Let me first of all be clear about why we implemented the three-year LTROs. 
As you will remember, the second half of 2011 was marked by an intensification of stress in 
sovereign debt markets and an environment of high uncertainty. This increasingly hampered 
the  access of  euro  area  banks  to market-based  funding.  If  no  action  had  been  taken,  this 
could  have  resulted  in  severe  strains  on  bank  lending  to  firms  and  households  and  a 
generalised selling of assets.  
The LTROs contributed to alleviate these very difficult funding conditions. Banks could satisfy 
their  additional  liquidity  needs,  which  is  reflected  by  a  net  liquidity  injection  of  around 
€520 billion,  taking  into  account  the  shifting  of  liquidity  out  of  other  operations.  Moreover, 
banks have benefited from more certainty about their medium-term funding due to the longer 
maturity of the new operations.  
I understand that you are particularly interested in the transmission of the LTROs to the real 
economy. This is indeed a crucial point: ensuring that the ECB’s monetary policy continues 
to  be  transmitted  effectively  to  the  real  economy  was  a  key  motivation  of  the  Governing 
Council decision. It is encouraging to observe that a very large number of small banks have 
participated in the two LTROs. Small banks are best placed to refinance the real economy, in 
particular small- and medium-sized firms which are the biggest generator of employment in 
the economy.  
We  are  confident  that  central  bank  liquidity  has  come  very  close  to  the  real  economy.  Of 
course, this does not mean that this will by itself boost lending to firms and households. First, 
the  central  bank  cannot  interfere  with  the  banks’  use  of  the  liquidity  since  that  is  their 
business decision. But we trust that they will use it to refinance the real economy because 
that is the role of a banking system. Second, the future evolution of credit growth will depend 
essentially  on  demand.  In  the  current  environment,  this  is  likely  to  remain  subdued.  Thus, 
money and credit growth may stay weak for some time before the overall economic situation 
improves. The Bank Lending Survey, with some new information about financing conditions 
will be published at 10 am this morning.  
Some of you may worry about the possible inflationary risks arising from these non-standard 
measures. Let me emphasize that our non-standard measures are not a constraint on setting 
interest  rates  in  line  with  what  is  required  to  ensure  price  stability  in  the  medium  term.  In 
particular, the interest rate on the 3-year LTROs is not fixed, but linked to the prevailing main 
policy interest rate. Furthermore, for measuring monetary liquidity, it is not the balance sheet 
of the Eurosystem that is relevant, but the balance sheet of the banking sector itself. Only the 
latter shows the interaction with the real economy. And this is captured by monetary data and 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
credit data which, as I have mentioned, are still very subdued. You can rest assured that the 
Governing Council will use all the instruments at its disposal to counter possible upside risks 
to price stability should they materialise. 
We also hear concerns that the Eurosystem is exposing itself to excessive risks. I would like 
to  underscore  that  the  expansion  of  our  balance  sheet  is  being  managed  with  extreme 
prudence.  We  continually  review  collateral  eligibility  and  our  risk  control  framework. 
Furthermore, the application of conservative risk control measures, such as haircuts, in all 
monetary policy operations protects the soundness of the Eurosystem’s financial position. 
Let  me  conclude  this  point  by  recalling  that  all  non-standard  measures  are  temporary  in 
nature.  Moreover,  liquidity  support  cannot  substitute  for  capital  or  for  sound  fiscal  and 
structural policies that bring about sustainable growth and stability in the European economy.  
Dealing with macroeconomic imbalances in a currency union 
Now, I  would like to discuss the second topic selected for our exchange of views, namely 
macroeconomic imbalances in the euro area. 
Of course, divergences of economic developments are a normal feature within a monetary 
union.  Such  divergences  can  also  be  observed  on  the  other  side  of  the  Atlantic.  But  they 
should not become of a persistent and structural nature. 
Unfortunately,  very  large  imbalances  were  allowed  to  accumulate  over  recent  years  in 
several European countries. These imbalances stemmed from different sources: insufficient 
fiscal discipline, financial excesses, failure to implement structural reforms especially, but not 
exclusively, in the labour and product markets and significant competitiveness losses. All of 
this necessitates urgent and resolute adjustment.  
Clearly,  it  cannot  be  the  responsibility  of  the  ECB  to  address  these  imbalances.  From  the 
perspective of monetary policy, our primary objective is to maintain price stability in the euro 
area as a whole. For that purpose, the ECB continuously monitors all relevant information 
from the countries and various business sectors of the euro area. But the monetary policy 
stance of the ECB has to be focused on the entire euro area. It cannot address divergences 
among individual euro area countries.  
That is the task of governments: they must undertake determined policy actions to address 
major weaknesses in the fiscal, financial and structural domains. We note that progress is 
being  made  in  many  countries.  These  measures  need  to  be  complemented  by  growth-
enhancing structural reforms to facilitate entrepreneurial activities, the start-up of new firms 
and job creation. Here, governments should be more ambitious.  
At the European level, there has been substantial progress towards reinforcing the economic 
governance framework. We have seen a strengthening of the fiscal rules of the Stability and 
Growth  Pact  and  the  introduction  of  the  Fiscal  Compact,  about  which  we  spoke  in  the 
Parliament  last  December.  And  we  are  implementing  the  new  focus  on  correcting 
macroeconomic imbalances.  
The recent crisis has shown that a well-functioning EMU needs not only a strong institutional 
set-up for monetary policy at the centre, but also one for economic policies.  
Ensuring  competitiveness  of  all  euro  area  countries  should  be  seen  as  a  common 
responsibility.  I  am  sure  many  of  you  here  in  the  European  Parliament  will  agree  that  we 
need a change in the mindset of how national policy-making is conducted and perceived.  
The economic policies of euro area countries are, ultimately, domestic policies for the euro 
area. Precisely because of spill-over effects, they must be subject to mutual surveillance, and 
corrected if required in the collective interest of the euro area as a whole. This should apply 
both to fiscal and macroeconomic policies.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
But surveillance alone is not sufficient. Citizens also expect from Europe common answers to 
the  common  challenges  which  all  euro  area  countries  are  facing.  In  a  context  of  global 
competition  and  ongoing  fiscal  consolidation,  euro  area  countries  should  join  their  forces. 
Given  that  they  share  a  single  currency,  they  have  even  stronger  reasons  than  other 
countries to work together. This can be in the field of research and development, education 
or infrastructure, they should strive for cooperation as much as possible.  
Let  me  add  that,  just  like  competitiveness,  I  see  financial  stability  clearly  as  a  common 
responsibly  in  a  monetary  union.  During  the  crisis,  we  have  observed  strong  negative 
spill-over  effects  across  euro  area  countries  and  between  the  banking  sector  and  its 
respective  sovereign.  National  supervisors  and  Treasuries  are  also  confronted  with  the 
well-known problem that during good times, large banks work as European institutions but in 
bad times fall on national shoulders. Ensuring a well-functioning EMU implies strengthening 
banking supervision and resolution at European level. 
European  integration  has  brought  peace  and  prosperity.  While  I  hesitate  to  sketch  out  the 
long-term end point of the integration process, I am convinced that we need to actively step 
up our reflections about the longer term vision for Europe as we have done in the past at 
other defining moments in the history of our union.  
Thank you for your attention.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
