K C Chakrabarty: Uses and misuses of statistics 
Address  by  Dr  K  C  Chakrabarty,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
DST Centre for Interdisciplinary Mathematical Sciences, Faculty of Science, Banaras Hindu 
University, as part of the 150th Birth Anniversary Celebrations of Mahanama Pandit Madan 
Mohan Malviya, Varanasi, 20 March 2012. 
 Assistance provided by Shri Abhiman Das in preparation of this address is gratefully acknowledged. 
1. 
Prof.  Umesh  Singh,  Coordinator,  DST  Centre  for  Interdisciplinary  Mathematical 
Sciences, Prof Sengupta, Dean Faculty of Science, Prof Joshi, other distinguished members 
of faculty of the University, and above all, dear students. I thank you all for inviting me to be 
in  your  midst  during  the  150th  birth  anniversary  celebrations  of  Mahamana  Pandit  Madan 
Mohan Malviya. It is a great honour and privilege for me. 
Pandit Madan Mohan Malviya 
2. 
You  have  provided  an  opportunity  to  me  to  pay  my  tribute  to  the  “Mahamana”  by 
delivering a lecture as part of the celebrations of his 150th birth anniversary. He was one of 
the greatest personalities that this nation has ever produced. In many senses, he was what 
most  of  the  top  class  institutions  today  vie  to  produce.  He  was,  at  the  same  time  a  great 
patriot,  an  eminent  educationist,  a  teacher  of  teachers,  a  silver-tongued  transcendental 
orator, an ancient as well as a modern leader, a reluctant but an eminent lawyer, a social 
reformer,  a  great  human  being, a  torch-bearer of  the  downtrodden,  and  above  all,  a  great 
nation builder. He lived his life for us and for the future generations. Each and every alumnus 
of  BHU  will  remain  ever  grateful  to  him  for  having  created  this  university,  a  capital  of  all 
discipline. 
My association with BHU 
3. 
Of course, some of you know of my association with this esteemed University and 
the city of Varanasi. I stayed in this city from my early childhood, did my schooling here and 
then joined the BHU for my graduation and post graduation. Then, I became a lecturer here 
while I pursued my Ph.D. I taught here for about 5 years and regard that time as one of the 
best  periods  of  my  life.  Though  my  career  progression  in  the  banking  system  including 
joining  the  RBI  was  not  as  a  statistician,  I  must  confess  that  the  analytical  ability  and 
articulation  skill  based  on  sound  knowledge  of  statistics,  which  I  developed  during  my 
academic career both as a student and teacher of Statistics at BHU, greatly contributed to 
my progress and success in banking career. I am grateful and thankful to all my teachers and 
colleagues in the department for what I am today. 
4. 
that is “Uses and Misuses of Statistics”. Let me begin with a quote: 
Today, I have chosen to speak on a theme which is directly relevant to all of you and 
The safety of science depends on the existence of men who care more for the 
justice of their methods than for the value of any results obtained by using them.1  
5. 
Statistics  is  a  method  of  learning  from  experience  and  decision  making  under 
uncertainty. That is why it is often called the study of the laws of chance. Chance is inherent 
in all natural phenomena, and the only way of understanding nature and making predictions 
                                                 
1   Cohen, Morris R., on “Scientific Method,” in The Encyclopaedia of the Social Sciences. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
is to study the laws of chance and formulate appropriate rules of action. Chance may appear 
as an obstructor and an irritant in our daily life but chance can also create. Through statistics, 
we  have  now  learnt  to  put  chance  to  work  for  the  benefit  of  mankind.  C.  R.  Rao,  in  the 
preface  of  his  famous  book  “Statistics  and  Truth”  thus  said  “all  knowledge  is,  in  the  final 
analysis, history. All sciences are, in the abstract, mathematics and all methods of acquiring 
knowledge are essentially statistics.”  
6. 
The importance of studying the nature of uncertainty was realised centuries ago. In 
particular,  the  introduction  of  statistical  ideas  in  physics  began  with  the  need  to  deal  with 
errors  in  astronomical  measurements.  It  was  Galileo  (1564–1642)  who  first  realized  that 
repeated  measurements  under  identical  conditions  do  vary.  Indeed  he  emphasized  that 
“measure again and again to find out the difference and difference of the difference”. About 
200 years later, Gauss (1777–1855) studied the probability laws of errors in measurements, 
which was finally formulated in what we today call the normal distribution. 
7. 
The centrality of uncertainties in pursuit of knowledge did not find enough support 
from the then scientific community. It is said that even Einstein was initially of the view that 
theories whose objects are connected by laws should be based on facts, not probabilities. He 
once famously said, “……God does not play dice with the universe…..” But surprisingly, he 
accepted the chance behaviour of molecules suggested by S. N. Bose, which resulted in the 
Bose-Einstein  theory.  The  inherent  nature  of  uncertainties  was  initially  less  understood. 
Although there are uncertainties at the individual level, very few realised a certain amount of 
stability in the average of a mass of individuals. This is what we call as “order in disorder”, or 
more technically “statistical regularity”, which paved the way for formulation of law of large 
numbers in statistics. 
Discipline of statistics: ancient roots 
8. 
Statistics as subject of collection and use of various kinds of statistics can be traced 
much  earlier  in  India.  Kautilya’s  Arthasastra  (321–296B.C.),  one  of  the  greatest  treatise  of 
economics,  indicates  a  system  of  census  and  data  collection  relating  to  agriculture, 
population  and  other  economic  activities,  covering  villages  and  towns.  In  addition,  the 
concept of cross-checking and validation by independent agents was very much part of the 
data collection system. Evidences in the writings of Huen Tsang of seventh to early eighth 
century  and  Ain-i-Akbari  by  Abul  Fazal  show  enough  empirical  basis  for  handling 
administration  and  politics.  Essentially,  the  basic  statistical  system  remains  with  the 
government.  Modern  statistical  information  system  was  developed  by  the  British  with  the 
objective of collecting taxes and does not meet with the  developmental and administrative 
needs  of  the  society  to  a  large  extent.  The  commercial  and  business  information  system 
were developed primarily for accountants and does not serve the purpose of management. 
Hence, the statistical system has to reorient to meet the developmental, administrative and 
management needs of the society. Practitioners of statistics have to play an important role in 
achieving this objective. 
Statistics pervades our daily lives 
9. 
We all live with statistics. Starting from the morning newspapers to the evening TV 
reports, we are surrounded by various statistical figures. We often come across data about 
out  economy:  India’s  population  rose  to  1.21  billion  people  over  the  last  10  years,  an 
increase by 181 million, according to the Census 2011; India’s GDP increased by 8.5% in 
2010–11; Inflation was about 7% in February this year. Deposits of scheduled commercial 
banks  was  up  by  14.6%  in  February,  2012  over  a  year  ago.  How  are  these  numbers 
generated?  All  these  figures  are  themselves  part  of  statistical  measurement.  There  are 
elaborate  statistical  systems  to  collect  detailed  data  and  compile  them  to  generate  the 
aggregate numbers. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Statistics provides a better understanding and exact description of a phenomenon of 
10. 
nature. Through an appropriate framework of data collection and well-organised planning of 
a scientific inquiry in any field of life, it helps in presenting complex information in a suitable 
tabular, diagrammatic and graphic form for an easy and clear comprehension, and helps in 
drawing valid inference about the population parameters from the sample data. If a problem 
can  be  properly  formulated  and  measurement  data  can  be  generated,  whether  it  arises  in 
physical, biological, social sciences or any other discipline, statistical tools can be designed 
to provide a scientific solution. Thus, it is widely recognized that the proper use of statistics is 
a key element of scientific enquiry. At this stage let me emphasize that quality and integrity of 
data is the most important element in the success and utility of statistics. 
Uses of statistics 
11. 
Let  me  give  some  examples  of  its  uses.  It  plays  a  critical  role  in  agriculture  in 
deciding the plant varieties, combination of fertilizer, pesticides, densities, soil qualities, and 
growth  of  output.  India’s  statistics  exploration  started  with  anthropological  experiment. 
Without  the  use  of  statistics,  business  and  economics  cannot  make  proper  planning  and 
policy. Performance measurement in education, including IQ, is a statistical construct. Use of 
statistics  in  psychological  behaviour  is  known  as  psychometry.  Examination  of  climate 
change  and  environmental  studies  are  effectively  statistical  data  analysis  of  weather  and 
environment. One of the simple applications of statistics is to estimate the number of fish in a 
pond, using random sampling and suitable statistical (hypergeometric) distribution. Does the 
data  support  genetic  theories  of  inherited  characteristics?  What  is  the  pattern  of  rainfall? 
What are the important risk factors for heart disease? Any marketing strategy is based on 
some  statistical  sample  study.  Is  education  attainment  related  to  income  and  health?  The 
Duckworth-Lewis  method  implemented  in  limited  over  cricket  is  a  statistical  method.  I  can 
keep on giving examples. 
Misuses of statistics 
12. 
But  since  its  beginning,  statistics  has  also  been  misused  and  there  has  been 
considerable debate about how to understand or respond to the misuse of statistics. After all, 
who hasn’t heard of the famous phrase: “There are three kinds of Lies: Lies, Damned Lies 
and Statistics”, which is variously attributed to Benjamin Disraeli, Alfred Marshall, Mark Twain 
and  many  others.  To  understand  what  is  meant  by  “misusing  statistics,”  it  is  important  to 
describe the role of statistics in the scientific method and relate the concept of “misuse” to 
other  ethical  concepts,  such  as  “misconduct”  or  “incompetence”  or  “negligence.”  Some 
misuses  of  statistics  can  be  considered  misconduct,  although  most  misuses  should  be 
viewed  as  negligence  or  deficits  of  competence.  While  on  the  ethical  dimension,  I  shall 
elaborate further, I shall deal with the other dimensions of “negligence” and “incompetence” 
as part of information illiteracy slightly later. 
13. 
How statistics has been used and what could be its consequence of misuse is well 
summarised  in  the  Preamble  to  the  Ethical  Guidelines  for  Statistical  Practice2.  It  says  the 
professional performance of statistical analyses is essential to many aspects of society. The 
use  of  statistics  in  medical  diagnoses  and  biomedical  research  may  affect  whether 
individuals live or die, whether their health is protected or jeopardized, and whether medical 
science advances or gets sidetracked. Life, death, and health, as well as efficiency, may be 
at stake in statistical analyses of occupational, environmental, or transportation safety. Early 
detection  and  control  of  new  or  recurrent 
infectious  diseases  depend  on  sound 
                                                 
2   American  Statistical  Association.  Ethical  Guidelines  for  Statistical  Practice.  Alexandria,  VA:  American 
Statistical Association, 1999. Available at http:// amstat.org/profession/ ethicalstatistics.html. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
epidemiological  statistics.  Mental  and  social  health  may  be  at  stake  in  psychological  and 
sociological applications of statistical analysis. Effective functioning of the economy depends 
on the availability of reliable, timely, and properly interpreted economic data. The profitability 
of individual firms depends in part on their quality control and their market research, both of 
which  should  rely  on  statistical  methods.  Agricultural  productivity  benefits  greatly  from 
statistically  sound  applications  to  research  and  output  reporting.  Governmental  policy 
decisions regarding public health, criminal justice, social equity, education, the environment, 
and other matters depend in part on sound statistics. Scientific and engineering research in 
all disciplines requires the careful design and analysis of experiments and observations. To 
the  extent  that  uncertainty  and  measurement  error  are  involved  –  as  they  are  in  most 
research  –  research  design,  data  quality  management,  analysis,  and  interpretation  are  all 
crucially  dependent  on  statistical  concepts  and  methods.  Even  in  theory,  much  of  science 
and  engineering  involves  natural  variability.  Variability,  whether  great  or  small,  must  be 
carefully examined both for random error and for possible researcher bias or wishful thinking. 
.  .  .  Because  society  depends  on  sound  statistical  practice,  all  practitioners  of  statistics, 
whatever  their  training  and  occupation,  have  social  obligations  to  perform  their  work  in  a 
professional, competent, and ethical manner. 
14. 
The results of statistical investigations are usually stated in numerical form and are, 
therefore,  in  the  public  mind,  assigned  a  degree  of  definiteness  usually  associated  with 
mathematical  technique.  The  careful  investigator,  however,  is  constantly  aware  of  the  fact 
that the preciseness of his numerical result varies directly with the degree of care used in 
selecting, from the larger universe, the sample upon which his study is based. The numerical 
conclusions  derived  from  a  study  of  the  sample  are  held  to  be  characteristic  and 
representative  of  the  universe.  A  very  common  error  in  statistical  investigation  is  the 
selection of a sample which is not an accurate cross-section of the larger universe but merely 
a particular, unique segment. Conclusions drawn from the biased sample will not, of course, 
accurately reflect the larger universe. The misuse occurs when such conclusions are held to 
be representative of the universe by those who either deliberately or un-consciously overlook 
the sampling bias. 
15. 
An  article  about  cats  appeared  in  The  New  York  Times’  on  August  22,  1989.  It 
stated, “The experts have also developed startling evidence of the cat’s renowned ability to 
survive, this time in the particular setting of New York City, where cats are prone at this time 
of year to fall from open windows in tall buildings. Researchers call the phenomenon feline 
high-rise  syndrome.”  Statistics  were  like  this:  from  June  4  through  November  4,  1984, 
132 such victims were admitted to the Animal Medical Centre and most of the cats landed on 
concrete and most survived. From the data on the distance of the fall for 129 of the 132 cats, 
it was observed that the falls ranged from 2 to 32 stories. Only one of 22 cats that plunged 
from above 7 stories died, and there was only one fracture among the 13 that fell more than 
9 stories. But how a cat will survive of a fall from a great height defying gravitation? Such 
description generally  does  not  push  one  to  scrutinize  the statements  till  it  was understood 
that  majority  of  the  cat  owners  do  not  report  these  incidents  to  any  medical  centre  and 
believe that other people probably don’t report their cats’ deaths, either. Therefore, the error 
seemed  so  obvious  that  sample  was  not  representative  and  there  was  data  reporting 
problems. 
16. 
Let me cite another example on the wrong notion of conditional probabilities, which 
appear in Statistical Science 2005, a type of intentional and unintentional misinterpretation of 
statistical information. It says when discussing fatalities on highways on page 78: “Four times 
more fatalities occur on the highways at 7 p.m. than at 7 a.m.” This of course does not imply, 
as some newspaper had suggested, that it is more dangerous to drive in the evening than in 
the  morning.  Recast  in  the  language  of  conditional  probabilities,  that  P(accident  |  7  p.m.) 
should not be confused with P(7 p.m. | accident). Unfortunately, it was. One more example, a 
study  of  the  deaths  arising  out  of  road  accidents  revealed  that  98  percent  deaths  occurs 
while driving on the left side of the road, whereas, only 2 percent death occurs in case of 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
people travelling in the middle of the road. Hence, it was wrongly inferred that it was safer to 
travel in the middle than on the side of the road. 
17. 
Another  area  of  concern  has  been  the  misuse  of  statistics  coming  from  spurious 
correlation  and  attributing  such  relation  to  type  of  cause  and  effect  phenomenon.  In  most 
cases  a  common  variable,  most  importantly  “time”  works  as  a  link.  Let  us  take  another 
example. Number of people watching TV serials and number of buffaloes will register a high 
correlation. If one tries to link them and finds a causal relationship is simply absurd. It is easy 
to  get  carried  way.  One  of  the  prime  misuses  of  statistics  is  finding  a  strong  relationship 
between  two  variables  when  actually  such  correlation  is  spurious.  However,  exploration  of 
such behaviour has also led to path breaking developments in econometrics. For example, 
most of the macroeconomic series have strong time trend and thus have strong correlation. 
Prima  facie  one  may  suspect  the  existence  of  spurious  correlation.  However,  further 
exploration  in  such  relationships  led  the  foundation  of  the  concept  of  cointegration.  If  two 
variables have a common trend, then there could be a possibility of a long-run equilibrium 
relationship  between  them.  This  statistical  finding  opened  up  a  new  dimension  of  modern 
economics and CWJ Granger was awarded Nobel prize in economics for this in 2003. 
18. 
Let me now give you an example from the banking world. The concept of inflation is 
often  misunderstood  by  people.  You  would  often  hear  this  refrain  from  many  persons  that 
despite  RBI  claiming  that  inflation  has  come  down  in  the  recent  past,  the  prices  have  not 
come  down.  So,  what  is  the  truth?  Well,  the  truth  is  simply  that  inflation  is  indicated  as  a 
percent change, so even when this percent is declining, all it means is that the prices are 
rising at a slower rate, but they are still rising! The prices would come down only when the 
inflation becomes negative. 
19. 
In conclusion, we must ask ourselves as to why a quotation like “Lies, Damned Lies, 
and  Statistics”  as  mentioned  by  me  earlier  is  made  about  the  subject  of  statistics.  In  my 
opinion, it is because the society is illiterate, i.e. it is information illiterate. Information literacy, 
which most people misunderstand, is the third generation of literacy. The first generation of 
literacy is when you know how to read and write. The second generation of literacy is when 
you are computer literate, but it is not enough to be just first or second generation literate. 
When transiting to a knowledge society, it is critical for all of us to be information literate or 
be third generation literate. And, one of the purposes of statistics is to bring about information 
literacy  in  the  society.  If  that  does  not  happen  then  statistics  can  be  used  to  prove  or 
disprove anything and it is the subject of statistics which would bear the burden of ridicule. 
So, it is up to all of us, faculty, students and practitioners alike, to redirect our efforts towards 
spreading information literacy in the society. Institutions associated with teaching and training 
of  statistics  have  a  more  important  role  to  play  in  that  direction,  and  I  am  confident  that 
students, teachers and practitioners of statistics associated with Department of Mathematical 
Sciences  at  BHU  will  take  greater  responsibility  in  spreading  information  literacy  in  the 
society.  And  this  will  be  your  greatest  service  to  the  memory  of  “Mahamana”  and  to  the 
discipline of Statistics. I wish you good luck in this effort. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
