Andreas Dombret: How to manage financial crisis from a systemic 
viewpoint 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank,  at  the  40th  Economics  Conference  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Republic  of 
Austria “European Monetary Union – lessons from the debt crisis”, Vienna, 10 May 2012. 
 The Gordian knot 
1. 
In these times of debt crisis some observers have resorted to speaking of a “Gordian knot”, 
implying that “cutting the knot” would put a quick and easy end to the problem. I must admit 
that this viewpoint leaves me surprised and slightly worried. 
It reminds me of a story by the great novelist Manès Sperber: A figure in his writings is a boy, 
who  was  asked  by  the  teacher:  “What  do  you  know  about  the  Gordian  knot?”  The  boy’s 
answer is remarkable: “Nobody can solve the Gordian knot, including Alexander. But instead 
of  admitting  this,  Alexander  took  the  sword  and  cut  the  knot,  what  every  stupid  guy  could 
have  done.  Henceforth,  Alexander  was  called  the  Great.”  The  teacher,  who  apparently 
admired historical heroes, was not amused: “Sit down; six”, he said. Those times the marks 
ranged from “one” to “six”, not from “AAA” to “D”. 
Another novelist, Erich Kästner, wrote in his essay “The Gordian knot: If I would have used 
my  pocket  knife  to  cut  the  knot  of  my  shoestring  my  mother  would  have  got  angry.”  “You 
must  not  cut  knots”,  she  would  have  answered:  “Shoestrings  can  be used  again.”  Clearly, 
mothers have a better idea of how to deal with knots when they arise. 
In my opinion, the moral of both these stories is similar to the lesson that can be learned from 
the  current  financial  and  sovereign  debt  crisis:  There  is  no  easy  way  to  solve  the  crisis 
without tediously disentangling the knot, whether there is a sword or not. Cutting the knot is 
something  different  from  solving  it.  And  containing  the  crisis  is  something  different  from 
solving it. 
2. 
The loops of the knot: systemic and fundamental elements of the current 
crisis 
Only  a  few  terms  have  experienced  such  a  surge  in  usage  in  recent  years  as  the  words 
“systemic”  and  “macroprudential”.  But  what  is  the  difference  between  a  systemic  and  a 
non-systemic event? 
If an event is non-systemic it can be treated in isolation. In the case of the debt crisis, the 
debt problems of countries can and should be treated as a series of individual problems and 
not as a systemic problem affecting the euro area as a whole. 
Things are different in the case of a systemic event, mainly due to the effect of contagion 
loops between the different sovereigns, the loops between the public sector and the financial 
sector,  the  contagion  loops  between  different  financial  intermediaries  and  ultimately  the 
feedback loops between the financial sector and the real economy. 
The  degree  of  financial  integration  in  the  euro  area  is  such  that  if  some  sovereigns  are 
pushed into a bad equilibrium this affects other countries. The banking system can become 
fragile.  What  starts  as  a  liquidity  problem  can  easily  turn  into  a  solvency  problem.  Strong 
externalities are created, making it impossible to isolate the problem of one country from the 
rest of the euro area. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
At  the  outset,  the  event  might  have  originated  locally,  caused  by  local  problems,  in  which 
case it might only be possible to solve it by addressing those root problems. In the meantime, 
however, we have seen how local problems can turn into a systemic problem. 
For example, local problems in some countries arise from a low degree of competitiveness, 
unsustainable  fiscal  positions  or  a combination  of  both.  The  eventual  solution is  a  gradual 
and steady improvement of their competitiveness and fiscal positions. There is no substitute 
for such an adjustment process at the local level. In the present situation, however, we may 
need additional instruments, for example firewalls or recapitalization measures, to address 
the systemic component. 
Turning to another example, the interest rates of some countries proved too low during the 
first decade of the euro, leading to house price booms and credit growth in those countries. 
These two factors have contributed to the recent crisis. Again, local problems turned into a 
systemic  problem.  Here,  the  solution  is  a  balance  sheet  adjustment  of  banks  and 
households. And again there is no getting round this tedious approach. The instruments to 
address the systemic component that are now available may assist this process. 
At  the  end  of  last  year  we  saw  clear  signs  of  a  systemic  financial  crisis.  The  provision  of 
liquidity for a period of three years, together with measures to strengthen fiscal discipline and 
to restructure Greek debts in an orderly fashion, has managed to mitigate the stress to some 
extent; at least for some period of time. Recently, tensions in the market have renewed due 
to  doubts  of  the  solidity  of  the  fiscal  positions  of  some  countries.  Moreover,  market 
participants  have  realised  that  the  loops  of  the  knot  between  the  public  sector  and  the 
banking  system  in  some  countries  have  become  tighter,  not  looser.  This  emphasizes  the 
need for fiscal consolidation that is disentangling the knot. 
Firewalls: a “sword” for cutting the knot? 
3. 
This characterization of the systemic component determines the rationale for a firewall and 
its design. Simply by building confidence, a firewall can prevent or mitigate contagion without 
actually having to be triggered. If triggered, it can help to prevent a country’s liquidity problem 
from  turning  into  a  solvency  problem.  Moreover,  it  can  buy  time  and  serve  as  a  tool  for 
commitment to implement necessary reforms. 
No  doubt:  A  large  and  effective  firewall  can  reduce  the  likelihood  of  being  triggered. 
However, the major issue here is the risk arising from simultaneity of payouts. The greater 
the  simultaneity,  the  less  credible  a  firewall  can  be,  because  it  cannot  cover  the  financing 
needs of all countries simultaneously. 
Thus,  a  firewall  is  limited  by  the  capabilities  of  the  individual  contributors.  In  a  crisis 
characterized by having a systemic component with a high degree of market integration and 
loops between the public sector and the banking sector the probability of coincident payouts 
seems to be high. 
Proponents of a firewall to act as a “sword” for cutting the knot seem to ignore this fact. The 
challenge is considerably more complex. It requires a design that balances the confidence-
building effects of an availability of sufficient funds where this is needed with the possibility 
that simultaneous payouts can overburden contributors. 
Moreover,  an  appropriate  design  of  firewalls  has  to  take  moral  hazard  considerations  into 
account. In this context, moral hazard is a serious problem. As policies needed to generate a 
long-term  solution  are  subject  to  complicated  political  processes,  the  political  incentives  to 
not follow through on those solutions can be strong. This would undermine what I consider to 
be  the  essential  benefit  of  a  credible  firewall:  Its  potential  ability  to  encourage  prudent 
economic policies. 
To summarize, financing by means of firewalls is no substitute for restoring solvency – or to 
go back to my original metaphor – it is not an effective sword for cutting the knot. This can 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
only  be  achieved  through  economic  adjustments  and  structural  reforms,  in  which  case  a 
firewall may well be helpful. 
Recapitalization: another “sword” for cutting the knot? 
4. 
The loops that exist between the sovereign risks and the risks in the banking system in the 
current crisis make it necessary to address banking risks specifically. Capital buffers might 
offer  an  appropriate  solution.  The  rationale  for  recapitalization  was  outlined  in  the 
Bundesbank’s most recent Financial Stability Review. I quote: 
“[…], in times of systemic stress, markets cease to make broad based distinctions because 
[…] it is almost impossible ex ante to forecast the position of an individual bank. […] Given 
the high degree of interconnectedness and the risk of contagion, this challenge demands not 
just an adequate capitalization of national banking systems but also convincing solutions that 
are coordinated across Europe.” 
In  principle,  adequate  capital  buffers  strengthen  the  resilience  of  the  financial  sector, 
because they interrupt the sequential failure of institutions and mitigate contagion risks. They 
can  reduce  the  procyclicality  present  in  the  system  as  they  create  room  for  manoeuvre 
before risky assets and credit supply have to be reduced in case a systemic event occurs. 
In an ideal world these buffers are set up during a boom period; they are to be used when a 
crisis  emerged,  which  is  the  idea  behind  countercyclical  capital  buffers.  However,  if  the 
buffers are low relative to the risks that are building up when the event has already occurred 
there  is  the  risk  of  excess  deleveraging  and  procyclicality.  This is  where  public  aid  comes 
into  play.  This  may  assist 
thereby 
counterbalancing excessive deleveraging pressure. 
As  you  know,  this  is  the  strategy  followed  by  the  European  and  national  authorities, 
combined with some moral persuasion to abstain from excess deleveraging. And it looks like 
this strategy is going to be successful. At least this is what the capitalization plans of banks 
indicate. Most of them intend to adjust their liability side to a large extent, not their asset side. 
Of course, in some countries there is nevertheless some deleveraging pressure; but this is, 
or was, due to the refinancing needs of their banks and is not caused by the recapitalization 
plan  itself.  On  the  contrary,  if  a  loss  in  confidence  is  a  major  reason  for  the  refinancing 
problems, restoring confidence through publicly assisted recapitalization might be a key tool 
to mitigate excess deleveraging. 
Moreover, deleveraging consists of both structural and cyclical components. It cannot easily 
be separated into “good” deleveraging which enforces the necessary adjustment of business 
models and “bad” deleveraging which implies a reduction of healthy business. 
Again,  publicly  supported  recapitalization  is  not  a  sword  for  cutting  the  knot,  but  rather  an 
instrument to assist necessary adjustment. 
the  banking  system 
recapitalization  of 
the 
Disentangling the knot: addressing systemic risks by the ESRB 
5. 
The discussion so far has shown that in the modern-day financial system the loops of the 
knot  are  intertwined  in  complex,  multidimensional  ways.  This  calls  for  a  coherent  and 
systematic  approach  to  addressing  the  problems.  Since  the  beginning  of  2011,  with  the 
European Systemic Risk Board, Europe has had a new macroprudential oversight body for 
analyzing systemic risks with formal “warnings” and “recommendations” to be deployed as 
formal  macroprudential  instruments.  The  ESRB  comprises  all  European  and  national 
supervisory authorities as well as central banks, with the latter playing a dominant role. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Given its institutional structure and the nature of its instruments, the comparative advantage 
of the ESRB lies not with crisis management. It lies less than ever with constructing “swords” 
for cutting the knot, but in crisis prevention and mitigation, that is in disentangling the knot. 
At an early stage, the ESRB can identify fundamental and local factors with the potential to 
prepare  the  ground  for  a  systemic  event.  It  can  also  recommend  counteractive  regulatory 
measures. This gives it the chance to address potentially systemic risks at an early point in 
the cycle. Once successfully implemented it can unburden itself, for example, of its monetary 
or fiscal policy tasks. This allows policymakers in those areas to concentrate on their own 
targets, leaving it to those responsible for macroprudential oversight to safeguard financial 
stability. 
For  example,  if  it  is  the  case  that  low  interest  rates  lead  to  excessive  leverage  or  to 
excessive risk-taking or to house price bubbles in some countries in a monetary union there 
is nothing that monetary policy can do about this. By contrast, once we have macroprudential 
instruments  at  our  disposal  we  can  use  a  leverage  ratio  or  a  loan  to  value  ratio,  just  to 
mention two options. The ESRB has recognized the importance of having sufficient flexibility. 
In  an  open  letter  to  EU  authorities  it  states:  “Macroprudential  authorities  at  both  Member 
State  and  Union  level  need  discretion  to  require  additional  disclosures  and  to  tighten 
temporarily a diverse range of (Pillar I) calibrations”. 
Establishing  a  macroprudential  policy  framework  in  a  monetary  union  reminds  me  of  a 
complicated  balancing  act.  That  is,  first,  to  find  the  right  balance  between  a  sophisticated 
system which is fine-tuned to any marginal change in systemic risk and an approach based 
on  easy-to-implement  rules.  The  second  challenge  is  to  find  enough  flexibility  when 
implementing instruments without endangering the level playing field. So far the discussion is 
not completed and requires also some practical experience. 
Conclusion 
6. 
So what is the moral of my speech? Clearly, I have no sword to remedy the situation. And for 
those who wish they had such a sword, the idea of undoing knots may sound like “muddling 
through”. But to my mind, this stony road of muddling through, this long-term disentangling of 
the knot, is vastly preferable to the alternative of cutting the knot. It means doing things the 
hard way and entails much future sacrifice and commitment. At the end of the day I have 
nothing to offer but “toil” and “sweat”. 
Nevertheless, thank you very much for your attention.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
