William C Dudley: Regional and national economic conditions 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York and Chairman of the Committee on the Global Financial System 
(CGFS),  before  the  Morris  County  Chamber  of  Commerce,  Florham  Park,  New  Jersey, 
18 September 2012. 
 Good afternoon, I am pleased to be in northern New Jersey to address the 8th Morris County 
Economic Development  Corporation (MCEDC)  Business Growth Forum – an annual event 
organized by the Morris County Chamber of Commerce. It is always a pleasure to speak with 
the business community and I thank you for inviting me here today. 
I  get  out  of  my  office  in  New  York  City  regularly  to  inform  myself  –  first-hand  –  about 
economic conditions and challenges across the second Federal Reserve District. Each visit 
within the region helps me to strengthen relationships with the diverse people of this District 
and build a deeper understanding of the economic challenges that we face. Today, I want to 
talk  a  bit  about  the  Fed  –  what  we  do  and  why  we  do  it.  Then  I’ll  provide  some  thoughts 
about the national and local economic outlook. Normally in these regional outreach speeches 
I  say  little  about  monetary  policy.  But  since  the  Federal  Reserve  made  some  meaningful 
decisions last week and it is important for people to understand the reasons and motivations 
for our actions. I will conclude with a brief discussion of policy. 
After that, I’ll be happy to answer any questions you have about what the Fed does and why, 
and about the economic outlook. 
As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal 
Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee, also known as the FOMC. 
What the new York Fed does 
By way of introduction, I will briefly review what my colleagues and I do at the New York Fed. 
The New York Fed is one of 12 regional Federal Reserve Banks that, together with the Board 
of Governors in Washington D.C., make up the Federal Reserve System, our nation’s central 
bank. 
The  Federal  Reserve  is  independent  within  government.  By  law,  we  are  charged  with 
managing the nation’s monetary policy – taking actions that raise or lower interest rates to 
promote  full  employment  and  price  stability.  The  Federal  Reserve  is  also  charged  with 
promoting financial stability, without which we cannot achieve our economic objectives. We 
play  an  important  role  in  the  nation’s  payments  and  settlements  system,  which  you  might 
think of as the plumbing of the financial system. And we have a specific mandate to promote 
economic development in each of our regions. 
As  president  of  the  New  York  Fed,  I  serve  as  the  vice  chair  of  the  FOMC,  the  Federal 
Reserve  committee  that  meets  eight  times  a  year  in  Washington  to  set  interest  rates  and 
make  other  decisions  about  monetary  policy.  The  members  of  this  committee  all  strive  to 
achieve  our  statutory  mandate.  Sometimes  we  have  different  views  on  the  specific  policy 
choices  at  hand,  and  you  should  view  this  as  completely  appropriate:  these  are  hard 
questions – particularly during difficult economic circumstances such as we face today. 
In fact, I think we make better decisions as a committee because we don’t all think alike. But 
we are united in our commitment to our dual mandate of maximum sustainable employment 
and price stability and in our belief that preserving the independence of the Federal Reserve 
in making monetary policy decisions is very much in the public interest. That independence 
allows  us  to  make  tough  decisions  based  on  data  and  analysis  insulated  from  short-term 
political pressures. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
At FOMC meetings, each Committee member presents a current outlook for his or her region 
and for the nation. In formulating these assessments, we consult with many sources – our 
boards  of  directors,  regional  advisory  councils,  community 
leaders  and  other  key 
stakeholders.  My  meeting  with  you  and  others  today  is  part  of  this  systematic  effort  to 
understand  what  is  going  on  in  the  grassroots  of  our  economy.  To  help  me  gather  more 
information about our region, I met this morning with Fox Valve, a small business in Dover 
that  manufactures  specialized,  highly  engineered  industrial  parts.  After  that,  I  had  the 
pleasure  of  participating  in  a  roundtable  discussion  with  members  of  the  local  Mexican-
American  business  community.  After  this  lunch,  I  will  travel  to  Picatinny  Arsenal  to  learn 
about its role in the state’s economic activity. I’ll also meet with the leaders of New Jersey 
Community  Capital  to  learn  about  their  cutting-edge  programs  for  helping  distressed 
homeowners  and  then  I’ll  speak  to  the  students,  faculty  and  alumni  at  Montclair  State 
University. 
In  addition,  my  colleagues  and  I  at  the  New  York  Fed  continually  track  conditions  in  our 
District,  and  we  have  created  a  number  of  tools  for  that  purpose.  For  example,  my  staff 
produces indices of economic activity for New York City, New York State and New Jersey. 
We also track local household credit conditions, including the amount and type of personal 
debt and whether payments are being made in a timely way. 
We also conduct a periodic poll about the credit needs of small businesses, which are an 
important source of new jobs in the region. In our latest poll of several hundred firms, many 
report  that  they  did  not  apply  for  credit  because  they  were  “discouraged.”  Perhaps 
surprisingly,  many  of  these  non-applicants  have  credit  profiles  similar  to  other  firms  who 
successfully sought credit. This finding suggests that the demand for credit could pick up as 
some “discouraged” firms learn that they might be able to obtain credit now. 
If  you,  as  a  representative  of  a  small  business,  would  like  to  participate  in  our  next  poll, 
please pass your card to my colleagues, who are in the audience, or see me after the speech 
and we will be glad to add you as a respondent. 
To promote economic development in our local communities, we publish a lot of data and 
analysis  on  the  local  economy,  including  our  small  business  poll  findings.  In  addition  we 
provide education outreach initiatives to help small businesses. For example, in October, we 
will host a workshop in Newark to help local businesses learn about export credit facilities 
and new tools for marketing. At the same time, we will launch our annual financial awareness 
video competition aimed at helping young adults make sound personal financial decisions. 
As you know, even states as wealthy as New Jersey have large pockets of poverty. So, we 
target some of our work specifically to low- and moderate-income groups. 
We have worked hard to help neighborhoods that face high foreclosure rates. This work is 
informed  by  analysis  that  suggests  that  high  levels  of  foreclosures  affect  the  value  of 
neighboring homes, the local tax base and economic vitality more broadly. We have provided 
housing  counselors  and  community  development  groups  with  the  latest  information  on 
mortgage  conditions,  via  mortgage  briefs,  roundtables,  presentations  and  newsletters  – 
including an interactive tool on our website that shows monthly delinquency and foreclosure 
conditions at the local level. This fall we will host a conference on distressed residential real 
estate  to  share  what  we  and  leading  experts  have  learned  with  senior  policymakers  and 
practitioners from across the United States. 
All in all, there is a lot to keep myself and my colleagues busy. 
Regional economic conditions 
So  how  is  our  region  doing?  Let  me  start  by  saying  that  New  Jersey  is  well-positioned  to 
prosper.  New  Jersey  is  the  11th  largest  state  –  with  a  population  of  8.8  million  and  this 
population is well-educated. Roughly 35 percent of adults over 24 years old have a college 
degree,  well  over  the  national  average.  Here  in  Morris  County,  that  figure  is  almost 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
50 percent.  The  state  is  also  quite  ethnically  diverse:  roughly  20  percent  of  New  Jersey 
residents were born abroad. 
The  state’s  economy  is  industrially  diverse,  resembling  the  nation.  New  Jersey  employs 
many people in healthcare, professional and business services, wholesale and retail trade, 
and leisure and hospitality. In the northern part of the state, we see a disproportionate share 
of jobs in a few industries: finance, particularly in Hudson County; goods distribution, related 
to  the  ports,  rail  lines  and  trucking  and  warehousing  activities  that  are  prominent  here; 
pharmaceuticals manufacturing and R&D; and private education. 
The  area  obviously  benefits  from  its  important  links  to  New  York  City.  In  particular,  many 
residents of this area, including myself, commute each day to the city. 
So how is the recovery proceeding here? Based on the New York Fed’s indices, economic 
activity in the state did not begin to recover until November 2010, more than a year after the 
nation and New York City. Since then, activity has recovered at a moderate pace, although 
we are still operating below our previous peak. 
Employment  in  New  Jersey  declined  substantially  during  the  downturn.  Our  employers  cut 
about  250,000  jobs.  This  represents  a  6  percent  loss  –  roughly  on  par  with  the  loss 
nationwide. Less than one in four of those jobs have been recovered to date, slightly weaker 
than the nationwide recovery and, of course, much weaker than I would like to see. Over the 
past year, the private sector has seen moderate job gains led by some of the key sectors I 
mentioned earlier, particularly professional and business services, education and health, and 
leisure and hospitality. But the state continues to shed jobs in manufacturing and there has 
been  little  recovery  in  construction.  State  and  local  government  cut  back  employment 
substantially during 2010, though there has been a modest pick up over the past year. 
Unemployment among New Jersey residents remains high. July’s reading of 9.8 percent puts 
the state’s rate well above the U.S. average. 
More  broadly,  how  are  the  state’s  families  faring  financially?  While  the  median  household 
income among New Jersey families is the second highest in the nation – at about $69,400 – 
roughly a tenth of residents live in families with incomes below the poverty line. Although this 
rate  is  below  the  national  rate  of  14  percent,  it  varies  considerably  by  county  across  the 
state, and is particularly high in Essex, Hudson and Passaic counties. Reducing poverty is a 
major challenge for policymakers. 
The  New  York  Fed’s  measures  of  regional  credit  conditions  suggest  continued  financial 
challenges for families here. As of the second quarter of 2012, for those people with a credit 
report, average debt per person in New Jersey was about $63,000, roughly unchanged over 
the past several years. Delinquency rates on that debt are high: 8.4 percent of all debt in the 
state  is  seriously  delinquent,  up  from  7.4  percent  in  2011  and  above  the  national  rate  of 
6.7 percent. So, many New Jersey households are still struggling with their finances. 
Although  there  are  some  recent  signs  that  home  prices  in  the  state  are  starting  to  firm, 
nevertheless,  the  housing  crisis  continues  to  take  a  toll  on  our  homeowners.  As  of  June, 
9.3 percent  of  all  mortgage  debt  in  New  Jersey  was  90-plus  days  delinquent,  three 
percentage points above the national rate. And that delinquency rate is actually a little higher 
here in northern New Jersey. 
National economic conditions 
The  performance  of  the  U.S.  economy  since  the  end  of  the  recession  in  2009  has  been 
disappointing. Real GDP has grown at an annual rate of just over 2 percent over this period, 
and it was even slower in the first half of 2012. As a result, employment gains have been 
modest,  unemployment  remains  above  8  percent  –  an  unacceptably  high  level  –  and 
participation in the jobs market remains depressed. Moreover, about 5 million workers have 
been  unemployed 
long-term 
for  six  months  or  more.  This 
important  because 
is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
unemployment can cause job skills to atrophy making it more difficult for such people to find 
jobs  in  the  future.  While  the  good  news  is  that  the  job-finding  rates  of  the  long-term 
unemployed have not yet deteriorated as many feared, we ought not to take this for granted 
going forward. 
Although energy prices have begun to rise again, total inflation, as measured by year-over-
year changes of the Consumer Price Index, is still around 1¾ percent – less than half the 
rate in September of 2011. In recent months, core inflation has also slowed and it is now also 
under 2 percent. 
Higher energy and grain prices mean that headline inflation will likely edge somewhat higher 
for a few months before moving slightly lower again. But measures of the underlying rate of 
inflation are moderate, wage gains remain subdued, and longer-term inflation expectations 
are fully consistent with our longer run inflation objective of 2 per cent as measured by the 
personal consumption expenditures (PCE) deflator. Near term, the economic outlook is that 
the growth pace is likely to remain disappointing. On the positive side, motor vehicle sales in 
August increased solidly. Nevertheless, retail sales outside of autos and gasoline were soft in 
August as households continue to be cautious. 
One  brighter  spot  has  been  the  housing  market.  Housing  starts  and  sales  of  new  and 
existing  single-family  homes  are  trending  up  gradually.  Nationally,  home  prices  have 
stabilized and begun to rise modestly after falling roughly 30 percent from their 2006 peak. 
Housing market conditions still vary significantly across the country with the worst performing 
counties experiencing annual house price declines of 8 percent or more. This sector is just 
getting back on its feet, so that even strong gains in the residential investment sector from its 
current tiny base will provide only a modest contribution to overall GDP growth. In addition, 
homeowner net worth remains much below its pre-crisis level. 
The near-term outlook for the business sector is particularly worrisome right now. New orders 
for  nondefense  capital  goods  and  information  on  business  plans  for  spending  on  new 
structures both suggest weakness in business fixed investment. Also, many indicators point 
to sluggish manufacturing activity, including the ISM manufacturing composite index, several 
regional  manufacturing  surveys,  and  August  industrial  production.  Our  own  Empire  State 
Manufacturing  Survey  fell  deeper  into  negative  territory  in  September.  This  manufacturing 
slowdown stems from several factors, including the slowdown in the pace of growth abroad 
and uncertainties about how the fiscal cliff in Washington will be resolved. 
So why has the economy grown so slowly since the official end of the “Great Recession?” 
There are many reasons, but I would cite five factors as particularly important: 
• 
Access to credit. Although credit availability is slowly improving, it remains impaired, 
especially for households with less-than-sterling credit histories and for some small 
businesses.  
Balance  sheet  repair.  Although  substantial  progress  has  been  made,  many 
households still need to rebuild their net worth following the housing bust. More than 
20 percent of homeowners with a mortgage are “underwater” – meaning they owe 
more on their home than it can be sold for.  
Fiscal drag. State and local governments have been cutting spending for over two 
and  half  years  and  federal  government  spending  is  also  contracting.  While  fiscal 
consolidation  is  essential  over  the  medium  to  long  term,  spending  cuts  reduce 
demand and are a drag on near-term growth.  
Risks relating to Europe. The crisis in the euro area has reduced the demand for 
U.S. exports and weighed on financial markets.  
Fiscal uncertainty at home. Families and firms face elevated uncertainty relating to 
future taxes and government spending, in particular from the so-called “fiscal cliff” – 
    4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
the prospect of sharp increases in taxes and cuts in spending at the start of 2013 if 
Congress and the White House cannot agree on an alternative fiscal plan.  
Given  the  signs  of  improvement  in  some  of  these  areas,  including  the  slow  but  steady 
progress  in  healing  balance  sheets  and  restoring  the  supply  of  credit,  I  anticipate  that  the 
pace  of  economic  growth  will  gradually  pick  up,  supported  by  very  low  interest  rates.  But 
heading into the FOMC meeting last week, I judged that, if we did not ease monetary policy 
further, the pace of improvement would be unacceptably slow. 
Monetary policy 
Last week the FOMC took additional action to promote a more robust recovery in a context of 
price stability. In order to ease policy, the FOMC deployed two complementary tools: asset 
purchases  and  forward  guidance  on  interest  rates.  With  respect  to  asset  purchases,  the 
Committee  said  it  would  start  buying  additional  mortgage-backed  securities  at  a  rate  of 
$40 billion  a  month.  In  terms  of  rate  guidance,  the  Committee  said  it  anticipated  that 
exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate would likely be warranted “at least through 
mid-2015.” 
As  Chairman  Bernanke  explained  in  the  press  conference  that  followed  the  meeting,  the 
Committee  also  took  two  steps  to  underscore  its  commitment  to  ongoing  support  for  the 
recovery.  First,  the  Committee  said  that  if  it  did  not  see  substantial  improvement  in  the 
outlook for the labor market, it will continue the MBS purchase program, undertake additional 
asset purchases and employ its other policy tools as appropriate until it does. Second, the 
Committee  emphasized  that  it  expects  that  a  highly  accommodative  stance  of  monetary 
policy  will  remain  appropriate  for  a  considerable  time  after  the  economic  recovery 
strengthens. 
As usual, the Committee will publish minutes of the meeting three weeks after it took place. 
In the interim, however, I thought it might be useful to provide my own perspective on these 
actions. 
In my view, the decision to ease policy further is fully consistent with our dual mandate and 
policy  framework.  As  I  mentioned  earlier,  we  have  two  goals  –  to  promote  maximum 
employment and price stability. We therefore seek to minimize how far employment is from 
its long run normal level and inflation is from our longer-run goal of 2 percent on the PCE 
measure. Because monetary policy works with a time lag, we base policy not just on where 
the  economy  is  today  but  where  we  expect  it  to  be  in  the  future.  To  do  this,  we  make 
economic forecasts, based on data and insights from a broad range of economic models. We 
also take into account the balance of risks around our base case outlook. 
Looking  ahead,  in  the  absence  of  further  monetary  easing,  I  concluded  that  growth  would 
remain too subdued over the next several years to make big inroads into the spare capacity 
that  remains  from  the  Great  Recession.  As  a  result,  unemployment  would  remain 
unacceptably high, with economic risks skewed to the downside. Meanwhile, with substantial 
slack  in labor  markets and  inflation  expectations  stable,  inflation  was likely  to  remain  a  bit 
below our 2 per cent longer-run objective. 
In  this  situation,  I  concluded  that  our  policy  framework  means  that  further  monetary  policy 
easing was appropriate provided that the benefits of using the tools available outweighed the 
costs. In my judgment, this standard has been satisfied here. I am confident that the costs 
are manageable, based in part on the experience we have of using the tools these past four 
years and that the benefits substantially exceed the costs, recognizing, of course, that our 
actions are not so powerful that they will instantly transform the economic outlook. 
So how do our actions support economic activity? Buying assets and extending interest rate 
guidance puts downward pressure on longer-term interest rates, so they are lower than they 
would otherwise be for any given economic outlook. This supports the price of assets such 
as  equities  and  homes.  Buying  mortgage-backed  securities  has  the  additional  effect  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
narrowing  the  interest  rate  spread  between  these  assets  and  Treasuries,  which  further 
reduces mortgage rates. Moreover, to the extent that our actions are seen as supporting the 
recovery and providing some insurance against adverse shocks, confidence in the medium-
term  economic  outlook  should  also  increase,  making  businesses  and  households  more 
willing  to  invest,  hire  and  spend.  If  we  are  successful,  long-term  Treasury  yields  could 
actually  rise  as  confidence  in  a  sustainable  recovery  increases.  At  the  same  time,  the 
expected returns on private assets should rise and risk premia decline. This matters because 
such shifts would provide support to the economic recovery. 
Now it is true that some of the channels through which monetary policy affects the economy 
may be partially impaired at the moment. For example, because of ongoing restrictions in the 
supply of mortgage credit to customers with less than perfect credit records, the impact of 
lower mortgage rates on housing is probably less powerful than normal. While this restraint 
should slowly ease as house prices stabilize, the difficulties of households with lower credit 
scores  in  obtaining  mortgage  credit  warrants  ongoing  attention.  However,  it  is  also  worth 
noting  other  channels  through  which  monetary  policy  affects  economic  activity  are  not 
impaired, including the impact on spending that is generated by rising wealth, declining risk 
premia and improving confidence. 
It  is  important  to  recognize  that  our  tools  are  not  all-powerful  –  monetary  policy  is  not  a 
panacea for all that ails our economy. But, at the margin, firms facing lower borrowing costs 
for  any  given  economic  outlook  will  invest  and  hire  more.  People  who  refinance  at  lower 
rates,  or  see  the  value  of  their  homes  and  401K  pension  plans  go  up,  will  spend  more.  I 
believe that a nudge in the right direction will move us closer to a self-reinforcing cycle of 
more hiring, more spending, more growth, and more investment. This is the type of virtuous 
cycle  that  we  should  seek  and  one  that  is  consistent  with  a  self-sustaining  and  improving 
economy. 
I believe our latest statement provides greater clarity about how we intend to use the tools 
we  have  to  promote  our  statutory  objectives.  As  Chairman  Bernanke  said  at  his  press 
conference, the idea is to make it “more explicit, more transparent to the public, make it more 
obvious that the Fed will do what’s needed to provide the support for the economy.” 
In particular, the amount of asset purchases that we undertake will be a function of how the 
economy evolves. If the economy is weaker, we’ll do more. If the economy is stronger, and 
we see a substantial improvement in the outlook for the labor market sooner, we’ll end up 
doing less. From my perspective, linking our purchases more closely to economic outcomes 
underlines  our  determination  to  generate  the  kind  of  recovery  that  will  deliver  more  rapid 
progress toward maximum employment in the context of price stability. 
So  what  does  “substantial  improvement  in  the  outlook  for  the  labor  market”  mean  to  me? 
Note  that  I  will  be  focusing  on  the  outlook,  not  just  the  current  state  of  labor  market 
conditions. In that context, it wouldn’t be enough for me just to see the unemployment rate 
decline a bit. It would also matter why the unemployment rate is declining and whether that 
improvement is likely to be sustained in the future. For example, higher payroll growth that 
was  not  supported  by  stronger  economic  growth,  or  falling  unemployment  rates  that  were 
due  mainly  to  declining  participation  in  the  labor  market,  would  not  likely  meet  my  test. 
Therefore, to gauge how substantial the improvement in the outlook for the labor market is, I 
will  be  looking  at  a  range  of  indicators,  including  the  unemployment  rate,  payrolls,  the 
participation  rate,  the  employment  to  population  ratio  and  job  finding  rates,  as  well  as  the 
growth momentum within the economy. 
As  we  approach  year-end,  the  maturity  extension  program  in  which  we  are  increasing  our 
holdings of long-dated Treasuries will be coming to an end. I’ll be taking stock on how we are 
doing with respect to our employment and inflation goals and whether it will be appropriate to 
continue purchasing longer-dated Treasuries when that program concludes. I think that this 
will depend on whether we have seen a substantial improvement in the labor market outlook 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
in  the  interim  and  any  further  evidence  about  the  costs  and  benefits  of  continuing  such 
purchases. 
In  terms  of  our  monetary  policy  regime,  the  FOMC  statement  noted  that  the  Committee 
expects to maintain a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy “for a considerable 
time after the economic recovery strengthens.” This is important because in situations such 
as  the  one  we  find  ourselves  in  today,  when  monetary  policy  is  somewhat  constrained 
because we cannot lower the federal funds rate below zero, one of the most powerful things 
a central bank can do is to provide guidance as to how it will behave in the future. In this 
respect, I am pleased that we have drawn a sharper distinction between what we expect the 
economy  to  look  like  in  a  few  years  time  and  how  we  expect  to  set  policy  based  on  that 
outlook. 
In particular, when the Committee extended the period for which it anticipates keeping the 
federal funds rate at exceptionally low levels – which I interpret to mean the current range of 
zero to 25 basis points – to “at least through mid-2015,” I don’t think this was due to greater 
pessimism about the economic outlook. In fact, when you look at the September Summary of 
Economic  Projections  of  the  Committee  members  –  the  medium-term  growth  outlook  was 
upgraded  a  bit  relative  to  prior  July  projections.  In  my  judgment,  combining  the  statement 
and our projections, the proper inference is that we were acting to secure a better outcome – 
more rapid progress toward full employment and price stability. 
Conclusion 
To  sum  up,  too  many  people  remain  without  the  jobs  that  they  need  to  help  support  their 
families  and  themselves,  and  while  the  economic  expansion  is  continuing,  we  aren’t  yet 
growing fast enough to put back to work many of the idle workers and business facilities that 
represent  the  productive  potential  of  our  economy.  Meanwhile  analysis  of  the  inflation 
outlook  suggests  that  price  increases  are  likely  to  be  close  to  our  2  per  cent  longer  run 
objective over the coming years. 
Not all of the factors that are holding back growth are directly amenable to monetary policy. 
Our nation’s economic challenges cannot be solved and our economic fortunes restored by 
the Federal Reserve alone. Others – notably the next Congress and White House – will have 
to step up to the plate. 
But I am confident that the Fed will promote maximum employment and price stability to the 
greatest extent our tools permit, and we will stay the course. We are setting policy to achieve 
a stronger recovery in the context of price stability. When that finally materializes, I’ll view it 
as  consistent  with  the  result  we  are  trying  to  achieve,  and  not  a  reason  to  pull  back  our 
policies prematurely. If you’re trying to get a car moving that is stuck in the mud, you don’t 
stop pushing the moment the wheels start turning – you keep pushing until the car is rolling 
and is clearly free. 
Thank you for your kind attention. I would be happy to take a few questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
