Prasarn Trairatvorakul: Regional cooperation for improved financial 
resilience and liquidity support – a decade on and the challenges ahead 
Keynote  speech  by  Dr  Prasarn  Trairatvorakul,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the 
10th Anniversary Commemoration of the launch of the Asian Bond Market Initiative (ABMI), 
Asian Development Bank, Manila, 4 May. 
 Ministers and Central Bank Governors;  
Distinguished Guests; Ladies and Gentlemen,  
It is an honour to be part of the 10th Anniversary Commemoration of the launch of the Asian 
Bond Market Initiative (ABMI). The ABMI along with the CMIM or the Chiang Mai Initiative 
Multilateralisation, have been at the centre of regional financial cooperation in the ASEAN+3 
Finance Ministers process which have gathered momentum at this year’s meeting.  
Since  its  inception,  the  ABMI  has  been  instrumental  in  spearheading  bond  market 
developments in our respective economies. The learning process from peer comparison 
and benchmarking, as well as the continued assistance from our+3 members, has been key 
drivers for us to develop our own domestic bond market. Over the years, the local currency 
bond market in Asia has expanded about five folds1 between 2001 and 2011. This growth 
performance exceeded that of the credit market which grew 4 times2 during this same period. 
Such is the success of regional cooperation which I would like to pay tribute to today.  
Bond  markets,  like  any  development  projects,  have  to  start  first  at  home  as  the  base  of 
development. Today, many of the ASEAN-5 countries have fairly deep and liquid local bond 
markets. Central banks, whose operation is contingent on a deep and liquid bond and 
foreign  exchange  markets,  have  been  part  of  the  development  process  for  the 
government  bond  market.  Over  the  years,  our  financial  markets  have  become  more 
efficient,  more  sophisticated  and  more  balanced.  ASEAN-5  have  moved  from  a 
predominantly  bank-based  or  credit  market  to  a  growing  capital  market,  both  equity  and 
bond. We  have  also  strived  to  better  manage  the  impact  from  volatile  capital  flows  as  we 
seek to balance between foreign inflows and capital outflow. Here bond markets have been 
instrumental  to  help  absorb  the  impact  from  the  volatilities  and  sudden  reversal  of  these 
flows. These developments have facilitated central banks in their conduct of monetary policy, 
manage market expectations, and guide the path of monetary policy.  
Today, the ABMI is taking this development further from a domestic orientation to a 
regional  level.  This  is  timely  in  view  of  the  increasing  need  for  Asians  to  find  new 
sources for growth and new markets for their exports, and in recognition of the need 
for “Asian savings to finance Asian investment”. Initiatives such as the Credit Guarantee 
and  Investment  Facility  (CGIF)  is  a  case  in  point  that  aims  to  foster  cross  border  fund 
mobilization using the tools of a regional credit guarantee vehicle. Other initiatives such as 
the  harmonization  of  the  regulatory  framework  in  the  region  will  also  help  foster  an 
investment-friendly environment that encourage issuers to tap funds across the region using 
procedures, prospectus, and disclosure requirements they are familiar at home. Savers will 
also have a greater choice of diversification of their savings.  
As  finance  people,  we  are  always  conscious  that  finance  always  follows  trade  and 
production. Today, our region trades more with one another and invest more in each other’s 
market, which is confirmed by the ranking of Asian trading partners as top export destination 
                                                
1   From 950 USD billion as of December 2001 to 5,700 USD billion at end 2011. 
2   From 2,800 USD billion at end 2001 to 14,000 USD billion at end 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
for most of our countries. It is therefore only natural that our financial markets become 
more integrated to enable our firms and enterprises to allocate resources where they 
most benefit themselves and the region.  
Notwithstanding these progress and ongoing works, there are challenges that come 
with a maturing and more integrated market. Some Asian bond markets experience, from 
time to time, market turbulence as foreign investors leave the market during the recent crisis 
period.  These  point  to  the  limited  ability  of  the  market  to  manage  large  amount  of  foreign 
capital  flows.  Moreover,  several  challenges  such  as  the  advent  of  ASEAN  Economic 
Community (AEC) in 2015, the implementation of the Basel III accord and the rocky recovery 
of the western hemisphere, remained ahead of us.  
In this regard, I view that priority should continue to be on strengthening the role of 
domestic  and  regional  institutional  investors.  This  group  of  market  participants  are 
important players on both the issuer and investor side. Collective investment or asset 
management  companies  can  be  an  important  vehicle  to  channel  cross  border  savings  for 
cross border investment. We know all too well that very few non financial single name issuer 
can succeed in a foreign market if they are not well known household names. But institutional 
investors such as insurance, pension funds and asset management firms are likely to be able 
to  better  intermediate  cross  border  savings  and  investment.  These  institutional  investors 
would be able to provide a two way flow and with a better knowledge of regional conditions 
and a natural home bias, would also be a stabilizing factor during severe market stress. A 
stronger  and  broader  regional  institutional  investor  will  also  provide  opportunities  for 
diversification  as  well  as  alternative  saving  vehicle  that  would  serve  the  changing 
demographic  trends.  Throughout  Asia,  we  are  seeing  increasing  demand  for  more 
sophisticated wealth management services.  
As regulators we also need to continue to collectively enhance our infrastructure and 
further  harmonize  regulatory  regimes  to  support  greater  cross  border  activities. 
Standardized  market  conventions  help  promote  cross  border  issuance  in  our  respective 
markets. But harmonization takes time as the devil is in the details. And harmonization may 
go  beyond  regulations  on  the trade  or  issuance of  bonds.  As  cross  border  initiatives,  they 
inevitably involve regulations over international capital flows which we need to also respect 
both host country and home country authorities. For instance, the home country may allow 
their  savers  to  invest  abroad,  but  the  recipient  countries  still  maintain  controls  on  inflows. 
Other  regulators may  permit  non residents to make  use  of  tools  such  as  repo,  as  liquidity 
enhancing  mechanism,  but  others  may  look  at  this  measure  as  way  to  engage  currency 
speculation. These are all delicate balancing acts which we would need to tackle as we strive 
to integrate our financial markets further.  
And  while  we  pursue  development  and  liberalization  objectives  we  also  need  to 
strengthen  our  regional  safety  net.  Today  our  regional  cooperation  has  multilayer 
safety net consisting of Cross Border Collateral Arrangement (CBCA) for our banks to 
avail themselves of liquidity from the host central bank using collaterals at their home 
or  head  office,  bilateral  foreign  exchange  swap  line,  and  the  Chiang  Mai  Initiative 
Multilateralisation (CMIM) serves as second line of defense and should continue to be 
enhanced to counter possible market turbulence. As you have heard from the Minister of 
Strategy  and  Finance  of  Korea,  Mr.  Bahk  Jaewan,  the  ASEAN+3  Finance  Ministers  and 
Central Bank Governors have made progress on important features of the CMIM. We have 
announced the doubling of the total size of the CMIM from $120 billion to $240 billion. We 
have  also  lengthened  the  supporting  period  and  increased  the  IMF  delinked  portion,  from 
20% to 30% this year with a view to increasing it to 40% in 2014, subject to review should 
conditions warrant.  
In  serving  as  a  regional  safety  net,  such  arrangements  contribute  to  further 
development of the regional financial markets by providing a credible liquidity firewall, 
both for crisis resolution and crisis prevention, to anchor investors’ confidence. It is only with 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
enough confidence that we can attract the participation of foreign investors into our markets 
for the sustainable developments of our economies and region.  
I look forward to an even greater success in the next 10 years.  
Thank you for your kind attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
