Rodrigo Vergara: The global economic scenario and monetary policy 
management 
Speech  by  Mr  Rodrigo  Vergara,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Chile,  at  the  2012  Latin 
American  Forum  of  the  Institute  of  International  Finance  (IIF),  Montevideo,  Uruguay, 
17 March 1012. 
 I thank Luis Oscar Herrera, Enrique Orellana and Tatiana Vargas for helpful comments. 
Thank you for inviting me to speak at the 2012 meeting of the IIF Latin American Economic 
Forum. This is my first time here as governor of the Central Bank of Chile. I have been asked 
to share with you some thoughts on the impact on our region of the crisis that is affecting the 
developed  world,  especially  of  how  we  can  confront  it  using  policy  instruments,  and  the 
challenges that lie ahead of us. 
These  last  years  have  been  very  challenging  in  terms  of  the  evolution  of  macroeconomic 
conditions in our region and worldwide. After the crises in Argentina and Brazil of the late 
1990s and early 2000s, for the most part Latin American economies experienced a period of 
sustained growth, lower unemployment and a drop or relative stability of inflation rates. 
Nonetheless, towards the end of the past decade this state was abruptly interrupted by the 
international financial crisis. The worst came with the fall of Lehman Brothers in September 
of 2008. The abrupt and significant collapse of global demand caused serious problems in all 
our economies. Terms of trade plummeted and soon we were facing a completely different 
picture. 
Economic policy reaction came promptly. In Chile, and other Latin American countries, we 
implemented a combination of fiscal and monetary policies to stimulate the economy. More 
important was the fact that probably for the first time, a crisis of the magnitude that affected  
– and still affects – developed countries, did not cause Latin American economies to enter 
into  a  balance  of  payments  crisis  or  a  profound  recession.  Suffice  it  to  remember  what 
happened in the early 1980s, when our own weaknesses and the shortcomings of economic 
policies, coupled with a significant rise in interest rates worldwide, dragged us into a deep 
recession. This is of utmost importance as it shows that we have matured in economic policy 
framework and that we face the challenge not only of maintaining but also of improving it. 
After some quarters, the world economy began to recover gradually. This process took place 
at  two  speeds.  Emerging  economies  recovered  at  a  fast  pace,  while  developed  countries 
experienced  a  slower  rebound.  The  causes  and  consequences  of  the  Great  Recession 
continue  to  affect  economic  performance  of  the  developed  world.  This  is  so  because  the 
fundamental problem, high indebtedness of households, companies and governments, is still 
present. The fact that the higher the level of debt the more costly the solutions and greater 
the side-effects, poses a problem. 
We have been seeing this clearly during recent quarters. You may recall that just a year ago 
the main problem faced by emerging economies was how to deal with inflationary pressures, 
given  the  narrowing  of  domestic  capacity  gaps  and  the  rise  in  prices  of  commodities  in 
international markets. This happened at the same time as the two-speed recovery process I 
just mentioned was accompanied by an interest rate differential that redirected capital flows 
towards  emerging  markets,  exerting  strong  pressures  to  appreciate  our  currencies.  Our 
concern then was the pace at which we would lower impulse to our economies, taking care 
that it did not intensify pressures on the exchange rate and cause new imbalances. 
Only  six  months  later  our  major  concern  had  changed  dramatically.  The  intensification  of 
financial  tensions  in  the  developed  economies  drastically  changed  our  perception  of  the 
future of the global economy. Financial markets drastically picked up this change of mood 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
and  very  quickly  we  saw,  among  other  developments,  drops  in  stock  prices,  hikes  in  risk 
premiums, and reductions in the prices of commodities. The tough discussions held in the 
United  States  on  fiscal  issues,  together  with  the  weakness  of  its  economic  data  towards 
mid-year, fueled these negative perceptions. 
Overall, emerging economies dramatically changed their perceptions and communication as 
to  the  future  of  monetary  policy.  Between  August  and  October,  probably  on  the  peak 
moments  of  the  last  financial  turbulences  in  the  developed  world,  many  central  banks 
stopped the process of interest rate raises, and many also changed the direction of changes 
in their monetary policies to more expansive ones. In Chile, after raising MPR by 200 basis 
points  during  the  first  half  of  2011  and  stating  that  there  were  still  some  increases  to  be 
made, in August we moved towards a neutral stance. In October, considering the envisaged 
consequences of the deterioration of the international scenario, we announced that we would 
increase monetary impulse if we foresaw that this situation could have a negative impact on 
our economy. Thus, in January of this year we lowered the MPR by 25 basis points. Now we 
have announced that new monetary policy actions will depend both on our assessment of the 
effects of the international scenario on the domestic economy as well as on the evolution of 
the domestic economy itself. 
Allow me to present you our vision of what is going on in the world and how it will affect us. 
Particularly, to do so from a monetary policy perspective. 
The current international scenario 
The  onset  of  2012  has  surprised  us  with  a  considerably  calmer  state  of  affairs  than  we 
expected  a  few  months  ago.  The  Eurozone  situation  is  far  from  being  solved.  There  are 
many challenges ahead, among them increasing productivity in many peripheral economies. 
Nonetheless,  significant progress  has  been  made.  The  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  has 
provided long-term liquidity to the financial sector, European leaders have placed conditions 
on this financing, governments have agreed on adjustment plans that seem to go in the right 
direction, and it seems as time has been bought to address the more structural problems that 
are still present in the Eurozone. Financial markets have understood this, and risk indicators 
and monetary conditions have improved. 
Consensus forecasts on world growth point to a performance of the global economy below 
that of 2011. Nonetheless, the degree of downward correction has diminished noticeably in 
the latest data. Does this mean that circumstances in developed countries have reached a 
point  beyond  which  we  must  not  expect  other  significant  setbacks?  This  is  not  so  in  my 
opinion. 
Allow  me  to  give  you  some  background.  As  mentioned,  the  solution  to  the  Eurozone’s 
problems is still far ahead. Its economy is in recession and the necessary adjustments are 
expensive  and  highly  unpopular  among  the  population.  Some  economies  have  very  high 
unemployment and a very fragile fiscal situation. If anything, measures adopted up to now 
have  put  a  firewall  to  isolate  systemically  relevant  economies  from  greater  disaster.  Also, 
financial  conditions  have  improved  these  last  weeks,  mainly  due  to  the  ECB’s  LTRO 
initiative.  With  it,  the  concern  over  the  region’s  banking  sector  financing  needs  has  been 
dealt with. 
However, serious fiscal and financial problems and macroeconomic imbalances continue to 
exist in the Eurozone. In response to high unemployment and low growth, banks’ portfolios 
deteriorated.  On  the  other  hand,  the  European  Banking  Authority  (EBA)  has  demanded  a 
capital increase of the system’s major banks. Finally, US dollar financing pressure persists in 
some major banks. This has resulted in more stringent credit conditions, which may continue 
and  have  a  profound  impact  particularly  on  small  and  medium-sized  businesses  and, 
eventually, on some countries’ foreign trade. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The situation of the Eurozone is complex and we cannot rule out as a possible risk scenario 
a disorderly default of peripheral economies, due to the challenging debt maturity profile they 
face. This high risk scenario is, however, less likely that at the end of last year. 
The US economic data of the last months have been a pleasant surprise. The labor market 
and  households’  expenditure  seem  to  have  behaved  better  than  forecast.  Although,  the 
difficulties that persist in the labor market and the fiscal adjustments that are needed explain 
the  continuing  doubts  as  to  how  true  and  sustainable  the  recovery  we  are  currently 
witnessing is. In spite of the more positive indicators, the Fed authorities extended from 2013 
to 2014 the period in which it expects to keep interest rate at minimum levels. Certainly, the 
problem of fiscal indebtedness continues. 
In emerging countries the data are diverse. Over the course of the second half of 2011 we 
witnessed a generalized deterioration of consumer and business expectations. Neither case 
can  be  compared  to  what  happened  between  late  2008  and  the  beginning  of  2009. 
Generally, the data show a deceleration of activity. Nonetheless, it is difficult to identify how 
much  of  this  decline  is  due  to  a  lower  external  stimulus,  how  much  is  accounted  for  by  a 
natural slowdown in each economy, and what part is explained by particular events. 
All  these  elements  add  up  to  a  situation  in  which,  although  the  external  scenario  is  not 
worsening,  the  belief  that  risks  have  disappeared  is  far  off.  It  is  possible  to  think  that  the 
likelihood of extreme scenarios is low, but, in my opinion, it is still there. 
More challenges for monetary policy 
As  already  mentioned,  the  change  in  how  the  global  panorama  was  perceived  led  many 
emerging  economies  to  change  their  views  on  their  future  economic  policies.  This  made 
them  halt  their  processes  of  lowering  expansiveness  and/or  made  them  resume  impulse. 
However, the new change of mood brought about by the greater calm of the beginning of the 
year, coupled with geopolitical factors, has again put us in a dilemma. 
On  one  hand,  probably  as  a  result  of  the  recent  memory  of  the  late  2008  and  early  2009 
global confidence crisis, most economic authorities quickly set up a close monitoring system 
and prepared a batch of instruments to implement a quick offsetting of the adverse effects of 
a global crisis. However, time has shown that the effects of the crisis of the Eurozone area 
have been fairly limited so far. 
Financial markets have suffered the biggest impacts, but trade, output and employment have 
not  been  greatly  affected.  In  Chile,  activity  and  domestic  demand,  specially  consumption, 
have not worsened significantly. This does not mean that our vision of the effects that the 
crisis in the developed world will have on our economy or the rest of the world has changed. 
However,  it  is  a  fact  that  activity  at  the  beginning  of  the  year  is  at  a  higher  level  than  we 
envisaged a few months ago. 
On  the  other  hand,  this  has  been  compounded  by  an  increase  in  the  oil  price.  Political 
tensions in the Middle East have again put pressure on this price, thus affecting domestic 
prices. 
The effects of a higher oil price can be interpreted at least twofold, with opposing implications 
for monetary policy. On one hand, in a situation of tight output gaps – as is the case of many 
emerging  economies,  Chile  among  them  –  an  increase  in  the  price  of  energy  may 
exacerbate  domestic  inflationary  pressure,  making  the  dynamics  of  inflation  more  complex 
and demanding great care when assessing the evolution of the inflation trend. On the other 
hand, in the face of existing risk scenarios, an increase in the oil price also has a negative 
effect on world activity. If we take into account the fragile state of households, businesses 
and governments in the developed world, a higher price of energy may further weaken their 
position and lead to a more lasting and deeper economic fragility. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
A third factor that has added difficulty to monetary policy management is a renewed concern 
over  capital  flows  towards  the  emerging  world.  The  change  in  investors’  mood  has  made 
them look for other markets in which to invest, and has led to a widespread appreciation of 
emerging countries’ currencies. As usual, this has rekindled a debate that was present in our 
discussions  a  year  back,  as  to  the  convenience  of  implementing  measures  to  avoid 
currencies  from  appreciating.  Last  year  several  emerging  economies,  among  them  Chile, 
intervened  their  exchange  markets  using  different  mechanisms.  This  year  some  emerging 
economies have continued to do so. 
Clearly,  the  discussion  as  to  the  convenience  or  not  of  performing  such  actions  remains 
unresolved.  The  first  thing  to  bear  in  mind  is  that  in  small  open  economies,  all  efforts  to 
persistently keep the exchange rate at levels beyond margins aligned with the fundamentals, 
particularly  at  overvalued  levels,  are  not  sustainable  and  may  eventually  generate  higher 
inflation. 
We are convinced that a floating exchange rate regime is the most appropriate one for the 
Chilean  economy,  as  it  facilitates  macroeconomic  and  external  accounts  adjustments. 
Nonetheless,  certain  circumstances  may  lead  the  Central  Bank  to  intervene  in  the  forex 
market,  either  to  maintain  an  adequate  international  reserve  position  or  to  respond  to 
overreactions of the exchange parity beyond its long-term fundamentals. However, there are 
costs associated to this type of intervention. A first cost is that it may create confusion as to 
the objective of the monetary authorities: inflation or the exchange rate. In our case, we have 
dealt  with  this  through  transparent  mechanisms  whereby  we  anticipate  the  amounts  and 
terms of interventions, and by maintaining a flexible exchange rate. In addition it has always 
been clear that the exchange rate is not an objective and the main goal of the Central Bank 
is  price  stability.  A  second  cost  is  of  a  financial  nature.  Foreign  reserves  are  invested  in 
highly liquid and secure instruments of developed countries, whose interest rates are lower 
than those of domestic instruments used to finance their acquisition. Conversely, the benefits 
of having these reserves are the enhanced security they provide in case of an abrupt cut of 
external financing. These benefits are hard to measure, but it is reasonable to expect that 
they  will  decline  as  the  availability  of  reserves  increases,  as  has  been  occurring  in  Chile 
since 2008. 
Allow me to express some final thoughts. 
Final thoughts 
News  during  these  last  weeks  have  led  us  to  a  scenario  in  which  the  effects  of  the 
deteriorating external situation that we forecast some time back are not evident and in which 
inflationary pressures stemming from a higher cost of energy have resurfaced. Hence, if a 
few  months  ago  it  was  clear  that  the  most  likely  scenario  for  monetary  policy  in  emerging 
economies was a further loosening, today it is much less clear so. Compounded to it is the 
renewed influx of capital flows towards emerging economies and the resulting appreciation of 
our  currencies.  Against  this  backdrop,  managing  monetary  policy  has  become  more 
complex. 
Today, our assessment continues to be that the crisis in the developed world will sooner or 
later affect the performance of our economies. It is possible that the impact will be less than 
what  we  thought  some  time  ago,  but  to  assume  that  nothing  will  happen  does  not  seem 
sensible.  Nonetheless,  the  difficulties  involved  in  measuring  the  actual  impact  makes  me 
very cautious in measuring the impulse required by each economy to offset the effects of the 
external scenario. 
Today, prudent monetary policy management has to be prepared for all kinds of scenarios 
and to adapt the amount of stimulus applied according to needs established on a case by 
case  basis.  As  I  said  a  moment  ago,  activity  we  see  today  is  at  a  level  above  what  we 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
forecast  a  few  months  back.  In  fact,  in  our  latest  Monetary  Policy  Meeting  we  decided  to 
maintain the Monetary Policy Rate at 5% for a second month in a row. 
The  current  situation  in  developed  economies  is  very  complex,  and  teaches  valuable 
lessons. On one hand, as to how imbalances that are not addressed on time end up creating 
enormous  costs  for  the  population.  For  those  of  us  in  charge  of  economic  policy  in  our 
countries, it is absolutely essential that we strive to address these imbalances if they exist, 
and at the same time that we do not create them through our decisions. Over-stimulating the 
economy when output gaps are narrow and inflationary pressures have risen could lead to 
imbalances. I trust that they are not as sizeable as those of the developed world, but in any 
case  solving  them  is  always  costly.  On  the  other  hand,  it  has  taught  us  the  relevance  of 
maintaining and improving a good macroeconomic framework. In Chile, this framework rests 
on four pillars. First, monetary policy management is based on a flexible inflation-targeting 
regime,  conducted  by  an  autonomous  central  bank  and  supported  by  a  floating  exchange 
rate system. Second, a fiscal policy that is accountable and predictable thanks to a structural 
balance  rule.  The  significant  amount  of  savings  accumulated  during  the  run-up  of  copper 
prices has been a crucial factor in bolstering the resilience of the Chilean economy and in 
providing  a  countercyclical  fiscal  boost.  Third,  a  high  degree  of  commercial  and  financial 
integration  with  the  rest  of  the  world.  Finally,  a  sound  financial  system,  with  globally 
integrated,  well  capitalized,  and  adequately-regulated  banks.  Our  countries  have  suffered 
decades as a result of mistaken economic policies. The Great Recession showed that our 
current  state  of  preparation  to  confront  and  mitigate  the  impact  of  an  adverse  scenario  is 
much  better  than  in  the  past,  and  that  it  is  the  path  that  we  must  continue.  Undoubtedly, 
there are still many things to improve. Attaining a level of development such that prosperity 
reaches the whole population is still far away, but at least we are on the right track. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
