Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Global policy perspectives 
Speech  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia,  at  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City  Economic  Symposium:  Overall  Panel  on  “Global  policy 
perspectives”, Jackson Hole, United States, 1 September 2012. 
 It  is  my  honour  to  be  invited  to  speak  on  this  closing  panel,  to  discuss  global  policy 
perspectives at this year’s Economic Symposium, in this magnificent environment at Jackson 
Hole. My remarks will focus on global policies from the perspective of a policy-maker from an 
emerging economy, to discuss the evolving new frontiers of global policies, the global policy 
spillovers in particular to emerging economies, and on the policy priorities in emerging Asia 
in this environment. 
The global economic and financial landscape has changed tremendously over this recent two 
decades.  Yet  the  underlying  motivation  and  progress  in  policy-making  have  not  reflected 
these  changes.  The  disparity  between  policy  and  the  new  landscape  has  become 
increasingly  more  evident  since  the  2008  global  financial  crisis.  Policy-makers  have  thus 
been  challenged  in  preventing  the  build-up  of  the  risks  and  imbalances  prior  to  the  crisis, 
arresting and containing the crisis once it had erupted, and then managing its aftermath. 
At  the  national  level,  these  changes  are  well  known.  Driven  largely  by  innovation  and 
advances  in  technology,  we  now  have  more  highly  complex  and  more  inter-connected 
financial systems with financial activity that has broadened to beyond the traditional financial 
intermediaries. More profound are the fundamental changes associated with the globalisation 
of finance, which has resulted in a more connected and inter-dependent world.   
Since the onset of the crisis, the policy response at the national level has been extensive and 
on an unprecedented scale, aimed to restore the functioning of the financial system and to 
arrest the steep deterioration in economic activity. Monetary policy was eased substantially, 
with  interest  rates  brought  down  swiftly  to  historical  lows.  The  cumulative  fiscal  expansion 
during  the  period  2007–2009,  amounted  to  close  to  an  average  of  four  percent  of  GDP. 
Meanwhile, financial sector policies gave priority to stabilising financial markets and restoring 
credit flows. 
While an economic depression has been averted, monetary accommodation has continued 
with  large  scale  financial  market  interventions  to  support  the  recovery.  Fiscal  policy, 
however,  shifted  to  address  fiscal  sustainability  and  the  increased  public  indebtedness, 
following  the  massive  stimulus  and  support  to  the  financial  sector.  The  challenge  is  to 
achieve this consolidation, while ensuring that the economic recovery and market confidence 
are not undermined.  
On the wide-ranging financial reforms to address the weaknesses that led to the crisis and to 
strengthen  the  resilience  of  the  financial  sector,  the  emphasis  has  been  on  enhancing 
regulation  and  addressing  macro-financial  concerns  to  avoid  the  build-up  of  financial 
imbalances.  These  policies  have  also  been  supported  by  wide-ranging  changes  to  the 
legislative framework and institutional structures. 
An  area  of  policy  that  has  not  been  as  extensive  is  the  cross-border  dimension  of  policy-
making,  despite 
increased 
connectivity of the world has been exemplified by the swift spread of financial and economic 
shocks throughout  the global  economy  and  international financial  system  in  2008,  and  the 
global supply chain disruption emanating from Japan in 2011. 
Despite  these  changes,  institutional  arrangements  and  governance  for  policy  cooperation 
and  coordination  have  yet  to  reach  the  levels  that  are  commensurate  with  the  degree  of 
global economic and financial integration. While individual efforts by any single economy are 
inter-dependence  between  economies.  The 
the  growing 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
vital to ensure that they do not become a source of instability to other parts of the world, they 
can  no  longer  guarantee  collective  stability.  Emerging  economies  that  are  more  open  and 
integrated with the global economy and international financial system are the most affected 
by these developments.  
The  global  financial  crisis  forcefully  demonstrated  the  importance  of  the  international 
dimension  of  policy.  In  the  early  stage  of  the  crisis,  the  coordinated  policy  rate  cuts,  the 
enhancement  of  U.S.  dollar  liquidity  facilities  by  several  key  central  banks,  and  the 
unprecedented and concerted fiscal expansion effort turned the tide of the global recession. 
The  establishment  of  the  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB)  in  2009,  together  with  the  Basel 
Committee  of  Banking  Supervision,  has  also  been  at  the  centre  of  much  of  the  work  on 
global financial sector reform. While this represents a positive step, the efforts remain recent 
and modest in an environment where the underlying changes were built up over an extended 
period of time, and had already become entrenched and widespread.  
Challenges arising from global policy spillovers 
Let me  now  turn to the challenges  arising from the global  policy  spillovers,  in  particular  to 
emerging economies. With cross-border inter-dependence and contagion being very much a 
phenomenon of this new environment, such global policy spillovers are rapidly transmitted to 
other parts of the world through economic and financial flows. While the repercussions of the 
global economic and financial disruptions have  been well recognised, less discussed have 
been the consequences of the global policy spillovers. 
Significant  and  continuous  spillovers  have  emanated  from  the  wide-ranging  policies  in  the 
advanced economies, including the unprecedented monetary easing, the fiscal stimulus then 
consolidation, the repair and resolution of the financial sector, the initiatives to reduce public 
and private sector indebtedness, and the consequences of the global regulatory reforms.  
The  highly  accommodative  global  monetary  environment  has  generated  higher  global 
liquidity. While contributing to the resumption of credit flows, it has exacerbated the recent 
surges in capital inflows to emerging economies. These inflows have resulted in significant 
strengthening  of  currencies,  rising  asset  prices,  stronger  credit  growth,  and  for  some, 
overheating conditions in the economy. 
These  inflows  have,  however,  been  punctuated  by  reversals  in  capital  flows,  following 
deleveraging  activities  mainly  by  the  banking  groups  in  the  crisis-affected  countries. 
Deleveraging  by  sovereigns  and  by  households,  in  particular  the  United  States,  have  also 
reinforced this trend. The deleveraging by banks was, in particular, felt in 2009, following the 
actions by banks in the United States to strengthen their capital positions, and more recently 
by  banks  in  the  Europe  to  meet  the  new  capital  adequacy  requirements.  In  view  of  the 
challenging conditions for capital raising, this is being achieved, in part, by asset reduction, 
either by asset sales, in particular in performing economies, or the withdrawal of credit lines. 
These operations not only have implications on asset prices but on currency movements, as 
funds from the asset disposal are remitted back to the home country. The reversal of capital 
flows following such deleveraging is thus accompanied by a correction in asset prices and 
depreciation in the currencies. For emerging economies, the more developed and liberalised 
the  financial  markets,  the  more  significant  will  be  the  impact  of  such  activities,  and  the 
greater will be the amplitude of the volatility in the asset prices and currency movements. 
Global policy spillovers have also been transmitted to the real economy through trade and 
investment flows. The world economy, including emerging economies, benefitted immensely 
from the fiscal stimulus that supported the economic recovery. However, as the deterioration 
in fiscal sustainability became a concern, the effects of the pull-back in public expenditure on 
growth  have  contributed  to  slowing  world  trade  and  cross-border  investment  activity. 
Emerging  economies,  in  particular  in  Asia,  have  seen  the  export  sector  slow  significantly. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
While foreign direct investment continues to gravitate to emerging economies, in particular to 
Asia, the scale of such investment activity has also moderated. 
Finally, the international regulatory reforms and the unilateral initiatives in a number of the 
major  advanced  economies  have  also  had  their  intended  and  unintended  consequences. 
The  reforms,  which  have  focused  on  building  a  stronger  global  regulatory  framework  and 
raising the resilience of the banking system, are still in their early stages of implementation. 
While it is too early to verify the concerns raised on the new prudential standards, the call 
has, however, been for the need to ensure that the benefits of greater systemic resilience will 
exceed any costs to the efficient functioning of the financial intermediation process and to the 
real economy. 
For  Asia,  the  new  standards  contribute  positively  for  regional  financial  integration,  as  they 
promote  a  more  consistent  regional  approach  to  regulation.  They  also  work  to  strengthen 
regional financial stability arrangements, through more robust frameworks for the oversight of 
systemically  important  financial  institutions  at  the  regional  level.  These  reforms  have, 
therefore, encouraged increased communication and closer coordination on financial stability 
developments between regulators in the Asian region. 
These  financial  reforms  are,  however,  not  without  challenges  for  emerging  economies.  In 
particular, the standardised regulatory prescription goes against the grain of regulation that is 
proportionate  to  risk.  Other  unilateral  regulatory  initiatives,  although  not  being  imposed 
outside the respective countries, are also charting a path forward that is likely to have wider 
ramifications, given the significant cross-border operations of the affected institutions.  
Policy priorities in emerging Asia  
Let me turn to the policy priorities in emerging Asia. While most emerging economies entered 
the global financial crisis from a position of strength, policy-makers continue to be challenged 
by the weaker global economic environment and the effects of the global policy spillovers. 
While the emerging economies in Asia have been affected by these external developments, 
most  have  demonstrated  resilience  during  this  period.  Let  me  confine  my  remarks  to  the 
policies that have contributed to this resilience. First, it is the payoff from a decade-long of 
policies and financial and economic reforms following the Asian financial crisis. Second, it is 
having an enhanced policy toolkit and the policy flexibility to manoeuvre in this environment. 
Third is the increased cooperation and collaboration in Asia, in the areas of surveillance, in 
the assessments of the risks and vulnerabilities to the region, and in the consideration of the 
policy options to address many of the new challenges. 
An important policy shift following the Asian financial crisis is to rebalance the economy and 
to  diversify  our  sources  of  growth.  This  has  involved  wide-ranging  policies  and  reforms  to 
promote domestic demand, in particular domestic consumption and investment activities by 
the  private  sector.  Accommodative  macroeconomic  policies  were  generally  supported  by 
policies and reforms to strengthen the financial system, to ensure that domestic demand was 
supported by the financial sector. With rising incomes, private consumption and investment 
activities  have  expanded  significantly  to  become  the  major  engine  of  growth  in  Asia. 
Cumulatively,  the  increase  in  domestic  demand  in  the  region  has  transformed  Asia  into 
becoming  a  huge  consumer  market.  This  has  also  prompted  greater  inter-regional  trade 
which  has  become  mutually  reinforcing  on  growth  in  the  region.  From  being  export-led, 
domestic demand has now become an important source of growth. Asia is, therefore, now 
shifting from being global producers to becoming global consumers. 
The wide-ranging financial reforms in several emerging economies in Asia, have resulted in 
financial  intermediaries  with  strong  capital  and  liquidity  buffers,  and  improved  risk 
management  and  governance  practices.  This  has  allowed  for  the  financial  intermediation 
process  to  continue  without  disruption  during  the  recent  global  financial  crisis.  The  more 
comprehensive  regulatory  frameworks  have  also  been  complemented  by  enhanced 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
surveillance  arrangements  and  a  relatively  more  intrusive  supervisory  oversight.  Wide-
ranging policy tools, including macro-prudential policies, have been relied upon to mitigate 
and  manage  the  risks  emanating  from  excesses  and  the  build-up  of  imbalances  in  the 
financial  system.  The  opportunity  was  also  taken  by  most  central  banks  in  the  region  to 
normalise interest rates once recovery had commenced. Interest rates, while still remaining 
accommodative, were raised from their historical lows. Finally, with more developed financial 
markets, shocks were now more dispersed throughout the financial system. This has allowed 
the financial system to better intermediate highly volatile capital flows. 
Despite this, the surges and reversals of capital flows continue to present a major challenge 
to policy. Specific policy strategies have also been adopted to reduce the prospect of being 
destabilised  by  these  flows.  Financial  reforms  following  the  Asian  financial  crisis  have 
transitioned  financial  systems  in  Asia  towards  greater  market  orientation  and  increased 
exchange  rate  flexibility.  This  has  facilitated  greater  capacity  to  adjust  to  the  increased 
volatility  in  the  financial  system.  Further  progress  on  liberalisation  has  also  increased  the 
potential to undertake foreign exchange transactions, including engaging in outward portfolio 
and  direct  investments  abroad.  This  has  resulted  in  stronger  two-way  capital  flows, 
contributing to more orderly conditions in the financial markets. 
Liquidity  management  measures,  prudential 
including  macro-prudential 
regulations 
measures, and more interventionist measures that include restrictions on such flows, have 
also been implemented in varying degrees to cope with the volatile capital inflows. For the 
most  part,  prudential  regulations,  such  as  the  imposition  of  ceilings  and  limits  on  external 
exposures, or minimum holding periods for specified domestic instruments, but which have 
not  discriminated  according  to  residency,  have  been  implemented.  Overall,  they  have 
enabled the financial sector, markets and the economy to function without disruption during 
the period of the global financial crisis. 
While policies at the national level are important, these have been complemented by a higher 
level of regional collaboration and cooperation. The Asian region is now  well ahead  in the 
areas  of  surveillance  arrangements,  financial  safety  nets  and  crisis  management.  These 
frameworks, which have been put in place during the good times, are also being supported 
by  ongoing  work,  in  the  area  of  building  a  consistent  regulatory  environment  given  the 
increasing  presence  of  Asian  banks  in  each  others’  jurisdictions.  This  is  reinforced  by 
cooperation among national supervisors and in the development of arrangements for cross-
border resolution. 
Regional platforms have been established for structured forums for the assessment of risks 
and vulnerabilities to the region, to increase the prospect for pre-emptive actions to be taken. 
Collaborative efforts are also ongoing in the area of building regional financial infrastructure, 
including the financial markets and payment systems to facilitate the efficient intermediation 
of  financial  resources  in  the  region.  Collaborative  efforts  are  also  accorded  to  the  area  of 
anti-money laundering, to ensure the integrity of the increasingly integrated financial systems 
in  Asia.  Finally,  collaboration  has  also  progressed  in  the  area  of  capacity  building,  to 
strengthen the institutional capability of the central banks in the region to deal with the new 
challenges of the new environment. 
Finally,  one  of  the  most  significant  but  often  under-appreciated  trends  across  most 
economies in these recent two decades, is the significant rise of inequality within economies. 
The economic crisis has worsened this trend given the conditions of high unemployment in 
many parts of the world. In many areas of policy-making, inequality is often not given explicit 
consideration. In Asia, this is being addressed at two levels – at the national level to develop 
inclusive financial systems and better social safety nets, and at the regional level, for regional 
initiatives to be inclusive, to ensure that regardless of the stage of development, countries in 
the group will build up their capacity and capability to benefit from the progress of the region.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Conclusion 
Let  me  conclude  my  remarks;  the  new  global  policy  frontiers  are  now  addressing  the 
challenges of the new global economic and financial landscape. Given the more connected 
and inter-dependent world, the call is for strengthening the cross-border dimension of policy-
making.  
Asia  has  taken  advantage  of  this  period  of  relative  stability  to  advance  economic  and 
financial integration, and to strengthen our economic potential. Asia will, however, continue 
to  be  vulnerable  to  external  developments  and  future  shocks.  To  be  in  a  better  state  of 
readiness to withstand these eventualities, the policy priority is to build resilience. Not only 
having the buffers and institutional capacity, but also to come together collectively to manage 
the new challenges, and thus be positioned to contribute constructively to global stability and 
growth. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
