Kiyohiko G Nishimura: What should we learn from the Eurozone Crisis? 
A regulatory-reform perspective 
Speech by Mr Kiyohiko G Nishimura, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Institute 
of 
International  Bankers  2012  Annual  Washington  Conference,  Washington  DC, 
7 March 2012. 
 Introduction: two “once-in-a-century” crises just three years apart 
1. 
Let  me  begin  by  thanking  the  Institute  of  International  Bankers  for  inviting  me  to  join  the 
leading international bankers today. I am delighted and honored to have the opportunity to 
deliver this speech at the 2012 Annual Washington Conference. 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  return  to  Washington  D.C.  from  Tokyo  after  30  years  of 
absence,  especially  as  it  is  just  two  weeks  before  the  Cherry  Blossom  Festival  officially 
begins. I vividly remember the Festival on the Mall in 1982 when I lived here. In fact, this year 
is special not only for me but also for all Washingtonians and Tokyoites. This year marks the 
centennial anniversary of the gift of these 3,000 cherry trees from Tokyo to Washington D.C. 
in  1912.  The  Washington  cherry  trees  have  rooted  strongly,  survived  the  elements,  and 
withstood the test of time. Their blossoms come into full bloom every spring so as to make us 
feel  eternal  peace  and  serenity,  regardless  of  economic  cycles,  market  swings,  and  in 
particular, financial crises. 
Alan Greenspan once described the “Lehman  Crisis of 2008” as a “once-in-a-century type 
event”.1  And  now  we  are  facing  the  “Eurozone  Crisis  of  2011”.  Some  say  the  potential 
magnitude  of  the  fallout  from  this  latter  crisis  may  approach  that  of  the  former  unless 
appropriate measures are devised and implemented promptly. Thus, we have experienced 
two once-in-a-century events within three years. Indeed, this is quite extraordinary. However, 
if we look closer at these two crises, we find they are not necessarily isolated events (or in 
statistical terms, they are not independent.) Rather a certain factor was active behind both 
events:  important  regulatory  changes  in  the  United  States  around  2004.  These  regulatory 
changes are seen as having led to excessive leveraging in the United States, culminating in 
the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers.  But  what  is  relatively  less  well  known  is  that  these 
regulatory changes provided fertile ground for the excessive risk taking of European financial 
institutions as well, making these institutions vulnerable to potential shocks after the Lehman 
Crisis, when the sovereign risks of a small periphery country surfaced. This vulnerability is 
the source of the contagion fears we have observed. 
In this speech, I examine the current Eurozone Crisis from the perspective of how to devise 
and  implement  a  regulatory  framework  appropriate  for  financial  stability  and  economic 
activity. In particular, I have two issues in mind. 
The first issue is that regulatory changes often have unintended and sometimes large cross-
border  impacts  in  the  increasingly  integrated  world  of  finance.  One  country’s  deregulation 
may cause excessive risk taking not only by that country’s financial institutions, but also by 
those in other countries, and in some cases, the impact is larger for foreign institutions than 
domestic ones. 
The second issue I wish to raise is that the effectiveness of regulatory changes is crucially 
dependent on economic conditions at the time those changes are introduced. Thus, there is 
                                                 
1  As reported by AFP, September 14, 2008. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
a  non-trivial  possibility  of  implementing  the  right  policy,  but  at  the  wrong  time.  And  by  the 
same token, appropriate sequencing is also dependent on economic conditions.  
In Section 2, I first explain how the U.S. regulatory changes, most notably deregulation on 
the leverage of investment banks, affected the behavior of European financial institutions. It 
is  not  at  all  likely  that  regulators  intended  this  effect,  so  this  is  a  classic  example  of  the 
unintended cross-border impact of regulation. I also argue that the timing of this regulatory 
change  was  not  quite  right:  deregulation  took  place  exactly  when  European  financial 
institutions,  as  well  as  their  U.S.  counterparts,  had  begun  to  search  for  yield  and  to  take 
risks, which turned out to be excessive. 
In  Section  3,  I  examine  what  we  should  learn  from  the  Eurozone  Crisis,  and  examine  the 
current issues of regulatory reform from this perspective. I argue that we should not indulge 
ourselves in the wishful thinking of a quick return to “normality”. In advanced countries, we 
are  likely  to  face  severe  and  prolonged  balance  sheet  adjustment  under  the  unfavorable 
conditions  of  population  ageing.  Bearing  this  in  mind,  I  also  argue  that  what  is  needed  is 
appropriate sequencing of regulatory reform when banks are deleveraging, not leveraging. 
Finally, I will touch upon the cross-border issue raised by the Volcker Rule in the Dodd-Frank 
Act, which is another example of the unintended cross-border impact of financial regulation. 
There, appropriate implementation is the key to avoiding unintended side-effects that may be 
quite hazardous to some countries. 
2. 
The Eurozone crisis and US regulatory change: unintended pull of 
“excessive” European risk taking 
Genesis of the Eurozone crisis 
2.1. 
The euro currency is a “grand experiment”: centralizing monetary policy to one central bank, 
yet leaving fiscal sovereignty to individual member countries, of which there were originally 
11,  now  expanded  to  17.  This  experiment  is  itself  a  “process”:  the  euro  was  adopted  not 
because the prerequisites of the optimal currency area had been met, but under the premise 
that  continuing  efforts,  for  example,  increasing  labor  market  mobility  and  flexibility,  would 
eventually lead to the true “conversion” of economic conditions while maintaining the identity 
of  member  countries.  Unfortunately  however,  various  imbalances,  especially  in  trade  and 
finance,  have  been  accumulated  on  the  way.  These  imbalances  have  led  to  the  current 
sovereign debt crisis, since the appropriate adjustment mechanism has been lacking, given 
that exchange rate adjustment is ruled out by definition.  
Nobody  denies  that  the  current  Eurozone  financial  problems  have  been  caused  by  the 
region’s sovereign debt crisis. And the sovereign debt crisis is the direct result of worsening 
public  finances  caused  by  massive  fiscal  stimulus  programs  to  support  the  economy  and 
capital injections to failing financial institutions after the Lehman Crisis of 2008. However, the 
current  Eurozone  crisis  is  at  least  partly  due  to  excessive  risk  taking  by  many  European 
financial institutions before the Lehman Crisis, especially in the U.S. financial markets, and in 
particular in those of structured products. 
Several years before the Lehman Crisis, notably after 2004, European financial institutions 
accelerated their search for yield and expanded their balance sheets. Chart 1 shows the total 
assets  of  the  financial  institutions  of  Germany,  France,  Italy  and  Spain,  relative  to  their 
position in 2004. A notable acceleration of expanding balance sheets is found in European 
financial institutions, except for German ones.  
Here the grand experiment of the euro played a pivotal role. Based on the European Union’s 
financial services directives, a single market was being formed in terms of financial markets 
and  financial  business  in  general.  Competition  intensified  among  financial  institutions,  and 
this squeezed their profits. A remarkable convergence of sovereign interest rates highlighted 
declining  risk  premiums  in  financial  markets  (Chart  2),  though  in  retrospect  this  proved 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
unsustainable.  Moreover,  there  were  challenges  from  growing  capital  markets  in  Europe, 
where  indirect  financial  intermediation  had  traditionally  dominated.  Fund  business  also 
accelerated in Europe as the net assets of asset management funds expanded after 2004 
(Chart 3).  
European  financial  institutions  expanded  their  claims  not  only  to  borrowers  within  Europe, 
including  those  in  their  own  countries,  but  also  to  those  outside  the  region.  For  example, 
Spain increased its claims on Latin American countries and France expanded those on the 
United States. According to the BIS International Consolidated Banking Statistics compiled 
by the Bank for International Settlements, European financial institutions, which traditionally 
had a major presence in cross-border claims, continued to boost volume and market share, 
especially after 2004 (Chart 4). A look at the statistics by country for non-Eurozone assets 
shows that both Spain and France experienced remarkable increases after 2004 (Chart 5). 
Even Germany showed a noticeable increase. 
2004: inflection point of the cross-atlantic financial markets 
2.2. 
Looking  back  at  the  history  of  European  financial  institutions’  risk  taking  behavior,  the 
widespread acceleration around 2004 is remarkable. There seem to be no particular events 
or  regulatory  changes  in  the  Eurozone  that  can  fully  explain  this  acceleration.  So,  what 
happened in 2004?  
In  fact,  2004  is  the  inflection  point  of  the  U.S.  financial  markets  as  well.  The  size  of  U.S. 
investment  banks’  balance  sheets  ballooned  after  2004  (Chart  6).  Likewise,  the  balance 
sheets  of  special  purpose  vehicles  (SPVs),  which  are  off  the  balance  of,  but  virtually 
supported  by  their  “parent”  commercial  banks,  accelerated  sharply  to  a  degree  that 
exceeded  even  those  of  the  investment  banks.  SPVs  increased  their  assets,  including 
investment in securitized products, against a backdrop of favorable funding conditions, which 
I  explain  shortly.  The  massive  expansion  of  the  balance  sheets  of  SPVs  together with  the 
“activism” of investment banks contributed significantly to the astonishing growth in the size 
of this so-called shadow banking system.  
One  factor  that  explains  this  remarkable  increase  in  risk  taking  activity  is  the  seemingly 
benign  financial  conditions  of  the  “Great  Moderation”  at  that  time.  Massive  capital  inflows 
from emerging economies contributed to lowering interest rates in the United States during 
the  period.2  After  joining  the  WTO  in  2001,  China  expanded  its  current  account  surplus, 
playing an increasingly important role in financing the U.S. current account deficit. A large 
portion of securities investment from China went to U.S. Treasuries and agency debt markets 
(Chart  7),3  contributing  to  the  decline  not  only  in  interest  rates  but  also  in  their  volatility 
(Chart 8). The sustained volatility decline after 2004 was remarkable, and likely contributed 
to the perception of declining risk, thereby encouraging the risk taking that turned out to be 
excessive after all.  
However, this so-called “savings glut” argument cannot explain why risk taking accelerated 
exactly in 2004, since the savings glut emerged well before 2004. What happened exactly in 
2004?  This  question  leads  us  squarely  to  the  regulatory  changes  in  the  United  States  in 
2004.  
                                                 
2  According to the “global savings glut” argument, capital inflows from countries with a current account surplus, 
such as China, brought about a decline in U.S. interest rates and thereby played a role in forming housing 
bubbles. Although the U.S. Federal Reserve raised policy rates in 2004 against a background of clear signs of 
an economic recovery, long-term interest rates remained stable at low levels, which the then Federal Reserve 
Chairman, Alan Greenspan, described as a “conundrum”. 
3  At the time, agency debt was under implicit government guarantee. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
In  2004,  the  net  capital  rules  on  U.S.  investment  banks  were  relaxed  (the  so-called  Bear 
Sterns  exemption).4  Specifically,  investment  banks  with  capital  of  US$5  billion  and  above 
were allowed to increase their leverage by applying for an exemption from the standard net 
capital  rule.  The  relaxation  partly  reflected  rising  calls  from  the  industry,  which  had  faced 
severe  business  conditions  in  the  early  2000s  and  was  seeking  to  strengthen  profitability 
through  greater  leverage.  The  increasingly  sophisticated  risk  management  of  these 
institutions,  as  it  was  described  at  the  time,  was  also  cited  as  one  rationale  for  this 
deregulation.  
Moreover, in 2004, regulatory changes with respect to Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac reduced 
federal mortgage pools and thus opened a large profit opportunity for  private-label RMBS. 
Many  commercial  banks  jumped  at  this  opportunity  to  set  up  their  own  SPVs.  These  two 
regulatory changes, coupled with economic and financial conditions that turned much more 
favorable  after  2004,  induced  aggressive  risk  taking,  which  in  retrospect  turned  out  to  be 
grossly excessive, as shown in the previous charts (see again Chart 6). 
Triple vulnerability of European institutions 
2.3. 
With profits being squeezed at home, European financial institutions tried to take advantage 
of these newly-opened and seemingly profitable opportunities in the U.S. markets. European 
investment in the U.S. securities market expanded. A clear difference was observed between 
European and Chinese securities investment: Europeans invested in credit products, while 
Chinese invested in safer assets, U.S. Treasuries in particular (Chart 9). This extraordinary 
expansion  of  European  investment  in  risk  assets  is  often  argued  as  being  at  least  partly 
responsible for the formation of the U.S. credit bubble. This is clearly an unintended effect of 
the 2004 regulatory changes. 
This excessive risk taking of European financial institutions in the U.S. markets led to their 
“triple” vulnerability to economic shocks. 
The first vulnerability is a sizable exposure to legacy assets. A large portion of lower-quality 
assets such as those related to subprime loans were held by European financial institutions, 
and even today these institutions face the challenge of dealing with these legacy assets. 
The  second  vulnerability  is  their  heavy  reliance  on  wholesale  dollar  funding.  A  distinctive 
feature of European financial institutions has been their relatively high loan-to-deposit ratio, 
compared  with  their  Japanese  and  U.S.  counterparts.  Consequently,  in  expanding  their 
balance sheets, European financial institutions have become increasingly reliant on market-
funded liquidity. Looking at the funding structure of French financial institutions, for example, 
the ratio of funding other than deposits by residents has been rising noticeably since 2004 
(Chart  10).  This  caused  a  significant  problem  when  U.S.  institutional  investors  such  as 
money market funds became increasingly nervous about counterparty risk in the Eurozone.  
The  third  vulnerability  is  sovereign  risk.  The  Eurozone  has  many  sovereigns  within  one 
currency  area.  It  becomes  increasingly  difficult  to  treat  all  sovereigns  equally  in  their  risk 
weights  once  market  participants  recognize  individual  debts  as  being  different  in  their 
creditworthiness. It should be noted that, although the U.S. and other countries’ institutions 
share the first vulnerability, the second and third are unique to the Eurozone.  
                                                 
4  When their holding companies were placed under the umbrella of the Securities and Exchange Commission in 
2004, U.S. investment banks were exempted from the standard SEC net capital rule. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
3. 
3.1. 
Looking forward: what should we learn from this episode? 
This time may truly be different: severe balance sheet adjustment under 
unfavorable conditions 
Now, I would like to examine what we should learn from the current Eurozone Crisis in terms 
of  financial  regulation,  and  examine  the  current  issues  of  regulatory  reform  from  this 
perspective.  
Global regulatory reform since the Lehman Crisis of 2008 has clearly been focused on the 
“prevention” of another crisis. Several advanced economies are to introduce new regulatory 
frameworks  for  the  purpose  of  preventing  financial  institutions’  excessive  risk-taking.  A 
typical example is the Dodd-Frank Act in the United States.  
The tale of U.S. financial markets after 2004, which I have just described, shows how loose 
regulations went wrong and resulted in bitter consequences. In this regard I fully understand 
the rationale of such regulatory reforms. Having said that, I am afraid that the global debate 
on these reforms has sometimes been based on the “wishful thinking” of a quick return to 
normality,  that  is,  on  the  assumption  that  the  new  regulatory  frameworks  would  be 
implemented in the normal times that are supposed to prevail in the immediate  wake of a 
brief crisis.  
The Bank of Japan repeatedly cautioned against such wishful thinking, having experienced 
prolonged  problems  after  Japan’s  financial  crisis  in  the  1990s.  The  Bank  warned  that 
downward pressure stemming from financial crises is likely to be persistent, and any signs of 
recovery observed shortly after the crisis could be a “false dawn”. It also emphasized the risk 
of bank deleveraging and balance sheet adjustment, especially when the adverse impacts of 
the  crisis  remain.  Indeed,  what  we  had  to  tackle  after  the  crisis  was  not  leveraging  and 
excessive  risk-taking  by  the  banking  sector,  but  deleveraging  and  malfunctioning  of  credit 
intermediation. Moreover, we had to deal with these problems under severe constraints on 
macro-policies, with interest rates close to the zero-bound and fiscal balance deteriorating.  
Unfortunately, developments in the global economy after the Lehman Crisis seem almost to 
have confirmed our fears. Moreover, many advanced economies are now experiencing both 
the  downward  pressures  associated  with  financial  fragility  and  the  structural  adjustment 
pressures from population ageing.  
Suppose  the  contrary.  When  advanced  economies  were  not  under  severe  pressure  from 
population  ageing,  counter-cyclical  fiscal  policies  were  broadly  effective  because  market 
participants were able to believe that any deterioration in fiscal balance should be temporary 
and,  consequently,  a  large-scale  increase  in  sovereign  risk  premiums  was  avoided. 
However,  the  fundamental  fiscal  balance  of  many  advanced  economies  is  now  broadly 
expected to worsen as a result of population ageing and reduced growth potential. In such an 
environment, the policy effects of fiscal easing are likely to be substantially reduced by an 
increase in sovereign risk premiums.  
Thus,  I  would  say  “this  time  may  truly  be  different”,  mainly  because  many  advanced 
economies  have  to  tackle  widely  ranging  challenges,  including  population  ageing  and  the 
consequent decline in potential growth rate, more intense constraints on fiscal policy and the 
persistent balance sheet adjustment pressures stemming from the financial crisis. Indeed, in 
“peripheral”  Euro-zone  countries,  on  which  markets  are  now  focusing,  financial  crises  and 
population ageing have been taking place almost simultaneously (Chart 11). We should all 
be  aware  that,  as  a  consequence,  most  of  the  new  regulatory  frameworks  are  to  be 
introduced not in “a normal time after crisis” as expected, but in a stressed time.  
3.2. 
Implementation of regulatory reform: crisis prevention versus crisis response 
Finding ourselves in such a difficult economic and financial environment, we should bear in 
mind that the best “prevention” may not be the best “response” to a crisis. Although public 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
capital  injections  into  banks  or  blanket  guarantees  of  deposits  might  give  rise  to  moral 
hazard, these measures are sometimes necessary in order to contain immediate  spillover. 
Similarly, increasing capital buffers may contribute to maintaining a bank’s solvency over the 
medium  term,  but  increasing  banks’  capital  burden  in  a  stressful  time  might  create  an 
adverse  feedback  loop  of  intensified  capital  constraints,  weak  bank  lending  and  economic 
slowdown,  thus  accelerating  the  bank  deleveraging  that  could  lead  to  a  devastating  credit 
crunch.  
Although  we  are  intellectually  tempted  to  consider  what  policy  tools  are  available  to  help 
promote  financial  stability,  it  is  practically  more  important  to  consider  when  to  use  these 
tools.  Particularly,  inappropriate  sequencing  of  policy  measures  might  intensify  the  risk  of 
adverse  feedback  loops  in  stressed  times,  even  though  individual  measures  could  be 
effective 
to  avoid 
miscommunication  through  the  inappropriate  timing  of  policy  announcements,  especially 
when  we  introduce  crisis  prevention  measures  in  an  environment  where  emergency 
responses to the on-going crisis are still crucial.  
In view of the on-going Eurozone crisis, we have to monitor carefully how European banks 
react  to  the  new  regulatory  environment  in  which  tighter  capital  regulations  are  expected. 
Needless  to  say,  after  the  substantial  leveraging  of  European  banks  before  the  crisis  as  I 
explained,  orderly  and  gradual  deleveraging  should  be  viewed  as 
the  “intended” 
consequences  of  tighter  regulation.  Nonetheless,  in  order  to  evaluate  the  impact  of  the 
Eurozone  problem  on  the  global  economy,  it  is  necessary  to  assess  whether  and  to  what 
extent  European  banks  intensify  their  deleveraging  overseas,  given  the  various  pressures 
they  face  within  their  home  jurisdictions.  I  believe  such  assessment  is  what  “macro-
prudence” is required to do.  
times.  Moreover,  we  should  be  extremely  careful 
in  normal 
The Volcker Rule and unintended cross-border impacts 
3.3. 
We are now tackling the difficult issue of implementing new regulations for crisis prevention 
while economic and financial conditions are still fragile. As a typical and familiar example of 
such  difficulties,  I  would  like  to  raise  a  couple  of  points  concerning  the  Volcker  Rule 
stipulated in the Dodd-Frank Act.  
First of all, I should make it clear that I fully agree with the fundamental reasoning behind the 
Volcker  Rule.  Indeed,  speculative  activities  by  some  financial  institutions  under  the 
“originate-to-distribute”  type  business  model  were  the  main  driver  of  the  recent  crisis,  as 
explained before. Based on such appropriate recognition, the Dodd-Frank Act asks financial 
industries to make a thorough assessment of their business models, and to modify them if 
necessary. 
At  the  same  time,  in  view  of  the  on-going  Eurozone  crisis,  I  would  like  to  emphasize  that 
policymakers  should  be  extremely  careful  to  avoid  any  unintended  consequences  when 
introducing  new  rules,  especially  in  terms  of  possible  negative  impacts  on  overseas 
sovereign debt markets at this juncture. Moreover, central banks are required to be attentive 
to  the  liquidity  of  sovereign  debt  markets,  which  are  the  core  of  the  monetary  policy 
transmission mechanism.  
The Volcker Rule is intended to restrict proprietary trading by banking entities for the purpose 
of  short-term  gain.  However,  the  Rule  could  have  significant  implications  for  important 
market-making activities as well as for market liquidity, depending on how related regulations 
are written and how they are actually implemented. According to the proposed regulations, 
U.S. government bonds and most other U.S. agency obligations are exempt from the Rule. 
Obviously, the U.S. authorities are keen to ensure smooth transactions for these securities, 
and are well aware of the importance of market-making activities for that purpose. 
Market liquidity is no less important for the securities of non-U.S. governments. However, the 
proposed  regulations  do  not  exempt  government  obligations  of  other  countries,  including 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Japan,  Canada  and  European  countries.  Thus,  if  the  Volcker  Rule  were  to  be  strictly 
implemented as proposed, it could adversely affect the liquidity of overseas sovereign debt 
markets.  
Another issue is that short-term foreign exchange swaps could also be subject to the Volcker 
Rule  under  the  proposed  regulations.  This  means,  dollar  liquidity  that  has  been  provided 
through foreign exchange swaps could be curtailed, causing difficulties for the dollar funding 
of financial institutions. This could also be a concern for many financial institutions, especially 
when the global condition of foreign-currency funding is tightened.  
I understand that the proposed regulations take into consideration the possible implications 
for  market-making  and  other  important  activities  by  way  of  several  exemptions.  But  these 
exemptions  seem  to  be  applied  under  strict  and  complicated  conditions,  and  often  allow 
ambiguous interpretations. As a result, some market participants seem uncertain as to how 
the Volcker Rule would impact both sovereign debt markets as well as funding conditions.  
At  a  time  when  tension  is  heightening  in  European  sovereign  debt  markets,  a  prudent 
assessment  of  the  potential  impact  of  the  Dodd-Frank  Act  on  other  countries  is  crucial, 
especially in terms of the liquidity of sovereign debt markets and the short-term funding of 
financial institutions. Needless to say, we should not expect any law to be a perfect solution 
in  this  difficult  environment,  but  well-articulated  guidance  by  the  authorities  and  well-
balanced implementation of the law is of the utmost importance.  
Concluding remarks: prudent implementation of the prudential measures 
4. 
In this speech I have argued that regulatory changes often have unintended and sometimes 
considerable  cross-border  impacts  in  the  increasingly  integrated  world  of  finance,  as 
evidenced  by  the  leveraging  rule  and  other  regulatory  changes  of  2004  on  European 
financial institutions, and now possibly by the Volcker Rule on non-U.S. financial institutions. 
However,  what  is  at  stake  goes  beyond  these  cross-border  effects:  the  effectiveness  of 
regulatory changes is crucially dependent on underlying economic conditions when they are 
introduced. Financial regulations are in their very essence prudential measures. Even more 
importantly, we need prudent implementation of these prudential measures. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
  8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
  10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  11
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13
