Yaseen Anwar: Ethics, corporate governance and financial inclusion 
Speech  by  Mr  Yaseen  Anwar,  Governor  of  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan,  at  the  Chartered 
Financial Analyst (CFA) Convention and Excellence Awards ceremony, Karachi, 4 July 2012. 
 Messrs  Jawaid  Iqbal,  Ashraf  Bajwa,  Governing Board  of  the  CFA  Association  of  Pakistan, 
Ladies and gentlemen: 
It  is  indeed  an  honor  to  be  invited  at  this  annual  CFA  convention  –  a  gathering  of  the 
country’s  finest  analysts,  investment  and  risk  managers  and  the  banking  industry 
professionals. I also appreciate the efforts of CFA Association of Pakistan for arranging this 
convention  at  a  very  significant  time  in terms  of  both  domestic  and  international  economic 
perspectives. 
The  progress  CFA  Association  of  Pakistan  has  made  in  raising  the  educational  skills  and 
ethical standards for investment analysts is highly commendable. I am delighted to learn that 
the association’s Charter membership of the Pakistan chapter is continuously increasing and 
its members are playing a significant role towards advancing professionalism in our financial 
institutions. Taking benefit of this opportunity, I feel it is appropriate to discuss the importance 
of ethics in financial businesses, and the role of corporate governance in a highly dynamic 
financial world and the constantly and rapidly evolving regulatory regimes. I will also briefly 
touch  upon  recent  initiatives  taken  for  promoting  financial  inclusion  and  literacy  in  the 
country. 
A  key  issue  in  finance  and  investment  management  is  the  understanding  and  practice  of 
ethical  norms.  If  we  closely  analyze  the  recent  financial  turmoil,  we  will  certainly  find 
misconduct of ethical norms by a few leading market participants that ultimately translated 
into market panic and subsequently crashes. This implies that a few individuals benefited at 
the expense of the entire society. It is due to that huge cost to society that we have seen 
increased focus on ethics and in this regard, the CFA curriculum places due emphasis on the 
code of ethics and professional conduct for financial analysts and investment professionals. 
With  the  growing  number  of  chartered  financial  analysts,  the  markets  are  expected  to  be 
better-off from their high ethical standards and improved knowledge of the financial markets, 
instruments and associated risks. 
We all agree to the notion that businesses need to be governed by a set of rules that protect 
the  interests  of  all  stakeholders.  The  codes  of  best  practices  and  principles  were  in  force 
internationally by the regulators and supervisors of various economic segments including the 
financial  sector  even  before the  events  that  led to  the  recent financial  crises.  But  many of 
these  standards  were  not  adhered  to  effectively  because  they  were  either  too  general  or 
perhaps the regulators had limited autonomy to implement the codes in its true spirit. 
We all know what led to the 2007/2008 crisis. Those opaque derivative products led to an 
asset  bubble  and  the  sub-prime  mortgage  sector  was  simply  the catalyst  that  popped  that 
asset bubble. Essentially, it was a mispricing of those risk assets. 
The current events unfolding in the international economic environment are both challenging 
as well as unique. Though substantial progress was made to limit the effects of the financial 
crisis,  the  vulnerability  still  persists  in  the  shape  and  size  not  imagined  earlier.  Few  would 
have  thought  that  the  effects  of  the  sub-prime  crisis  will  question  the  survival  of  the  Euro 
Currency  and  would  threaten  the  entire  European  region  to  fall  into  a  severe  recession. 
Meanwhile, in our domestic economy though, we have largely been successful in mitigating 
the effects of exogenous shocks and contagion risks of the international crisis. But we still 
face challenges of our own, and ensuring conservative and prudent policies, should enable 
us to remain resilient from exogenous shocks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Among many other factors, the global financial crisis and domestic turbulence can also be 
attributed  to  failures  in  corporate  ethics  and  underlying  weaknesses  in  how  corporate 
governance is practiced. Internationally, the prevailing corporate governance practices failed 
to  safeguard  against  excessive  risks  taken  by  leading  financial  institutions.  The  market 
players  exhibited  herd  behavior  and  deviated  from  the  ethical  norms  by  engaging  in 
speculative  activities  for  self-gain.  Hence,  it  can  be  argued  that  for  efficient  and  well-
functioning markets, a responsible and ethical behavior of the participants is a pre-requisite 
apart  from  an  enabling  environment,  proper  infrastructure,  skills  and  knowledge.  Similarly, 
domestically it behooves us to upgrade our corporate governance practices at all institutions 
to strengthen our pace of economic recovery and make the environment more challenging 
and productive for corporates and private institutions. 
One key lesson policy makers and regulators learned from the recent sub-prime crisis is that 
among  many  other  factors,  weak  corporate  governance  practices  in  leading  financial 
institutions  played  a  crucial  role  in  creating  the  asset  price  bubble  and  misallocation  of 
financial  resources.  As  a  result,  policy  makers  in  the  post-crisis  period  are  placing  more 
emphasis on improving market transparency and Corporate Disclosure. 
Similarly,  regulators  have  also  placed  heavy  emphasis  on  imposing  stricter  regulatory 
regimes  and  hands-on  approach  towards  ensuring  sound  corporate  governance  practices. 
These measures have encouraged the Boards and management of financial institutions to 
improve  their  governance  practices  and  eliminate  knowledge  gaps.  The  regulators  also 
require the Boards to develop their capacity to assess the nature of risks keeping in view the 
size  and  complexity  of  the  institutions  on  an  ongoing  basis.  Similarly,  the  misaligned 
incentives  and  the  remuneration  of  Directors  and  Executives  of  banks  and  financial 
institutions also came under scrutiny in the post-crisis reforms. This led to growing efforts for 
rationalization of compensation practices in the financial sector, with a focus on medium to 
longer term goals to avoid undue risk-taking and promoting transparency and meeting proper 
disclosure requirements. 
Though  corporate  governance  is  important  for  every  institution  and  business,  I  consider  it 
more  critical  for  the  banks  as  they  are  the  custodians  of  household  and  business  sector 
deposits and their intermediary role is only possible when the society has full confidence in 
its banking system. And, this is where the role of the central bank and other regulators of the 
financial system comes in. 
The corporate governance revolves around three basic principles of fairness, transparency 
and accountability. SBP has been on the forefront in promoting sound corporate governance 
practices  and  fair  competition  in  the  banking  sector  by  introducing  various  reforms  and 
prudential  regulations.  The  SBP  has  implemented  a  comprehensive  corporate  governance 
regime for the banks, which is supported by a robust legal and regulatory framework, risk-
based  supervision  and  detailed  banking  sector reforms,  notably,  privatization,  liberalization 
and  consolidation  of  banks.  The  measures  taken  by  SBP  have  enabled  the  corporate 
governance  regime  for  banks  and  its  different  elements  are  not  only  compatible  with 
international best principles but are also parallel with most other emerging economies. 
Central  Banks  are  vital  in  instilling  confidence  in  the  economy.  They  are  key  towards  the 
promotion of trust and confidence in the financial sector. Interested groups on the other hand 
may  attempt  to  disrupt  the  regulatory  framework  and  in  turn  confidence  in  the  institution. 
Accordingly,  we  must  provide  constant  reassurance  to  the  public  of  the  confidence  in  the 
Central Bank. 
Cognizant  of  the  international  regulatory  developments,  the  SBP  regularly  reviews  the 
international regulatory standards and best practices issued by the Financial Stability Board 
(FSB), Bank for International Settlements (BIS) and other multilateral agencies and standard 
setting bodies and assesses them for their possible implementation in its banking system. 
The  SBP’s  regulatory  approach  towards  promoting  and  strengthening  of  corporate 
governance has been successful in inducing a positive change in the corporate governance 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
culture in the banking sector that has transformed them into healthy and profitable financial 
institutions. It also positively impacted the solvency profile of the banking system, that has 
enhanced  their  market  value  and  attracted  substantial  foreign  investment  in  the  banking 
sector during the 2004–2009 period. 
I  am  pleased  to  state  that,  the  World  Bank’s  country  review  of  Pakistan  based  on  OECD 
Principles on Corporate Governance (Report on Observance of Standards and Codes) rated 
Pakistan  above  average  on  most  of  the  Principles1.  Further,  in  a  survey,  the  World  Bank 
rated  Pakistan  as  the  leader  on  the  robustness  of  corporate  governance  standards  and 
practices in South Asia. 
Adoption  of  ethical  standards  in  dealing  with  bank  customers  is  an  important  attribute  of 
corporate ethics, which improves the standing of the financial institutions. Effective treatment 
of  banks’  customers,  ensuring  provision  of  services  to  prospective  customers  and  their 
proper  education  are  key  traits  necessary  for  providing  strength  to  the  institution.  While 
banks  are  continuously  trying  to  provide  best  services  to  their  customers,  SBP  has  been 
playing  its  part  in  improving  financial  literacy,  enhancing  depth  and  reach  of  financial 
services, and resolving issues faced by the bank customers. For the purpose, the SBP has 
not only embarked upon providing a conducive regulatory framework for financial inclusion 
encompassing promotion of microfinance banking and alternate delivery channels like mobile 
banking. 
The  SBP  has  recently  launched  a  Nationwide  Financial  Literacy  Program  (NFLP)  with  the 
collaboration  of  multilateral  agencies  including  Asian  Development  Bank  (ADB)  and  local 
private partners including Pakistan Banks Association (PBA), Pakistan Microfinance Network 
(PMN), Pakistan Poverty Alleviation Fund (PPAF) and Bearing Point. This first-ever financial 
literacy initiative is expected to impart financial knowledge covering basic concepts such as 
budgeting,  savings,  investments,  debt  management,  financial  products  and  branchless 
banking among the masses. 
Our branchless banking regulatory framework has been ranked number 1 by the Economist 
magazine. The fast growing network of BB agents has now reached over 26,000 as of March 
31st,  2012  and  total  volume  of  transactions  have  increased  to  25.3  million  (up  23%). 
Deposits  have  grown  by  18%  to  Rs  594  million.  This  fits  well  into  our  Financial  Inclusion 
strategy. In fact, Central Bank should have an expanded mandate to include those sectors of 
Financial Exclusion. This adds to overall growth of the economy and women should be an 
important  component  to  this  effort.  I  have  always  stated  that  how  can  we  as  an  economy 
grow when 50% of our population is in a non-productive capacity. 
On the issue of consumer protection, availability of an effective redressal system adds to the 
confidence of the financial system and ensures that customers are being served without any 
discrimination.  Consumer  protection  is  primarily  based  on  institutional  arrangements  that 
include  a  formal  set  of  disclosure  requirement  and  addressing  grievance  mechanisms. 
Besides,  customers  also  desire  proper  handling  and  maintenance  of  their  accounts,  and 
privacy  of  their  personal  financial  information.  For  cost  effective  and  quick  redressal,  SBP 
has  issued  necessary  guidelines  to  the  banks  regarding  complaint  handling  along  with 
institutionalization of the Banking Mohtasib Pakistan. 
The  State  Bank  has  also  taken  considerable  interest  in  enhancing  the  capacity  of  its  own 
human  resource  as  well  as  that  of  the  banking  sector  that  is  an  important  element  for 
ensuring  the  effective  implementation  of  the  regulatory  requirements.  SBP  through  its 
subsidiary,  NIBAF,  is  providing  world  class  training  and  arranging  specialized  courses  in 
banking,  economics  and  finance.  Further,  SBP  also  encourages  its  employees  to  gain 
international certifications like the CFA, to boost their professional capacity. 
I am confident that the steps taken by the SBP to promote financial literacy and inclusion and 
capacity  building  of  the  banking  sector  professionals  will  be  highly  useful  in  creating  a 
professional,  sound  and  vibrant  financial  culture.  Similarly,  the  regulations  to  promote 
corporate governance are also expected to promote corporate ethics in the banking sector. It 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
is now up to the young generation – like many of you to improve the skill-set and take keen 
interest  in  striving  for  excellence  and  maintaining  professionalism.  The  State  Bank  looks 
forward to working with you and the whole community towards achieving our shared goals of 
economic growth and social prosperity. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
