Dimitar Bogov: Challenges of countries from South-Eastern Europe in 
the current economic and financial turbulence in the euro area 
Opening  speech  by  Mr  Dimitar  Bogov,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  the  Republic  of 
Macedonia,  at  the  NBRM  conference  on  the  occasion  of  the  20th  anniversary  of  the 
monetary independence of the Republic of Macedonia, Skopje, 27 April 2012. 
 Dear  Deputy  Prime  Minister,  dear  ministers,  distinguished  Governors,  Your  Excellences, 
dear guests, colleagues and friends 
It is an honor to greet you and wish you welcome to this conference, which is a part of the 
activities for marking the 20th anniversary of the monetary independence of the Republic of 
Macedonia.  The  last  two  decades  of  monetary  independence,  the  Republic  of  Macedonia 
has  faced,  and  in  our  opinion,  successfully  addressed  many  challenges.  Our  twentieth 
anniversary  takes  place  in  exceptionally  turbulent  developments  of  global  economy, 
particularly marked by events triggered by the euro area debt crisis. This means that as the 
other central banks from the region, we face a new challenge. Taking into account the timing 
of the conference, its topic came quite spontaneously, and therefore we consider that it will 
raise  interesting  discussion  of  current  issues  of  the  central  banks  of  the  South-Eastern 
Europe and beyond. On this occasion, I will briefly present my opinion on how the region has 
dealt with the crisis and the lessons learnt, leaving more time for panel discussion and for the 
presentations of the prominent representatives of international institutions and central banks 
in the region. 
How has the region been dealing with the crisis so far? 
In the recent five years of global economic crisis, generally we distinguish two subperiods. 
The  first  wave  of  crisis broke  out  in  the  US  economy  in  the  second  half  of  2007 and  was 
primarily marked by the mortgage credit crisis and the collapse of large investment banks, 
destabilizing  the  international  financial  markets  and  deteriorating  the  expectations  of 
economic entities. The second wave of crisis hit Europe in mid-2010 and was recognized as 
euro area debt crisis, causing new financial market disturbances, lower confidence among 
market  participants,  higher  costs  for  financing  and  need  of  recapitalization  of  the  banking 
sector. Apparently, the second wave of crisis broke out in the vicinity of our region. Yet, that 
the countries from the region get over this period relatively unwounded. One of the potential 
explanations is the fact that unlike the period of first wave of crisis, the countries from the 
region faced the second wave of crisis with fewer imbalances in their economies, i.e. better 
prepared to adjust to the external environment. 
Facing the outbreak of crisis in the euro area was relatively painless. Yet, it does not mean 
that  the  risks  have  passed.  The  forecasts  for  2012  are  also  marked  by  uncertainty  and 
potential  adverse  effects  of  the  events  related  to  the  euro  area  crisis.  Given  the  generally 
unfavorable expectations for the European economy, the growth prospects of the countries in 
the region are also uncertain and accompanied by downward risks, considering the relatively 
close trade relations with the European Union. The lower external demand, along with the 
lower  capital  flows  to  the  region,  creates  a  need  of  proper  adjustment  of  the  domestic 
demand aimed to ensure sustainable external position. Therefore, some countries will need 
fiscal consolidation. The growing European debt crisis, the series of downward revisions of 
credit ratings of several international banks, the volatility of stock markets and the uncertainty 
clouding the future developments undermined the confidence of investors, in global terms, 
thus  making  the  issue  of  deficit  financing  more  pronounced  and  being  treated  more 
prudently. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Besides  the  macroeconomic  performances,  the  attention  has  been  and  will  be  focused  on 
the  financial  stability.  The  new  risk  to  the  financial  sector  triggered  by  the  European  debt 
crisis  is  either  direct  or  indirect  exposure  to  the  Greek  debt  and  the  subsequent  potential 
losses.  The  second  risk  is  attributable  to  the  reduced  availability  of  funding  from  foreign 
parent banks, when some of them face the need of recapitalization that refers to additional 
risks  to  the  intensity  of  credit  activity  in  the  countries  from  the  South-Eastern  Europe, 
particularly  those  where  borrowings  from  foreign  banks  played  a  significant  role  in  the 
establishment of credit potential. The third risk is induced rather by the effects of the global 
developments  on  the  gradual  deterioration  of  macroeconomic  performances  of  the 
economies  in  the  region,  and  resulted  in  impairment  of  the  credit  portfolio  quality  of  the 
banking  system,  which  has  undoubtedly  affected  or  will  affect  their  future  activities  and 
performances. 
Let me summarize the first point – the region has successfully dealt with the euro area crisis 
so  far,  but  the  risks  remain.  Many  issues  are  still  open  and  accordingly,  the  alertness  of 
policy makers has to remain high. 
What are the lessons learnt from the crisis? 
The financial crisis shifted many traditional views in the economy, including the role and the 
objectives  of  monetary  authority,  where  besides  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  and  the 
concern for the price stability, there is an obvious need for more active engagement of the 
central banks in the maintenance of financial stability in the economy.  The period of crisis 
worldwide is full of many successful examples, probably the most so far in the world history, 
of  application  of  wide  range  of  prudential  measures,  modifications  in  the  standard  set  of 
instruments and implementation of nonstandard measures of monetary policy. The need of 
comprehensive  risks  monitoring  in  the  economy  and  greater  flexibility  concerning  the 
intensity and the type of measures, taking into account the ultimate monetary objectives, is 
probably one of the major lessons from the crisis. 
The economic theory clearly refers to the fact that the financial system is a relevant factor for 
economic growth, and the new message, clearly sent by the recent crisis, as the president of 
the  Bundesbank,  Weidmann,  once  said  in  one  of  his  recent  addresses,1  is  that  there  is  a 
need of “well designed regulatory reform”. Otherwise, a financial system which is developed 
and widely globalized today could become an obstacle for the economic growth. Thus, even 
though  the  crisis  is  still  present  in  our  everyday  life,  the  financial  institutions  have  already 
been facing new banking standards, and the national regulators seek to incorporate them in 
the national regulation.  
The  debt  crisis  in  the  euro  area  resulted  in  establishment  of  new  fiscal  framework  of  the 
European Union and emphasized the need of fiscal consolidation. Fiscal imbalances are not 
sustainable on a long run, which is a postulate that also applies to the countries of the region, 
particularly  countries  where  fiscal  consolidation  is  crucial  for  maintaining  macroeconomic 
equilibrium.  
Besides  the  experiences  above,  during  the  crisis  we  also  gained  many  other  experiences 
related to the market sensitivity, the promptness of market response to the changes arising 
from  the  development  of  crisis,  and  the  slow  reversible  process  of  regain  of  confidence 
among market participants. Lessons and experiences learnt from the crisis should help us 
face future challenges more successfully. 
                                                 
1  Jens Weidmann, president of the Deutsche Bundesbank, Keynote speech at the Frankfurt Finance Summit, 
Frankfurt, March 2012. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Conclusion 
Please  allow  me  to  ascertain  that  this  crisis  broadened  our  perspectives,  imposed  new 
aspects  of  policy  making,  and  increased  our  interdependence  in  the  global  economy.  The 
South-Eastern  European  countries  which  have  been  facing  many  challenges  on  their 
pathway  to  the  European  Union  will  probably  face  new  future  challenges  arising  from  the 
current  conceptual  shifts  in  the  Union.  However,  the  countries  from  South-Eastern  Europe 
should continue seeking to create sound macroeconomic policies, inevitably accompanied by 
structural  reforms  that  need  to  ensure  higher  structural  quality  and  structural  flexibility  of 
economies, which is a sine qua non not only for prompter integration to the European Union, 
but also for sound and sustainable development in a long run. 
Distinguished guests, 
Today,  at  this  conference,  we  open  up  the  discussion  on  issues  that  have  been  and  will 
probably remain in the focus of interest of the central banks from the region for a long period 
of  time.  We  tackle  crucial  issues  which  will  absorb  the  attention,  energy  and  available 
resources  of  many  institutions  in  the  region  and  beyond,  in  the  period  ahead.  I  would  like 
invite  you,  through  presentations  and  discussions,  to  make  a  modest  contribution  to  the 
conceptualization  and  definition  of  the  main  approaches  to  face  and  deal  with  future 
challenges in the region. 
Thank you for your attention and have a successful conference! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
