Subir Gokarn: Launch of the OTC derivatives trade repository 
Inaugural address by Dr Subir Gokarn, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
CCIL, Mumbai, 9 July 2012. 
 We are gathered here to mark the launch of the OTC Derivatives Trade Repository. As you 
know,  in  the  aftermath  of  the  US  sub-prime  crisis,  improving  transparency  and  reducing 
counterparty  risk  in  OTC  derivatives  transactions  have  been  two  principal  themes  of 
discourse in the context of helping create a robust financial market architecture. This would 
not  only  reduce  the  possibility  of  recurrence  of such  a  crisis  in  future  but  also  contain  the 
fallout and facilitate timely action by regulators. Transparency of OTC derivatives markets is 
now viewed as an essential pre-condition for all other measures to be effective. Regulators 
need  comprehensive  and  timely  information  in  order  to  effectively  regulate,  prevent  risk 
build-up and ensure pre-emptive corrective action. Similarly, market participants also need to 
have sufficient knowledge about overall activities and positions in the market to enable them 
to better assess the potential riskiness of their operations. They can then take appropriate 
risk management measures contributing to the overall safety of the financial system. 
The 2009 commitment of G-20 at Pittsburgh is based on this premise and accordingly states, 
“All  standardized  OTC  derivative  contracts  should  be  traded  on  exchanges  or 
electronic  trading  platforms,  where  appropriate,  and  cleared  through  central 
counterparties  by  end-2012  at  the  latest.  OTC  derivative  contracts  should  be 
reported to trade repositories.” 
Though Indian financial markets are relatively sparse in terms of the number and complexity 
of  products  as  well  as  varieties  of  participants,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  always  been 
concerned with improving the transparency of the OTC derivatives market. The Bank had put 
in place summary reporting in various forms according to the regulatory need in case of all 
OTC derivatives, particularly forex derivatives, much before the onset of the crisis. The Bank 
had  even  required  mandated  transaction  level  reporting  much  before  the  importance  of 
transparency for financial safety was widely accepted. It may be recalled that in July 2007, 
RBI had, through a regulatory mandate, tasked CCIL to collect and collate transaction level 
data for IRS. The reporting framework for Credit Default Swaps (CDS) was put in place from 
the  date  of  introduction  of  the  instrument  itself.  The  current  initiative  is  another  significant 
step in that direction. Its objective is to create a comprehensive repository framework for all 
OTC foreign exchange and interest rate derivatives  with phase-wise implementation of the 
various reporting modules. 
The  reporting  platform  being  launched  today  caters  to  OTC  inter-bank  USD-INR  forwards, 
FX  swaps  and  FCY-INR  options.  The  platform  will  be  upgraded  in  subsequent  phases  to 
capture  other 
foreign  exchange  derivatives  namely  FCY-INR  and 
FCY-FCY forwards  and  FX  swaps;  FCY-FCY  options;  FCY-INR  and  FCY-FCY  currency 
swaps;  FCY Interest  Rate  Swap 
(FRA)  and 
Caps/Floors/Collars; and all/selective client trades in the above foreign exchange derivatives 
and Rupee IRS. Over the period, it will be integrated with the reporting platform for the Credit 
Default Swap (CDS). 
In its final shape, this repository structure will not only become a warehouse of information on 
OTC  derivatives  markets  but  will  also  provide  post  trade  processing  services  for  the 
derivatives  contracts,  thus  enhancing  the  market  efficiency.  CCIL  has  been  advised  to 
develop various post-trade processing services in consultation with market participants. The 
repository structure will also be used for dissemination of price and volume data to market 
participants as well as to the general public. 
(IRS),  Forward  Rate  Agreement 
inter-bank 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Globally,  the  concept  of  Trade  Repository  is  evolving. One  of  the  issues  being  debated  is 
data  portability  and  aggregability  among  the  trade  repositories  spanning  countries  and 
jurisdictions. The OTC derivatives market in India mainly comprises domestic counterparties 
and  hence,  extra-jurisdictional  issues  do  not  have  much  significance  at  this  point  in  time. 
However,  we  are  alive  to  the  needs  of  uniformity  of  standards  across  the  globe  and  our 
repository  framework  should  have  sufficient  flexibility  to  conform  to  international  standards 
and best practices as they evolve depending upon their relevance in the Indian context. This 
is a task for CCIL. 
It  is  well  recognised  that  there  are  significant  economies  of  scope  between  central 
counterparty  functions  and  repository  functions.  Yet,  the  two  have  some  fundamental 
differences inasmuch as one involves taking risky positions while the other is a pure service 
function  without  any  exposure.  The  RBI  working  group  on  the  subject  has  accordingly 
recommended a subsidiary model for the repository function of CCIL, to preserve an arm’s 
length  between  CCP  function  and  repository  function  of  CCIL.  This  is  in  line  with  best 
corporate  governance  practices.  I  am  sure  this  aspect  will  be  dealt  with  by  CCIL  as  the 
reporting system consolidates. 
To conclude, I am pleased to observe that we are among the first few jurisdictions to have 
fulfilled the G-20 commitment regarding reporting of OTC derivatives. I appreciate the hard 
work that has gone into it by the teams from CCIL and Financial Markets Department of RBI 
as  well  as  the  FIMMDA,  FEDAI,  PDAI  and  market  participants.  Thank  you  all  for  having 
achieved  another  milestone  in  making  the  Indian  financial  system,  transparent,  safe  and 
robust. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
