Øystein Olsen: The conduct of monetary policy 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Øystein  Olsen,  Governor  of  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of 
Norway), at the hearing before the Standing Committee on Finance and Economic Affairs of 
the Storting (Norwegian parliament), Oslo, 29 May 2012. 
 Please note that the text below may differ from the actual presentation. The statement is based on Norges Bank’s 
Annual Report for 2011, Monetary Policy Report 1/12 and the Executive Board’s assessments in the period to the 
monetary policy meeting on 10 May. 
I  would  like  to  thank the  Chairman  of  the  Committee  and  thank  you for this  opportunity  to 
report on the conduct of monetary policy in connection with the Storting’s deliberations on the 
Government’s  Financial  Market  Report.  My  statement  here  today  is  based  on  the  Bank’s 
Annual  Report,  but  also  on  the  Executive  Board’s  assessments for  the  period  to  the  most 
recent monetary policy meeting and new information. 
Norges Bank’s conduct of monetary policy is oriented towards low and stable inflation. The 
operational target of monetary policy is consumer price inflation of close to 2.5 per cent over 
time. At the same time, monetary policy shall contribute to stabilising developments in output 
and employment. 
 When I was here last year, the key policy rate had just been raised to 2.25 per cent. Inflation 
was low at around 1¼ per cent, but there were prospects that growth in advanced economies 
was recovering and that both capacity utilisation and inflation in Norway would pick up. The 
key  policy  rate  was  kept  unchanged  at  the  June  meeting,  but  the  interest  rate  forecast 
implied a likely interest rate increase after summer. Norges Bank did, however, underline the 
risk  of  a  possible  appreciation  of  the  krone  and  inflation  that  might  become  too  low  as  a 
result of economic divergences between Norway and other countries. 
In the course of summer and autumn, international growth prospects worsened considerably. 
Financial  market  tensions  heightened,  and market  participants’ key  rate expectations  were 
lowered  appreciably.  Yields  on  government  bonds  in  countries  with  weak  public  finances 
jumped, while equity prices declined. Money market premiums moved up and banks’ funding 
costs rose. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The turbulence and weaker growth prospects abroad fed through to the Norwegian economy. 
At  the  monetary  policy  meetings  in  August,  September  and  October,  the  Executive  Board 
decided to leave the key policy rate unchanged at 2.25 percent. 
Around  the  turn  of  the  year,  financial  turbulence  intensified  and  the  risk  of  a  downturn 
increased, particularly in Europe. The debt crisis in the euro area made it more difficult and 
expensive  for  European  banks  to  procure  market  funding.  Norwegian  banks  were  also 
affected. With a view to countering the higher premiums in the money market and curbing the 
effects of weaker developments abroad on the Norwegian economy, the key policy rate was 
reduced to1.75 percent in December. 
The situation in international financial markets improved in the course of winter. The krone 
appreciated.  On  the  other  hand,  growth  in  advanced  economies  was  weak  and  euro  area 
GDP fell towards the end of the year. Central banks abroad announced that the key rates 
would be kept at a low level for a prolonged period. At the monetary policy meeting in March, 
Norges  Bank  underlined  that  weak  growth  prospects  abroad  and  the  strong  krone  were 
keeping  inflation  at  a  low  level  and  curbing  activity  in  some  sectors.  The  key  rate  was 
reduced to 1.5 percent at that meeting. 
 Europe is now in a downturn. Many countries are struggling with large deficits and mounting 
government  debt.  Structural  reforms  are  being  implemented,  pension  schemes  are  being 
tightened and tax systems are under review. At the same time, tighter credit standards and 
increased capital requirements will limit the supply of bank credit. In addition, a number of 
countries must restore competitiveness after a period of high cost growth prior to the financial 
crisis.  In  the  short  run,  the  tightening  measures  pull  down  activity  and  push  up 
unemployment. 
Central banks in other countries are using strong measures to prop up activity and inflation. 
As shown in the chart, key rates among many of our trading partners are close to zero and 
are expected to remain low for a long period. In the US, UK and Japan the central banks 
have made large-scale government bond purchases in order to push down long-term interest 
rates. The European Central Bank (ECB) has also stretched itself, for example by providing 
long-term loans to banks. The ECB operations during winter contributed to boosting liquidity 
and  reducing  risk  premiums  in  the  European  banking  system  and  in  the  sovereign  debt 
market. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Financial  market  turbulence  has  flared  up  again  recently,  with  particular  focus  on  the 
macroeconomic situation and budget developments in Spain and other countries in southern 
Europe. The political unrest in Greece and growing fears of a Greek government debt default 
have  curbed  risk  appetite  in  the  markets.  Yields  on  Italian  and  Spanish  government  bond 
have increased, while US, UK and German government bond yields have fallen to historically 
low levels. International equity indices have declined, particularly in Europe. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
 Despite  a  prolonged  downturn  abroad  and  financial  market  turbulence,  activity  in  the 
Norwegian  economy  is  remains  robust.  Capacity  utilisation  has  been  close  to  normal  over 
the  past  year.  GDP  for  mainland  Norway  expanded  by  2.4  per  cent  in  2011  according  to 
preliminary  figures.  Prices  for  Norwegian  export  goods  are  favourable  relative  to  import 
prices. The oil and construction industries are booming and both employment and the supply 
of labour are on the rise. Unemployment is low and fairly stable. At the same time, house 
prices are moving up and household debt is still rising faster than household income. On the 
other  hand,  some  segments  of  the  export  industry  are  feeling  the  adverse  effects  of 
developments in Europe and a strong krone. 
Key policy rate is low because inflation is low and because the downturn abroad and a strong 
krone  are  dragging  down  on  growth  in  some  sectors  in  Norway.  Very  low  interest  rates 
abroad  and  high  premiums  in  money  and  credit  markets  reinforce  this  picture.  There  are 
unusually wide differences between various interest rates, reflecting the high level of money 
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
market and credit premiums. Many households are paying up to 4 percent on housing loans 
and interest rates on corporate loans range between 5 and 6 percent. 
When setting interest rates, the Bank does not give  weight exclusively to bringing inflation 
back  to  target.  Weight  is  also  given  to  the  effects  of  the  interest  rate  on  output  and 
employment.  At  the  same  time,  weight  is  given  to  the  risk  that  a  prolonged  period  of  low 
interest  rates  can  lead  to  elevated  risk-taking  and  excessive  debt  accumulation  in  the 
household and business sector. Such imbalances may have spillover effects further ahead, 
with substantial effects on output and employment. 
 In the March 2012 Monetary Policy Report, Norges Bank clarified how these considerations 
are  expressed  in  the  Bank’s  response  pattern.  In  that  connection,  the  Bank  adjusted  the 
criteria to which it gives weight in interest rate forecasting. The key policy rate is set so that 
inflation  is  brought  back  to  target.  At  the  same  time,  inflation  targeting  is  flexible,  which 
means  that  the  path  for  inflation  should  be  weighed  against  developments  in  output  and 
employments. Interest rate setting should also be robust. This means that the interest rate 
should be set so that monetary policy mitigates the risk of a buildup of financial imbalances. 
 Normally, the key policy rate cannot achieve several objectives simultaneously. In the case 
of  conflicting  objectives,  the  choice  of  interest  rate  path  will  involve  a  trade-off  between 
different considerations. 
If monetary policy only took into account the low level of inflation, the key policy rate would 
be rapidly reduced and kept close to zero for a good while. Inflation might then pick up faster, 
partly as a result of a weaker krone. In the light of the trade-off against other considerations, 
however, the Bank does not want to accelerate the pace of inflation. The result would be a 
pronounced  impact  on  output  and  employment  and  increased risk  of  a  buildup  of financial 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
imbalances.  A  prolonged  period  of  low  interest  rates  may  increase  the  risk  that  debt  and 
asset prices will be driven up to levels that are unsustainable over time. When weight is also 
given to the two other criteria, the interest rate path therefore becomes higher even though 
the level of the key policy rate is low from a historical perspective. 
 The Norwegian economy is well poised to face new shocks and challenges. While many of 
our  trading  partners  are  struggling  with  low  growth,  high  unemployment  and  mounting 
government debt, the Norwegian economy still features buoyant activity, low unemployment 
and government budget surpluses. 
The  petroleum  industry  and  oil  revenues  have  given  us  a  solid  economic  foundation 
compared with other countries. At the same time, the oil revenues and  the high cost level 
pose certain challenges to the Norwegian economy. With today’s high oil prices, petroleum 
investment is likely to expand sharply in the years ahead. Petroleum-related industries are 
faring well. Public sector enterprises are also enjoying a favourable and stable environment. 
Internationally exposed industries are facing sluggish markets and high costs. Norway’s dual 
economy is coming into clearer evidence. 
Petroleum  activity  influences  the  Norwegian  economy  partly  through  actual  production 
activity and partly through government spending of petroleum revenues. In 2011, petroleum 
revenue  spending  over  the  central  government  budget  was  below  5  percent  of  mainland 
GDP, while demand from the petroleum sector was about 17 percent. 
6 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
High oil prices and investment growth are fuelling demand for labour in the oil sector and the 
supplier  industry.  In  an  economy  with  close  to  full  employment,  this  leads  to  intensified 
competition  for  skilled  labour.  The  result  is  reduced  profitability  in  other  internationally 
exposed industries. 
The  phasing  in  of  a  new,  profitable  industry  and  increased  spending  over  public  budgets 
have the effect of crowding out other activity. Some decline in other industries is an inevitable 
consequence of domestic spending of oil revenues. For the economy to be sustainable over 
a  longer  horizon,  it  is  important  to  find  an  appropriate  balance  and  prevent  excessive 
crowding  out  of  exposed  sectors.  Monetary  policy  has  little  to  contribute  in  this  regard, 
whereas fiscal policy and other economic policy instruments are decisive. 
Rapid wage growth over many years has led to a high domestic cost level. Measured in a 
common  currency,  the  cost  level  in  Norway  relative  to  our  trading  partners  is  20  percent 
higher  than  the  historic  average  for  Norway’s  oil  age.  As  a  result  of  the  high  cost  level, 
internationally  exposed  industries  are  vulnerable  to  weaker  international  growth,  a  fall  in 
export prices and a stronger krone. 
The real value of the krone has increased in recent years, reflecting solid domestic economic 
growth,  high  oil  prices  and  relatively  weak  growth  among  our  trading  partners.  As  long  as 
there are no available resources in the Norwegian economy, increased petroleum revenue 
spending  over  the  central  government  budget  will  push  up  the  real  value  of  the  krone  or 
undermine competitiveness. 
This  is  likely  to  continue  as  long  as  we  plough  more  oil  money  into  the  economy.  The 
petroleum fund mechanism and moderate and predictable petroleum revenue spending over 
the  central  government  budget  will  nevertheless  make  a  considerable  contribution  to 
stabilising  economic  developments  ahead.  By  limiting  petroleum  revenue  spending  to  the 
real  return  on  the  Fund,  we  can  also  ensure  that  future  generations  share  the  benefits 
provided by our petroleum wealth. 
House prices are at a historically high level. The rapid growth in household income has been 
a key factor behind the rise in house prices for some time. In recent years, this tendency has 
been amplified by high immigration and hence strong population growth. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
 In spite of vigorous building activity, the number of completed dwellings is still low in relation 
to population growth. This housing gap has developed over several years and is pushing up 
house prices. A tight labour market and low interest rates are pushing in the same direction. 
The rise in house prices and the rate of debt accumulation are closely linked. Since the mid-
1990s  household  debt  in  Norway  has  risen  appreciably  faster  than  income.  On  average, 
household debt is now twice as high as disposable income. 
A rising share of households are facing a debt burden that makes them vulnerable when the 
interest rate again moves up to a normal level or if economic developments in Norway should 
take a turn for the worse. In such a situation, many households might find it challenging to 
service  their  debt  and  may  reduce  household  spending.  A  pronounced  fall  in  household 
demand  will  have  a  negative  impact  on  corporate  earnings  and  enterprises’  capacity  to 
service loans from Norwegian banks. 
The key policy rate influences a number of variables, including the krone exchange rate, debt 
and house prices. In its interest rate setting, the Bank seeks to take into account all the key 
relationships in the economy, those that influence the real economy and inflation. But there is 
a  limit  to  the  tasks  that  can  be  given  to  monetary  policy.  Monetary  policy  cannot  alone 
prevent  financial  imbalances  or  secure  the  competitiveness  of  the  Norwegian  business 
sector. 
The  objective  of  monetary  policy  is  low  and  stable  inflation  and  the  Bank  only  has  one 
instrument – the interest rate. Inflation expectations are now firmly anchored, which means 
that  Norges  Bank  can  give  weight  to  stabilising  economic  developments  in  interest  rate 
setting.  But  monetary  policy  cannot  be  overburdened.  When  assessing  the  various 
considerations, monetary policy must pursue its primary objective – low and stable inflation. 
Other economic objectives must be pursued using policy tools such as financial regulation, 
the tax system and fiscal policy. 
Thank you for your attention. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
