H R Khan: Enabling affordable housing for all – issues and challenges 
Inaugural address by Shri H R Khan, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
International Conference on “Growth with stability in affordable housing markets”, organized 
by the National Housing Bank and the Asia Pacific Union for Housing Finance, New Delhi, 
30 January 2012. 
 The  speaker  acknowledges  the  contribution  of  Shri  M  P  Baliga,  Shri  S  C  Dhal  and  Shri  Surajit  Bose  of  the 
Reserve Bank of India and the valuable comments of Shri R V Verma, Chairman, National Housing Bank.  
It is a pleasure to address such a distinguished gathering of delegates at the international 
conference and the well-known experts from the sector who have assembled here. It is my 
pleasure to be here not only as a representative of the Reserve Bank of India but also as a 
member  of  the  Board  of  the  National  Housing  Bank  (NHB).  Over  the  years,  the  Reserve 
Bank  and  the  NHB  have  committed  to  the  cause  of  improving  the  condition  of  the  Indian 
housing  sector  considering  that  housing  constitutes  one  of  the  four  basic  requirements  for 
human  survival  roti  (food),  kapada  (clothing),  makan  (housing)  and  izzat  (dignity).  Our 
experience  shows  that  housing  tends  to  serve  as  a  catalyst  for  a  change  in  socio-cultural 
milieu and also aids in economic development. More importantly, housing lays the foundation 
for  a  life  of  dignity.  By  investing  in  homes,  people,  in  particular,  the  low-income  groups, 
accumulate equity that can then be used as collateral, making them more credit-worthy for 
accessing  finance  through  formal  channels  and  also  for  generating  income.  Against  this 
background,  addressing  housing  shortage  and  improving  affordability  remains  an  integral 
part of our national policy towards poverty alleviation.  
Dilemmas for the policy makers 
The  recent  housing  bubble  in  the  US  which  in  many  ways  contributed  to  global  financial 
market crisis is still fresh in the minds of all the stakeholders in the financial markets. The 
housing  crisis  in  the  US  has  yet  again  proved  that  the  mission  of  social  objectives,  if  not 
driven with regulatory caution, can lead to financial instability. Such events not only cause 
severe structural damages to the financial system but also lead to further intensification of 
the  problem  that  the  mission  originally  was  seeking  to  overcome.  Therefore,  dilemma  for 
policy  makers  is  to  choose  either  a  policy  which  aims  at  affordable  houses  for  all  without 
compromising  the  stability  of  the  financial  sector  or  a  policy  which  enables  all  to  afford 
houses with focus on inclusive growth for the people at large.  
The  mandate  of  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  whether  stated  explicitly  or  otherwise,  is  for 
promotion of inclusive growth without undermining financial stability. The dilemma is all the 
more significant in the context of housing sector initiatives as they involve framing policies on 
affordability of housing and also harnessing and promoting markets so as to serve the entire 
spectrum  of  customers,  irrespective  of  their  levels  of  income  and  the  phase  of  business 
cycle.  
The extent of problem 
Housing  shortage  has  always  been  a  major  problem  over  the  years  in  our  country  since 
independence.  Such  shortage  estimated  as  excess  households  over  houses  including 
houseless  households,  congestion  (number  of  married  couples  requiring  separate  house), 
and 
replacement/  up-gradation  of  kutcha/  unserviceable  kutcha  houses  and  
obsolescence/ replacement of old houses, etc. had grown over the decades. 
The  Working  Group  on  Rural  Housing  for  the  Eleventh  Five  Year  Plan  (2007–12),  has 
estimated the total housing shortage in rural areas at 47.43 million units at the end of 2012. 
BIS central bankers’  speeches 
 1
As  per  Government  estimates,  the  total  housing  shortage  in  the  urban  areas,  at  the 
beginning  of  the  11th  Plan  period  was  around  24.71  million  units  and  is  likely  to  go  up  to 
26.53 million units by 2012. The urban situation is equally appalling with 99 per cent of the 
housing  shortage  pertaining  to  the  Economically  Weaker  Section  (EWS)  and  Low  Income 
Group  (LIG)  categories.  It  is  also  of  major  concern  that  90  per  cent  of  the  rural  housing 
shortage (approximately, 42.69 million units) are in respect of Below the Poverty Line (BPL) 
categories. 
According  to  a  report  of  ICRA1,  housing  loans as  a  percentage  of  GDP  have  remained  at 
around  7  per  cent,  significantly  lower  than  the  levels  achieved  in  most  of  the  developed 
countries. It indicates the extent of opportunity for deeper penetration of such market. With 
improving  demographics  and  economies  of  scale,  the  mortgage  to  GDP  ratio  is  likely  to 
increase. The stakeholders, however, need to reckon with problems and impediments in the 
process which may arise from changes in the economic cycle, uncertainties surrounding land 
acquisition policies, changes in the policy framework and systemic risk that could arise out of 
rapid credit expansion with lax due diligence standards.  
Concept of affordability 
“Affordability”  as  a  concept  is  very  generic  and  could  have  different  meanings  for different 
people  based  on  differences  in  income  levels.  Different  countries  have  defined  affordable 
housing  to  present  the  economic  potential  of  an  individual  buying  a  house.  In  developed 
countries like the US and Canada, a commonly accepted guideline for affordable housing is 
that the cost of housing should not exceed 30 per cent of the gross income of the household. 
Affordable  housing  and  low-cost  housing  are  often  interchangeably  used  but  are  quite 
different from each other. Low-cost housing is generally meant for the Economically Weaker 
Sections (EWS) categories and comprises bare minimum housing facilities while affordable 
housing is mostly meant for the Low Income Groups (LIG) and the Middle Income Groups 
(MIG). 
Defining affordable housing in India is a difficult task given that for every square kilometer of 
the  country  the  dynamics  of  the  market  are  different.  Keeping  in  mind  that  the  housing 
shortages affect mostly the EWS and LIG, and the younger group of urban-urban migrants 
changing  cities  in  search  of  better  prospects,  affordable  houses,  for  the  purpose  of  such 
schemes, are taken as houses ranging from about 300 square feet (super built up area) for 
EWS,  500  square  feet  for  LIG  and  600  to  1200  square  feet  for  MIG,  at  costs  that  permit 
repayment of home loans in monthly installments not exceeding 30 per cent to 40 per cent of 
the monthly income of the buyer. 
A major issue involving the affordable low cost housing is the quality of housing. As per the 
2001 census data, only 51.62 per cent of Indian households stay in pucca (concrete) houses. 
As  on  end-June  2009,  55  per  cent  of  the  rural  households  and  92  per  cent  of  the  urban 
households lived in pucca structures (Table I).  
                                                 
1 
ICRA  Report  –  Industry  Outlook  and  Performance  Review  of  Housing  Finance  Companies  and  the  Indian 
Mortgage Finance Market for 2010–11. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’  speeches
Distribution of households with respect to Kutcha (non-concrete)  
& Pucca (concrete) categories 
Table I  
 The Challenges in India – reasons for low affordability 
Although  India  has  been  registering  a  fast  paced  growth  during  the  first  decade  of  the 
21st century there is still a significant population below the poverty line (BPL), irrespective of 
the parameters defining the line. This requires economic and social support to get above the 
poverty  line.  The  levels  of  unemployment  also  remain  significantly  high,  thereby  rendering 
housing unaffordable to many. It is also important to reckon the fact that even today there is 
a  large  population  which  remains  financially  excluded  from  the  formal  banking/financial 
systems and, in the process, is deprived of access to housing finance. 
Rural housing 
The vulnerabilities to the rural housing sector are often thought to be limited to the delivery 
system for housing materials, services and finance. The sector, however, is deeply affected 
by infrastructure deficit – roads, electricity supply, drinking water and sanitation. The housing 
finance which played a key role in the urban  housing revolution, if I may say so, is rather 
conspicuous by its absence in the rural setting. To aggravate the situation further, there is a 
real paucity of common or non-agricultural land for meeting the housing needs of the poor; 
whatever  little  is  available  is  pre  empted  by  the  demands  from  other  sectors.  The  lack  of 
vibrancy in the market for village properties and the marked volatility in agricultural incomes 
combine to dampen the prospects of this nebulous sector. 
Challenges from urban migration 
The other challenge emanates from the economic condition of our rural areas which leads to 
migration  of  population.  The  number  of  people  in  urban  cities  and  towns  has  gone  up 
substantially  primarily  as  a  by-product  of  demographic  explosion  and  poverty  induced 
rural-urban  migration.  This  situation  has  resulted  in  tremendous  pressure  on  urban 
infrastructure  and  consequent  increase  in  the  number  of  homeless  people  living  on  the 
streets. As per the 2001 census, the total urban homeless population was 0.78 million, which 
would  be  much  more  currently  given  the  inadequate  availability  of  affordable/low  cost 
housing. As per the 2001 census, the country’s urban land mass (2.4 per cent of total land 
mass) housed approximately 28 per cent of the population, excluding people who live on the 
streets (Chart I). 
BIS central bankers’  speeches 
 3
 If we look deeper into the extent of availability of basic amenities, the position is all the more 
disturbing. As per the Report of Housing Condition & Amenities in India (2009), 65 per cent 
of  rural  and  11  per  cent  of  urban  households  do  not  have  adequate  sanitation  facilities. 
34 per cent of the rural and 4 per cent of the urban households did not have the facility of 
electricity. Only 18 per cent of the rural households had all the three facilities (drinking water 
within premises, sanitation & electricity) whereas in urban areas, all the three facilities were 
available to 68 per cent households. 
Constraints to housing sector 
Any sector is likely to be influenced by both demand and supply constraints. On the demand 
side,  mainly  income  levels  of  the  people,  overall  cyclical  condition  of  the  economy  and 
affordability  of  housing  play  the  most  important  role  and  availability  of  land,  finance  at 
reasonable  price,  infrastructure,  legal  and  regulatory  framework  are  some  of  the  major 
constraints from the supply side.  
Constraints of land availability 
Amongst  the  four  constraints,  land  bears  particular  relevance  in  the  Indian  context.  The 
continuous  tussle  between  agriculture  and  industry  in  a  country  with  a  vast  segment 
employed in agriculture and with a policy attempting to boost the manufacturing sector has 
its undesired effects on sectors like housing. But the required policy support to the housing 
sector cannot be ignored since construction has direct linkages with the manufacturing sector 
and any boost in this sector is likely to boost the manufacturing sector as well. On the other 
hand, with growth in the rural sector, demand for low-cost and affordable housing is expected 
to  increase.  The  recent  bill  on  Land  Acquisition  and  Rehabilitation  &  Resettlement  has 
proposed to fix the compensation for rural and urban land at four and two times the market 
value respectively. It also stipulates a specified period for the completion of projects. Many 
feel that the law is likely to increase prices of land and property and also further constrain 
land availability. If this happens, it may increase the proportion of land cost in the total cost. 
As  mentioned  earlier,  urban  land  mass  is  under  severe  constraint  to  meet  the  housing 
requirement of the country’s urban population which is growing rapidly. This implies that the 
vision of “Affordable Housing for All” will require acquisition/supply of large land parcels on a 
regular  basis.  At  the  same  time,  we  need  to  ensure  proper  development  of  the  housing 
4 
 BIS central bankers’  speeches
sector;  otherwise  we  may  be  seeing  increasing  number  of  slums  and  unauthorised 
settlements. 
Financial constraints 
Another important constraint that has been existent all along for the housing sector is finance 
for  the  developers  as  well  as  finance  for  the  households,  particularly  for  the  low 
cost/affordable housing category. The current financing mechanism prevalent in the country 
mostly targets middle and high income sections of the society while the households falling 
under low income and economically weaker sections category find it difficult to secure formal 
housing finance. Commercial banks and traditional means of housing finance typically do not 
serve low-income groups, whose income may vary with crop seasons or is below the “viable” 
threshold to ensure repayment or those who cannot provide collateral for loans. In India, as 
mentioned  earlier,  the  mortgage  to  GDP  ratio  is  estimated  at  around  7  per  cent.  This 
contrasts with mortgage to GDP ratio of over 51 per cent in USA. However, even if one were 
to benchmark with more comparable counterparts, the ratio ranges between 15 and 20 per 
cent for South East Asian countries. The penetration level of mortgages is miniscule when 
compared  with  the  shortage  of  housing  units.  This  problem  is  more  acute  for  low  income 
families seeking affordable houses.  
Need for long-term debt market  
Housing constitutes a long term asset for a large segment of population in rural and urban 
areas. As debt markets are not very deep, access to long-term funding for housing finance 
institutions is difficult. Most banks use their shortterm funds from deposits and deploy these 
funds in long-term housing loans, thereby creating an asset liability mismatch. Reserve Bank 
of India has cautioned banks of the dangers of borrowing short and lending long. To mitigate 
such  problem,  in  some  countries,  banks  have  been  permitted  to  float  long-term  mortgage 
bonds  to  match  their  mortgage  assets.  To  tackle  the  interest  rate  risks,  most  assets  and 
liabilities  are  on  a  floating  rate  basis.  In  India,  there  has  been  a  long-standing  demand  to 
allow pension and provident funds to invest in housing finance. These funds are suppliers of 
long-term capital. They typically have a low risk tolerance but do crave for diversification. The 
mutuality  of  interest  is  strong  between  homeowners  and  long-term  institutional  investors. 
Going  forward,  to  tide  over  the  paucity  of  funds,  it  is  imperative  to  develop  the  secondary 
mortgage market. Securitisation ensures recycling of funds. While some countries in South 
Asia  have  issued  mortgage-backed  securities,  most  transactions  are sporadic  and  ad-hoc. 
Rigidities  in  the  legal  framework,  high  stamp  duties  and  lack  of  uniformity  in  underwriting 
norms are recognized as some of the hindrances in the development of mortgage market. Of 
course,  regulatory  concerns  for  unbridled  securitization  and  massive  growth  in  home  loan 
portfolio  with  very  lax  underwriting  standards  which  caused  considerable  damage  to  the 
financial markets, particularly in the context of the advance economies like the US, have to 
be kept in view. Drawing upon the lessons from imprudent securitization of mortgages which 
contributed to a larger extent to the recent global financial crisis, Reserve Bank of India is 
reviewing the regulatory framework for securitization in India. It is expected that the market 
for  residential  mortgage  backed  securities  (RMBS)  will  develop  on  safe  and  sound  lines 
under the new regulatory framework. 
Loan products 
A housing loan is inherently different from any other retail loan. This is because a house is 
probably the single largest investment a person makes in his/her lifetime. It has been noticed 
that a customer seeking a housing loan does not just require finance – they may also need 
ancillary services like loan counselling or legal advice to ensure the title of the property is 
clear or technical advice to ensure that the structural aspects of the property are in order. It is 
these  add-on  services  that  distinguish  the  good  quality  of  services  from  not  so  good.  The 
typical mortgage borrower of South Asian countries, including India belongs to the upper or 
BIS central bankers’  speeches 
 5
middle class, is of an average age of 35–40 years, usually a first time home buyer and by 
and large a salaried employee. 
Most loan products are fairly standardised – plain vanilla home loan products, loans for home 
improvement  and  extension,  land  loans,  loans  for  non-residential  premises  and  the  newer 
breed of loans include home equity and topup/ personal loans. Against the backdrop of lower 
interest rates seen across the region, most home loans are on floating rate loans. In India, 
the  floating  rate  of  some  banks  and  housing  finance  institutions  is  benchmarked  to  prime 
lending  rate.  It  has  been  noticed  that  several  customers  opt  for  floating  rate  loans  without 
understanding  the  inherent  risks  involved.  Even  most  of  the  existing  fixed  rate  loans  have 
been converted into floating rates. To tide over the dilemma of whether to opt for a fixed or 
floating rate loan, blended options are being offered wherein the customer can hedge part of 
the interest rate risk by opting for a combination of fixed and floating rates. The major issue, 
however,  is  that  most  individual  borrowers  find  it  difficult  to  manage  the  interest  rate  risk 
under  pure  or  semi  floating  interest  rate  regime.  Hence,  there  is  greater  need  for  fixed 
interest  rate  loan  products  for  individual  borrowers.  Coming  to  currency  risk,  fortunately, 
home loan borrowers in the Asia-Pacific region and India, in particular, are not exposed to 
exchange  rate  risks  as  borrowings  are  in  domestic  currency.  Another  area  of  product 
innovation  could  be  deposit  linked  home  loan  products.  This  would  be  very  useful  for  low 
income  groups  as  they  can  build  equity  and  establish  payment  capability  track  record  for 
availing of home loans. 
Legal constraints 
A major feature of the Indian urbanization process is its non-uniform  geographical spread. 
While  smaller  cities  and  towns  are  fast  emerging  as  centre  of  demand,  the  pressure  on 
existing four metros remains enormous. A crucial factor behind this tendency is the barrier for 
major players in real estate in tapping the vast land potential in rural areas reinforced by poor 
enforcement of laws against encroachment of public lands as well as lack of clear titles to 
private  lands  causing  an  artificial  scarcity  of  land  in  rural  areas.  Another  major  issue  is 
absence of large scale digitization of land records and the easy access to such records for 
checking titles/encumbrances. 
The dynamics between rural and urban housing demand is also different with housing in rural 
India  still  largely  for  own  use  rather  than  for  sale  and  resale.  A  possible  reason  for  this, 
among other things, could be the problem of transferring ownership rights. As we reach limits 
to urbanization in metros, rural areas should increasingly come under the focus of real estate 
development and we would require strong legal framework to prevent the bottlenecks.  
Role and responsibilities of stakeholders 
Given  the  dimensions  of  the  problem  and  various  constraints  that  affect  a  viable  and 
sustainable solution, well-coordinated and concerted effort on the part of all the stakeholders, 
including the private sector, is required. This will ensure that all segments of the population 
genuinely aspiring to own a house are effectively catered to without of course compromising 
on 
and  
government/  government  bodies  to  tackle  this  colossal  housing  shortage  will  have  limited 
impact until and unless the private sector joins hands to meet the challenge. 
balance.  Efforts 
regulators 
ecological 
financial 
stability 
and 
of 
Commercial banks and HFCs 
The Indian banking sector has an expansive reach and is well geared to serve all segments 
of the society, including the underprivileged. The banking sector has been actively involved 
in lending to the housing sector with an outstanding of Rs. 3786 billion as on December 30, 
2011,  which  is  an  increase  of  Rs.  410.10  billion  (12.10  per  cent)  over  the  previous 
corresponding  year.  The  housing 
loan  portfolios  of  HFCs  registered  a  growth  of 
6 
 BIS central bankers’  speeches
21.71 per cent  during  2010–11.  This  was  comparatively  higher  than  15  per  cent  growth 
reported by commercial banks (Tables II & III). 
Table II  
Comparative position of housing sector credit 
by commercial banks and HFCs 
 Table III  
Outstanding housing loans of HFCs2 
 
The housing loan portfolio of any financial institution is a product of two variables – number 
of accounts and loan outstanding per borrower. It has been observed that there has been a 
noticeable slowdown in the growth of the portfolio (Tables IV & V). One plausible reason is 
that post-crisis, banks have realised that while the demand for housing loans is tremendous, 
there is no substitute for prudent lending policies. This probably explains the slowdown in the 
growth rate of number of accounts. Another reason which has affected the demand has been 
the rising prices of property and prevalence of relatively high rate of interest in the context of 
high inflation rates. 
                                                 
2  Source: National Housing Bank 
BIS central bankers’  speeches 
 7
Table IV  
Outstanding gross bank credit3 
Table V  
Growth rate of number of accounts and outstanding  
amounts in the housing sector portfolio of commercial banks 
  
It  is  encouraging  to  note  that  the  share  of  HFCs  in  the  Indian  housing  market  has  been 
exhibiting a rising trend. Looking ahead, HFCs are likely to gain sufficient experience in the 
sector  and  would  be  able  to  maintain  their  market  share  on  the  strength  of  their  focused 
approach, targeting of special customer segments and relatively superior customer service. 
This in a way would pave for constructive competitive environment as traditional lenders like 
banks would need to tap their extensive network and broad customer base more effectively 
and at the same time maintain the priority sector lending targets. 
In order to remain competitive, both commercial banks and the HFCs need to realize that a 
customer  seeking  a  housing  loan  does  not  just  require  finance  –  they  also  need  ancillary 
services and hand-holding like loan counseling, legal advice, etc. Selling a loan product is a 
small step in the process of making affordability of housing a reality; bigger leaps by way of 
encouraging deeper financial inclusion coupled with financial literacy is the need of the hour.  
Re-engineering of the existing business models is extremely essential given the fact that a 
large  number  of  the  targeted  and  potential  customers  are  possibly  financially  excluded. 
Assessment of the customers and their credit requirement can be achieved more effectively 
by adopting a field based approach, such as, using surrogates, triangulation and building up 
                                                 
3  Source: Reserve Bank of India Report on Sectoral Deployment of Bank Credit – December 2011 
8 
 BIS central bankers’  speeches
knowledge about the customer. Banks and HFCs have to provide innovative products to the 
sector and work in close collaboration with the other stakeholders in the industry. They also 
need to adopt different appraisal and risk management methods for low ticket housing loans.  
Micro Finance Institutions (MFIs) 
In the wake of micro-finance revolution in India, housing micro-finance has assumed a lot of 
importance and has potential of having notable impact on the stakeholders engaged in the 
mission for affordable housing. Microfinance has the potential to enable small borrowers to 
start planning for a house and arranging requisite resource for it. At the same time, these 
institutions can have an impact on the household decision making, portfolio diversification of 
lenders, expansion of housing sector and growth of the local economy as a whole. 
Microfinance  for  housing  is  believed  to  progressively  upgrade  poor  families’  homes.  Such 
upgradation  would  include  improving  existing  rooms,  adding  a  room,  or  installing  water  or 
electricity. Based on their credit history microfinance for housing should be designed for the 
low-income  households who  wish  to  expand  or improve  their  dwellings or  build a  home  in 
incremental  steps,  relying  on  small  loans  raised  over  a  period  of  time.  It  has  to  be  a 
sustainable approach suited to the needs of the low-income market. 
MFIs are considered to be the next best alternative for financing the EWS and LIG category. 
MFIs,  however,  face  challenges  which  prevent  them  from  extending  housing  loans.  The 
challenges are primarily due to the longer period of housing loans (typically between five to 
seven years minimum, if not more) as against usual micro loans of one to two years duration 
and  due  to  the  larger  amount  of  loan  compared  to  usual  micro  loans  extended  by  MFIs. 
Typically, a house, particularly in the urban areas, will be about `1 lakh, whereas when MFIs 
extend livelihood finance, between ` 10,000 to ` 35,000. If they have to lend to a significant 
number of people, the amount to be loaned has to increase substantially. This can lead to 
problem for MFIs. Another problem with the MFIs is of availability of finance and ensuring 
regular collection of larger installments from the borrowers. Recognising the importance of 
community-based  financial  institutions  as  delivery  mechanisms  for  housing  finance  to  the 
financially  excluded,  the  NHB  has  initiated  a  housing  microfinance  programme  by  way  of 
financial  assistance  to  the  MFIs.  The  programme  is  based  on  an  integrated  habitat  and 
partnership approach with customised product intervention aimed at supplementing various 
other financial sector interventions. 
Private sector stakeholders 
Today,  technological  innovations  have  transformed  the  conventional  style  of  trade  and 
commerce. There are numerous examples which reflect that with adoption of technology, the 
end-product  can  be  highly  improvised  and  made  affordable  to  all  segments  of  customers. 
Some  of  the  best  examples  would  be  the  rapid  technological  innovation  in  the  mobile 
telephone industry, marketing innovation in consumer non-durable sector, etc. It is high time 
that  the  real  estate  sector  also  invests  resources  for  more  research  and  development  to 
enable construction of environment friendly, low cost houses. It is important to realize that 
the terrain of our country, climatic conditions of regions, economic conditions of people and 
the  intensity  of  the  problem  changes  as  we  traverse  across  the  country.  A  search  for  one 
technology fits all would not be viable and practically feasible. 
One  model  which  could  be  considered  and  developed  is  the  hub  and  spoke  model  for 
enhancing  rural  housing  construction.  The  “hub”  of  the  service  could  be  located  in  a 
district/taluka  headquarters  and  the  services  into  rural/interior  areas  are  provided  by  local 
rural  centres  i.e.  the  “spokes”.  The  hubs  will  be  the  centre,  say,  for  pre-fabrication  of 
semi-finished structures for housing and skilled labour and will provide men & material to the 
spokes. This will ensure scale of economies in technologically innovative and homogenous 
low cost housing to the rural centres. 
BIS central bankers’  speeches 
 9
National Housing Bank (NHB) 
NHB was setup with an objective of channelizing long-term finance to individual households, 
thereby  proving  the  much  needed  impetus  to  the  housing  sector.  NHB  acts  as  a  principal 
agency  to  promote  housing  finance  institutions  both  at  local  and  regional  levels  and  also 
provides  financial  and  other  support  to  such  institutions.  The  year  2010–11  has  been  an 
important year for the NHB as it had crossed Rs. 120 billion loan disbursements, of which 
approximately 50 per cent was for rural housing, during the financial year. Since inception, 
NHB has been supporting the housing finance companies and during the year 2010–11, over 
50 such companies had a portfolio of over Rs. 1100 billion4. One of its flagship projects is the 
Golden  Jubilee  Rural  Housing  Finance  Scheme  which  aims  at  the  rural  households.  The 
scheme offers a platform for easier access to housing finance to enable an individual in the 
rural area to either build a house or improve the existing house5. The initial success of the 
scheme can be gauged from the fact that over 3 million dwelling units have been financed. 
NHB is also playing a significant role in creating market infrastructure for housing finance and 
has made efforts in plugging the demand supply gaps, particularly for the low and moderate 
income households in urban and rural areas. It had led initiative in developing the secondary 
mortgage market and the standards for securitisation market in the country. The Bank is also 
leading the initiative for setting up a Government-sponsored Credit Guarantee Trust Fund for 
low income housing in close collaboration with the Ministry of Housing, Govt of India, and for 
setting up a Mortgage Guarantee Company in partnership with other International Financial 
Institutions. 
Government/Government bodies 
The Government policies have remained geared towards alleviating poverty with a host of 
direct  intervention  programmes.  The  early  eighties  was  the  period  of  shift  in  the  policy 
orientation  from  the  exclusive  focus  on  nutrition  based  approach  towards  poverty  to  cover 
broader  perspectives  of  providing  affordable  housing  to  all.  The  Scheme  of  Affordable 
Housing  in  Partnership  promotes  various  types  of  public-private  partnerships  –  of  the 
government  sector  with  the  private  sector,  the  cooperative  sector,  the  financial  services 
sector, the state para-statals, urban local bodies, etc. It has the potential to provide a major 
stimulus  to  economic  activities  through  affordable  housing  for  creation  of  employment, 
especially for the construction workers and other urban poor who are likely to be amongst the 
most vulnerable groups in during the economic downturns. 
Government  bodies  can  consider  single  window  clearance  mechanism  for  the  purpose  of 
further  simplifying  the  approval  processes  for  low  cost  affordable  housing  along  with 
reconsideration  of  the  taxation  policies.  The  public  agencies  and  the  state  and  local 
governments should work to bring efficiency in land market, approval processes, provision of 
efficient  infrastructure  and  e-governance  viz.  introducing  electronic  record  for  land  and 
bringing in more transparency in the record of land and houses, etc. It will add good value if 
the  financing  agencies  can  also  connect  into  these  developments  and  together  drive  the 
reforms at the state and local levels. In order to meet the enormous needs of the housing 
sector,  short  cuts  through  the  subsidy  approach  are  no  longer  sustainable  over  the  long 
period. As subsidy based approach cannot be stretched beyond a point, a more viable and 
sustainable  strategy  has  to  be  evolved.  There  is,  therefore,  a  need  for  having  a  market 
oriented mechanism to meet the challenge of the affordable housing sector. 
                                                 
4  Source: Annual Report of the National Housing Bank 
5  Source: Annual Report of the National Housing Bank 
10 
 BIS central bankers’  speeches
State Governments 
In the entire process for creating an enabling environment for affordable housing, the role of 
State  Government  is  extremely  critical.  State  Governments  may  contemplate  forging 
Public-Private  Partnerships  to  ensure  a  fair  return  on  investment  to  the  private  land 
owners/developers  through  guided  development  and  availability  of  serviced  sites  for 
allotment  to  low  income  families  at  affordable  prices.  Incentives  and  provision  of 
infrastructure can induce private sector entrepreneurs to invest in housing including that for 
the poor. It can consider measures to control the spiralling increase of land prices and curb 
speculative  activities  for  developing  land  and  also  check  unregulated  and  environmentally 
damaging  land  development  activities.  Another  aspect  which  may  be  considered  is  the 
promotion  of  high  density  housing  in  selected  areas  in  cities  through  appropriate 
amendments  to  zoning and  land  use  regulations.  This  may  obviate  the  necessity  of  costly 
land acquisition and avoid high infrastructure costs. State Governments may also revisit the 
current  provision  of  tenancy  rights  and  promote  rental  housing  by  creating  a  balance 
between the interests of the landowner and the tenant. This will pave the way for supply of 
rental  housing  at  affordable  rents  and  act  as  an  incentive  for  people  to  build  houses  for 
themselves and for others. 
Reserve Bank of India 
The supportive policy of the Reserve Bank of India and enabling fiscal regime has together 
contributed to the growth and expansion in the housing market. As regulators of the banking 
system, it is, however, important for the Reserve Bank of India to remain cautious against 
imprudent  practices  for  short  term  gains.  The  current  focus  of  its  regulations  is  to  ensure 
orderly  growth  of  housing  loan  portfolios  of  banks.  The  policy  orientation  of  the  Reserve 
Bank, simply put, is to ensure and promote inclusive growth without adversely impacting the 
equilibrium  of  financial  stability.  Reserve  Bank  remains  supportive  of  initiatives  of  the 
stakeholders as long as the programmes of affordable houses for all do not lead to structural 
damages to the financial eco-system. 
Along with the Government, SEBI, Reserve Bank’ s endeavors have been to develop a deep 
and  vibrant  debt  market  including  for  mortgage  securities  in  a  calibrated  manner  so  as  to 
ease financing pressures on the banks and also to provide an alternate avenue for raising 
long term resources. Reserve Bank has permitted investments by banks in mortgage backed 
securities  subject  to  certain  conditions.  We  are  also  constantly  reviewing  existing  policy 
framework including those governing the priority sector lending to ensure that the bank credit 
to these sectors remain growing, smooth and uninterrupted. 
Reserve Bank has been using pre-emptive countercyclical provisioning and differential risk 
weights – supplemented by varying loan to value (LTV) ratios – to contain excessive credit 
growth to sectors which show signs of risk build-up. In order to prevent excessive leveraging, 
the  Reserve  Bank  had  advised  banks  in  December  2010  that  the  LTV  ratio  should  not 
exceed 80 per cent in respect of housing loans. However, for small value housing loans, i.e., 
housing  loans  up  to  `2  million  LTV  ratio  was  prescribed  at  a  higher  maximum  level  of 
90 per cent.  Further,  the  risk  weight  for  residential  housing  loans  of  higher  amounts,  i.e. 
`7.50 million and above, irrespective of the LTV ratio, has been prescribed at 125 per cent to 
prevent excessive speculation in the high value housing segment. 
In  the  recent  past,  it  was  observed  that  some  banks  were  following  the  practice  of 
sanctioning housing loans at teaser rates, i.e., at comparatively lower rates of interest in the 
first few years, after which rates are reset at higher rates. This practice raised concern as 
some borrowers may find it difficult to service the loans once the normal interest rate, which 
is higher than the rate applicable in the initial years, becomes effective. It was also observed 
that  many  banks,  at  the  time  of  initial  loan  appraisal,  were  not  taking  into  account  the 
repaying capacity of the borrower at normal lending rates. Therefore, in view of the higher 
risk associated with such loans, the standard asset provisioning on the outstanding amount 
had been increased from 0.40 per cent to 2.00 per cent with effect from December 23, 2010. 
BIS central bankers’  speeches 
 11
The provisioning on these assets would revert to 0.40 per cent after one year from the date 
on  which  the  rates  are  reset  at  higher  rates  if  the  accounts  remain  “standard”.  Since 
restructuring  of  an  account  is  normally  indicative  of  some  problem  in  the  account,  it  was 
decided in November 2008 that restructured housing loans should be risk weighted with an 
additional risk weight i.e. 25 percentage points over the risk weights normally applicable to 
the account. 
43.  Although  some  of  these  prudential  norms  appear  to  be  restrictive  for  growth  of  the 
housing finance sector, it needs to be kept in view that they are essential for sustainable and 
orderly development of the sector as they are meant to address macro-prudential concerns 
of financial stability.  
funds  and  creating  a 
insurance,  allowing  real  estate  mutual 
Way forward 
The  desire  for  a  safe  and  secure  home  is  timeless  and  universal.  The  twin  problems  of 
affordability and accessibility that impede the progress of housing in our country need to be 
addressed  on  a  sustainable  basis.  For  this,  it  would  be  desirable  for  the  governments  to 
withdraw from direct participation in the housing and housing finance sector and instead they 
need  to  take  on  the  role  as  facilitators  to  create  the  enabling  environment  to  encourage 
greater  private  sector  participation.  Further  efforts  of  the  government  are  required  to 
strengthen foreclosure laws, land records need to be computerised and archaic land laws, 
especially rental laws, need a complete overhaul. Steps, such as, digitization of land records, 
linking of central regulations with state regulations, encouraging credit bureaus, introducing 
mortgage 
favourable 
environment  to  facilitate  foreign  direct  investment  in  housing  for  genuine  and  needy 
customers will help stimulate the housing finance sector.  
Currently,  the  real  estate  sector  is  largely  unregulated  with  consumers  often  unable  to 
procure  complete  information  or  enforce  accountability  on  builders  and  developers  in  the 
absence  of  effective  regulation.  In  order  to  plug  the  gap,  the  Central  Government  has 
proposed  to  establish  the  Real  Estate  Regulatory  Authority  in  each  state  with  specified 
functions,  powers,  and  responsibilities.  The  objective  is  to  ensure  regulation  and  planned 
development in the real estate sector. Once these authorities are established, they should 
act  as  the  nodal  agency  to  co-ordinate  efforts  regarding  development  of  the  real  estate 
sector  and  render  necessary  advice  to  the  appropriate  government  agencies  to  ensure 
growth and promotion of a transparent, efficient and competitive real estate sector and also 
establish  resolution  mechanisms  for  settling  disputes  between  the  builders/promoters  and 
the allottees/ buyers. 
There  is  also  a  felt  need  for  the  institutions  involved  in  the  financing  of  housing  sector  to 
consider  developing  segment  specific  credit  products  to  enable  more  people  to  afford  a 
house. One such product could be savings induced home loan or a home loan deposit. The 
willing  consumers  may  be  induced  to  generate  a  savings  balance  by  way  of  monthly  or 
periodic deposits. This will enable creation of a track record for repayment of a future home 
loan product. Once the customer reaches a threshold balance, the financial institutions can 
consider sanctioning of a housing loan. The balance in the account could act as collateral or 
the  margin.  The  amount  deposited  every  month  would  act  as  the  base  to  assess  the 
repayment  capacity  of  the  customer  for  the  purpose  of  calculating  the  monthly  repayment 
installments. 
The  credit  risks  originating  in  the  housing  sector,  particularly  low  ticket  housing  segment, 
should also be internalized through proper insurance schemes for banks and other lenders. 
The various stakeholders should aim at timely completion of projects, delivery of houses/flats 
to  target  segments  without  cost  escalations  and  with  valid  titles  and  all  necessary 
clearances. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’  speeches
In short, a comprehensive and holistic approach involving easy availability of land, accessible 
financing,  supportive  legal  framework  and  innovative  technology  is  required  for  making 
housing affordable for all. I am sure that this conference will generate meaningful discussions 
and  pave  way  for  innovative  thinking  and  policy  inputs  to  make  housing  affordable  and 
available to all. 
BIS central bankers’  speeches 
 13
