Prasarn Trairatvorakul: “Challenges and Opportunities” 
Speech  by  Dr  Prasarn  Trairatvorakul,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the  German 
Business Talks event, Bangkok, 28 February 2012. 
 Good evening, 
Ambassador Rolf Schulze, 
Distinguished guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I would like to thank the German Embassy for inviting me to give the key-note speech at the 
German  Business  Talks  event.  Germany  is  by  far  the  biggest  trading  partner  of  Thailand 
within  Europe,  accounting  for  over  20  per  cent  of  total  trade  volume  between  Europe  and 
Thailand. With the increasing presence of German multinational corporations in Thailand, I 
hope that our businesses will become more integrated and continue to prosper together into 
the  future.  In  this  session,  I  would  like  to  focus  on  two  key  issues.  The  first  concerns  the 
future challenges facing Thailand. The second issue is about the Bank of Thailand’s (BOT) 
role in meeting these challenges. 
Let us begin with the challenges. 
On  the  external  front,  the  global  economy  is  beset  by  substantial  risks  and 
uncertainties. Major advanced economies are still grappling with fragile recoveries. In the 
US, despite some recent positive news from the labor market, economic activity continues to 
be weighed down by substantial debt over-hang. This inhibits a full recovery in the housing 
sector and consumer spending, which together form the backbone of the US economy. In the 
euro-area, everyone here is obviously keenly aware of the unfolding sovereign debt crisis. 
Against  the  backdrop  of  fear  and  uncertainty,  banks  have  tightened  their  lending  and 
consumers have become more cautious in their spending. This will act as a drag on the euro-
area economy going forward. 
A  key  constraint  for  both  the  US  and  euro-area,  as  well  as  many  other  advanced 
economies,  is  the  limited  policy  space  available  to  authorities.  In  these  countries, 
monetary  policy  and  fiscal  stimulus  have  been  pushed  to  their  limits.  Limited  capacity  to 
respond to new shocks thus represents a real risk for these economies, and for the global 
economy, that we must be weary of. In this setting, and given the deep-seated nature of the 
problems  being  faced,  meaningful  remedies  rest  just  as  much  on  political  factors  as  on 
economic  ones.  How  governments  respond  and  how  their  electorates  receive  these 
responses will be an important source of uncertainty. 
In  contrast,  the  rising  economies  in  Asia  offer  a  more  positive  outlook.  Despite  the 
slowdown in exports of many Asian countries, reflecting the softer global economic backdrop, 
domestic demand remains robust. More fundamentally, the continued rise of China and the 
formation  of  the  ASEAN  Economic  Community  (AEC)  will  generate  enormous  economic 
opportunities for the region. As will be discussed later, the key challenge for Thailand will 
be how to optimally position ourselves to reap the full benefits of this trend. 
This brings me to the internal challenges. The overriding focus for Thailand this year is 
ensuring domestic recovery and restoration after the devastating floods in 2011, as well as 
putting in place short and long-term plans to prevent a repeat of these events. The damage 
from the floods was severe, with widespread disruptions in the agriculture and manufacturing 
industries  in  affected  areas.  As  a  result,  economic  activity  contracted  by  9  per  cent 
year-on-year  in  the  last  quarter  of  2011  and  the  economy  barely  grew  over  the  year  as  a 
whole. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
In the face of such dramatic numbers, it is important to remind ourselves of the nature of the 
shock  that  Thailand  faced.  Floods,  like  other  natural  disasters,  are  temporary  one-off 
events. They hit you out of nowhere, but then disappear. This is very different from growth 
slowdowns due to inherent weaknesses in the economy, such as financial crises. As we are 
witnessing  in  many  parts  of  the  developed  world,  such  retrenchment  in  economic  activity 
tend to be long-lasting as previous excesses have to be worked out from the system. The 
aftermath  of  one-off  shocks,  on  the  other  hand,  is  generally  characterized  by  rapid 
resumption of economic activity as things get back on track. 
Thus  there  is  no  question  that  Thailand  will  recover  quickly  and  strongly  from  the 
floods.  We  project  that  economic  growth  will  rebound  to  4.9  percent  in  2012,  boosted  by 
private and public spending for post-flood restoration. In 2013, economic growth is projected 
to gather momentum, expanding by 5.6 percent. This positive trajectory reflects a number of 
key fundamental strengths in the Thai economy. First, our human capital remains intact and 
strong. Thailand’s flexible and skilled workforce will continue to provide a solid foundation for 
businesses  to  flourish  and  expand.  Second,  the  corporate  sector  boasts  healthy  balance 
sheets from accumulated savings and profits, enabling them to rebuild and invest. Third, the 
banking  sector  is  strong  and  well-placed  to  provide  the  financing  necessary  to  sustain  the 
investment  cycle.  Finally,  Thailand  is  well  positioned  geographically  to  serve  as  a 
supply-chain  hub  for  many  industries  and  to  reap  the  benefits  of  an  expanding  as  well  as 
more integrated Asian economic block. 
As  alluded  to  earlier,  the  process  of  regional  integration  will  provide  Thailand  with 
enormous opportunities to expand our role in the region through increased trade in 
goods  and  services.  Realizing  these  opportunities  will  not  be  easy,  nor  will  they  be 
automatic.  The  key  impetus  falls  on  structural  reforms  that  lift  Thailand’s  international 
competitiveness.  Considerable  adjustment  and  transformation  of  our  economy  will  be 
required.  Factors  of  production  will  have  to  be  reallocated  to  activities  that  offer  the  most 
promising way forward. Government policies and laws will have to be updated and changed 
to  best  facilitate  such  structural  adjustments,  all  the  while  making  sure  that  the  burden  of 
adjustment  on  those  who  stand  to  lose  is  bearable.  The  pursuit  of  economic  growth 
should not be absolute, but inclusive. 
As should be apparent, such challenges cannot possibly be completely met in the short-term, 
let alone in 2012. I suppose it should not be a surprise that the challenges I have outlined 
involve relatively long horizons. As a central banker, we are trained to focus always on the 
medium to long run. After all, it is precisely such a focus that enables central banks to best 
serve as pillars of economic stability over time. 
Against this backdrop, let me now turn to the BOT’s role in meeting these challenges. 
Starting  with  monetary  policy,  the  key  focus  at  this  juncture  is  to  strike  the  right 
balance between accommodating the domestic recovery while ensuring stability in the 
long-term.  In  the  context  of  the  sharp  slowdown  in  economic  activity  from  the  floods, 
moderating inflationary risks, and pronounced headwinds from the global economy, the MPC 
decided  to  ease  policy  during  the  last  two  meetings.  These  policy  actions  have  helped  to 
shore up private sector confidence and accelerate the return of economic activity to normal 
levels. The MPC is firmly committed to maintaining long-term price stability and interest rates 
are currently at a level that is deemed to be consistent with that goal. 
Moving further afield, it is clear from my earlier remarks that setting Thailand on a path to 
long-run  economic  prosperity  will  entail  lifting  the  competitiveness  of  our  economy.  What 
contribution can the BOT make in this regard? 
First  and  foremost,  as  well  as  most  obviously,  the  BOT  needs  to  deliver  on  its 
mandate  of  macroeconomic  stability.  Ample  evidence  has  demonstrated  that  a  stable 
macroeconomic  environment  is  a  key  prerequisite  for  sustainable  growth  in  the  long  run. 
Such an environment will also make the process of adjustment and economic transformation 
easier.  In  this  respect,  I  believe  that  we  have  the  right  monetary  framework  to  best 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
achieve  this.  The  BOT’s  inflation  targeting  framework  has  served  us  very  well  since  its 
adoption over 10 years ago. 
Apart from serving as an anchor for macroeconomic stability, the BOT can also undertake 
steps, or act as a catalyst for the necessary changes, that will serve to enhance Thailand’s 
competitiveness and augment economic adaptability. Most directly, the BOT can strive to 
enhance  the  effectiveness  of  the  financial  sector  in  serving  as  intermediaries  of 
capital.  Our  current  strategy  is  to  broadly  deliver  tangible  improvements  in  four  key 
dimensions.  First,  encourage  financial  innovation  and  the  expansion  of  available  financial 
instruments.  Second,  broaden  the  choice  available  to  firms  and  households  in  terms  of 
financial  services.  Third,  reduce  the  cost  of  these  financial  services.  And  finally,  improve 
access to them. 
To this end, the BOT has embarked on a multi-pronged approach that involves a number of 
strategic plans. Chief and foremost is the second Financial Master Plan. This plan, which 
takes  into  account  major  global  developments  such  as  regional  integration  and  global 
regulatory reform, will further this vision of a modern and inclusive financial sector landscape. 
At  the  same  time,  we  are  pursuing  ways  to  improve  financial  system  infrastructure, 
including through upgrades to the payment systems to promote more efficient settlement of 
private sector transactions. 
Complementing  these  efforts  is  our  development  of  the  Capital  Account  Liberalization 
Master  Plan  aimed  at  facilitating  and  encouraging  more  outward  investment  by  Thai 
residents in foreign assets. Apart from the sizeable diversification gains to be had, a more 
streamlined  capital  account  and  foreign  exchange  regulatory  regime  will  help  to  boost 
financial market development and reduce costs for the private sector. Finally, in recognition 
of  the  fact  that  the  full  benefits  of  improvements  in  financial  services  cannot  be  realized 
without  adequate  readiness  on  the  part  of  consumers,  we  have  recently  launched  the 
Financial Consumer Protection Center to provide financial education to the public. 
In  all  this,  it  must  be  stressed  that  the  BOT  can  only  do  so  much.  Effective  upgrading  of 
Thailand’s  competitiveness  and  lifting  our  level  of  productivity  requires  strong  commitment 
from  all  segments  of  the  economy.  A  common  vision  among  all  stakeholders  is 
necessary,  especially  when  it  comes  to  implementing  tough  structural  reforms.  The  BOT 
will  strive  to  be  an  active  participant  in  pushing  forward  the  national  agenda  on 
reforms, particularly on issues that involve the public sector, to upgrade the efficiency of our 
economy. 
Let me end by thanking the German business community for the substantial contribution that 
you  have  made  to  our  economy  and  I  very  much  hope  to  see  the  mutually  beneficial 
relationship between our countries continue to blossom into the future. Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
