Richard W Fisher: The limits of the powers of central banks 
Remarks  by  Mr  Richard  W  Fisher,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  Dallas,  on  the  Limits  of  the  Powers  of  Central  Banks  (with  metaphoric 
references to Edvard Much’s Scream and Sir Henry Raeburn’s The Reverend Robert Walker 
Skating on Duddingston Loch, at St Andrews University, St Andrews, Scotland, 5 June 2012. 
 The views expressed by the author do not necessarily reflect official positions of the Federal Reserve System. 
Thank you, Professor Sutherland. I am delighted to be here at St. Andrews and very much 
appreciate  your  organization  of  this  meeting  today.  To  be  at  the  site  where  John  Knox 
preached an epic sermon about Christ’s cleansing of the temple and overthrowing the money 
changers’ tables, which was so powerful that it led to riots against the establishment of the 
time, the papacy, is daunting – nearly as much so as playing the Old Course on yesterday’s 
bank holiday with Professor Andy Mackenzie, the university’s great scratch golfer and noted 
physics professor. 
In  a  setting  as  august  as  this  one  –  on  the  eve  of  the  600th  anniversary  of  this  great 
academy  –  and  speaking  on  the  day  marking  the  129th  anniversary  of  the  birth  of 
John Maynard Keynes and the 289th anniversary of the baptism of Adam Smith in nearby 
Kirkcaldy – I should disclose up front that I am the least formally trained among the mostly 
academic  economists  who  sit  at  the  table  where  we  make  monetary  policy  at  the  Federal 
Reserve, the 19-person forum known as the Federal Open Market Committee, or FOMC. I 
have an MBA, not a PhD. I am an autodidact when it comes to monetary theory. On the other 
hand, I am the only participant in our policy deliberations who has been both a banker and a 
professional  money  manager  –  the  only  one  who  has  been  a  market  operator.  What  the 
credentialing gods denied me, the practitioner angels kindly granted me: another skill set that 
provides a complementary perspective to those of my more learned colleagues. I shall speak 
today,  as  I  always  do,  only  from  my  perspective;  nothing  I  say  represents  the  thinking  or 
proclivities of other members of the FOMC. And most of what I will say will confront theory 
with my interpretation of the rude reality of the marketplace. 
A quick primer on the Federal Reserve’s structure 
For  those  of  you  who  do  not  know  well  our  central  bank’s  structure,  a  quick  primer.  The 
Federal  Reserve  is  the  third  central  bank  in  American  history.  We  were  created  during 
Woodrow  Wilson’s  presidency,  in  the  aftermath  of  the  Financial  Panic  of  1907.  Congress 
passed the Federal Reserve Act in 1913; like St. Andrews, we will mark a centennial next 
year, but it will be our first, while you celebrate your sixth.  
The Federal Reserve Act established 12 Federal Reserve Banks, together with a Board of 
Governors. The members of the Board, of which Ben Bernanke is Chairman, are appointed 
by the president of the United States and confirmed by the Senate. The 12 Bank presidents 
are not: They serve at the pleasure of nine-member boards of directors composed of private 
bankers and citizens from their respective districts. They are distinctly nonpolitical, immune 
from partisan influence; they represent Main Street, not the Washington power elite or the 
New  York  money  changers,  just  as  President  Wilson  and  the  Federal  Reserve  founders 
envisioned. These are profit-making banks that perform services for the private banks in their 
districts:  warehousing  and  distributing  currency;  operating  discount  windows  from  which 
banks borrow to assist in their operating funding needs; functioning as the depository for the 
$1.5  trillion  or  so  in  excess  reserves  presently  piled  up  and  going  unused  in  our  private 
banking system. The Banks also house and manage staff that supervise and regulate banks 
in  the  districts  (under  policy  guidance  from  the  Board  of  Governors),  and  perform  other 
services,  the  most  widely  observed  and  commented  upon  of  which  is  the  operating  of  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
open-market operations conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York on behalf of all 
12  Banks  at  the  instruction  of  the  FOMC.  All  12  Bank  presidents  serve  on  the  FOMC 
together with the seven members of the Board of Governors. This is where monetary policy 
for  the  United  States  is  determined  by  collective  decision.  The  operating  procedure  of  the 
FOMC is for each of the governors to have a vote on policy; the bankers rotate their votes, 
with  the  New  York  Fed  having  a  constant  vote.  However,  all  19  members  –  the  seven 
governors  and  the  12  bankers  –  participate  fully  in  every  FOMC  meeting  and  actively 
contribute to policy discussions.  
The FOMC has traditionally decided the federal funds rate, the overnight rate for interbank 
lending  that  anchors  the  yield  curve.  In  recent  years,  in  reaction  to  the  Financial  Panic  of 
2008  and  2009  and  its  aftermath,  the  FOMC  has  instructed  the  New  York  desk  to  buy 
mortgage-backed  securities  and  Treasury  notes  and  bonds  –  eschewing  Treasury  bills. 
Presently,  the  Fed  holds  more than  $850  billion  in  mortgage-backed  securities  (MBS)  and 
over  $1.6  trillion  in  Treasuries.  This  expansion  of  our  portfolio  and  extension  of  maturities 
held therein is known as “quantitative easing”, or QE. After cutting the base rate for overnight 
lending – the fed funds rate – to zero, the majority of the committee decided to expand the 
money  supply  by  purchasing  MBS,  notes  and  bonds.  When  we  buy  something  in  the 
marketplace, we pay for it, and this has resulted in significant liquidity floating about the U.S. 
economy,  much  of  it  going  unused.  As  mentioned  earlier,  $1.5  trillion  of  excess  reserves 
from private banks is on deposit in the 12 Federal Reserve Banks, where it earns a paltry 
0.25 percent, rather than being lent to job-creating businesses at rates bankers would prefer. 
Additionally, some $2 trillion of excess cash is parked on corporate balance sheets – above 
and beyond the operating cash flow needs of the business sector – and copious amounts of 
cash  are  lying  fallow  in  the  pockets  of  nondepository  financial  institutions,  such  as  private 
equity and other investment funds. 
A  running  discussion  in  the  marketplace  centers  around  whether  the  FOMC  will  decide  to 
engage in further quantitative easing, especially given the most recent economic weakness 
in the U.S., against the backdrop of the well-known problems in Europe and slower growth in 
China and other “emerging” economies. I shall turn to that in a few moments. First, I want to 
go back to the 12 Federal Reserve Banks. 
Different growth patterns in the 12 Federal Reserve districts 
Here is a map of the 12 Federal Reserve Bank districts. The Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas 
is responsible for the Fed’s activity in the light green area – the Eleventh District – home to 
27  million  people  in  Texas,  northern  Louisiana  and  southern  New  Mexico.  Roughly 
96 percent of the district’s output comes from Texas. 
2 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Here is a chart showing the disparate behavior of the economies in the 12 Federal Reserve 
Districts, as measured by employment growth. You will see that going back to 1990 – some 
22  years  –  the  Eleventh  Federal  Reserve  District  has  outperformed  the  other  Federal 
Reserve Districts in job creation. 
In terms of employment, the Dallas Fed’s district went into the recession last and was one of 
the first to come out. We have since punched through previous peak employment levels. 
 Here is the job creation record of the so-called mega-states within the United States since 
1990. And last, and just for fun, here is the record of Texas’ job creation over the past two 
decades versus resource-rich countries, such as Australia and Canada, as well as versus the 
major countries of Europe, the U.S. and Japan.  
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Indulge me for a minute here. I share these with you not to engage in stereotypical “Texas 
brag” or because St. Andrews has become a popular destination for recent generations of 
undergraduate scholars from Texas. I do so to illustrate a point, specifically the influence of 
fiscal policy on the effectiveness of monetary policy. 
  The limits of monetary policy and the importance of fiscal policy 
Here  is  the  rub.  As  mentioned,  the  FOMC  sets  monetary  policy  for  the  nation,  for  all 
50 states – its influence is uniform across America. The same rate of interest is charged on 
bank loans to businesses and individuals in Texas as is charged New Yorkers or the good 
people of Illinois or Californians; Texans pay the same rates on mortgages and so on. Why is 
it that the Texas economy has radically outperformed the rest of the states? A cheap answer 
is to revert to the hackneyed argument that Texas has oil and gas. It is true that we produce 
as  much  oil  as  Norway  and  almost  as  much  natural  gas  as  Canada.  And  we  have  some 
60 percent of the refineries of the United States. But remember that the numbers I showed 
you are employment numbers. Only 2 percent of employment in Texas is directly generated 
by oil and gas and mining and related services. We are grateful that we are energy rich. But 
we  are  a  diversified  economy  not  unlike  the  United  States,  where  business  and  financial 
services, health care, travel and leisure activities and education account for similar portions 
of our workforce. Why, then, do we outperform the rest of the United States?  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
To me, the answer is obvious: We have state and local governments whose tax, spending 
and regulatory policies are oriented toward job creation. We have the same monetary policy 
as all the rest; our income is taxed at the same federal tax rate; and we are equally impacted 
by Washington’s tax, spending and regulatory policies. But we have better fiscal policy at the 
state level. We have no state income tax; we are a right-to-work state; we have state and 
local governments that, under both Democratic and Republican leadership, have for decades 
assiduously  courted  job  creators  –  so  much  so  that  we  have  even  outperformed  the  job 
creation  of  most  every  other  major  industrialized  economy  worldwide,  as  shown  by  the 
previous slide.  
Whither monetary policy? 
Now,  back  to  the  hue  and  cry  of  financial  markets,  and  the  question  of  further  monetary 
accommodation.  Interest  rates  are  at  record  lows.  Trillions  of  dollars  are  sitting  on  the 
sidelines, not being used for job creation. We know that in areas of the country where fiscal 
and regulatory policy incents businesses to expand – Texas is the most prominent of those 
places – easy money is more likely to be put to work than in places where government policy 
retards  job  creation.  During  the  next  few  weeks  as  I  contemplate  the  future  course  of 
monetary policy, I will be asking myself what good would it do to buy more mortgage-backed 
securities or more Treasuries when we have so much money sitting on the sidelines and yet 
have no sense of direction for the future of the federal government’s tax and spending policy. 
And with the president’s health care legislation awaiting resolution in the Supreme Court, we 
also  know  that  no  business  can  budget  its  personnel  costs  until  that  case  is  decided.  If 
job-creating businesses have no idea what their taxes will be, are clueless about how federal 
spending will impact their customers or their own businesses and cannot budget personnel 
costs  –  all  on  top  of  concerns  about  the  risk  to  final  demand  posed  by  the  imbroglio  in 
Europe and slowing growth in emerging-market countries – how could additional monetary 
policy be stimulative? 
A good theoretical macroeconomist can acknowledge that a great deal of liquidity is, indeed, 
going  unused  at  present.  They  might  likely  argue  that  further  monetary  accommodation 
would raise inflationary expectations by magnifying the fear that the Fed and other monetary 
authorities  are  hell-bent  on  expanding  their  balance  sheets  and,  consequently,  the  money 
supply  so  dramatically 
the  good 
macroeconomist would deduce, would be salutary: It would scare money out of businesses’ 
pockets  and  into  job  expansion  and  would  lead  individuals  to  conclude  they  better  spend 
their  money  today  rather  than  have  it  depreciated  by  inflation  tomorrow,  thus  pumping  up 
consumption and final demand.  
I  beg  to  differ.  I  would  argue  that  this  would  represent  a  form  of  piling  on  the  already 
enormous uncertainty and angst that businesses face with our reckless fiscal policy. To me, 
that would be the road to perdition for the Federal Reserve. There is in the marketplace a 
lingering fear that the Fed has already expanded its balance sheet to its stretching point and 
that  an  exit  strategy,  though  articulated,  remains  theoretical  and  untested  in  practice.  And 
there  is  a  growing  sense  that  we  are  unwittingly,  or  worse,  deliberately,  monetizing  the 
wayward  ways  of  Congress.  I  believe  that  were  we  to  go  down  the  path  to  further 
accommodation at this juncture, we would not simply be pushing on a string but would be 
viewed as an accomplice to the mischief that has become synonymous with Washington.  
inflation  will 
follow.  The 
inevitably 
result, 
that 
Raeburn versus Munch 
There  is  no  question  that  these  are  worrisome  times:  The  world  economy  is  slowing, 
joblessness is rampant in many countries, and in the United States, growth is anemic and 
unemployment remains unacceptably high. To me, this means that the Fed, and all central 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
their  heads  about 
them  and  not  give 
banks,  must  keep 
recommendations of those who are given to solving all problems with monetary policy.  
If  only  for  your  visual  pleasure,  I  have  chosen  two  paintings  anybody  in  the  vicinity  of 
St. Andrews  and  Edinburgh  would  know,  in  order  to  illustrate  alternative  approaches  to 
central banking at this juncture. 
The first is an icon of Scottish culture: Sir Henry Raeburn’s depiction of The Reverend Robert 
Walker  Skating  on  Duddingston  Loch,  a  seminal  work  in  the  permanent  collection  of  the 
Scottish National Gallery and a favorite of mine since I first saw it some 30 years ago.  
the  convenient 
to 
in 
 To  me,  Raeburn’s  work  provides  a  fitting  visual  metaphor  for  the  ideal  countenance  of  a 
central  banker:  The  Reverend  Walker  skating  forward  confidently  and  with  grace  upon  a 
notably uneven, rocky surface on an icy, dark, blustery day.  
An  alternative  depiction  is  Edvard  Munch’s  The  Scream  from  Norway’s  Gunderson 
Collection, now on temporary exhibit at the National Gallery. (There are four versions of this 
pastel, one of which recently sold for $119.9 million at auction at Sotheby’s. If you haven’t 
been  into  Edinburgh  to  see  the  Gunderson  version,  I  am  sure  you  read  about  Sotheby’s 
record-setting auction.)  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 In sharp contrast to Raeburn’s painting of composure, The Scream depicts a panicked form. 
In an autobiographical epigraph, Munch wrote that he conceived of the painting after a period 
of exhaustion and despair: “I stopped and leaned against the balustrade, almost dead with 
fatigue.  Above  the  blue-black  fjord  hung  the  clouds,  red  as  blood  and  tongues  of  fire.  My 
friends had left me, and alone, trembling with anguish, I became aware of the vast, infinite 
cry of nature”.1 
 I am going to conclude by suggesting that the image that best behooves central bankers as 
guardians of financial stability and agents of economic potential is that of Henry Raeburn’s 
Reverend Walker. To be sure, central bankers everywhere are fatigued and exhausted and 
increasingly friendless. But when the landscape is dark and threatening, those charged with 
making monetary policy must comport themselves with a grace that reassures markets and 
the  public  that  they  are  calmly  in  control  of  the  sacred  charge  with  which  they  have  been 
entrusted.  They  must  keep  their  “cool”  even  when  the  vast,  infinite  cry  of  the  money 
changers reaches a fevered pitch, the economic seas are blue-black and the clouds in the 
financial markets are red as blood and tongues of fire. Presenting an image comparable to 
that of the visage depicted by Edvard Munch – of policymakers trembling with anguish at the 
daunting demands of their profession – would provide scant comfort to those who depend 
upon  them  to  maintain  their  composure  and  skate  ably  across  a  cold  and  foreboding 
economic landscape, seeking to guide the economy to a better place. 
Central  banks  are  just  one  vehicle  for  influencing  overall  macroeconomic  behavior,  in 
addition  to  influencing  through  regulation  the  microeconomic  agents  that  transmit  that 
influence  to  the  markets  –  banks  of  deposit  and  other  financial  institutions.  We  work 
alongside  another  potent  macroeconomic  lever:  fiscal  authorities  –  governments  that  have 
the power to tax the people’s money, spend it in ways they deem appropriate, and create 
laws and regulations that influence microeconomic behavior.  
Unless fiscal authorities can structure their affairs to incent the private sector into putting the 
cheap  and  ample  money  the  Fed  has  provided  to  the  economy  to  work  in  job  creation, 
monetary policy will prove impotent. And we will likely barely survive our first centennial, let 
alone have confidence that we will reach our sixth. 
Thank you.  
                                                
1 
“Painting and Sculpture in Europe 1880 to 1940”, by George Heard Hamilton, Baltimore, Md.: Penguin Books, 
1967, p. 75. This quote was written by Edvard Munch in his epigraph for the “The Scream” – known then as 
“The Cry” – when it was reproduced in the Revue blanche in 1895. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
