Paul Tucker: Introductory remarks at the book launch for “Investing in 
change – the reform of Europe’s financial markets” 
Introductory remarks by Mr Paul Tucker, Deputy Governor for Financial Stability at the Bank 
of  England,  at  the  Association  of  Financial  Markets  in  Europe  book  launch,  London, 
1 February 2012. 
 AFME’s book is significant as it has reached beyond its own community – of investment and 
wholesale  bankers.  The  contributions  come  from  journalism,  politics,  academia,  business, 
and central banking. Each of our communities carries some of the responsibility for the mess 
that engulfed the world’s financial system, inflicting hardship on households and businesses 
around  the  globe.  That  must  continue  to  drive  us  as  we  work  to  devise  new  “rules  of  the 
game” for a better financial system. 
This evening, I want to dwell on just one of the guiding principles of the international reform 
programme: banks should not depend on a safety net from taxpayers.  
Of course, retail deposits – up to £85,000 in this country – will continue to be insured. And 
we  probably  also  need  measures  –  possibly  segregated  accounts  –  that  can  protect  the 
Temporary High Balances that arise when, for example, a person sells a house or receives a 
legacy. But regular creditors of banks should be at risk. Pretty much everything underway in 
international finance at present reflects the dynamics set in train by a progressive withdrawal 
of the safety net. 
Two points on how that will be delivered. And three points on what it will mean.  
On the “how”, the first thing to say is that going forward, banks are being required to carry 
considerably more capital and liquidity. Second, as is now well known within the industry, the 
international authorities have agreed a blueprint for resolution regimes to manage the failure 
of  so-called  Systemically  Important  Financial  Institutions  in  an  orderly  way.  G20  Leaders 
have  committed  to  legislate  that  regime  into  their  domestic  systems  where  necessary.  All 
resolution regimes have the effect of distributing the losses of distressed financial firms – ie 
losses  already  or  prospectively  exceeding  equity  –  across  unsecured,  uninsured  creditors. 
That  is  the  only  place  losses  can  go  if  taxpayers  are  to  be  spared.  “Bailin”  has  focussed 
minds on this, but is in fact just one method, albeit a very important one, for ensuring that 
uninsured creditors take losses.  
Those “how” points are very familiar. A few comments, therefore, on possible implications – 
all of which, looking ahead, point towards the crucial importance of our capital markets.  
First, in a world of less leveraged banks, a business model of Originate and Warehouse – 
because that is what it became by the middle of the past decade – is unlikely to be viable. 
Maybe a genuine model of Originate and Distribute will emerge, with something like agency-
type market making and trading. 
Second, holders of bank paper – especially bonds – will be living in a different world. They 
will have a big incentive to monitor the riskiness of banks. This is prospectively very positive. 
A couple of years ago I asked around London who were the best analysts of banks. Pretty 
well  all  those  named  were  current  or  past  equity  analysts.  A  measure  of  success  of  our 
reforms will be that some leading analysts will concentrate on debt rather than equity, on the 
downside risks: credit analysts. They will be needed. Maybe there are some already. 
The upshot is that withdrawing the safety net from banks will require the other parts of the 
financial  system  to  be  sound,  because  they  will  have  to  stand  on  their  own  feet.  It  is 
sometimes pointed out that the insurance industry – other than AIG – did not benefit from 
state  support.  But,  of  course,  insurance  companies  holding  bank  debt  were  the  direct 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
beneficiaries of state support for the banking system. Regulators of insurers – including, in 
this  country,  prospectively  the  Bank  of  England  through  the  Prudential  Regulation  
Authority – will need to take the changed regime for banks into account. We no more want 
insurance to be part of a “socialised” financial sector than banking. 
Finally  on  the  “whats”,  a  world  in  which  bank  debt  is  perceived  to  carry  risk  is  a  world  in 
which, as I have said before, it may be helpful for banks’ management to be remunerated 
partly  through  subordinated  debt  rather  than  just  equity.  Management  would  then  have  a 
clear personal incentive to focus on and contain tail risks. I understand that the EU Code on 
remuneration would already be consistent with this. 
What I am describing is not a scary prospect. It should, in fact, be liberating to establish a 
financial system based more firmly on the principles of the market. 
But it is a prospective world in which our capital markets will be at least as important as they 
were  over  recent  decades.  That  underlines  the  necessity  of  the  work  on,  for  example, 
standards for central counterparties, on shadow banking, and on transparent and resiliently 
liquid  markets.  This  is  a  world  in  which  securities  regulators  will  play  a  vital  role  in 
underpinning stability. In the UK, the new Financial Conduct Authority under Martin Wheatley 
will be a member of the new macroprudential body, the Financial Policy Committee, for just 
that reason.  
Thank you again to AFME for providing a forum through its book for this public policy debate 
to continue. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
