Barry Whiteside: Microfinance and financial literacy development in Fiji 
Opening speech by Mr Barry Whiteside, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji, at the Korovou 
Microfinance Expo, Korovou, 19 May 2012. 
 The Permanent Secretary Provincial Development & Multi-Ethnic Affairs, Lieutenant Colonel 
Inia Seruiratu 
The Commissioner Central, Major Bale Tuitubou 
The Roko Tui Tailevu, Mr. Semisi Saukawa 
Korovou Town Administrator, Mr. Jone Bera 
Microfinance clients and entrepreneurs 
Representatives of banks and financial institutions 
Government agencies and NGOs 
The Vanua of Tailevu 
Distinguished guests, friends, colleagues, ladies and gentlemen 
Bula vinaka and a very good morning to you all.  
It  is  a  real  pleasure  for  me  to  be  here  today  on  this  occasion  to  help  open  the  Korovou 
Microfinance expo. I note that this is a first for your town and the feedback we have received 
since announcing our plan to bring the expo to Tailevu has been very positive. 
I  wish  to  acknowledge  the  tremendous  support  we  have  received  from  the  Commissioner 
Central’s  Office,  the  Roko  Tui  Tailevu,  the  Principal  of  Tailevu  North  High  School 
Mr. Senikarawa,  the  Northland  Rugby  Secretary  and  all  the  stakeholders  here  today  in 
organizing this event. Vinaka vakalevu!  
This is the first Microfinance Expo organized by the Reserve Bank this year and follows two 
we had in the maritime zone and at the Suva Hibiscus festival last year.  
Our  partners  are  here  again  today  –  the  banks,  other  financial  institutions,  the  non-bank 
financial institutions, investment agencies, government agencies, mobile network operators, 
NGOs,  Microfinance  institutions,  the  National  Centre  for  Small  and  Medium  Enterprise 
Development and the micro enterprises and entrepreneurs. All are combining their efforts to 
promote  greater  awareness  of  financial  inclusion.  It  is  a  good  example  of  public  sector, 
private  sector  and  civil  society  partnership  towards  common  goals.  Results  are  produced 
through  such  coordination  and  understanding.  At  the  end  of  the  day,  it  is  the  general 
population that will benefit from such collaboration.  
Ladies and gentlemen, this Microfinance Expo in Korovou is a rare opportunity for you; we 
have  brought  microfinance  and  financial  literacy  to  your  door-step.  I  hope  you  will  take 
advantage, and benefit from this opportunity. The occasion is meant to be educational and 
fun.  Apart  from  the  abundance  of  useful  information,  services  and  products  displayed  and 
presented by the institutions represented, there  are also lots of giveaways for the children 
and the entire family. 
I  urge  you  to  make  this  a  day  where  you  take  away  something  new  in  terms  of  your 
understanding of finance. Please visit all the stalls where our stakeholders and colleagues 
are waiting eagerly to serve and assist you. And most importantly, please enjoy the day! 
With  these  few  words  I  would  like  to  kindly  introduce  Mrs.  Lorine  Tevi,  a  member  of  the 
National  Financial  Inclusion  Taskforce,  to  enlighten  you  further  in  the  vosa  vakaviti.  But 
before I do so, I have much pleasure in declaring the Korovou Microfinance Expo open. 
Vinaka Vaka Levu. 
END 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
