Jens Weidmann: Global economic outlook – what is the best policy mix? 
Speech  by  Dr  Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the  Economic 
Club of New York, New York, 23 April 2012. 
 Introduction 
1.  
Ladies and Gentlemen 
George  Bernard  Shaw  is  said  to  have  made  an  interesting  remark  about  apples  –  “If  you 
have an apple and I have an apple and we exchange these apples then you and I will still 
each have one apple. But if you have an idea and I have an idea and we exchange these 
ideas, then each of us will have two ideas.” 
I  think  those  words  perfectly  encapsulate  the  intention  of  the  Economic  Club  of  New  York 
and of today’s event. Ideas multiply when you share them and they become better when you 
discuss them. 
I  am  therefore  pleased  and  honoured  to  be  able  to  share  some  ideas  with  such  a 
distinguished audience today. And I look forward to discussing them with you. 
In  a  long  list  of  speakers,  I  am  the  third  Bundesbank  President  to  speak  at  the  Economic 
Club. The first was Karl Otto Pöhl in 1991, followed by Hans Tietmeyer in 1996. 
Although  only  a  few  years  have  passed  since  then,  the  global  economic  landscape  has 
completely transformed in the meantime – just think of the spread of globalisation, think of 
the introduction of the euro, think of the Asian crisis or the dotcom bubble. All these events 
and others have constantly shaped and reshaped our world. 
Most recently, we have experienced a crisis that, once again, will change the world as we 
know  it  –  economically,  politically  and  intellectually.  It  is  this  new  unfolding  landscape  that 
provides the backdrop to my speech. 
I shall address two questions: “Where do we stand?” and “Where do we go from here?” 
Of  course,  it  is  the  second  question  that  is  the  tricky  one.  In  answering  it,  we  should  be 
aware that every small step we take now will determine where we stand in the future. 
Specifically,  I  shall  argue  that  measures  to  ward  off  immediate  risks  to  the  recovery  are 
closely  interconnected  with  efforts  to  overcome  the  causes  of  the  crisis.  They  are 
interconnected much more closely and vitally than proponents of more forceful stabilisation 
efforts usually assume. 
But, first, let us see where we stand at the present juncture. 
Where do we stand? 
2.  
When we look back from where we are standing right now, we see a crisis that has left deep 
scars. 
The International Labour Organisation estimates that up to 56 million people lost their jobs in 
the wake of the crisis. This number equals the combined populations of California and the 
state of New York. 
Or look at government debt: Between 2007 and 2011, gross government debt as a share of 
GDP  increased  by  more  than  20  percentage  points  in  the  euro  area  and  by  about 
35 percentage points in the United States. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
I think we all agree that the crisis was unprecedented in scale and scope. And the first thing 
to  do  was  to  prevent  the  recession  turning  into  a  depression.  Thanks  to  the  efforts  of 
policymakers and central banks across the globe, this has been achieved. 
Following a slight setback in 2011, the world economy now seems to be recovering. In its 
latest  World  Economic  Outlook,  the  IMF  confirms  that  global  prospects  are  gradually 
strengthening and that the threat of sharp slowdown has receded. 
Looking ahead, the IMF projects global growth to reach 3.5% in 2012 and 4.1% in 2013. For 
the same years, inflation in advanced economies is expected to reach 1.9% and 1.7%. 
Basically, I share the IMF’s view. However, we all are aware that these estimates have to be 
taken with a grain of salt – probably a large one. Being a central banker, I am not quite as 
calm about inflation. Taking into account rising energy prices and robust core inflation, prices 
could rise faster than the IMF expects. 
We have to be careful that inflation expectations remain well anchored and consistent with 
price  stability.  Expectations  getting  out  of  line  might  very  well  turn  out  to  be  a  non-linear 
process.  If  this  were  to  happen,  it  would  be  difficult  and  expensive  to  rein  in  expectations 
again. 
Even though the outlook for growth has improved over the past months, some risks remain – 
the European sovereign debt crisis being one of them. And this seems to be the one risk that 
is  weighing  most  heavily  on  peoples’  minds  –  not  just  in  Europe  but  here  in  the  United 
States, too. 
The euro-area member states have responded by committing to undertake ambitious reforms 
and by substantially enlarging their firewalls. This notwithstanding, the sovereign debt crisis 
has  not  yet  been  resolved.  The  renewed  tensions  over  the  past  two  weeks  are  a  case  in 
point.  Thus,  we  have  to  keep  moving,  but  each  step  we  take  has  to  be  considered  very 
carefully. As I have already said: each small step we take now will determine where we stand 
in the future. 
Where do we go from here? 
3.  
Eventually, three things will have to happen in the euro area. First, structural reforms have to 
be  implemented  so  that  countries  such  as  Greece,  Portugal  and  Spain  become  more 
competitive. Second, public debt has to be reduced – a challenge that is not confined to the 
euro  area.  Third,  the  institutional  framework  of  monetary  union  has  to  be  strengthened  or 
overhauled, and we need more clarity about which direction monetary union is going to take. 
I think we all agree on this – including the IMF in its latest World Economic Outlook. 
However,  there  is  much  less  agreement  on  the  correct  timing.  Since  the  crisis  began,  the 
imperatives I have just mentioned have tended to be obscured by short-term considerations. 
And surprisingly, this tendency seems to be becoming stronger now that the world economy 
is getting back on track. 
This view is reflected by something Lawrence Summers wrote in the Financial Times about 
four weeks ago. Referring to the US, he said that “… the most serious risk to recovery over 
the  next  few  years  […]  is  that  policy  will  shift  too  quickly  away  from  its  emphasis  on 
maintaining  adequate  demand,  towards  a  concern  with  traditional  fiscal  and  monetary 
prudence.” 
It  is in  this spirit  that  some  observers  are  pushing  for  policies  that  eventually  boil  down  to 
“more of the same”: firewalls and ex ante risk sharing in the euro area should be extended, 
consolidation  of  public  debt  should  be  postponed  or,  at  least,  stretched  over  time,  and 
monetary policy should play an even bigger role in crisis management. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
I  explicitly  do  not  wish  to  deny  the  necessity  of  containing  the  crisis.  But  all  that  can  be 
gained is the time to address the root problems. The proposed measures would buy us time, 
but they would not buy us a lasting solution. 
And five years after the bursting of the subprime bubble and three years after the turmoil in 
the wake of the Lehman insolvency, we have to ask ourselves: Where will it take us if we 
apply these measures over and over again – measures which are obviously geared towards 
alleviating the symptoms of the crisis but which fail to address its underlying causes? 
In my view, this would take us nowhere. There are two reasons for this. First, the longer such 
a  strategy  is  applied,  the  harder  it  becomes  to  change  track.  More  and  more  people  will 
realise this and they will start to lose confidence. They will lose confidence in policymakers’ 
ability to bring about a lasting solution to our problems. And we should bear in mind that the 
crisis is primarily a crisis of confidence: of confidence in the sustainability of public finances, 
in competitiveness and, to some extent, in the workings of EMU. 
But  there  is  a  second  reason  why  the  “more  of  the  same”  will  not  take  us  anywhere.  The 
analgesic  we  administer  comes  with  side  effects.  And  the  longer  we  apply  it,  the  greater 
these side effects will be, and they will come back to haunt us in the future. 
In  the  end,  it  is  just  not  possible  to  separate  the  short  and  the  long  term.  You  will  be 
tomorrow what you do today. 
With these two caveats in mind, let us take a closer look at the suggested policy mix. For the 
sake of brevity, I shall focus on monetary and fiscal policies. 
An even bigger role for monetary policy? 
3.1  
To  contain  the  crisis,  the  EMU  member  states  have  built  a  wall  of  money  that  recently 
reached  the  staggering  height  of  700  billion  euros.  As  I  have  already  said,  ring-fencing  is 
certainly necessary, but again: it is not a lasting solution. And it is not the sky that’s the limit – 
the limits are financial and political. 
In  the  face  of  such  limits,  the  Eurosystem  is  now  seen  as  the  “last  man  standing”. 
Consequently,  some  observers  are  demanding  that  it  play  an  even  bigger  role  in  crisis 
management.  More  specifically,  such  demands  include  lower  interest  rates,  more  liquidity 
and larger purchases of assets. 
But  does  the  assumption  on  which  these  demands  are  based  hold  true  when  we  take  a 
closer look at it? In the end, monetary policy is not a panacea and central bank “firepower” is 
not unlimited, especially not in monetary union. 
True,  this  crisis  is  exceptional  in  scale  and  scope,  and  extraordinary  times  do  call  for 
extraordinary measures. But the central banks of the Eurosystem have already done a lot to 
contain crisis. Now we have to make sure that by solving one crisis, we are not preparing the 
ground for the next one. 
Take, for example, the side effects of low interest rates. Research has found that risk-taking 
becomes  more  aggressive  when  central  banks  apply  unconditional  monetary 
accommodation  in  order  to  counter  a  correction  of  financial  exaggeration,  especially  if 
monetary policy does not react symmetrically to the build-up of financial imbalances. In the 
end, putting too much weight on countering immediate risks to financial stability will create 
even greater risks to financial stability and price stability in the future. 
The  Eurosystem  has  applied  a  number  of  unconventional  measures  to  maintain  financial 
stability.  These  measures  helped  to  prevent  an  escalation  of  the  financial  turmoil  and 
constitute  a  virtually  unlimited  supply  of  liquidity  to  banks.  But  monetary  policy  cannot 
substitute for other policies and must not compensate for policy inaction in other areas. 
If the Eurosystem funds banks that are not financially sound, and does so against inadequate 
collateral, it redistributes risks among national taxpayers. Such implicit transfers are beyond 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
the  mandate  of  the  euro  area’s  central  banks.  Rescuing  banks  using  taxpayers’  money  is 
something that should only be decided by national parliaments. 
Otherwise, monetary policy would nurture the deficit bias that is inherent to a monetary union 
of sovereign states. In this regard, the situation of the Eurosystem is fundamentally different 
from that of the Federal Reserve or that of the Bank of England. 
Moreover,  extensive  and  protracted  funding  of  banks  by  the  Eurosystem  replaces  or 
displaces  private  investors.  This  breeds  the  risk  that  some  banks  will  not  reform  unviable 
business models. So far, progress in this regard has been very limited in a number of euro-
area countries. 
And the Eurosystem has also relieved stress in the sovereign bond market.  However, we 
should  not  forget  that  market  interest  rates  are  an  important  signal  for  governments 
regarding the state of their finances and that they are an important incentive for reforms. 
Of course, markets do not always get it right. They may have underestimated sovereign risks 
for a long time and now they are overestimating it. But past experience taught us that their 
signal is still the most powerful incentive we have. At any rate, I would not rely on political 
insight or political rules alone. 
After  all,  monetary  policy  must  not  lose  sight  of  its  primary  objective:  to  maintain  price 
stability in the euro area as a whole. What does this mean? Let us say that monetary policy 
becomes too expansionary for Germany, for instance. If this happens, Germany has to deal 
with this using other, national instruments. 
But by the same token, we could say this: even if we are concerned about the impact on the 
peripheral countries, monetary policymakers must do what is necessary once upside risks for 
euro-area  inflation  increase.  Delivering  on  its  primary  goal  of  maintaining  price  stability  is 
essential  for  safeguarding  the  most  precious  resource  a  central  bank  can  command: 
credibility. 
To  sum  up:  what  we  do  in  the  short-term  has  to  be  consistent  with  what  we  are  trying  to 
achieve in the long-term – price stability, financial stability and sound public finances. This 
implies a delicate balancing act – a balancing act we shall upset if we overburden monetary 
policy with crisis management. 
Rethinking consolidation and structural reforms? 
3.2  
Now, what about consolidation and structural reforms? Here, too, we have to strike the right 
balance between the short and the long run. 
Those who propose putting off consolidation and reforms argue that embarking on ambitious 
consolidation  efforts  or  far-reaching  structural  reforms  at  the  present  moment  would  place 
too  great  a  burden  on  recovery.  They  do  not  deny  the  necessity  of  such  steps  over  the 
medium  term,  but  in  the  short-run  they  consider  it  more  important  to  maintain  adequate 
demand, avoid unsettling people and nurture the recovery. 
But in the end, the current crisis is, to a large degree, a crisis of confidence. And if already-
announced consolidation and reforms were to be delayed, would people not lose even more 
confidence  in  policymakers’  ability  to  get  to  the  root  of  the  crisis?  We  can  only  win  back 
confidence if we bring down excessive deficits and boost competitiveness. And it is precisely 
because these things are unpopular that makes it so tempting for politicians to rely instead 
on monetary accommodation. 
It  is  true  that  consolidation,  in  particular,  might,  under  normal  circumstances,  dampen 
aggregate  demand  and  economic  growth.  But 
these  normal 
circumstances?  It is  quite  obvious  that  everybody  sees  public  debt  as  a  major  threat.  The 
markets do, politicians do, and people on Main Street do. 
the  question 
is:  are 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
A widespread lack of trust in public finances weighs heavily on growth: there is uncertainty 
regarding potential future tax increases, while funding costs are rising for private and public 
creditors alike. In such a situation, consolidation might inspire confidence and actually help 
the economy to grow. 
In my view, the risks of frontloading consolidation are being exaggerated. In any case, there 
is little alternative. In the end, you cannot borrow your way out of debt; cut your way out is 
the only promising approach.  
Conclusion 
4.  
Allow me to conclude by going back to the beginning of my speech where I mentioned the 
benefits of sharing and discussing ideas. 
I  have  stressed  that  we  have  to  embark  on  reforms  that  make  the  crisis  countries  more 
competitive;  that  we  have  to  reduce  public  debt  and  that  we  have  to  further  improve  the 
institutional framework of monetary union. 
But  the  spirit  of  my  argument  was  expressed  succinctly  some  20  years  ago  by  Karl  Otto 
Pöhl. In his speech at the Economic Club he said: “The true function of a central bank must 
be, however, to take a longer-term view.” 
And after five years of crisis, the long term might catch up with us faster than we expect. We 
therefore have to think about the future now – and we have to act accordingly as well. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
