William C Dudley: What does interconnectedness imply for 
macroeconomic and financial cooperation? 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  Swiss  National  Bank-International  Monetary  Fund 
Conference, Zurich, 8 May 2012. 
 It  is  a  pleasure  to  have  the  opportunity  to  speak  here  today.  As  I  see  it,  the  complex 
interconnections that exist between the real and financial sectors of the economy, both within 
and between countries, have important implications for both macroeconomic and regulatory 
policy.  In  particular,  cross-border  coordination  in  both  realms  is  warranted.  Often, 
macroeconomic and regulatory policies are too narrow in their focus. At times, policies are 
designed with the goal of being “best” at the national level. Yet the resulting mix of national 
policies is distinctly inferior to what a well-coordinated global regime could have produced. 
Today I will discuss two important challenges that go along with living in an interconnected 
world. The first is how to define what aspects of macroeconomic policy or regulation require 
greater  international  coordination  and  harmonization.  Some  issues  can  be  handled 
effectively at a national level, but the crisis has demonstrated clearly that many can not. The 
second challenge is how to make international coordination workable so that progress can be 
made  in  a  timely  manner  while  still  preserving  sufficient  autonomy  for  countries  to  fashion 
policies to suit their particular idiosyncratic structures. As always, my remarks today reflect 
my  own  views  and  not  necessarily  those  of  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  or  the 
Federal Reserve System.  
We  live  in  a  globalized economy  in  which  the  flows  of  products,  capital,  and  ideas  across 
borders  have  led  to  significant  economic  gains  for  literally  hundreds  of  millions  of  people 
around the world. Thus, there is a strong public interest in ensuring that this global economic 
integration  is  supported  by  a  coherent  set  of  coordinated  national  macroeconomic  policies 
and  a  harmonized  international  regulatory  regime.  This  applies  to  the  policy  actions  we 
undertake  to  reduce  economic  imbalances  as  well  as  to  the  regulations  we  develop  to 
address the vulnerabilities in our financial system that were exposed by the crisis. The better 
we  are  able  to  develop  cooperative  global  solutions  to  these  types  of  issues,  the  more 
successful  we  will  be  in  creating  a  sounder  and  more  sustainable  global  economy  and 
financial system. 
It is clear that there were important imbalances in both economic and financial activity in the 
years preceding the financial crisis. For example, in the U.S., too much of economic activity 
was  based  on  an  unsustainable  housing  boom.  The  turmoil  in  financial  markets  that  was 
unleashed  when  the  boom  collapsed  subsequently  forced  the  U.S.  and  other  countries  to 
undergo  significant  adjustments.  These  adjustments  were  often  sudden.  They  transmitted 
large  shocks  across  the  global  economy.  These  shocks,  in  turn,  necessitated  other 
adjustments in trade, investment, and in financial markets elsewhere.  
More  generally,  we  know  that  the  global  economy  operates  under  an  important  constraint  
–  the  sum  of  trade  balances  around  the  world,  properly  measured,  must  add  up  to 
zero. When one country follows policies that are designed to increase exports, there must be 
an  offsetting  adjustment  elsewhere  –  either  higher  imports  or  fewer  exports  by  another 
country. Similarly, there is the same adding up constraint in terms of the financial flows that 
accompany trade and investment on the capital account – current account balances around 
the world – again properly measured – must add up to zero. 
What  this  means  in  practical  terms  is  that  the  outcomes  for  economic  activity  and  capital 
flows for any individual country depend not only on the public policy and private decisions 
made within that country, but also on policies and mix of activities pursued in other countries. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
For  example,  for  Germany  to  have  a  large  trade  surplus  with  the  rest  of  Europe,  other 
European  countries  must  run  trade  deficits.  And  if  Germany  runs  such  surpluses  it  must 
accumulate large financial claims on the other countries. Or, if the U.S. has an unsustainably 
high level of consumption, the adjustment to a lower, more sustainable level must be offset 
by greater investment and exports if the U.S. economy is to be able to operate close to full 
employment. 
The  fact  that  it  takes  (at  least)  two  to  tango  to  make  these  types  of  adjustments  is  just 
another way of saying that our economies are interconnected. In order for the U.S. to reduce 
its  dependence  on  consumption  and  to  increase  its  exports,  there  need  to  be  offsetting 
adjustments  in  other  countries,  such  as  China.  Thus,  the  key  issue  to  consider  in  crafting 
internationally  coordinated  macroeconomic  policy  is  not  whether  these  adjustments  will 
ultimately  take  place.  They  will  take  place  because  they  have  to  take  place.  Instead,  the 
issue for policymakers is whether the policies we put in place will allow adjustments to occur 
in a way that is consistent with a stable global economy, high levels of employment, and low 
inflation. 
At times, the situation is akin to the Prisoner’s Dilemma – a non-cooperative approach will 
lead to inferior results for both players compared to a cooperative approach in which each 
side  foregoes  the  chance  for  highest  potential  payoff  in  exchange  for  the  payoff  that 
maximizes returns jointly. But effective cooperation that leads to higher joint returns is difficult 
in this game because of the complexity of the inter-linkages and the political and institutional 
constraints that constrain the scope for action at the national level. 
In  macroeconomic  terms,  the  prospects  for  achieving  a  more  cooperative  solution  can  be 
enhanced  by  policy  transparency  so  that  the  policy  goals  and  reaction  function  of  each 
authority  can  be  well  understood  by  others.  This  again  applies  both  within  and  across 
countries. For example, the Federal Reserve is making efforts to provide greater clarity about 
its  inflation  objective  in  the  context  of  the  dual  mandate.  In  doing  so,  the  Fed  is  also 
continuing  to  underscore  that  actions  such  as our  purchase  of  U.S.  government  securities 
are  driven  exclusively  by  our  monetary  policy  goals,  and  that  these  policy  actions  will  not 
continue beyond the moment they become inconsistent with our dual mandate objectives. In 
general, policymakers should strive to ensure that we have both fiscal and monetary policy 
frameworks that are transparent and viewed as credible and durable. 
Interconnectedness  means  that  events  –  be  it  the  tragedy  of  a  Japanese  earthquake  and 
tsunami, a revolution in Libya, or a financial crisis sparked by a housing boom and bust in the 
United States – can be transmitted to domestic economies located far away from the initial 
source of shock, often at market-speed measured in milliseconds. This interconnectedness 
underscores  our  common  interest  in  cooperating  not  just  to  facilitate  needed  economic 
adjustments, but also to address fragilities in our interconnected global financial system. 
I  think  coordination  on  regulatory  matters  differs  from  on  macroeconomic  issues  in  two 
important respects. First, the benefits to cooperation and coordination on certain aspects of 
regulation seem easier to identify up front. Second, while policy coordination on regulatory 
issues  is  also  very  challenging,  it  may  not  be  quite  as  difficult  as  in  the  macroeconomic 
realm. The stakeholders are not typically as numerous or diffuse, the problems are generally 
easier  to  identify,  the  gains  from  a  cooperative  solution  are  more  obvious,  and  the 
cooperative solutions themselves may be easier to implement. 
On  the  regulatory  side,  I’ll  start  with  a  few  broad  observations.  First,  it  is  essential  that 
regulations be harmonized internationally to a much greater degree than in the past. This will 
ensure  there  is  a  common  minimum  level  of  standards,  which  in  turn  will  help  discourage 
regulatory arbitrage and a “race to the bottom”. 
Second, it is critical that the harmonized regulations produce something that is coherent and 
effective on an international level, and that the different regimes in specific jurisdictions add 
up to a workable whole. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Third,  regulatory  harmonization  and  cooperation,  by  necessity  requires  trust  and  a 
willingness  to  share  relevant  information  across  jurisdictions.  A  corollary  to  this  is  that 
national regulators need to be willing to constrain their unilateral actions somewhat in order 
to facilitate engagement and cooperative solutions on a global basis. 
In  this  respect,  I  think  there  are  two  areas  where  considerable  progress  has  been  made 
since  the  crisis  –  the  capital  regulation  of  globally  active  banking  organizations  and  the 
establishment  of  global  standards  for  financial  market  infrastructures.  The  first  initiative  is 
designed to ensure that globally active firms have sufficient capital to keep their risk of failure 
very low. The second initiative is designed to strengthen the financial market infrastructure so 
that if a large globally systemic firm were to fail, this event would not threaten to bring down 
the entire financial system. 
But even in these areas there still is much to do. With respect to Basel III, it is important that 
the  regime  be  implemented  on  a  consistent  basis  around  the  world.  In  particular,  the 
definitions of capital must not be watered down and risk-weighted asset calculations must be 
done  in  a  consistent  manner  around  the  world.  An  identical  portfolio  of  assets  should 
generate a comparable amount of risk-weighted assets regardless of the country in which the 
bank’s home office is domiciled. 
With  respect  to  standards  for  financial  market  infrastructures,  the  Principles  for  Financial 
Market  Infrastructures,  which  were  published  last  month,  are  an  important  step  forward. 
These principles establish the minimum standard for important FMIs around the world. 
But the establishment of these standards is just the first step. National authorities now need 
to ensure that their domestic regulatory regimes embody these principles, and these national 
regimes have to be credibly assessed for ongoing conformance to the new standards.  
Global standards for financial market infrastructures are necessary if we are to build a safe 
global system of central counterparty clearinghouse (CCPs) infrastructures though which to 
clear  standardized  over-the-counter  derivatives  trades  around  the  world. For  national 
regulators to be comfortable with such an arrangement there has to be an appropriate level 
of  information  exchange  and  cooperative  oversight,  and  the  Principles  explicitly  mandate 
this. Although cross-border information exchange and cooperative oversight are certainly not 
new – the coordination of currency settlement around the world through CLS is one important 
example – the model has to be further developed and adopted more broadly across a wider 
range of important global financial market infrastructures.  
How we proceed from here will be critical to our success in building a global financial system 
that is both stable and efficient. By facilitating the greatest netting down of risk, global CCPs 
through  which  all  standardized  OTC  derivatives  trades  would  be  cleared,  hold  out  the 
potential  for  the  greatest  amount  of  risk  reduction  and,  thus,  improvement  in  financial 
stability. But, for that outcome to occur, there needs to be a global oversight framework that 
ensures that the CCPs are held to global standards – not just in theory, but also in practice.  
There  are  other  areas  where  we  face  significant  challenges  in  effective  global  information 
exchange  and  regulatory  cooperation.  We  have  much  more  to  do  to  develop  resolution 
regimes  for  globally  systemic  financial  institutions,  including  establishing  the  rules  of  the 
game for the exchange of supervisory data for such firms, in clearly identifying ex ante the 
responsibilities  of  home  and  host  countries  in  terms  of  potential  liquidity  support,  and  in 
overseeing the orderly wind-downs of such firms when they encounter difficulties. 
The  exchange  of  supervisory 
the 
consolidated condition of a bank that operates in a host country, and for gaining insights into 
broader financial stability issues. For example, giving supervisors in host countries improved 
access  to  consolidated  balance  sheet  information  for  foreign  firms  operating  in  their 
jurisdiction  would  allow  for  a  more  accurate  assessment  of  a  firm’s  liquidity  position  and 
funding plans. 
for  understanding 
important  both 
information 
is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Another  area  where  there  needs  to  be  greater  international  cooperation  is  in  defining  the 
roles of home and host countries especially during times of stress. What is the responsibility, 
for  example,  of  the  host  country  to  provide  lender-of–last-  resort  liquidity  to  foreign  firms 
operating  in  their  jurisdiction?  At  what  stage,  if  any,  does  that  responsibility  shift  to  home 
country?  Should  these  responsibilities  change  depending  on  the  degree  of  information 
exchange or the degree or duration of stress? 
On the resolution front, we know that the benefits of a harmonized global regime would be 
substantial. By providing greater transparency to investors and depositors about the rules of 
the game in the event of distress, such a regime would likely reduce the likelihood of runs 
and financial panics while also allowing financial intermediation to occur on a global basis. 
However,  it  is  proving  challenging  for  some  jurisdictions  to  provide  clarity  around  how  an 
orderly  resolution  would  be  implemented  in  practice.  At  the  same  time,  this  lack  of  clarity 
within jurisdictions is contributing to and exacerbated by the lack of a harmonized approach 
across different legal and regulatory regimes. Many questions must be answered: How would 
different  creditor  and  counterparty  claims  be  treated? Who  would  provide  the  bridge 
financing to facilitate the orderly liquidation? Would the home country regime ensure equal 
treatment  of  all  banks’  claims  around  the  world,  regardless  of  jurisdiction  or  legal 
entity? Would there be clarity about this, ex ante? 
If  an  effective  global  resolution  regime  with  clearly  defined  ex  ante  characteristics  were  to 
turn out to be a bridge too far, national authorities may have to fall back on a subsidiarization 
model,  in  which  global  firms  would  have  to  establish  subsidiaries  on  a  country-by-country 
basis each with their own capital and liquidity buffers. Such a regime would require greater 
capital and liquidity as the banks would lose the significant risk diversification benefits gained 
from  operating  in  many  different  countries.  Such  a  regime  would  also  presumably  make  it 
more  difficult  for  these  firms  to  provide  financial  services  seamlessly  to  multinational 
corporations, global asset managers, and others that operate on an international basis. Even 
in  this  scenario,  however,  it  would  be  important  to  ensure  that  national  resolution  regimes 
could interact with each other in a coherent manner. 
To  sum  up,  my  view  is  that  we  live  in  a  globalized  world  both  with  respect  to  the 
macro-economy and the financial system. But too often we set macroeconomic policy and 
regulatory policy at a national level, and miss important opportunities to coordinate and make 
the  global  economic  and  financial  system  stronger  overall. We  need  to  understand  where 
greater  global  perspective  is  required  and  we  need  to  apply  that  perspective  consistently 
across jurisdictions in a timely manner. If we don’t do this, we won’t achieve all the benefits 
that are possible from global specialization and we will continue to run significant risks with 
respect to financial stability. 
Thank you for your kind attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
