K C Chakrabarty: Human Resource management in banks – need for a 
new perspective 
Inaugural address by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at 
the HR Conference of Public Sector Banks, Mumbai, 1 June 2012. 
 Assistance provided by Shri Shailendra Trivedi and Shri Mukul M. Pillai in preparation of this address is gratefully 
acknowledged. 
Shri Alok Misra, CMD, Bank of India, Dr. K. Ramakrishnan, Chief Executive, Indian Banks 
Association,  CMDs  and  EDs  of  Public  Sector  Banks,  fellow  bankers,  external  consultants, 
members  of  the  press  and  distinguished  guests.  I  thank  you  for  inviting  me  to  this 
conference. 
I am happy to note that a conference focusing exclusively on HR issues is being organized 
by Public Sector Banks. I understand that the conference is being organized at the instance 
of the Government of India, who are the promoters/ owners of the Public Sector Banks. It is 
good to see the promoters/ owners taking a keen interest in the human resource issues of 
the promoted companies. Of late, a general trend of promoters/ owners taking keen interest 
in normal routine operations of banks is being observed, which needs careful analysis. 
Let  us  have  a  look. Why  are  the  promoters/owners  being made  to  take  a  keen  interest  in 
your routine affairs? Efficient and effective HR systems are the key here. In my opinion, this 
may be due to something lacking in the management capacity of the banks. Hence, we need 
to  upgrade  our  HR  capacity  development  process  to  enhance  management  capacity  of 
banks, to avoid such needs on a recurring basis. If the banks’ HR practices are augmented 
and  optimized,  may  be  through  such  conferences,  there  will  be  an  overall  improvement  in 
efficient  management  of  banks,  which  would  preempt  the  need  for  the  promoter/  owner 
getting involved in normal issues. I would, therefore, like to congratulate the Department of 
Financial  Services,  Government  of  India  for  prompting  banks  to  take  this  long  pending 
initiative. 
I would structure my talk today into three broad segments where I would be discussing the 
importance of human resource management for banks, some of the key challenges facing 
HR managers in Public Sector Banks, including probable solutions, and why now is the right 
time to focus on HR issues. 
Why human resource management is important for Banks 
Human Resource Management is important for banks because banking is a service industry. 
Management of people and management of risk are two key challenges facing banks. How 
you  manage  the  people  and  how  you  manage  the  risks  determines  your  success  in  the 
banking business. Efficient risk management may not be possible without efficient and skilled 
manpower.  Banking  has  been  and  will  always  be  a  "People  Business".  Though  pricing  is 
important,  there  may  be  other  valid  reasons  why  people  select  and  stay  with  a  particular 
bank.  Banks  must  try  to  distinguish  themselves  by  creating  their  own  niches  or  images, 
especially in transparent situations with a high level of competitiveness. In coming times, the 
very survival of the banks would depend on customer satisfaction. Those who do not meet 
the customer expectations will find survival difficult. Banks must articulate and emphasize the 
core  values  to  attract  and  retain  certain  customer  segments.  Values  such  as  "sound", 
"reliable", "innovative", "international", "close", "socially responsible", "Indian", etc. need to be 
emphasized  through  concrete  actions  on  the  ground  and  it  would  be  the  bank’s  human 
resource that would deliver this. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
It is a common complaint among bank executives that skilled manpower is in short supply. 
No two arguments on this, HR resources are becoming scarce – both in quality and quantity. 
And,  it  is  quite  elementary  that  any  resource  that  is  in  short  supply  needs  to  be  properly 
managed  for  the  benefit  of  society  and,  therefore,  you  need  to  pay  attention  to  the  entire 
Human  Resource  Management  process.  What  do  I  mean  when  I  say  this?  You  need  to 
manage  the  people  –  and  for  this  you  need  to  discriminate  between  the  people,  I  mean 
positive discrimination. The entire spectrum of HR practice requires revolutionary changes if 
the banks have to survive.  Managing the people is the key challenge. And, in my opinion, 
discrimination is the key word when dealing with people. You will notice that I will use this 
word very frequently during my discussion. 
How to Manage Human Resources 
I  would  like  to  highlight  the  following  key  challenges  faced  in  HR  management  in  any 
organization and which is all the more relevant for public sector banks today: 
Planning  
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
Acquiring the right people 
Retaining/ Developing the people 
Managing people separation / exit 
I would attempt at sharing my thoughts on each of the above areas: 
Planning 
(a)  
As  the  economy  grows  at  a  steady  rate  of  around  7–8%,  incomes  rise  and  demographic 
dividends start accruing, the Banking industry is expected to take a quantum leap forward. 
But this growth will need a large number of people and considering that there are retirements 
in lakhs, a defining moment is being presented before the Nationalized Banks to transform. 
Are the banks ready to handle the new bunch of employees who will be culturally so different 
from their predecessors of the post nationalization era? It all begins with having a manpower 
plan. How many banks can claim to have a proper manpower plan that captures the type of 
people it requires, the level at which they are required, clearly defined roles for everyone, etc. 
Manpower plans should follow a lifecycle approach, that is, from the time of recruitment of an 
employee to his retirement. Further, this needs to be integrated with the Business Plan and 
strategy  of  the  bank.  Are  we  having  a  Business  Strategy  or  Business  Plan  needs  to  be 
addressed first. 
While  planning  your  people  requirement  it  is  very  important  for  you  to  develop  your 
“employer  brand”,  that  is,  your  reputation  as  an  employer  to  attract,  engage  and  retain 
talented candidates and employees. Banks will have to plan for the following:  
• 
• 
• 
A steady, carefully calibrated recruitment programme,  
As rapid technological changes transform business – continuous skill up-gradation.  
A new generation of the workforce will be working alongside an older generation as 
a  team.  Banking,  in  my  opinion  is  a  team  work and  this  new  situation  will  require 
cultural adjustments and therefore, change management  
Acquiring the right people: 
(b)  
What kind of talent is required by the banks? Discrimination is the key. Do  we need good 
people? Or do we need suitable people? I think we require good but suitable people. Is the 
mad  rush  to  top  campuses  justified?  Will  the  people  recruited  from  top  management 
institutes understand the Financial Inclusion drive? Will these people have empathy towards 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
poorest  of  the  poor? I  have  often  heard  bank  heads  talking  about the  challenge  of finding 
people keen to work in rural areas. Does it not indicate that there is something amiss in the 
way we recruit people? Is it not better to recruit people from smaller cities? 
How do we get to acquiring people with the right kind of talent? Unfortunately, it is the same 
limited talent pool that will be targeted by Banks, Financial Institutions, Insurance, Telecom 
and other industries which are on fast growth track and in need of talented manpower. While 
my friends in the Banking Industry are busy developing “on-line” application forms and “on-
line” tests, we need to probably question if we are even targeting the right kind of talent pool. 
I  would  like  to  have  a  study  on  how  many  people  in  remote  villages,  at  the  taluka /  tehsil 
level,  appear  for  the  recruitment  tests  that  are  conducted.  Because,  these  might  be  the 
people who could be best suited to drive our financial inclusion agenda. While we are busy 
testing  the  people  for  problem  solving  skills  on  paper,  Professor  Debashis  Chatterjee, 
Director of IIM Kozhikode says that these do not necessarily mean problem solving skills on 
the  ground.  Our  recruitment  tests  do  not  focus  on  testing  the  psychological  abilities  of 
candidates to ensure that only the ones with right attitude towards the job are selected. This 
is why we often end up with people having brilliant minds but incapable of actually delivering 
on the tasks assigned. 
Banks  need  to  seriously  look  at  lateral  recruitment  as  an  option  to  induct  specialists  at 
various  levels  with  specific  skill  sets  and  experience  pool.  While  we  have  often  heard  of 
people leaving banks to join finance, legal, accounting firms, etc. seldom have we heard of 
people leaving these professions to join banks. This, I think, needs to change. 
The right people will come only if they are paid competitive salaries. However, too much pay 
also involves moral hazard issues and invites adverse attention of external stakeholders. As 
we will see later, the salary structure in the PSBs appears to be distorted. There has to be 
discrimination in salaries of people. 
Retaining/ Developing the People: 
(c)  
We may be able to get the most suited people for our work but then the challenge is to retain 
these  people  and  to  develop  them.  There  are  several  dimensions  to  this  issue  such  as 
training/  re-skilling  of  employees,  performance  measurement,  promotion  policy,  transfer 
policy, talent management, communication, etc. I would like to briefly dwell on some of these 
issues: 
Training  /  Re-skilling:  The  nature  of  business  requires  massive  re-skilling  of  the  existing 
workforce  and  continuous  skill  up-gradation.  Khandelwal  Committee  has  recommended 
major  up-gradation  of  in-house  training  facilities  of  banks.  I  tend  to  have  a  different  view. 
With a lot of service providers in the market, should we not majorly utilize their services? In-
house  training  facilities  should  be  used  for  courseware  development  on  IT  /  electronic 
platforms.  The  courseware  should  facilitate  skill  development.  Again,  there  will  have  to  be 
discrimination  in  the  training  that  each  employee  has  to  be  provided  –  based  on  his  /her 
requirements and the need of the institution, not as a routine, not as a measure of reward 
alone. 
It  is  also  important  here  to  understand  why  people  work?  In  the  olden  times,  in  agrarian 
societies,  people  worked  for  livelihood.  Times  changed  and  came  the  industrial  age. 
Livelihood was not the only reason of working. As Henry Ford famously said “Why is it every 
time I ask for a pair of hands, they come with a brain attached?” The people then understood 
that apart from livelihood, there is something else required. This something else was termed 
“Job Satisfaction”. We have moved on further and are now in the “Knowledge Age” and in 
this age, in my opinion, people work for “Empowerment” more than anything else. I will touch 
upon other requirements of managing in Knowledge Age a bit later. 
The  best  development  of  people  is  through  empowerment.  People  at  all  levels  in  the 
organization must feel empowered. For this, we need to cut layers of bureaucracy that we 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
have created over the years and adopt an effective way to delegate. We have made some 
beginning in this direction in the RBI. 
Performance  Management:  This  is  the  most  important  area  of  Human  Resource 
Management,  the foundation  of  which  is  discrimination.  Unfortunately,  current  systems  are 
unable to discriminate and differentiate between performers and non-performers. In fact, it is 
impossible to identify who are the performers and who are the non-performers. I don’t know if 
any one of you has even attempted to identify who are, say, the bottom 25% people in your 
organization. In any organization typically there would be some 10–15% of people who would 
be the high performers. HR managers often focus on this segment and try to cater to their 
needs first. Instead, I feel that focus should be on the remaining 85% as any improvement in 
their performance would have a significant impact on the organization’s performance. With all 
the efforts a student who always scores above 90% marks in his class, will benefit by only a 
few percentage. The one who scores only 45%, however, has the potential of doubling his 
marks. 
The results of not having a proper performance management system are disastrous. We are 
all having to deal  with the problem of people who are “promotable” but not “postable” and 
people  who  are  “postable”  but  not  getting  promoted.  This  is  because  we  have  failed  to 
discriminate  between  performers  and  non-performers.  HR  systems  may  have  failed  to 
appreciate  performers.  In  fact,  we  have  not  even  tried  to  define  what  performance  is  in  a 
given  job.  Despite  this,  what  is  the  kind  of  time  we  are  spending  on  Performance 
Management? What is the kind of attention that the Boards, CMDs and EDs give to this? To 
begin with, job roles and job descriptions need to undergo a major overhaul. In fact, even at 
the level of CMDs/ EDs there is a need for complete job description and clear delineation of 
job roles of CMDs and EDs. We need to define “performance” appropriately in the context of 
banking services today for all levels of functionaries. 
A fair, transparent and objective mechanism for performance management is a must for all 
banks  because  an  effective  Performance  Management  System  is  the  key  to  talent 
management  and  succession  planning.  In  RBI  we  are  shortly  going  to  introduce  a  new 
Performance  Management  System  that  will  work  on  goal  setting,  potential  appraisal  of 
performers and developing a talent pipeline. 
We  are  also  going  to  face  major  challenges  on  the  Talent  Management  front.  In  coming 
times, the work force will get complex and there will be a need to juggle a wide  variety of 
people with varied needs and preferences, resulting in an array of relationships between the 
organization  and  those  who  work  for  it.  Peter  Drucker  had,  more  than  a  decade  ago, 
expressed  the  need  for  what  he  called  “non-traditional”  work  relations:  flexible  schedules, 
contract arrangements, virtual teams, etc. 
Managing in the knowledge era: We  are  living  in  the knowledge  age where  our  existing 
management  theories,  which  are  oriented  towards  being  more  productive  in  the  industrial 
society and the ethics around it, will need to undergo a 360 degree change. As I mentioned 
earlier,  the  key  driver  that  motivates  people  in  the  knowledge  era  is  not  livelihood  or  job 
satisfaction but is the feeling of empowerment. When we talk of talent management today, it 
is about managing knowledge workers and there are some prerequisites for it: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
The new generation, in the age of knowledge workers, is going to be different. We need to 
rewrite our employment contracts. There should be a variety of people working with us on 
variety of options – part time / contractual / regular – regular in regular job / regular on flexi-
hours, etc. 
They cannot be treated as subordinates, but as associates  
They cannot be managed, but led  
They will work flexi-time and flexi-place but would need a “home base”  
Above all, they cannot be purchased or bribed, they have to be empowered.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
A  Performance  Management  System  should  throw  up  future  leaders.  This  sounds  very 
simple but we must know what we expect from these leaders. What is expected of a leader? 
A leader is expected to do three things: 
(i)  
(ii)  
Plan (the tasks) 
Inspire (people) 
Inspire for aspiring 
Inspire for perspiring 
Deliver (on results). 
And; 
(iii)  
A leader is no leader if he / she cannot deliver. 
Systems/ Processes: The hallmark of any effective HR system/ process is that it should be 
objective and transparent. These traits are essential for the manpower to repose trust in the 
organization’s systems/ processes. No HR function can be effective if it does not enjoy the 
trust and confidence of its constituents. 
Two key stakeholders in the HR management process are Board/ Senior Management and 
Unions.  How  much  time  do  Board  members  spend  on  HR  related  issues?  Perhaps,  not 
enough. Structurally, it is important that Board/ senior management is actively involved in HR 
matters involving all its manifestations. Organized employee unions are an important part of 
the  democratic  process  and  form  an  effective  channel  for  communicating  with  employees 
down the line. It is important to involve them in the HR process without allowing them to have 
an overbearing influence. 
Communication: Communication with employees is a vital part of the HR process as it helps 
enhance transparency in HR practices, thereby imparting credibility to them. When dealing 
with  human  beings,  it  is  important  to  be  objective,  transparent  and  non-discriminatory  and 
this must be effectively communicated. The employee must say that the management has all 
the  above  qualities.  The  Board  must  spend  time  on  devising  ways  and  means  for  this 
communication  –  lay  down  appropriate  structures  for  the  purpose.  All  forms  of  modern 
communication channels including intranet, corporate e mails, etc. can be adopted to reach 
out  to  employees.  However,  despite  these  developments,  the  traditional  channel  of 
communicating  through  unions  continues  to  be  relevant  as  employees  attribute  greater 
credibility and reliability to messages received through their unions. The Banks have a clear 
cut advantage in this respect – they already have a participative process. Representatives of 
the  employees  sit  on the  Board  itself  and  hence,  it requires  better  practice  of  participative 
management in the real sense of the term. 
Managing people separation / exit: 
(d)  
Except maybe a last few years, so far most of the people leaving us were due to retirements. 
Things will change, unless we are doing all the other things that I spoke out earlier, properly, 
people  will  also  leave  us  for  other  opportunities  –  and  believe  me,  there  are  going  to  be 
plenty of them – not only from competitor banks and financial sector but also from outside the 
financial sector. 
We need to introduce a system of exit interviews to determine why people are leaving our 
organization – whether there are any inherent system/ structure failures? Have we not been 
able to empower the people enough? We should not try to block their exit but, as a part of 
the manpower planning process, should be able to identify substitutes who can step in and 
ensure  non-disruption  of  important functions,  in  the  event  of the  exit  of a key  person. The 
place  of  an  experienced  person  could  always  be  filled  in  through  lateral  recruitment  of  a 
person with matching skills/ experience. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
While we are facing a crunch of manpower – can we use our retired people in some way – 
we are paying them pension and reasonable medical benefits already – can some contracts 
not  be  worked  out  for  them?  Again,  can  we  not  provide  some  empowerment  to  them  to 
leverage on their inherent loyalty? They could be useful in brand building efforts, or perhaps, 
in our financial inclusion initiatives. It is, definitely, an avenue that could be explored. 
Is it the right time? 
Definitely yes. Believe me, the time is now! In fact, we are already behind the clock. During 
the 2010 to 2020 decade, Nationalized Banks are at the cusp of a unique opportunity – with 
people retiring in lakhs making it a “retirement decade”, it is the best time to transform the HR 
processes and implement some new age concepts. This kind of opportunity to transform HR 
processes is once-in-a-lifetime window which, if properly utilized, could help our banks take 
giant strides. On the other hand, those who miss the bus would lag behind. The kind of HR 
changes required are a tremendous challenge and opportunity at the same time. We need 
some  fresh  ideas  to  make  the  banks  “future  –  ready”.  This  Conference  would,  I  believe, 
throw up many such ideas. 
In  the  beginning,  I  alluded  to  the  promoters  –  Government  –  taking  a  keen  interest  in  the 
Banks.  Why  has  this  situation  arisen?  Let  me  present  some  data  on  staff  expenses  of 
various bank groups: 
Table: Staff expenses (Payments to and Provisions for employees)  
of Public Sector Banks versus Private Sector Banks 
Year 
Public Sector Banks 
Private Sector Banks 
Staff 
Cost per 
employee 
(Rupees) 
Staff 
Cost per 
employee 
(Rupees) 
1998–99 
8,83,648 
1,67,940 
60,777 
1,69,307 
2002–03 
7,57,251 
2,70,426 
59,374 
3,54,532 
2003–04 
7,52,627 
2,97,903 
81,120 
3,17,308 
2006–07 
7,28,878 
3,81,449 
1,37,284 
3,83,439 
2007–08 
7,15,408 
4,00,611 
1,58,823 
4,47,920 
2008–09 
7,31,524 
4,72,493 
1,76,339 
4,83,501 
2009–10 
7,39,646 
5,55,874 
1,82,520 
5,16,491 
2010–11 
7,57,535 
7,15,914 
2,18,679 
5,63,154 
 
The  above  table  suggests  that  Public  Sector  Banks  are  no  longer  the  major  employment 
provider in the financial market and also that their per employee expenses have gone above 
that  of  Private  Sector  Banks.  The  staff  strength  of  Public  Sector  Banks  have  gone  down 
between 1998–99 and 2010–11 but that of Private Sector Banks have gone up significantly. 
The per employee expenses of Public Sector Banks have gone above that of Private Sector 
Banks  and  today,  is  more  than  150%  higher  than  that  of  Private  Sector  Banks.  This  is 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
despite  the  fact  that  pension  expenses  of  PSU  Banks  are  not  fully  reflected  in  their  staff 
expenses. One thing is, thus, loud and clear – the competitive advantage in terms of staff 
costs that we always thought the Public Sector Banks had is no longer there. The absence of 
the  cost  advantage  coupled  with  the  problem  of  lower  productivity  underscore  the  critical 
need for urgent HR transformation in Public Sector Banks. Hence, time has come for us to 
pay attention to this critical aspect on which our ability to compete finally hinges on. We can 
no longer postpone this issue. 
Conclusion 
The public sector banking system in India is standing at an important cross road. There are 
critical  choices  to  be made  and  initiatives  to  be  taken. The time  is  ripe for  leaving  the  old 
baggage  and  taking  bold  measures.  These  measures  would  determine  the  future  path  of 
public sector banks and whether they would continue to retain their position of preeminence 
in  the  banking  space  or  would  they  yield  to  the  pressure  from  their  peers  in  the  private 
sector.  Considering  the  importance  that  banks  have  in  the  nation  building  process,  the 
choices made now could have a bearing on the economic future of the country and on the 
lives of crores of our fellow countrymen, many of whom are yet to be touched by the formal 
financial system. We must succeed. Not only for ourselves but also for the society and for the 
nation. 
I hope that some of the issues raised by me here today are dwelled upon during the course 
of this Conference and concrete action plans emerge to tackle the HR challenges facing our 
banks. I wish the Conference all success. Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
