Masaaki Shirakawa: Wishing the best for the Bundesbank’s new move in 
Tokyo 
Remarks  by  Mr  Masaaki  Shirakawa,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  reception  to 
commemorate 25 years of the Deutsche Bundesbank in Tokyo, Tokyo, 6 September 2012. 
 Good evening ladies and gentlemen. 
It  is  a  great  honor  to  be  invited  to  this  reception  celebrating  the  25th  anniversary  of  the 
Deutsche Bundesbank in Tokyo and the opening of its new and enlarged office. I would like 
to  extend my  sincere  congratulations to  Dr.  Andreas  Dombret  and  Dr.  Joachim  Nagel, the 
Executive Board members of the Bundesbank, Dr. Karlheinz Bischofberger, the head of the 
Financial Stability Department, Mr. Klaus Merk, the Representative of the new Tokyo office, 
and other staff members of the Bundesbank. Now please allow me to extend a few words of 
congratulations.  
Relationship between Germany and Japan 
Last year coincided with the 150th anniversary celebrating the signing of a treaty of amity and 
commerce between Germany and Japan. A variety of events were held in many places in 
both  countries.  In  March  2011,  I  was  given  the  opportunity  to  speak  at  Goethe  University 
Frankfurt.1 The commonly held image of Germany and Japan is that both countries are seen 
as  nations  with  advanced  manufacturing  technologies  and  highly  diligent  populations. 
According  to  the  global  public  opinion  poll  of  2011  conducted  by  the  BBC  World  Service, 
Germany  was  seen  as  having  the  most  positive  influence.  This  year,  Japan  is  top  of  this 
category with Germany as the runner-up. The reason for the positive perception of the two 
nations was their contribution to the global economy and to industry. 
The history of modernization in Japan shows that the country learned a lot from Germany 
when  establishing  the  social  infrastructure  necessary  for  its  economic  development  in  the 
nineteenth century. There are a number of stories related to the Germany-Japan relationship 
that every Japanese citizen knows. For example, in the early nineteenth century during the 
Edo period, at the time of Japan’s self-imposed isolationist policy, a German medical doctor, 
Philipp Franz von Siebold, opened a school called Narutaki-juku near Dejima in Nagasaki, for 
Japanese people to learn Western medicine. Large parts of modern Japanese law, including 
the civil code, are based on German law. And, as a central banker, I must of course remind 
you  of  the  great  contribution  made  by  Germany  to  banknotes  in  Japan.  Today,  Japan 
possesses the most advanced anti-counterfeit technology for banknotes. However, when the 
first notes were printed, Japan learned its printing techniques mostly from Germany. In 1872, 
ten  years  before  the  establishment  of  the  Bank  of  Japan  during  the  Meiji  period,  the 
Japanese government issued the first standardized yen notes, called the Meiji Tsuho. Since 
it was difficult with Japanese technology at that time to produce original plates with a delicate 
design and a pattern suitable to prevent counterfeiting, the Japanese government placed an 
order with a printing company in Frankfurt, Dondorf and Naumann, to create original plates 
for printing and asked for technical support.2 In this regard, we owe a lot to Germany for the 
production of the first yen notes. 
                                                
1   See the Bank of Japan's website, Masaaki Shirakawa, “150 Years of Innovation and Challenges in Monetary 
Control,”  Speech  at  Goethe-Universität  Frankfurt  am  Main  in  Celebration  of  the  150th  Anniversary  of 
German-Japanese  Diplomatic  Relations  on  March  8,  2011.  http://www.boj.or.jp/en/announcements/press/ 
koen_2011/data/ko110309a.pdf. 
2   See the Currency Museum page on the website of the Institute of Monetary and Economic Studies of the Bank 
of Japan: “Short Essays on Monetary History Contained in Monetary and Economic Studies: Paper Money in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Relationship between the Deutsche Bundesbank and the Bank of Japan 
It is said that the German Chancellor Helmut Kohl once stated that “I did not like many of the 
monetary  policy  decisions  of  the  Bundesbank,  but  as  a  citizen,  I  am  very  glad  about  the 
existence of the Bundesbank.” As this episode shows, the Bundesbank is well known for its 
independence and achievements in securing price stability. 
The Bank of Japan opened its Representative Office in Frankfurt in 1956, and in the following 
year,  the  Bundesbank  was  established  by  succeeding  the  Bank  deutscher  Länder.  Since 
then,  cooperation  and  friendship  between  these  two  central  banks  has  grown,  and  our 
representatives  in  Frankfurt  have  visited  the  Bundesbank  and  conducted  various  meetings 
so  that  both  sides  can  exchange  opinions,  quite  frankly  and  frequently,  on  important 
economic  and  financial  issues.  I  would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  express  my  sincere 
gratitude to all those who have contributed to nurturing the close bonds of cooperation and 
friendship between the Bundesbank and the Bank of Japan. Given the ever-increasing pace 
of  economic  and  financial  globalization,  I  believe  the  strong  human  networks  that  thrive 
among central bankers are becoming ever more important. 
In addition, I would like to express our sincere gratitude for the heartwarming support from 
the Bundesbank a year and a half ago. As you know, on March 11, 2011, Japan was hit by 
the  Great  East  Japan  Earthquake.  The  President  of  the  Bundesbank  Regional  Office  in 
Hesse arranged a charity concert to be held in the office’s auditorium. Furthermore, a large 
number of German people donated a great deal of money to Japan through the International 
Red Cross. Such generous and heartfelt support proved once again that Germany is indeed 
our good friend,  as  they  say  in  Germany, “In  der  Not  erkennt man  den wahren  Freund  (A 
friend in need is a friend indeed)”. 
Expansion of Tokyo Representative Office 
The  Bank  of  Japan  would  like  to  congratulate  the  Bundesbank  in  Tokyo  on  its  25th 
anniversary and on the opening of its new enlarged office. The Bundesbank chose Tokyo as 
the  home  for  one  of  its  two  overseas  Representative  Offices,  together  with  New  York.  In 
addition,  the  Bundesbank  made  the  decision  to  establish  a  trading  office  in  Tokyo  this 
September.  The  decision  shows  that  the  Bundesbank  recognizes  the  importance  of  the 
Japanese  economy  as  well  as  the  role  of  the  Tokyo  financial  market  in  the  Asia-Pacific 
region. The Bank of Japan greatly appreciates the Bundesbank’s decision, which I believe 
will be highly welcomed by all the people involved in the Tokyo financial market. 
Let me say in closing, that I strongly believe the enhancement of the new Tokyo office will 
deepen the friendship and cooperation, not only between the Deutsche Bundesbank and the 
Bank of Japan, but also between Germany and Japan. Congratulations. 
                                                                                                                                                   
Japan;  2-8  Shin-shihei  Note  (Meiji  Tsuho  Note)”.  http://www.imes.boj.or.jp/cm/english_htmls/feature_gra2-
8.htm. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
