Alan Bollard: Dealing with debt 
Speech by Dr Alan Bollard, Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, and Mr Michael 
Reddell, to the Employers and Manufacturers Association, Auckland, 6 August 2012. 
 Introduction 
Households, firms, and governments across much of the advanced world have taken on very 
large amounts of debt in the last couple of decades. In New Zealand, for example, the private 
sector owes three times what it did in 1998. People and governments are now living with the 
aftermath; dealing with the debt. Many individual lives will have been irreversibly changed. 
Even  at  an  aggregate  economy  level,  it  looks  as  though  we  could  be  dealing  with  the 
aftermath for quite some time yet.  
This speech offers some perspectives on what the accumulation of debt means for people, 
and for our economies. Inevitably some of the material will have quite a provisional flavour: 
how  things  will  play  out  remains  uncertain,  and  is  being  intensely  debated  by  academic 
researchers and policymakers alike. It matters to us all. 
Some context 
Debt is not new. In his  recent book, Debt: The First 5000 Years, the American sociologist 
David Graeber demonstrates the central role that credit has played in economic and social 
life  stretching  back  millennia.  But  some  things  are  newer:  for  example,  the  scale  and 
pervasiveness of the public and private debt, the scale of cross-border gross and net debt, 
and  the  central  role  that  highly-leveraged  financial  institutions  and  wholesale  financial 
markets  play  in  making  that  debt  possible.  And  what  is  particularly  striking  in  the  last  few 
decades has been the rate at which debt has increased (relative to income).  
If debt is not new, neither is it a bad thing. Debt gives borrowers and savers alike additional 
options. The ability to lend and borrow is an important part of what enables us to enjoy the 
sort of life we do. To see the point, one has only to try to imagine a world without debt – a 
world  in  which  entrepreneurs  could  not  borrow  to  develop  fast-growing  firms,  and  where 
home ownership was restricted to the rich and the over-50s (who had saved the full price of a 
house).  
At  a  national  level,  the  ability  of  one  country’s  citizens  to  borrow  from  those  of  another 
country  means  that  regions  that  need  a  lot  of  new  capital  to  develop  (think  of  the  United 
States or New Zealand in the late 19th century) can borrow from those with a lot of savings 
(think  of  the  late  19th  century  United  Kingdom).  That  has  huge  benefits.  Public  debt  can 
serve  important  purposes  too.  Historically,  many  of  the  biggest  increases  in  public  debt 
occurred during wars; debt allowed the huge fiscal costs to be spread across time. Other big 
increases  in  public  debt  were  used  to  fund  the  expansion  of  public  infrastructure.  More 
mundanely, the ability to borrow enables governments to buffer some of the macroeconomic 
effects of downturns. 
High  debt  and  big  swings  in  public  and  private  debt  have  featured  prominently  in  New 
Zealand’s modern economic history:  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   Central government debt was over 100 per cent of GDP for 70 years from the 1870s 
(and in excess of 200 per cent of GDP at peak). In 1972 net government debt was 
as low as 6 per cent of GDP, but was back to 50 per cent by 1992 (Figure 1). 
Private debt data are not as readily available, but total mortgage debt – houses and 
farms – is estimated to have been around 140 per cent of GDP at the end of the 
1920s.  It  is  a  little  lower  than  that  now,  but  as  recently  as  1990  the  stock  of 
mortgages was equal to only around 35 per cent of GDP (Figure 2).  
Our net international investment position (the net amount of debt and equity raised 
from foreign lenders and investors) has gone through similarly wide fluctuations. We 
were very heavily dependent on international capital prior to World War II, but the 
net amount outstanding abroad dropped to perhaps as low as 5 per cent of GDP in 
the  early  1970s.  Over  the  1970s  and  1980s,  the  net  reliance  on  foreign  savings 
increased substantially, settling at levels that are high by international standards and 
seem uncomfortable (Figure 3). 
Over the last couple of decades the main New Zealand story has been about the substantial 
increase in private debt; taken on by farmers, non-farm businesses, and households alike. 
For most of the period, government debt was falling and our (net) reliance on international 
savings has not changed very much. 
Figure 1 
Government debt* 
* From 1972, gross sovereign-issued debt and former core Crown net debt. 
Source: NZ Treasury, Statistics New Zealand 
 2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Figure 2 
Farm and housing mortgage debt  
Source: RBNZ, Statistics New Zealand  
 Figure 3 
Net international liabilities 
Source: Statistics New Zealand, Lane & Milesi-Ferretti (for pre-1989 NIIP data) 
 Rapid growth in debt can foreshadow problems 
The phrase “all things in moderation” might well have been invented for debt.  
For individuals, circumstances differ hugely. Young people starting out in the housing market 
probably always will borrow a large proportion of the price of their first house, and a large 
amount  relative  to  their  current  income.  Such  loans  are  risky  for  the  individual  borrower  if 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
something goes badly wrong. But for a well-managed bank (and for the economy as a whole) 
higher risk loans like those will typically be balanced with other loans which have gradually 
been being repaid for 20 or 30 years.  
For whole economies, “too much” debt can cause problems. But researchers are not really 
sure quite what is “too much” (among other things, measurement and institutional differences 
complicate  things).  Historically,  a  much  better  indicator  to  watch  out  for  has  been  large 
increases in debt (relative to incomes) for several years in succession.  
As  Reinhart  and  Rogoff  have  documented,  financial  crises  are  often  followed  by  tough 
economic times. But even without a financial crisis, periods of rapid increases in debt tend to 
be  followed  by  periods  of  economic  stress  –  recessions  that  last  longer  and  prove  more 
troublesome  than  a  “plain  vanilla”  recession,  in  which  any  lost  output  is  recovered  very 
quickly  (New  Zealand’s  mild  1998  recession  might  have  been  an  example  of  that  sort  of 
recession).  
There are good reasons why a large and rapid increase in debt (to GDP) seems to matter. 
Debt is not taken on in a vacuum. People are readier to take on debt when they are relatively 
more optimistic than usual about the future. Banks are keener than usual to lend when times 
feel  good.  And  people  make  choices,  re-organise  their  balance  sheets  and  their  spending 
patterns on the basis of that heightened optimism.  
Any  number  of factors, often  at  least  a  couple  in  combination,  can  result  in  a  credit  boom 
getting started. Countries’ experiences differ on that score, even in the most recent boom. 
But, typically, something causes spirits to lift, and with them spending and business activity. 
People become more willing to take the risk of buying a house or farm, of consuming more of 
their incomes than previously, or of expanding a business.  
Once credit is growing rapidly, the process tends, for a time at least, to be self-reinforcing. 
Easy credit tends to lift asset prices (strengthening expectations of further price increases), 
and people feel wealthier as a result. Experience tends to confirm people’s initial heightened 
sense  of  optimism.  Expectations  of future  incomes  are revised  up  and  people  make  plans 
accordingly.  In  time,  almost  inevitably,  people  tend  to  be  lulled  into  complacency  about 
downside risks, and become over-optimistic about how long the good times will last. Towards 
the  end,  it  is  often  the most  optimistic  borrowers  and  most  optimistic  lenders  who  are  still 
readiest to borrow and lend. 
New  Zealand’s  credit  boom  was  triggered  by  a  number  of  factors  among  them  the  huge 
unexpected surge in immigration in 2002/03. Potential household borrowers found that jobs 
were  easy  to  get,  wages  were  rising  quite  rapidly,  and  business  profits  were  good. 
Consumers  felt  more  confident  too,  and  were  willing  to  spend.  Population  pressure  and 
supply  constraints  meant  that  despite  a  high  level  of  construction  activity,  house  prices 
doubled.  The  boom  in  rural  land  (and  growth  in  lending  to  farmers)  was  even  bigger 
(Figure 4).  When  credit  is  growing  rapidly,  asset  prices  are  rising,  and  turnover  is  high, 
businesses servicing the domestic economy find themselves doing well. They, in turn, invest 
to take advantage of what look then like sustainably better opportunities. Sustained booms 
also generate surprising amounts of tax revenue. In New Zealand’s case, as the boom went 
on,  fiscal  policy  shifted  to  a  substantially  looser  stance.  That  shift  put  more  cash  into  the 
pockets  of  many,  including  families  who  might  otherwise  have  found  buying  a  house 
becoming just too expensive.  
 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Figure 4 
Credit growth: the boom by sector  
(Dec 2001 = 100) 
Source: RBNZ 
 But as booms go on, pressures build up on scarce resources, and policy interest rates tend 
to be raised to keep inflation in check. Optimistic borrowers shrug off rate rises for a while, 
but  the  burden  of  servicing  the  debt  gradually,  but  inexorably,  begins  to  mount.  Marginal 
projects become harder to sell and prudent lenders get a little uneasy. Modern credit booms 
have also often tended to skew the economy, diverting resources away from the tradables 
sector  towards  the  more  domestically-oriented  parts  of  the  economy  (construction, 
consumption and government spending). Productivity growth – the basis of sustained future 
income growth – tends to erode when that happens. 
The more leveraged a borrower is, the smaller the adverse change in circumstances that is 
needed  for  the  loan  to  become  a  problem.  Perhaps  a  firm’s  sales  growth  slows  or  asset 
prices do not rise quite as much as had been expected, the risk of losing one’s job rises, it 
takes a little longer to fill vacancies in rental properties, or the servicing burden becomes just 
too heavy. By the peak of New Zealand’s boom, for example, many highly-leveraged owners 
of investment properties faced weekly outgoings (interest and other expenses) well in excess 
of rental income. 
Of  course,  the  quality  of  the  debt,  and  the  purpose  for  which  it  is  taken  on,  matter.  New 
Zealand was probably fortunate that the small amount of very high risk lending was mostly 
undertaken  by  finance  companies  and  other  lenders  who  were  outside  our  core  banking 
system. But the nature of credit booms is that some of what initially looked to be good sound 
borrowing – whether to finance personal consumption or to undertake productive business 
investment – turns out not to be. That debt can then hang heavily: on the borrowers or (if 
borrowers fail to pay) the lenders.  
During  credit  and  asset  price  booms,  not  everyone  borrows.  For  every  buyer  of  a  higher-
priced asset, there was a seller. And both probably felt good about the deal done in good 
times. Older people who managed to downsize and sell the family home or farm secured a 
larger retirement nest-egg. As a result, they can consume more for the rest of their lives. A 
downturn  in  house  or  farm  prices  does  not  directly  affect  them.  But  the  people  who 
optimistically paid a very high price for assets, and who borrowed to finance the purchase (or 
who perhaps drew down some of the apparent increase in equity in their existing home) are 
now stuck with the higher debt. Time cannot simply be turned backwards. Having belatedly 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
realised that we had become over-optimistic, we cannot just go back to 2001. For better or 
worse, people have to live with, and work through, the consequences of past choices.  
That means many people have to reassess their plans, which typically means less spending 
and less investment. An atmosphere of caution takes hold, and affects everyone’s behaviour 
to some extent. For some it might just mean eating out less often, or cancelling an overseas 
holiday.  Employers  become  more  cautious  about  hiring,  so  those  who  lose  their  jobs face 
longer spells out of work. For some it might mean postponing retirement; for others delaying 
having (or cutting back the number of) children.  
On the other side, potential house buyers can now bide their time – no longer worrying about 
being priced out of the market if they wait a few more months or bid a little less aggressively. 
Lenders,  quite  rationally,  become  more  cautious  too:  collateral  values  are  not  rising  any 
longer,  and  many  business  borrowers find  their  cash-flows  lagging  behind  what  the  banks 
had counted on. On the fiscal side, when times get tougher governments also have to revise 
their  plans,  reassessing  the  level  of  tax  revenue  they  can  count  on,  no  longer  putting 
substantially  more  new  money  into  the  economy  each  year.  The flow  of  new  programmes 
tails  off;  existing  provisions  are  wound  back  and  the  private  sector  has  to  adjust  to  that 
change too. 
Adjusting after a credit boom 
During the last three years of the boom, private sector credit in New Zealand rose by around 
14 per cent each year (Figure 5), when (nominal) GDP was rising at about 6 per cent. As we 
noted  in  our review  of monetary  policy,  published  recently  in  the  Bulletin,  we  probably  put 
less weight on this gap at the time than we should have, or than we would do today. And that 
last phase came after a decade or more when private debt as a share of GDP had already 
steadily and substantially increased: private sector credit was about 70 per cent of GDP in 
1990 and was 160 per cent at peak in 2009. The end of the credit boom came rapidly: annual 
credit growth fell from 15 per cent to 2 per cent in only 18 months. 
Figure 5 
Private sector credit* growth 
* Private sector credit to resident borrowers, excluding repos  
Source: RBNZ 
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Figure 6 
Public and private sector credit* 
*Private sector credit to residents, ex repos, and former core Crown net debt 
Source: RBNZ, Statistics New Zealand 
 New Zealand’s credit growth was not so different from that in a variety of other countries. In 
one  form  or  another,  the  United  Kingdom,  the  United  States,  Australia,  Spain,  Denmark, 
Ireland and a swathe of other small OECD countries all saw historically large increases in 
private debt, and typically in asset prices too. The only major countries to avoid such booms 
were Japan and Germany. Japan, of course, was still adjusting to its own earlier private debt 
boom and bust.  
If  we  had  been  asked  a  decade  ago  about  how  New  Zealand  might  have  coped  in  the 
aftermath  of  a  rapid  build-up  in  debt  and  asset  prices,  we  might  have  been  relatively 
sanguine, especially if we had been told that the boom would end without a systemic banking 
crisis in either New Zealand or Australia.  
If asked, we would have talked in terms of a few years of relatively low actual growth, as the 
pressures on resources that had built up during the credit boom years dissipated. We would 
have looked towards a fall in the exchange rate, which would have raised both the cost of 
consumption  and  the  returns  to  production. That,  in  turn,  would  have  prompted  productive 
resources  to  shift  back  towards  the  tradables  sector.  Consumer  spending  would  no  doubt 
have  been  expected  to  weaken  but  we  would  have  expected  materially  stronger  exports. 
That sort of view underpinned, and is reflected in, the economic projections we published in 
the years just before the global recession.  
In  this,  entirely  conventional,  textbook  resource-switching  story  the  economy  would  have 
emerged  better-balanced.  We  would  not  have  expected  any  material  or  sustained 
interruption in the incomes the economy could sustainably generate over time. If anything, 
the rate of potential GDP growth might have been expected to accelerate.  
In  many  ways,  in  fact,  it  was  New  Zealand’s  story  in  the  early  1990s,  when  we  had  had 
corporate and government debt excesses, and a financial crisis of our own, to work through. 
Then, markedly lower real interest rates and a lower exchange rate facilitated a step-up in 
economic growth, exports, and productivity.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
Over  the  longer  term,  the  prosperity  of  a  country  and  its  people  depends  largely  on  the 
quality  of  the  country’s  institutions,  and  the  product  and  market  innovations  which  firms 
operating here can generate or draw on. The terms of trade – the value of what the world will 
pay for what we sell – also matters. Neither the quality of our institutions, nor the scope for 
generating  or  adopting  innovative  products  and  practices,  should  be  materially  adversely 
affected by an overhang of debt and somewhat overvalued house and farm prices. As just 
one  stark  example,  the  economic  historian  Alexander  Field’s  new  book  A  Great  Leap 
Forward demonstrates that, despite the grim American experience of the Great Depression, 
underlying  total  factor  productivity  growth  remained  strong  through  the  1930s,  laying  the 
foundations for renewed American prosperity in the post-war era. 
Sweden’s experience in the 1980s and 1990s is also widely cited. Household and corporate 
debt rose markedly in the boom years following liberalisation (though by less so than New 
Zealand  and  other  countries  experienced  in  the last  decade). That  culminated  in  a  severe 
recession and banking crisis in the early 1990s. But a sharp fall in exchange rate in 1992, 
and  a  strong  recovery  in  the  rest  of  the  world,  underpinned  a  substantial  rise  in  Swedish 
business investment and export incomes. A few years further on, the level of per capita GDP 
was  right  back  at  the  trend  level  one  might  have  expected  to  have  seen  if  the  crisis  had 
never happened (Figure 7). In another example, Korea experienced a very large credit boom 
in  the  1990s  and  then  a  severe  financial  and  economic  crisis  in  1997/98.  But  per  capita 
incomes were quite quickly back on the previous rapid growth path once the crisis passed 
(Figure 8). 
Figure 7 
Sweden: per capita real GDP 
Source: Conference Board Total Economy Database 
 8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Figure 8 
Korea: per capita real GDP 
Source: Conference Board Total Economy Database 
 Experience suggests that the aftermath of a debt and asset price boom need not materially 
hold  back  a  country’s  economic  performance  for  long.  But  this  time  it  looks  as  if  the 
accumulated  debt  is,  in  fact,  acting  as  quite  a  sustained  drag,  in  New  Zealand  and  other 
advanced economies. 
Figure 9 
New Zealand: per capita real GDP 
Source: Statistics New Zealand, RBNZ 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  9 
In mid 2012, New Zealand’s GDP per capita is still around 3 per cent below its previous peak 
(reached back in December 2007). Even allowing for the froth at the peak of the boom (in the 
jargon, the output gap we think existed in 2007); if the growth rate of the previous decade or 
so been sustained, per capita GDP would now be substantially higher than it is (Figure 9). 
But there is nothing in our forecasts – or those of other agencies – to suggest we are likely to 
get back to previous trend any time soon. To do so by 2017, 10 years on from the peak of 
the last boom, New Zealand’s economy would have to grow by perhaps 5 per cent each and 
every year from here on. Perhaps it will happen, but it does not look very likely at this stage. 
Indeed, we recently revised down our view of New Zealand’s sustainable rate of growth.  
Looking at per capita GDP growth across countries since 2007, New Zealand’s growth appears 
to be around the middle of the pack: some advanced countries have done quite a lot better, 
and some considerably worse. Our experience on that count is not much different from that of 
the United States (and while we have done a little better on employment they have done better 
on productivity). In many countries, we have to deduce or infer an important role for debt, but in 
the  United  States,  where  much  more  detailed  data  are  available,  it  is  clear  that  the  recent 
economic performance of states and counties where people took on relatively more debt has 
been worse than the economic performance in the rest of the country. 
There are, however, important differences. A crucial difference from, say, the American (or 
Spanish and Irish) experiences so far is that New Zealand house prices have not come down 
very  much,  or  for  very  long.  The  Federal  Reserve  recently  released  data  suggesting  that 
median household wealth in the United States fell 40 per cent in the three years to 2010 – 
and was back to 1992 levels. Most of the drop in wealth resulted from a fall in house prices – 
and house prices in the United States had not risen as much those in New Zealand. Sharp 
falls  in  nominal  house  prices  tend  to  be  much  more  disruptive,  especially  to  the  financial 
system, than  the  same fall  in  real  house  prices  that  occurs gradually  through  a  prolonged 
period of house price inflation running a little lower than general inflation.  
Another  important  difference  is  that  the  government’s  debt  as  a  share  of  GDP  is  still 
materially lower in New Zealand than in many advanced countries. Public debt here, and in 
most advanced countries, has increased substantially since 2008, but our starting point was 
so  much  lower  than  most.  New  Zealand  avoided  the  sort  of  systemic  financial  crisis,  and 
associated  bank  bailout  costs,  that  has  resulted  in  significant  additional  public  debt  being 
taken on in a growing number of countries. It is, however, widely accepted, here and abroad, 
that ongoing fiscal deficits are now mostly structural in nature. Authorities cannot just wait for 
time  and  normal  economic  recovery:  only  concrete  policy  choices  will  close  the  deficits, 
although of course there is lively debate as to just how rapidly that should be done. 
Factors that help explain the tepid recovery 
Why, then, are so many countries, even ones like New Zealand that avoided both a systemic 
financial crisis and the difficulties of a common currency area, still experiencing such a tepid 
recovery?  
We cannot be definitive but, in addition to the current idiosyncratic pressures in Europe, three 
factors seem to be at least part of the story: 
• 
First,  the  very  widespread  nature  of  the  2000s  credit  boom  and  the  resulting 
overhang.  Consider,  by  contrast,  the  experience  after  Japan’s  credit  and  property 
boom in the 1980s. Many talk of Japan’s “lost decade” – but per capita GDP in Japan 
fell  only  slightly  and  briefly  in  the  early  1990s,  and  its  per  capita  growth  and 
productivity (GDP per hour worked, or per person of working age) performance since 
the end of the boom far outstrips anything New Zealand or the United States (let alone 
the United Kingdom) have seen in the last few years (Figure 10). When Japan had to 
adjust,  it  was  able  to  do  so  partly  by  exporting  more.  The  world  economy  was 
performing  strongly,  and  lots  of  borrowers  in  other  countries  were  very  ready  to 
increase their own debts. When a single country experiences weak domestic demand, 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  resources can switch relatively readily into sectors more reliant on external demand. 
But it is hard for that to happen in a large chunk of the advanced world all at the same 
time, especially when many of those countries cannot cut official interest rates further, 
given the effective near-zero bound on nominal interest rates.  
Second, the sharp rise in New Zealand’s terms of trade in recent years appears to 
have  complicated  our  adjustment.  Such  a  lift  in  the  terms  of  trade,  if  expected  to 
last,  would  typically  trigger  an  investment  boom  as  firms  in  the  tradable  sector 
sought  to  take  full  advantage  of  the  much-improved  product  prices  and  higher 
expected  profits.  The  Australian  investment  boom  of  the  last  few  years  is  an 
example.  Nothing  similar  has  happened  here  since  the  global  recession. Whether 
that is because of the overhang of existing rural debt (and the illiquidity of the rural 
property  market)  or  because  the  high  terms  of  trade  are  not  expected  to  last,  or 
some  other  reason  altogether,  is  not  clear.  But,  for  now,  high  export  prices  have 
tended  to  hold  up  the  exchange  rate,  but  private  business  investment,  even  in 
sectors benefiting directly from the high terms of trade, has remained subdued.  
Third, there is the economic position of the advanced world as a whole relative to the 
emerging  world  as  a  whole.  Once,  fast-growing  emerging  countries  ran  balance  of 
payments  current  account  deficits  and  slower-growing  advanced  countries  ran 
surpluses. That was as true of 19th century New Zealand and the United States as it 
was of 20th century Singapore and Korea. For the decade or more, the pattern has 
been the other way round. Many emerging economies, some globally significant, have 
been  running  large  surpluses  or  even  balanced  current  accounts,  when  one  might 
reasonably  have  expected  that  they  would  be  running  deficits,  and  thus  supporting 
demand in the rest of the world. That might have been tenable, and consistent with 
strong widespread global growth, while the West was in a position to run up public and 
private debt rapidly. But advanced economy debt already appears too high, especially 
against a backdrop of rapidly ageing populations. A more balanced pattern of global 
growth would be likely to provide medium-term benefits to all regions of the world.  
Figure 10 
GDP per hour worked following credit booms* 
(1989 = 100 for Japan; 2007 = 100 for New Zealand and the United States) 
*Horizontal axis shows years before and after 1989 for Japan, and 2007 for New 
Zealand and the United States. In each case, GDP per hour worked is set equal to 
100 in the base year. 
Source: Conference Board Total Economy Database, Statistics New Zealand 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
Prospects for lower debt ratios 
Some  of  the  big  historical  swings  in  domestic  and  external  debt  ratios  New  Zealand  has 
experienced  were  highlighted  earlier.  There  is  nothing  self-evidently  permanent  about  the 
sorts of debt ratios we and other countries have seen in recent years. Indeed, there is good 
reason to think that over time debt to income ratios will fall back somewhat. But no one has a 
good sense of when or how much. History and theory offer no more than tentative pointers.  
For now, it is sobering that across whole economies, including New Zealand, debt to income 
ratios have still been edging up. In many countries, including New Zealand, private (business 
and household) debt to income ratios having fallen back a little – and that is typically what 
people  have  in  mind  when  they  talk  about  deleveraging.  But  the  rising  public  debt  has 
typically  been  at  least  offsetting  any  reduction  in  private  debt  ratios,  and  in  New  Zealand 
private debt itself is now growing at around the same rate that nominal GDP is increasing.  
(Of course, private and public debt are connected, although not tightly or mechanically. The 
private  sector  tends  to  respond  to  big  government  deficits  by  saving  a  little  more  than 
otherwise. In the same way, big government surpluses in the boom years probably led the 
private sector to save a bit less (and take on more debt) than it otherwise would have.) 
Debt  to  income  ratios  can  fall,  broadly,  in  three  ways:  bad  debt  write-offs;  income  growth; 
and by borrowers, in aggregate, making net repayments of their loans.  
In the United States, some of the (not insignificant) reduction in household debt to date has 
been in the form of bad debt write-offs. Those losses on housing lending have had obvious 
consequences  for  the  financial  sector.  In  New  Zealand,  there  have  been  few  significant 
losses on lending to households and, outside the finance company sector, total loan write-
offs have been relatively modest. Banks’ non-performing loans rose materially, but peaked at 
not much more than 2 per cent of total loans outstanding – well below the very substantial 
losses after 1987, in turn no doubt partly reflecting the much better quality of lending this time 
round. Most private lending is secured on property, so large loan losses tend to occur when 
there  is  both  a  substantial  fall  in  property  values  and  a  high  unemployment  rate.  In  most 
areas, New Zealand property prices did not fall very much or for long. And painful as it is for 
those directly affected, New Zealand’s unemployment rate in the last few years has risen to 
only around the average for the last 25 years. 
Income growth is the most attractive path to lowering debt to income ratios. It has often been 
an important part of successful adjustments. But, so far, incomes are still well below previous 
expectations.  Across the  economy, most  borrowers  in the middle  years of  the  last  decade 
probably expected that incomes would keep rising reasonably fast – not to find that average 
real  incomes  have  not  grown  at  all  since  2005.  Faster  sustained  growth  remains  very 
attractive, if only we were able to achieve it. For New Zealand, it is difficult to envisage the 
sort of resource-switching that seems likely to be required occurring without a sustained fall 
in  the  (real)  exchange  rate.  That,  in  turn,  probably  involves  structural  change  in  the  real 
economy and some improvement in the international situation: it is certainly not something 
New Zealand monetary policy can bring about. 
What  about  prospects for  net repayments  of  debt?  Business  credit  rose  rapidly  during  the 
boom, although in a more disciplined way than during the property and equity boom of the 
mid-late 1980s. The stock of this debt fell for a time after 2008, partly because during the 
recession a number of highly-indebted firms had no choice but to raise additional equity or 
sell  assets  to  get  their  debt  back  to  levels  acceptable  to  their  bankers.  Looking  ahead,  if 
business  savings  (retained  earnings)  increased  further,  those  savings  might  be  devoted 
partly  to  repaying  debt. But  sustained growth  is  likely  to  require  increased  investment  and 
that is more likely to require some additional external finance. As it is, non-property-related 
business lending once again appears to be rising at a reasonably healthy pace.  
A  return  to  sustained fiscal  surpluses  will,  over  time,  mean  a fall  in  the  level  of  net  public 
debt. But as governments do not generate much of their own income, returning to surpluses, 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
from the current position of significant structural deficits, involves some mix of discretionary 
spending cuts, or increased taxes. In the transition, either route will tend to reduce income in 
the hands of firms and households. 
And what about households? There is no simple single story. The very low level of activity in 
the housing market in recent years (Figure 11) has tended to dampen household debt slightly 
artificially. That happens because existing borrowers go on repaying their mortgages, but not 
much new debt is being taken on. But such low levels of turnover (and despite the recent 
rise, turnover is still very low by historical standards) and low house-building activity are not 
expected to continue. Sharply higher house prices were a significant channel through which 
household debt rose: young buyers had to take on a lot more debt to buy out older sellers 
who had taken on their debt when house prices were much lower. If house prices are not 
changing much now, the typical young new buyer will still be taking on more debt than the 
typical older sellers will have been repaying. But if real house prices were to fall over time, 
perhaps  as  the  evident  supply  constraints  were  eased,  that  would  be  likely  to  lead  to 
materially lower aggregate household debt to income ratios.  
Figure 11 
House sales to population ratio 
(quarterly sales per thousand of population) 
Source: Real Estate Institute of New Zealand, Statistics New Zealand 
 Higher  household  savings  rates  raise  household  wealth,  but  whether  they  alter  gross 
household debt very much depends on who is doing the increased saving. For example, if 
people with large debts are now feeling overburdened then any increase in their savings will 
typically  reduce  the  aggregate  level  of  household  debt.  Many  of  the  most  indebted 
households are already quite cash-constrained. On the other hand, most households have 
little  or  no  debt  and  if  it  is  predominantly  those  people  who  are  saving  more,  whether 
because  the  economic  climate  encourages  greater  caution  or  perhaps  because  lower 
interest rates (and lower expected asset returns more generally) makes building up adequate 
retirement  savings  a  bigger  challenge,  household  financial  assets  may  rise,  but  with  little 
observed change in household debt.  
Whatever the precise pattern, it seems likely that the experience of recent years will change 
the nature of conversations in New Zealand families. For decades, it has seemed attractive 
for households to borrow – first as a hedge against a couple of decades of high inflation, and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
more recently as real house prices rose more dramatically than at any time in our history. 
High inflation is a thing of the past. And a repeat of the house price boom not only seems 
unlikely but would be very damaging and risky if it were to occur. 
Few  of  us  have  the  luxury  of  simply  observing  or  waiting  for  history.  Businesses  and 
households face real spending and savings decisions each day and New Zealand’s economic 
performance in the next few years will depend in part on the way in which firms and household 
respond to the changing circumstances and risks, in a climate of considerable uncertainty. 
Implications for the Reserve Bank 
What  does  all  this  mean  for  us  specifically  as  New  Zealand’s  central  bank,  charged  with 
running monetary policy to maintain price stability and conducting prudential supervision to 
promote the soundness and efficiency of the financial system? 
When  recessions  happen,  central  banks  typically  cut  policy  interest  rates  quite  a  lot.  In 
2008/09  we  cut  the  Official  Cash  Rate  (OCR)  by  nearly  six  percentage  points,  more  than 
almost any other central bank cut. But like most other central banks we have been surprised 
at the way policy rates have needed to, and been able to, remain so low for so long.  
We expected that most of the OCR cuts would be relatively short-lived, while the economy 
regained its footing. Financial market prices suggest that the private sector typically shared 
that sort of view. Two years ago, for example, we thought the OCR would be around 5.75 per 
cent  by  now  (Figure  12).  It  is  still  2.5  per  cent,  and  financial  markets  have  recently  been 
toying with the idea that the OCR might yet need to go lower (albeit mainly because of global 
risks).  Even  our  counterparts  across  the  Tasman,  dealing  with  Australia’s  record  terms  of 
trade, have been cutting their policy rate back towards 2009 lows.  
It begins to look as though something is going on now that we have not seen before. It is still 
too early to know quite what the nature and scale of the change is, and how enduring it might 
be. Among the challenges policymakers face is getting a better understanding of why, given 
how weak GDP has been in many countries, there is not more excess capacity evident in our 
economies. Fortunately, few monetary policy decisions are set in stone: we get to review the 
OCR, in light of all the emerging data, murky as they often are, every six weeks or so. 
Figure 12 
90-day interest rate projections 
Source: RBNZ estimates 
 14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Wearing our other (financial stability) hat, we are conscious of the risks financial institutions 
(the lenders) face. On the one hand, our banks (and their Australian parents) are still heavily 
reliant  on  foreign  wholesale  funding  (and,  of  course,  more  than  half  of  New  Zealand 
government  bonds  are  also  held  by  foreign  lenders).  Over  the  course  of  New  Zealand’s 
history, dependence on foreign funding has repeatedly proved an Achilles heel. The position 
is less risky than it was in 2008, but the risks certainly have not disappeared. If anything, the 
climate for cross-border lending, and for wholesale funding of banking systems, is probably 
less favourable than it has been for decades. 
New  Zealand  banks  are  well-capitalised  and  credit  risk  is  measured  conservatively.  The 
quality of New Zealand bank assets looks reasonably good, even in the face of some fairly 
demanding stress tests. But we will need to keep watching that situation closely, especially if 
incomes continue to lag behind what was expected when much of the debt was taken on. 
Our  sense  is  that  real  house  prices  are  still  somewhat  overvalued:  they  are  certainly  well 
above historical levels (Figure 13), and look expensive by international standards (relative to 
incomes or rents). If house prices were to fall, debt to asset ratios (the traditional measure of 
leverage)  would  worsen  (as  they  have  done  in  the  United  States),  even  if  debt  to  income 
measures were still gradually falling.  
Figure 13 
House price to rent ratio 
(1970=100) 
Source: OECD (to 2010Q3), QVNZ, Statistics New Zealand 
 Farm  debt  grew  very  rapidly  during  the  boom.  Dairy  farmers,  for  example,  have  taken  on 
almost $20 billion of net new debt since 2003, and (real) farm prices are well above where 
they were. Banks have taken some significant losses on loans to the dairy sector over recent 
years:  for  some  borrowers  things  did  not  turn  out  anywhere  near  as  well  as  expected.  In 
aggregate, the debt stock will probably be sustainable if commodity prices stay strong. But 
whatever the medium-term prospects, we know that commodity prices go through very big 
cycles.  When  product  prices  are  very  volatile,  high  leverage  can  be  a  recipe  for  a  nerve-
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
wracking  ride  for  borrowers,  lenders,  and  bank  regulators  alike.  We  have  taken  steps  to 
require banks to hold more capital against rural loans than they were doing previously.  
Concluding comments 
Standing  back  from  the  details,  five  years  on  from  the  beginnings  of  the  global  crisis,  the 
picture is still far from clear. Some things about dealing with debt have unfolded as expected: 
what cannot go on forever does not do so, and effortless adjustments after several years of 
rapid  credit  growth  are  rare.  But  other  things  have  been  less  expected,  not  just  here,  but 
across  the  advanced  economies.  In  particular,  the  persistently  tepid  recoveries  remain  a 
surprise. At present, none of the various hypotheses to explain what is going on seem fully 
adequate. 
The  accumulation  of  debt  within  New  Zealand  itself,  and  the  disappointed  expectations  of 
borrowers who paid very high prices for assets, is clearly playing some role in our low rates 
of growth  of  productivity  and  GDP.  Quite  how  large  that  contribution  is  may  be  something 
economic historians still debate decades hence. But the global nature of the adjustment is 
clearly also an important part of the New Zealand story. Whatever the precise channels, as 
yet not much of the expected rebalancing of the New Zealand economy (particularly towards 
exports) seems to have happened. Perhaps this should not be too surprising in view of the 
persistently  high  real  exchange  rate,  itself  partly  influenced  by  the  adverse  international 
climate.  
Looking ahead, we suspect that sustainable long-term ratios of household and farm debt, in 
particular,  are  likely  to  be  below  current  levels.  We  also  suspect  that  our  net  international 
investment position as a share of GDP (our net reliance on foreign debt and equity finance) 
will,  in  time,  settle  at  a  level  lower  than  it  has  been  for  much  of  the  last  two  decades 
(although a sustained improvement in our productivity prospects could, at least temporarily, 
mean a further increase in our use of foreign savings, to finance the investment needed to 
take advantage of the improved prospects).  
But it is also fair to note that we have suspected for a long time that New Zealand’s private 
and external debts were, in some sense, too high to be sustained. Towards the end of his 
term,  the  previous  Governor  Don  Brash  gave  a  thoughtful  speech  on  debt  issues  in  early 
2002, in which he noted that New Zealand then looked as if it was dealing with the aftermath 
of a long accumulation of private and external debt and adjusting accordingly. The exchange 
rate, for example, had been quite low for a couple of years. But that period turned out to be 
just a pause before the latest and largest wave of borrowing and asset price growth. Some 
things  make  this  time  look  different  –  in  particular  the  wide  range  of  countries  undergoing 
similar experiences – but it pays to be cautious about drawing strong conclusions. Looking 
ahead, we will need to be open to revising our hypotheses as events unfold.  
History is littered with booms and busts, some of which seem to have gone on for a very long 
time. But these things pass. When New Zealanders today look at Australia’s prosperity, who 
remembers  the  searing  financial  and  economic  crisis  Australia  itself  endured  in  the  1890s 
and early 1900s? Even severe overshoots in credit and asset prices, which can be costly and 
disruptive at the time, and which may permanently change the lives of some borrowers, are 
likely to throw our overall economic performance off course only temporarily. Our history, and 
the experience of other countries, attests to that. 
16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
