Benoît Cœuré: Risk-sharing in EMU – before, during and after the crisis 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at  the  inaugural  conference  “European  crisis: historical  parallels  and economic  lessons”  of 
the  Julis-Rabinowitz  Center  for  Public  Policy  and  Finance,  Princeton  University,  Princeton, 
20 April 2012. 
 I  wish  to  thank  Bartosz  Mackowiak  and  Alexander  Popov  for  their  contributions  to  this  speech,  and  Ignazio 
Angeloni for his comments. I remain solely responsible for the opinions contained herein. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I am honoured to be able to speak at the inaugural conference of the Julis-Rabinowitz Centre 
for Public Policy and Finance. 
In  my  remarks  today,  I  wish  to  reinterpret  the  crisis  in  the  euro  area  by  speaking  about 
mechanisms to share economic risks within Economic and Monetary Union (EMU). 
I  will  first  describe  risk-sharing  in  EMU  before  the  global  financial  crisis  of  2007–08.  The 
architects of the euro expected Monetary Union to foster flexibility of national economies and 
convergence  between  them,  and  emphasised  the  need  for  economic  policy  to  accompany 
and  accelerate  this  process.  Furthermore,  they  stressed  that  national  public  debt  levels 
needed  to  be  moderate  on  average,  so  that  fiscal  policy  could  be  used  to  smooth  out  the 
effects of adverse economic shocks. They also believed that most of the pre-EMU shocks to 
national  economies  were  the  result  of  monetary  and  exchange  rate  policy  decisions,  and 
they expected them to be less pronounced once Monetary Union was in place. 
I will argue that the outcome was very different from that foreseen by the architects of the 
euro.  In  the  first  years  of  EMU,  market-based  risk-sharing  mechanisms  developed 
surprisingly quickly – perhaps too quickly – while policy did too little to induce flexibility or 
convergence and national fiscal institutions malfunctioned. 
I will then speak about the effects on risk-sharing of the global financial crisis of 2007–08 and 
the ensuing European sovereign debt crisis that began in 2010. 
The two crises impaired the market-based risk-sharing mechanisms in EMU. Since flexibility 
or  convergence  had  not  been  achieved  to  the  necessary  extent,  and  national  fiscal  policy 
had limited ability to provide self-insurance, the two crises left the euro area with insufficient 
risk-sharing arrangements. The actions of the European Central Bank (ECB) and other public 
institutions, acting within their respective domains and according to their mandates, had the 
effect of temporarily filling this void. 
In the last part of my remarks, I will argue that, for EMU to be put on a sound and durable 
footing,  market-based  risk-sharing  mechanisms  must  be  restored  and  strengthened. 
Furthermore, the need for policy-makers to foster flexibility and convergence and for national 
fiscal  policy  to  act  responsibly  must  be  taken  seriously.  The  development  of  new  pan-
European institutions is also desirable, but as a complement to – not as a substitute for – 
policy action at the national level. 
Risk-sharing in the euro area before the crisis 
The architects of the euro were well aware of the theory of optimum currency areas. Based 
on  their  knowledge  of  this  theory  and  on  empirical  evidence,  they  expected  firms  and 
households in euro area countries to respond much less flexibly to economic shocks than, for 
instance,  firms  and  households  in  individual  states  in  the  US  union.  Comparatively  less 
developed  financial  markets,  more  rigid  labour  markets,  low  mobility  of  labour  across 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
participating economies, and the absence of a federal system of taxes and transfers similar 
to that in the United States were well-known features of the newly created Monetary Union. 
Since  financial  markets  were  relatively  less  developed  and  labour  markets  relatively  more 
rigid, most professional economists expected market-based risk-sharing mechanisms to play 
a limited role in EMU, at least initially. To cope with this situation, the European governments 
bound themselves in the Treaty on European Union to foster the flexibility and convergence 
of their economies and to cooperate on economic policy. Furthermore, the nations adopting 
the  common  currency  agreed  to  fiscal  rules.  The  reasoning  was  that  if  an  EMU  member 
country had a moderate level of public debt in the steady state and  an adverse  economic 
shock occurred, the government of that country would be in a position to smooth taxes and 
spending over time. The national deficit would go up and down with the business cycle, but 
debt  would  fluctuate  around  this  moderate  steady-state  level.  History  has  taught  us  that 
successful monetary unions usually come together with a fiscal union.1 This is illustrated by 
the  history  of  the  United  States.  Nevertheless,  the  view  held  in  Europe  at  the  time  of  the 
creation of the euro was that national fiscal rules could substitute for a fiscal union, provided 
they were strong enough.  
What did we actually see in the first years of EMU, before the outbreak of the global financial 
crisis?  The  policy  commitments  were  not  kept.  Policy-makers  made  little  effort  to  foster 
flexibility or convergence.  
The integration of markets for goods and services between euro area countries did continue, 
though essentially independently of any policy measures and as a result of previously taken 
commitments,  such  as  the  Single  European  Act,  and  to  some  extent  as  an  endogenous 
consequence of Monetary Union. Trade flows within the euro area have increased and their 
nature  has  changed,  with  a  lot  more  trade  at  the  intensive  margin  and  export  price 
compression.2 
However, labour markets remained rigid in essentially all member countries. Labour within 
individual euro area countries has traditionally been significantly less mobile than labour in 
this country. Economic research shows that in the United States, in the year after a regional 
labour demand shock, labour mobility accounts for about one-half of the increase in regional 
employment resulting from that shock. In the European Union, before the crisis, it would take 
three  times  as  much  time  –  three  years  –  for  labour  mobility  to  account  for  a  similar 
proportion of the rise in regional employment after a shock. Instead, most of the reaction to 
shocks came through changes in participation rates.3 Almost everywhere, the adoption of the 
euro was followed by at best incremental reform steps. Dual labour markets developed, with 
a significant fraction of employment growth due to temporary, and thus fragile, jobs.4 
Perhaps most importantly, many countries had entered EMU with high levels of public debt 
and did little or nothing to reduce it. For instance, France had a public debt-to-GDP ratio of 
57% in the year 2000 and 64% in 2006. Germany had a public debt-to-GDP ratio of 60% in 
                                                 
1   See  Bordo,  M.,  “The  Euro  needs  a  Fiscal  Union:  Some  Lessons  from  History”,  Shadow  Open  Market 
Committee, October 2010. 
2   See Fontagné, L., Mayer, T. and Ottaviano G., “Of Markets, Products and Prices: The Effects of the Euro on 
European Firms”, Intereconomics: Review of European Economic Policy, 44 (3), 2009, pp. 149–158. 
3   Strikingly, this finding held within individual European countries. This empirical regularity could not therefore 
be explained by factors such as language or unwillingness to move to another country. See Decressin, J. and 
Fatas,  A.,  “Regional  labour  market  dynamics  in  Europe”,  European  Economic  Review,  39(9),  1995,  
pp. 1627–1655. The contribution of labour mobility to adjustment may have improved in the 1990s and now be 
closer  to  that  observed  in  the  United  States.  See  L’Angevin,  C.,  “Labor  Market  Adjustment  Dynamics  and 
Labor Mobility Within the Euro Area”, DGTPE Working Paper, 2007–6. 
4   See Arpaia, A. and Mourre, G., “Institutions and performance in European labour markets: Taking a fresh look 
at evidence”, European Economy – Economic Papers, No 391, Directorate General Economic and Monetary 
Affairs, European Commission, 2009. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
2000  and  68%  in  2006.  The  analogous  numbers  for  Italy  were  108%  and  106%,  and  for 
Greece 103% and 106%. The Stability and Growth Pact was devised in 1998 to make sure 
that national budgets were kept close to balance or in surplus, thus regaining their ability to 
deliver insurance against macroeconomic shocks. It did not work. 
While progress was at best slow when it came to labour flexibility and national fiscal policy, 
market-based  risk-sharing  mechanisms  developed  surprisingly  quickly.  Integration  of 
financial  markets  proceeded  at  a  rapid  pace,  allowing  firms  and  households  in  Europe  to 
reap the benefits of lower and more uniform financing costs.  
The ECB developed its own set of indicators, both price and quantity indicators, in order to 
monitor  the  progress  of  financial  integration  in  the  euro  area.5  In  some  market  segments, 
integration was immediate and complete; in others it was more gradual. Euro area money 
markets  achieved  the  fastest  and  most  complete  integration.  The  cross-country  standard 
deviation  of  unsecured  lending  rates  decreased  essentially  to  zero  immediately  after  the 
introduction  of  the  euro.  While  somewhat  more  fragmented,  equity  markets  showed 
significant  signs  of  integration  as  well,  especially  after  the  application  of  the  Financial 
Services Action Plan. For example, the share of equity issued by euro area residents and 
held by residents of other euro area countries more than doubled between 1997 and 2006, to 
29%.6 
Perhaps the most striking sign of market-based risk-sharing in the first years of EMU was the 
simple  fact that  the  current  account  deficits  and  surpluses  of  euro  area  countries widened 
significantly. Furthermore, the large current account deficits were financed internally, within 
the euro area. In the years between the launch of EMU and the global financial crisis, Greece 
saw its current account deficit rise from about 7% to 15% of GDP; Spain from about 3% to 
12%;  Ireland  from  zero  to  about  7%;  and  Portugal  from  about  3%  to  5%  of  GDP.  These 
deficits  were  financed  in  the  market,  largely  by  investors  from  a  single  country:  Germany. 
Germany,  which  entered  EMU  with  a  roughly  balanced  current  account,  saw  its  current 
account surplus climb to about 8% of GDP by 2007. 
One  can  say  that  in  the  first  years  of  EMU,  the  Feldstein-Horioka  puzzle  within  the  Union 
quickly  disappeared.  This  development  had  a  straightforward  explanation  in  economic 
theory: less wealthy euro area countries had better growth prospects and offered a higher 
return on investment. In this environment, greater financial integration allowed a decrease in 
saving and an increase in investment in less wealthy euro area countries.7  
The  countries  with  large  current  account  deficits  boomed.  All  countries  with  large  current 
account  deficits  except  for  Portugal  experienced  a  signification  improvement  in  real  GDP. 
Between 2001 and 2007, real GDP increased by 35% in Ireland, 30% in Greece and 25% in 
Spain. By comparison, in the same period Germany grew by 10%. Increasingly, there were 
signs  that  high  GDP  growth  rates  were  not  accompanied  by  comparable  developments  in 
productivity. Current account deficits were exacerbated by excessive expectations of future 
revenues,  encouraged  by  a  benign  global  environment.  As  the  boom  continued,  a  gap  in 
relative  prices  opened.  Between  1998  and  2007,  unit  labour  costs  in  Greece,  Ireland, 
Portugal and Spain increased by 10% or more. In the same period, unit labour costs actually 
fell in Germany, and by more than 10%. The magnitude of that gap in relative prices as well 
as  the  size  of  the  current  account  deficits  could  have  –  and  perhaps  should  have  –  been 
interpreted as warnings. Accordingly, lending between euro area countries probably reflected 
insufficient risk management by financial institutions rather than genuine opportunities. This 
                                                 
5   The  full  set  of  these  indicators  can  be  found  in  the  ECB’s  annual  report  entitled  “Financial  integration  in 
Europe”. 
6   See “Financial integration in Europe”, ECB, April 2008. 
7   See  Blanchard,  O.  and  Giavazzi,  F.,  “Current  account  deficits  in  the  euro  area:  The  end  of  the  Feldstein-
Horioka puzzle?”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 33(2), 2002, pp. 147–210. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
should  have  been  apparent  from  the  extent  to  which  long-term  cross-national  investments 
were funded by short-term liabilities. To the extent that this was the case, hidden liabilities 
developed even in countries in which official fiscal statistics appeared reassuring. As such 
liabilities  originated  in  the  private  sector,  it  was  not  properly  understood  that  they  would 
eventually migrate to government balance sheets when they assumed systemic importance. 
To sum up, here is a snapshot of risk-sharing mechanisms in EMU on the eve of the global 
economic  crisis:  financial  markets  which  had  developed  surprisingly  quickly  –  perhaps  too 
quickly,  in  the  light  of  the  large  transnational  capital  flows  within  EMU;  insufficient 
surveillance by governments of current account imbalances and insufficient risk management 
by  market  participants;  and,  at  the  same  time,  little  policy  effort  to  achieve  flexibility, 
convergence  or  fiscal  responsibility  owing  to  a  benign  global  environment,  and  perhaps  to 
the erroneous belief that Monetary Union would in itself engineer convergence. The mix of 
mobile  capital,  rigid  labour  and  fiscal  underperformance  left  the  euro  area  vulnerable  to  a 
sudden malfunctioning of financial markets. Fickle capital could flow out of deficit countries at 
short notice, leaving them unprepared for adjustment.  
EMU  seemed  on  the  way  to  becoming  an  endogenous  optimum  currency  area,  and 
insufficient attention was paid to the possibility that markets could become segmented along 
national borders. Such fault lines should have been evident. 
Crisis 
When the global financial crisis of 2007–08 hit the European financial system, the market-
based risk-sharing mechanisms in EMU were impaired. The newly developed euro area-wide 
interbank  market,  in  particular  the  unsecured  interbank  market,  first  froze  and,  when  it 
recovered,  it  became  fragmented  along  national  lines.  A  deterioration  also  occurred  in  the 
secured  market  segment,  usually  more  resilient  to  market  stress.  Today,  yields  on  money 
market  instruments,  and  even  more  on  sovereign  bonds,  have  diverged  across  euro  area 
countries.  Cross-border  bond  holdings  by  banks  have  been  partially  unwound,  and  pan-
European  banking  groups  are  tempted  to  allocate  liquidity  into  national  pools.  In  equity 
markets, the impact of the financial crisis on cross-border integration seems to have been 
more limited, but overall, much of the pre-2007 progress in terms of financial integration risks 
being erased.8 
Since  flexibility  and  convergence  had  not  been  achieved  to  the  necessary  extent  and 
national  fiscal  policy  had  limited  ability  to  provide  insurance,  the  euro  area  was  left  with 
insufficient  risk-sharing  arrangements.  The  actions  of 
the  ECB  and  other  public  
institutions – some of them newly created – within their respective domains and according to 
their mandates, had the effect of temporarily filling this void. 
Official  assistance  packages  –  backed  by  the  European  Financial  Stability  Facility  (EFSF) 
and the International Monetary Fund – have provided elements of ex post cross-country risk-
sharing to Greece, Ireland and Portugal, which had been cut off from international markets. 
Other  policy  steps  have  been  taken  towards  restoring  trust  in  financial  markets  and  the 
soundness  of  banks.  I  am  thinking  of,  for  example,  the  capital  exercise  of  the  European 
Banking  Authority  (EBA)  and  injections  of  public  capital  into  banks  in  some  euro  area 
countries. 
Meanwhile,  the  actions  of  the  ECB  and  of  the  euro  area  national  central  banks  –  the 
Eurosystem – aimed to ensure the uniform transmission of the single monetary policy and a 
smooth  functioning  of  euro  area  payment  systems  –  in  effect  substituting  for  the 
                                                 
8   On the impact of the crisis, see “Financial integration in Europe”, ECB, April 2012. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
malfunctioning euro area interbank market. Let  me describe briefly the  policy measures of 
the ECB in response to the crisis. 
The ECB cut the policy interest rates to unprecedentedly low levels and chose to match fully 
the  increase  in  the  banks’  demand  for  reserves,  in  order  to  support  economic  activity, 
prevent  deflationary  pressures  and  ensure  a  uniform  transmission  of  the  single  monetary 
policy. We also lengthened the maturity at which we provide reserves to banks by launching 
two  three-year  longer-term  refinancing  operations  (LTROs).  Let  me  explain  why.  In  the 
autumn  of  2011,  market-based  funding  was  becoming  scarcer  for  banks  in  the  euro  area. 
The  LTROs  have  been  critical,  we  think,  in  preventing  funding  issues  from  igniting  a 
disorderly deleveraging process which could have led to a significant curtailment of banks’ 
lending to households and firms, and posed a downside risk for price stability. 
At  times,  we  have  undertaken  direct  intervention  in  selected  financial  markets.  We  have 
intervened only on a temporary and limited basis in clearly dysfunctional markets judged as 
being of critical importance for the transmission of the ECB’s monetary policy. 
The  extent  of  the  financial  tension  and  the  downward  pressure  on  economic  activity  has 
varied across the euro area countries. Typically, banks that have experienced funding strains 
are  operating  in  countries  that  ran  large  current  account  deficits  in  the  pre-crisis  era.  The 
direct purpose of the ECB’s intervention has been to ensure that each bank – irrespective of 
its  location  in  a  particular  euro  area  country  –  has  sufficient  reserves  to  deal  with  the 
possibility that creditors may refuse to roll over loans to that bank. Concretely, in some cases 
the reserves borrowed by distressed banks have been transferred to the creditors of those 
banks, often banks in the main current-account-surplus country in the euro area, Germany. 
The ECB has acted, on a temporary basis, as a substitute for decentralised markets within 
the euro area.9 
As a by-product of these developments, so-called TARGET2 imbalances have emerged. You 
will  recall  that  TARGET2  is  a  recording,  clearing  and  settlement  system  operated  by  the 
ECB. National central banks in the euro area – members of the Eurosystem – can build up 
claims vis-à-vis TARGET2 over time. TARGET2 is only a mirror of the underlying economic 
and  financial  imbalances:  with  a  properly  functioning  interbank  market,  no  claim  would 
appear  in  TARGET2,  and  the  underlying  economic  situation  would  be  exactly  the  same. 
Constraining  the  flow  of  funds  through  TARGET2  would  address  a  symptom  of  the  crisis 
without tackling its causes. It would hamper the freedom of capital movements as well as the 
smooth operation of payment systems, which is a basic task of the Eurosystem as mandated 
by its Statute. 
The current situation is not a viable risk-sharing arrangement for the long run. Today, risk-
sharing  between  euro  area  countries  occurs  to  a  considerable  extent  through  public 
institutions  and  only  to  a  limited  extent  through  markets.  This  has  constituted  an  optimal 
response to a temporary malfunctioning of markets. However, financial integration remains 
key  to  the  efficiency  and  competitiveness  of  the  European  economy.  The  EU  is a  market-
based  economy  and  markets  must  play  the  primary  role  in  allocating  economic  resources 
across  EMU  countries,  sending  price  signals  and  monitoring  the  associated  risks  under 
adequate supervision.  
Risk-sharing in the euro area after the crisis 
Let me discuss now what I see as the challenges ahead of us: how to restore and strengthen 
market-based risk-sharing mechanisms between euro area countries, and how to make euro 
area countries more resilient to adverse economic shocks in the future. 
                                                 
9   See  also  Merler,  S.  and  Pisani-Ferry,  J.,  “Sudden  Stops  in  the  Euro  Area”,  Bruegel  Policy  Contribution, 
2012/06. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
I would like to break this discussion down into four areas. 
First,  the  rest  of  the  euro  area  –  or  the  rest  of  the  European  Union  –  should  continue  to 
support the adjustment process of euro area countries that had to address an unsustainable 
fiscal  deficit  or  current  account  deficit  –  provided  that  there  is  adequate  conditionality  and 
monitoring. Currently, the rest of the euro area is accompanying – via the EFSF – the fiscal 
adjustment  in  Greece,  Ireland  and  Portugal.  Indeed,  the  rest  of  the  world  is  supporting  it 
through the IMF. The establishment of the European Stability Mechanism makes permanent 
the possibility of external support to a euro area member country in need. Ex ante monitoring 
and peer pressure are even more critical. The new excessive imbalance procedure prepared 
by the European Commission should be applied forcefully to identify an imbalance early on 
and seek a common solution with the euro area country in question. 
Second,  the  Treaty  on  Stability,  Coordination  and  Governance  in  the  Economic  and 
Monetary  Union  –  known  as  the  Fiscal  Compact  –  must  be  promptly  ratified  and  applied 
consistently.  Consistent  application  of  its  provisions  –  in  particular,  the  balanced  budget  
rule – will restore market confidence and the ability of national fiscal policy to smooth out the 
effects  of  adverse  economic  shocks.  Note  that  the  rules  laid  down  in  the  Fiscal  Compact 
concern the structural budget deficit, not the cyclical component of the budget. The intention 
is not to tie the hands of national fiscal policy-makers. Instead, the idea is to define clear and 
enforceable goals for fiscal policy in the long run, while leaving room for fiscal policy to react 
to negative shocks at business cycle frequency. This is surely a sound prescription for fiscal 
responsibility. 
Third,  Europe  needs  to  restore  and  strengthen  its  risk-sharing  via  financial  markets  and 
financial  institutions.  As  was  outlined  in  the  Delors  Report,  EMU  was  created  as  the 
indispensable complement to the Single Market.10 It is ironic that the outcome of this crisis is 
EMU with, de facto, little cross-country capital mobility. However, we cannot simply return to 
the kind of financial integration we had in the pre-crisis era. I have argued on other occasions 
that  European  policy-makers  ought  to  adopt  a  “Financial  Compact”  as  a  complement  to 
Monetary Union and to the Fiscal Compact, and pursue the creation – or re-creation – of a 
true pan-European market for capital. Repairing the single market for capital is a collective 
endeavour  in  which  the  ECB  has  a  role  to  play,  in  coordination  with  the  European 
Commission and the European Supervisory Authorities.  
To this end, let me put forward a few ideas. Meeting the capital adequacy targets set by the 
EBA’s capital exercise should be a priority. This process will strengthen banks, which will not 
only  facilitate  an  appropriate  provision  of  credit  to  the  economy,  but  will  also  reduce 
counterparty  risk  and  thereby  help  restart  interbank  transactions.  In  addition,  the  liquidity 
coverage ratio foreseen under the Basel III agreement must be implemented in such a way 
that  it  is  not  an  obstacle  to  restarting  interbank  credit,  in  particular  in  its  cross-national 
dimension.  It  is  also  vital  to  break  the  feedback  loop  between  bank  and  sovereign  credit 
which  lies  at  the  very  heart  of  the  current  crisis.11  I  therefore  believe  that  the  Financial 
Compact  should  include  a  harmonised  regime  for  bank  resolution  and,  further  ahead,  a 
single  European  agency  responsible  for  deposit  insurance  and  for  winding  down  failed 
banks. 
Fourth,  European  policy-makers  need  to  take  seriously  the  notion  that  it  is  up  to  them  to 
foster the flexibility of labour market institutions, the mobility of labour between regions and 
euro area countries, and the integration of European markets for goods and services. Much 
progress remains to be made in order for Europeans to live in a truly Single Market. Policy 
                                                 
10   “Report on economic and monetary union in the European Community” (the Delors Report), Committee for the 
Study of Economic and Monetary Union, Jacques Delors, Chairman, April 1989. 
11   This  mechanism  was  foreseen  by  Eichengreen  and  Wyplosz.  See  Eichengreen,  B.  and  Wyplosz,  C.,  “The 
Stability Pact: More than a Minor Nuisance”, Economic Policy, 13, 1998, pp. 65–104. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
initiatives  to  raise  the  economic  growth  potential  in  the  aftermath  of  this  crisis  will  be 
welcome.  It  is  crucial  that  their  promoters  take  the  perspective  of  the  Single  Market,  as 
opposed to the perspective of national economies.  
You have probably noticed that my discussion of how to recreate risk-sharing mechanisms in 
the euro area made little mention of the ECB. This is because the single monetary policy can 
at best support the required reform steps. Our best contribution will be to provide liquidity to 
banks  so  long  as  they  are  financially  sound  and  have  high-quality  collateral,  to  ensure  a 
smooth  functioning  of  the  payment  system  and,  above  all,  to  continue  to  deliver  price 
stability.  
interventions 
temporarily  provided  risk-sharing  arrangements 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
When one thinks about the crisis in the euro area in terms of mechanisms to share economic 
risks within EMU, the following observations emerge. 
The  years  between  the  creation  of  the  euro  and  the  global  financial  crisis  saw  an 
unexpectedly  rapid  development  of  market-based  risk-sharing  mechanisms  in  EMU. 
However, current account imbalances were not monitored adequately by governments, and 
risks taken by financial market participants were insufficiently understood. Those years also 
saw,  contrary  to  the  provisions  of  the  Treaty  on  European  Union,  little  action  by  policy-
makers  to  induce  flexibility  and  convergence  or  to  correct  public  finances.  History  will  tell 
whether this was due to a benign global environment, to excessive faith in the endogenous 
effects  of  monetary  union,  or  to  badly  designed  institutions.  The  euro  area  became 
vulnerable to a breakdown of financial markets. 
Policy 
for  Europe,  but 
ultimately,  market-based  risk-sharing  mechanisms  must  be  restored  and  strengthened. 
Furthermore,  the  need  for  policy-makers  to  induce  flexibility  and  convergence  and  for 
national  fiscal  policy  to  act  responsibly  must  be  taken  seriously.  New  pan-European 
institutions  can  be  an  important  complement  to  –  without  being  a  substitute  for  –  policy 
actions at the national level. 
I would like to end by quoting James Ingram’s conclusion of his visionary study of European 
monetary integration, published 39 years ago by this University: 
“It  is  obvious  that  the  necessity  for  perfect confidence in  the  permanent  fixity  of  exchange 
rate  in  monetary  integration,  as  defined  in  this  essay,  ultimately  confronts  the  reality  of 
national  sovereignty,  which  implies  the  right  and  power  of  a  nation  to  change  its  mind. 
Europe has so far resolved the potential conflict between sovereignty and federalism through 
negotiation  and  compromise.  Such  resolution  may  become  increasingly  difficult  as 
integration becomes closer. Without some signs of political unification, it may be particularly 
difficult to convince the capital markets that exchange rates are irrevocably fixed.”12 
Negotiation and compromise have indeed become more difficult as integration has become 
closer. But the EU is a union of democracies and it should be more trustful of the power of 
democracy to produce the solutions that will address the deep causes of the crisis. Signs of 
political unification are needed more than ever to combat European fragmentation, withstand 
the  temptation  to  raise  national  barriers,  and  take  collective  action  to  deliver  stability  and 
growth. 
Thank you for your attention. 
                                                 
12   Ingram, J.C., “The Case for European Monetary Integration”, Essays in International Finance, 98, Princeton 
University, 1973. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
