Ebson Uanguta: Promoting innovation and entrepreneurship in Namibia 
Speech  by  Mr  Ebson  Uanguta,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Namibia,  at  the  Namibia 
Business Innovation Centre (NBIC) Business Idea Competition, Windhoek, 23 May 2012. 
 Master of Ceremonies  
Prof. Tjama Tjivikua, the Rector of Polytechnic of Namibia  
Ms. Dagmar Honsbein, Director: Namibia Business Innovation Centre (NBIC)  
Dr Malan Lindeque, Permanent Secretary: Ministry of Trade & Industry  
Other Members of Polytechnic of Namibia’s Management Team  
Members of Advisory Board and NBIC Staff  
Invited Guests  
Participants of the competition  
Members of the Media  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Good afternoon. It’s a pleasure to join you today at this important event. I am honoured to be 
the keynote speaker and to present the awards to the finalists and overall winners.  
Ladies and gentlemen,  
Let me begin by congratulating each finalist of the Business Idea Competition. This year, I 
understand there were a record number of entrants and the quality of entrees has improved. 
Therefore,  to  be  chosen  among  all  these  applications  as  the  top  3  winners,  you  are  truly 
among  the  creative  and  innovative  individuals.  We  honour  you  for  your  hard  work  and 
resilience  thus  far  on  this  very  important  journey  of  innovative  entrepreneurship.  This  is 
indeed  an  important  step  in  that  journey;  that  is  the  step  of  conceptualisation  of  your 
business ideas. The next important step should be to monetise your innovation. Judging by 
your demonstrated hard work and commitment thus far, I have no doubt that all of you will 
pull  through  to  the  stage  of  sustainable  monetisation  of  your  ideas.  The  mentorship 
programme provided by the NBIC will help greatly in that process. I therefore implore you to 
avail  yourselves  to  the  ultimate  mentoring  that  will  be  offered,  so  that  you  will  be  able  to 
implement your business ideas successfully.  
To the other participants who did not make it to the finals, I urge you to keep on pursuing 
your ideas and dreams to innovate. History has repeatedly shown that perseverance is a key 
factor  to  the  long-term  success  of  every  innovator  and  each  entrepreneur.  For  instance, 
Thomas Edison termed as one of the most prolific inventor in history had 1,000 unsuccessful 
attempts at inventing the light bulb. It is reported that when a reporter asked, “How did it feel 
to fail 1,000 times?” Edison replied, “I didn’t fail 1,000 times. The light bulb was an invention 
with 1,000 steps.” This is the attitude that we should adopt; an attitude of “persistence until 
the  breakthrough”.  This  is  exactly  what  Namibia  needs;  an  army  of  persistent,  innovative 
entrepreneurs that will steer employment creation and economic growth.  
Ladies and gentlemen,  
As we all know, NBIC aspires to be the innovation hub that sparks the interest for innovation 
and  entrepreneurship  among  people  from  all  walks  of  life.  This  is  done  through  different 
programmes in place, such as workshops and individual mentoring to help people develop 
their  innovative  ideas  into  formalized  businesses.  As  such,  today  we  are  marking  the 
outcome  of  one  of  these  programmes  which  is  the  Business  Idea  Competition.  This 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
programme  in  particular,  targets  the  general  public.  It  is  a  form  of  inspiring  citizens  of 
Namibia  to  initiate  innovative  business  Ideas.  Entrepreneurs  play  a  key  role  in  keeping 
economies strong and competitive. They are the creators, risk takers, inventors and creator 
of jobs and wealth in an economy.  
The  starting  point  for  any  business  centers  on  the  belief  that  entrepreneurship  is  about 
creativity through a person coming up with an innovative idea in the market. In other words, 
one point of starting a business is to identify a problem in a certain market and come up with 
an idea of how to solve that problem. This was also confirmed by Thomas Edison when he 
said “I never perfected an invention that I did not think about in terms of the service it might 
give others… I find out what the world needs, then I proceed to invent.”  
With these words, Ladies and gentlemen,  
Entrepreneurs  should  be  encouraged  to  explore  causes  and  problems  in  areas  they  are 
passionate about because any problem could translate into a business. In addition, to be a 
successful  entrepreneur,  you  need  to  have  the  passion,  confidence  as  well  as  the 
commitment and ability to realize the materialization of your business ideas. Of course, you 
also need a business plan, but at the beginning, you need to come up with an idea. In short, 
one can say a great businesses start with a creative innovative idea that solves a problem at 
hand.  
Against this background, Ladies and Gentlemen,  
We need to change our focus and spend more time on training our people and help them to 
become innovative and creative. The reason is that, if we can get better ideas, we get better 
business plans and better businesses. For example, Bill Gates, Mary Kay, Richard Branson, 
Thomas  Edison,  Debbi  Fields  –  to  name  just  a  few,  are  some  of  the  successful 
entrepreneurs in the world, but they never graduated from college, nor did they pursue formal 
education  in  business  or  entrepreneurship.  Yet  from  Microsoft  to  Virgin  and  other  big 
businesses,  they  redefined  what  it  takes  to  turn  good  ideas  into  lucrative  businesses.  We 
therefore  acknowledge  and  recognise  the  important  role  the  NBIC  is  playing  in  training, 
coaching and mentoring aspiring innovative entrepreneurs. We believe that NBIC provides a 
unique  opportunity 
ideas,  explore  new  businesses,  discuss  emerging 
technologies,  share  growth  strategies  and  obtain  insight  from  global  business  leaders, 
community leaders and worldwide experts.  
The Bank of Namibia is therefore very proud to be associated with the NBIC’s quest to help 
people to create and realize their new innovative ideas. Indeed, as one of the sponsors of 
NBIC, today, the Bank of Namibia would like to reaffirm its commitment and support to this 
noble  call. We  have  faith  in  what  NBIC  is  doing  and  hope  that  it  will  continue  to  do  even 
more. We know that NBIC’s contribution to innovation and creativity will help greatly in the 
Nation’s quest for employment creation and economic growth, and more so, for Namibia to 
become a competitive country in the world.  
On its part, the Bank of Namibia, together with the Ministry of Finance and support from other 
Government  Ministries  and  Agencies  will  continue  to  persist  in  ensuring  that  the  Financial 
Sector  Strategy  that  makes  access  to  finance  for  SMEs  as  one  of  its  focal  points  is 
successfully  implemented.  This  is  in  light  of  the  fact  that  access  to  finance  will  go  a  step 
further in complementing the efforts of institutions such as NBIC and thereby ensuring that 
we create a vibrant culture of entrepreneurship as a Nation.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Without  much  ado,  allow  me  to  go  to  the  second  part  of  my  task  today  to  applaud  the 
finalists. These are the people who worked late into the evening and early in the morning to 
come  up  with  creative  and  innovative  business  ideas.  On  behalf  of  the  Bank  of  Namibia, 
once again, I want to congratulate all the finalists of the NBIC Business Idea Competition and 
wish you the best of luck. We look forward to learning more about your innovative ideas and 
helping you to move them off the drawing boards and into the marketplace. Although, you 
to  exchange 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
have  emerged  as  winners  today,  the  ultimate  winners  will  be  the  people  whose  quality  of 
lives will be changed through the impact of your business ideas on economic growth and job 
creation in Namibia – through your hard-work and determination.  
Finally, I would like to leave you with these words from Steve Jobs as food for thought, “I am 
convinced  that  about  half  of  what  separates  the  successful  entrepreneurs  from  the  non-
successful  ones  is  pure  perseverance.”  Let’s  persevere,  and  make  Namibia  a  truly 
competitive,  global  player.  Ladies  and  gentlemen,  it  is  therefore  a  great  honour  for  me  to 
present the awards to the winners of the Business Idea Competition.  
I thank you! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
