Már Guðmundsson: Iceland’s crisis and recovery and the crisis in the 
eurozone 
Address  by  Mr  Már  Guðmundsson,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland,  in  an 
international  panel  of  bank  governors  on  the  European  financial  crisis  and  the  Israeli 
economy, 
Israel, 
28 June 2012. 
the  Eli  Hurvitz  Conference  on  Economy  and  Society,  Masada, 
 Almost 90% of Iceland’s financial sector collapsed in the first week of October 2008, after its 
three  private  cross-border  banks  failed.  In  the  panic  that  gripped  global  financial  markets 
after the collapse of Lehman Brothers, these banks, like so many internationally active banks 
around  the  world,  were  faced  with  a  wholesale  run  on  their foreign  currency  liabilities  and 
were therefore heading towards a default on those liabilities in the absence of lender-of-last-
resort assistance in terms of foreign currency. However, given the size of the balance sheets 
involved (10 times GDP overall, with over two-thirds in foreign currency), it was impossible 
for  the  Icelandic  authorities  to  provide  this  assistance  on  their  own.  Had  the  government 
made a full-scale attempt to save the banks, it would have been at serious risk of defaulting 
itself. The Icelandic banks’ failures were large by any criteria: the largest of them places 4th 
on the world list of corporate failures, and the three Icelandic banks combined rank 2nd, after 
Lehman. It was thus an event of systemic proportion in parts of Europe. 
At that point, Iceland was already on its way into a recession after an unsustainable boom 
and serious overheating during 2005–2007 and a currency crisis in the first half of 2008. The 
banking collapse and the associated wealth loss and further currency depreciation only made 
the recession worse.  
Over  the  course  of  that  autumn,  two  separate  but  interrelated  sub-stories  of  the  recent 
Icelandic saga were converging in a tragic grand finale. These are: 
1. 
Iceland’s boom-bust cycle and problems with macroeconomic management in small, 
open, and financially integrated economies. 
The rise and fall of three cross-border banks operating on the basis of EU legislation 
(the European “passport”). 
2. 
Let us look a little bit closer at the second story. In just five years’ time, the Icelandic banking 
system expanded from a combined balance sheet of under 2 times GDP at the end of 2003 
to almost 10 times GDP in mid-2008. Most of this expansion was cross-border, and a great 
deal  of  it  had  very  little  to  do  with  Iceland,  as  both  financing  and  investment  took  place 
abroad.  
There  were  indeed  important  domestic  factors  behind  this  expansion.  One  was  the 
privatisation of the Icelandic banking system in the early 2000s, which was carried out in a 
manner  that  placed  the  country’s  largest  banks  into  the  hands  of  risk-loving  investment 
bankers and the ill-founded promotion of “financial centre Iceland”. On the other hand, it is 
hard to imagine that this scenario could have played out as it did without the worldwide glut 
of cheap credit in the years before the global financial crisis and Iceland’s position as a party 
to  the  EEA  Agreement,  which  provides  for  a  legal  and  regulatory  framework  based  on 
European  Union  Directives,  including  free  movement  of  capital  and  provision  of  financial 
services. The underlying principles are those of home licensing for operation throughout the 
EEA and a level playing field for competition, where size and location are not supposed to 
matter.  This  European  “Passport”  enabled  the  Icelandic  banks  to  operate  throughout  the 
EEA, including through branches in other EEA countries.  
We know now that there were and are deep flaws in this framework: flaws that are important 
elements  in  the  current  eurozone  crisis.  A  key  issue  here  is  the  dichotomy  between 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
European  passport  rights,  on  the  one  hand,  and  national  supervision,  national  deposit 
insurance, and national crisis management and resolution regimes, on the other. This is what 
recent proposals of a banking union are supposed to deal with. But then, for EEA countries 
outside the euro area, this framework entails potentially enormous foreign currency liquidity 
risk in the banking system that is not covered by a lender-of-last-resort (LOLR). This was a 
key element in the Icelandic banking crisis and must be addressed in future reforms of the 
system.  
Let me now say a few words about Iceland’s crisis and recovery. The shocks hitting Iceland 
in 2008 were mitigated by the policy response, which had two focal points. First, immediate 
crisis management was based on several key goals: keeping domestic payment systems up 
and  running,  preserving  common  citizens’  access  to  their  deposits,  and  ring-fencing  the 
sovereign  against  the  failing  private  banks.  The  tools  used  were  to  declare  all  deposits  in 
Iceland safe and to carve domestic banks (1.7 times GDP) out of the failing banks. Second, 
Iceland  went  on  a  programme  with  the  IMF,  which  had  three  main  goals:  stabilising  the 
exchange rate, achieving fiscal sustainability, and rebuilding a sound, domestically oriented 
financial sector. Comprehensive capital controls were a key element in the programme. 
The recession that followed  was the deepest in post-war history,  with  GDP falling by 12% 
from  peak  to  trough  and  unemployment  soaring  from  around  2%  pre-crisis  to  a  peak  of  
8–9%. The exchange rate fell by over 50% in 2008, taking the real rate to around 30% below 
its long-term historical average. That helped turn the huge current account deficit around to 
an underlying surplus but wreaked havoc on domestic demand and balance sheets, as ⅔ of 
corporate debt and 20% of household debt was in foreign currency, and an additional ¾ of 
household debt was indexed to the price level. But the policy measures were successful in 
turning  the  situation  around:  the  exchange  rate  stabilised  in  2009,  fiscal  consolidation 
progressed from 2010 onwards, growth resumed in the second half of 2010, the sovereign 
regained foreign capital market access in summer 2011, and the new banks were profitable 
and well capitalised. On the other hand, private sector debt restructuring has proven more 
time-consuming  than  originally  hoped,  and  lifting  the  capital  controls  is  a  challenging  task. 
According to the latest figures, Iceland’s growth rate is 4.5% and the unemployment rate has 
fallen to the 5½–6% range. 
What lessons can be drawn from this story? 
1. 
Excessive and volatile capital flows played an important role in Iceland’s crisis, and 
the capital controls and the underlying balance of payments problem are a legacy of 
that. 
To  a  significant  degree,  the  euro  area  crisis  is  also  a  capital  flow  –  balance  of 
payments problem. 
The framework for cross-border banking in the EU is deeply flawed. Either there will 
be a regression of financial globalisation at the EU level, or the freedoms must be 
matched by public frameworks and policies. 
In  the  absence  of  international  or  EU-wide  reforms,  small,  open  economies  like 
Iceland  might  have  to  take  action  to  protect  themselves,  such  as  restricting  the 
international  activities  of  home  banks  and  placing  much  more  stringent  prudential 
limits on foreign currency maturity mismatches and foreign currency lending. 
An independent flexible currency is a double-edged sword. In Iceland’s case, it was 
both part of the problem and part of the solution. 
We  need  to  think  of  ways  to  protect  the  sovereign  from  failing  banks.  Bailing  out 
bondholders is probably not always the best policy. 
Finally, some elements of the so-called “Icelandic model” merit further consideration 
as regards wider applicability: allowing banks to fail, using the exchange rate as a 
tool for adjustment, and using capital controls as a tool for stabilisation. But we need 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
to avoid hype and over-simplification. Some of what Iceland did was due to a lack of 
other  options,  and  the  cost-benefit  analysis  of  allowing  banks  to  fail  or  imposing 
capital  controls  might  look  quite  different  in  larger  countries  or  countries  with 
different connections with the rest of the world.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
