Loi M Bakani: Papua New Guinea’s semi annual Monetary Policy 
Statement (MPS) 
Address by Mr Loi M Bakani, Governor of the Bank of Papua New Guinea, Port Moresby, 
30 March 2012.  
 Objective of monetary policy 
The  objective  of monetary  policy  in  Papua  New  Guinea  (PNG)  is  to  achieve  and  maintain 
price stability. This entails low inflation supported by stable interest and exchange rates. The 
maintenance of price stability leads to: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Confidence in the kina exchange rate and management of the economy; 
A foundation for stable fiscal operations of the Government; 
Certainty for businesses to plan for long-term investment; and 
 A stable macroeconomic environment conducive to economic growth. 
Executive summary 
In  2011,  PNG  realized  high  economic  growth  as  measured  by  the  increase  in  real  Gross 
Domestic  Product  (GDP)  of  8.9  percent,  while  inflation  for  the  year  was  a  moderate 
6.9 percent. 
Real GDP growth is expected to remain buoyant in 2012 of around 8.0 percent, supported by 
strong domestic demand, as construction activity for the PNG Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) 
project peaks, production at the Ramu Nickel/Cobalt mine commences, other private sector 
investments come on line, and high public and private spending ensues in the lead up to the 
national  elections.  All  sectors  are  expected  to  grow,  led  by  manufacturing,  building  and 
construction, and transportation/storage/communication. 
The Bank projects annual headline inflation for 2012 to be around 8.0 percent, and both the 
exclusion-based and trimmed mean measures to be around 7.5 percent. 
PNG has also experienced significant levels of excess liquidity within the banking system in 
recent  years,  which  poses  a  threat  to  the  soundness  of  the  financial  system  and  to 
macroeconomic stability. The main source of liquidity is the foreign exchange reserve build-
up,  stemming  largely  from  dollar-denominated mineral  tax  earnings1,  inflows  related  to  the 
PNG LNG project and other private foreign direct investments. Whilst liquidity does not seem 
to  currently  have  an  impact  on  inflation  via  private  sector  credit,  despite  strong  economic 
growth, the Bank of PNG (Central Bank) is concerned about its potential adverse impact on 
price stability. 
The balance of payments recorded a surplus in 2011 and is projected to increase further in 
2012.  This  outcome  is  associated  with  inflows  for  the  PNG  LNG  project  and  high  export 
earnings.  At  the  end  of  2012,  the  gross  foreign  exchange  reserves  are  projected  to  be 
around US$5,087 (K10,598) million, sufficient for 7.6 months of total and 19.9 months of non-
mineral import covers. 
                                                
1   These  foreign  exchange  inflows  are  then  converted  by  the  Bank  of  PNG  into  kina,  and  either  spent  or  re-
deposited by the Government largely at commercial banks, thereby adding to liquidity. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The increase in international reserves led to growth in the money supply and liquidity. The 
trends in growth of monetary aggregates as experienced in 2011 are expected to continue in 
2012. In 2012, broad money supply is projected to increase by 14.8 percent, driven mainly by 
an  increase  in  the  Net  Foreign  Assets  (NFA)  of  the  banking  system.  Monetary  base  and 
private sector credit are projected to grow by 33.2 percent and 7.0 percent, respectively. 
The Government projects a balanced budget of K10.5 billion for 2012, with emphasis on key 
priority  areas,  consistent  with  its  medium  term  plans.  However,  any  further  increases  in 
Government  expenditure  in  relation  to  the  national  elections  and  rapid  draw  down  of  trust 
accounts  at  the  Central  Bank  would  exacerbate  the  already  high  levels  of  liquidity.  It  is 
therefore  important  that  there  is  close  coordination  between  fiscal  and  monetary  policy  to 
ensure macroeconomic stability. 
In anticipation of the sizeable revenue inflows from the PNG LNG project, the Government 
enacted the Sovereign Wealth Fund (SWF) Act in February 2012. The SWF is expected to 
contribute  to  macroeconomic  stability  and  provide  ongoing  funding  to  the  Government 
budget.  The  funds  will  be  managed  on-shore  and  invested  off-shore  and  therefore  will 
minimise  the  effect  of  large  foreign  exchange  inflows  on  domestic  liquidity  and  reduce 
upward pressure on the exchange rate. 
Given the projected strong domestic economic growth and associated demand pressures 
in 2012, the Bank  will  continue to assess the trade-off between high economic growth 
and inflation. The Bank will therefore maintain the tight policy stance and may adjust it to 
ensure  the  high  level  of  liquidity  is  managed  appropriately  so  that  inflation  is  at  an 
acceptable level and stability in the financial system is maintained. 
1.0  
Monetary policy discussions 
Monetary policy assessment, issues and expectations 
1.1  
Annual  headline  inflation  was  6.9  percent  in  the  December  quarter  of  2011,  lower  than 
7.2 percent in the December quarter of 2010, after peaking at 9.6 percent in the June quarter 
of  2011. The  lower  outcome  was  attributed  to  a  decline  in  the  price  of betelnut  and  lower 
imported prices of food and fuel, supported by the appreciation of the kina exchange rate. 
Underlying inflation as indicated by the exclusion-based and trimmed mean measures were 
7.7 percent and 6.5 percent in the December quarter of 2011, respectively. These outcomes 
were lower than the forecast made in the September 2011 MPS, despite the strong domestic 
demand associated with the PNG LNG project and high Government expenditures. 
The  Bank  projects  annual  headline  inflation  for  2012  to  be  around  8.0  percent,  while 
trimmed-mean and the exclusion-based inflation are projected to be around 7.5 percent. The 
forecasted  headline  inflation  is  lower  than  the  8.4  percent  average  for  2011,  due  to  the 
strength  of the kina,  lower  imported  inflation,  and  stable  international food  and fuel  prices. 
The kina is expected to remain strong through 2012, mainly due to high capital inflows and 
export  receipts.  While  this  has  the  effect  of  lowering  inflation,  it  can  adversely  affect  the 
traditional  export  sector.  On  the  other  hand,  firms  must  be  fair  in  the  conduct  of  their 
businesses by passing the benefit of kina appreciation through lower prices to consumers. 
Inflation in PNG’s major trading partners eased in the second half of 2011 and is expected to 
pass through to domestic inflation in 2012. Food, in particular cereal, and fuel prices dropped 
in  the  second  half  of  2011,  though  both  have  increased  slightly  in  the  first  few  months  of 
2012. 
However,  inflationary  pressures  still  prevail,  attributable  to  domestic  demand  pressures 
arising from the ongoing construction of the PNG LNG project and subsequent increase in 
business  activity  in  2012,  and  increased  private  and  public  spending  in  relation  to  the 
national  elections.  The  elections  will  also  increase  the  transactions  demand  for  money. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Supply-side  shocks  in  early  2012,  attributable  to  bad  weather  and  subsequent  damage  to 
agricultural output and transport infrastructure are also expected to contribute to inflation. 
For the medium term, headline inflation is projected to be around 7.5 percent in 2013 and 
7.0 percent  in  2014.  These  projections  are  based  on  a  number  of  factors  including  the 
winding-down  of  the  construction  phase  of  the  LNG  project  in  late  2013,  the  continued 
strengthening of the kina and easing global demand (see Chart 1). 
There  are  upside  risks  to  these  projections,  including  higher  domestic  demand  and 
associated  inflation  expectations  by  firms  due  to  the  PNG  LNG  project,  any  substantial 
increase  in  food  and fuel  prices,  as  well  as  higher  than  expected  inflation  in  PNG’s  major 
trading partners. The European debt crisis and oil export embargo on Iran embodies further 
risks to global macroeconomic stability. 
The global economic recovery continued to slow down during the second half of 2011, mainly 
driven  by  lower  economic  growth  in  both  the  advanced  and  emerging  economies.  The 
International Monetary Fund (IMF) accordingly revised downwards its global growth estimate 
for 2011 to 3.8 percent in the January 2012 World Economic Outlook (WEO) Update, from 
4.0 percent in the September 2011 WEO. Global growth is now forecast to be at 3.3 percent 
in  2012  and  3.9  percent  in  2013,  down  from  4.0  percent  and  4.5  percent,  respectively, 
projected in the September 2011 WEO. Easing inflation and concern over economic recovery 
has  prompted  central  banks  in  the  advanced  economies  to  maintain  their  accommodative 
monetary policy stance, except for the European Central Bank (ECB) and Reserve Bank of 
Australia (RBA). Financial market volatility was high in the second half of 2011, mainly due to 
the European debt crisis, which caused investors to retreat to safe haven assets such as US 
government securities and gold. 
The overall balance of payments is projected to be in surplus by K1,371.3 million in 2012. 
This projected outcome is mainly associated with the inflows for the PNG LNG project and 
other private sector foreign direct investments. The current account is projected to record a 
deficit  in  2012,  attributed  mainly  to  increased  imports  and  higher  net  services  and  income 
payments related to the PNG LNG project (see Chart 2). 
By  the  end  of  2012,  the  gross  foreign  exchange  reserves  are  projected  to  be  around 
US$5,087 (K10,598) million, sufficient for 7.6 months of total and 19.9 months of non-mineral 
import  covers.  Gross  reserves  are  projected  to  be  higher  in  the  medium  term  due  to 
increased  inflows  associated  mainly  with  high  volumes  of  PNG’s  export  commodities  (See 
appendix – Table 2). As at 28th March 2012, the level of gross foreign exchange reserves 
was US$4,283.4 (K8,794.6) million. 
Reflecting the developments in the balance of payments, the daily average kina exchange 
rate  appreciated  against  the  US  dollar  by  19.9  percent  to  US$0.4458  between  the  March 
quarter of 2011 and 28th March 2012. The appreciation reflected high agricultural and mineral 
export  receipts,  combined  with  inflows  related  to  the  construction  phase  of  the  PNG  LNG 
project. The kina appreciated against the Australian dollar by 8.3 percent to A$0.4276 over 
the  same  period.  The  appreciation  was  attributed  to  cross  currency  movements,  as  the 
Australian  dollar  weakened  against  the  US  dollar.  As  a  result,  the  Trade  Weighted  Index 
(TWI)  appreciated  by  12.6  percent  during  the  same  period.  The  Real  Effective  Exchange 
Rate  (REER)  also  appreciated  by  7.6  percent  during  the  December  quarter  of  2011  (see 
Chart 3). 
The increase in international reserves led to the growth in money supply and liquidity. Annual 
growth  in  broad  money  supply  (M3*)  and  monetary  base  in  2011  were  17.3  percent  and 
61.7 percent,  respectively.  The  increase  in  broad  money  supply  resulted  mainly  from 
increases  in  NFA  of  the  depository  corporations,  while  the  substantial  growth  in  monetary 
base mainly reflected increase in commercial bank deposits at the Central Bank. Lending to 
the private sector continued to grow moderately as a result of firms utilising own funds while 
those  associated  with  the  PNG  LNG  project  received  funding  from  the  project.  The  Bank 
issued  net  new  Central Bank  Bills  (CBBs) totaling  K1,102.0 million,  to diffuse  some  of  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
excess liquidity. However, domestic interest rates continued to fall, given the persistent high 
level  of  liquidity,  with  CBB  rates  at  around  2.0  percent  and  Treasury  bill  rates  at  around 
3.0 percent.  Total  liquidity  of  the  banking  system  further  increased  by  37.2  percent  to 
K8,888.4 million in 2011, due to high Government expenditure and foreign exchange inflows. 
Net claims on the Government declined by K846.7 million in 2011, mainly due to increased 
deposits  in  the  trust  accounts.  In  the  first  quarter  of  2012,  the  Bank  issued  additional  net 
CBBs  of  K92.4  million.  Excess  liquidity  continued  to  remain  high,  therefore  the  Bank 
increased the CRR by an additional 1.0 percent. 
In  2012,  broad  money  supply  is  expected  to  increase  by  14.8  percent,  driven  mainly  by 
increase  in  NFA  of  the  banking  system.  Monetary  base  and  private  sector  credit  are 
projected  to  grow  by  33.2  percent  and  7.0  percent,  respectively.  The  Bank  considers  the 
projected growth in monetary aggregates appropriate to support economic growth, but is also 
mindful of their inflationary impact, for instance if growth in private sector credit picks up (see 
Appendix-Table 1). 
Economic  activity  in  PNG  as  measured  by  real  GDP  growth  for  2011  is  estimated  by  the 
Bank to be higher than the 8.9 percent projected in the 2012 National Budget, with increases 
in  all  sectors.  The  annual  level  of  employment  in  the  formal  private  sector2  increased  by 
6.2 percent  in  the  December  quarter  of  2011.  The  construction  of  the  PNG  LNG  project, 
Government-donor  funded  projects,  combined  with  strong  growth  in  private  sector  activity 
contributed  to  higher  employment.  Excluding  the  mineral  sector,  the  annual  level  of 
employment also grew by 6.2 percent in the December quarter of 2011. In addition, the total 
nominal  value  of  sales  by  the  private  sector3  remained  high,  over  the  twelve  months  to 
September 2011. Strong economic growth is expected to continue in 2012, as construction 
activity  for  the  PNG  LNG  project  reaches  its  peak,  combined  with  high  Government 
spending, especially related to the national elections and commencement of production by 
the  Ramu  Nickel/Cobalt  mine.  All  sectors  are  expected  to  grow,  led  by  the  mining  and 
quarrying, 
and 
transportation/storage/communication sectors. 
The  2012  National  Budget  was  framed  against  the  uncertainty  in  the  global  economy  and 
high  domestic  economic  activity.  The  Government  projects  a  balanced  budget  of 
K10.5 billion,  with  emphasis  on  increased  spending  in  the  priority  areas  of  education, 
transport,  law  and  order,  and  health,  consistent  with  the  Medium  Term  Fiscal  Strategy 
(MTFS)  and  Medium  Term  Development  Plan  (MTDP).  The  Government  also  projects 
balanced  budgets  for  2013  and  2014  of  similar  magnitude  (see  Chart  4).  Public  debt  is 
projected to be 23.2 percent of GDP in 2012, compared to 24.1 percent in the 2011 revised 
estimates. The lower ratio is mainly due to an increase in GDP. 
Under  the  2011  original  budget,  K723.2  million  was  appropriated  for  specific  project  trust 
accounts. This was not fully funded and therefore the 2011 Supplementary Budget allocated 
a further K648.5 million to be deposited in trust accounts at the Central Bank. However, only 
K433.0  million  has  been  deposited  as  at  December  2011.  Despite  the  Government’s 
undertaking  to  open  and  transfer  trust  account  funds  to  the  Central  Bank,  Government 
deposits  including  trust  accounts  in  commercial  banks  continue  to  remain  high  totaling 
K2,884.3 million. Thus, at the Central Bank, the amount of trust account funds decreased 
from  K741.3  million  in  September  2011  to  K366.3  million  as  at  23rd  March  2012  (see 
Chart 5). 
Depositing all Government trust account funds at the Central Bank and smooth spending of 
those funds over time will assist with liquidity management. In light of the PNG LNG project 
manufacturing, 
construction, 
building 
and 
                                                
2   Based on the Bank’s surveys. Not all companies engaged in the PNG LNG project are included in the surveys. 
3   Based on the Bank’s surveys. Not all companies engaged in the PNG LNG project are included in the surveys. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
related  payments  and  the  national  elections  in  2012,  the  Government  should  prudently 
manage  its  fiscal  operations  within  the  parameters  of  the  Budget.  Furthermore,  the 
Government  should  refrain  from  competing  with  the  PNG  LNG  project  and  plan  for  the 
utilization of these resources when the construction phase ends. 
In anticipation of the sizeable revenue inflows from the PNG LNG project and other mineral 
projects, the Government enacted the Sovereign Wealth Fund (SWF) Act in February 2012. 
The  Fund  will  be  managed  through  the  Stabilisation  and  Development  Funds,  and  is 
expected  to  contribute  to  macroeconomic  stability  and  provide  ongoing  funding  to  the 
Government  budget. It will  be  managed  on-shore,  with funds  invested  off-shore  and  spent 
on-shore. This will minimise large foreign exchange inflows and reduce upward pressure on 
the exchange rate, thereby mitigating the effect of Dutch Disease. Until the SWF comes into 
operation, the Government should deposit revenue inflows from mineral taxes in an offshore 
account  to  be  managed  by  the  Central  Bank.  This  will  also  assist  the  Bank  in  its  liquidity 
management efforts. 
In  light  of  these  developments,  closer  coordination  and  cooperation  between  the  Treasury 
and  Finance  Departments  and  the  Bank  in  the  conduct  of  fiscal  and  monetary  policies  is 
necessary to maintain macroeconomic stability. 
Monetary policy stance 
faster drawdown of trust accounts from the Central Bank; 
higher than budgeted overall expenditure by the Government; 
higher transactions demand for money during the national elections; and 
continued high inflows of foreign exchange. 
1.2  
The main issue that the Central Bank is confronted with is the increasing level of liquidity in 
the banking system in recent years, caused by the foreign exchange reserve build-up related 
largely to dollar-denominated mineral tax earnings, high export earnings, inflows related to 
the PNG LNG project and other private foreign direct investments. Whilst the high liquidity 
levels  do  not  appear  to  influence  inflation  via  the  credit  channel  despite  strong  economic 
growth, it is still a threat to price stability and soundness of the financial system. 
Upside risks to the Bank’s projection of 33.2 percent in monetary base would come from: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Some or all of these, if realized, could potentially lead to price instability and adversely affect 
business confidence. 
In addition, the upside risks to the Bank’s inflation projection of around 8.0 percent in 2012 
include: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
As a result of this concern on high level of liquidity and potential impact on price stability, the 
Central  Bank maintained  a  tight monetary  policy  stance  by  leaving  the KFR  unchanged  at 
7.75 percent in the December quarter of 2011 and March quarter of 2012 (see Chart 6). To 
support the tight stance, the CRR was increased from 6.0 percent to 7.0 percent in March 
2012.  Given  the  projected  strong  economic  growth  and  associated  demand  pressures  in 
2012,  the  Bank  will  continue  to  assess  the  trade-off  between  high  economic  growth  and 
significantly higher domestic demand pressures and inflation expectations; 
any substantial increase in food and fuel prices; 
higher than expected inflation in PNG’s major trading partners; 
any supply-side shocks associated with bad weather; and 
impact of the European debt crisis and oil export embargo on Iran. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
inflation. The Bank will therefore maintain this policy stance and may adjust it to ensure the 
high level of liquidity is managed appropriately so that inflation is at an acceptable level. 
Conduct of monetary policy 
1.3  
Monetary policy will be conducted within the reserve money framework. The MPS provides 
the  overall  monetary  policy  stance,  while  the  monthly  KFR  remains  the  instrument  for 
signaling this stance or any changes through an announcement by the Governor. Following 
the  announcement,  Open  Market  Operations  (OMOs)  will  be  conducted  to  support  the 
Bank’s  monetary  policy  stance.  The  OMOs  involve  Repurchase  Agreement  (Repo) 
transactions with commercial banks and the auction of CBBs to ODCs and Treasury bills to 
the general public. The Bank will also consider using its direct policy instrument, the CRR, to 
assist in liquidity management. 
In 2012 the Bank plans to introduce the Tap facility for small retail investors to participate in 
the Government securities market. 
The Bank will continuously assess developments in the market and use all the instruments at 
its  disposal  to  ensure that financial  stability  is  maintained  and  inflation  is  at  an  acceptable 
level. 
 
 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   7 
  8 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   9 
Appendix 
  10 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
