Christian Noyer: France’s Prudential Supervisory Authority and Financial 
Markets Authority – enhancing the protection of French consumers 
Introduction  by  Mr  Christian  Noyer,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France,  President  of  the 
Prudential Supervisory Authority (Autorité de contrôle prudentiel) and Chairman of the Board 
of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  the  ACP-AMF  academic 
symposium, Paris, 11 May 2012. 
 Dear Mr President, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I  welcome  you  to  this  symposium  organised today  by  the  Prudential  Supervisory  Authority 
and the Financial Markets Authority. 
Before saying a few words on the subject of this morning’s discussions, I would like to say 
just how much Jean-Pierre Jouyet and myself are attached to fruitful collaboration between 
the two authorities that we preside. 
Since the creation of the ACP two years ago, the ACP and the AMF have united their efforts 
to durably enhance the protection of French consumers.  
A common division has been set up. Apart from the public information platform, Assurance 
Banque  Épargne  Info  Service,  which  the  general  public  is  increasingly  aware  of,  the  two 
authorities have also conducted numerous consumer protection initiatives. For example, in 
2010,  the  simultaneous  publication  of  an  ACP  recommendation  and  an  AMF  guideline 
allowed the establishment of a framework for the marketing of complex products whatever 
their distribution channel. In order to limit the excesses sometimes encountered, these two 
texts underscored the need for contracts that are intelligible to non-professional consumers.  
In 2011, the number of jointly conducted control missions increased. Twelve joint missions 
were  conducted  in  entities  distributing  life  insurance  contracts  and  financial  products;  the 
common  actions  also  concerned  operators  offering  leveraged  transactions  on  the  Forex 
market  and  the  processing  of  complaints  throughout  the  financial  sector.  In  2012,  joint 
missions will continue to focus on the different players involved in the marketing of insurance 
contracts,  particularly  among  portfolio  management  companies,  banks  and  distribution 
platforms.  
This joint work proves, if proof is needed, the shared determination of the two authorities to 
place  consumer  interests  at  the  heart  of  the  regulatory  framework  governing  different 
financial products.  
Indeed, by their very nature, certain subject areas automatically imply collaboration between 
the  two  bodies.  This  is  the  case  for  example  of  household  savings.  While  the  financial 
markets are a natural target for these savings, in the vast majority of cases, retail investors 
can only access these markets via the services offered by financial institutions and insurance 
entities. 
The  crisis  we  have  experienced  these  last  four  years  has  had  a  profound  impact  on  the 
economy of our country and of the world, affecting as much the financial markets, banks and 
insurance companies as the savings behaviour of households. To understand the changes 
that the crisis has induced and to take appropriate action in the best conditions, the ACP and 
the AMF need to work together and be attentive to the views of experts and practitioners.  
That  is  the  primary  aim  of  this  morning’s  symposium,  bringing  together  the  scientific 
committees  of  both  the  ACP  and  the  AMF  who  play  a  key  advisory  role  in  each  of  our 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
institutions  and  who  clearly  work  in  areas  of  common  interest.  It  is  organised  around  the 
following specific themes that I would like to introduce with a few words. 
I. 
Firstly, in a difficult context, French households have altered their investment 
choices: what are the consequences of this alteration? 
Already high before the crisis, the savings rate of French households has further increased, 
reaching levels close to those recorded at the start of the 1980s. 
This  increase  in  the  savings  rate  seems  to  reflect  a  precautionary  attitude  on  the  part  of 
households.  
The  year  2011  was  also  characterised  by  a  significant  reallocation  of  assets  between  the 
various savings options. Alongside a substantial withdrawal from UCITS and a fall in net new 
money flowing into life insurance contracts – a movement that has nevertheless slowed since 
the  beginning  of  2012  –  bank  savings  products  have  posted  a  significant  rise  in  deposits. 
Savers clearly decided to place their money in more liquid and less risky banking products 
such as passbooks to the detriment of long-term investments, despite the need for the latter 
to cover certain requirements for both households and the economy.  
These movements can be explained by several factors: risk aversion, preference for liquidity, 
tightening  of  remuneration  spreads,  tax-regime  uncertainty,  “re-intermediation”  of  savings 
ahead of the new prudential rules (Basel III and Solvency II). I would like to emphasise just 
how complementary the approaches that will be presented to you in this first session can be. 
While the topic of savings touches upon a wide range of well-known macroeconomic issues, 
it  is  the  individual  decisions  of  households  and  their  financial  services  providers  that 
ultimately generate the fundamentals. 
II. 
Following on from this, what challenges do movements of household savings 
pose for the marketing of financial products? 
The  rules  framing  the  marketing  of  financial  products  play  a  fundamental  role  in  modern 
economies because they contribute so much to consumer confidence, particularly when the 
consumer wishes to make long-term investments.  
In a highly complex economic environment, the advisory duty is an essential link in the chain 
between  household  satisfaction  and  the  economic  efficacy  of  their  investments.  The 
numerous questions concerning life-insurance received by the legal specialists on the ACP 
information platform bear witness to this reality.  
The  marketing  of  financial  products  also  raises  questions  of  consumer  protection.  The 
financial  services  provider  must  take  into  account  the  client’s  profile  including  his/her  age, 
assets,  investment  horizon  and  degree  of  risk  aversion,  and  adapt  the  investment 
opportunities  offered  accordingly  so  that  the recommended  investments  are  tailored to  the 
client’s wishes and needs. Guaranteeing that savers receive the right information is therefore 
indispensable.  
Beyond this, at a time when savers seem to be turning towards more liquid products, how 
can  the  industry  cater  for  savers’  longer-term  financing  needs  and  for  the  financing 
requirements of other economic agents? Should these needs and requirements be taken into 
consideration  in  the  way  financial  products  are  marketed?  This  will  be  the  theme  of  our 
second session. 
Lastly, what role should regulators play? 
III. 
Regulators  carefully  monitor  changes  in  household  savings  patterns  and  the  marketing 
conditions of financial products. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The  evolution  of  household  savings  decisions  can  impact  the  soundness  of  financial 
institutions.  In  fact,  any  sharp  switch  from  one  form  of  saving  to  another  can  potentially 
destabilise the financial system and therefore the economy as a whole. The same is true for 
badly calibrated financial products that can have negative consequences on the profitability 
of  institutions,  especially  when  the  remuneration  of  the  product  clearly  deviates  from 
prevailing market interest rates.  
As regards product marketing, it is, I repeat, a key factor in consumer confidence, particularly 
with  respect  to  longer-term  investments  which  play  such  an  important  economic  role.  The 
ACP  and  the  AMF  will  make  sure  that  these  longer-term  investment  opportunities  are 
preserved and, in this context, the development of aggressive and abusive sales practices is 
not acceptable. 
More generally, we will ensure that credit institutions and insurance entities behave prudently 
in their quest to gather client resources and rigorously in their respect of consumer protection 
laws. 
This will be the theme of the round table in the third session that will close this symposium. 
I thank you for your attention and hand the floor to Antoine Frachot who will assume the role 
of moderator for the first session.  
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
