Philip Lowe: The changing structure of the Australian economy and 
monetary policy 
Address  by  Mr  Philip  Lowe,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  the 
Australian Industry Group 12th Annual Economic Forum, Sydney, 7 March 2012. 
 I would like to begin by thanking the AiGroup for the invitation to once again speak at the 
annual  Economic  Forum.  When  I  spoke  at  last  year’s  Forum,  the  title  of  my  remarks  was 
“Changing Relative Prices and the Structure of the Australian Economy”. Today, I would like 
to revisit this topic of structural change, first talking about some of the adjustments that are 
taking  place  within  the  Australian  economy  and  then,  second,  discussing  some  of  the 
implications of these adjustments for monetary policy.  
Structural Change in the Australian Economy 
Structural change is, of course, something that is not new. It is one of the ongoing features of 
all economies. Over the past half a century, one of the most obvious changes has been the 
growth of the services sector, which has accounted for a steadily increasing share of both 
output and employment. In 1960, for example, a little over 50 per cent of the workforce in 
Australia  was  employed  in  the  services  sector.  Today,  the  figure  is  over  75 per cent 
(Graph 1). Conversely, the shares of manufacturing and agriculture have steadily declined.  
Graph 11 
These trends have been driven by a range of factors, but three stand out. The first is that the 
demand for services has increased faster than the demand for goods as average incomes 
have  risen.  The  second  is  that  most  services  are  produced  domestically  rather  than 
imported.  And  the  third  is  that  the  rate  of  labour  productivity  growth  in  the  production  of 
                                                  
1  Withers  G,  T  Endres,  and  L  Perry  (1985),  “Australian  Historical  Statistics:  Labour  Statistics”,  Australian 
National University Source Papers in Economic History No 7. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
services is lower than that in the production of goods. Not surprisingly, these same general 
influences have also been at work in all other advanced economies.  
Beyond these long-term influences, the structure of the Australian economy is currently also 
being affected by a number of other factors that are more unusual in nature. I would like to 
take a few minutes to talk about two of these.  
The Mining Boom and the Exchange Rate 
The first is the mining boom and the high exchange rate. 
As is well known, Australia is currently experiencing, on the one hand, a once-in-a-century 
terms of trade and investment boom and, on the other, a very high exchange rate. These 
events are, of course, related to one another and are really different sides of the same coin. 
It  is  worth  noting  that  these  developments  have  not  led  to  unusually  large  shifts  in  the 
industry structure of employment, and they are unlikely to do so. While employment in the 
mining sector has increased by around 70,000 people, or 40 per cent, over the past couple of 
years, its share of total employment is still low and the mining boom will not change the fact 
that  the  vast  bulk  of  Australians  work  in  the  services  sector.  Instead,  due  to  the 
capital-intensive  nature  of  mining,  it  is  in  the  investment  figures  where  the  evidence  of 
structural change is clearest. Over the next few years, mining-sector investment will reach 
new  highs  as  a  share  of  GDP,  and  is  likely  to  account  for  around  40 per  cent  of  total 
business  investment  (Graph 2).  Structural  change  is  also  clearly  evident  in  the  export 
numbers,  with  resources  now  accounting  for  around  60 per  cent  of  total  exports,  up  from 
35 per cent a decade ago. 
Graph 2 
This boom in the mining sector and the terms of trade is having positive spillover effects to a 
number of areas of the economy, including parts of the services sector. It has delivered a 
very substantial increase in Australia’s real income and this increase has boosted spending. 
But the accompanying high exchange rate is also having a contractionary effect on a number 
of sectors of the economy.  
The manufacturing sector is clearly one of these. Over the past decade there has been little 
growth in manufacturing output and the level of employment has declined, particularly over 
 2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the past couple of years (Graph 3). Exports of manufactured goods also remain below the 
level  reached  in  2008.  This  stands  in  contrast  to  the  volume  of  global  trade  which  has 
regained its earlier peak.  
Graph 3 
 Notwithstanding  these  trends,  manufacturing  still  has  an  important  role  to  play  in  the 
Australian  economy.  It  employs  around  950,000  people  and  accounts  for  9 per  cent  of 
output.  This  role  is,  however,  changing.  Realistically,  Australia  cannot  hope  to  be  a 
large-scale  producer  of  relatively  standardised,  plain-vanilla,  manufactured  goods  for  the 
world  market.  But  what  we  can  be  is  a  supplier  of  manufactured  goods  that  build  on  our 
comparative  advantages:  our  educated  workforce;  our  ability  to  design  and  manufacture 
specialised  equipment;  our  reputation  for  high-quality  food;  our  research  and  development 
skills; and our expertise in mining-related equipment.  
Inevitably, the high exchange rate means that the manufacturing industry has little choice but 
to move up the value-added chain in order to compete. This is, of course, a lot easier to say 
than to do. It means difficult changes for many firms and those who work for them. It also 
means  ongoing  investment  in  human  capital  and  the  latest  machinery  and  equipment  and 
constant attention to improving productivity. One piece of evidence that things are moving in 
this  direction  is  in  the  ABS  business  characteristics  survey,  which  asks  firms  a  series  of 
questions about innovation. In this survey the manufacturing sector clearly stands out as one 
where firms are actively reviewing their business practices and, over recent times, they have 
been doing this more frequently (Graph 4). No doubt, more of this will be required over the 
years ahead. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Graph 4 
The changes within manufacturing are also evident in the export figures. While, in aggregate, 
exports  of  manufactured  goods  are  little  changed  from  their  level  in  2007,  there  has  been 
strong growth in some categories including specialised industrial machinery and professional 
and  scientific  instruments  (Graph  5).  These  are  both  areas  where  human  capital  and 
specialised  skills  are  important.  In  contrast,  exports  of  motor  vehicles  and  construction 
materials are well down on their earlier levels.  
 Graph 5 
Another area of the economy where the high exchange rate is having a noticeable effect is 
the tourism sector. As is the case in the manufacturing sector though, the story is not uniform 
across the industry. Indeed, the structural change that is occurring in the economy is taking 
place not just across industries, but within industries as well.  
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The boost to real incomes from the mining boom has clearly increased Australians’ ability to 
travel.  However,  the  high  dollar  has  contributed  to  a  decline  in  travel  to  the  traditional 
domestic  holiday  destinations,  with  Australians  travelling  overseas  in  ever  increasing 
numbers. This has created quite difficult conditions for parts of the industry with, for example, 
room  occupancy  rates  along  the  Queensland  coast  having  fallen  over  recent  years 
(Graph 6).  In  contrast,  conditions  are  noticeably  stronger  in  the  accommodation  sectors  in 
some  of  the  large  cities  which  are  benefiting  from  an  increase  in  business  travel  and  an 
apparent shift in preferences by overseas tourists for city-based experiences. In Sydney, for 
example, room occupancy rates are at quite high levels. 
Graph 6 
Household Spending and Borrowing 
 A second general factor that has been driving changes in the structure of our economy is the 
adjustment in household borrowing and spending behaviour. The RBA has talked frequently 
about this issue over recent years, and the flow-on effects are evident in various parts of the 
economy.  
One of these is the property market. In the early 2000s, when the property boom was in full 
swing and investors were busy buying properties to rent out, around one in 12 dwellings in 
Australia was changing hands each year (Graph 7). Today, the rate of turnover is only about 
half  of  this,  with  around  one  in  25  dwellings  changing  hands  last  year.  This  lower  rate  of 
turnover  has  contributed  to  weak  employment  growth  in  the  real  estate  sector  over  recent 
years, after many years of strong growth.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Graph 7 
 The  change  in  household  behaviour  is  also  affecting  the  financial  sector.  Financial 
institutions are having to learn to live with much lower growth in their balance sheets than 
was  the  case  over  recent  decades.  This  is  leading  to  changes  in  business  practices,  and 
there  has  been  a  slight  decline  in  employment  in  the  banking  sector  over  recent  years. 
Conversely, there has been strong growth in employment in the provision of financial advice, 
partly due to the steady inflows into superannuation funds.  
A third area where the change in household behaviour is having a structural effect is in the 
retail industry. While I talked earlier about the increase in the consumption of services, there 
are also significant changes taking place within the retail industry. Perhaps the most striking 
of  these  is  the  decline  in  sales  at  department  stores  and  clothing  and  footwear  retailers 
(Graph  8).  Indeed,  since  early  2009,  the  volume  of  sales  in  these  stores  has  declined  by 
around 6 per cent. This stands in contrast to relatively steady growth in the volume of sales 
in the rest of the retail industry.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Graph 8 
 There are a variety of explanations for these divergent trends, but there is no doubt that the 
greater price transparency brought about by the internet is part of the story. Many Australians 
have worked out that the prices charged by domestic retailers for certain goods are higher 
than those charged by overseas online retailers. Whether this price difference is because of 
higher domestic costs or because foreign manufacturers and wholesalers are selling into the 
Australian  market  at  higher  prices,  Australian  consumers  have  responded  by  increasingly 
going online. As in the other areas of the economy that I have talked about, this is causing a 
rethinking of business models and retailers are having to make changes to the way they run 
their businesses.  
So, putting all this together, the overall picture is a pretty complicated one. How you view the 
economy  depends  very  much  on  your  perspective.  Even  within  specific  industries, 
experience can vary widely from firm to firm. To date though, while there are obviously large 
effects on individual businesses and people, the various cross currents have balanced out 
reasonably well from a macroeconomic perspective: GDP growth is close to trend, inflation is 
consistent with the target, interest rates are around average and unemployment is low. 
These  macroeconomic  outcomes  are  much  better  than  those  being  recorded  in  other 
advanced economies. However, the various cross currents are having an unsettling effect on 
parts of the community, with many people focusing on the costs of structural change. These 
costs are undoubtedly real and they are not borne evenly across the country. However, the 
benefits of structural change are also real and, over time, as we have seen in the past, these 
benefits do get spread widely across the population. If Australia is to take advantage of the 
opportunities that lie ahead, the structure of the economy must continue to evolve and we 
need to ensure that our labour and capital are used where the returns are highest.  
Implications for Monetary Policy 
I  would  now  like  to  turn  to  some  of  the  implications  of  the  ongoing  structural  change  for 
monetary policy. There are four closely related observations that I would like to make. 
The  first  is  that  structural  change  adds  to  the  difficulty  of  assessing  the  balance  between 
supply  and  demand  in  the  economy.  Given  the  historically  unusual  nature  of  the  forces 
affecting  the  economy,  history  provides  only  limited  guidance  as  to  the  magnitude  of  their 
ultimate  effects.  This  is  one  reason  why  the  Reserve  Bank  is  devoting  considerable 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
resources to understanding these forces, including by frequently talking to businesses at the 
forefront of this structural adjustment.  
The second observation is that the main role for monetary policy is to keep inflation low and 
stable. The current list of economic uncertainties is long enough without adding uncertainty 
about the general level of prices to the list. The task for monetary policy is to ensure stability 
in the overall economy so that difficult decisions at the firm and industry level are not further 
complicated by macroeconomic instability. 
In undertaking this task, the Bank needs to understand the forces driving structural change, 
and we are working hard on this. But it is important to recognise that the RBA can do little to 
affect these forces. As I said at last year’s Forum, the emergence of Asia as a major force in 
the global economy has shifted world relative prices and this underlies many of the changes 
that are occurring in the Australian economy. This shift in relative prices is not something that 
monetary policy in Australia can influence. It is driven by global developments and is causing 
adjustments  not  just  in  Australia,  but  around  the  world.  Monetary  policy  in  Australia  can, 
however, help in our own adjustment process by keeping the overall economy on an even 
keel.  
The  third  observation  is  that  the  flexibility  of  the  economy  is  important  when  structural 
change  is  taking  place.  To  the  extent  that  there  are  significant  impediments  to  resources 
moving  between  industries  and/or  parts  of  the  country,  these  impediments  are  likely  to 
worsen  the  short-run  trade-off  between  inflation  and  unemployment.  While  the  degree  of 
flexibility in the economy is determined by factors other than monetary policy, it can have an 
important bearing on overall macroeconomic outcomes.  
And  the  final  observation  is  more  directly  about  the  link  between  monetary  policy  and  the 
exchange  rate.  It  has been  argued  in some  quarters  that  Australia’s high  interest  rates  by 
current  world  standards  have  put  upward  pressure  on  the  exchange  rate,  and  thus  have 
added to the pressures being experienced in some industries. Some who have argued this 
see part of the solution as being a material easing of monetary policy. 
The difficulty with this argument is that, at least on the evidence to date, something like the 
current combination of exchange rates and interest rates appears to be what is needed to 
maintain overall macroeconomic stability. The high exchange rate and the high interest rates 
relative  to  the  rest  of  the  world  are  both  being  driven  by  the  fact  that  Australia  is  a  major 
beneficiary of the change in world relative prices. They are both playing an important role in 
preserving  overall  macroeconomic  stability,  something  which  has  proved  very  difficult  to 
achieve in previous resources booms, which typically ended in a bout of serious inflation with 
significant costs to the community. 
Of  course,  it  is  possible  for  exchange  rates  to  overshoot.  Australia  is  seen  by  foreign 
investors, including central banks and sovereign wealth funds, as an attractive destination for 
investment, and we need to be alert to the possibility that portfolio flows could push up the 
exchange  rate  too  far.  While  the  evidence  of  the  past  30  years  is  that  movements  in  the 
exchange  rate  have  been  an  important  stabilising  force  for  the  Australian  economy,  the 
unusual  nature  of  the  current  forces  means  that  we  need  to  watch  things  closely.  An 
important indicator here is the labour market with the unemployment rate having been in the 
5 to 5¼ per cent range over the past year. If the unemployment rate were to rise persistently, 
it  might  suggest  that  the  contractionary  effect  of  the  high  exchange  rate  was  more  than 
offsetting the expansionary effect of the investment boom and the terms of trade. If this were 
to turn out to be the case, monetary policy would have the flexibility to respond provided the 
inflation outlook remained benign. 
Conclusion 
To summarise, the challenge that we Australians face is to make the best of the fundamental 
changes that are taking place in the global economy. As a country rich in natural resources, 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
we  are  well  placed  to  benefit  from  this  change.  But  if  we  are  to  take  advantage  of  this 
opportunity,  the  structure  of  the  economy  must  continue  to  evolve.  Labour  and  capital  will 
continue to shift to the resources sector. Industries affected by the high exchange rate will 
need to find ways of moving up the valued-added chain. And parts of the service sector will 
need to continue their adjustment to the changes in household spending and borrowing. 
These adjustments are difficult, but if they are not allowed to occur, as a nation we will have 
given up the potential benefits that the changes in the world economy are making possible. 
Public policy can help in the adjustment process by promoting flexibility in the economy and 
by reducing some of the costs of change for individuals and communities. It can also help 
manage some of the new risks arising from these global developments. Monetary policy can 
help the adjustment by keeping inflation under control and maintaining stability in the overall 
economy. Our judgement is that the current setting of monetary policy is consistent with this, 
with the Board keeping the cash rate unchanged at 4.25 per cent at its meeting yesterday. 
I would like to thank you very much for your time this morning, and I am happy to answer 
questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
