Vítor Constâncio: Financial stability – methodological advances and 
policy issues 
Welcome remarks by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at 
the  European  Central  Bank  conference  on  “Financial  stability  –  methodological  advances 
and policy issues”, 14–15 June 2012, Frankfurt am Main, 14 June 2012. 
 General welcome 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
On behalf of the ECB, I am very pleased to welcome you to this high level conference on 
“Financial  Stability:  Methodological  Advances  and  Policy  Issues”.  In  particular,  it  is  my 
pleasure to welcome our distinguished speakers, discussants and panellists. 
Since the eruption of the financial crisis in mid-2007, and especially in its second, and more 
euro-centred phase, financial stability issues have come to the forefront of both the academic 
and policy-making agendas.  
As  a  reflection  of  this  development,  with  this  conference  we  have  invited  a  number  of 
prominent speakers to cover a wide range of analytical areas, which we think are crucial for 
addressing the complex and pertinent policy issues that we are facing during these difficult 
times.  
It is our hope and expectation that following the various presentations and discussions we 
will  have  over  the  next  two  days,  our  knowledge  and  awareness  of  key  financial  stability 
analytical tools and policy issues will help us overcome the challenges that we are facing in 
our efforts to move to a more resilient and sustainable financial system.  
Conference is organised around three elements of financial stability analysis 
(surveillance, assessment and policy) 
The conference is organised around three broad elements that characterises how financial 
stability analysis is conducted here at the ECB.  
First, through  our financial  stability  surveillance  activities  we  monitor,  identify  and  prioritise 
potential  sources  of  systemic  risk  in  the  euro  area  and  the  EU  financial  system.  This  is 
largely done through the use of a number of quantitative tools, such as indicators to measure 
systemic  risk  and the  level  of  stress  in the financial  system,  as  well  as  with  early  warning 
indicators and models to detect and predict underlying vulnerabilities. 
Second, on the basis of the systemic risks identified in the context of our surveillance work 
we subsequently aim at assessing the potential impact of a materialisation of these risks on 
the stability of the euro area/EU financial system and its degree of resilience. This strand of 
our  work  likewise  is  based  on  various  quantitative  tools  that  include  a  top-down  macro 
stress-testing framework and different types of contagion models using network analysis. 
Third, the final element of our organisational setup consists of the analysis of policy issues 
relating to financial regulation and supervision, financial stability arrangements (e.g. financial 
crisis management and resolution) and other financial services areas (e.g. accounting). This 
work encompasses the regular monitoring and assessment of developments in these areas 
as  well  as  contributing  to  European  and  international  discussions  on  regulatory  and 
supervisory issues.  
This three-pronged approach allows us to focus on the distinct but complementary activities 
related  to  financial  stability  surveillance,  systemic  risk  assessment  and  policy  responses, 
respectively, while still ensuring that interlinkages between these elements are considered in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
an integrated manner when providing financial stability advice to the decision-making bodies 
of  the  Eurosystem,  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  and  to  the  wider  public.  The 
ECB Financial Stability Review is only one example of product where the three elements are 
developed.  
tools  underlying 
the  concepts  and  analytical 
We are living difficult times and need state of the art tools and indicators for analysis.  
As  mentioned  before,  we  are  currently  living  in  an  extremely  complex  and  difficult 
macroeconomic  situation.  The  financial  crisis,  if  anything,  revealed  that  we  need  to 
understand  much  better  the  interactions  between  the  financial  and  real  economic  sectors. 
Particularly, 
financial  stability  and 
macro-prudential  analysis  were  found  somewhat  deficient  to  properly  guide  policymakers 
trying to steer through the crisis. This has underlined the need for “state-of-the-art” tools and 
indicators  for  conducting  financial  stability  analysis.  Indeed,  especially  during  the  past  five 
years the academic research has very much enhanced the analytical toolbox that we have 
available  to  properly  analyse  and  assess  the  pertinent financial  stability  issues  of the  day. 
Further  enhancements  are,  of  course,  needed  and  I  can  only  encourage  the  academic 
community  to  continue  in  this  direction  as  it  will  greatly  help  policy  makers  when  trying  to 
understand and ultimately address financial stability issues of a systemic nature.  
Also in this light, it is my expectation that today and tomorrow’s conference will provide us 
with cutting-edge research in the financial stability area; thus providing a highly useful stock 
taking of the progress made in recent years, while ideally also pointing towards areas where 
further improvements are still needed.  
Need to rethink also policies and policy frameworks 
The  conference  will  conclude  with  a  panel  discussion  on  macro-prudential  policies.  Key 
questions  in  this  area  include  the  translation  of  systemic  risk  analysis  into  concrete  policy 
actions  and  the  related  challenge  of  developing  a  well-functioning  macro-prudential  policy 
toolkit. In this regard, we have to ensure that once systemic risks are identified, policy actions 
are taken in a timely and effective way, taking into consideration in particular that risks are 
evolving over time and across institutions and markets. 
Furthermore, I expect an interesting discussion on the macro-prudential aspects of the new 
capital and liquidity framework (Basel III). This topic is of paramount importance from a policy 
perspective,  given  the  on-going  implementation  process  of  Basel  III  around  the  globe.  In 
Europe,  the  Capital  Requirements  Directive  IV  and  related  Regulation  are  expected  to 
substantially reshape the macro-prudential policy framework, and I hope in this regard that 
our panellists will help us better understand the policy implications of this new framework and 
to find answers to the question how we can strike the right balance between policy measures 
taken at the national and at the European level. 
Conclusion  
With these words, I open this conference on “Financial Stability:  Methodological Advances 
and  Policy  Issues”,  and  look  forward  to  the  keynote  addresses,  presentations,  and  the 
discussions  that,  I  am  sure,  will  help  us  in  carrying  out  our  task  of  contributing  to  ensure 
financial stability. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
