Ignazio Visco: What does society expect from the financial sector? 
Panel discussion remarks by Mr Ignazio Visco, Governor of the Bank of Italy following the 
Per Jacobsson Lecture by Dr YV Reddy, 24 June 2012, Basel, Switzerland. 
 The global crisis has spotlighted a number of problems. Some are well known (eg the fact 
that in some countries in the past the regulatory and supervisory approach was inadequate 
to address them). Others are relatively new. A comprehensive overview of the many issues 
facing  public  authorities  has  just  been  provided  by  Dr  Reddy,  with  a  thorough  checklist  of 
what has gone wrong, what is being done, and what direction we should probably be moving 
in. 
I would like to focus on a more limited set of issues, which in my view are among the most 
telling about the weaknesses of the financial system today. 
First, however, let me recall that although the title of our roundtable is “What does society 
expect  from  the  financial  sector?”  we  are  likely  to  only  be  able  to  discuss  what  we  think 
society “should” expect. With this in mind, I would like to make three points: 
● 
Finance has long been viewed as a morally dubious activity. My appeal to authority 
on  this  matter  is  a  reference  to  a  lecture  delivered  by  Amartya  Sen  about  twenty 
years  ago  as  the  first  Paolo  Baffi  Lecture  (Money  and  value:  on  the  ethics  and 
economics  of  finance,  Bank  of  Italy,  Rome,  1991).  Sen  wondered:  “How  is  it 
possible  that  an  activity  that  is  so  useful  has  been  viewed  as  being  morally  so 
dubious?”  He  recalled  a  series  of  historical  episodes:  Jesus  driving  the  money 
lenders  out  of  the  temple,  Solon  cancelling  debts  and  prohibiting  many  types  of 
lending  in  ancient  Greece,  Aristotle  describing  interest  as  an  unnatural  and 
unjustified  breeding  of  money  from  money.  Recent  protests  against  the  financial 
industry  –  the  Occupy  Wall  Street  movement,  the  “Indignados”  in  Spain  and  their 
counterparts  in  other  European  countries  –  can  certainly  lay  claim  to  an  eminent 
series of historical precursors. 
Superimposed  on  this  “structural”  mistrust,  one  can  detect  cyclical  patterns  in  the 
public’s attitude towards finance, affected by the conditions of financial systems and 
shifts in the political mood about state intervention in the economy. Until the 1970s it 
was taken for granted that market failures required the presence and response of a 
regulator  to  avoid  suboptimal  results.  Then  came  the  great  inflation  of  the  1970s, 
combined  with  high  unemployment,  and  the  accent  began  to  be  placed  on 
government failures. Governments, central banks and other regulators were blamed 
for  failing  to  prevent  those  developments.  This  eventually  led  to  an  ideological 
swing:  a  push  to  reduce  the  magnitude  of  state  intervention.  The  failures  of  the 
“regulated economy,” the pace of technological advance and the rapid expansion of 
international  trade  after  the  end  of  the  Cold  War  fuelled  a  protracted  process  of 
financial  deregulation  that  was  halted  only  by  the  financial  crisis  that  broke  out  in 
2007. The latter triggered a move toward re-regulation – or better regulation – that is 
still under way. The pendulum keeps swinging and will certainly continue to do so. 
But  despite  the  negative  perception  of  banking  and  finance,  blind  backlash  is  a 
danger  to  be  avoided.  As  Amartya  Sen  argued,  finance  is  essential  to  the 
functioning of the real economy. And I share Dr Reddy’s view that finance is a force 
for good. It is crucial for sharing and allocating risk, especially for poorer societies 
and  people,  insofar  as  risk  aversion  decreases  with  wealth.  It  is  crucial  for 
transferring resources over time and removing the liquidity constraints that hamper 
the  economy  and  the  exploitation  of  ideas.  It  is  very  important  in  promoting 
economic  growth,  especially  by  fostering  innovation. We  have  countless  historical 
    1 
examples  of  good  financial  innovations.  Think,  for  example,  of  the  “letters  of 
exchange” introduced by Italian merchants in the Middle Ages: they were probably 
the  first  fiduciary  money,  and  trade  benefited  enormously  from  this  financial 
instrument. More recently, consider the development of “micro-finance” in the 1970s: 
an  innovation  that  has  enhanced  financial  inclusion,  helping  poor  borrowers  to 
smooth their income and cope with illness or other temporary shocks. And, in the 
last two decades, recall the role of the “venture capital” industry in the promotion of 
successful innovative corporations such as Apple, Intel and Google. 
I  would  now  like  to  offer  a  few  thoughts  on  issues  related  to  what  has  gone  wrong  in  the 
financial system in the last few decades. I will consider four points: 
● 
Financial  market  participants  tend  not  to  be  aware  of  the  fundamental  non-
stationarity  of  economic  developments.  The  wave  of  financial  innovation  in  the 
2000s was fuelled by the idea, in principle correct and fruitful, that the proliferation of 
new  (and  complex)  financial  instruments,  allowing  agents  to  insure  against  many 
dimensions  of  risk,  was  a  way  to  “complete  the  markets”,  to  get  closer  to  the 
theoretical  Arrow-Debreu  world,  enabling  investors  to  transfer resources  efficiently 
across time, space and states of the world. But this idea relied on the presumption 
that the world is basically stationary (and substantially linear), that the future is pretty 
much like the past, that we can extrapolate from relatively small samples, and that 
there is a single “data generating process” that we can identify and understand. (We 
must  admit  that  all  this  is  not  limited  to  finance  but  also  applies  more  broadly  to 
macroeconomics,  econometric  modelling  and  forecasting.)  The  real  world  is 
different,  though;  for  many  years  the  big  investment  banks  were  able  to  sustain 
returns  much  higher  than  what  was  justified  by  economic  growth,  but  the  day  of 
reckoning was bound to come. In a way, innovation, based on the presumption of 
stationarity, sows the seeds of the non-stationarity that eventually undermines that 
very presumption. 
Complexity  was also used, somewhat perversely, as part of the case for a sort of 
benign  neglect  on  the  part  of  regulators.  The  big  financial  players  argued 
successfully  that  financial  innovation  was  too  complex  and  too  opaque  for  the 
regulators  to  get  their  heads  around  it.  Indeed,  they  said,  to  safeguard  the 
international financial system from systemic risk, the main priority was promoting an 
“industry-led” effort to improve internal risk management and related systems. This, 
in  a  nutshell,  was  the  view  espoused  by  the  Group  of  Thirty  report  following  the 
outbreak of the Asian crisis (“Global institutions, national supervision and systemic 
risk”, Group of Thirty, 1997. See also the article by John Heimann, and comments 
therein, in the special issue of the Banca Nazionale del Lavoro Quarterly Review on 
“Globalization  and  stable  markets”,  March  1998).  But  this  thesis  was  often 
accompanied  by  the  argument  to  the  effect  that  “you,  regulators  and  supervisors, 
will  always  be  behind  financial  innovation;  it  would  be  better  to  allow  us,  the  big 
financial international players, to self-regulate; we are grownups, we can take care 
of  ourselves”.  And,  after  all,  “if  someone  makes  mistakes,  some  will  gain  what 
others  lose;  why  can’t  we  be  left  alone  to  play  this  zero-sum  game  of  ours?” 
Accepting this argument was a critical mistake. The regulators did not, in fact, have 
either the right incentives or the ability to acquire the necessary information, for two 
reasons.  First,  the  big  financial  players  are  global,  and  national  regulators  had 
powers too narrow to be able to confront them. The difficulties in coordinating the 
regulators’  actions,  in  the  face  of  a  natural  tendency  to  preserve  each  one’s 
particular  sphere  of  influence,  was  a  powerful  drag  on  the  ability  to  rise  to  the 
challenge posed by a finance gone global. Second, the phenomenon of regulatory 
capture that Dr Reddy mentioned in his talk was a definite reality. Powerful political 
and economic influences were at play, and in some cases prevailed.  
 2 
    Other  factors  that  have  now  become  well  known  were  the  financial  industry’s 
remuneration  policies  and  incentive  structure,  which  ultimately  induced  excessive 
risk-taking and short-termism. (On these attitudes, I would like to recall the pertinent 
insights  of  Tommaso  Padoa-Schioppa  and  Andrew  Crockett  at  the  last  two  Per 
Jacobsson  lectures.)  Significantly,  compensation  structures  that  favour  risk-taking 
are  correlated  with  banks’  default  risk.  Of  course  this  may  be  useful  to  attract 
managers  with  low  risk  aversion,  which  may  be  a  desirable  trait  for  financial 
intermediaries. But from the systemic perspective, default by a bank generates costs 
that do not fall entirely on its shareholders, so that the “optimal policy” from the bank 
shareholders’ standpoint may be very suboptimal for the economy overall. While this 
state  of  affairs  benefited  the  “whole”  financial  industry,  it  may  also  have  led  to  a 
possibly serious misallocation of resources. We may now be observing a reversal, 
with an outflow of highly skilled people from the financial industry. Whether this is 
desirable or not depends on one’s view of externalities, and on the costs that a less 
efficient  financial  sector  may  have  for  society.  After  all,  social  returns  might  be 
higher in other occupations. Anyway, a reduction in salaries in the financial industry 
may  reduce  the  potential  skill  gap  between  the  industry  and  its  regulators.  The 
regulatory  agencies  may  become  better  able  to  attract  highly  skilled  financial 
workers, improving the effectiveness of their regulatory and supervisory activity.  
Finally, there has been a change in the relative importance of the various banking 
activities. 
trading  has  expanded  very  significantly. 
Interestingly,  the  cost  of  financial  intermediation  has  been  trending  upward  in  the 
past  40  years.  This  is  counterintuitive,  given  the  technological  advances  in 
information and communication technologies, which should have disproportionately 
increased  efficiency  in  the  financial  industry.  It  is  likely  that  the  technological 
advances  have  mostly  been  internalised  by  the  industry  itself  and  deployed  to 
increase secondary market activities, in particular proprietary trading. 
In  particular,  proprietary 
Over  the  last  few  years  the  crisis  has  heightened  appreciation  of  the  benefits  of  a  more 
stringent  regulatory  regime.  And  much  has  been  done  to  remedy  the  shortcomings  of 
financial  systems.  At  the  international  level,  under  the  political  impulse  of  the  G-20,  the 
Financial  Stability  Board  and  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  introduced 
substantial regulatory changes to reduce the frequency of financial crises and increase the 
resilience of economic systems. Improvements have been introduced in many areas such as 
bank capital and liquidity, OTC market infrastructure, and compensation policies in finance; 
importantly, new macro-prudential authorities have been established in many countries. But 
the regulatory overhaul has not yet been completed. Several issues are still being actively 
discussed,  such  as  the  role  of  rating  agencies  and  accounting  standards.  Although  new 
regulations on systemically important financial institutions have recently been approved, the 
“too-big-to-fail” issue is still a major concern. It would be foolish to pretend that defaults can 
be avoided, so we need to be prepared for their occurrence. The ongoing work on resolution 
regimes is a promising approach in this regard. 
Rules alone are not enough, however. Allow me to mention a few scattered areas from which 
progress should be expected: 
● 
One  element  that  is  essential  for  guaranteeing  systemic  stability  is  the  method  of 
measuring risk-weighted assets (RWA), the denominator of capital adequacy ratios. 
RWA  measures  have  recently  attracted  increasing  attention from market  analysts, 
banks  and  supervisory  authorities.  It  has  been  argued  that  the  methodologies  for 
computing RWA may not be comparable across institutions and, especially, across 
jurisdictions,  and  that  they  should  more  properly  reflect  risk  in  order  to  avoid 
ultimately jeopardising financial stability. These problems highlight the relevance of 
supervisory  practices  in  determining  banks’  capital  requirements  (for  example,  in 
validating internal banks’ models for calculating risk weights). Here, rigorous micro-
prudential supervision is essential. We really need to work out a single rulebook, to 
  3 
  move with determination towards taking joint responsibility and using peer reviews 
as much as possible in our supervisory activity. The watchword can only be: “more 
and better supervision”. 
Furthermore,  in  today’s  globalised  world,  it  is  crucial  to  make  sure  that  countries 
cooperate and agree on the appropriate stringency of financial regulation. Countries 
should not compete by relaxing rules in order to attract financial intermediaries, as 
this may generate negative externalities for other countries. This is a most delicate 
issue, and while a perfectly level playing field may not be achievable, we have to be 
conscious of the consequences of a “beggar-thy-neighbour” approach to regulation. 
The transition to a uniform system of rules and oversight of the financial sector must 
be hastened. In the euro area, and in the European Union at large, the project for 
banking union is ambitious, but it goes in the right direction. 
Let  me  close  on  a  different  but  related  topic.  Some  countries  are  now  investing 
increasingly  in  efforts  to  improve  the  financial  literacy  of  the  public.  This  too  is 
important.  On  the  one  hand,  it  helps  to  build  the  demand  side  of  the  “inclusive 
finance” that Dr Reddy mentioned, while on the other, financially literate citizens are 
better  able  to  understand  the  efforts  of  regulators  and  policy  makers  to  improve 
supervision  and  regulation,  and  less  likely  to  subscribe  to  the  simplistic  view  that 
“finance  is  evil”.  But  we  should  realise  that  –  as  the  case  of  Bernard  Madoff  and 
others  in  the  US  and  elsewhere  clearly  show  –  this  is  no  panacea.  (Madoff’s 
customers  were  surely  much  better  educated  than  the  average.)  Therefore,  for 
purposes  of  consumer  protection  in  the  financial  services  industry,  financial 
regulation  and  good  supervision  are  the  necessary  complements  to  financial 
education and inclusion. 
To  conclude, following  Dr  Reddy’s  final  remarks,  I  would  like  to quote from  a  book  by  the 
brilliant Bank of Italy economist Curzio Giannini, who passed away prematurely nine years 
ago  (The  age  of  central  banks,  Edward  Elgar, 2011,  translated from the  Italian  L’età  delle 
banche centrali, Il Mulino, 2004). In that “beautifully written and illuminating” work, as Charles 
Goodhart describes it in his foreword, Curzio applied “a theory of history” to describe how 
from pre-industrial payment technologies through the rise and fall of convertibility we ended 
up  with  the  revolution  in  the  payment  system  that  has  accompanied  the  globalisation  of 
money and the challenge of building trust in an under-institutionalised environment. Already 
at  the  turn  of  the  century,  Curzio  clearly  saw  the  likely  consequences  of  financial 
developments, and concluded, “In the years to come, the most interesting developments will 
probably  be  precisely  in  the  sphere  of  supervision  and  regulation”  and  that  “[w]hatever  its 
detractors  may  say,  the  central  bank  has  no  need  to  move  into  new  lines  of  business. 
Capitalism generated the central bank and capitalism will come to it again, even if the current 
infatuation with the financial markets’ self-regulating capacity were to endure. […] The central 
bank produces an intangible but essential good – trust – of which capitalism has an immense 
need. We must not forget that trust, or its synonym “confidence”, derives from the Latin fide, 
meaning faith, which cannot be produced simply by contract. In fact the legitimacy of central 
banks does not lie in their policy activism, or the ability to generate income, or even, save in 
a highly indirect sense, their efficiency. Rather, […] it derives from competence, moderation, 
the long-term approach, and the refusal to take any tasks beyond their primary role.” In the 
end this, perhaps, is what society should expect, if not from the financial sector, from those 
who are called to look after financial stability. 
4 
  