Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj: Corporate governance and Shari’a 
compliance in Bahrain  
Welcome speech by His Excellency Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj, Governor of the Central 
Bank of Bahrain, at the AAOIFI (Accounting and Auditing Organisation for Islamic Financial 
Institutions) Annual Shari’a Conference, Manama, 7 May 2012. 
 Excellencies,  distinguished  guests,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  this  conference  comes  at  an 
important time for the Islamic financial sector. This conference is focussing on six key areas 
that  both  the  standard  setters  and  the  financial  sector  must  work  together  upon  if  Islamic 
finance is to continue to grow and achieve its full potential. 
So I thought in this Welcome Address I would talk about one area where the Central Bank, 
as  a  regulator  and  as  a  member  of  AAOIFI  has  a  special  interest.  And  that  subject  is 
Governance. 
AAOIFI currently has issued seven standards relating to governance and two standards with 
respect to ethics. Deficiencies in Governance at financial institutions have been repeatedly 
highlighted in the past five years following the commencement of the Global Financial Crisis 
in 2007. Three of the standards issued by AAOIFI specifically refer to governance. The first 
of these standards concerns the Audit & Governance Committee. In practice, this standard 
requires  the  Audit  Committee  to  do  rather  more  than  just  to  review  a  financial  institution’s 
accounting practices and audit plan. It requires the Committee to review the use of Restricted 
Investment  Accounts’  funds.  It  emphasises  the  need  to  ensure  that  funds  are  invested  in 
accordance with terms agreed with the customer. Too often over the past five years we have 
seen  how  the  interests  of  customers  at  both  conventional  and  Islamic  banks  have  been 
neglected as bank management have focussed on bonuses and share price. If banks neglect 
customers’  interests,  then  they  will  lose  those  customers.  This  theme  of  looking  after  the 
interests  of  customers  is  carried  on  in  the  AAOIFI  Governance  Principles  paper  issued  in 
2005.  In  particular  Principle  3  of  this  paper  warns  against  inequitable  treatment  of  fund 
providers. The 2009 AAOIFI Corporate Social Responsibility paper also focuses on dealing 
responsibly with clients and “par excellence” customer service. If you couple the governance 
standards with the ethics paper for employees of financial institutions, you find a formidable 
set  of  requirements,  principles  and  standards  relating to  putting the  interests  of customers 
first. 
So against this background of improving levels of disclosures, the CBB will be making further 
efforts through its review of its corporate governance and business conduct rules to raise the 
bar  for  corporate  governance.  The  review  of  the  CBB  corporate  governance  requirements 
has already finished its first stage of internal review. The next will be consultation with the 
financial sector. 
Coupled with governance is Shari’a. This is one of the themes of this conference. From the 
perspective  of  the  CBB  as  a  regulator,  we  have  noted  that  all  too  often,  the  approach  of 
banks, particularly conventional banks has been to start with a conventional transaction or 
product and then try to give it a finishing coat of Shari’a compliant paint. Financial institutions 
must not regard Shari’a compliance as the finishing touch to product development. Instead, 
product development needs to start from Shari’a principles: i.e. Islamic financial institutions 
must become Shari’a driven. 
And that is why this conference and the next set of consultations by AAOIFI are going to be 
so  important.  If financial  institutions  and  standards  setters  can  address  the  interest  of 
customers,  governance  and  Shari’a  compliance  satisfactorily  then  we  can  look  forward  to 
Islamic finance continuing its growth and reaching its full potential. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
