Duvvuri Subbarao: Price stability, financial stability and sovereign debt 
sustainability policy challenges from the New Trilemma 
Inaugural  speech  by  Dr  Duvvuri  Subbarao,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
Second  International  Research  Conference  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  Mumbai, 
1 February 2012. 
 I  have  great  pleasure  in  welcoming  you  all  to  the  Reserve  Bank’s  Second  International 
Research Conference (SIRC). 
We  held  our  first  international  conference  two  years  ago,  in  February  2010,  as  a  flagship 
event of our Platinum Jubilee celebrations. Many of you who had attended that conference 
complimented us for its quality and urged us to repeat it. As much as we were flattered by 
those compliments, I also suspect that the urging for a repeat was at least partly motivated 
by the prospect of escaping from the bitter cold of some of your home countries at this time 
of the year. So, here’s welcoming all of you to warm and sunny Mumbai. 
Conference theme 
Let me start by explaining the motivation for the conference theme: “Price Stability, Financial 
Stability and Sovereign Debt Sustainability: Policy Challenges from the New Trilemma”. 
The global financial crisis followed by the euro zone debt crisis has changed the theology of 
central  banking  in  a  fundamental  way.  The  orthodoxy  of  central  banking  before  the  2008 
crisis  was:  single  objective  –  price  stability;  single  instrument  –  short-term  interest  rate. 
Although  most  central  banks  deviated  to  different  extents  from  this  minimalist  model,  this 
came increasingly to be considered the holy grail. 
The crisis came as a powerful rebuke to central banks for having neglected financial stability 
in their single-minded pursuit of price stability. By the time of our first conference two years 
ago, a consensus was developing around the view that financial stability has to be within the 
explicit policy calculus of central banks, although opinion was divided on the precise nature 
of institutional arrangements for maintaining financial stability. 
Fast forward to 2011/12. Even as central banks are grappling with balancing the demands of 
price stability and financial stability, there is now yet another powerful assault on central bank 
orthodoxy arising from the big elephant in the room – the euro zone sovereign debt crisis. 
The European Central Bank (ECB) is being called upon to bend and stretch its mandate to 
bail  out  sovereigns  who  have  forfeited  the  confidence  of  markets.  Actually  that  is  an 
understatement. In reality, the ECB is being challenged on why it is, to use an Indian word, 
being  so  brahminical  about  its  mandate  when  the  world  around  it  is  collapsing.  The 
argument, in its essence, is that if a central bank is committed to financial stability, it cannot 
ignore the feedback loop between financial stability and sovereign debt sustainability, and by 
extension therefore, it has to be mindful of sovereign debt sustainability concerns. 
What do these trends engendered by the crisis indicate? In particular, is it the case that the 
mandate  of  central  banks  is  set  to  expand  from  the  single  objective  of  price  stability  to 
multiple objectives of price stability, financial stability and sovereign debt sustainability? Can 
central banks simultaneously support all these three objectives and do so efficiently? That in 
essence is the new trilemma. 
The  new  trilemma  triggers  several  questions.  How  do  the  three  objectives  underlying  the 
trilemma reinforce each other, and in what ways do they conflict with each other? What is 
their impact on growth? Is the trilemma an exclusive phenomenon of crisis times, or does it 
manifest  in  normal  times  as  well?  What  is  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  responsibility  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
central  banks  for  each  of  these  objectives?  Are  central  banks  equipped  to  handle  these 
additional  responsibilities?  And  finally,  what  does  this  expanded  mandate  mean  for  the 
effectiveness and autonomy of central banks? 
That  indeed  is  a  long  list  of  questions.  The  purpose  of  this  conference  is  to  think  through 
these weighty questions centred around this new trilemma.  
Is this indeed a trilemma? 
We deliberated internally on whether this evolving challenge for central banks would indeed 
qualify as a trilemma. One view was that this is not strictly a trilemma as there is no theory 
which  says  that  we  cannot  simultaneously  obtain  price  stability,  financial  stability  and 
sovereign debt sustainability. The opposing view was that what central banks have at hand is 
indeed  a  trilemma  in  as  much  as  there  can  be  clear  tensions  between  the  objectives 
underlying  the  new  trilemma,  and  central  banks  may  not  be  able  to  determine,  with  any 
degree of exactitude, what inter se priority must be accorded to each of the three objectives 
under different sets of circumstances. So, is this a trilemma or not? To compound the search 
for an answer, the word “trilemma” has not made it to all standard dictionaries yet. So, permit 
me a little indulgence into the world of trilemmas. 
The world of trilemmas 
Epicurus, the Greek Philosopher who lived around 300 BCE, was possibly the first to use the 
concept of a trilemma to reject the idea of an omnipotent God. The distinction of being the 
first  to  actually  use  the  word  “trilemma”  goes  perhaps  to  the  17th  century  English  non-
conformist  clergyman,  Philip  Henry,  who  recorded  in  his  diary,  “We  are  put  hereby  to  a 
Trilemma,  to  turn  flat  Independents,  or  to  strike  in  with  the  conformists,  or  to  sit  down  in 
former silence”. Arthur C. Clarke, the British science fiction writer, cited a trilemma in trying to 
achieve  production  quickly  and  cheaply  while  also  maintaining  high  quality,  leading  to  the 
quip:  “Quick,  Cheap,  Good:  Pick  two”.  In  public  choice  theory,  there  is  the  trilemma  of 
juggling three priorities – coverage, cost and choice – when offering a public service. 
If  we  turn  to  economics,  we  will  see  that  trilemmas  have  indeed  proliferated.  Dani  Rodrik 
(2007)  argued  that  if  a  country  wants  more  of  globalization,  it  must  either  give  up  some 
democracy or some national sovereignty. Niall Ferguson (2009) highlighted the trilemma of a 
choice between commitment to globalization, to social order and to a small state (meaning 
limited  state  intervention).  In  one  of  his  FT  columns,  Martin  Wolf  spoke  about  the  US 
Republican Party’s fiscal policy trilemma: the belief that large budget deficits are ruinous; a 
continued eagerness to cut taxes; and an utter lack of interest in spending cuts on a large 
enough  scale.  Then  we  have  the  Earth  Trilemma  (EEE),  which  posits  that  for  economic 
development  (E),  we  need 
the 
environmental issue (E). 
The trilemma more directly relevant to this conference theme is a financial stability trilemma 
put forward by Dirk Schoenmaker (2008), explaining the incompatibility within the euro zone 
of  a  stable  financial  system,  an  integrated  financial  system,  and  national  financial  stability 
policies. By far the most high profile current trilemma, as per some analysts, is the euro-zone 
trilemma: the seeming irreconcilability between its three wishes: a single currency, minimal 
fiscal contribution to bail outs, and the ECB’s commitment to low inflation. 
increased  energy  expenditure  (E),  but 
this  raises 
The old trilemma 
Even as I have spoken about more recent trilemmas in economics, the prima donna of all of 
them  is  Mundell’s  “impossible  trinity”.  This  old  trilemma  asserts  that  a  country  cannot 
simultaneously maintain all three policy goals of free capital flows, a fixed exchange rate and 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
an independent monetary policy. The impossible trinity, as students of economics have learnt 
for  over  a  half  century,  has  a  strong  theoretical  foundation  in  the  Mundell-Fleming  model 
developed in the 1960s.  
 The  choices  the  world  made  under  the  impossible  trinity  varied  over  time.  Under  the  gold 
standard, exchange rates were fixed and capital could move around, but central banks were 
forced to adjust interest rates to ensure they did not run out of reserves. This could lead to 
pressure on the real economy, and a lot of booms and busts. 
Under  Bretton  Woods,  we  had  fixed  exchange  rates  (with  occasional  adjustments)  and 
independent  monetary  policy,  but  capital  mobility  was  highly  restricted;  when  I  first  went 
abroad over 30 years ago, Indians couldn’t take out more than $20, no matter the purpose of 
the trip. The Bretton Woods system broke down under the weight of fixed exchange rates, and 
the world moved to largely floating exchange rates. Capital has flowed freely round the world. 
In  the  post-Bretton  Woods  era,  countries  have  made  different  choices.  The  most  common 
case, typical across advanced economies, is to give up on a fixed exchange rate so as to run 
an open economy with an independent monetary policy. On the other hand, economies that 
adopt  a  hard  peg  give  up  on  independence  of  monetary  policy.  Examples  include  the 
currency boards set up by Hong Kong and, for a time, Argentina. More recently, responding 
to a rapid appreciation of the Swiss Franc as a result of the safe haven effect, Switzerland 
declared its commitment to defend a pre-announced exchange rate. 
History  is  replete  also  with  examples  of  countries  aiming  to  achieve  all  three  goals  at  the 
same time, and failing to do so, often in a disorderly way. Thailand’s decision to abandon the 
hard peg against the US dollar in July 1997 is a classic example. 
Notwithstanding its real life validation, it is not as if Mundell’s “Impossible Trinity” is inviolable. 
Many  of  the  assumptions  underlying  this  model  do  not  often  hold;  indeed  the  new  open 
economy  macroeconomy  models  that  build  in  price  rigidities  and  monopolistic  competition 
demonstrate policy dynamics quite different from those built in the Mundell-Fleming tradition. 
It  is  also  not  the  case  that  countries  are  forced  into  corner  solutions  at  the  nodes  of  the 
impossible  trinity  triangle.  As  it  happens,  reflecting  the  forces  of  globalization  and  their 
asymmetric impact, many emerging economies have opted for middle solutions. 
Impossible trinity to holy trinity 
In  the  context  of  this  conference,  is  the  new  trilemma  –  the  simultaneous  pursuit  of  price 
stability,  financial  stability  and  sovereign  debt  sustainability  –  a  new  impossible  trinity? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Possibly not. There is no theory which says that these objectives are inconsistent with one 
another.  It  can  even  be  argued  that  the  three  objectives  reinforce  each  other,  and  that 
together they sustain growth, thereby constituting not an impossible trinity, but actually a holy 
trinity of objectives.  
 That does not by any means imply that the holy trinity of objectives can always be achieved 
simultaneously, or once achieved, can be maintained as such indefinitely. There would be 
tensions  and  trade-offs,  especially  in  the  short-term.  In  particular,  the  tensions  materialize 
with brutal force in a state of disequilibrium – when inflation is off target, the financial system 
is fragile and public debt is ballooning. To the extent we have to manage these tensions, the 
policy problem qualifies as a trilemma. 
The many ways in which the new trilemma plays out 
Policies in pursuit of the three objectives under the trilemma interact in complex, and often 
unintended ways. Sometimes they are supportive of each other; at other times, they may run 
counter  to  each  other.  More  perplexingly,  the  tensions  and  trade-offs  may  be  different  in 
crisis times from normal times.  
4 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
Let me attempt to illustrate this by citing some examples from global experience, including 
recent experience. Given the three objectives underlying the new trilemma, and the two-way 
directions  in  which  they  can  interact,  we  have  a  total  of  six  “cause  and  impact”  bilateral 
interactions. I will consider them one by one. 
Price Stability → Financial Stability 
(i) 
Before  the  global  financial  crisis,  the  stereotype  view  was  that  price  stability  and  financial 
stability  complement  each  other  i.e.  monetary  policy  and  policies  for  financial  stability  are 
mutually reinforcing. The crisis has proved that wrong. Note that we saw the global financial 
sector come to the brink of collapse in the midst of a period of extraordinary price stability. 
Indeed the experience of the crisis has prompted an even stronger assertion – that there is a 
trade-off between price stability and financial stability. In other words, the more successful a 
central  bank  is  with  price  stability,  the  more  likely  it  is  to  imperil  financial  stability.  The 
argument goes as follows. The extended period of steady growth and low and stable inflation 
during the Great Moderation lulled central banks into complacency. Only with the benefit of 
hindsight is it now clear that the prolonged period of price stability blindsided policy makers to 
the cancer of financial instability growing in the underbelly.  
An even more recent example of a conflict between policies for financial stability and price 
stability is of the ECB reversing its crisis driven expansionary stance by raising interest rates 
twice  during  April–July  2011.  The  ECB  justified  this  on  the  argument  of  stemming  the 
underlying inflationary pressures, but many criticized this move as being premature and as 
clearly unhelpful to restoring financial stability. Of course, we all know that the ECB reversed 
these hikes during November–December 2011 in response to the euro zone slow down. 
Financial Stability → Price Stability 
(ii) 
Let us now see the interaction in the reverse direction. Whether policies aimed at financial 
stability can affect price stability is a debate that has stayed with us all through the period of 
management  of  the  crisis.  Many  analysts  have  argued  that  the  extraordinary  monetary 
expansion, especially by the Fed, to bring interest rates to the Zero Lower Bound (ZLB) and 
following it up with two rounds of “Quantitative Easing” (QE), all aimed at restoring financial 
stability,  may  actually  be  sowing  the  seeds  of  inflation.  The  argument  goes  that  since  the 
inflationary impact of easy monetary policies is difficult to see real time, the Fed risks going 
overboard with monetary easing thereby jeopardizing future price stability. 
We  also  have  an  illustration  from  emerging  economies  of  policies  for  financial  stability 
affecting  price  stability.  During  the  crisis,  EME  central  banks  eased  monetary  policy  to 
provide  relief  to  the  financial  sector,  but  this  also  saw  inflation  quickly  resurging  when 
recovery started. 
Financial Stability → Sovereign Debt Sustainability 
(iii) 
The management of the crisis offered an important lesson on how policies aimed at restoring 
financial  stability  could  impair  sovereign  debt  sustainability.  By  far  the  most  obvious 
illustration of this link is the cost of bail outs of failing financial institutions, accompanied by 
“fiscal  stimulus”,  to  prevent  the  financial  sector  problems  from  causing  overall  economic 
activity  to  collapse.  The  fiscal  action  was  unquestionably  necessary  to  restore  financial 
stability.  But  the  net  impact  need  not  always  be  benign.  There  are  circumstances  under 
which  fiscal  expansion  in  support  of  financial  stability  can  threaten  sovereign  debt 
sustainability. That will happen if the sovereign is already highly indebted, and the recovery is 
not  quick  enough  or  robust  enough.  Governments  will  then  see  their  revenues  falling,  will 
need to borrow to bridge the fiscal gap, and can potentially get trapped in a self-reinforcing 
adverse fiscal feedback loop eventually jeopardizing their sovereign debt sustainability. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Sovereign Debt Sustainability → Financial Stability 
(iv) 
For transmission of shocks from the sovereign to the banking system, the evolving situation 
in  the  euro  zone  is  clearly  the  most  glaring  example.  Consider  Greece,  where  banks  are 
being asked to share the burden of bailing out the government, the so called private sector 
involvement – PSI, so that sovereign debt could be brought down to sustainable levels. But 
this  will  affect  their  collective  viability  and  potentially  threaten  broader  financial  stability. 
There has been acrimony over whether the PSI is voluntary or involuntary. For the purpose 
of this issue, that debate is a technicality; it does not alter the basic contours of contagion 
from sovereign debt to financial stability. 
The  ECB’s  new  term  repo  (LTRO)  window  offers  another  example  of  how  sovereign  debt 
sustainability concerns can affect financial stability. This new window offers banks three-year 
money at the repo rate to encourage them to use that money to lend to sovereigns, taking 
advantage  of  the  arbitrage  opportunity.  But  this  financial  engineering  is  a  fragile  and 
potentially problematic arrangement. Banks will need to post additional collateral with ECB if 
the  bonds  they  offered  fall  in  value  or  suffer  a  credit  downgrade.  For  precisely  the  same 
reasons – fall in value and credit downgrade – banks will need to provide additional capital 
against monies they have lent to sovereigns. This could put banks on a collateral spiral and 
erode overall financial stability. 
Sovereign Debt Sustainability → Price Stability 
(v) 
The most obvious route for sovereign debt concerns impinging on price stability is through 
the  monetization  of  government  debt.  Central  banks  do,  of  course,  resort  to  open  market 
operations  (OMOs)  –  buying  and  selling  government  paper  –  for  purposes  of  liquidity 
management. But if the motivation for the OMO is to help out a fiscally vulnerable sovereign 
or to reduce the cost of borrowing for the sovereign, central banks could end up holding price 
stability hostage to sovereign debt concerns. 
Fiscal  concerns  can  dominate  monetary  policy  in  other  less  dramatic  ways.  In  the  years 
before  the  crisis,  an  increasing  number  of  governments  were  voluntarily  adopting  fiscal 
responsibility  rules,  thereby  allowing  room  for  autonomous  monetary  policy.  These  rule-
based  fiscal  regimes  unravelled  during  the  crisis  as  both  governments  and  central  banks 
implemented expansionary policies in close coordination. While such coordination during the 
crisis  was  not  questioned  except  by  extreme  purists,  now  in  the  recovery  period,  several 
fundamental concerns are resurfacing. 
At the heart of these concerns is whether monetary policy is once again becoming hostage to 
fiscal compulsions. The specifics of the debate vary but the basic issues are similar. In the 
US, the debate is over the trade-off between short-term fiscal stimulus and long-term fiscal 
consolidation. In the euro area, the question is about the shared benefits of a monetary union 
without the shared responsibilities of a fiscal union. In India, the question has been whether 
the  OMOs  conducted  by  the  Reserve  Bank  to  manage  systemic  liquidity  are  acting  as  a 
disincentive for fiscal discipline. The questions all around are: are central banks being forced 
beyond their comfort zone to subordinate their monetary policy stance to the government’s 
fiscal  stance? Aren’t  the  so  called  unconventional  measures,  in  reality,  quasi-fiscal 
measures? Are central banks, in the process, compromising their basic commitment to price 
stability? 
Price Stability → Sovereign Debt Sustainability 
(vi) 
There are several ways in which policies aimed at price stability can influence sovereign debt 
sustainability. Higher interest rates, necessitated to combat inflation, raise the costs of debt 
to the government. Also, if the government has large subsidies on its budget, as do many 
emerging  and  developing  economies,  inflation  could  raise  the  cost  of  subsidies  thereby 
raising the borrowing need of the government. On the other hand, governments with large 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
debts may not actually mind a bit of inflation as it affords them an opportunity to inflate away 
some of the debt. 
I have spoken about the tensions and trade-offs between the three objectives underlying the 
new trilemma. The examples that I have given are by no means exhaustive but are intended 
to illustrate the complex policy challenges they pose to central banks.  
Four questions underlying the new trilemma 
Now let me turn to some important questions that central banks will confront in managing the 
new trilemma. In particular, I will raise four questions.  
Question 1: are we seeing a return of fiscal dominance of monetary policy? 
This question has surfaced with vigour in the context of the euro zone crisis. The ECB claims 
that  its  bond  purchase  programme  is  aimed  at  restoring  liquidity  and  improving  monetary 
transmission.  But  many  analysts  believe  that  this  is  a  thinly  veiled  attempt  to  shore  up 
sovereign borrowing and that the ECB is actually acquiescing in fiscal dominance. 
Although this tension between the central bank mandate and sovereign debt sustainability is 
presently being played out in Europe, it is not new; nor is it unique to Europe. The seventy 
odd  years  since  the  Great  Depression  saw  a  famous  rivalry  between  fiscal  and  monetary 
policies  for  influence.  Historically  central  banks  suffered  from  fiscal  dominance  since  they 
had  to  acquiesce  in  governments  “borrowing  as  much  as  required  at  as  low  a  cost  as 
possible”. 
This state of affairs started changing in the 1980s, with a wave of support for central bank 
independence  arising  largely  in  response  to  the  damage  inflicted  by  the  stagflation  of  the 
1970s and the clear lesson that high inflation is detrimental to sustainable growth. So, fiscal 
dominance gradually yielded to independent central banks, free of short-term compulsions, 
targetting largely, and in some cases exclusively, price stability. Now it seems we are seeing 
a  reversal  of  that  trend  with  central  banks  being  called  upon  to  mind  sovereign  debt 
sustainability concerns. 
Fiscal dominance manifests through the central bank acquiescing in the fiscal stance of the 
government. This usually happens through monetization of debt through the central bank’s 
bond  buying  programme.  Central  banks  typically  conduct  OMOs  more  as  reverse 
transactions  (repos)  for  liquidity  management  purposes  in  line  with  their  monetary  policy 
stance and intermediate targets. In that case, they should be seen as pure monetary policy 
operations. But at times, OMOs could be motivated by the objective of providing liquidity to 
support government borrowing or of reducing the yield on treasury bonds to enhance debt 
sustainability. It then becomes a case of acquiescence in fiscal dominance. There is often 
only  a  thin  line,  and  the  interpretation  of  the  motivation  for  outright  OMOs  could  vary 
depending on the circumstances. 
In  the  presence  of  large  sovereign  borrowing  that  makes  the  government’s  fiscal  stance 
unsustainable, central banks typically have little choice. If they do not conduct OMOs to bring 
systemic  liquidity  within  reasonable  limits,  they  risk  losing  control  over  financial  stability.  If 
they do conduct OMOs, they risk losing control over price stability. What this really says is 
that  fiscal  responsibility  is  much  more  than  a  question  of  whether  monetary  policy  is 
independent or not. It is a question of sustaining macroeconomic stability.  
Question 2: will the management of the new trilemma erode the autonomy and 
accountability of Central Banks? 
The  much  prized  autonomy  of  central  banks  has  come  under  assault  post-crisis  with  an 
influential view gaining ground that one of the principal causes of the crisis was the unbridled 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
autonomy  of  central  banks.  The  standard  argument  for  central  bank  autonomy  is  that 
autonomy  enhances  the  credibility  of  the  central  bank’s  inflation  management  credentials. 
Monetary policy typically acts with a lag, and price stability therefore has to be viewed in a 
medium  term  perspective.  Having  autonomy  frees  the  central  bank  from  the  pressure  of 
responding  to  short-term  developments,  deviating  from  its  inflation  target  and  thereby 
compromising its medium term inflation goals. 
Now that the importance of central bank autonomy in monetary policy has come to be largely 
accepted, the question is: will additional responsibilities underlying the new trilemma affect 
that autonomy? And how will this new situation also affect the accountability structures of the 
central banks? It may be useful to take stock of the apprehensions in this regard. 
For overseeing systemic stability, new governance structures have emerged after the global 
crisis.  These  include  the  Financial  Services  Oversight  Council  (FSOC)  in  the  US,  the 
Financial Policy Committee (FPC) in the UK and the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) 
in the EU. Here in India, we have the Financial Stability and Development Council (FSDC). 
The precise institutional arrangements vary, but across all of them, central banks have a lead 
responsibility. 
With  these  new  institutional  arrangements  for  financial  stability  in  place,  the  autonomy 
question has acquired an additional dimension. Note that central bank autonomy has worked 
because  they  could  keep  at  arms  length  from  the  governments.  But  once  a  coordination 
mechanism  is  in  place,  these  barriers  may  melt  away.  Also,  even  if  that  is  what  the  book 
says,  it  may  be  difficult  to  straitjacket  the  discussion  at  the  coordination  forum  to  financial 
stability.  As  we  have  seen,  there  are  no  “pure”  financial  stability  issues;  they  are  all  inter-
connected.  A  discussion  on  financial  stability  could  very  well  lead  to  a  discussion  on 
monetary policy. What then of the autonomy of the central bank? This apprehension, as all of 
you will appreciate, is non-trivial.  
If  we  now  add  responsibility  for  sovereign  debt  sustainability  to  this  already  complex 
situation,  the  reason  for  apprehension  about  the  threat  to  the  autonomy  of  central  banks 
becomes  more  obvious.  Sovereign  debt  is  a  quintessentially  political  subject,  and  as  we 
noted earlier, the very foundation of central bank autonomy is justified on the need to free 
monetary policy from fiscal dominance. By requiring central banks to be mindful of sovereign 
debt sustainability concerns as part of the “new trilemma”, is the hard won gain of freedom 
from  fiscal  compulsions  being  compromised?  But  look  at  it  also  from  the  opposite 
perspective. Given that investor trust in public debt is part of the foundation of a nation-state, 
is it realistic for a central bank to remain indifferent to sovereign debt sustainability? 
The new trilemma also poses questions for central banks on the accountability front. With a 
single  objective  of  price  stability,  the  deliverable  could  be  precisely  defined,  the  outcome 
accurately  measured,  and  accountability  clearly  extracted.  Multiple  objectives,  and  as  we 
have  seen,  with  tensions  and  trade-offs  between  them,  can  diffuse  and  erode  this 
accountability  mechanism.  The  central  bank  can  always  explain  away  any  failure  on  one 
front as a result of policies to defend another front. 
There are no easy answers to these apprehensions about the impact of the new trilemma on 
central  bank  autonomy  and  accountability.  Governments  and  central  banks  in  each 
jurisdiction will have to define the nature and extent of the latter’s responsibility for financial 
stability and sovereign debt sustainability. I can only lay down certain tenets that must inform 
this process. First, the fundamental responsibility of central banks for price stability should 
not  be  compromised.  Second,  central  banks  should  have  a  lead,  but  not  exclusive, 
responsibility,  for  financial  stability.  Third,  the  boundaries  of  central  bank  responsibility  for 
sovereign  debt  sustainability  should  be  clearly  defined.  Fourth,  in  the  matter  of  ensuring 
financial  stability,  the  government  must  normally  leave  the  responsibility  to  the  regulators, 
assuming an activist role only in times of crisis. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Question 3: does the pursuit of the new trilemma militate against growth? 
My short answer to this question is “no”. Let me elaborate. It is possible that in the short-
term,  policies  aimed  at  price  stability,  financial  stability  and  sovereign  debt  sustainability 
could, at times, run counter to policies required for promoting growth. But growth achieved at 
the cost of the objectives of the new trilemma cannot be sustained. What can be sustained is 
only  growth  that  is  consistent  with  these  objectives.  So,  some  sacrifice  ratio  may  be 
operative in the short-term, but in the medium term, there is no trade off between sustainable 
growth and maintaining the objectives of the new trilemma. 
Let me illustrate this with reference to the debate that played out quite actively in India all of 
last year around the growth-inflation trade-off. We had inflation ruling all through the year in 
the range of 9–10 per cent. To combat this, the Reserve Bank has had to tighten monetary 
policy  –  raising  rates,  as  all  our  critics  are  fond  of  saying  repeatedly  –  a  record  total  of 
13 times. While inflation did not show any downward trend till late in the calendar year 2011, 
growth has certainly moderated. The Reserve Bank’s latest projection for growth for FY12 is 
7 per cent, down from 8.4 per cent last year. The criticism has been that we could not bring 
inflation down but only ended up hurting growth. This is not the occasion to enter a defence 
of  our  position.  But  in  the  context  of  this  conference,  the  criticism  throws  up  an  important 
issue on the growth-inflation trade-off.  
Evidence from empirical research suggests that the relationship between growth and inflation 
is non-linear. At low inflation and stable inflation expectations, there is a trade-off between 
growth and inflation. But above a certain threshold level of inflation, the trade-off disappears, 
this relationship reverses, and high inflation actually starts taking a toll on growth. Estimates 
by the Reserve Bank using different methodologies put the threshold level of inflation in the 
range of 4%–6%. With WPI inflation ruling above 9 per cent till recently, we were way past 
this threshold. At this high level, inflation is unambiguously inimical to growth; it saps investor 
confidence  and  erodes  medium  term  growth  prospects.  The  Reserve  Bank’s  monetary 
tightening all through last year was accordingly geared towards safeguarding medium term 
growth even if it meant some sacrifice in near-term growth. 
The debate on the trade-off between financial stability and growth runs along roughly similar 
lines. Post-crisis, regulation of financial institutions is being tightened. In particular, under the 
Basel III package, banks will be required to hold higher capital, better quality capital and also 
build up capital and liquidity buffers. What does this mean for growth? 
A  BIS  study,  undertaken  by  a  group  led  by  Stephen  Cecchetti,  estimates  that  a  one 
percentage  point  increase  in  the  target  ratio  of  tangible  common  equity  (TCE)  to  risk-
weighted  assets  (RWA)  phased  in  over  a  nine  year  period  reduces  output  by  close  to 
0.2 per cent.  The  study  argues  though  that  as  the  financial  system  makes  the  required 
adjustment, these costs will dissipate and then reverse after the adjustment period, and the 
growth path will return to its original trajectory. A Basel Committee study estimates that there 
will be net positive benefits from Basel III because of the reduced probability of a crisis and 
reduced volatility in output in response to a shock. An IIF study, however, estimates a higher 
sacrifice ratio – that the G3 (US, Euro Area and Japan) will lose 0.3 percentage points from 
their annual growth rates over the full ten-year period 2011–2020. 
What are the implications of these numbers relating to growth sacrifice for emerging market 
economies  (EMEs)?  Let  me  take  the  example  of  India.  Admittedly,  the  capital  to  risk 
weighted  asset  ratio  (CRAR)  of  our  banks,  at  the  aggregate  level,  is  above  the  Basel  III 
requirement although a few individual banks may fall short and may have to raise capital. But 
capital adequacy today does not necessarily mean capital adequacy going forward. As the 
economy  grows,  so  too  will  the  credit  demand,  requiring  banks  to  expand  their  balance 
sheets, and in order to be able to do so, they will have to augment their capital. 
In a structurally transforming economy with rapid upward mobility like India, credit demand 
will  expand  faster  than  GDP  for  several  reasons.  First,  India  will  shift  increasingly  from 
services to manufactures whose credit intensity is higher per unit of GDP. Second, we need 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
to  at  least  double  our  investment  in  infrastructure  which  will  place  enormous  demands  on 
credit.  Finally,  financial  inclusion,  which  both  the  Government  and  the  Reserve  Bank  are 
driving,  will  bring  millions  of  low  income  households  into  the  formal  financial  system  with 
almost all of them needing credit. What all this means is that we are going to have to impose 
higher capital requirements on banks as per Basel III at a time when the economy’s credit 
demand  is  going  to  expand  rapidly.  How  best  can  we  resolve  this  tension  between  the 
demands of growth and the demands of financial stability is a question that we in India and 
several other EMEs will have to address.  
I have gone at some length on this not to argue that the costs of financial stability outweigh 
the benefits, but to argue that the cost-benefit calculus will vary from country to country, and 
will  vary  for  a  given  country  over  time.  So,  the  challenge  for  every  country,  advanced, 
emerging and developing, is to tailor its financial stability policies to maximize the benefit cost 
ratio on a dynamic scale. 
Now let me come to the third leg of the equation – the link between growth and sovereign 
debt  sustainability.  Like  with  the  other  two  legs  of  the  new  trilemma,  even  in  the  case  of 
sovereign debt, there is an inflexion point beyond which fiscal deficits militate against growth. 
Government borrowing is not bad  per se, but excessive borrowing is. There is therefore a 
need to cap total public debt as a proportion of GDP.  
What  is  equally  important  in  respect  of  fiscal  management  is  the  quality  of  public 
expenditure.  If  the  government  borrows  and  squanders  that  money  away  on  unproductive 
current expenditure, both fiscal sustainability and growth would be jeopardized. Governments 
need to spend on merit goods and public goods, in particular on improving human and social 
capital and on physical infrastructure.  
So, after all this discussion, what is the answer to the question: does the pursuit of the new 
trilemma  militate  against  growth?  No.  It  does  not.  But  there  could  be  some  trade-offs  and 
governments  will  have  to  tailor  their  policies  to  ensure  that  the  benefit  –  cost  calculus  is 
always maximised.  
Question 4: what are the limits to unconventional policy measures? 
As the crisis exploded with brutal intensity and depth, central banks around the world acted 
with  an  unusual  show  of  policy  force,  ferociously  cutting  policy  rates  to  near  zero  or  even 
zero.  Realizing  soon  that  this  was  not  sufficient  to  restore  calm  and  confidence  to  the 
markets,  they  had  to  follow  up  the  conventional  measures  with  a  slew  of  unconventional 
measures variously described as quantitative and credit easing.  
The  first  wave  of  unconventional  measures  was  aimed  at  providing  liquidity  to  the  system 
either by way of collateralized loans through the repo window or outright purchase of bonds. 
Liquidity  management  is  of  course  standard  monetary  policy  procedure.  What  made  this 
unconventional  were  mainly  two  things.  The  first  was  the  quantum  of  operations.  The 
volumes were large, and were aimed at flooding the market with liquidity, much beyond what 
is expected in normal times.  
The second characteristic that made liquidity infusion unconventional was the relaxation of 
standards  regarding  the  type  of  bonds  bought  under  the  OMOs.  In  this  regard,  different 
central  banks  relaxed  regulations  to  different  extents.  While  the  Bank  of  England  stuck  to 
treasuries, the Fed bought federally backed mortgage bonds in addition to treasuries. The 
Bank  of  Japan  went  further  buying  also  corporate  bonds,  commercial  paper,  exchange 
traded funds and real estate investment trusts.  
The second wave of unconventional measures went beyond repo operations and OMOs. The 
Bank  of  Japan  extended  targeted  loans  to  banks  to  spur  long  term  investment.  The  Fed 
supplemented two rounds of QE with “operation twist” – of purchasing longer term treasuries 
against sale of short-term treasuries in an effort to depress the entire yield curve rather than 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
just its short end. Last week, it also began publishing the expected interest rate path for the 
coming years. The ECB, as noted earlier, is providing three-year loans to banks. 
What  of  emerging  economy  central  banks?  They  too  had  resorted  to  unconventional 
measures although their policy rates did not hit the zero lower bound. In the Reserve Bank, 
for example, at the height of the crisis, we operated a term repo window to enable banks to 
meet  the  liquidity  requirement  of  mutual  funds  and  non-bank  finance  companies  (NBFCs). 
We relaxed the statutory liquidity ratio (SLR) prescription for banks by up to 1.5 percentage 
points  of  their  net  demand  and  time  liabilities  (NDTL)  for  this  purpose.  The  risk  weight  on 
banks’  exposure  to  NBFCs,  which  was  raised  earlier,  was  rolled  back.  The  restriction  on 
commercial banks in buying back the CDs held by mutual funds was lifted. We also instituted 
a foreign currency swap facility for banks.  
Unconventional  measures  have  been  contentious.  Central  banks  have  largely  maintained 
that the unconventional measures they deployed are a part of the monetary policy arsenal, 
and  that  the  intent  behind  them  is  to  improve  monetary  transmission.  Their  critics  have 
argued  that  central  banks  have  actually  stepped  beyond  their  mandates  to  accommodate 
extraneous compulsions.  
All  in  all,  the  global  financial  crisis  and  the  ongoing  Eurozone  crisis  have  raised  important 
questions about the unconventional measures that central banks can resort to – their range, 
intent  and  the  way  the  intent  should  be  communicated  to  the  markets.  I  am  sure  this 
conference will visit this debate in much greater detail over the next two days. 
Conclusion 
Let  me  now  conclude  by  summarizing  what  I  have  said.  I  explained  the  rationale  for  the 
conference  theme:  “Price  Stability,  Financial  Stability  and  Sovereign  Debt  Sustainability: 
Policy Challenges from the New Trilemma”. I then illustrated how the three legs under the 
new trilemma interact with one another. Thereafter I raised the following four questions that 
central banks need to address in the context of the new trilemma: 
(i) 
(ii) 
Are we seeing a return of fiscal dominance of monetary policy? 
Will the management of the new trilemma erode the autonomy and accountability of 
central banks? 
Does the pursuit of the new trilemma militate against growth? 
What are the limits to unconventional policy measures? 
(iii) 
(iv) 
To  what  extent  are  the  old  and  new  trilemmas  similar?  Under  the  old  trilemma  –  the 
impossible trinity – countries had to sacrifice one of the three objectives – fixed exchange 
rate, independent monetary policy and free capital flows. Under the new trilemma – the holy 
trinity – no country can afford to sacrifice any of the objectives as the feedback loops can 
quickly  shift  the  economy  from  an  equilibrium  to  a  disequilibrium.  The  issue  really  is  of 
managing the inter se prioritization among the objectives and of determining the role of the 
central bank in this management.  
So, how best can we manage the new trilemma? The crisis has given us valuable lessons 
from practice. We also have assorted bits of theory. The task ahead is to put them together 
into  a  coherent,  workable  theory  of  the  new  trilemma.  I  hope  this  conference  will  take  us 
closer to that.  
A final thought, which is actually an extension of what I said at our last conference. In his 
best-selling  book,  “The  Ascent  of  Money”,  Niall  Ferguson  says  that  sometimes  the  most 
important  historical  events  are  the  non-events:  the  things  that  did  not  happen.  From  that 
perspective, that the Great Recession did not turn into the second Great Depression, as we 
had feared, will count as a major non-event, notwithstanding the depth and duration of this 
recession.  If  the  euro  survives  the  sovereign  debt  crisis,  as  we  hope,  it  will  be  another 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
spectacular  non-event.  Non-events  they  may  be,  but  they  have  changed  our  thinking  on 
central  bank  mandates  in  a  powerful  way.  How  influential  that  thinking  will  be  on  the  way 
forward will depend on how firmly central banks embrace the new trilemma.  
References 
Chancellor, Edward (2011): “Germany’s Eurozone trilemma”, Financial Times, November 6, 
2011. 
Ferguson, Niall (2009): “Conservatism and the Crisis: A Transatlantic Trilemma”, Centre for 
Policy Studies Ruttenberg Lecture, March 24, 2009. 
Rodrik,  Dani  (2007):  “The  inescapable  trilemma  of  the  world  economy”,  June  27,  2007, 
rodrik.typepad.com/dani_rodriks_weblog. 
Schoenmaker, Dirk (2009): “A New Financial Stability Framework for Europe”, The Financial 
Regulator, Vol.13(3). 
Wolf,  Martin  (2010):  “The  political  genius  of  supply  side  economics”,  Financial  Times, 
July 25, 2010. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
