Matthew Elderfield: Recent regulatory developments in Ireland 
Opening remarks by Mr Matthew Elderfield, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, 
at the Central Bank of Ireland Stakeholder Conference, Dublin, 27 April 2012. 
 Good  morning,  Minister,  ladies  and  gentlemen.  I  would  like  to  welcome  you  to  our  first 
stakeholder conference and to warmly welcome our visitors to Ireland. In a few minutes I will 
invite Mr Michael Noonan, Minister for Finance to open the conference, but first I would like 
to make some introductory remarks.  
Our  purpose  here  today  is  to  give  Irish  stakeholders  an  overview  of  current  and  future 
EU and  international  regulatory  developments  and  to  provide  them  with  an  opportunity  to 
share their views. We have here with us representatives of consumers, the financial services 
industry  and  broader  stakeholder  groups,  as  well  as  colleagues  from  the  European 
Supervisory  Authorities,  other  national  regulatory  authorities  and  members  of  the  press.  I 
want  to  welcome  our  speakers  and  panellists  and  thank  them  for  their  engagement  and 
commitment. We are privileged indeed to have such eminent representatives with us today. 
Our discussions will be far reaching but we should try to organise them around two broad 
long-term  themes  –  stability  and  consumer  protection.  A  fundamental  objective  of  the 
Central Bank  of  Ireland  is  to  ensure  “the  stability  of  the  financial  system  overall”.  This  is 
complemented  by  our  participation  in  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  and  the 
Central Bank  is  now  organised  to  fulfil  these  mandates.  As  regards  consumers,  it  is  more 
important than ever that consumers make well-informed decisions and feel confident they are 
adequately protected if something goes wrong. The consumer mandate has been a priority 
for the Central Bank and is an increasing focus of all the European Supervisory Authorities 
and  their Joint  Committee.  The  Central  Bank aims  to  be an  active  advocate  for consumer 
issues in these fora.  
Before  the  discussions  to  open  up  the  debate  to  the  wider  European  and  international 
agendas, let me say a little about how we in the Central Bank have been dealing with some 
of the challenges faced in Ireland.  
It is vital that we do whatever is necessary to protect and improve the reputation of Ireland as 
a financial centre. The Irish authorities have taken decisive steps to strengthen the banking 
system  through  rigorous,  conservative  and  independent  assessments  of  loan  losses, 
involving recapitalisation actions and targeted reduction of non-core assets.  
Efforts  have  also  been  made  to  improve  regulation.  In  the  Central  Bank  we  see  improved 
standards  of  governance  and  fitness  and  probity  across  financial  services  in  Ireland  as  a 
priority.  The  statutory  Code  of  Corporate  Governance  sets  out  clear  requirements  for  the 
directors  and  boards  of  both  banks  and  insurance  companies.  While  these  may  be  more 
demanding  than  those  in  place  in  other  jurisdictions,  we  believe  they  set  an  appropriate 
benchmark.  The  statutory  Fitness  and  Probity  Standards  strengthens  the  Central  Bank’s 
“gatekeeper role” and allow us, where appropriate, to suspend or remove an individual from 
a senior position in a regulated firm.  
In December 2011 we formally launched our PRISM framework for supervision and applied it 
to banks and insurers. We will extend it to investment firms and credit unions next month and 
later  in  the  year  we  will  use  it  in  support  of  focused  thematic  inspection  work  across  a 
significant number of firms. PRISM is at the centre of our new assertive risk-based approach 
to  supervision.  Put  simply,  PRISM  involves  the  targeting  of  our  supervisory  resources 
between firms on the basis of empirically driven quantitative metrics showing the potential of 
each firm, were it to experience problems, to adversely affect consumers, the economy or 
public  finances.  We  have  significantly  upgraded  the  skills  of  our  supervisors  both  by 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
recruitment and training programmes. They will ask difficult questions, they will be sceptical 
and ready to engage in sometimes unpalatable but necessary conversations and analysis. 
Enforcement  also  helps  to  deliver  a  regulatory  regime  which  is  credible  and  effective.  We 
have stepped up our work in this area. Last year we entered into enforcement settlements 
with 10 financial providers, resulting in a range of sanctions including the disqualification of 
2 directors and fines totalling €5 million. Areas prioritised in 2012 include mortgage arrears, 
retail intermediaries, payment protection insurance and client asset requirements. 
We are looking forward to adoption of the Central Bank (Supervision and Enforcement) Bill 
which should reinforce the powers of the Bank in the context of regulation setting, proactive 
supervision  and  enforcement.  The  Bill  includes  a  single  wide  ranging  power  of  direction, 
wider  powers  for  authorised  officers,  the  ability  to  require  “skilled  persons’  reports”  and 
increased  administrative  sanctions  penalties.  More  broadly,  it  proposes  protections  for 
whistle-blowers  and  will  strengthen  the  Central  Bank’s  ability  to  provide  assistance  to 
overseas supervisors. 
This is a flavour of recent regulatory developments in Ireland. The process of rethinking our 
philosophy, changing our culture and reengineering our processes continues. Our regulatory 
resources have kept pace with the  new challenges and responsibilities having grown from 
385 in 2009 to a target for this year of 714. In 2012 we expect to consolidate and drive for 
greater efficiency and effectiveness with the resources now at our disposal. Throughout this 
period we have tried always to learn from best practice internationally and to take advantage 
of  our  membership  of  the  European  Supervisory  Authorities.  During  the  panel  on  banking 
later this morning I will say something about our expanding engagement with the European 
institutions  and  the  lead-in  to  the  Irish  Presidency  of  the  Council  of  Ministers,  which  gets 
under way in January 2013.  
Let me now invite Minister Noonan to open our conference.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
