Yaseen Anwar: Monetary policy framework in the SAARC region 
Address  by  Mr  Yaseen  Anwar,  Governor  of  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan,  at  the 
SAARCFINANCE  seminar  on  “Monetary  policy  framework  in  the  SAARC  (South  Asian 
Association for Regional Cooperation) region”, Islamabad, 14–16 June 2012. 
 the  auspices  of 
Distinguished speakers, honored guests and fellow colleagues, allow me to welcome you, on 
behalf  of  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan,  to  Islamabad  for  the  seminar  on  “Monetary  Policy 
Frameworks in the SAARC region”.  
The  seminar,  as  you  all  know,  has  been  organized  under 
the 
SAARCFINANCE banner. The SAARCFINANCE initiative, now more than 14 years old, has 
been instrumental in providing a platform that enables knowledge-sharing across the SAARC 
region and allows for discussion and debate amongst the region’s premier economic decision 
makers. 
Let’s move on to the subject of the seminar now. 
Central banks are often synonymous with monetary policy. And why shouldn’t they be? After 
all, monetary policy is any central bank’s premier policy tool to achieve its objectives. Strictly 
academically, the monetary policy framework consists of an institutional arrangement, which 
provides  an  anchor  to  identify  monetary  policy  objectives  and  describes  how  the  policy  is 
implemented through a set of instruments and their intermediate and operating targets. Wow, 
that was quite a mouthful! Let’s make it simple. In essence, monetary policy has its means 
(i.e.  the  framework)  and  its  ends  (i.e.  macroeconomic  objectives).  When  those  two  are 
congruent, the monetary policy framework is considered well-defined.  
Let’s go backwards here and have a look at the ends first. The universal aim of monetary 
policy  is  achieving  price  stability;  a  secondary  aim  of  monetary  policy  may  be  growth.  For 
instance, the preamble to The State Bank Act states that the bank is supposed to “regulate 
the monetary and credit system of Pakistan… with a view to securing monetary stability and 
fuller utilization of the country’s productive resources”. Therefore, SBP is concerned with not 
just inflation and price stability, but also with economic growth.  
That was the easy part. The tough part is actually finding and calibrating the tools that are 
required to achieve these ends.  
Broadly speaking, central banks tend to target one or more of monetary aggregates, inflation 
or  exchange  rates.  All  three  of  these  have  an  impact  on  the  real  economy  and  have 
implications  for  price  stability.  In  the  recent  past,  countries  have  moved  towards  inflation 
targeting regimes. However, such a regime requires that the central bank’s policies remain 
independent  of  the  fiscal  authority,  have  market  credibility  and  are  time-consistent.  Given 
that conditions in developing countries may not allow for such freedoms, inflation targeting 
may prove to be ineffective in such economies. Indeed, these are interesting times to be an 
economist;  and  in  such  times,  we  must  occasionally  toss  conventional  prescriptions  aside 
and seek customized solutions. But for that it is necessary to fully understand our individual 
economies. 
The  Greeks  may  not  be  going  through  the  best  of  times  right  now,  but  it  was  a  Greek 
philosopher  who  first  advised  “know  thyself”.  And,  analogous  to  this,  any  competent 
policymaker must know his or her own economy inside out. He must know what makes the 
economy  tick;  how  the  linkages  in  the  economy  interact  with  each  other;  how  signals  and 
information gets transmitted through these linkages; and what each of the knobs and dials on 
his dashboard does to calibrate the economy. The process of self-discovery is as relevant for 
the individual as it is for the economy. The process of improving the economy starts after the 
process of understanding.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
For  instance,  monetary  policy  may  be  transmitted  through  a  variety  of  different  channels. 
Most  commonly,  the  real  interest  channel  is  used  to  influence  aggregate  demand  and 
fine-tune  the  economy.  But  we  must  take  a  step  back  and  ask  ourselves:  do  the  linkages 
hold as strongly in the actual economy as they do in theory, especially given the high level of 
inflation  and  the  high  frequency  of  price  changes  that  most  developing  economies  face? 
Monetary  policy  may  also  be  transmitted  through  the  balance  sheets  of  banks  and  firms. 
Once again, we must know how bank lending and pricing behavior changes in response to 
changes  in  the  policy  rate.  Then,  there’s  also  the  exchange  rate  channel  and  finally,  the 
expectations channel, which I shall discuss in a bit more detail later. But they key idea here is 
that  a  thorough  understanding  of  all  these  transmission  channels  is  needed  in  order  to 
calibrate an effective monetary policy framework. Know thy economy! 
Allow me to share my understanding regarding the workings of these channels in Pakistan. 
As  I  pointed  our  earlier,  the  real  interest  channel  is  extremely  weak  in  times  of  frequent 
prices changes and high inflation. A recent survey carried out by the Research Department 
revealed that prices are revised roughly every quarter in the economy. Coupled with the fact 
that we have had, more or less, double-digit inflation for the past 4 years now, prices are very 
quick to adjust. Therefore, the impact on aggregate demand through the real interest channel 
is muted.  
On the contrary, we have observed that the lending channel via the banks is quite robust. In 
fact,  the  transmission  of  monetary  shocks  through  the  lending  channel  is  asymmetrically 
distributed;  smaller  banks,  which  have  a  higher  cost  of  funds,  tend  to  amplify  monetary 
shocks  for  smaller  borrowers.  In  fact,  the  bank  lending  channel  is  the  primary  channel 
through which monetary policy is transmitted to the real economy in Pakistan. On a related 
side-note,  it’s  important  to  mention  that  Pakistan  has  moved  away  from  credit  allocation 
policies and now let’s the market decide both the quantity and the price of credit to various 
sectors. 
The country has also liberalized its foreign exchange markets and lets the forces of demand 
and supply dictate the rupee exchange rate. While this is an important step towards greater 
global integration, it has meant that the exchange rate channel is particularly relevant now – 
especially  due  to  the  implications  that  it  has  for  inflation.  Given  the  influence  that  full 
exchange rate pass-through has, SBP monitors the foreign exchange market very closely.  
Finally, monetary policy may also influence inflation through the expectations channel. I can 
think of no better example to illustrate the mechanism of the expectations channel than Paul 
Volcker’s time at the helm of the Fed. Having credibly committed to tackling inflation, Volcker 
raised rates drastically and managed to weed out the inflationary expectations that had taken 
root in the American economy after the oil shocks of the 70s. In my opinion, the two decades 
of low inflation that the American economy enjoyed following Volcker can at least be partially 
attributed to the suppression of inflation expectations. In fact, I also believe that a large part 
of the persistence of inflation in Pakistan’s economy is due to the sustained period of high 
inflation, which has allowed inflationary expectations to incubate.  
The transition from understanding these channels to developing the proper mechanisms to 
impact our objectives may not be smooth. After all, we should concede that there are some 
things  that  we  have  absolutely  no  control  over  in  the  short-run.  Similarly,  a  certain  policy 
measure may also produce conflicting outcomes, such as a reduction in inflation but a rise in 
current and fiscal accounts; how should we proceed then? We need to stay abreast of a very 
steep  learning  curve  and  constantly  keep  checking  if  the  relationships  that  we  have 
assumed,  while  developing  our  models,  still  hold.  The  economy  is  a  living,  evolving 
organism. Relationships between variables break down ever so often. This only adds to the 
excitement of being a policymaker, ladies and gentlemen!  
The complexity and the uniqueness of our economy only emphasize the need to develop a 
thorough grass-roots understanding of the economy, and a customized toolbox to deal with 
the  multiples  challenges  along  the  way.  Far  too  often  have  we  relied  on  conventional 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
prescriptions without fully understanding the symptoms. I challenge you all to question the 
assumptions that you have based your frameworks on; let’s take nothing as a given and let’s 
make our policy directives as unique as the economies they target.  
I’m in a room full of central bankers here and it is probably unnecessary to say this, but, at 
the end of the day and despite our best efforts, even seemingly seamless plans may fail and 
our  policy  instruments  may  let  us  down.  Yes,  it  is  tough  to  map  out  the  behavior  of  an 
informal sector that is probably the size of the formal economy; yes, it is difficult to impose 
fiscal  discipline;  yes,  it  is  almost  impossible  to  control  the  international  prices  of  fuels  and 
grains;  and  yes,  our  textbooks  seem  to  be  clueless  when  it  comes  to  tackling  today’s 
economic  problems.  But  this  only  underscores  the  need  –  no,  the  necessity  –  to  fully 
understand the nature of our economies. Know thy economy, ladies and gentlemen! 
And now I invite you all to share your ideas and experiences with the rest of us. Tell us about 
the nature of your economies; tell us about your toolkits; and tell us how they have fared with 
time.  I  can  tell  you  that  we,  at  the  State  Bank,  have  come  a  long  way  from  the  days  of 
rationalized  credit  and  strict  controls  on  exchange  rate.  We  have  moved  towards  a  better 
understanding  of  our  economy  and  we’ve  made  some  significant  progress  towards 
discovering the impact that our monetary policy has on the real economy. I hope that you will 
get a chance to share your thoughts with us and lead our minds to previously unexplored 
territories.  
The  SAARCFINANCE  seminar  series  was  meant  to  facilitate  the  transfer  of  ideas  and 
experiences. Today, I am excited about what we may learn from each other over the next 
few days.  
On  that  note,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  let  us  share  our  insights  regarding  monetary  policy 
frameworks; and let’s get to know our economies.  
Thank you for your time and I wish you all an amazing stay in Islamabad!  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
