Eddie Yue: Hong Kong – challenges and opportunities ahead 
Speech by Mr Eddie Yue, Deputy Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at 
the  Hong  Kong  Institute  of  Bankers  Annual  Conference  2012  “The  year  of  transformation 
– heading into a new era”, Hong Kong, 13 September 2012. 
 Financial Secretary, Patrick, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, 
Good morning. It’s my great pleasure to be here at the fourth Annual Conference of the Hong 
Kong Institute of Bankers. 
The  conference  title  behind  me  talks  of  “Heading  into  a  New  Era”.  That’s  a  grand  and 
ambitious  statement.  But,  I  believe,  a  fair  one.  The  opportunities  ahead  for  the  banking 
sector  are  vast,  particularly  in  terms  of  the  offshore  renminbi  (RMB)  market  and  asset 
management services. 
Today  I’d  like  to  discuss  with  you  the  reasons  for  my  optimism.  In  doing  so,  I  will  detour 
slightly through some of the policy, regulatory and organisational priorities I think we will all 
need to work on. 
To start out, though, I should first acknowledge that, as with any journey, the travelling may 
not  always  be  smooth.  There  is  likely  to  be  some  occasional  turbulence.  I’m  referring,  of 
course, to the external economic challenges. So let me start there. 
The challenges 
It has now been five years since the start of the global financial crisis. Yet low growth and 
high  volatility  remain  key  features  of  the  global  economy.  So  much  so  that  some 
commentators have asked whether these represent “the new normal”. 
Underlying this situation are challenges many and varied. Overshadowing them all is the risk 
of contagion from weaknesses in the advanced economies. The high level of sovereign debt 
at  the  peripheral  eurozone  countries,  and  its  potential  vicious  feedback  into  economic 
recession, is now the principal threat to the global recovery. Meanwhile, in the US, it is still 
unclear whether recent encouraging signs will be sustained. A big concern there is whether 
public  sector  deleveraging  will  play  out  in  the  form  of  a  fiscal  cliff  or  a  more  gradual, 
manageable  fiscal  slope.  Either  way,  via  budget  cuts  or  continued  fiscal  uncertainties,  the 
near-term responses will likely continue to hold back private investment and employment. 
The aggregate risk of all these challenges for us in Asia is clearly a knock-on drag on Asian 
economies. There are also two important side effects: first, the impact of monetary loosening 
in  advanced  economies  on  consumer  and  asset  prices  in  Asia.  And  second,  the  potential 
loss  of  lending  for  infrastructure  projects  in  Asia  as  European  banks  deleverage  and 
retrench. 
For  policymakers,  this  is  a  triple-whammy:  subdued  growth,  asset  inflation  and  capital 
retrenchment.  And  compounding  this  are  very  high  levels  of  uncertainty  and  volatility,  as 
markets alternate between risk-on and risk-off. All of which makes policy calibration highly 
challenging  and  economic 
forecasting  somewhere  between  extremely  difficult  and 
impossible. 
Position of Hong Kong’s banking system 
Given this backdrop, it is very important that we understand and monitor the developments in 
the US and Europe as closely as possible. That way we will be able to calibrate our policy 
response  and  take  swift  appropriate  action.  This  is  especially  important  in  view  of  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  potential for a further deterioration in the European situation and how it might impact Hong 
Kong’s banking system. So please allow me to make a few brief points to address this: 
• 
First,  I  would  make  clear  that  the  Hong  Kong  banking  sector’s  exposure  to  the 
Eurozone’s peripheral countries is essentially immaterial. We do not expect to have 
any  significant  direct  impact  should  there  be  an  escalation  of  the  crisis  in  those 
countries. 
Second, while there have been signs of European banks reducing their lending to 
Asia,  so  far  the  scale  has  been  manageable,  and  this  has  not  caused  significant 
credit  tightening  in  Asia.  In  Hong  Kong,  any  slack  left  behind  by  European  banks 
has been effectively picked up by Japanese, Australian and other Asia banks keen 
to expand in the region. 
Third, if we cannot predict the future, we can anticipate a range of possible futures. 
As a result, as you would expect, the HKMA has been diligent in developing proper 
contingency plans for a wide range of possible scenarios. This of course includes 
working  with  the  banking  sector  in  Hong  Kong  to  ensure  our  banks  are  fully 
prepared for potential shocks. We have, for example, asked our banks to step up 
their  contingent  funding  plans  and  to  maintain  sufficient  high-quality,  liqueﬁable 
assets  to  meet  any  unexpected  developments.  In  addition,  we  have  been  active 
internationally – both bilaterally and multilaterally to ensure we have a coordinated, 
well-informed  and  mutually  supportive  approach.  This  includes  our  work  as  a 
member of the Financial Stability Board. 
So, while there are challenges, we are very much alive to them. We monitor the risks closely 
and work continuously with our partners to prepare, and stand ready to take any appropriate 
action. 
Opportunities for Hong Kong 
Having  acknowledged  the  immediate  challenges,  I  think  it’s  time  now  to  turn  towards  the 
opportunities, above all in this region. For while the challenges from the West are deep, they 
should not blind us to the opportunities within Asia. 
I would say that the coming opportunities for the banking industry here are bright – even if at 
times they may appear to be obscured by clouds abroad. In fact, I believe that they put us on 
the threshold of a new era for the banking industry in Hong Kong. 
I would like to highlight two of the most promising opportunities. The first is the offshore RMB 
market, which has developed rapidly over the past two years. The second is the increasing 
demand for asset and wealth management services, both institutional and individual. 
Opportunity 1: offshore RMB market 
On the offshore RMB market, Hong Kong bankers have been the first ones to exploit the new 
business opportunities. The development of this market in Hong Kong is a story very familiar 
to you, so let me focus my remarks on three specific questions which I am often asked. 
First,  is  the  RMB  liquidity  pool  in  Hong  Kong  big  enough?  Over  the  past  year  or  so,  the 
growth of RMB customer deposits has turned modest. On occasions there have even been 
month-on-month  declines.  Some  commentators  have  seen  this  as  a  sign  that  the  RMB 
liquidity pool in Hong Kong is beginning to plateau and might not be able to support future 
RMB bond issuances and other financial activities. 
Frankly, I think this should not be a cause for concern. One needs to recognise that the level 
of RMB customer deposits is a useful but incomplete measure of RMB liquidity. For instance, 
banks have been increasingly issuing RMB certificates of deposits as a means to tap RMB 
funds. Taking RMB customer deposits and certificates of deposits together, these added up 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
to 700 billion yuan at the end of July 2012, with a modest 5% increase from the end of 2011. 
In other words, the RMB deposit pool has remained largely stable, at a time when we are 
seeing  very  vibrant  RMB  dim-sum  bond  issuances  and  expansion  in  other  RMB  financing 
and investment activities. 
This  is  a  healthy  sign  that  market  forces  are  balancing  supply  and  demand,  and  that  the 
offshore RMB market in Hong Kong is maturing. Looking ahead, the level of RMB deposits 
may  rise  or  fall  from  time  to  time.  This  is  only  natural  as  RMB  financing  and  investment 
activities take place, and as RMB funds flow in and out of the system. It is what one would 
expect from the growing interaction between the onshore and offshore market. Similarly, the 
pricing  of  RMB  funds,  indicated  by  the  offshore  RMB  interest  rates,  will  also  adjust  in 
response  to  the  fund  flows,  thereby  restoring  the  balance  in  the  supply  and  demand  of 
RMB funds.  
So, is the RMB liquidity pool in Hong Kong big enough? I would respond that since the scope 
of RMB business has already expanded from merely deposit-taking to a much wider range of 
banking  and  financial  activities,  the  amount  of  RMB  customer  deposit  is  only  a  partial 
measure of RMB liquidity or the overall state of play of RMB business in Hong Kong. What is 
more  important  is  how  efficient  the  pool  of  RMB  is  moving  around  the  system.  That  is, 
whether  we  are  seeing  the  channelling  of  RMB  savings  to  investments,  through  bank 
lending,  bond  issuance  and  other  activities.  After  all,  financial  business  is  about  the 
circulation of money, rather than everyone holding a stagnant pool of money. 
The  second  question  that  I  am  often  asked  is  whether  the  wider  use  of  RMB  and  the 
development  of  offshore  RMB  business  are  still  on  a  rising  trajectory.  There  have  been 
suggestions that, with the market now expecting the appreciation of RMB to slow down – or 
even reverse – there will be less interest in conducting RMB business. 
It seems to me that this would be a one-sided interpretation of a much more positive story. 
From a macro perspective, given the Mainland’s substantial trade and investment links with 
other  parts  of  the  world,  it  is  safe  to  expect  that  a  fair  –  and  growing  –  portion  of  such 
activities will be conducted in RMB. Considering that the percentage of China’s trade settled 
in RMB is only less than 10% now (compared with 30% of Japanese trade denominated in 
Japanese Yen), it is reasonable to expect RMB-denominated trade to grow further. And with 
the Mainland economy continuing to grow faster than other major economies, we can also 
expect  that  the  incentive  for  individuals  and  institutions  outside  China  to  hold  more  RMB 
assets will remain, if not get stronger. 
Consider  also  that,  a  more  two-way  RMB  exchange  rate  will  be  conducive  to  a  more 
balanced,  and  hence  sustainable,  development  of  offshore  RMB  business.  For  instance, 
when the RMB exchange rate expectation is no longer skewing towards just one direction, 
the incentives for both the payee and the payer to settle a trade transaction in RMB will be 
more balanced. Corporates will also be more willing to raise financing in RMB when it is not 
expected  to  appreciate  strongly.  On  this  front,  we  are  happy  to  see  that  RMB  lending 
business is developing progressively, with outstanding RMB loans reaching 60 billion yuan at 
end-July 2012, nearly four times the level of a year ago. 
So,  is  the  wider  use  of  RMB  a  continuing  trend?  Well,  I  would  say  the  scope  for  further 
development is clear, and it will be very much up to how corporates and banks can get more 
engaged in the new business of RMB. 
Third question:  does  the  development  of  offshore  RMB  business  in  other financial  centres 
pose a threat to Hong Kong? 
This  question,  I  have  to  say,  suffers  from  the  fallacy  of  “zero-sum”  thinking.  As  more 
corporates  and  investors  worldwide  are  becoming  interested  in  conducting  their  business 
transactions  and  investments  in  RMB,  it  is  natural  to  see  financial  institutions  in  different 
parts of the world providing RMB services to meet the demand of their customers. This does 
not necessarily mean that RMB businesses are being diverted to other places. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Indeed, such developments will mean that banks in Hong Kong will not be dealing only with 
each other locally, and there will be new business opportunities to conduct RMB businesses 
with  counterparts  overseas.  For  instance,  as  a  global  hub  for  RMB  liquidity  and  financing, 
Hong  Kong  is  well  placed  to  channel  customer  and  wholesale  RMB  deposits  towards 
corporations  and  financial  institutions  in  other  parts  of  the  world.  In  fact,  we  are  already 
seeing such a trend. For instance, the RMB amounts due from and due to overseas banks 
amounted to some RMB140 billion yuan and RMB120 billion yuan respectively at the end of 
June 2012.  
So, does the development of offshore RMB business in other financial centres threaten Hong 
Kong? I would say that while it is correct to be mindful about competition, we should not lose 
sight of the business opportunities that lie ahead of us as the pie grows bigger. To maintain 
and expand Hong Kong’s role as a global RMB hub, we need to enhance our RMB business 
links with banks and customers in other centres, and I am hopeful about the developments in 
this direction. 
Opportunity 2: asset and wealth management services 
Now, let us turn to the second macro opportunity I mentioned earlier, the greater demand for 
asset and wealth management services, both institutional and individual.  
One of the results of the positive growth story in Asia, especially Mainland China, is a new 
dynamic along the “value-chain” of the asset management industry globally. 
At the top of the value-chain are the end-investors, sometimes referred to as “asset owners”. 
They include pension and endowment funds, sovereign wealth funds and private wealth of 
individuals. This group of investors is primarily responsible for asset allocation. 
The asset owners would normally invest via asset managers – such as mutual funds, hedge 
funds and private equity funds – whom I refer to the middle part of the value-chain. At the 
bottom of the chain are service providers such as fund administrators, custodian banks and 
dealer brokers. They provide services to the asset managers. 
Therefore,  asset  allocation  decisions  by  end-investors,  either  institutional  or  private  wealth 
owners, have a knock-on impact throughout the rest of the asset management value-chain. 
Currently,  the  portfolios  of  asset  owners  in  the  advanced  economies  are  still  significantly 
underexposed to emerging markets. For example, at present, a typical US pension fund has 
just  6%  of  their  investment  exposure  in  emerging  markets.  Not  surprisingly,  given  the 
economic  challenges  facing  the  advanced  economies  outlined  earlier  and  the  growth 
opportunities  in  Asia,  there  is  growing  interest from  these  end-investors  in  increasing  their 
investment exposure to Asia, rather than relying on investing in fixed income products of the 
developed economies as they have in the past. This change in allocation preference towards 
Asia will generate significant demand for asset and wealth management services that Hong 
Kong’s financial institutions are well placed to provide. 
But the immediate question is: are we in Hong Kong ready to meet this growing demand? 
Well, we do start with a number of strengths and advantages. 
As Asia’s premier asset management centre, Hong Kong is the largest hub for Asian hedge 
funds  and  the  second  largest  hub  for  private  equity  in  Asia,  only  slightly  trailing  Mainland 
China.  Hong  Kong’s  private  banking  platform  offers  unparalleled  access  to  the  growing 
wealth  pool  in  Mainland  China  and  across  Asia.  We  already  have  the  largest  number  of 
overseas asset managers seeking to invest in the financial market in Mainland China through 
the  Qualified  Foreign  Institutional  Investors  (QFII)  framework.  We  are  also  the  first 
springboard for asset managers from the Mainland seeking to grow their overseas footprint. 
In  order  to  attract  business  from  asset  owners,  asset  managers  are  increasingly  realising 
they need to demonstrate their commitment to Asia. One of the main and direct ways is by 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
setting up an office in Hong Kong. This has also cascaded further down the value-chain, with 
a growing number of service providers also moving here. 
However, despite these strengths and advantages, we cannot afford to be complacent. We 
know,  for  example,  that  Hong  Kong’s  asset  management  industry  needs  to  become  more 
diverse,  with  more  high-value  jobs.  Of  our  asset  management  employee  base,  the  vast 
majority  are  currently  in  sales  and  marketing,  with  only  10%  in  core  asset  management 
functions such as fund management, research and trading. This compares to over a quarter 
in the UK and US. 
So to capitalise on the opportunities ahead, a top priority must be to develop our asset and 
wealth management sector. That’s why, in partnership with asset managers here and around 
the world, the HKMA has been exploring how to improve our international competitiveness, 
including  through  a  more  favourable  operating  and  regulatory  environment.  From  time  to 
time, we meet with stakeholders across the value-chain to gather practitioners’ views as to 
what the market needs in order to develop further. We will continue our work in this regard. 
Private banking 
One area we know we can improve is private banking. This is a business area that is growing 
exponentially  in  the  region.  According  to  industry  research,  Asia-Pacific  has  accounted for 
half  the  growth  in  global  wealth  from  2010  onwards.  It  also  has  a  fifth  of  the  world’s 
millionaires. And these numbers will get bigger, with global wealth expected to rise 50% by 
2016. 
So,  the  opportunities  for  our  region  are  enormous. We  must  ensure  we  have  a  regulatory 
framework  that  recognises  this,  one  that  is  user  friendly  to  private  banking  clients,  yet 
sufficiently  robust  to  provide  appropriate  investor  protection,  as  well  as  being  on  par  with 
international standards. 
To achieve this, we’ve recently introduced some refinements to our regulatory arrangements, 
following consultation with the industry. These measures were announced in June, so I’d just 
like to very briefly recapitulate four of the key points as follows. 
First, while we want to ensure appropriate protection to all investors, it is reasonable to treat 
private banking and retail banking clients differently in the investment process. So the first 
change is that we have provided an expanded definition for “private banking customers” that 
caters much better for the operational needs of private banks. 
Second,  we  have  clarified  that  private  banks  may  adopt  a  “portfolio-based”  approach  to 
suitability  assessment  instead  of  mechanically  matching  their  client’s  overall  risk  tolerance 
level to the risk level of individual products on a per transaction basis. 
Third, the new guidance simplifies the rationale for the recommendations process by stating 
that private banks may choose to document this in writing instead of via audio-recording in a 
face-to-face interview with the clients. 
And  fourth,  the  guidance  now  states  that  private  banking  clients  need  not  go  through  the 
usual  biennial  risk  profile  reviews,  so  long  as  they  can  confirm  that  there  is  no  material 
change in their circumstances. 
I believe these measures offer significant facilitation and flexibility to private banks and their 
clients.  However,  I  would  stress  that  private  banks must  ensure  that they  put  in  place  the 
necessary systems and internal controls, such as proper documentation. Indeed, this is not 
only for the client’s protection but the bank’s. 
Talent and professional development 
Well, ladies and gentlemen, so far we’ve discussed major economic challenges from Europe 
and  the  US  and  the  new  opportunities  in  this  region.  And  we’ve  noted  the  importance  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
having  the  right  policy  and  regulatory  framework.  But  these  are  not  all.  Overcoming  the 
challenges and capturing the opportunities also requires each of us in our own institutions to 
play our part. 
So before closing, I’d like to take a moment to focus on the role of talent development and 
professional standards. This is an area that should always be a top priority for us all. But I 
stress it today in the context of the risks and potential rewards I outlined earlier. 
Simply put, the stakes for each of us – for our institutions, the industry and indeed for Hong 
Kong  –  are  higher  now  than  ever  before.  We  should  therefore  invest  in  talent  and 
professional development accordingly. 
To make this concrete, the HKMA and the SFC – with, I’m pleased to note, the warm support 
of the private banking industry and professional bodies – have set up a taskforce to work out 
an enhanced competency framework for private banking practitioners. Our initial thinking is 
that the framework should emphasise vocational training and practical application, as well as 
ethics. 
Under  this  framework,  private  banking  practitioners  could  take  different  examinations 
provided by, say, the HKIB and the Hong Kong Securities Institute, and ultimately acquire a 
professional qualification. To ensure continuous development, practitioners would also take 
additional  regular  training.  Under  the  same  proposed  new  framework,  the  HKMA  intends 
there  to  be  more  emphasis  in  future  on  practitioner  competency,  continuous  professional 
training and adherence to common set of professional ethical standards. 
Getting  this right  will  be  an  important  piece  in  the  puzzle  towards  building  a  world-beating 
sector  here  in  Hong  Kong.  Getting  it  right  means  raising  competence  and  professional 
standards and, consequently, raising levels of trust and custom. 
To achieve that will take a full, team effort. So I very much welcome your input to developing 
these ideas further and flesh out the framework over the coming months. 
Closing remarks 
At  the  outset  of  my  remarks,  I  highlighted  the  banner  headline  indicating  that  we  are 
“Heading into a New Era”. Having journeyed this far, is this statement a fair one? Given the 
opportunities  I’ve  outlined,  I  think  the  answer  really  should  be  “yes”.  But  if  I’m  cautious,  I 
would have to say, “Yes, if”: if we can rise to the challenges touched on earlier; if we can 
capitalise  on  the  great  strengths  and  advantages  of  Hong  Kong;  if  we  can  invest  in  our 
people and our institutions to match the scale of the opportunities.  
If  we  can  do  that,  I  believe  we  can  truly  make  this  a  transformative  moment  in  the 
development  of  the  banking  landscape  in  Hong  Kong.  The  prize  for  your  institutions,  your 
clients and for Hong Kong is great. I look forward to continue working with you so, together, 
we attain it. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
