B Mahapatra: Implications of Basel III for capital, liquidity and 
profitability of banks 
Address of Mr B Mahapatra, Executive Director of the Reserve Bank of India, at the National 
Conference  on  Emerging  Macro  Environment,  Regulatory  Changes  and  Bank 
Competitiveness, organized by the National Institute of Bank Management, Pune, 3 March 
2012. 
 The contributions made by Shri Rajinder Kumar and Shri Rajnish Kumar are gratefully acknowledged. 
It is heartening that the National Institute of Bank Management (NIBM), Pune is organizing a 
two-day  National  Conference  on  “Emerging  Macro  Environment,  Regulatory  Changes  and 
Bank Competitiveness”, today and tomorrow. I am indeed grateful to the NIBM for giving me 
this privilege to talk to you today on a topic – Implications of Basel III for Capital, Liquidity 
and Profitability of Banks – which is contemporaneous, not only in the financial circles, but 
also in the larger space of public policy. My motivation for the talk on this subject is also due 
to my job as a bank regulator and my association with the process of policy formulation and 
implementation of Basel III for banks in India.  
The Context  
Let me first set the context for Basel III. Basel III is the regulatory response to the causes and 
consequences of the global financial crisis. So, what were the causes of the crisis and the 
consequence? 
Causes of global financial crisis 
From  the  macroeconomic  perspective,  the  crisis  has  been  attributed  to  the  persistence  of 
global imbalances. It is often said that the solution to a previous crisis becomes the cause for 
the next crisis. You may recall that the previous crisis was the Asian crisis of 1997–98, and 
one of the important lessons learnt by the Asian countries was to build a war chest of foreign 
exchange reserves to fight against the attack on the country’s currency. Therefore, Asia and 
in particular, China and some other emerging economies produced goods at a cheaper rate 
and pursued a policy of export-led growth and accumulated huge foreign exchange reserves. 
As a corollary, the USA and Europe consumed that produce and became net importers. The 
foreign exchange reserves accumulated by the Asian and other emerging economies were 
necessarily to be invested in advanced economies which have deep markets. 
The  huge  amount  of  capital  that  flowed  from  the  emerging  economies  to  the  advanced 
economies, depressed yields in the financial markets of advanced economies. In the “search 
for yield” to improve returns on investment, market players indulged in financial innovation 
and  engineering.  They  developed  structured  financial  products  like  securitization  and 
re-securitization based on sub-prime mortgage backed securities (MBS), collateralized debt 
obligations  (CDOs)  and  CDO  squared  etc.  Credit  default  swaps  (CDS)  were  also  used  to 
create synthetic structures which increased their illiquidity and complexity. Oblivious of the 
inherent  risks  created  by  these  features,  securitizations  continued  to  grow  by  leaps  and 
bounds 
impending  disastrous 
consequences. 
Another cause of the crisis was attributed to the socio-economic and political factors in the 
USA. Dr. Raghuram Rajan in his book Fault Lines has highlighted that the income of average 
American was stagnant for quite some time and poverty and inequality were increasing. The 
politicians  could  not  improve  the  income  of  the  people  but  devised  policies  to  encourage 
the  spiraling  of  sub-prime 
lending  with 
leading 
to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
them  to  fulfill  the  dream  of  owning  a  house  by  taking  loans  from  banks  and  financial 
institutions at the prevailing low interest rates. Thus, the birth of the toxic product “sub-prime 
mortgage” took place. It was said if the poor people cannot have income for consumption, 
“let them eat credit”. 
At the micro level, the business models of banks and financial institutions also contributed to 
the fermentation of the crisis. The “originate-to-distribute” model of sub-prime mortgages did 
not create any incentive for banks for better appraisal and supervision of such mortgages. 
Their reliance on wholesale funding markets created gaps in liquidity risk management. Short 
term  funds  were  used  for  creating  long  term  assets.  The  availability  of  plenty  and  cheap 
funds encouraged banks to be highly leveraged, that too by borrowing short term funds. 
The  crisis  has  also  been  attributed  to  the  inadequate  corporate  governance  and 
inappropriate  and  perverse  incentive  system  in  the  financial  sector.  There  were  several 
weaknesses  in  corporate  governance  in  the  run  up  to  the  crisis.  Corporate  governance 
arrangements failed to curb excessive risk taking in banks and financial institutions. Studies 
have shown that risk management systems failed in many cases more due to poor corporate 
governance than due to the inadequacy of the mathematical models used. The Board and 
even senior management, in some cases, failed to establish an informative and responsive 
risk measurement and management reporting framework. The institutional arrangements in 
many  instances  conferred  importance  and  status  on  the  risk  takers  at  the  expense  of 
independent risk managers and control personnel. Where strategy was in place, Boards did 
not establish suitable metrics to monitor implementation. 
Out of the many issues that have arisen in the context of the global crisis, executive pay and 
compensation  practices  in  the  financial  sector  have  perhaps  invoked  the  maximum  public 
outrage. There has been wide spread criticism that incentives and pay packages were set 
inappropriately, encouraged irresponsible risk taking, were inconsistent with the firm’s capital 
bases  and  focused  on  short-term  profit  maximization.  Compensation  for  senior  executives 
has been perceived to be excessive with little correlation to the long term performance of the 
institutions concerned. Particularly glaring was the multi-million dollar payments and bonuses 
to  the  executives  of  failed  firms  which  had  received  public  funding.  It  is  now  widely 
acknowledged  that  the  flawed  incentives  framework  underlying  banks’  compensation 
structures in the advanced countries fuelled the crisis. 
Banks entered the crisis with inadequate capital. The Basel requirement of common equity 
was as low as 2% of risk-weighted assets (RWAs). Banks did not calculate the risk-based 
capital  properly.  The  Basel  capital  rules  favoured  lower  capital  for  the  trading  book  and 
higher capital for the banking book. Banks exploited this loophole and parked banking book 
assets  in  the  trading  book,  indulging  in  capital  arbitrage.  Similarly,  capital  requirement  for 
mortgage loans was higher than capital requirement for mortgaged backed securities (MBS). 
This  encouraged  banks  to  securitize  their  mortgage  loans  through  a  Special  Investment 
Vehicle  (SIV)  set  up  by  them.  Banks  offered  liquidity  supports  to  their  own  SIVs  which 
securitized  the  mortgage  loans  and  enhanced  the  credit  rating  of  such  instruments. 
Enhanced ratings require less capital. Banks invested in such products requiring less capital. 
Thus, there was an “incestuous” relation in keeping banking book assets in trading book, for 
which  liquidity  support  was  given  by  the  bank  to  enhance  its  rating  and  reduce  capital 
requirement. 
The growth of “shadow banking” system in the run up to the crisis was unprecedented. One 
estimate suggests that the size of shadow banking system was almost three times the formal 
banking  system.  This  coupled  with  their  dependence  on  the  wholesale  funding  market 
compounded the crisis. 
Supported by unprecedented innovation and engineering, the financial sector became too big 
in  relation  to  the  real  economy,  but  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  system  was  found 
wanting. The regulators and supervisors did not look at system-wide build up of risk. They 
reposed faith in free markets and believed in self-correction of market excesses. But that did 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
not  happen.  “Leaning  against  the  wind”  was  considered  inappropriate.  The  credit  rating 
agencies also did not perform their role as envisaged and junked themselves. 
Every banking crisis has some common elements. But every time, experts say, “this time is 
different”. Then what was different this time? Probably, the phenomenal growth of shadow 
banking  system,  most  of  which  was  outside  the  regulatory  purview,  and  the  excessive 
dependence  of  banks  and  financial  institutions  on  the  wholesale  funding  markets,  are  the 
“different” factors behind this crisis. 
At a more philosophical level, what the crisis highlighted was the massive breakdown of trust 
–  trust  in  banks,  in  financial  system,  in  rating  agencies,  in  investment  advisers  and  in 
politicians. Trust, which takes time to build up is an important element in the functioning of 
financial  markets  as  the  very  nature  of  financial  contracts  requires  a  high  level  of  trust. 
Several questions come to mind in this context during the crisis. Was the behaviour of the 
players across the chain of the financial system fair and ethical or was it influenced by the 
greed  to  make  quick  profits  and  fat  bonuses?  Did  the  bankers  and  investment  advisers 
explain the risks in the complex financial products they sold to their clients? And what about 
the credit rating agencies? Did they compromise on their standards? 
The  crisis  has  triggered  an  interesting,  if  also  a  soul  searching  debate  on  the  role  of 
leadership.  Leaders  at  the  helm  of  affairs  probably  let  us  down.  They  were  lulled  by  the 
phenomenal  success  of  modern  financial  engineering  and  the  “great  moderation”  and  got 
carried away by “irrational exuberance” and could not see the “black swan”.  
Consequences of the global financial crisis 
The consequences of the crisis are there for all of us to see. What started as a contamination 
of sub-prime mortgage loans and the securitized products based on that, led to an illiquidity 
spiral  and  soon  became  a  solvency  issue  for  the  financial  sector.  The  inter-connection 
between banks in the financial system propagated it into a systemic crisis. Banks, starved of 
liquidity,  started  to  deleverage  and  stopped  lending  to  the  real  sector.  The  financial  crisis, 
thus, became a full-scale economic crisis. Since banks are essential to an economy and their 
failure affects the real sector, particularly when they are too big, the public authorities had no 
alternative  but  to  rescue  the  banks  by  injecting  capital,  guaranteeing  their  liabilities  and 
purchasing their toxic assets. This created the moral hazard issue of “privatization of profits 
but socialization of losses”. 
However,  one  unintended  but  interesting  aspect  of  the  rescue  programme  was  that 
non-equity capital providers to the banks escaped scot free as they were required to absorb 
losses only in the event of liquidation of banks and not other-wise. 
There are several estimates of the cost of the crisis to the public exchequer. The amount of 
support to the systemically important financial institutions (SIFIs) during the crisis was about 
25% of GDP. Capital injection and asset purchase for G20 countries was US $ 653 billion or 
2.1% of GDP. Fiscal cost of direct support for G20 countries averaged 2.8% of GDP, with 
UK at 6.1%, Germany at 4.8% and USA at 3.6%. The Government debt of these countries is 
projected to rise by 40% of GDP during 2008–15. Cumulative output loss in these countries 
is estimated to about a quarter of their GDP. 
Enhancement to Basel II or Introduction of Basel II.5 
Post-crisis, the global initiatives to strengthen the financial regulatory system are driven by 
the political leadership of the G20 under the auspices of the Financial Stability Board (FSB) 
and the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS). Immediately after the crisis, the 
Basel Committee, in July 2009, came out with certain measures, also called enhancement to 
Basel  II  or  Basel  II.5,  to  plug  the  loopholes  in  its  capital  rules  which  were  exploited  to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
for  securitization  of  commercial  real  estate  was 
arbitrage capital by parking certain banking book positions in the trading book which required 
less capital. 
These measures, under Pillar 1, include introduction of an incremental risk charge (IRC) for 
specific risk or credit risk in trading book under the Internal Models Approach (IMA). Capital 
charge 
for 
re-securitization introduced. The Value-at-Risk (VaR)-based measure for capital charge for 
market  risk  under  IMA  has  been  substantially  enhanced  by  including  a  stressed-VaR 
element.  The  overall  capital  requirement  for  the  trading  book  is  expected  to  rise  by  about 
3 times. Pillar 2 has been strengthened by issuing guidance on firm-wide risk management; 
managing reputation risk and liquidity risk; improving valuation practices; and implementing 
sound  stress 
testing  practices.  Appropriate  additional  disclosures  complementing 
enhancements in Pillar 1 and 2 have also been introduced. 
increased  and 
that 
The Basel III 
The Basel Committee published its Basel III rules in December 2010. I propose to discuss 
the major features of Basel III in a little more detail. Learning the lessons from the crisis, the 
objectives  of  Basel  III  are  to  minimise  the  probability  of  recurrence  of  a  crisis  of  such 
magnitude.  Towards  this  end,  the  Basel  III  has  set  its  objectives  to  improve  the  shock 
absorbing capacity of each and every individual bank as the first order of defence and in the 
worst  case  scenario,  if  it  is  inevitable  that  one  or  a  few  banks  have  to  fail,  Basel  III  has 
measures to ensure that the banking system as a whole does not crumble and its spill-over 
impact  on 
III  will  have  some 
micro-prudential  elements  so  that  risk  is  contained  in  each  individual  institution;  and  a 
macro-prudential overlay that will “lean against the wind” to take care of issues relating to the 
systemic risk. 
is  minimized.  Therefore,  Basel 
the  real  economy 
Micro-prudential elements of Basel III 
The  micro-prudential  elements  of  Basel  III  are  (i)  definition  of  capital;  (ii)  enhancing  risk 
coverage of capital; (iii) leverage ratio; and (iv) international liquidity framework. 
Definition of capital 
The  existing  rules  require  a  capital  adequacy  ratio  of  8%  to  the  RWAs.  Rules  allow 
Tier 1 capital at a minimum of 4% of RWAs and Tier 2 capital comprising of debt instruments 
of medium term maturity of at least 5 years at a maximum of 4% of RWAs. Tier 3 capital with 
short maturity of at least 2 years can also support Tier 2 capital to some extent. Common 
equity in Tier 1 capital can be as low as 2% of RWAs. Innovative features such as step-up 
option are allowed in capital instruments. The regulatory adjustments to capital are effected 
both at Tier 1 and Tier 2 capital in equal measure. 
The existing definition of capital is, thus, flawed. Capital is not only deficient in quality equity 
capital,  but  also  contains  elements  of  debt  which  do  not  support  the  bank  as  a  going 
concern.  As  I  have  stated  earlier,  big  banks  entered  the  crisis  with  insufficient  level  and 
quality of capital. Under Basel III, Tier 1 capital will be the predominant form of regulatory 
capital. It will be minimum 75% of the total capital of 8%, i.e., 6%, as against 4% now, i.e., 
50%  of  total  capital.  Within  Tier  1  capital,  common  equity  will  be  the  predominant  form  of 
capital. It will be minimum 75% of the Tier 1 capital requirement of 6%, i.e., 4.5%, from the 
existing level of 2%. You may observe that the meaning of “predominant” portion of common 
equity  in  Tier  1  capital  and  Tier  1  capital  portion  in  total  capital  (Tier  1  plus  Tier  2)  as 
50% under Basel I and II has under gone a change to 75% under Basel III, improving the 
overall level of high quality capital in the banks. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
To my mind the most revolutionary feature of Basel III in this regard is to ensure that public 
sector rescue of non-viable, but still functioning banks, does not entail absorption of losses 
by  the  tax-payers  while  leaving  the  non-common  equity  capital  providers  unscathed. 
Therefore,  under  Basel  III,  the  terms  and  conditions  of  all  non-common  Tier  1  and 
Tier 2 instruments issued by banks will have a provision that requires such instruments, at 
the option of the relevant authority, to be either written off or converted into common equity 
upon  the  bank  being  adjudged  by  the  supervisory  authority  as  having  approached  or 
approaching the point of non-viability. 
Additionally, innovative features in non-equity capital instruments are no longer acceptable. 
Tier 3 capital has also been completely abolished. The regulatory adjustments or deductions 
from capital presently applied at 50% to Tier 1 capital and 50% to Tier 2 capital will now be 
100% from the common equity Tier 1 capital. To improve market discipline, all elements of 
capital  are  required  to  be  disclosed  along  with  a  detailed  reconciliation  to  the  reported 
accounts. These requirements will be implemented uniformly across all jurisdictions and the 
consistency  in  application  will  be  ensured  by  the  Basel  Committee  through  a  peer  review 
process. 
Thus, the definition of capital in terms of its quality, quantity, consistency and transparency 
will improve under Basel III. 
Enhancing risk coverage of capital 
In  view  of  significant  shortcomings  noticed  in  the  management  and  capitalization  of 
counterparty credit risk, measures have been introduced under Basel III, to strengthen the 
capital requirements for counterparty credit exposures arising from banks’ OTC derivatives, 
repo and securities financing activities. These reforms will raise the capital set against these 
exposures,  reduce  procyclicality  and  provide  additional  incentives  to  move  OTC  derivative 
contracts to central counterparties, thus helping to reduce systemic risk across the financial 
system.  They  also  provide  incentives  to  strengthen  the  risk  management  of  counterparty 
credit exposures. 
Going  forward,  banks  must  determine  their  capital  requirement  for  counterparty  credit  risk 
using  stressed  inputs.  This  will  address  concerns  about  capital  charges  becoming  too  low 
during periods of compressed market volatility and help address procyclicality. Banks will be 
subject to a Credit Valuation Adjustment (CVA) capital charge to protect themselves against 
the potential mark to market losses associated with deterioration in the creditworthiness of 
the counterparty. The CVA is a measure of diminution in the fair value of a derivative position 
due  to  deterioration  in  the  creditworthiness  of  the  counterparty.  Standards  for  collateral 
management  and  initial  margining  have  been  strengthened.  Banks  with  large  and  illiquid 
derivative exposures to counterparties will have to apply longer margining periods as a basis 
for determining the regulatory capital requirement. Additional standards have been adopted 
to strengthen collateral risk management practices. 
Thus, the Basel III framework will have enhanced risk coverage. This is necessitated due to 
the  excessive  exposures  of  banks  to  derivative  products  whose  risks  were  not  captured 
comprehensively under Basel I or Basel II framework. 
Leverage ratio 
Pre-crisis,  the  leverage  of  some  of  the  internationally  active  banks  was  at  a  high  level  of 
about  50  times  of  the  capital,  even  though  such  banks  complied  with  capital  adequacy 
requirement. The risk of leverage, particularly when built up with short term borrowings, and 
the  consequential  impact  of  deleveraging  during  periods  of  stress  by  withdrawing  credit  to 
the  real  sector,  accentuated  the  crisis.  The  Basel  Committee  has,  therefore,  introduced  a 
simple, transparent, non-risk-based leverage ratio as a supplementary “backstop” measure 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
to  the  risk-based  capital  requirements.  The  leverage  ratio  has  both  micro-prudential  and 
macro-prudential elements. At the micro level, it serves the purpose of containing excessive 
risk,  as  a  supplement  to  the  risk-based  capital  ratio.  The  risk-based  capital  ratio  does  not 
capture the risk of excessive leverage on account of having low risk assets. The leverage 
ratio as a simple accounting measure will capture that. The Basel Committee has proposed 
testing  a  minimum  Tier  1  leverage  ratio  of  3%  (33.33  times)  to  start  with  as  a 
Pillar 2 measure which will eventually be made a Pillar 1 requirement. 
International liquidity framework 
Despite liquidity being central to the functioning of financial markets in general and banks in 
particular, liquidity regulation did not receive adequate attention until recently. There were no 
internationally agreed and harmonized liquidity standards. The regulation of banking sector 
during the past two decades largely revolved around Basel I and Basel II capital regulations. 
Nor were there any international standards to limit excessive maturity mismatch resulting in 
increasing  proportions  of  long-dated  assets  being  financed  by  short-term  borrowings.  The 
financial crisis has highlighted the importance of robust liquidity risk management by banks. 
It was observed during the crisis that even those banks which had sufficient capital base had 
experienced  difficulties  due  to  imprudent  liquidity  management  practices  by  excessive 
dependence  on  wholesale  funding  markets.  The  crisis  demonstrated  that  liquidity  and 
solvency  are  quite  deeply  interrelated.  Illiquid  banks  can  become  insolvent  in  no  time  and 
similarly an insolvent bank can become illiquid rapidly. 
Basel  III  has  introduced  two  new  liquidity  standards  to  improve  the  resilience  of  banks  to 
liquidity shocks. In the short term, banks will be required to maintain a buffer of highly liquid 
securities measured by the Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR). This liquidity buffer is intended to 
promote resilience to potential liquidity disruptions over a 30-day horizon. It will help ensure 
that a global bank has sufficient unencumbered, high-quality liquid assets to offset the net 
cash outflows it could encounter under an acute short-term stress scenario of 30 days. The 
scenarios may include a significant downgrade of the institution’s public credit rating, a partial 
loss  of  deposits,  a  loss  of  unsecured  wholesale  funding,  a  significant  increase  in  secured 
funding  haircuts  and  increases  in  derivative  collateral  calls  and  substantial  calls  on 
contractual and non-contractual off-balance sheet exposures, including committed credit and 
liquidity facilities. 
Another  liquidity  risk  measure,  the  Net  Stable  Funding  Ratio  (NSFR),  requires  a  minimum 
amount of stable sources of funding at a bank relative to the liquidity profiles of the assets, as 
well  as  the  potential  for  contingent  liquidity  needs  arising  from  off-balance  sheet 
commitments, over a one-year horizon. The NSFR aims to limit over-reliance on short-term 
wholesale funding during times of buoyant market liquidity and encourage better assessment 
of liquidity risk across all on- and off-balance sheet items. The objective of the NSFR is to 
promote resilience over a longer time horizon by creating additional incentives for banks to 
fund their activities with more stable sources of funding on an ongoing basis. 
Macro-prudential elements of Basel III 
The  changes  in  definition  of  capital  and  enhancements  of  capital  requirement  for  trading 
book under Basel II.5 mentioned by me earlier would raise the collective resilience of banks 
and would in a way, contribute to reduction in systemic risk. However, in extreme situations 
this alone would be inadequate to ensure the financial stability. Therefore, ensuring financial 
stability  would  necessitate  specific  macro-prudential  elements.  Basel  III  seek  to  address 
issues  relating  to  systemic  risk  through  various  measures  including  (i)  leverage  ratio;  (ii) 
capital conservation buffer; (iii) countercyclical capital buffer; (iv) addressing procyclicality of 
provisioning 
the 
too-big-to-fail problem; and (vii) addressing reliance on external credit rating agencies. 
interconnectedness; 
(vi)  addressing 
(v)  addressing 
requirements; 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Leverage ratio 
The macro-prudential element of leverage ratio under Basel III has the objective of protecting 
against system-wide build up of leverage that result in destabilizing unwinding process during 
stress. It also protects against perverse incentive to pile on “low risk” assets, which may not 
remain as such under extreme situations producing systemic risk. 
Capital conservation buffer 
Drawing lessons from the crisis that banks were distributing earnings even during periods of 
stress, Basel III prescribes that a capital conservation buffer of 2.5% of RWAs, comprising 
common equity Tier 1 capital, over and above the minimum common equity requirement of 
4.5% and total capital requirement of 8%, needs to be built up outside periods of stress. This 
can be drawn down as losses are incurred during periods of stress. When buffers have been 
drawn down, banks can build them up either through a reduction in distribution of dividend, 
share buyback and staff bonus payments or raising capital from the private sector. 
Countercyclical capital buffer 
The  countercyclical  capital  buffer  is  aimed  at  ensuring  that  banking  sector  capital 
requirements  take  account  of  the  macro-financial  environment  in  which  banks  operate. 
National  authorities  will  monitor  credit  growth  and  other  indicators  which  may  signal  a 
build-up of system-wide risk and, accordingly, they will put in place a countercyclical capital 
buffer  requirement  as  and  when  circumstances  warrant.  This  requirement  will  be  released 
when system-wide risk crystallizes. The buffer will be implemented through an extension of 
the capital conservation buffer and vary between zero and 2.5% of RWAs, depending on the 
extent  of  the  build-up  of  system-wide  risks.  Banks  are  required  to  meet  this  buffer  with 
common equity Tier 1 capital or other fully loss-absorbing capital. Furthermore, banks will be 
subjected  to  the  restrictions  on  distributions  also  if  the  capital  level  (capital  conservation 
buffer plus countercyclical buffer) falls below the required levels during the periods when the 
countercyclical capital buffer is in force. Banks will have to ensure that their countercyclical 
buffer requirements are calculated and publicly disclosed at least with the same frequency as 
their minimum capital requirements. 
Addressing procyclicality of provisioning requirements  
Financial institutions are prone to business cycles. In good times, banks’ borrowers do well 
and service the loans in time. In bad times, borrowers tend to default in servicing interest and 
principal payment. Banks’ profits go down but at the same time they are required to make 
higher loan loss provisions for the non-performing loans. In order to address the procyclical 
issues, the Basel Committee is working closely with the International Accounting Standards 
Board  (IASB)  towards  an  expected  loss  approach  to  loan  loss  provisioning  instead  of  the 
current practice of incurred loss approach. 
Addressing interconnectedness  
Interconnectedness  among  banks,  especially  the  large  ones,  is  sought  to  be  addressed 
through  various  measures  such  as  enhanced  regulatory  framework  for  global  systemic 
important  banks  (G-SIBs),  prescription  of  higher  asset  value  correlation  under  the  Internal 
Ratings  Based  (IRB)  Approach  for  exposures  to  large  financial  institutions  with  assets  of 
US $ 100 billion and with unregulated institutions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Addressing too-big-to-fail problem 
The  Basel  Committee  will  group  G-SIBs  into  different  categories  of  systemic  importance 
based on the score produced by the indicator-based measurement approach. G-SIBs will be 
initially allocated into four buckets based on their scores of systemic importance, with varying 
levels of additional loss absorbency requirements applied to the different buckets. Based on 
policy  judgment  derived  from  various  empirical  analysis,  the  Basel  Committee  has 
determined  that  the  magnitude  of  additional  loss  absorbency  for  the  highest  populated 
bucket should be 2.5% of risk-weighted assets at all times, with an initially empty top bucket 
(fifth bucket) of 3.5% of risk-weighted assets. The magnitude of additional loss absorbency 
for the lowest bucket should be 1.0% of risk-weighted assets. The magnitude of additional 
loss absorbency is to be met with common equity Tier 1 capital as defined by the Basel III 
framework.  The  G-SIBs  will  also  be  subject  to  tighter  supervision.  In  addition,  liquidity 
standards  have  been  introduced  to  reduce  excessive  reliance  on  short  term  wholesale 
funding. 
Addressing reliance on external credit ratings 
To reduce the reliance on external ratings of the Basel II framework, measures have been 
proposed that include requirements for banks to perform their own internal assessments of 
externally  rated  securitization  exposures,  the  elimination  of  certain  “cliff  effects”  (sharp 
increase in applicable risk weights) associated with credit risk mitigation practices, and the 
incorporation  of  key  elements  of  the  IOSCO  Code  of  Conduct  Fundamentals  for  Credit 
Rating Agencies into the Committee’s eligibility criteria for the use of external ratings in the 
capital framework. 
Transition and phase-in 
In  view  of  the  large  scale  reforms  and  their  impact,  Basel  III  will  be  phased  in  and 
implemented over a long period of time, staring from January 1, 2013 to January 1, 2019. 
Capital instruments that no longer qualify as non-core Tier 1 capital or Tier 2 capital, will be 
phased out over a ten-year period starting from 2013. The final calibration of liquidity ratios 
and leverage ratio will be made after further quantitative impact study and observation. 
Macroeconomic impact of Basel III 
Assuming  that  banks  may  be  able  to  raise  the  increased  capital  requirement  under 
Basel III from the market, questions have been raised as to its impact on economic growth 
and  profitability  of  banks.  In  general,  the  increase  in  equity  capital  requirement  is  likely  to 
increase the weighted average cost of capital. Banks would partly pass on the increase cost 
of capital to the borrowers as higher lending rates. Thus, the equilibrium lending rates are 
likely to be marginally higher and as a consequence, credit growth could be a little lower than 
in the last few years. 
However, the important question is how much? Also, after the steady state has been reached 
on full implementation of Basel III, whether the cost would come down? I would try to provide 
some answers to these questions based on the research done by the official sector including 
the Basel Committee, and non-official or private sector institutions. 
The Bank for International Settlements (BIS) and the FSB, with a view to phase-in the new 
regulations  in  a  manner  that  is  compatible  with  the  global  economic  recovery,  undertook 
studies to assess the macroeconomic impact of the transition to higher capital and liquidity 
requirements.  The  Macroeconomic  Assessment  Group  (MAG)  set  up  by  the  Basel 
Committee and FSB has estimated that bringing the global common equity capital ratio to a 
level that would meet the agreed minimum and the capital conservation buffer, would result 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
in  a  maximum  decline  in  GDP,  relative  to  baseline  forecasts,  of  0.22%,  at  the  end  of 
Basel III implementation period. The estimated maximum GDP impact per percentage point 
of higher capital was 0.17%. 
In  addition,  the  Basel  Committee’s  study  on  the  Long-term  Economic  Impact  (LEI)  of  the 
stronger capital and liquidity requirements has suggested that the net benefits in terms of the 
gains  from  reduced  probability  of  banking  crises,  and  the  consequential  loss  of  growth, 
remain positive. 
The estimates of the International Institute of Finance (IIF), a private sector body, is that level 
of GDP will be 3.2% lower than it would otherwise be (i.e., relative to the baseline scenario) 
after five years with an output loss of 0.7% per annum. This is several magnitudes higher 
than  the  MAG’s  estimate  of  an  output  loss  of  0.03%  per  annum.  The  wide  difference  in 
estimates is attributed to different assumptions and samples. 
Implications of Basel IIIon Indian banks 
In general, higher capital and tighter liquidity requirements under Basel III will increase the 
capital requirements in Indian banks, as in other countries. However, the actual impact would 
vary in different countries depending upon the amount of exposures impacted under Basel 
III, existing capital structure of banks, i.e., extent of reliance on non-common equity capital 
elements, existing rules relating to regulatory adjustments, credit growth experienced by the 
economies  and  existing  credit  to  GDP  ratio.  The  impact  of  these  requirements  on  the 
profitability  of  banks  would  depend  upon  sensitivity  of  lending  rates  to  capital  structure  of 
banks and sensitivity of the credit growth to the lending rates. 
Capital  
Under  Basel  III,  the  trading  book  exposures  especially  those  having  credit  risk  and 
re-securitizations  exposures  in  both  banking  and  trading  book  attract  enhanced  capital 
charges. The CVA for OTC derivatives will also attract additional capital. Since the trading 
book and OTC derivative portfolios of Indian banks are very small and they do not have any 
exposures  to  re-securitized  instruments,  impact  of  these  changes  in  capital  regulation  on 
their balance sheets is insignificant. 
The  average  Tier  1  capital  ratio  of  Indian  banks  is  around  10%  with  more  than  85%  of  it 
comprising  common  equity.  The  regulatory  adjustments  will  reduce  the  available  equity 
capital  only  marginally  for  various  reasons.  First,  items  such  as  goodwill,  Deferred  Tax 
Assets  (DTAs)  etc.  are  already  deducted  from  Tier  1  capital  for  Indian  banks.  Secondly, 
some other items which are subject to deduction such as mortgage servicing rights, treasury 
stocks,  gains  on  account  of  fair  valuation  of  liabilities  which  exist  in  other  developed 
economies,  do  not  exist  in  India.  Thirdly,  reciprocal  cross-holdings  of  capital  and  other 
investments  in  the  capital  of  banking,  financial  and  insurance  entities  are  insignificant 
because  these  investments  are  restricted  due  to  existing  regulatory  limits.  Thus,  Indian 
banks will have high common equity capital ratio even under Basel III which will stand them 
in good stead. It is worth noting that more than 50% of Indian banks have common equity 
ratio  of  higher  than  8%  at  present  and  can  implement  Basel  III  even  today  without  any 
phase-in. 
Bank credit to GDP ratio of India is around 55% which is relatively lower as compared with 
that  in  many  other  countries.  However,  the  past  trend  shows  that  it is  likely  to  increase  in 
future  as  the  credit  penetration  in  the  economy  has  been  steadily  increasing.  The  Indian 
economy is also expected to grow at an annual growth rate of 8–9% for next 10 years or so. 
This would undoubtedly necessitate a considerable growth in bank capital. However, we also 
know  that  many  Indian  banks  have  actually  been  operating  with  equity  capital  ratio  of 
7–8% for last 5 years when the economy continued to grow at an average rate of about 8%. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
This  provides  us  comfort  in  terms  of  both  the  ability  of  banks  to  operate  at  higher  equity 
capital levels required under Basel III and also the capacity of the Indian capital market to 
provide the required equity capital to banks. 
Government of India has progressively reduced its shareholding in public sector banks and in 
the  case  of  many  of  these  banks,  the  Government’s  shareholding  is  close  to  51%.  This 
means that in the future, the Government of India would provide the matching contribution to 
meet the additional equity requirements of banks, in contrast to the past when it had allowed 
a  large  part  of  additional  equity  requirements  to  be  met  from  the  market  by  letting  its 
shareholding  fall  from  100%  to  51%.  Thus,  the  demand  for  equity  from  the  capital  market 
would  be  less  to  that  extent  but  public  sector  banks’  dependence  on  the  Government  for 
capital support will increase. 
Liquidity – Issues relating to SLR and LCR 
In India, banks are statutorily required to hold minimum reserves of high-quality liquid assets. 
Currently, such reserves (Statutory Liquidity Ratio – SLR) are required to be maintained at a 
minimum  of  24%  of  net  demand  and  time  liabilities.  Since  these  reserves  are  part  of  the 
minimum  statutory  requirement,  RBI  faces  a  dilemma  whether  and  how  much  of  these 
reserves can be allowed to be reckoned towards the LCR. If these reserves are not reckoned 
towards  the  LCR  and  banks  are  to  meet  the  entire  LCR  with  additional  liquid  assets,  the 
proportion  of  liquid  assets  in  total  assets  of  banks  will  increase  substantially,  thereby 
lowering  their  income  significantly.  RBI  is  examining  to  what  extent  the  SLR  requirements 
could be reckoned towards the liquidity requirement under Basel III. 
Profitability  
Studies  have  suggested  that  internationally,  Basel  III  requirements  will  have  a  substantial 
impact on profitability. One such study conducted by McKinsey & Company suggest that all 
other things being equal, Basel III would reduce return on equity (RoE) for the average bank 
by about 4 percentage points in Europe and about 3 percentage points in the United States. 
The  retail,  corporate,  and  investment  banking  segments  will  be  affected  in  different  ways. 
Retail  banks  will  be  affected  least,  though  institutions  with  very  low  capital  ratios  may  find 
themselves  under  significant  pressure.  Corporate  banks  will  be  affected  primarily  in 
specialized  lending  and  trade  finance.  Investment  banks  will  find  several  core  businesses 
profoundly  affected,  particularly  trading  and  securitization  businesses.  Banks  are  already 
seeking to manage RoE in the new environment by balance-sheet restructuring and business 
model  adjustments.  The  study  suggests 
the  balance  sheet  restructuring  and 
business-model  adjustments  could  potentially  mitigate  up  to  40  percent  of  Basel  III’s  RoE 
impact, on an average. 
I would like to give you a sense of likely impact on the lending rates of banks. Suppose, a 
typical Indian bank has RoE of 15% and interest paid on non-equity elements of capital is 
10%. Further, suppose that the equity to RWAs ratio of the bank is 6%. Now if the bank is 
required to maintain an additional 1% equity, the weighted average cost of funds would rise 
by 5 basis points only. If the equity capital required rises by 2%, the increase in lending rate 
to pass on the full increase in cost of capital to borrowers would be 10 basis points. There is 
likely to be some increase in cost of non-equity capital as well. But, all this is unlikely to push 
the cost of lending significantly. And, Indian banks should keep in mind that their net interest 
margins (NIMs) are very high as compared with their counterparts in many other countries. 
This  only  indicates  the  need  for  improving  efficiency  and  considerable  scope  for  bringing 
down the cost of intermediation. I would also like you to appreciate the fact that while many 
large  international  banks  are  required  to  increase  their  equity  capital  by  more  than 
100% over the existing levels, many Indian banks would certainly not be required to increase 
that 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
their equity levels by that order. Therefore, the impact on their RoE is likely to be much less 
than 3 to 4 percentage points as observed in the case of US and European banks. 
Benefits of effective implementation of Basel III 
Effective  implementation  of  Basel  III  will  demonstrate  to  regulators,  customers,  and 
shareholders  that  the  banking  system  is  recovering  well  from  the  global  financial  crisis  of 
2008 and has been developing the resilience to future shocks. A smooth implementation will 
also contribute to a bank’s competitiveness by delivering better management insight into the 
business,  allowing  it  to  take  advantage  of  future  opportunities.  At  the  same  time,  the 
challenges  in  implementation  of  Basel  III  should  not  be  underestimated.  For  every  bank, 
working out the most cost-effective model for implementing Basel III will be a critical issue. 
The comfortable capital adequacy levels at present for the Indian banking system do provide 
some comfort. However, as the economy grows, so will the credit demand requiring banks to 
expand their balance sheets, and in order to be able to do so, they will have to augment their 
capital; more specifically the equity capital. 
While implementation of Basel III would undoubtedly imply some costs, this should not be the 
criterion to determine whether Basel III would add value to the financial system. The correct 
measure should be whether or not Basel III would deliver a much safer financial system with 
reduced  probability  of  banking crises  at  affordable  costs.  I think  Basel III  passes  that  test. 
The impact of costs is minimized through long phase-in. 
At  times  a  question  is  asked  whether  it  is  appropriate  for  the  countries  which  neither 
contributed to the crisis nor have exposure to the toxic assets need to implement Basel III. 
The  answer  is  a  clear  “Yes”.  The  reason  is  that  in  the  present-day  globalised  world  it  is 
difficult  for  any  local  financial  and  economic  system  to  completely  insulate  itself  from  the 
global economic shocks. The indirect effects of events happening in any part of the world can 
very  well  be  transmitted  throughout  the  world  through  various  channels.  In  addition,  many 
provisions  of  Basel  III  address  the  weaknesses  in  the  measurement  of  risk  under 
Basel II framework revealed during the crisis. Thus, Basel III would strengthen the financial 
system  of  both  developing  and  developed  countries.  It  needs  to  be  appreciated  that  if  the 
implementation of Basel III is not consistent across jurisdictions there would be a race to the 
bottom to make use of arbitrage opportunities, which nobody wins! 
I feel Indian banks should minimize costs by retaining maximum amount of earnings in the 
initial years of implementation, even though they might meet the capital requirements at that 
point  in  time  with  smaller  retentions.  This  would  avoid  costs  involved  in  fresh  issuances. 
Indian banks are also comfortably placed in terms of liquidity requirements as they have a 
large  reservoir  of  liquid  Government  securities  to  meet  the  SLR  stipulation.  RBI  is 
considering how much of it can be allowed to be reckoned towards compliance with the LCR. 
It is also expected that as the proportion of equity in the capital structure of banks rises, it 
would reduce the incremental costs of raising further equity as well as non-common equity 
capital. 
Banks will have to issue fresh capital particularly to replace the ineligible non-equity capital 
towards later years of implementation. Successful issuance of fresh capital would demand 
greater transparency and greater market discipline. 
The Reserve Bank of India has issued the draft guidelines on capital and liquidity rules of 
Basel  III  on  30  December  2011  and  21  February  2012,  respectively.  The  Reserve  Bank’s 
approach has been to adopt Basel III capital and liquidity guidelines with more conservatism 
and at a quicker pace. As I have discussed above, the impact of these rules is not going to 
be onerous and there will be considerable advantage in adopting Basel III by our banks. I will 
be interested in knowing your views.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
Conclusion 
Let me now sum up. I started with the context in which the Basel III was set up – the causes 
and  consequences  of  the  global  financial,  nay,  economic  crisis.  I  thereafter  discussed  the 
immediate  response  to  the  crisis  in  enhancing  Basel  II  or  introducing  Basel  II.5  capital 
requirement for the trading book, which was the epicenter of the crisis and capital arbitrage. 
Moving from there, I went in detail into the objectives of Basel III and the micro-prudential 
and macro-prudential elements of Basel III in relation to its objectives. 
I went on to describe how the definition of capital, its quality and quantity, and consistency 
and transparency, and risk coverage will improve micro-prudential regulation under Basel III. 
I also underscored that the new leverage and liquidity framework will not only enhance the 
risk absorbency of individual banks but also aid in stabilizing financial system during periods 
of  extreme  stress.  The  other  macro-prudential  elements  of  Basel  III,  such  as,  capital 
conservation buffer, countercyclical capital buffer, and too-big-to-fail problem problem, were 
also discussed. 
I  analyzed  the  macroeconomic  impact  of  Basel  III  and  the  various  research  that  have 
observed  that  there  could  be  some  initial  cost  in  implementation  of  Basel  III,  but  the  long 
term  benefits  will  be  immense  as  it  would  reduce  the  probability  of  banking  crises.  The 
implications  of  Basel  III  on  capital,  liquidity  and  profitability  of  banks,  particularly  Indian 
banks, were discussed. 
I would also take this opportunity to apprise you that Basel III is just a part of the financial 
sector reforms agenda being pursued by G20. While the immediate challenge is to ensure 
consistent  implementation  of  Basel  II  and  Basel  III  across  banks  and  jurisdictions,  other 
important issues such as strengthening the corporate governance, compensation practices, 
and resolution regimes; enhancing the regulatory and supervisory framework for global and 
domestic  Systemic  Important  Banks  (SIBs);  improving  the  OTC  derivatives  markets;  and 
regulation  of  shadow  banking  system  have  also  been  addressed  or  are  engaging  the 
attention of FSB and Basel Committee. The macro-prudential framework under Basel III is 
still  untested  and  would  need  continuous  research,  monitoring,  and  experience  sharing 
among the regulators to ensure its effectiveness. 
Thank you. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
