Sayuri Shirai: Europe’s economic and financial developments and 
monetary policy in Japan 
Speech  by  Ms  Sayuri  Shirai,  Member  of  the  Policy  Board  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the 
77th meeting of the Society for the Economic Studies of Securities, Tokyo, 9 June 2012. 
 Introduction 
I. 
Good afternoon, members of the Society for the Economic Studies of Securities. My name is 
Sayuri Shirai, and I am a Policy Board member of the Bank of Japan. It is indeed a great 
honor and a pleasure for me to give a talk at this esteemed society. Today, I would like to 
focus on Europe, which is the common theme of today’s meeting, with the greater emphasis 
being  on  the  euro  area,  where  developments  have  shown  considerable  uncertainty  over 
recent months. 
First, let me briefly outline the content of this presentation, which will consist of four parts. I 
would  like  to  begin  by  describing  recent  changes  seen  in  the  euro  area.  Next,  I  will 
summarize  my  view  on  the  fundamental  issues  facing  the  euro  area.  Following  that,  I  will 
review the region-wide responses to the European sovereign debt crisis. In the final part, I 
would like to summarize recent economic and price developments in Japan, the impact of the 
European sovereign debt crisis on the Japanese economy, and Japan’s monetary policy and 
related developments.1 I very much look forward to a lively discussion with you after my talk. 
II. 
Changes in the political situation and greater emphasis on growth – two 
recent transformations in the Euro Area 
As we are all aware, global financial markets have been nervous in recent months following a 
period  of  some  easing  of  strains  in  the  first  quarter  of  2012.  I  believe  that  two  important 
changes  have  been  associated  with  the  recent  enhanced  sensitivity  of  global  financial 
markets: one is changes in the political situation; the other is growing focus on growth, the 
interpretation of which appears to be somewhat different from what it was in the past.  
Recent changes in the political situation 
With regard to political changes, I view the first event in the euro area as having been the 
collapse of the coalition government in the Netherlands on April 23, 2012. This occurred as a 
result of disagreement over budget cuts. That dispute emerged because then-Prime Minister 
Mark Rutte had stressed the need for additional budget cuts in order to meet the 3-percent 
fiscal  deficit  target  –  the  common  target  set  by  the  EU  –  by  2013.  However,  his  minority 
coalition  partner,  the  Freedom  Party,  rejected  the  proposal  and  demanded  that  the  target 
year be postponed. As you are aware, the Netherlands is one of the “core” countries of the 
EU,2  which  are  known  for  having  achieved  favorable  macroeconomic  performance  over  a 
long  period.  Prior  to  the  global  financial  crisis  of  2008–09,  the  fiscal  balance  of  the 
Netherlands had recorded a surplus, and the ratio of sovereign debt to GDP had remained 
below  the  EU’s  60-percent  threshold.  Since  the  crisis,  the  fiscal  balance  has  shifted  to  a 
deficit, with a peak of 5.5 percent of GDP in 2009; however, the Netherlands managed to 
                                                 
1  The data used in this speech cover the period up to June 6, 2012. 
2  Here,  I  refer  to  Germany,  Austria,  the  Netherlands,  and  Finland  as  the  core  countries.  All  these  countries 
enjoy current account surpluses and a very high-grade credit rating on their sovereign bonds. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
reduce that to 4.6 percent by 2011. Owing to the continued fiscal deficit, the sovereign debt 
to GDP ratio has risen to 65.2 percent, though this is well below the euro-area average of 
88 percent. Moreover, the Netherlands is, like Japan, a net external creditor nation, thanks to 
its  accumulated  current  account  surpluses  –  a  phenomenon  that  is  in  contrast  with  the 
“peripheral” countries of the EU. The unemployment rate in the Netherlands is also low at 
around  5  percent.  Therefore,  I  was  genuinely  surprised  by  the  news  about  the  political 
turmoil. This event reminded me that fiscal austerity measures are painful even for the core 
countries, and the Dutch public felt frustrated about the recession that had continued over 
three  consecutive  quarters  from  July  to  September  2011  and  the  resultant  rising 
unemployment rate. On April 26, nonetheless, the Dutch government managed to produce 
an agreement with some opposition parties on austerity measures worth around €12.4 billion 
in  2013  to meet  the  3-percent  target;  however,  the  Dutch general  election  is  scheduled  to 
take place in September.  
The next regime change took place in France – the second-largest economy in the euro area 
– and that event surprised the world. The first round of voting in the presidential election was 
held on April 22, 2012, in which Mr. François Hollande, the candidate for the Socialist Party, 
took a lead over Mr. Nicolas Sarkozy, the incumbent president and candidate for the Union 
for a Popular Movement. During the election campaign, Mr. Hollande promised to renegotiate 
the terms of the EU Fiscal Compact, which was signed by 25 of the 27 EU member countries 
in March 2012.3 Like Mr. Sarkozy, he is also committed to meeting the 3-percent fiscal deficit 
target in 2013 and subsequently balancing the budget by 2017. Mr. Hollande’s plan was to 
achieve  this  by,  for  example,  imposing  a  tax  on  financial  transactions,  introducing  a 
75-percent income tax on earnings above €1 million euros, and raising the corporate tax on 
the  biggest  companies  to  35  percent,  while  reducing  taxes  on  small  and  medium-sized 
enterprises  (SMEs)  and  scrapping  a  value-added  tax  (VAT)  increase  proposed  by 
Mr. Sarkozy. Mr. Hollande has also promised to expand public spending by such efforts as 
raising state spending, reducing the retirement age to 60 years for those having worked more 
than  41.5  years,  hiring  150,000  youths  in  state-subsidized  jobs,  and  hiring  more  teachers 
and police officers. In the second round of presidential voting held on May 6, Mr. Hollande 
won the first vote and became the country’s first socialist president in 17 years. The market 
now appears to have adopted a wait-and-see attitude before it judges the credibility of his 
fiscal consolidation plan as well as the fate of the Fiscal Compact. 
The  biggest  political  change  occurred  in  Greece  after  the  general  election  held  on  May  6, 
2012,  in  which  the  Panhellenic  Socialist  Movement  (PASOK)  and  New  Democracy  (ND) 
– who had joined in a grand coalition in November 2011 headed by Mr. Lucas Papademos, 
the  former  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  vice-president  –  lost  by  wide  margins.  Since  no 
political party won an absolute majority of seats, President Karolos Papoulias attempted to 
offer successive exploratory mandates to the leaders of the three main parties in accordance 
with  the  constitution.  However,  each  party  ended  up  failing  to  form  a  government  and 
returning their mandates to the president. After the president had failed in his final attempt to 
form  a  government  after  meeting  all  party  leaders,  it  was  decided  that  Mr.  Panagiotis 
Pikrammenos,  head  of  the  Council  of  State,  would  become  the  leader  of  a  caretaker 
administration  until  a  new  election  could  take  place  on  June  17.  The  result  of  the  Greek 
election intensified the nervousness of markets amid fears that a new government other than 
                                                 
3  The Fiscal Compact is an intergovernmental treaty signed by all the EU members except the Czech Republic 
and the United Kingdom on March 2, 2012. The compact is expected to go into force on January 1, 2013 if 
12 members of the euro area ratify it by that time. According to the compact, the structural fiscal deficit must 
not exceed 0.5 percent of GDP, and this fiscal rule has to be specified in each country’s national legal system 
at least at the statutory level, although some deviation may be permitted under exceptional circumstance. The 
rule contains an automatic correction mechanism in the event of deviation, with a possible penalty equivalent 
of up to 0.1 percent of GDP. According to the enhanced Stability and Growth Pact, moreover, countries whose 
sovereign debt exceeds the 60-percent threshold level should reduce it at an average rate of 1/20 per year as 
a benchmark. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
PASOK  and/or  ND  could  reject  the  fiscal  consolidation  and  economic  reform  programs 
already agreed with the troika – the European Commission, the International Monetary Fund 
(IMF),  and  the  ECB.  Greece  would  thus  fail  to  receive  its  scheduled  financial  support, 
thereby leading to the collapse of the government administration and a possible exit from the 
euro area.  
Increasing attention on growth 
Against the background of these political changes, I noticed that a second type of change 
has occurred in recent months: a number of key policy players have begun to actively use 
the key word “growth,” though in a different context from how it was used in the past. For 
example, ECB President Mario Draghi stressed the need of a Growth Compact in addition to 
the already-agreed Fiscal Compact on April 25, 2012. On May 3, he subsequently elaborated 
the idea of a Growth Compact by proposing the following: (1) an increase in the involvement 
of the European Investment Bank (EIB) and a redirection of EU structural funds toward the 
low-income areas; and (2) prioritizing an expenditure cut (especially a cut in current, rather 
than investment, expenditure) over a tax increase.4 
On May 5, European economics commissioner Olli Rehn made remarks somewhat similar to 
those of Mr. Draghi and stated that the EU needs to increase public investment to promote 
growth and jobs in the region. Mr. Rehn said it should do so by creating project bonds for 
infrastructure  development  (as  proposed  by  the  European  Commission  in  October  2011), 
increasing the lending capacity of the EIB, and improving accessibility of EU structural funds 
for guaranteeing lending to SMEs. Mr. Rehn also stressed that, based on economic analysis, 
the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  contains  considerable  scope  for  judgment  regarding  public 
deficit and debt and also that its legal provisions applied to excessive deficit procedure; he 
encouraged countries with fiscal surpluses to boost public spending. On  May 8,  European 
Commission President Barroso announced a plan to expand infrastructure investment in the 
EU  by,  for  example,  issuing  project  bonds  by  June  2012.  Regarding  the  feasibility  of  a 
renegotiation of the Fiscal Compact, Mr. Jean-Claude Juncker, head of the Eurogroup, has 
taken a balanced position between the demand by Mr. Hollande to renegotiate the compact 
and resistance to this by Ms. Angela Merkel. On May 7, Mr. Juncker declared that it would 
not  be  possible  to  renegotiate  the  Fiscal  Compact,  although  it  would  be  possible  to  add 
growth  elements,  but  not  necessarily  in  the  form  of  a  treaty.  Reflecting  these  new  moves, 
EU President Herman Van Rompuy called for an informal European Council (EU summit) to 
be held on May 23 to discuss the balance between growth and fiscal austerity measures. 
EU’s approach to growth thus far 
The question emerges as to why the growth agenda has now suddenly become a focus of 
attention. Does it mean that previously the EU had barely paid attention to the issue? It is 
clear  that  the  EU  has  been  tackling  the  issue  of  promoting  growth  together  with  fiscal 
consolidation over the past few years. As you may recall, for example, the European Council 
in  June  2010  adopted  the  growth  strategy  called  “Europe  2020,”  whereby  each  member 
country  had  to  undertake  structural  reforms  toward  strong,  sustainable  recovery.  The 
strategy  also  targeted  EU  needs  to  better  focus  on  boosting  Europe’s  competitiveness, 
productivity, growth potential, and economic convergence to deliver more growth and jobs. 
                                                 
4  This  approach  over  fiscal  consolidation  has  gained  some  support  in  recent  years.  For  example,  World 
Economic  Outlook  compiled  by  the  IMF  (2010)  stresses  that  fiscal  contraction  that  relies  on  spending  cuts 
tends to have smaller contractionary effects than tax-based adjustments. This is partly because central banks 
usually provide substantially greater stimulus following a spending-based contraction than after a tax-based 
contraction.  Monetary  stimulus  is  particularly  weak  following  indirect  tax  hikes  (such  as  VAT),  which  raise 
prices. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Accordingly,  five  headline  targets  were  agreed  to  as  common  objectives  for  guiding  the 
action of member countries.5  
In  line  with  this  approach,  the  EU  introduced  a  so-called  “European  Semester”  in  2011, 
whereby each member country submitted a medium-term budgetary strategy and a National 
Reform  Program  to  the  European  Commission  for  assessment.  The  commission  then 
published  a  country-specific  report  on  detailed  policy  recommendations,  covering  fiscal 
consolidation  and  structural  reforms.  Moreover,  the  EU  introduced  the  “Macroeconomic 
Imbalance  Procedure  (MIP)”  in  December  2011,  which,  as  the  name  suggests,  is  a 
surveillance mechanism that aims to prevent and correct macroeconomic imbalances within 
the EU. This alert system uses a “scoreboard” of 10 indicators as well as detailed country 
studies.  Each  indicator  is  given  a  threshold,  so  a  large  divergence  in  each  country’s 
performance from the threshold functions as a warning signal.6 As in the original “Excessive 
Deficit Procedure,” which was applied to the size of fiscal deficits, strict rules come into effect 
in the event of a large divergence in the form of a new “Excessive Macroeconomic Imbalance 
Procedure  (EIP)”;  this  carries  a  possible  financial  penalty  of  up  to  0.1  percent  of  GDP  for 
euro-area  member  countries.  The  decision-making  process  in  the  new  regulations  will 
employ  reverse  qualified  majority  voting  to  make  all  the  appropriate  relevant  judgments 
before a penalty is introduced. This semi-automatic procedure makes it difficult for member 
countries to form a blocking majority.  
In February 2012, the European Commission disclosed the first Alert Mechanism Report. Of 
the 27 EU member countries, those that are already under enhanced economic surveillance 
–  Greece,  Ireland,  Portugal,  and  Romania  –  were  exempted  from  examination  under  the 
macroeconomic  imbalances.  The  report  indicated  that  12  countries  –  Belgium,  Bulgaria, 
Denmark, Spain, France, Italy, Cyprus, Hungary, Slovenia, Finland, Sweden, and the United 
Kingdom  –  bore  some  potential  risk  related  to  macroeconomic  imbalances  and  thus 
warranted  further  detailed  analysis.7  According  to  the  report,  Spain,  for  example,  will  take 
time to correct its external and internal imbalances despite the efforts being made to rectify 
its  imbalances  owing  to  the  sheer  size  of  the  internal  and  external  debt.  It  has  also  been 
pointed out that a fall in employment linked to downsizing in the construction sector and the 
economic recession has been aggravated by a sluggish adjustment of wages. At the end of 
May  2012,  the  commission  confirmed  that  the  12  countries  need  to  correct  the  large 
macroeconomic imbalances and that the adjustment process should be closely monitored.  
                                                 
5  The five targets were as follows: (1) an increase of the employment rate for women and men aged 20–64 to 
75  percent;  (2)  achieving  combined  public  and  private  R&D  investment  levels  to  3  percent  of  GDP; 
(3) reducing  greenhouse  gas  emissions  by  20  percent  compared  with  1990  levels;  (4)  reducing  school 
drop-out rates to 10 percent and increasing the proportion of the population aged 30–34 having completed 
tertiary  or  equivalent  education  to  40  percent;  and  (5)  promoting  social  inclusion,  particularly  by  reducing 
poverty and aiming to lift at least 20 million people out of the risk of poverty and exclusion. 
6  The  10  indicators  are  divided  into  two  areas:  external  imbalances  and  competitiveness,  and  internal 
imbalances. The external imbalances and competitiveness comprise the following: (1) three-year average of 
current  account  balance  as  a  percent  of  GDP  (with  an  indicative  threshold  of  between  plus  6  percent  and 
minus  4  percent);  (2)  net  international  investment  position  as  a  percent  of  GDP  (minus  35-percent  lower 
quartile);  (3) 
in  real  effective  exchange  rate  (between  plus  and 
minus 5 percent); (4) five-year percentage change in export market shares (minus 6-percent lower quartile); 
and  (5)  three-year  percentage  change  in  export  market  shares.  The  internal  imbalances  comprise  the 
following: (6) year-on-year change in deflated house prices (plus 6-percent upper quartile); (7) private sector 
credit  flow  as  a  percent  of  GDP  (plus  15-percent  upper  quartile);  (8)  private-sector  debt  as  a  percent  of 
GDP (160-percent  upper  quartile);  (9)  general  government  debt  as  a  percent  of  GDP  (60  percent);  and 
(10) three-year average of the unemployment rate (10 percent). 
three-year  percentage  change 
7  The report concludes that the following countries do not require a further detailed review: the Czech Republic, 
Germany, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, the Netherlands, Austria, Poland, and Slovakia. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Background to the refocus on growth 
Thus, it could be said that greater efforts have been made over recent years at the EU level 
to boost growth and competitiveness. Why, then, has the question of growth been discussed 
so intensively over recent months? In general, boosting growth requires the implementation 
of  various  structural  reforms  (Chart  1).  And  some  peripheral  countries  have  only  just 
launched  some  needed  structural  reforms  and  are  thus  far  from  being  in  a  position  of 
completing them. The answer to this question may be associated with public anxiety because 
some  reforms  may  be  accompanied  by  social  transformation  and  short-term  economic 
suffering,  such  as  wage  restraints,  job  losses,  and  profit  losses  in  protected  sectors. 
Moreover,  the  public  may  become  frustrated  by  fiscal  austerity  measures  that  end  up 
squeezing  domestic  absorption  and  promoting  deleveraging  of  the  banking  sector  in  the 
short term; this is because it takes time to realize long-term gains, such as an improvement 
in credibility and a cut in long-term interest rates. Furthermore, sluggish growth in the rest of 
the world has not generated sufficient external demand for the euro area that could offset the 
shrinkage  in  domestic  demand  driven  by  the  collective  acts  of  fiscal  consolidation.  In 
addition,  it  is  important  to  recognize  that  the  context  of  growth  has  shifted  from  improving 
competitiveness,  which  could  be  achieved  in  the  medium  to  long  term,  to  moderating 
short-term pains caused by austerity measures implemented during the economic recession. 
Various interpretations related to growth 
Despite  the  above  reasoning,  it  is  my  impression  that  the  word  “growth”  is  interpreted 
differently from the way it was in the past and by the people employing the term. It appears 
that there are at least three types of interpretation.8 According to the first interpretation, the 
EU  should  expand  its  region-wide  infrastructure  investment  by  issuing  project  bonds  and 
more actively utilizing EIB and EU structural funds to mitigate the adverse impact of fiscal 
austerity  measures  adopted  by  a  number  of  member  countries.  The  second  interpretation 
holds that the current fiscal consolidation schedule could be slowed down – for example, by 
extending the target year for fulfilling the 3-percent fiscal deficit goal if the situation allows it.9 
With  this  interpretation,  the  better  mix  of  revenue-generating  and  expenditure-reducing 
measures is also stressed. According to the third interpretation, structural reforms should be 
prioritized  so  as  to  effect  an  immediate  positive  impact  on  growth  and  employment.  This 
latter  option  may  help  reduce  the  sense  of  exhaustion  with  austerity  programs  that  some 
countries have experienced. 
However, I believe that these interpretations do not rule out the structural reforms needed for 
boosting  growth  in  each  country.  Some  action  has  recently  been  associated  with  the  first 
interpretation. On May 23, the informal European Council agreed that the board of the EIB 
would be invited to consider an increase of its capital by June for financing projects across 
the EU. The previous day, political agreement was also reached by the Council of the EU, 
European Commission, and Parliament with regard to the pilot phase of the project bonds. 
Based on the guarantee of €230 million from the EU budget, project bonds could possibly 
finance up to €4.6 billion of key infrastructure projects in the areas of transport, energy, and 
                                                 
8  Other proposals include Eurobonds, which would be issued jointly by euro area member countries by pooling 
their debt. This idea was rejected by Ms. Merkel in 2011, but it was brought up again by Mr. Hollande at the 
European  Council  on  May  23,  2012.  While  Eurobonds  could  be  a  long-term  strategy  for  integration, 
Ms. Merkel stressed that they would reduce incentives for countries to contain their fiscal deficits. Recently, 
the European Commission addressed an idea of a banking union, with integrated financial supervision and a 
single  deposit  guarantee  scheme.  The  idea  of  a  uniform  deposit  guarantee  scheme  was  proposed  and 
rejected by member countries a few years ago. It would appear to require quite some time before this proposal 
can be agreed upon. 
9  On May 2012, the European Commission suggested, for example, that Spain, France, the Netherlands (the 
impact  of  an  additional  deficit  cut  agreed  at  the  end  of  April  was  not  taken  into  account),  Slovenia,  and 
Slovakia might not meet the 3-percent fiscal deficit target unless additional measures were undertaken. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
communications.10  The  second  interpretation,  or  a  moderation  of  the  fiscal  consolidation 
schedule, might be feasible if a country could present a credible medium-term plan. But this 
may not be possible for some peripheral countries owing to a lack of market confidence. On 
this  issue,  the  European  Commission  made  an  initial  move  with  Spain  by  suggesting  a 
possible extension of one year on the schedule for meeting the 3-percent fiscal deficit target 
to  2014  –  on  condition  of  improved  expenditure  control  over  local  governments  and  the 
submission of a credible two-year budget plan for 2013–14. 
Three fundamental issues related to the Euro Area 
III. 
So far, I have discussed recent changes in the political situation and the increased focus on 
growth in the euro area. My observation is that those changes reflect deeper fundamental 
issues  pertaining  to  the  region:  (1)  issues  arising  from  accumulated  current  account 
imbalances;  (2)  issues  related  to  the  savings-investment  gaps  that  constitute  the  current 
account  imbalances;  and  (3)  issues  arising  from  accumulated  fiscal  imbalances.  These 
issues  are  of  course  interconnected,  but  the  distinction  may  assist  in  understanding  the 
fundamental problems that the region faces. 
Accumulated current account imbalances 
Regarding the first fundamental issue, the current account imbalances have expanded in the 
euro area since the adoption of the euro (Chart 2). Thanks to an elimination of exchange-rate 
risk  and  a  decline  in  inflation  differentials,  peripheral  countries  –  such  as  Greece,  Ireland, 
Portugal, and Spain – gained access to considerable financial resources from the region at 
substantially  lower  interest  rates  than  before.  In  real  terms,  their  interest  rates  were  lower 
than those of the core countries. Cheap external finance enabled the peripheral countries to 
swell  their  net  external  debt  (Chart  3).11  Major  financiers  to  the  peripheral  countries  were 
largely concentrated in the core countries (with current account surpluses) and France. Since 
capital  inflows  to  the  peripheral  countries  mostly  took  the  form  of  bank  loans  and  bond 
issues,  the  growing  net  external  debt  made  those  countries  more  prone  to  changes  in 
investor  sentiment.  In  retrospect,  if  those  countries  had  allocated  the  external  financial 
resources  toward  more  productive  investment  and  investment  leading  to  a  shift  to 
higher-value-added  economic  structure, 
their  economic 
productivity  and  enhanced  international  competitiveness.  Subsequently,  this  would  have 
enabled those countries to repay their external debt by gradually shifting to current account 
surpluses.  
Instead, the capital inflows largely financed domestic consumption and the real estate and 
construction sectors (although this comment does not necessarily fully apply in the case of 
Ireland, where a number of high-technology multinational firms have been operating). Thus, 
the foreign borrowing did not promote sustainable economic growth or contain external debt 
growth (Chart 2). To reduce net external debt, it is necessary to achieve a current account 
surplus.  At  this  stage,  only  Ireland,  whose  current  account  deficit  was  initially  small,  has 
succeeded  in  achieving  a  current  account  surplus.  It  is  fair  to  say  that  the  other  countries 
have  made  efforts  to  reduce  their  current  account  deficits  –  at  the  scale  of  around 
5 percentage  points  or  more  of  GDP  in  the  case  of  Greece  and  Spain  and  4  percentage 
points  in  Portugal  during  the  period  of  2007–11.  Nonetheless,  it  will  be  some  time  before 
these three countries could achieve current account surpluses, and so their net external debt 
they  could  have 
improved 
                                                 
10  The EIB will manage the project. If the EIB could guarantee the project bonds, more bonds could be issued on 
the market. Private sector participation would also be expected. 
11  Italy is not included in this analysis, because its current account to GDP ratio is small and its net external debt 
to GDP remains below the indicative threshold of 35 percent specified under the macroeconomic imbalance 
procedure. Its primary fiscal balance is in surplus, although its government debt to GDP ratio is large. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
is unlikely to decline soon. In other words, the external imbalance on a stock (debt) basis will 
remain for the time being. Meanwhile, among the core countries, Finland reduced its current 
account surplus to GDP ratio by 5 percentage points over the same period, though Germany, 
Austria,  and  the  Netherlands  barely  reduced  their  current  account  surpluses.  In  particular, 
the  current  account  surplus  to  GDP  ratio  remains  high  in  Austria  (around  2  percent), 
Germany  (around  5  percent),  and  the  Netherlands  (over  7.5  percent).  This  enables  these 
core  countries  to  further  accumulate  their  net  external  assets.  In  other  words,  the  surplus 
countries  have  continued  to  accumulate  net  external  assets,  and  the  deficit  countries  net 
external debt – despite some emerging improvements over the current account imbalances 
in  the  euro  area  (Chart  3).  I  believe  that  this  partly  explains  why  the  debtor  peripheral 
countries  currently  find  it  difficult  to  resume  adequate  private-sector-based  capital  inflows 
despite their adjustment efforts.  
Growing savings-investment gaps 
With respect to the second issue listed above – savings-investment gaps – the savings–GDP 
ratio (hereafter, saving rate) showed a declining trend in the four peripheral countries before 
the  global  financial  crisis.  The  scale  of  the  decrease  was  greatest  in  Greece  followed  by 
Portugal (Chart 4). It could be said that Greece and Portugal allocated a large part of their 
capital  inflows  to  both  private  and  public  consumption  (such  as  public  pay,  pensions,  and 
medical care). Owing to the tendency for Germany to increase the saving rate, the current 
account imbalances between Greece and Portugal, on the one hand, and Germany, on the 
other,  could  be  explained  primarily  by  the  difference  in  saving-rate  patterns.  However,  the 
saving rates of Ireland and Spain were not very different from that of Germany: Ireland and 
Spain  increased  the  investment-GDP  ratios  (hereafter,  investment  rates),  while  that  of 
Germany remained at a low level. Thus, the current account imbalances between Ireland and 
Spain,  on  the  one  hand,  and  Germany  on  the  other,  could  be  attributed  largely  to  the 
difference  in  investment  patterns  (Chart  5).  An  increase  in  the  two  countries’  investment 
rates reflected a boom in real estate and construction investment. It is a well-known fact that 
those two countries underwent rapid real estate price appreciation prior to the global financial 
crisis.  
Since the global financial crisis erupted, all four peripheral countries have faced a decline in 
their  saving  rates.  This  implies  that  the  improvement  in  the  current  account  balances,  as 
indicated  earlier,  arose solely  through  a  sharp decrease  in  the  investment  rates.  This  was 
particularly the case in Ireland, where the drop in real estate prices was more drastic than in 
Spain  and  which  experienced  the  sharpest  decline  in  the  investment  rate.  However,  the 
decline in the investment rates for the other three countries has also been great. Given that 
the  four  peripheral  countries  have  suffered  from  a  substantial  fall  in  investment,  it  is 
understandable  that  the  idea  of  expanding  EU-wide  infrastructure-investment  projects  to 
offset the adverse impact of austerity measures has been widely stressed recently, as noted 
earlier. 
Growing fiscal imbalances 
On  the  third  fundamental  issue  listed  above  –  that  related  to  accumulated  fiscal 
imbalances – Greece was the only country where the size of the fiscal deficit was large and 
whose general government debt as a share of GDP exceeded 100 percent even before the 
global financial crisis (Charts 6, 7). In Ireland and Spain, the ratio of general government debt 
to GDP remained below the 60-percent target thanks to their accumulated fiscal surpluses. 
Portugal  had  been  poised  to  bring  its  fiscal  deficit–GDP  ratio  down  toward  the  3-percent 
target  prior  to  the  global  financial  crisis,  and  so  its  general  government  debt–GDP  ratio 
remained at around 70 percent.  
Since  the  global  financial  crisis,  the  fiscal  balances  of  most  euro-area  countries  have 
deteriorated because of the implementation of fiscal-stimulus policies and measures to bail 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
in  Germany’s 
the  deterioration 
out  the  banking  sector.  The  size  of  deterioration  of  the  fiscal  balance  between  2007  and 
2011  reached  minus  2.6  percentage  points  in  Greece,  minus  13.2  percentage  points  in 
Ireland, minus 1.1 percentage points in Portugal, and minus 10.4 percentage points in Spain. 
By  contrast, 
fiscal  deficit–GDP  ratio  was  a  mere 
1.2 percentage points over the same period, which contributed to the widening gap in fiscal 
balances in the euro area. Moreover, Germany’s fiscal deficit–GDP ratio is already below the 
3-percent target and, according to the European Commission, the ratio is projected to drop to 
around  1  percent  in  2012  and  reach  a  balance  by  2013.  Germany  achieved  more  than 
3 percent economic growth for 2010–11, and its unemployment rate dropped to a historical 
low  of  5.6  percent.  These  favorable  outcomes  have  helped  Germany  conduct  fiscal 
consolidation without having to introduce drastic measures to cut its fiscal deficit. Meanwhile, 
the peripheral countries are obliged to contain their fiscal deficits further to prevent overall 
government  debt  from  swelling.  Since  Germany  faces  a  decline  in  the  ratio  of  general 
government  debt  to  GDP  in  the  near  future,  this  means  that  the  internal  imbalances  on  a 
stock (debt) basis are likely to expand in the region. 
Assistance at the EU or Euro-Area level 
IV. 
Given this background, the peripheral countries, rather than the core countries, are expected 
to make greater economic adjustments, such as fiscal consolidation and structural reforms. 
Some of these reforms will take time and cause hardship before they bear fruit. To mitigate 
the adverse impact of the adjustments, financial assistance at the EU or euro-area level is 
necessary.  This  is  especially  true  for  the  peripheral  countries  because  of  their  lack  of 
private-sector capital flows. Without regional or international financial support, such countries 
would have been forced to squeeze domestic absorption so drastically that the public would 
have had to go through intolerable suffering – notwithstanding that a correction could have 
been made more rapidly for both the internal and external imbalances.  
First recipient of international financial assistance – Greece 
As  is  well  known,  Greece  was  the  first  country  in  the  euro  area  to  receive  international 
financial assistance. The total amount was set at €110 billion in the first round of assistance, 
which was agreed to be shared between the euro-area member countries (€80 billion) and 
the  IMF  (€30  billion).  Since  the  general  government  debt  for  Greece  had  been  growing 
rapidly,  the  idea  of  private-sector  involvement  (PSI)  gained  favor  in  the  euro  area.  After 
negotiations,  a  large  number  of  private  sector  creditors  finally  agreed  to  voluntarily  accept 
restructuring of the Greek debt. This PSI took place before the completion of the first round 
of  financial  assistance  scheduled  for  Greece  and  was  regarded  as  a  precondition  for  the 
second round of financial assistance.12 The total amount for the second round of assistance 
was  set  at  €172.7  billion,  including  undisbursed  amounts  from  the  first  program.  The  cost 
was agreed to be borne by the euro area (€144.7 billion) mainly through the platform of the 
European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) and the IMF (€28 billion). The contribution from 
the euro area included the amount related to the PSI incentive and bank recapitalization.  
Newly established financial support system in the Euro Area  
It  will  be  recalled  that  the  Greek  sovereign  debt  crisis  had  a  contagious  effect  on  other 
peripheral  countries  such  as  Ireland  and  Portugal.  As  a  result  of  the  contagion,  these 
countries found it difficult to raise funds in the market and thus asked the EU, the euro area, 
                                                 
12  The PSI ended up covering €205.6 billion, including both Greek and foreign law sovereign bonds, and the rate 
of  participation  reached  97  percent  as  of  the  end  of  April  2012  as  a  result  of  applying  collective  action 
procedures to the Greek law bonds. With the PSI and additional international financial assistance, Greece’s 
general government debt ratio is expected to decline to below 120 percent of GDP by 2020. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
and the IMF for financial support – in November 2010 in the case of Ireland and in May 2011 
in the case of Portugal.13 The EFSF was established by the euro area following the decisions 
made  in  May  2010,  and  it  began  operations  in  August  2010.  It  is  backed  by  guarantee 
commitments  of  €780  billion  from  the  member  countries  and  has  a  lending  capacity  of 
€440 billion. In November 2011, furthermore, it was agreed to increase the EFSF’s power by 
(1) providing partial protection certificates to a sovereign bond issued by member countries, 
and (2) creating a coinvestment fund to purchase sovereign bonds in primary and secondary 
markets.  
To prevent contagion of the sovereign debt crisis to other larger member countries, the euro 
area  decided  to  create  a  permanent  crisis  mechanism  called  the  European  Stability 
Mechanism (ESM). The ESM, which will become operational in July 2012, will take over all 
the features of the EFSF and have a maximum lending capacity of €500 billion, based on the 
paid-up capital of €80 billion. Both the EFSF and ESM will coexist until the EFSF expires in 
mid-2012. The new treaty to create the ESM was signed in February 2012. The decisions to 
grant stability support are generally taken by mutual agreement, but in the case of urgency 
they could be decided by a qualified majority of 85 percent of the votes cast. In addition, the 
IMF has made efforts to raise funds globally in an effort to establish sufficient power to be 
able to deal with a potentially contagious crisis arising from Europe. At the G20 summit of 
April  2012,  the  IMF  announced  that  it  had  raised  more  than  $430  billion,  including 
contributions from the euro area ($200 billion) and Japan ($60 billion). Although not all of the 
IMF funds will be available to Europe, it certainly reduces uncertainty related to the issue of 
how to handle larger countries, such as Italy and Spain, in the case of contagion.  
ECB monetary policy as a crisis response  
In response to the recent sovereign debt crisis, the ECB has adopted a series of measures 
since the middle of 2011. After having raised its policy rate or the interest rate on the main 
refinancing operations from 1 percent to 1.5 percent by raising 25 basis points each in April 
and July 2011, the ECB reduced the rate back to 1 percent by cutting 25 basis points each in 
November  and  December.  Other  recent  measures  included  US  dollar  liquidity-providing 
operations,  a  cut  in  the  reserve  ratio,  a  modification  of  collateral  requirements,  fixed-rate 
longer-term refinancing operations (LTROs) with full allotment, a securities market program, 
and a covered-bond purchase program.  
Among  these  measures,  two  notably  appear  to  have  contributed  substantially  to  the 
stabilization of global financial markets: (1) the US dollar liquidity-providing operations, and 
(2)  the  LTROs  with  a  maturity  of  36  months.  The  ECB  has  been  conducting  US  dollar 
liquidity-providing operations as part of coordinated actions with five other central banks to 
address pressures in the global money markets: namely, the Bank of Canada, the Bank of 
England, the Bank of Japan, the Federal Reserve, and the Swiss National Bank (Chart 8). 
The  new  action  emerged  in  November  2011  as  a  response  to  the  growing  strains  in 
US dollar financial markets. These central banks agreed to lower the pricing on the existing 
temporary  US  dollar  liquidity  swap  arrangements  by  50  basis  points  so  that  the  new  rate 
would be the US dollar Overnight Index Swap rate plus 50 basis points. At the same time, it 
was  agreed  that  these  swap  arrangements  would  be  extended  to  February  1,  2013.  As  a 
contingency  measure,  these  central  banks  agreed  to  establish  temporary  bilateral  liquidity 
swap  arrangements  so  that  liquidity  could  be  provided  in  each  jurisdiction  in  any  of  their 
                                                 
13  The amount of financial assistance for Ireland amounted to €67.5 billion, which was received from the EFSF 
(€17.7 billion), European Financial Stabilization Mechanism (EFSM; €22.5 billion), and IMF (€22.5 billion), and 
included bilateral assistance from the United Kingdom, Denmark, and Sweden (€4.8 billion). The assistance 
for Portugal amounted to €78 billion, from the EFSF (€26 billion), ESM (€26 billion), and IMF (€26 billion). The 
EFSM  is  a  financing  facility  for  EU  member  countries  with  a  lending  capacity  up  to  €60  billion  based  on 
borrowing on the market by the European Commission. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
currencies if necessitated by market conditions. In particular, the cut in the interest rate on 
the  US  dollar  liquidity-providing  operations  succeeded  in  substantially  lowering  the  cost  of 
swapping euros for US dollars (Chart 9). Furthermore, the decline in the US dollar funding 
cost encouraged many European banks having difficulty in raising funds from the market to 
borrow  directly  from  the  ECB,  thereby  preventing  forced  fire  sales  of  assets  and  a  cut  in 
loans denominated in the US dollar.  
The second measure contributing to the stabilization of the financial market was the LTROs 
with a maturity of 36 months, which were conducted on December 21, 2011 and February 
28, 2012. On December 8, 2011, the ECB decided to reduce the reserve ratio and modify 
collateral  requirements  together  with  an  announcement  of  the  three-year  LTROs.  The 
reserve ratio was reduced from 2 to 1 percent as of the reserve maintenance period, starting 
on  January  18,  2012.  To  increase  collateral  availability,  the  ECB  decided  to  reduce  the 
credit-rating threshold for certain asset-backed securities and, as a temporary solution, allow 
national central banks to accept as collateral additional performing credit claims (i.e., bank 
loans)  that  satisfied  specific  eligibility  criteria.  In  allowing  the  application  for  the  three-year 
LTROs,  the  modification  of  the  collateral  requirements  can  be  regarded  as  having 
contributed  to  easing  the  funding  situation  of  European  banks  caused  by  the  shortage  of 
eligible  collateral.  As  a  result, 
the 
euro-denominated funding costs in the money markets, but also bringing down the spread of 
the yields on Portuguese, Spanish, and Italian sovereign bonds vis-à-vis German bonds. In 
addition, the LTROs helped promote the issuance of senior unsecured bank bonds (Charts 
10–13). Thus, it is widely regarded that the LTROs prevented a bank funding crisis and thus 
deleveraging on a massive scale.  
the  LTROs  succeeded  not  only 
lowering 
in 
Recent Developments in Financial Markets 
Since uncertainty over European political and economic developments has intensified over 
recent  months,  some  interest  rates  have  risen  accordingly.  Nonetheless,  the  scale  of  the 
increase  in  the  US  dollar  funding  cost  borne  by  European  banks,  for  example,  has  so  far 
been  modest  compared  with  the  situation  prior  to  the  new  arrangement  related  to  the 
US dollar liquidity-providing operations at the end of November 2011 (Chart 9). Likewise, the 
euro-denominated  funding  cost  in  money  markets  has  remained  calm  (Charts  10,  11). 
Meanwhile, the spreads of the yields on Portuguese, Spanish, and Italian sovereign bonds 
vis-à-vis German bonds have risen, as has the Greek spread; this was partly owing to the 
decline  to  the  record  low  level  of  the  yield  on  German  sovereign  bonds  (Chart  13).  The 
Spanish  banking  sector  faces  a  surge  in  the  credit  spread  over  its  financial  bonds,  which 
reflects recent growing concerns over the soundness of that banking sector (Chart 14). Stock 
prices  are  generally  showing  declining  trends  as  a  reflection  of  European  sovereign  debt 
problems and concerns over the global economic slowdown (Chart 15). Given the sensitivity 
of market developments, I will continue to watch closely the impact of European political and 
economic developments on global financial markets. 
V. 
Impact of European sovereign debt problems on the Japanese economy and 
monetary policy of the Bank of Japan (the Bank) 
I would now like to move to the final part of my presentation, and I will begin by summarizing 
recent economic and price developments. 
Outlook on economic activities and prices with risk factors 
Recently, it has become increasingly evident that the Japanese economy is shifting toward a 
pick-up phase, although economic activity has remained more or less flat (Chart 16). With 
regard to outlook, the Japanese economy is expected to return to a moderate recovery path 
in the first half of fiscal 2012. This is likely since the pace of recovery in overseas economies 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
led 
largely  by 
improve  – 
the  emerging  economies  and 
should  gradually 
reconstruction-related domestic demand in the post-Great East Japan Earthquake period. In 
fiscal 2013, Japan’s economy is expected to maintain its growth at a pace above its potential 
as overseas economies continue to achieve relatively high growth. However, the economic 
growth  rate  is  expected  to  be  somewhat  lower  than  in  fiscal  2012  because  the  positive 
effects  from  reconstruction-related  domestic  demand  are  likely  to  gradually  diminish 
(Chart 17). 
With regard to prices, developments in the consumer price index (CPI; all items less fresh 
food)  indicate  that  after  reaching  a  historical  trough  of  2.4  percent  in  August  2009,  the 
year-on-year rate of decline has continued to slow consistently since around the end of 2009. 
In recent months, that rate of change has been around 0 percent. In terms of the outlook for 
prices, the rate of change will remain in positive territory and show a gradual increase as the 
aggregate supply and demand balance is expected to continue improving with the moderate 
recovery.  International  commodity  prices  are  currently  bearish,  partly  reflecting  concerns 
over the European sovereign debt problems; though these prices may follow a moderately 
rising trend owing to an expected increase in demand for food and energy in line with the 
growth in emerging economies. Assuming that  medium- to long-term inflation expectations 
remain stable, the rate of change in the CPI is projected to gradually rise to a range of above 
0.5 percent and less than 1 percent toward the second half of fiscal 2013. Thereafter, it will 
likely not be too long before the rate reaches the “price-stability goal in the medium to long 
term” of 1 percent for the time being, as specified in the statement released by the Bank of 
Japan (hereafter, Bank) in February 2012. 
The aforementioned outlook is the scenario the Bank considers to be the most probable: it is, 
in  other  words,  its  baseline  scenario.  As  described  in  detail  in  the  Outlook  for  Economic 
Activity and Prices, or the Outlook Report for short, the following four major risks concerning 
the outlook for economic activity warrant attention: (1) uncertainty related to developments in 
overseas economies; (2) uncertainty with regard to reconstruction-related domestic demand; 
(3)  uncertainty  associated  with  firms’  and  households’  medium-  to  long-term  growth 
expectations;  and  (4)  issues  related  to  Japan’s  fiscal  sustainability.  Among  those  risks,  I 
personally  am  particularly  mindful  of  those  relating  to  adverse  spillovers  of  the  European 
sovereign debt issues and political developments to the baseline scenario.  
There are mainly two types of price-associated risks. The first type concerns developments 
in  firms’  and  households’  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations;  the  second  type 
relates  to  developments  in  import  prices.  With  this  second  type,  the  possibility  exists  that 
crude  oil  prices  will  surge,  mainly  as  a  reflection  of  geopolitical  risk.  If  that  does  occur, 
Japan’s  terms  of  trade  will  experience  deterioration,  which  will  squeeze  firms’  profits  and 
reduce  households’  purchasing  power,  and  ultimately  it  will  have  an  adverse  effect  on  the 
whole Japanese economy. 
Impact of European sovereign debt problems on the Japanese economy  
Concerning  European  sovereign  debt  problems,  the  impact  can  be  ascertained  mainly  by 
means  of  three  channels  –  international  trade,  finance,  and  exchange  rates.  With 
international trade, it would seem that the direct impact on Japan’s exports has been limited, 
given that exports to the euro area account for only around 10 percent (Chart 18). Rather, a 
more significant impact could be felt indirectly through a slowdown in trade and foreign direct 
investment activities in emerging countries, such as China, where the euro area represents 
one of the largest trade partners (Charts 19, 20).  
With regard to finance, the US dollar funding market and money markets remain calm. The 
US dollar funding cost remains low for Japanese banks since their exposure to the euro area 
has been limited and their balance sheets have been relatively sound. It is true, though, that 
Japanese banks faced a moderate increase in US dollar funding costs in the middle of the 
deepening European sovereign debt crisis from the middle of 2011. After the introduction of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
the new coordinated arrangement of the six central banks at the end of November, however, 
the US dollar funding market has remained calm, especially for Japanese banks (Chart 21). 
Money  markets  have  also  been  relaxed  (Chart  22).  Long-term  yields  on  Japanese 
government bonds (JGBs) have shown further deceleration thanks to increased demand for 
them as safer assets (Chart 23). Like European stocks, nonetheless, Japanese stocks are in 
decline (Chart 24). 
The  direct  impact  of  the  European  sovereign  debt  crisis  has  been  felt  mainly  through 
exchange  rates.  Because  of  its  current  status  as  a  safer  currency,  the  yen  tends  to 
appreciate with intensifying strains in global financial markets (Chart 25). This suggests that 
changes in the risk-taking behavior of global investors have become closely associated with 
movements in exchange rates. Recent movements have shown that enhanced nervousness 
in global financial markets caused by resurgence of the European debt crisis has increased 
risk  aversion  among  global  investors  and  promoted  the  yen’s  appreciation  relative  to 
mid-March  this  year.  The  yen  has  appreciated  against  the  euro,  partly  because  of  the 
reversed  interest  rate  differentials  between  German  and  Japanese  bond  yields  with  a 
remaining  maturity  of  less  than  two  years.  If  sustained,  the  yen’s  appreciation  may  be 
detrimental to Japanese firms, adversely affecting their investment and production behavior 
and making it harder for the Japanese economy to recover. This perspective also makes me 
feel that developments in Europe demand careful attention. 
Conduct of monetary policy 
The Bank is naturally concerned about the long-term prevalence of deflation in the Japanese 
economy.  On  February  14  of  this  year,  the  Bank  introduced  “the  price-stability  goal  in  the 
medium to long term” – defined as the inflation rate consistent with price stability sustainable 
over  the  medium  to  long  term.  The  purpose  of  this  action  was  to  promote  public 
understanding  of  the  Bank’s  determination  to  overcome  deflation.  It  was  decided  that  the 
goal would be within a positive range of 2 percent or lower in terms of the year-on-year rate 
of change in the CPI, and the goal was set at 1 percent for the time being. Moreover, the 
Bank made it clear that it would continue pursuing powerful monetary easing – through its 
virtually  zero-interest  rate  policy  and  continued  implementation  of  the  Asset  Purchase 
Program (hereafter, Program) – until it judged the 1-percent goal to be within sight; this was 
on  condition  that  it  identified  no  significant  risk  to  the  sustainability  of  economic  growth, 
including from the accumulation of financial imbalances. At the same time, the total size of 
the  Program  was  raised  by  10  trillion  yen  –  from  about  55  trillion  to  about  65  trillion  yen 
(Chart 26). 
On  April  27,  the  Bank  decided  to  increase  the  total  size  of  the  Program  further  by  about 
5 trillion  yen  –  from  about  65  trillion  to  about  70  trillion  yen  –  following  changes  in  its 
composition, including the increase in the purchase of JGBs by about 10 trillion yen.14  
Regarding the decision to enhance monetary easing in April, I would like to stress that a high 
degree of uncertainty remains in terms of the Bank’s assessment, as already explained. The 
positive signs in economic and price developments that have emerged in recent months do 
not necessarily imply that the baseline scenario will be realized as projected. Even though 
                                                 
14  Moreover, the purchases of exchange-traded funds and Japan real estate investment trusts were increased by 
about  200  billion  yen  and  10  billion  yen,  respectively.  The  maximum  outstanding  amount  of  the  Bank’s 
fixed-rate  funds-supplying  operation  against  pooled  collateral  with  a  six-month  term  was  reduced  by  about 
5 trillion yen, taking into account the recent episodes of under-subscription. In addition, the remaining maturity 
of JGBs to be purchased under the Program was extended from one to two years to one to three years. The 
same treatment was applied to the remaining maturity of corporate bonds to be purchased under the Program. 
In addition, it was decided that the schedule for increasing the outstanding amount of the Program to about 
65 trillion  yen  by  around  the  end  of  2012  would  be  maintained.  It  was  further  decided  to  increase  the 
outstanding amount of the Program to about 70 trillion yen by around the end of June 2013. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the  scenario  may  eventually  materialize,  it  is  still  not  certain  how  soon  it  may  do  so. 
Considering recent episodes, for example, there were some cases of the baseline scenario 
not  having  been  fulfilled,  even  though  the  economy  appeared  to  be  on  the  track  of 
sustainable  economic  growth  and  prices  also  initially  appeared  to  be  rising  steadily. 
Therefore, the Bank decided to seize this occasion and further enhance monetary easing to 
better ensure the return of the Japanese economy to sustainable growth with price stability. 
As  explained  above,  I  believe  this  action  also  demonstrates  the  Bank’s  determination  to 
implement its monetary policy commitment.  
Tackling the long-term structural challenge 
Finally, I would like to address an issue commonly faced by a number of major central banks 
in advanced countries and regions: the extremely accommodative monetary environment has 
not necessarily led to increased domestic demand, such as investment and consumption, as 
much as had been expected (Chart 27). Though there are structural factors relating to this 
issue, their root causes are country- or region-specific and thus different from each other.  
In the case of Europe, the short-term depressing impact of the fiscal austerity measures and 
deleveraging  of  the  banking  sector,  as  explained  earlier,  make  it  difficult  to  increase  bank 
lending  for  the  moment.  It  is  likely  to  be  some  time  before  the  region  starts  to  enjoy 
sustainable,  favorable  growth  in  lending  activities.  In  the  case  of  Japan,  the  working-age 
population  has  been  in  decline  since  the  mid-1990s,  and  this  has  contributed  to  the 
decreasing  trend  in  growth  rates.  To  overcome  deflation,  it  is  thus  important  to  stress  the 
need to address Japan’s long-term structural challenges of diminishing growth rates amid a 
rapidly  aging  population.  It  is  clear  that  we  need  to  enhance  productivity  growth  (of  the 
working-age population) so as to overcome the depressing impact caused by the rapid pace 
of the decrease in the population and working-age population growth rates. However, it may 
be  said  that  implementation  of  the  necessary  structural  reforms  for  boosting  growth  and 
productivity has been sluggish, and the shift in economic structure has been limited. Issues 
related to mounting government debt and social security reforms have generated uncertainty 
over the future economic outlook. Moreover, a series of shocks – such as the global financial 
crisis, the Great East Japan Earthquake, the European sovereign debt crisis, and the 2011 
Thai floods – also contributed to this outlook. These factors combined to deter expectations 
of further rises in growth by firms and households despite a very accommodative financial 
environment driven by monetary stimulus measures. 
To meet the diverse challenges that arise out of this background and establish a new basis 
for economic growth, Japanese firms need to become more innovative and competitive in an 
effort to add value to their activities and explore new sources of demand, both at home and 
abroad. The government also needs to support the business community by creating a more 
business-friendly  environment.  Financial  institutions  should  strive  toward  strengthening  the 
foundations for economic growth by giving financial support to innovative, viable firms and 
providing new types of financial and other services, which are increasingly under demand. 
Meanwhile,  the  Bank’s  accommodative  monetary  policy  will  certainly  shore  up  such 
private-sector activities through a steady decline in the cost of raising capital. By promoting 
longer-term  economic  growth,  the  Bank  has  helped  sustain  the  business  community 
indirectly: it introduced a fund-provisioning measure to help reinforce the basis for economic 
growth  (Growth-Supporting  Funding  Facility)  in  2010,  and  it  has  provided  longer-term 
fixed-rate funds to financial institutions. This facility was expanded in March and April of this 
year  (Chart  28).  It  should  be  emphasized  that  the  goal  of  overcoming  deflation  will  be 
achieved through such continuous, comprehensive efforts by firms, financial institutions, the 
government, and the Bank operating within their respective roles. 
In conclusion, I would like to express once more my gratitude to the Society for the Economic 
Studies of Securities for giving me this wonderful opportunity to make a presentation in front 
of its distinguished members. Thank you very much for your kind attention. And I wish you all 
every success in your work and further development in the Society. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13
  14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15
  16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 17
  18 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 19
  20 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 21
 22 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 23
 24 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 25
 26 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 27
  28 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
