Øystein Olsen: The economic outlook 
Speech by Mr Øystein Olsen, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), to invited 
foreign embassy representatives, Norges Bank, Oslo, 12 April 2012. 
The  speech  is  based  on  the  annual  address  2012,  the  assessments  presented  at  Norges  Bank’s  press 
conference following the Executive Board’s monetary policy meeting on 14 March, Monetary Policy Report 1/12 
and previous speeches. Please note that the text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation. 
 Demanding time for Europe 
Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
In the course of the past two years we have seen economic problems spread across debt-
laden countries in Europe. Greece was the first country to experience a financial collapse. 
The Greek government had to resort to external financial assistance in spring 2010, followed 
by Ireland and Portugal. The turbulence spread further in autumn last year. 
Several  euro  area  countries  are  now  struggling  with  soaring  public  debt  and  weak 
competitiveness  in  addition  to  restructuring  and  public  budget  cuts.  Confidence  in  some 
countries’ ability to service debt has been weakened. 
Chart 1 
The  root  causes  of  the  crisis  were  global  trade  imbalances,  with  high  saving  in  emerging 
economies  and  comparably  large  deficits  in  many  advanced  countries.  The  imbalances 
drove  down  long-term  interest  rates  to  very  low  levels  and  the  appetite  for  risk  grew. 
Inadequate financial sector regulation led to a further deepening of the imbalances. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Chart 2 
 Four  years  after  the  financial  crisis  engulfed  the  world,  a  European  version  has  now 
emerged. Both market participants and the authorities failed in their assessments after the 
introduction  of  a  single  currency.  Prior  to  the  introduction  of  the  Economic  and  Monetary 
Union,  there  were  wide  differences  between  interest  rates  facing  different  European 
countries,  which  primarily  reflected  different  inflation  expectations  across  countries.  But 
through  the  1990s,  long-term  interest  rates  drifted  down  to  German  levels.  Over  the  next 
10 years,  sovereign  interest  rates  were  fairly  similar  –  and  very  low  –  for  all  euro  area 
countries  despite  wide  differences  in  debt  levels,  budget  deficits  and  growth  rates.  Market 
participants  did  not  take  into  account  differences  in  sovereign  creditworthiness.  Sovereign 
debt was treated as virtually risk-free, both in the markets and by the authorities. The period 
contrasts  with  the  recent  two  to  three  years  during  which  interest  rates  on  sovereign  debt 
have widened sharply. For many countries, interest rates have reached very high levels. In 
retrospect,  we  see  that  market  participants  failed  in  their  risk  assessment  through  the  ten 
years following the introduction of the euro. 
Economic  policy  also  failed.  EU  rules  relating  to  budget  deficits  and  public  debt  were 
disregarded  early  on  when  Germany  and  France  exceeded  the  limits  they  had  so  eagerly 
advocated  when  the  European  Monetary  Union  was  established.  Other  countries  followed 
their example. Low interest rates made it easy to finance deficits by issuing new debt. 
When financial markets collapsed in autumn 2008, the authorities had to intervene. Bail-out 
packages  for  banks  shifted  debt  from  private  to  public  hands.  Governments  increased 
spending to curb the fall in activity. 
But Keynesian policy – increased spending in order to stimulate demand during a downturn – 
requires  a  willingness  to  exercise  fiscal  restraint  during  an  upturn.  Many  countries  already 
had large budget deficits and high debt before the crisis, despite many years of prosperity. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Limited growth capacity in the private sector also came into evidence when some countries 
could no longer stay afloat on borrowed funds. Good times turned into bad, with the need for 
crisis-related measures. The burden became heavy to bear. 
Many  countries  are  now  struggling  to  rein  in  large  deficits  and  rising  government  debt. 
Structural reforms are being implemented in Europe. Pension rules are being tightened and 
tax  systems  are  under  review.  The  cost  of  such  reforms  would  have  been  lower  in  good 
times. 
Chart 3 
 A  lack  of  fiscal  discipline  is  not  the  only  factor  behind  the  relatively  high  interest  burdens 
facing Greece, Portugal, Spain and Italy. Public deficits rose in tandem with a fall in private 
saving.  Countries  lived  beyond  their  means  and  accumulated  current  account  deficits  and 
substantial debt while their debt-servicing capacity weakened. The result is a deterioration in 
their creditworthiness. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Chart 4 
 The  combination  of  large  deficits  and  growing  demographic  problems  is  particularly 
challenging,  as  is  the  case  for  southern  European  countries,  where  fertility  rates  are  well 
below the replacement rate and lower than the average for advanced countries. 
The demographic challenge will be even greater ahead. In some of the countries the number 
of  pensioners  will  be  close  to  the  number  of  economically  active.  The  basis  for  economic 
growth is thus weakened. The burden of rising debt and pension payments will be heavier. 
It  takes  a  long  time  to  reverse  demographic  trends.  Financial  incentives  can  be  effective. 
Norway, with favourable support schemes for families with children, has a relatively high birth 
rate. In other European countries, there is a risk that these hard times will exacerbate the 
demographic  challenge.  Unemployment,  in  particular  among  youth,  has  risen  sharply  and 
many people have a dark view of the future. 
The  events  of  recent  years  have  brought  fresh  experience  and  reminded  us  of  several 
historical lessons. 
Economic  policy  must  be  sustainable.  Governments  must  save  during  upturns  in  order  to 
weather  downturns.  At  the  same  time,  there  are  limits  to  what  economic  policy  can 
accomplish if the economic foundations are being eroded. A competitive business sector is 
crucial to maintaining growth and welfare. This also applies to Norway. 
The financial crisis was a reminder of how risk can be mis-assessed. Moreover, risks that 
operators seem to be managing well individually may prove to be a considerable strain on 
the financial system as a whole. As a response to this, a new macroprudential surveillance 
framework is now in the making. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Norway, which is in a surplus and net asset position, faces some particular challenges. As 
investor  and  manager  of  the  Government  Pension  Fund Global,  we  have  seen  that  prices 
and yields can react strongly to uncertainty about the future. 
New steps in the management of financial wealth 
Norway invests a large proportion of its petroleum revenues in international equity, bond and 
real  estate  markets  via  the  Government  Pension  Fund  Global.  The  fund  is  fully  integrated 
with the government budget, and the same priorities are imposed on spending from the Fund 
as  on  any  other  government  spending.  Today,  the  value  of  the  Fund  is  around  NOK  3.5 
trillion, or about 170 percent of mainland GDP. 
Chart 5 
The  Fund  should  be  invested  with  a  view  to  maximising  future  purchasing  power.  At  the 
same time, investments must be diversified in order to reduce the risk of losses also during 
periods when markets are shrouded in fear and uncertainty. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Chart 6 
 The  world’s  economic  geography  is  changing.  While  growth  in  advanced  economies  has 
been weak and is slowing, growth is robust in Latin America and Asia. Several countries in 
Africa are now catching up. 
The Fund has considerable ownership interests in Europe. Its average holding in European 
companies  is  today  around  three  times  as  high  as  in  the  Americas  and  Asia.  The  chosen 
regional distribution is related to Norway’s import pattern and has been viewed as a form of 
currency hedging. But the result has been that a large proportion of the Fund is invested in a 
region  that  has  experienced  weak  growth  over  the  past  decade.  Analyses  show  that 
exchange rate risk in the Fund is relatively small and less than previously assumed. Based 
on  these  findings,  the  Norwegian  Government  has  decided  that  the  relative  share  of 
European  investments  should  be  reduced  over  time,  so  that  the  Fund’s  geographical 
diversification is further improved. 
A more even distribution of the Fund’s ownership will provide us with the opportunity to take 
part in value creation in regions with strong growth. This implies a reduction in the allocation 
to  European  equities  and  an  increase  in  the  allocation  to  the  Americas  and  emerging 
economies. High economic growth in Asia may provide sound returns on investments in that 
region,  even  though  today’s  equity  prices  already  reflect  expectations  of  higher  growth  in 
eastern  than  in  western  regions.  A  more  even  distribution  will  nonetheless  improve  the 
trade-off between risk and expected rewards. 
Petroleum revenue spending 
Norway as an oil nation stumbled at the start. The current account surplus at the end of the 
1960s had reversed to a deficit of 12 percent of GDP by 1977. The deficit was three times as 
large as that recorded by Italy and Spain last year. The International Monetary Fund came 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
knocking  at  Norway’s  door.  Fiscal  policy  had  to  be  tightened  and  many  Norwegians 
experienced a decline in income. 
Norway  was  hit  by  oil  price  shocks  in  the  following  years  and  economic  reforms  were 
implemented in several areas. After some years, the deficits had been turned into surpluses 
and transfers could be made to the Petroleum Fund. 
Norway’s experience from its first 30 years as an oil-producing nation led to the introduction 
of the fiscal rule, which has been a key element of Norwegian economic policy for the past 
decade. In 2001, the Storting laid down guidelines for the phasing-in of petroleum revenues 
into  the  Norwegian  economy,  establishing  two  main  principles:  economic  policy  must 
contribute to stable economic developments and be sustainable over time. 
By linking petroleum revenue spending to the expected real return on the Fund – and not to 
current petroleum revenues – the fiscal rule provided for a gradual and sustainable phasing-
in  of  the  revenues.  If  we  can  restrict  spending  to  the  return,  the  Fund  will  never  shrink  in 
absolute  terms.  Norway  will  also  be  less  vulnerable  to  fluctuations  in  current  petroleum 
revenues. 
The  government  has  stated  that  the  expected  annual  return  on  the  Fund  will  be  close  to 
4 percent over time. In the initial years, the actual return, adjusted for inflation and costs, was 
close to 4 percent. In recent years, with the financial crisis and the sovereign debt crisis, the 
real return has been lower, averaging about 2½ percent since 1998. 
We should be careful about taking a rear-view mirror approach to forming expectations about 
the future. Equity prices fluctuate considerably and there is a possibility that the results of the 
past  few  years  will  be  counterbalanced  by  good  years  ahead.  But  changes  in  the  global 
economy  affect  the  growth  outlook  and  the  balance  of  risks,  and  hence  financial  market 
returns as well. 
Chart 7 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  7
The  yield  on  the  presumably  safest  long-term  government  bonds  can  provide  a  basis  for 
estimating the return on the Fund. Returns exceeding this will reflect the risk we are willing to 
take. 
In  2001,  real  interest  rates  on  long-term  government  bonds  averaged  around  3  percent 
internationally. Real interest rates have since fallen and long-term real interest rates are now 
at a historical low of between 0 and 1 percent. 
Over time, we expect equities to yield a higher return than bonds. Over the past few years, 
the Fund has increased its allocation to equities, compensating to some extent for low bond 
yields. However, the excess return on equities must be considerable to keep up the overall 
return on the Fund. This is not impossible, but perhaps more than we can expect. A bolder 
investment strategy could compensate for low interest rates, although the risk of substantial 
losses would also increase. This is not a path we are likely to take. 
Table 1 
 The fiscal rule was drawn up in 2001. Today, the situation is different. In 2001, a real return 
on the Fund of 4 percent, or a little higher, based on the then prevailing distribution between 
equities and bonds, was a reasonable assumption. Today, calculations yield a lower figure 
for expected real return.1  
The real return on bonds in the Fund’s portfolio can now be estimated at 1 percent. With a 
normal  risk  premium  on  equities,  the  real  return  on  the  whole  Fund  can  be  quantified  at 
3 percent. There is a possibility that the real return will be higher, but it may also be lower. If 
we  spend  more  than  the  annual  return  on  the  Fund,  we  will  be  eating  into  the  savings 
portion. 
The  conclusion  is  that  a  more  robust  approach  would  now  be  to  base  fiscal  policy  on  an 
annual expected real return on the Fund of 3 percent. Such an adjustment would underpin 
the  main  principles  that  were  behind  the  establishment  of  the  fiscal  rule  –  stability  and 
sustainability. 
                                                 
1   See Norges Bank Staff Memo 6/2012. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Chart 8 
 In 2011 the structural non-oil budget deficit was about 3 percent, which is close to such a 
new  path.  Adapting  petroleum  revenue  spending  to  a  lower  expected  return  should  not 
therefore be particularly demanding. If we wait, a necessary policy adjustment later could be 
far more painful. 
Monetary policy 
Central banks in other countries are deploying strong measures to buoy up economic activity 
and inflation. Key interest rates in many countries are close to zero. Central banks in the US, 
UK and Japan have made large-scale bond purchases and thereby expanded their balance 
sheets in order to push down long-term interest rates. It is likely that the sharply expanded 
access to long-term liquidity from the European Central Bank (ECB) has reduced the risk of a 
banking  crisis  in  the  euro  area.  At  the  same  time,  ECB  measures  have  contributed  to 
stabilising government bond markets, and short-term funding costs for Italy and Spain have 
declined. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
Chart 9 
The  EU  is  working  on  measures  to  restore  financial  market  confidence  –  and  public 
confidence. Greece has reached an agreement with its private creditors on a substantial debt 
restructuring. On this basis, euro area heads of state or government have approved a new 
loan package for Greece. Banks have been instructed to increase their core capital. 
Chart 10 
 10 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
The  Norwegian  economy  is  still  well  equipped  to  withstand  the  negative  effects  of  the 
financial  crisis.  Oil  prices  are  high,  contributing  to  Norway’s  favourable  terms  of  trade. 
Growth is being sustained by high activity in the oil industry. We have room for manoeuvre in 
economic policy. However, a number of enterprises are feeling the impact of the downturn 
abroad. Some segments of the export industry are feeling the effects of lower turnover and a 
strong krone. A high level of uncertainty is causing households and enterprises to be more 
cautious in their consumption and investment decisions. At the same time, house prices and 
household debt are still rising. 
Capacity  utilisation  in  the  Norwegian  economy  is  now  near  a  normal  level.  Growth  in 
mainland GDP is projected at about 3 percent this year and in the years ahead, broadly in 
pace with potential output growth. 
Chart 11 
 The  operational  target  of  monetary  policy  is  annual  consumer  price  inflation  of  close  to 
2.5 percent over time. Recently, inflation has been low, close to 1 percent. Inflation will be 
brought back to target, but how long this will take depends on the disturbances to which the 
economy is exposed and their effect on the prospects for the path for inflation and the real 
economy ahead. 
When  setting  the  key  policy  rate,  we  do  not  exclusively  assign  weight  to  bringing  inflation 
back to target, but we also take into account the impact of the interest rate on output and 
employment. The inflation targeting regime is flexible. 
By  taking  account  of  the  deviation  in  the  nominal  interest  rate  from  a  normal  level  when 
setting the key policy rate, Norges Bank seeks to counter the build-up of financial imbalances 
that may disturb activity and inflation further ahead. This does not mean that the level of the 
key  policy  rate  is  an  independent  objective  of  monetary  policy.  Rather,  the  purpose  is  to 
overcome weaknesses in our analytical tools in order to cope with the possible build-up of 
financial imbalances resulting from keeping interest rates low over time. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
Chart 12  
 At our most recent interest rate meeting the key policy rate was reduced by 0.25 percentage 
points  to  1.50  percent.  In  its  assessment  the  Executive  Board  stated  that:  “...weak  growth 
prospects  abroad  and  the  strong  krone  are  contributing  to  keeping  inflation  low  and 
dampening economic growth in Norway (...). If the interest rate is set too high, the krone may 
appreciate further, inflation may continue to fall and growth in output and employment may 
become too low. This suggests that the key policy rate should be reduced further. On the 
other hand, there is virtually normal capacity utilisation in the Norwegian economy. Moreover, 
low interest rates over time may induce households and enterprises to take excessive risks 
and accumulate excessive debt.” 
After a decade of learning, inflation targeting has become more flexible. The current outlook 
suggests that it will likely take several years before inflation is back on target. However, the 
inflation target has to be reached over time, otherwise our credibility is put at risk. Flexibility 
is good to have, and easy to lose. In assessing various considerations, monetary policy must 
be geared to meet its primary objective of low and stable inflation. There are limits as to how 
many  goals  monetary  policy  can  meet.  Other  instruments  must  be  used  to  attain  other 
objectives. To ensure that new or further financial imbalances do not build up, we also need 
a  tighter  overarching  international policy  framework  to  address  the  stability  of  the  financial 
system  as  a  whole.  A  macroprudential  policy  framework  should  be  part  of  this  new 
framework. 
Macroprudential policy framework 
Financial  market  participants  can  trigger  self-reinforcing  economic  fluctuations.  Individual 
banks  and  investors  do  not  necessarily  take  into  account  the  overall  risk  in  the  financial 
system. The consequences became clear during the financial crisis: banks had inadequate 
equity capital, relied excessively on short-term wholesale funding and had insufficient buffers 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
of  liquid  assets.  The  new  international  regulatory  framework  is  intended  to  remedy  this 
situation. 
Stricter capital adequacy and liquidity coverage standards are in the offing. The authorities 
will  also  be  able  to  tailor  banks’  capital  requirements  to  the  overall  risk  in  the  financial 
system. During upturns, these requirements can be raised, so that banks will have to hold 
more capital for their loans. This will smooth lending growth and better equip banks to bear 
losses during downturns. 
The authorities must acquire tools that allow banks to be wound up in an orderly manner. 
Banks must also draw up plans for their own liquidation in the event of difficulties. Owners 
and creditors – not taxpayers – must bear the losses. 
Politicians  have  the  overriding  responsibility  for  financial  stability.  It  can  be  demanding  to 
restrain credit growth in times of strong optimism and confidence in the future. Well defined 
mandates and a clear delegation of responsibility in the field of monetary policy has worked 
well.  Similarly,  the  legal  authority  to  implement  macroprudential  measures  to  safeguard 
financial stability should be delegated. 
We  can  never  fully  insulate  the  financial  system  from  shocks.  But  we  can  increase  our 
resilience. One of the most important things we can do is to keep our own house in order 
–  by  preventing  major  imbalances  from  building  up  in  the  economy  or  in  the  financial 
system, and by ensuring that the financial system in general is robust. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13
