Lesetja Kganyago: The impact of the Eurozone financial crisis on African 
Economies 
Speech by Mr Lesetja Kganyago, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, to 
the NEPAD (The New Partnership for Africa’s Development) Business Foundation, Sandton, 
17 April 2012. 
 Programme Director 
Chair of Nedbank, Dr Ruel Khoza 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
All protocols observed 
It  is  now  generally  accepted  that  the  global  financial  crisis  showed  its  first  signs  in  the 
sub-prime market in USA. It is thus tempting to think that it has got nothing to do with us. 
However  we  do  know  that  in  a  world  where  the  financial  systems  and  the  economies  are 
closely integrated, this would have been cold comfort. 
The  slowly  unfolding  financial  crisis  in  the  United  States  and  the  eventual  shock  of  the 
Lehman  bankruptcy  in  October  2008  hit  an  already  weakening  economy.  As  credit  was 
restricted globally and trade volumes collapsed around the world, the value of real exports of 
goods and services declined. 
What  I  would  like  to  do  today  is  to  address  three  questions  that  would  hopefully  spark  a 
discussion during the panel discussion: 
What do we know about the Euro crisis? 
What are the channels through which it affects African economies? 
How did African economies fare and/or respond during the crisis? 
What do we know about the Euro crisis? 
Fiscal situation: The fiscal metrics of many Euro area countries have been deteriorating in 
the past five years. This culminated in the bailing out of Ireland and a Troika programme for 
Greece,  including  a  very  significant  write-off.  Most  Euro  area  countries  have  debt  to 
GDP ratios in excess of 60% and this includes even the stronger anchor countries such as 
Germany  and  France.  In  the  case  of  Greece;  Ireland;  Italy;  Portugal  and  Spain,  the  fiscal 
situation  also  got  reflected  in  higher  borrowing  costs  that  made  any  fiscal  stimulus  a 
non-option for policy makers. 
Recent budget data suggest that the weaker countries in the euro zone will overshoot their 
official fiscal consolidation targets. These countries are caught between a rock and a hard 
place. Save for austerity, fiscal consolidation can only come from faster economic growth. 
The growth situation: Growth outcomes have been disappointing in the Euro area, to say the 
least. Recent data suggest that there could have been further contraction in the first quarter 
of this year while global growth has not been as supportive to the euro economy. There is 
also a policy dilemma of balancing fiscal consolidation and providing support to the economy 
to  continue  growing.  With  financial  markets  reluctant  to  lend  to  fiscally  weak  sovereigns, 
borrowing  costs  had  risen  to  the  point  that  it  raised  the  issue  of  affordability  and 
sustainability.  This  has  left  countries  to  choose  a  path  of  austerity  to  regain  credibility.  As 
these  austerity  measures  kick  in,  developed  economies  are  getting  pushed  back  into 
recession with implications for the rest of us. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The  banking  sector  and  the  inter-bank  market:  The  banking  sectors  in  the  peripheral 
countries of the Euro zone carry a large number of potentially bad assets on their balance 
sheets.  Banks  had  stopped  trusting  each  other  leading  to  a  fairly  dysfunctional  interbank 
market. There is clearly a clean up to be made. What is not clear is how much of it has taken 
place. 
The  ECB  had  to  step  in  to  get  the  inter-bank  market  going  again  with  two  facilities.  Initial 
indications are that the intervention has worked, at least for now. The markets have reacted 
positively to this. The Libor-IOS spread in the euro zone, a key indicator of liquidity conditions 
in the inter-bank market, has declined from its highs in the last quarter of 2011.  
The  question  that  faces  policy  makers  is  whether  the  liquidity  that  has  been  injected  has 
enabled credit to flow into the real sector of the economy. Initial indications seem to suggest 
that this is not yet the case. Bank lending to the private sector in the Euro zone barely grew 
in January and February. 
Governments seem to have been big beneficiaries from these liquidity operations. Data from 
the ECB show that banks’ lending to governments grew at 6 per cent in February. It shows 
acceleration from the 4.6 per cent growth in January. Portuguese banks increased their bank 
holding of euro area government debt by 4.24 billion euro, Greek banks by 4.12 billion euro 
while Italian banks increased their holding by 23 billion euro in February. What we observe is 
that it would take sometime before these liquidity injections start to flow to the real sector.  
How did we fare and/or respond to the crisis? How does this affect us as African 
Economies, what are the channels through which it affects us? 
Given  the  unfolding  of  the  shocks  hitting  the  African  economies,  the  monetary  and  fiscal 
policy  responses  were  largely  reactive.  The  main  forward-looking  macroeconomic  policy 
setting and decisions were made some years earlier, and enabled a sustained moderation in 
the  economic  effects  of  the  crisis.  Like  many  other  emerging  market  economies,  capital 
inflows and upward pressure on the exchange rates played a complicating role in how the 
economy responded to the shocks and to policy.  
The impact on African economies so far has been fairly limited. While the economic recovery 
has  temporarily  stalled  in  parts  of  Europe  and  growth  slowed  in  North  America,  the  IMF 
forecasts1 emerging and developing economies to grow by 5.4 per cent in 2012 – down from 
6.2 per cent in 2011 – and by 5.9 per cent in 2013. Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) is expected to 
grow by 5.5 per cent in 2012 (compared with 4.9 per cent in 2011) and is projected to grow 
further by 5.3 per cent in 2013.  
Generally speaking, African economies have benefited from stronger commodity prices and 
greater foreign direct investment. These gains were constrained by currency appreciation in 
some  instances,  and  more  importantly,  by  rising  food  prices.  So  the  crisis  did  feed  itself 
through the commodity channel and the commodities are a double-edged sword for African 
economies.  African  economies  produce  commodities  that  we  export  to  Europe,  China  and 
the  rest  of  the  world.  There  are  significant  parts  of  the  African  continent,  including  ours, 
where we are actually importers of crude oil, and as commodity prices rise and the price of 
crude rises it feeds itself into domestic energy prices and it also feeds itself into domestic 
food prices. So it is a very important channel to understand. We have been fortunate not just 
in South Africa, but in many of the African countries, that the effect was actually muted by 
appreciating  domestic  currencies  as  prices  of  other  commodities  we  export,  rose.  The 
patterns of gains across Africa depend on the proportion of commodities in the export basket 
and the extent to which countries import food and oil. Moderating global food prices should 
                                                 
1  The data that I used to make the points with respect to the impact of the crisis is drawn extensively from the 
IMF Regional Economic Outlook published in October 2011. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
improve  outcomes  in  most  African  economies,  while  sharply  lower  commodity  prices  hold 
some potential for a more serious negative economic shock. This is the double-edged sword 
of commodity prices that I talked about. 
The  second  channel  that  the  Euro  crisis  had  affected  us  had  been  through  export  growth 
through-out the Sub-Saharan African economies. When the global crisis set in, export growth 
from the Sub-Saharan economies declined from an annual average of 7.0 per cent between 
2000 and 2007 to only 1.4 per cent between 2008 and 2010. A significant slow-down. Much 
of  this  deceleration  comes  from  slower  growth  in  Europe.  The  proportion  of  exports  from 
Sub-Saharan  Africa  to  Europe  mirrors  that  of  South  Africa,  where  it  has  fallen  from  about 
36 per cent in 2005 to about 26 per cent in 2011. This trend will continue as sub-Saharan 
African exports redirect towards faster growing regions of the world. As the IMF points out in 
the Regional Economic Outlook, between 1990 and 2010, the value of Sub-Saharan Africa’s 
exports expanded at an annual average rate of 8.5 percent. Of that rate, nearly 50 per cent 
came from growth in exports to emerging and developing economies. The contribution has 
increased to about 66 per cent between 2005 and 2010.2 
Exports from Africa to the EU remain strongly biased towards minerals, crude oil and natural 
gas mainly from Nigeria (and the North African economies of Algeria and Libya) as well as 
other  commodities  from  countries  like  South  Africa  and  Botswana.  Over  the  longer  term, 
demand  for  and  exports  of  commodities  will  remain  strong.  China  will  remain  a  critical 
consumer of African exports.3 
Some forecasts show SSA exports re-achieving growth rates of around 10 per cent later this 
year. Considerable gains have been made in a number of industries in moving up the export 
value chains and expanding services exports.4 Using these gains to diversify export baskets 
should be an important long-term part of most countries’ economic development plans.  
The  last  channel  is  the  FDI  one.  Foreign  direct  investment  (FDI)  flows  from  the  European 
Union (EU-27) to Sub-Saharan Africa were EUR 11.5 billion in 2010 and this was a decline 
from EUR 13.1 billion the previous year; and these flows of FDI were mainly to South Africa.5 
To  Africa  as  a  whole,  FDI  inflows  reached  Euro  21.3  billion  in  2010.  While  this  figure 
constitutes only 5.3 per cent of total EU FDI flows for 2010, the proportion of EU FDI flowing 
to  Africa  has  increased  considerably  from  1.3  per  cent  in  2007.  Positive  long-term  growth 
prospects in Africa should attract higher levels of FDI in the future. Forthcoming trends will be 
seen  in  countries  like  Brazil,  India  and  China’s  investments  into  Africa.  As  market  growth 
continues  and  investment  opportunities  expand,  we  should  expect  to  see  complementary 
investments by European firms.6 
                                                 
2  Regional Economic Outlook, October 2011. 
3  Regional Economic Outlook, October 2011. China’s consumption during 2010 accounted for about 20 percent 
of  world  consumption  of  non-renewable  energy  resources  (oil,  gas,  coal),  23  percent  of  major  agricultural 
crops (corn, cotton, rice, soybeans, wheat), and 40 percent of base metals (copper, aluminium). 
4  Regional Economic Outlook, October 2011. Kenya and Ethiopia’s exports of cut flowers; Rwanda exporting 
branded coffee and has also broken into the U.S. handicrafts market; Mali (fresh mango exports to Europe), 
Lesotho  (apparel  exports),  and  Uganda  (frozen  fish).  These  are  also  landlocked  countries.  In  Mali,  the  key 
innovation  was  to  overcome  obstacles  by  developing  a  multimodal  transport  system  (road,  rail,  sea)  as  an 
alternative  to  air  freight,  while  meeting  quality  and  phytosanitary  requirements.  Service  exports  have  been 
growing fairly strongly in sub-Saharan African countries, even though not as fast as in emerging partners. 
5  Eurostat  describes  SSA  as  central  and  southern  Africa,  so  there  could  be  some  discrepancies  with  other 
figures. 
6  Regional Economic Outlook, October 2011. Chinese FDI to sub-Saharan Africa, as a share of total FDI to the 
region,  climbed  from  less  than  1  percent  in  2003  to  16  percent  by  2008.  Investments  from  India  are  also 
significant:  by  2006,  Indian  investment  stocks  in  sub-Saharan  Africa  were  almost  as  large  as  Chinese  FDI 
flows in the region. These investments are increasingly widespread geographically and in terms of industries. 
Chinese investment is also directed toward manufacturing, construction, finance, agriculture, and service. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
SSA  economies  were  in  good  macroeconomic  shape  going  into  the  crisis.  No  wonder  we 
were able to cope better during the crisis. Most countries had balanced budgets or modest 
surpluses  and  because  of  debt  relief  initiatives,  debt  levels  were  also  low.  Countries  had 
accumulated  reserves  and  modest  savings  levels  and  inflation  was  relatively  low  or  under 
control.  Thus,  most  countries  had  flexibility  to  ease  policies,  which  helped  to  dampen  the 
impact of the crisis particularly on poverty alleviating initiatives. However, countries that did 
not have flexibility of easing macroeconomic policies continued to rely heavily on foreign aid. 
Policy adjustments in most of the African countries have been country-specific. It should be 
pointed out that Africa is not a homogeneous geographic space, it is a continent made up of 
countries, so the policy responses were also country-specific. In response to price shocks, 
few flexible exchange rate countries have had to tighten monetary policy. However, interest 
rates  remain  at  low  levels  set  during  the  financial  crisis. Nominal  effective  exchange  rates 
have weakened in some countries and some oil-exporting countries have increased reserves 
sharply.7 Fiscal policy has loosened in many countries, including ours, to support growth and 
to  finance  more  expansive  capital  investment  projects.  Weak  control  over  public  finances 
remains  an  issue  in  some  countries,  and  needs  to  be  countered  by  more  aggressive 
institutional development, governance reforms, and human capital building.  
Now let me share with you some perspectives about Africa’s largest economy. Most of the 
comments  that  I  would  be  making  on  SA  flow  mainly  from  a  speech  I  delivered  on  the 
17th March 2012 somewhere in Magaliesburg. 
South  Africa’s  policy  discourse  during  the  crisis  centred  on  the  need  for  a  fiscal  stimulus 
response  to  the  fall  in  foreign  demand  and  slowing  domestic  economy.  This  was 
incompatible however with a macroeconomic response to those advocating a moderation in 
the appreciation of the currency as it rebounded from the overshot depreciation in late 2008. 
In  addition  to  the  positive  economic  factors  driving  the  resumption  of  capital  inflows  –  the 
sound public debt position and high commodity prices – the high inflation rate and growth in 
unit labour costs were driving up the real effective exchange rate. The current account deficit 
remained  high  as  a  result  of  growth  in  gross  domestic  spending  exceeding  growth  in 
domestic production.  
These  factors  meant  that  monetary  policy  alone;  that  is  lowering  the  policy  rate  to  reduce 
carry  trade,  could  not  have  prevented  the  appreciation  of  the  nominal  and  real  exchange 
rates. To prevent the real appreciation of the currency would have required macroeconomic 
policy  tightening  to  rein  in  domestic  expenditure  and  moderate  inflation.  In  practice  this 
meant either that the domestic currency public debt would have to increase by the amount 
the  authorities  were  willing  to  intervene  in  the  foreign  exchange  markets,  or  fiscal  policy 
would  have  to  adjust  to  find  the  resources  for  foreign  currency  purchases  out  of  current 
spending or from increased revenue. Short of increased borrowing and the implications for 
short-term  interest  rates,  the  other  options  entailed  reducing  public  spending  on  current 
programmes or tax increases. Exactly what you do not want to do when you are in a crisis, 
because you want to act counter-cyclically. Taking that stance would have meant that you 
act pro-cyclically and you would have plunged the economy into recession. 
The  approach  taken  by  the  fiscal  authorities  was  to  provide  funding  to  purchase  foreign 
currency  inflows  from  foreign  direct  investment.  Where  there  has  been  insufficient  rand 
available for this purpose, forward market foreign currency swaps were conducted to finance 
the reserve purchases.  
How  we  address  our  home-grown  economic  challenges  is  not  to  suggest  that  global 
difficulties  can  be  left  unattended.  Three  serious  disorders  confront  the  short  and  medium 
term.  
                                                 
7  Nigeria being an exception. Reserves have fallen and the exchange rate has depreciated. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The  first  is  the  effects  of  macroeconomic  policy  making  in  advanced  economies.  These 
policy settings, intended to resolve the combination of slow growth and over indebtedness, 
and conducted in a globalised world economy, contribute at some level to the flow of capital 
into emerging markets and the developing world.  
The second disorder is in financial markets in advanced economies. High debt levels in the 
developed  world  and  the  European  sovereign  debt  crisis  have  triggered  unconventional 
policy responses and a variety of risks is evident. The most troubling is the possibility of the 
current  financial  crisis  intensifying  sharply  and  resulting  in  even  more  credit  contraction, 
sales  of  assets,  and  eventually  stronger  real  economy  effects.  A  severe  worsening  in  the 
growth prospects for Europe would result in a calamitous fall in the demand for exports from 
around the world.  
The third disorder that we need to be alive to is a possibility for financial contagion that will 
affect emerging market economies. In this instance, countries with financial and/or economic 
vulnerabilities  would  experience  local  currency  asset  sales,  capital  flight,  and  long  term 
negative  effects  in  confidence  of  consumers  and  businesses  in  the  real  economy.  Such 
effects would very likely occur in the event of a financial and economic meltdown in Europe, 
but would not necessarily only come out of such a combination of circumstances.  
The private sector in emerging economies remains in deficit to the rest of the world and only 
Asian  emerging  economies  have  net 
foreign  asset  positions.  As  European  banks 
recapitalise,  the  resulting  deleveraging  could  reduce  foreign  funding  for  emerging  markets 
significantly. European banks provide about 30 per cent of Latin American bank credit and 
they provide 40 per cent of Eastern Europe’s so that a contraction in EU bank loans to these 
countries could constrain their economic growth significantly. The prolonged global crisis and 
the vulnerabilities created or exposed by policy efforts globally to address the crisis have to 
some extent increased the risk of financial contagion. In that context, reducing vulnerabilities 
must be a key priority for both monetary and fiscal authorities.  
We have been lucky in South Africa because our fiscal and monetary authorities responded 
in sync. What we are not saying as South Africans or we are not saying it as strongly as we 
are supposed to, is that South Africa entered the financial crisis with a very resilient, robust 
and well capitalised financial system.  
The  South  African  banking  system  is  rated  amongst  the  best  in  the  world.  It  is  rated  just 
behind that of Canada by the World Economic Forum. It is a very strong financial system and 
is rated ahead of the financial system of the USA. It has become a national strength while 
elsewhere the financial sectors have become a key weakness and that actually matters.  
As this crisis continues, there is one distinguishing factor about the South African financial 
system,  besides  the  fact  that  the  South  African  financial  system  continues  to  function,  the 
South African interbank market also continue to function. Banks in South Africa continue to 
trust each other and had been lending money to each other, thus facilitating the flow of credit 
for the real sector. Whilst credit in Europe is only growing at only 1 per cent, credit in South 
Africa is growing at close to 8 per cent, which means that indeed credit is flowing.  
But there is something else that is supposed to be highlighted. It is the fact that not only is 
the  South  African  financial  sector  well  capitalised,  our  big  corporates  actually  have  very 
strong  balance  sheets  and  borrow  from  the  capital  markets  .They  have  no  reason  to  be 
borrowing  money  from  the  banks  save  for  working  capital  .Credit  in  SA  used  to  grow  at 
double digits. It now actually grows at 6 to 8 per cent, while we have inflation at 6 per cent. It 
is actually a fairly decent growth rate. As such from a regulatory perspective, it suggests that 
you do not have a credit fuelled bubble actually building up.  
As we look at our financial sector let us also not forget that even with the global regulatory 
standards  coming  into  being,  South  African  Banks  already  comply  with  most  of  the  new 
standards, even before they come into effect. That is how strong our financial sector is.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
A  lot  has  been  said  about  the  growth  of  unsecured  lending  in  South  Africa.  Of course,  as 
regulators we are concerned about the growth in unsecured lending, but South Africans, do 
we really know what we want. Two years ago we said to the banks, you only want to lend 
money to people who have security. So the banks have come around and said well it looks 
like South Africans want us to lend to people who don’t have security, unsecured. Then we 
turn around and we say that well there is problem here, you are lending money to people 
who are unsecured, so I’m not sure what we are actually looking for.  
Nonetheless from where I am sitting as a regulator, everything that is growing too fast is a 
reason for me to worry about. If the share prices rise too fast, I get worried. If property prices 
rise too fast, I get worried, if credit rises too fast, I get worried and if unsecured credit rises 
too fast, I get worried. That is why the National Credit Regulator decided they want to go and 
dig  and  understand  what  is  driving  this  unsecured  lending.  That  is  why  from  the  South 
African Reserve Bank we asked the Registrar of Banks to go around and understand what is 
driving this unsecured lending. It is growing and it is growing too fast, but this is from a low 
base.  
But let us also say something here, the banking sector is a three trillion rand industry, and 
unsecured lending has grown from 23 billion to some 50 billion rand; it has doubled and is 
growing too fast. But it is such a small component of the sector. I don’t know how many of 
you  use  this  unsecured  lending;  I  do  use  it,  but  I  only  use  it  through  my  credit  card.  The 
categories that have me worried are not the credit card lending or overdraft facilities, but it is 
actually more the personal loans and we would want to get to understand what is actually 
driving this. This said, even if this entire R50bn falls into default it won’t make a dent on the 
banking sector. 
To  conclude,  African  economies  need  to  strengthen  the  domestic  and  regional  basis  for 
growth. This is best done by strengthening regional and extra-regional commercial and trade 
agreements, developing cross-border infrastructure, strengthening macroeconomic policies, 
and  developing  institutions  and  human  capital.  Attracting  foreign  direct  investment  and 
making  better  and  more  use  of  imported  technology  and  skills  is  also  critical  to  long-term 
growth.  These  efforts  are  not  made  easier  by  the  difficulties  of  the  world  economy,  which 
have  generated  volatile  capital  inflows  and  depressed  trade.  The  former  complicates 
macroeconomic  management  somewhat.  The  latter  reduces  growth  in  exporting  industries 
and increases competition for domestic firms. 
 African  economies  entered  the  crisis  with  a  very  strong  footing  thanks  to  very  prudent 
macroeconomic  policies.  Africa  will  continue  to  grow  even  as  Europe  slows  down,  but  we 
better  be  alive  to  the  fact  that  Europe  is  a  very  important  trading  partner  for  us.  It  is  an 
important destination for our exports and it is a very important source of FDI and if you are 
from  the  lower  income  African  countries,  it  is  also  a  very  important  source  of  technical 
assistance and foreign aid. 
And with those words I would like to say thank you very much for your attention.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
