Choongsoo Kim: Monetary and macroprudential policies in the aftermath 
of the crisis 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Choongsoo  Kim,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Korea,  at  the  Bank  of 
Korea  International  Conference  2012  “Monetary  and  Macroprudential  Policies  in  the 
Aftermath of the Crisis” co-organized with the IMF, Seoul, 14–15 June 2012. 
 Good morning. 
Distinguished speakers, participants. 
I bid you all a very warm welcome to the 2012 Bank of Korea International Conference. In 
particular,  I  would  like  to  express  my  gratitude  to  Professors  Thomas  Sargent,  Barry 
Eichengreen,  and  Yung  Chul  Park,  Dr.  Jonathan  Ostry,  and  all  of  our  speakers  and 
participants for their invaluable contributions to this conference. My special thanks go as well 
to the IMF, our conference co-host. 
I am confident that this conference will provide us with an excellent forum for discussing the 
valuable precepts drawn from the global financial crisis, and sharing ideas in the face of risks 
and challenges in the years ahead. Since the outbreak of the global crisis, policy community 
and academia in the global world have brought their minds to bear on the question of how 
the crisis arose and proposals for its resolution.  
Although I am sure that these efforts need to be continued, especially so amid the sovereign 
debt crises in the eurozone, it is never too early to start the discussion of what direction of 
monetary policy should follow in the future.  
Crises are the surface manifestation of important underlying imbalances. There is no doubt 
that financial and real imbalances played major roles in causing the crisis and worsening its 
severity.  We  should,  however,  acknowledge  that  a  big  gap  between  reality  and  our 
perception of it sowed the seeds of the crisis. We need, therefore, to reset our understanding 
of the real economy and the financial system. 
In  fact,  this  has  been  how  our  predecessors  overcome  the  economic  crisis  of  the  20th 
century. The Great Depression changed the world as they knew it, and put their knowledge 
and  ideas  to  the  test.  But,  they  were  willing  and  brave  enough  to  revise  their  views  and 
beliefs to lay the foundation of new framework – “macro” economics. 
A crisis is accompanied by severe strains. But, at the same time, it offers an opportunity to 
broaden  our  understanding.  If  we  can  come  up  with  a  new  framework  that  will  last  for 
decades or longer, we will be similarly remembered as another generation of economists and 
central bankers that overcame the previous orthodoxy to turn the crisis into the beginning of 
a new era. 
Taking the opportunity given me here today, I  would like to address several critical issues 
related  to  future  monetary  and  macro-prudential  policy,  and  to  say  a  few  words  about 
strengthening global cooperation to achieve financial stability. 
Global financial crisis and monetary policy 
The global financial crisis, as we all know, started in the financial sector but has eventually 
led to fiscal crises in many advanced economies, not to mention a global recession.  
In  response  to  the  crisis,  central  banks  around  the  world  undertook  a  wide  range  of 
measures. Policy rates were cut swiftly, and non-conventional measures were also deployed 
including,  among  others,  large-scale  term-loans  to  troubled  financial  institutions,  outright 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
asset purchases, and interventions in credit markets. These measures have helped support 
financial markets and thereby avoid financial meltdown.  
Despite  such  success  on  the  financial  front  in  the  early  phase  of  the  crisis  management, 
monetary policy fell short of avoiding deep recessions, which in turn triggered severe strains 
on the fiscal status of many advanced economies. The ensuing eurozone fiscal crisis is still 
an  on-going  event  that  is  preventing  the  global  economy  from  recovering  a  sound  growth 
momentum – even four years after the outbreak of the global crisis.  
As  we  have  seen  in  many  instances,  central  bank  activism  is  indeed  pivotal  in  crisis 
management.  But  we  should  also  be  mindful  of  potential  adverse  side  effects.  Socializing 
private losses may easily lead to moral hazard while central banks' over-stretched balance 
sheets could end up constraining the flexibility of future policy operations. Massive increases 
in official liquidity may have negative spillovers across sectors and national borders. In this 
light, we should keep in our mind that monetary policy is no panacea. I believe that an in-
depth review of post-crisis monetary policy and its outcomes, including both successes and 
failures, should be a first step toward establishing new thinking on monetary policy.  
To be complete, however, our new thinking should go beyond its operational aspect to cover 
more  fundamental  dimensions  such  as  the  mandates  and  the  governance  structure  of  the 
monetary  policy  as  broadly  defined.  I  believe  that  new  thinking  on  such  dimensions  is 
essential to our efforts to build a stronger institutional basis for crisis prevention.  
Many  specific  questions  arise  in  this  regard.  Should  the  mandate  of  monetary  policy  be 
broadened to include financial stability – particularly in the context of inflation targeting? How 
should monetary policy be coordinated with macro-prudential policies? Who should bear the 
responsibility  of  keeping  financial  stability  if  multiple  authorities  are  involved?  What 
institutional  structures  should  be 
to  render  the  monetary  authority  more 
accountable?  
All  these  questions  have  in  fact  been  taking  center  stage  in  the  post-crisis  debate  on 
monetary  and  macro-prudential  policy.  And  there  was  notable  progress  in  our  search  for 
practical answers.  
In  retrospect,  the  monetary  policy  has  been  a  victim  of  its  own  success  in  that  the  global 
crisis was preceded by the period of the Great Moderation. It is evident by now that ensuring 
financial  stability  is  as  important  as  maintaining  stable  prices.  It  is  also  evident  that 
policymakers – including central banks – failed to detect systemic risks in advance and keep 
them under appropriate control. Last but not least, the danger of excess leverage and global 
liquidity expansion has been downplayed in the midst of stable inflation. 
In  this  light,  I  commend  highly  the  initiative  led  by  the  G20  in  formulating  a  new  financial 
regulatory framework that can be an effective complement to monetary policy in achieving 
price  and  financial  stability  simultaneously.  Specifically,  the  Basel  III  framework  requires 
stronger capital and liquidity buffers than its predecessor, and also includes a set of macro-
prudential tools. Regulations on Global-SIFIs should help address possible market distortions 
arising from the too-big-to-fail hypothesis.  
For  emerging  economies  with  highly  liberalized  capital  account,  it  is  of  utmost  importance 
from a macro-prudential perspective to guard against adverse shocks of external origin and 
associated  volatile  and  pro-cyclical  capital  flows.  In  this  regard,  Korea  has  recently 
implemented  macro-prudential  tools  such  as  adjustable  caps  on  banks’  foreign  currency 
derivative  positions  and  a  macro-prudential  levy  on  their foreign  currency  liabilities.  I  hope 
that Korea’s policy experience could be a good reference for other emerging countries.  
Despite  such  commendable  progress,  however,  many  critical  questions  are  still  left 
unanswered or unsettled with regard to the monetary and macro-prudential policies and the 
global financial system. I hope this conference will shed new light on these critical issues.  
in  place 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Global cooperation for global financial stability 
Now allow me to briefly touch upon the issue of global policy cooperation before closing my 
address.  
I should begin by saying that we must clearly recognize the enormous complexity of today’s 
financial realities and economic circumstances. The real and financial sectors are fast fusing, 
and  ever-growing  cross-border  activities  rule  out  unilateral  actions.  As  such,  no  policy 
framework is likely to be effective without close cooperation among countries. This is indeed 
one of the key lessons from our policy responses to the global crisis. 
In today’s highly interconnected world, financial disruptions in one country or region would be 
no  longer  a  problem  of  the  country  or  region  alone.  By  the  same  token,  policy  measures 
taken  by  a  country  can  easily  affect  other  countries.  For  example,  extraordinary  monetary 
easing by major central banks does appear to have helped their home countries contain the 
fallout from the crisis. But many emerging countries were forced to confront adverse financial 
spillovers from large and sharp swings in the global liquidity condition. 
In short, coordinated global efforts to rein in the excessive global liquidity and cross-border 
spillovers have fallen short of expectations. And we all know too well that international policy 
cooperation has always been difficult to achieve. But history is not destiny. Nor does it mean 
that we should give up. A global solution is needed more than ever to overcome the current 
crisis, which is a global problem. And for the benefit of all, the global community should be 
more united than ever in tackling the enormous challenges that lie ahead of us.  
Concluding remarks 
Ladies and gentlemen,  
The world economy is still struggling to find its way out of the Great Recession. It is in need 
of  stronger  and  wiser  policy  actions  that  can  address  the  very  complex  economic  and 
financial troubles we are facing now. But our understanding of what went wrong and what 
should be done is still incomplete. This is even more the case if we turn our attention to the 
future  of  the  global  financial  system  and  to  the  monetary  and  macro-prudential  policy 
framework. 
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  I  believe  that  global  policy  cooperation  should  be  a  priority  in  our 
search for an exit from the current crisis. I also believe that effective collaboration between 
policymakers and academia is every bit as crucial as that between policymakers.  
We do not sit idle by during the crisis. Nor should we sit idle by, being complacent with the 
conventional wisdom. We must bridge the gap between reality and our perception of it. It is 
our duty and indeed our very real privilege to engage in and work through the conundrums 
we encounter today.  
I look forward very much to a new thinking on monetary and macro-prudential policy. And I 
am confident that this conference will contribute to developing the new thinking that we all 
need.  
Once again, I wish to extend my heartfelt appreciation to all participants, and my hope for 
your active discussion of new insights and views here during the next two days. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
