Barry Whiteside: Building financial literacy and financial inclusion in Fiji 
Opening  address  by  Mr  Barry  Whiteside,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji,  at  the 
National Financial Competency Development Workshop, Suva, 5 September 2012. 
 Mr. Knut Ostby, United Nations Development Program Resident Representative;  
Distinguished Guests;  
Ladies and Gentlemen.  
Good morning to you all and thank you for taking out time from your busy schedules to be 
part of this forum. This Workshop marks another important milestone on our journey towards 
building financial literacy and financial inclusion in Fiji.  
Over the last few years, the Reserve Bank of Fiji has taken a more proactive and broader 
role  in  promoting  and  developing  financial  inclusion  in  our  country.  We  certainly  have  not 
done this alone. In fact, the key factor contributing towards the progress we have achieved 
so far has been the innovation and the effective collaboration by all the stakeholders. This 
has  been  our  strength  and  we  hope  that  this  forum  will  provide  further  opportunity  for 
consultation and participation by all of us in formulating a national strategy and action plan 
for developing financial competency throughout Fiji. This may be just one part of the whole 
financial inclusion exercise, however, it remains a critical part.  
I would, at this point, like to take this opportunity to acknowledge the catalytic role and the 
tremendous contribution of the Pacific Financial Inclusion Programme (PFIP) our co-host and 
strategic  partner  towards  greater  financial  inclusion.  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  the  PFIP  has 
been involved with the Reserve Bank of Fiji and other development partners for a number of 
years. Its timely support and strategic programs have initiated and invigorated many projects 
that  not  only  have  extended  the  outreach  and  the  innovation  of  financial  products  and 
services, but have also contributed to capacity building in Fiji and some of the larger Pacific 
islands.  
Introduction  
Fiji’s efforts and achievements in the area of financial inclusion have not gone unnoticed. Our 
experiences  over  the  last  three  years  have  been  shared  at  global  forums  as  a  model  of 
success, where significant work has been achieved in such a short time and despite the fact 
that we are one of the smaller developing economies. I will be further updating the Alliance 
for Financial Inclusion annual meeting in South Africa later this month on our progress.  
For  a  number  of  years  policy  makers  and  leaders  have  recognised  that  economic 
performance  and  benefits  are  to  be  gained  from  aligning  national  policies  towards  greater 
financial inclusion. In August 2008, Finance Ministers, Central Bank Governors and Senior 
Officials  from  the  Pacific  area  and  Timor-Leste  attended  a  conference  in  Coombs,  near 
Sydney, Australia.  
The Coombs Declaration that was issued after the Conference stated,  
“...that  by  lifting  levels  of  financial  literacy  or  financial  capability  in  the  region, 
economic  performance  would  be  improved,  with  flow  on  social  and  financial 
benefits for individuals and families.”  
The  following  year  in  2009  regional  Government  leaders  and  central  bank  governors  met 
again and endorsed what is now commonly known as the 2020 Money Pacific Goals.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The four key goals articulate the vision and commitment by the Pacific Island nations to take 
a lead action in building financial competency through the combined actions of the public and 
private sectors.  
They state that:  
• 
• 
• 
• 
all schoolchildren are to receive financial education through core curricula;  
all adults are to have access to financial education;  
simple and transparent consumer protection policies are to be put in place; and  
there must be a fifty percent reduction in the number of households without access 
to basic financial services.  
In  November  2009,  the  Reserve  Bank  and  the  Pacific  Financial  Inclusion  Programme 
organised  a  National  Microfinance  Workshop  where  financial  service  providers,  mobile 
network operators, relevant government agencies, NGO’s and donor partners all agreed to 
work together to reach 150,000 unbanked clients by 2014. One of the key outcomes of that 
workshop  was  the  formation  of  a  National  Financial  Inclusion  Taskforce  (NFIT)  to  set  the 
agenda,  coordinate,  monitor  and  supervise  the  implementation  and  progress  of  a  medium 
term strategy for financial inclusion in Fiji.  
The  Financial  Literacy  Working  Group  was  one  of  three  working  groups  set  up  under  the 
Taskforce  and  was  mandated  to  look  into  and  develop  strategies  to  strengthen  and  build 
financial literacy. In its first meeting in 2010 this Working Group identified three key areas of 
focus. These were: 
• 
• 
• 
Preparation of a national financial competency building strategy;  
Implementation of adult financial literacy programs; and,  
Integration  and  strengthening  of  financial  education  into  the  core  curriculum  at 
primary and secondary school levels.  
The Financial Literacy Working Group continues to work very closely with the Reserve Bank, 
PFIP, various government institutions such as the Ministry of Education and the Fiji Bureau 
of Statistics, the private sector and NGOs, in the implementation of projects under its area of 
mandate. The Financial Education or FinEd Fiji Project, currently being piloted this year in 
28 “champion” schools, by the Ministry of Education and PFIP, will result in 197,000 students 
having exposure to financial education in all Fiji schools, annually from 2013.  
National Financial Competency Survey  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  in  the  first  quarter  of  2011,  the  Reserve  Bank  was  approached  to 
take the lead role as Project Manager and coordinate a survey that would provide a reliable 
set of data to assess the current levels of financial literacy of low income households as well 
their attitudes towards money. The actual survey  was undertaken in the last two  weeks of 
November 2011 and some key initial results were released in the first quarter of this year.  
A  draft  report  entitled  “The  Financial  Competence  of  Low  Income  Households  in  Fiji”  was 
presented to the National Financial Inclusion Taskforce last month.  
I  understand  that  an  embargoed  copy  has  been  circulated  and  is  now  available  to  all  the 
participants present here today.  
The  Report  makes  interesting  reading  and  I  am  sure  that  participants  may  have  further 
questions.  I  am  especially  interested  in  the  recommendations  on  critical  issues  that  are 
pertinent  to  our  financial  system:  such  as  lack  of  understanding  among  the  low  income 
households about financial products and services, particularly the cost of money; what are 
some of the innovative ways of disseminating financial literacy training and information; what 
kind  of  information  do  financial  service  providers  need  to  design  appropriate  financial 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
products;  how  can  the  private  sector  facilitate  financial  literacy  training  ;  and,  what  are 
solutions that can provide for the risk of poverty in old age.  
We  are  fortunate  to  have  here  with  us  today,  Dr.  Jonathan  Sibley,  the  consultant,  who 
designed the framework and assessed the financial competency data. Dr Sibley will discuss 
his Report and would be able to respond to questions relating to the findings.  
The importance of financial literacy  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  the  value  of  financial  literacy  and  its  policy  implications  is  well 
documented  and  we  are  again  very  fortunate  to  have  two  senior  representatives  from  the 
Ministry  of  Finance  and  the  Ministry  for  Strategic  Planning,  National  Development  and 
Statistics, to share insights from the Government’s perspective.  
The  challenge for  the  Reserve  Bank,  and  indeed  all  of  us  here  today,  is  to  ask  ourselves 
what  we  can  all  do  collectively  to  create  an  inclusive  environment.  An  environment  which 
empowers consumers and those from low income households to have access to affordable 
and appropriate financial services and products: and, in having such access, being further 
able to make informed financial decisions and choices.  
What else can be done to encourage all individuals to prepare a budget, and support them to 
save  and  invest  wisely?  For  every  household  that  does  this  there  is  an  opportunity  to 
improve  living  standards  and  bring  about  a  more  prosperous  community  and  nation. 
Financial literacy is the key driver in achieving financial competency.  
Importance of financial literacy to Reserve Bank of Fiji  
Ladies and gentlemen, various country studies have shown that when people are financially 
literate and have access to appropriate financial services there is greater potential for socio 
and economic development and opportunities for people to work their way out of poverty.  
As  I  have  mentioned  throughout  this  speech,  much  has  already  been  done  by  the 
stakeholders  here  today  in  our  drive  towards  full  financial  inclusion. We  can  perhaps  give 
ourselves a little pat on the back. However, the momentum must continue. And this is why 
we are all here! We each still have a part to play.  
The Reserve Bank pledges its ongoing support to continue the role we have taken on. A role 
which  we  felt  so  strongly  about  that  it  required us  to  create  a  new  department  in  order  to 
facilitate the need that was evolving.  
In addition to what we have been doing, the Bank is also currently reviewing and developing 
an  appropriate  consumer  protection  framework  mechanism  to  provide  minimal  standards 
both for consumer empowerment and market conduct. To this end we are working with other 
central banks in peer learning and sharing of lessons learnt and best practices.  
We will continue to budget for and facilitate and promote financial literacy during the financial 
inclusion and microfinance expositions that we organise around the country. We encourage 
our  fellow  stakeholders  to  advocate  this  important  issue  and  are  monitoring  and  collating 
data to see where this can be effectively used. 
Conclusion 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen, the  theme for the  workshop  is  an  apt  one: “Financial  Literacy  and 
Competency for All”, clearly with the emphasis on the all. 
The focus of this workshop is to develop and ensure that there is a policy in place at national 
level to support and empower both consumers and stakeholders. It is about empowering and 
making  available  necessary  information,  knowhow  and  tools,  for  all  citizens  to  be  able  to 
make informed financial decisions. This is particularly so for vulnerable groups, such as the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
poor and underserved. This has to be a national agenda. Every Fijian must take ownership of 
this.  Our  decisions  today  impact  the  later  generation  and  it  is  essential  that  this  is  taken 
seriously. 
Learning never stops. Knowledge is accumulated over time with each passing day. What we 
deliberate and strategize over the next one and a half days will impact the lives of each and 
every individual in Fiji. Take a moment to realize this fact that the decisions made today will 
make a change. Let us make it happen! 
With  these  words,  I  declare  this  workshop  open  and  wish  you  all  the  very  best  in  your 
deliberations. 
Vinaka. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
