Erkki Liikanen: The great recession and its long shadow – youth 
unemployment 
Speech  by  Mr  Erkki  Liikanen,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Finland,  at  the University  of  Tartu, 
Tartu, 30 May 2012. 
 Unemployment to center of policy debate 
The financial crisis has brought unemployment back to center of the policy debate in Europe 
and elsewhere. Almost 4 million jobs were lost in the euro area since the start of the crisis in 
2008, and employment still remains about 3 million workers below the pre-crisis level. 
Differences in unemployment experiences and youth unemployment reflect shocks and 
institutions 
increases 
The impressive aggregate figures mask large differences across countries and across worker 
groups.  While  some  euro  area  countries  have  experienced  dramatic 
in 
unemployment, in others the labour market adjustment has been milder than expected. One 
the  one  hand  these  differences  reflect  the  different  nature  of  shocks  affecting  individual 
countries. On the other hand, they reflect labour market institutions and policies in place in 
these countries.  
The shocks and institutions are also behind the perhaps most worrisome manifestation of the 
crisis on the labour market, the rise of youth unemployment to record levels. It has risen to a 
half  of  the  youth  labour  force  (aged  15–24)  in  Spain  and  Greece  and  a  third  of  the  youth 
labour force in Ireland. In Estonia the youth unemployment rate stands at the current 25% 
(although  peaking  at  40%  in  2010).  However,  at  the  same  time  some  countries  have 
experienced  only  moderate  increases  in  the  youth  unemployment  rate,  and  in  Germany  it 
has actually fallen to the current 8%. 
Earlier debate on shocks and institutions relevant again 
Looking  at  these  recent  developments,  the  debate  on  the  interaction  of  shocks  and 
institutions  behind  the  rise  and  persistence  of  European  unemployment  seems  highly 
relevant again.  
The chief economist of the IMF, then a professor at MIT, Olivier Blanchard claimed in 2000 in 
his Harry Johnson lecture and his article with Justin Wolfers (Blanchard & Wolfers 2000), that 
to explain both the rise and cross country heterogeneity in European unemployment since 
the 1960s, the interaction between shocks and institutions is crucial.  
Lars Ljungqvist and Thomas Sargent (1998) blamed the high European unemployment since 
the 1980s to welfare states’ diminished ability to cope with more turbulent economic times, 
such  as  the  ongoing  restructuring  from  manufacturing  to  the  service  industry,  adoption  of 
new information technologies, and a rapidly changing international economy.  
Assar  Lindbeck  and  Dennis  Snower  (2001),  in  their  insider-outsider  theory,  examine  why 
labor  markets  are  segmented  into  “good  jobs”  (with  relatively  high  wages  and  high  job 
security) and “bad jobs”. They also examined how various types of labor turnover costs give 
insiders their market power, how they use this power to their own advantage (e.g., in pushing 
up  their  wages),  how  the  insiders’  activities  affect  the  outsiders  and  vice  versa.  They  also 
assess,  what  this  insider-outsider  interaction  implies  for  employment,  unemployment,  and 
other macroeconomic activities. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Discuss shocks and institutions behind the European youth unemployment 
High costs for both individuals and society 
Relevant in European countries fighting with deteriorating public finances, 
competitiveness and aging populations 
Today, I will discuss the shocks and institutions behind the European youth unemployment 
problem.  The  relocation  of  unemployed  young  workers  to  new  jobs  is  a  key  policy  issue 
facing  European  policy  makers,  as  prolonged  unemployment  at  the  start  of  the  working 
career has substantial short and long term costs for both individuals and society. In addition 
to  the  immediate  lost  output,  these  costs may  include  loss  of  skills,  lower  productivity  and 
wages and a permanent decrease in potential output (or increase in the NAIRU) in the years 
to  come.  These  costs  are  especially  relevant  in  Europe,  where  countries  are  fighting  with 
deteriorating public finances, competitiveness issues and aging. 
A well-functioning labour market improves the efficiency of monetary policy 
transmission 
The  functioning  of  the  labour  market  also  affects  the  economic  environment  in  which 
monetary  policy  is  conducted.  A  flexible  and  well  functioning  labour  market  improves  the 
efficiency  of  monetary  policy  transmission,  and  provides  an  economic  environment  which 
facilitates price-stability oriented monetary policy of the ECB.  
Why is youth unemployment generally higher than that of other age groups? 
Youth unemployment has more than doubled in some countries 
The  rise  of  youth  unemployment  since  the  start  of  the  crisis  is  stupefying.  The  euro  area 
aggregate  youth  unemployment  rate  (i.e.  16–24  years  old)  exceeded  20%  by  the  end  of 
2011.  
In some countries, however, youth unemployment has more than doubled during the crisis. 
In Spain it has risen from 19% to 51%, in Greece from 23% to 50% and in Ireland from 9% to 
31%  and  in  Estonia  from  7%  to  the  current  25%  (although  it  peaked  at  40%  in  2010q1). 
Although  less  dramatic,  the  rise  in  youth  unemployment  in  Italy  and  Portugal  has  been 
considerable.  
However, at the same time some countries have experienced only moderate increases in the 
youth unemployment rate, and in Germany it has actually fallen from 11% to 8%. 
Youth unemployment is high over the cycle also a structural issue 
Youth  unemployment  is  higher  than  unemployment  for  other  age  groups  also  over  the 
business cycle. On average, it is more than double the overall unemployment rate for euro 
area  countries.  In  Italy  and  Sweden  it  is  more  than  three  times  higher  than  the  overall 
unemployment rate. We have seen a strong rise in youth unemployment during the crisis, but 
it is also a structural issue. Policy measures must be designed accordingly.  
Young workers as labour buffers 
Young people are more vulnerable on the labour market than other age groups and they are 
also easily used as labour buffers when employers adjust their work force. Reasons for high 
youth unemployment lie in the properties of young workers relative to older workers, in habits 
and common practices in the labour market as well as in labour market institutions. 
As to getting hired and being laid off, young workers have a disadvantage relative to their 
older colleagues. They have limited or no work experience and in particular they have little 
firm-specific skills. The unemployment rate of labour market entrants tends to be high due to 
frictions  in  the  transition  from  education  to  work  (e.g.  inexperienced  in  job  search).  Often 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
young workers have temporary contracts, and they are subject to last-in-first-out rules when 
personnel reductions take place. 
Labour  market  institutions  that  differentiate  across  worker  groups  often  penalize  youth.  In 
particular, dual employment protection legislation (firing costs) that depends on employment 
duration (e.g. Italy, Spain) is commonly seen as an important factor behind the spectacular 
rise  in  youth  unemployment  during  the  crisis  in  e.g.  Spain.  The  ease  of  ending  temporary 
contracts  relative  to  permanent  ones  has  led  to  a  situation  where  young  workers  on 
temporary  contracts  can  be  laid  off  without  costs,  while  older  workers  on  permanent 
contracts have largely kept their jobs.  
The  youth  are  also  typically  overrepresented  in  cyclically  sensitive  sectors  such  as 
construction, which also reflects dual labour market institutions in European countries. 
Sectoral shocks from the crisis have hit hard on the young 
Collapse of construction sector in Spain, Ireland and Estonia massive job destruction 
The  rise  in  unemployment  and  youth  unemployment  has  been  strongest  in  the  countries 
where  imbalances,  a  booming  construction  sector  or  accumulated  loss  in  competitiveness, 
have been prominent before the crisis.  
In the run-up to the crisis, the construction sector absorbed a large share of the workforce, 
and  young  people  were  overrepresented  in  this  growing  sector.  For  instance  in  Spain, 
dropping out from studies to work on the construction sites was a large scale phenomenon. 
The subsequent collapse of the overheated construction sector in Spain, Ireland and Estonia, 
lead  to  a  massive  loss  of  jobs.  In  Ireland  and  Spain,  the  construction  sector  accounts  for 
around  50%,  of  the  overall  employment  contraction.  Relative  to  the  peak  of  the  cycle,  the 
Spanish construction sector has lost 1.1 million jobs, and the Irish equivalent 160,000 jobs. 
These  jobs  focused  particularly  on  the  young  because  in  these  countries  the  construction 
sector employed an especially large number of young people.  
Industry  accounted  for  the  bulk  of  the  employment  decline  in  Slovakia,  Slovenia  and  Italy 
although the number of jobs in this sector also decreased markedly in Estonia and Spain.  
Temporary export shock in Germany and Finland labour hoarding by adjusting working 
time 
In contrast, in Germany and Finland the crisis was felt mainly through the export sector while 
domestic demand remained relatively robust. The downturn in international trade was rather 
short, which made it possible for firms to focus also in the availability of labour in the future. 
Labour hoarding, by adjusting hours of work rather than the number of workers, moderated 
the  rise  in  unemployment.  Unlike  in  the  construction  sector,  the  loss  of  jobs  in  the  export 
sector was not particularly focused on the young, as the proportion of young people in the 
manufacturing is approximately the same as their share in the work force as a whole. 
Property bubble and a credit crunch lead to more domestic disturbances, more 
permanent restructuring than temporary export shock 
The source of the shock has been an important factor for the labour market consequences. 
The export shock during the initial quarters of the crisis was temporary and hence firms could 
retain workers in anticipation of the trade recovery. The bursting property bubble and a credit 
crunch  lead to more  domestic disturbances,  more  permanent  restructuring  and  uncertainty 
so that firms are more reluctant and less able to retain staff. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Sectoral shocks and reallocation 
After the crisis, the need for alternative sources of employment has grown. In particular this 
is the case in countries such as Spain and Ireland, where the sectoral growth outlook for the 
hardest hit sector (construction) remains poor.  
Relocation is a slow process 
The relocation of surplus labour from permanently downsized sectors to more resilient ones 
with  a  better  growth  potential  can  be  a  slow  process  even  in  a  growing  economy.  In  the 
absence of robust growth this is an even more daunting endeavor. In Spain, it is made more 
difficult  by  the  low  educational  level  of  a  part  of the young  people,  as  during  the  upswing 
many abandoned their education to work on the building sites.  
In  manufacturing,  too,  there  is  pressure  for  reallocation.  Already  before  the  crisis,  the 
employment trend in Europe has been downwards for an extended period. The EU27 area 
has lost 5.8 million manufacturing jobs since the year 2000. This persistent weakness on the 
labour  market  and  the  slow  relocation  of  labour  into  potential  growth  sectors  is  harmful  to 
both  labour  productivity  and  labour  supply.  The  loss  of  young  people’s  labour  input,  in 
particular, will have long-lasting consequences.  
Restructuring is a factor behind the perhaps strikingly large and persistent employment 
consequences of deep recessions 
Implies mismatches evidenced by outward shifts of Beveridge curves 
As  Reinhart  and  Rogoff  (2009)  point  out,  restructuring  during  deep  recessions  is  a  factor 
behind the large and persistent employment consequences of deep recessions. The need for 
relocating unemployed workers to different sectors of the economy implies mismatches on 
the labour market that will make unemployment more persistent in the years to come. These 
mismatches  are  already  manifested  by  an  outward  shift  of  the  euro  area  Beveridge  curve 
and  by  outward  shifts  of  the  Beveridge  curve  in  countries  most  severely  hit  by  sectoral 
shocks.1,2 
Failure to reallocate young workers would lead to a lost generation 
Given  the  magnitude  of  the  youth  unemployment  problem,  European  economies  cannot 
afford  to  fail  in  relocating  the  unemployed  young  workers  to  new  jobs.  Failure  in  this  task 
would imply a lost generation and all the individual and macroeconomic costs that follow with 
it. 
Dual labour markets place young people in the frontline in a recession 
In  many  countries  specific  worker  groups  are  affected  by  labour  market  institutions  in 
different  ways.  This  certainly  applies  to  employment  protection  legislation.  Since  the 
implementation of labour market reforms in the 1980’s, efforts have been made to increase 
                                                
1  Bonthuis, Jarvis & Vanhala (2012) find a significant shift in the euro area Beveridge Curve since the onset of 
the  crisis,  but  considerable  heterogeneity  at  the  country  level.  At  the  extremes,  country  level  differences 
include a significant outward shift in the Beveridge Curve for Spain, an inward shift for Germany. 
2  The Beveridge curve is widely used to describe the cyclical state of the labour market and the efficiency of the 
labour market  in  terms  of  matching  unemployed  workers  to  job  vacancies.  It  traces  a  negative  relationship 
between unemployment and vacancy rates over the course of a business cycle, tracing the evolution of the 
economy from expansionary phases (leading to lower unemployment and higher vacancies) to contractions in 
activity  (with  higher  unemployment  and  lower  vacancies).  Shifts  in  the  Beveridge  curve  are  of  particular 
interest  in  times  of  crisis,  since  they  are  suggestive  of  structural  changes  in  the  unemployment-vacancy 
relationship. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
labour market flexibility in European economies. The reforms were targeted at reducing the 
high  and  persistent  structural  unemployment rates  in  European  countries,  and to  ease  the 
relocation of labour from stagnant sectors of the economy to sectors with growth potential.  
Partial reforms focused on more flexible use of temporary employment contracts 
These  partial  reforms,  however,  focused  primarily  on  more  flexible  use  of  fixed-term 
employment contracts. Carrying through these reforms was easier politically than changing 
the  conditions  applied  to  permanent  employment  contracts  (eg  diluting  employment 
protection). This created a dual labour market in many European countries, not only in Spain, 
but also in France, Italy, Portugal (and Sweden). 
Relative position of fixed-term (typically young) employees has weakened 
As the labour market has split in two, the position of fixed-term, often young employees has 
weakened  relative  to  permanent  (typically  older)  workers.  The  reforms  have  liberalised 
regulations  concerning  the  use  of  temporary  contracts,  while  the  conditions  for  permanent 
contracts have been left literally unchanged. The use of temporary contracts had earlier been 
restricted to e.g. seasonal work in agriculture, tourism, and construction, but after the reforms 
they could be used more easily for regular activities.  
Differences  in  severance  payments  between  fixed-term  and  permanent  employment 
contracts have grown, and in some cases there are no severance payments related to the 
termination  of  temporary  contracts.  Temporary  contracts  can  typically  not  be  contested  in 
labour courts. 
Use of temporary contracts has become more widespread has particularly affected the 
position of young people, as fixed-term employment contracts are common among the 
young 
Consequently  the  use  of  temporary  contracts  has  become  more general  with  these  labour 
market  reforms,  but  there  are  large  cross-country  differences.  In  Spain  the  proportion  of 
temporary  workers  of  all  workers  was  about  30%  before the  crisis  (in  2007),  in  Portugal  it 
was  22%  and  in  France  15%.  These  differences  are  in  part  explained  by  differences  in 
severance payments. For example, severance payments for permanent workers in Spain are 
much higher, and the regulations concerning the use of temporary contracts much laxer than 
in France. 
The trend towards dual labour markets has particularly affected the position of young people, 
as fixed term employment contracts are common among the young. In France, Sweden and 
Spain over 50% of employment contracts for young people are fixed-term. 
Dualism has directed the employment shocks especially to fixed-term workers and, by 
extension, young people 
During the crisis the rise in unemployment has been strong particularly in southern European 
countries. The dualism in labour markets has directed the employment shocks especially to 
fixed-term  workers  and,  by  extension,  young  people.  In  Spain,  88%  of  layoffs  has  been 
focused on temporary contracts, and thus strongly on young workers.  
The key problems of duality 
A  key  problem  in  dual  labour  markets  is  that  temporary  contracts  do  not  work  as  a 
“springboard”  to  more  stable  employment  relationships.  The  transition  from  temporary 
contracts  to  permanent  ones  is  low,  and  workers  find  themselves  in  a  vicious  circle  of 
temporary jobs, including recurring spells of unemployment. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
The problem lies in the large gap in firing costs between permanent and temporary 
jobs, and in the discrete jump in the cost 
The problem lies in the large gap in firing costs between permanent and temporary jobs, and 
in the jump in the firing cost when a temporary contract is converted to permanent one. In 
addition, lax regulations concerning the use of temporary contracts worsen the situation. 
Threshold to regularize a worker is high 
For the employer there is a large step in the potential firing cost when converting a temporary 
contract to a permanent one, and therefore the threshold to regularize a worker is high. In 
particular, this is the case when regulations concerning the use of temporary contracts are 
lax. Temporary contracts will be renewed or the workers will be changed to avoid paying the 
firing cost. This has often been the case in recent years in e.g. Spain. 
The consequences of high and persistent youth unemployment 
The  relocation  of  the  unemployed  youth  to  new  jobs  is  a  pressing  issue,  as  prolonged 
unemployment at the start of the working career has substantial short and long term costs 
both for individuals and for the society. 
Unemployment at the start of the working life can cast a long in terms of wages, 
productivity and employment 
At the individual level, unemployment at the start of the working life can cast a long shadow 
over the working career. Wages and productivity are deteriorated by the reduced early career 
work experience that is caused by unemployment. In addition, a vicious circle of fixed-term 
contracts influences productivity due to weaker incentives for both employers and employees 
themselves  to  invest  in  the  training.  Weak  labour  force  attachment  also  raises  the  risk  of 
exclusion and poverty. 
At the macro level, the costs include foregone output, higher social security outlays and 
lower level of potential output and overall welfare 
At the macro level, the immediate cost of youth unemployment is lost output and social costs. 
Still more important are the macro level long term costs. Weak labour productivity evolution 
at  the  individual  level  accumulates  to  a  lower  level  of  potential  output  (or  increase  in  the 
NAIRU) and overall welfare in an economy.  
The costs of prolonged unemployment, weak labour market attachment, exclusion, including 
costs  related  to  higher  criminality  and  worse  health  outcomes,  build  a  heavy  long  term 
burden on public finances.  
Highly relevant in the current European context, where countries are fighting with 
deteriorating public finances, competitiveness issues and aging populations 
These  costs  are  especially  relevant  in  the  current  European  context,  where  countries  are 
fighting with deteriorating public finances, competitiveness issues and aging populations. 
The functioning of the labour market also affects the economic environment in which 
monetary policy is conducted 
The  functioning  of  the  labour  market  also  affects  the  economic  environment  in  which 
monetary  policy  is  conducted.  A  flexible  and  well  functioning  labour  market  improves  the 
efficiency  of  monetary  policy  transmission,  and  provides  an  economic  environment  which 
facilitates price-stability oriented monetary policy of the ECB.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
What can be done about youth unemployment? 
The structurally high youth unemployment and its spectacular rise during the crisis can be 
explained by the properties of young workers relative to older workers, the institutions that 
govern the educational system and the labor markets, as well as the nature of the shocks 
during the crisis.  
May not always be meaningful to focus policy measures on the youth in particular 
If the consequences of youth unemployment are considered more serious than those of other 
age groups, it may be justified to focus measures particularly on the youth. At the same time 
many measures aimed at lowering unemployment in general, affect the young unemployed 
more than other age groups. This is why often general measures to lower unemployment are 
most important for the young unemployed. They can be complemented but not replaced by 
specific measures which focus only on the young. 
We can assess the youth unemployment also from the viewpoint of the supply and demand 
of the labour input of young workers, as well as mismatch problems and issues of specificity. 
We  must  also  keep  in  mind  structural  as  well  as  cyclical  aspects  of  high  youth 
unemployment. 
(i) Labour supply 
The value of alternative activity relative to job search and employment… 
For  the  labour  supply  a  key  determinant,  in  addition  to  wages,  is  the  value  of  alternative 
activity  relative  to  job  search  and  working.  Labour  market  institutions  and  the  educational 
system  have  a  central  role  in  determining  the  value  of  alternative  activities  and  thus  the 
supply  of  labour.  In  the  long  run  labour  supply  determines  the  potential  output  of  an 
economy. This is especially relevant with ageing populations. 
Unemployment insurance reforms should activate workers and avoid income traps 
Generous  and  long  lasting  unemployment  insurance  policies  are  criticized  for  their 
passivating  effect  on  job  search.  For  this  reason  many  countries  (e.g.  Germany)  have 
recently  adopted  policies  aiming  at  activating  workers.  The  measures  include  reducing 
overall the level and duration of unemployment benefits, tightening the rules of accepting job 
offers, at the risk of reduced or losing benefits, responsibility of job search, and means tested 
benefits. 
Social security systems frequently have unintended effects, such as “income traps” where it 
is not worth accepting a job low wage or short term job for a worker. This is because the rise 
in earned income leads to a larger drop in social benefits. Effectively this implies a marginal 
tax rate of over 100%, which reduces labour supply. Measures that allow for some earmings 
before  losing  social  benefits  have  been  implemented  for  example  in  the  German  Hartz 
reforms. 
Return to education in bad times may be rational 
In  recessions  young  workers  exit  the  labour  force  more  than  other  age  groups.  In  many 
cases the young return to education, which may be a rational choice considering the lower 
opportunity  cost  of  studying  (expected  value  of  job  search  is  lower).  Also  a  higher 
educational level improves labour market prospects for the worker. Promoting transitions to 
education by increasing temporarily the number students may be optimal from the society’s 
perspective as well, as the opportunity cost in terms of lost output is lower in a recession.3 
                                                
3  This view has been advocated by the 2010 Nobel laureate Christopher Pissarides. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
(ii) Labour demand 
The demand for young workers may be associated with both cyclical and structural elements. 
When unemployment and youth unemployment is due to a cyclical weakness in aggregate 
demand, unemployment is involuntary (and supply policies may be relatively weak).  
In  recent  years,  efforts  to  sustain  aggregate  demand  have  been  implemented  through 
expansive  fiscal  policies.  In  the  longer  term  this  is  not  sustainable  due  to  public  finance 
constraints. Fiscal stimulus may also not address the underlying structural problems, such as 
the reduced competitiveness or the structural change needed in the economy. 
A part of the job losses are permanent 
During the crisis the level of output has dropped to a lower level in many countries, and part 
of the job losses are permanent. This means that a recovery will not necessarily bring back 
the  lost  jobs.  It  is  possible  that  labour  costs  must  fall,  to  bring  employment  back  to  its 
pre-crisis level. 
The productivity of a worker and the cost of labour determine its demand 
In the longer term the key factors for labour demand are the productivity of a worker and the 
price of labour, namely, the costs that accrue to the employer from a worker. The wage is, of 
course, an essential part of the costs, but the employer also bears other wage related costs, 
possible training, search and firing costs. 
Wage formation that leads to a wage distribution that is more compressed than the 
productivity distribution, tends to weaken young workers employment. 
The price of a labour is the wage. The productivity of young workers is often lower than that 
of older ones, but wages do not always fully reflect this productivity difference. If personnel 
reductions  are focused on  those for  whom  the productivity-wage  difference  (profitability)  is 
the lowest, the reductions will primarily be on the young workers.  
Overall, wage formation that leads to a wage distribution that is more compressed than the 
productivity  distribution,  tends  to  weaken  young  workers  employment.  A  wage  distribution 
that  is  narrower  than  the  productivity  distribution  may  be  caused  by  a  number  of  factors. 
These  include  aiming  at  wage  inequality,  wage  bargaining  institutions  that  represent  the 
median worker or insider workers or minimum wages. A rapid rise in unit labour costs (wages 
that rise faster than productivity) may also endanger especially the jobs of the youth. 
Many countries have reduced minimum wages for young workers 
Minimum wages often concern the least educated and least productive workers, and often 
young  people  often fall  into  this  category.  Thus,  the  level  of minimum  wages  is  potentially 
important  for  the  employment  of  young  workers.  In  fact,  many  countries  have  reduced 
minimum  wages  for  young  workers,  for  example,  80%  of  the  minimum  wage.  A  reduced 
minimum wage is, however, meaningful only in countries where there is a significant share of 
workers working at the minimum wage (for example in France). 
One  wage  related  measure  is  to  reduce  the  employers’  social  contributions  to  targeted 
groups,  such  as  low-productivity  workers  (often  young),  to  promote  employment  of  young 
persons.  This  is  on  the  other  hand  has  to  take  into  account  the  losses  to  public  finances 
caused by the reduction and substitute them from other sources. 
Apprenticeship  places  that  pay  a  sub-minimum  wage,  and  where  the  contracts  include  a 
training commitment from the employer, have been successful (e.g. in France). 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Dual employment protection legislation weaken the position of the youth 
Firing cost should be gradually increasing with the duration of employment relationship 
Employment  protection  legislation  often  treats  different  categories  of  workers  in  different 
ways. Differences in redundancy costs of fixed-term and permanent employees are large in a 
number  of  countries.  Fixed-term  contracts  are  common,  particularly  among  young  workers 
and ideally they can act as a “bridge” to a permanent position. But the temporary contracts 
are in a weaker position relative to ongoing contracts, and layoffs have been concentrated on 
fixed-term  contracts.  So  young  people  are  in  general  in  a  weaker  position  due  to  their 
over-representation  in  these  contracts.  For  fixed-term  contracts  to  be  converted  into 
permanent  ones  more  frequently,  the  threshold  for  converting  should  become  lower.  A 
proposed  solution  has  been  that  the  firing  cost  would  be  gradually  increasing  with  the 
duration  of  employment  relationship  (e.g.  Bentolila  et  al.  2011).  Then  a  large  jump  in  the 
firing cost when continuing the employment relationship, would be avoided.  
(iii) Mismatch and reallocation 
The recovery in European economies and the success in reallocating the surplus labour from 
permanently downsized sectors to more resilient ones are intertwined and will determine the 
economic fortunes of European economies in the years to come.  
If there is a problem of mismatch, a recovery or expasionary policies will not likely 
lower such structural unemployment 
Indeed,  understanding  the  nature  of  euro  area  unemployment  has  important  policy 
implications. When unemployment is cyclical and due to a lack of job creation, a pick-up in 
economic growth or expansionary policies will tend to reduce unemployment. However, when 
there is a mismatch between job vacancies and available workers, a recovery in growth or 
expansionary policies will not affect such structural unemployment much. 
Mismatch calls for measures that improve matching efficiency, along with adjustment in 
workers skills and adjustment in relative wages 
This calls for measures that improve matching efficiency in European labour markets, along 
with adjustment in workers skills and adjustment in relative wages.  
The transition from education to work is an important point of friction. According to the OECD 
job  search  programmes  have  proved  to  be  successful  and  cost  efficient  in  employing  the 
youth who are employable.  
Youth unemployment tends to be the highest for the least educated. Sufficient education, or 
lack  of  it,  is  crucial  in  determining  labour  market  outcomes  of  young  people.  Completing 
basic education and obtaining a secondary degree are a minimum requirement for a young 
person to obtain and retain a job, as well as to being able to learn in a job. Especially for 
marginalized  youth,  education  outside  of  the  class  room  has  been  successful,  so  that  the 
youth are continuously exposed to a work environment and accumulate experience. German 
style apprenticeship programs have been found to pave the way from education to working 
life.  
Wages provide incentives 
Wages provide incentives. The relative wages of different occupations should reflect demand 
and  supply  conditions  and  direct  young  workers  to  those  sectors  and  occupations  where 
work is available.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
Is the “German labour market miracle” a textbook example of successful reforms? 
In Germany both unemployment and youth unemployment have continued during the crisis, 
now  the  unemployment  rate  being  at  its  lowest  rate  in  two  decades,  at  6%  and  youth 
unemployment at 8.5%. 
Although this impressive evolution of unemployment and youth unemployment is in part due 
to better economic development than in other euro area countries, the German labor market 
institutions play a role. The target of the German labor market institutions and reforms has 
not been the youth only, but because the youth are at “the margin”, meaning that changes in 
unemployment  affect  them  more  than  proportionately,  the  general  labour  market  reforms 
have  successfully  also  reduced  youth  unemployment.  The  key  institutions  and  reforms  in 
Germany are the Hartz reforms (2003–2005), wage moderation, the “Kurzarbeit” short time 
working scheme, and the apprenticeship vocational training programme. All of these include 
elements that promote the fall in youth unemployment. 
Hartz reforms aimed at both labour supply and demand 
The  Hartz  reforms  included  a  number  of  measures  aiming  at  both  labour  supply  and 
demand. By tightening the eligibility of and reducing the duration and level of unemployment 
benefits, as well as  with different types of low-wage jobs and wage subsidies the German 
government  aimed  at  activating  unemployed  workers.  Labor  market  regulations  were 
reduced, by altering employment protection and the rules for temporary contracts. Opening 
clauses  to  labour  contracts  were  introduced,  to  bring  flexibility  in  times  of  trouble.  These 
concern flexibility of working time and wages. 
Wages have grown moderately 
Wages have grown moderately in recent years in Germany, which has contributed to the fall 
in unemployment. The increase in low-wage jobs has in part supported the employment of 
low productivity workers, often the young. 
“Kurzarbeit” has had a positive employment effect during the crisis beneficial especially 
for the employment of workers on permanent contracts, typically older workers 
Whereas  labour  input  adjustment  has  been  made  through  the  reduction  of  (temporary) 
workers in many countries, in Germany the adjustment has been made largely in hours per 
worker with the so called “Kurzarbeit” short time working scheme. In this programme, firms 
temporarily reduce the hours of their workers and the loss in wages is partly compensated by 
the  public  funds.  This  short  time  working  scheme  has  had  a  positive  employment  effect 
during the crisis. 
Short time working arrangements may amplify insider-outsider problems in the German 
labour market 
The Kurzarbeit programme has, however, been beneficial especially for the employment of 
workers on permanent contracts, typically older workers. For temporary workers the effects 
have  been  smaller  (Hijzen  &  Venn  2010).  Thus  the  short  time  working arrangements may 
amplify  insider-outsider  problems  in  the  German  labour  market.  Until  now  the  positive 
economic development of the German economy has kept this hidden. 
A short-term vs. long term tradeoff: current employment vs. restructuring 
The  short  time  working  schemes  may  also  involve  a  short-term  vs.  long  term  tradeoff. 
Although these schemes have been successful in mitigating the rise in unemployment, they 
may also hinder the reallocation of labour across sectors of the economy. If this is the case, 
the  short  term  benefits  of  higher  employment  may  come  at  the  cost  a  harderneed  for 
restructuring later. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Apprenticeships have served well to lead youth to jobs 
In Germany vocational training is based on apprenticeships. About a quarter of employers 
offer  apprenticeship  training.  Those  in  vocational  training  typically  spend  approximately 
3 days a week in firms as part-time employees for 2–4 years. The costs of apprenticeship 
training are borne by the firms and the public sector. It is commonplace that apprenticeship 
places are converted into employment relationships at the end of the training period. 
The  export-driven  German  manufacturing  economy  may  be  especially  well  suited  for  a 
system of apprenticeships, for services it might be less suitable. The Netherlands and Austria 
have similar experiences from apprenticeships as Germany.  
Monetary policy and the functioning of the labour market 
The primary goal of the Eurosystem monetary policy is price stability. The monetary policy 
stance  of  the  ECB  is  focused  on  the  euro  area  and  the  primary  objective  of  the  ECB 
Governing Council remains to maintain price stability over the medium term. This is the best 
contribution of monetary policy to fostering growth and job creation in the euro area.  
Having said this, it should be noted that the functioning of the labour market and monetary 
policy are tightly intertwined. To make this point, one can think of the following examples: 
The functioning of the labour market affects the economic environment in which 
monetary policy is conducted 
The functioning  of  the  labour  market  affects  the  economic  environment  in  which  monetary 
policy is conducted. An inefficiently allocated labour force lowers the potential output of an 
economy  and  in  the  short  run  it  limits  the  rate  at  which  the  economy  can  grow  without 
generating  inflationary  pressures.  Reforms  that  increase  labour  market  flexibility  in  such  a 
way  that  the  job  matching  process  becomes  more  efficient  should  transitorily  increase  the 
potential growth rate of the euro area economy until a higher employment rate is reached. 
A  greater  matching  efficiency  of  euro  area  labour  markets  and  a  higher  wage  flexibility 
should speed up the adjustment of wages and prices to monetary policy actions. This should 
reduce  the  short-run  effects  of  monetary  policy  on  the  real  economy.  This  improved  short 
term inflation/growth trade-off would facilitate the conduct of the stability oriented monetary 
policy of the ECB. 
Matching inefficiencies might lead to wage increases in excess of labour productivity 
growth, thus triggering inflationary pressures 
Bottlenecks  in  the  labour  market  resulting  from  matching  inefficiencies  might  also  lead  to 
general wage increases in excess of labour productivity growth, thus triggering inflationary 
pressures.  
Pressures on wages and wage dispersion, as well as inflation pressures may arise 
even in the presence of high aggregate unemployment 
At  first  glimpse,  this  point  may  seem  irrelevant  in  the  current  situation  where  there  is  an 
abundance  of  unemployed  workers.  However,  the  uneven  sectoral  developments  and  the 
composition  of  the  unemployment  pool  (workers  from  downsizing  sectors,  long  term 
unemployed)  may  lead  to  an  environment  where  excess  demand  and  supply  of  labour 
coincide.  Sectors  and  occupations  experiencing  labour  shortages  will  exert  high  wage 
demands even in the presence of high aggregate unemployment. Consequently, pressures 
on  wages  and  wage  dispersion,  as  well  as  inflation  pressures  may  arise  even  in  the 
presence of high aggregate unemployment.  
Also  the  labour  market  institutions  in  many  European  countries  have  produced  an  insider-
outsider  divide  between  workers  (permanent  contract  older  workers/temporary  contract 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
young workers) where insiders may make high demands when outsiders are being laid off at 
the same time. 
Conclusion 
Shocks and institutions have piled employment adjustment pressures especially on the 
young 
The  interaction  of  shocks  and  institutions  behind  the  rise  and  persistence  of  European 
unemployment received a lot of attention in economic research and policy debate at the turn 
of the millennium.4 Now the financial crisis has brought unemployment back to center of the 
European  policy  debate.  Shocks  and  institutions  have  piled  employment  adjustment 
pressures especially on the young, and youth unemployment has risen to record levels.  
If youth unemployment remains persistently high, the risk of structural unemployment (and 
exclusion)  increases,  because  nothing  converts  cyclical  unemployment  to  structural 
unemployment more efficiently than prolonged spells of unemployment. 
The relocation of the unemployed youth to new jobs is a pressing issue 
The  relocation  of  the  unemployed  youth  to  new  jobs  is  a  pressing  issue,  as  prolonged 
unemployment  at  the  start  of  the  working  career  has  substantial  long  term  costs  for  both 
individuals and society as a whole. Labour market institutions and policies should take this 
challenge seriously. 
Labour market institutions in many European countries are slowing down the process 
of economic restructuring 
In their present form, the labour market institutions in many European countries are slowing 
down the process of economic restructuring and hampering the pace of employee allocation 
between  sectors.  High  and  persistent  unemployment  makes  fiscal  consolidation  more 
challenging, and hampers the monetary transmission mechanism. 
Labour market institutions and reforms should avoid partiality 
Labour market segmentation tends to amplify employment adjustment disproportionately for 
some groups,  like  young  workers. Therefore  labour  market  institutions  and  reforms should 
avoid  partiality,  ie.  large  differentiation  across  worker  groups.  The  focus  should  be  on 
comprehensive  reforms  that  lower  average  labour  adjustment  costs  across  the  whole 
economy instead. 
Reforms that promote restructuring and reduce segmentation will pay off in the future in 
terms of competitiveness, potential output, welfare and public finances 
The functioning of the labour market will be an important determinant for the speed or the 
recovery  of  European  economies.  Reforms 
that  promote  restructuring  and  reduce 
segmentation will pay off in the future in terms of competitiveness, potential output, welfare 
and public finances. 
Thank you for your attention. 
                                                
4  See e.g. Blanchard & Wolfers (2000) and Ljungqvist & Sargent (1998). 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
at 
References 
Bentolila,  Samuel,  Juan  José  Dolado  and  Juan  F.  Jimeno.  2011.  “Reforming  an  Insider-
Outsider Labor Market: The Spanish Experience”, IZA Discussion Papers 6186. 
Blanchard, Olivier and Justin Wolfers. 2000. “The Role of Shocks and Institutions in the Rise 
of  European  Unemployment:  The  Aggregate  Evidence”.  The  Economic  Journal,  Vol.  110, 
No. 462, C1–C33. 
Bonthuis, Boele, Valerie Jarvis and Juuso Vanhala. 2012. “What’s going on behind the euro 
area  Beveridge  Curve?”  mimeo.  Available 
http://www.suomenpankki.fi/en/ 
suomen_pankki/organisaatio/asiantuntijoita/Pages/vanhala_juuso.aspx 
Hijzen,  A  ja  D.  Venn.  2010.  “The  role  of  short-time  work  schemes  during  the  2008–08 
recession”, OECD WP 115. 
Karjanlahti,  Kristiina  and  Juuso  Vanhala.  2012.  “Nuorisotyöttömyyden  nousu  duaalisilla 
työmarkkinoilla” BoF Online X/2012. 
Lindbeck,  Assar  and  Dennis  J.  Snower.  2001.  “Insiders  versus  Outsiders”,  The  Journal  of 
Economic Perspectives, Vol. 15, No. 1, 165–188.  
Ljungqvist,  Lars  and  Thomas  J.  Sargent.  1998.  “The  European  Unemployment  Dilemma” 
Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 106, No. 3, 514–550 
Pissarides, Christopher A. 2011. “Regular education as a tool of counter-cyclical employment 
policy”. Nordic Economic Policy Review, 1/2011, 209–232. 
Reinhart,  C.M.,  and  K.S.  Rogoff.  2009.  “The  Aftermath  of  Financial  Crises”.  American 
Economic Review, 99(2): 466–72.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
