Hirohide Yamaguchi: Agenda for Japan’s economy and challenges 
facing small and medium-sized enterprises 
Speech  by  Mr  Hirohide  Yamaguchi,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  Japan 
Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Tokyo, 19 April 2012. 
Introduction 
 It is my great honor to have an opportunity to speak in front of front-line business leaders. 
The Bank of Japan and the chamber of commerce and industry have had a close relationship 
for  more  than  a  century.  The  first president  of  the  Tokyo Chamber  of  Commerce,  Japan’s 
first chamber of commerce and industry, was Mr. Eiichi Shibusawa, who is called the father 
of Japan’s capitalism, and his grandson was Mr. Keizo Shibusawa, the 16th Governor of the 
Bank of Japan. The 15th Governor Mr. Toyotaro Yuuki was President of the Japan Chamber 
of Commerce and Industry (JCCI) before taking office as Governor. The Bank also received 
valuable advice from the successive Presidents of the JCCI as Counsellors, and staffers of 
the  Bank  have  been  exchanging  views  directly  on  various  occasions  with  the  regional 
Chamber of Commerce members and firms. Financial and economic information obtained on 
those occasions has been valuable in the Bank’s policy conduct, and I take this opportunity 
to thank you for your cooperation. 
Today,  I  will  review  the  recent  developments  in  Japan’s  economy,  followed  by  challenges 
facing it, while bearing in mind the activities of small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs). 
Then, I will explain the Bank’s recent monetary policy conduct. 
I. 
Recent developments in Japan’s economy 
Recent economic developments and outlook for the immediate future 
Let me start with the recent economic developments in Japan (Chart 1). Japan’s economy 
rapidly recovered from the plunge following the Great East Japan Earthquake through last 
summer.  While  the  economy  has  subsequently  been  more  or  less  flat  due  partly  to  the 
effects of a slowdown in overseas economies and the yen’s appreciation, there have recently 
been  some  signs  of  a  pick-up.  Public  investment  has  started  to  increase  and  private 
consumption has firmed up due in part to the effects of measures to stimulate demand for 
automobiles. Overseas economies on the whole still have been in the deceleration phase, 
but  some  improvement  has  been  observed,  including  continued  moderate  improvement  in 
U.S. economic conditions. As for the outlook, we expect that Japan’s economy will resume a 
moderate 
led  by  emerging  and 
commodity-exporting  economies,  and  reconstruction-related  demand  after  the  earthquake 
disaster increases. 
recovery  as  overseas  economies  will  pick  up, 
Uncertainties about the outlook 
Such economic outlook is associated with various uncertainties. Today, I will point out three 
uncertainties that require special attention. 
The  first  uncertainty  surrounds  developments  in  overseas  economies,  especially  the 
European economy. Thanks to massive liquidity provision by the European Central Bank and 
financial support to Greece, the possibility that the European debt problem will induce turmoil 
in global financial and capital markets through funding problems of financial institutions has 
at least lessened. However, it is not yet known whether European peripheral countries can 
smoothly carry out more drastic measures of fiscal and economic structural reform. Recently, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Spain’s struggle with fiscal reform has started to be recognized as a new destabilizing factor 
to financial and capital markets. 
The second uncertainty surrounds developments in international commodity prices, including 
crude  oil  prices.  A  rise  in  crude  oil  prices  will  put  downward  pressure  on  Japanese  firms’ 
profits and households’ real purchasing power. If inflationary pressure increases globally, we 
cannot  rule  out  the  possibility  that  overseas  economies,  in  which  some  improvement  has 
started to be seen, will slow down again. 
The third uncertainty surrounds the domestic electricity situation. The electric power supply 
and demand situation might become increasingly severe, mainly during the summer. There is 
also a problem of an increase in electricity costs associated with a shift to thermal power. 
Those will increase future uncertainty particularly for the SMEs, which lack self-defense tools 
including privately-owned electrical power facilities. If the severe electricity situation becomes 
protracted, it may become an incentive for firms, which aim at the optimal division of labor at 
home and abroad, to expand production and business overseas. Unless alternative domestic 
production is generated, Japan’s growth potential might decline. 
In relation to the first uncertainty about developments in overseas economies, let me touch 
on  developments  in  foreign  exchange  markets.  While  the  yen  has  been  weakening 
somewhat since February, it remains at a substantially high level compared with that prior to 
the Lehman shock. That is because global investors have become increasingly risk averse 
partly in response to the Lehman shock and the ensuing aggravated European debt problem, 
and have thus purchased assets including the yen, which were considered to be relatively 
safe. In the current phase of high uncertainty about the outlook for overseas economies, the 
Bank believes special attention should be paid to the possibility that the yen’s appreciation 
will have a negative impact on Japan’s economy through a decline in exports and corporate 
profits  as  well  as  a  worsening  of  business  sentiment.  The  yen’s  appreciation  has  various 
merits,  including  reduction  in  import  costs.  Nevertheless,  it  might  be  difficult  even  for 
domestic demand-oriented firms, which are supposed to benefit from the yen’s appreciation, 
to step out and take positive action utilizing the merits in the current situation, in which they 
struggle to visualize future growth. 
Uncertainty  about  the  future  of  the  economy  will,  to  some  degree,  put  a  brake  on  firms’ 
current economic activity. In that sense, medium- to long-term economic developments and 
firms’ views on those developments are reflected in the current economic activity. Keeping 
those points in mind, from a somewhat longer-term perspective, I will review developments in 
Japan’s economy and consider the agenda for its revival. 
II. 
Medium- to long-term agenda for Japan’s economy 
Downtrend in economic growth rate 
Japan’s economy achieved a high real growth rate of an average of about 10 percent during 
the  high-growth  period.  While  the  growth  rate  subsequently  declined,  a  relatively  high 
average growth rate was maintained at about 5 percent in the 1970s and 4–5 percent in the 
1980s.  It  fell  substantially  to  around  1.5  percent  in  the  1990s  and  further  to  less  than 
1 percent  in  the  2000s  (Chart  2).  Such  decline  in  the  economic  growth  rate  is  partly 
attributable to the ending of Japan’s process of catching up with advanced economies, which 
had  continued  since  the  high-growth  era,  and  a  decrease  in  the  working-age  population 
associated with progress in aging.  
Even when the population of workers declines, if added value earned by a worker, namely, 
labor  productivity  increases,  the  growth  potential  of  the  economy  as  a  whole  can  be 
maintained.  However,  as  economic  globalization  has  been  progressing  rapidly  since  the 
1990s and emerging economies have become rivals, Japan’s economy has not been able to 
adapt  sufficiently  to  such  a  changing  environment  and  Japanese  firms’  international 
competitiveness and productivity have declined. For two major reasons Japanese firms were 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
labor  and  capital  did  not  smoothly  move 
unable to adapt to the changing environment. First, the effects of the bursting of the bubble 
overlapped. Japanese firms were busy resolving “three excesses” of debt, employment, and 
business  capacity  that  had  piled  up  during  the  bubble  period,  and  did  not  have  leeway  to 
pursue  proactive  economic  activity.  Second,  economic  structural  reform  was  delayed, 
namely, 
to 
high-productivity  areas.  In  the  case  of  Japan,  aggressive  fiscal  and  monetary  policies 
continued  to  underpin  the  economy  since  the  1990s.  In  the  meantime,  while  the  need  for 
drastic structural reform was pointed out many times, in reality the reform did not progress 
except for deregulation in some areas. It could be one reason for the downtrend in Japan’s 
economic  growth  rate  since  the  1990s  that  structural  reform,  which  was  essentially 
necessary in strengthening growth potential, did not progress smoothly. 
low-productivity  areas 
from 
Low growth and deflation 
Such downtrend in growth potential is also one reason for Japan’s long-standing problem of 
deflation.  If  the  downtrend  in  the  economic  growth  rate  becomes  protracted,  people  will 
become  unable  to  have  confidence  in  or  expectations  for  future  growth.  As  I  mentioned 
earlier,  concern  over  future  growth  shrinks  people’s  current  spending.  If  that  results  in  a 
decline  in  the  actual  growth  rate,  it  forms  a  vicious  cycle  of  once  again  lowering  people’s 
future  growth  expectations.  Such  structural  vicious  cycle  will  induce  a  chronic  demand 
shortage. When there is a lack of demand compared with the supply of goods and services, 
normally, prices will fall. Since the second half of the 1990s, Japan’s economy experienced a 
downturn three times triggered by the financial system crisis, the bursting of the IT bubble, 
and  the  Lehman  shock.  Whenever  Japan  was  faced  with  a  substantial  decline  in  the 
economy,  the  aforementioned  vicious  cycle  was  strongly  recognized,  and,  even  in  the 
ensuing  economic  recovery  phase  Japan  repeatedly  encountered  the  situation  in  which 
growth expectations did not sufficiently rise and it could not escape from a demand shortage. 
The result was a protracted deflationary trend. 
Output gap and a mismatch between demand and supply 
According to an estimate by the Cabinet Office, the current annualized output gap is about 
15 trillion yen. As it was estimated to be about 40 trillion yen immediately after the Lehman 
shock,  the  gap  has  narrowed  considerably  but  has  remained  substantial.  In  that  regard, 
some point out that if economic activity is stimulated by fiscal or monetary policy to create a 
demand of 15 trillion yen, the output gap will be filled and Japan’s economy can immediately 
overcome deflation. It is not that simple. The output gap in numerical terms is the difference 
between the size of demand for the existing goods and services and the existing production 
capacity to supply those goods and services. However, in reality, people’s demand itself has 
been changing due to structural changes in society, including aging. If the supply side has 
not been able to sufficiently meet such new demand, then it might not merely be the problem 
of an output gap but the problem associated with a mismatch between demand and supply, 
namely,  demand  has  not  been  meshing  well  with  supply.  For  example,  in  medical  and 
welfare industries, it has been often said that, despite expectations for further demand due to 
aging,  sufficient  services  have  not  consequently  been  provided  due  to  various  regulations 
and  a  labor  shortage  in  the  field.  In  addition,  if  there  is  a  case  in  which,  even  while 
recognizing  the  expansion  of  Asian  markets  or  an  increase  in  foreign  tourists  as  business 
opportunities,  firms  are  unable  to  establish  systems  for  export  expansion  or  sales 
strengthening  due  to  a  lack  of  market  information  or  the  difficulty  in  finding  suitable 
personnel, thereby letting the demand just pass, it is also a kind of mismatch. 
Based on such line of thinking, it is obvious that the idea of merely filling the output gap is 
insufficient. It is necessary to change the supply structure, namely, reduce supply capacity in 
areas where future demand is not expected on one hand, and expand a supply system that 
meets people’s new demand on the other. If potential demand leads to actual added value, 
corporate  profits  and  productivity  will  rise  and,  as  a  result,  the  growth  potential  of  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
economy  as  a  whole  will  increase.  In  the  following  I  will  consider  firms’  efforts  toward  the 
revival of Japan’s economy. 
SME’s challenges for revival of Japan’s economy 
III. 
Looking at the productivity of the Japanese manufacturing industry over the past 20 years, 
the rate of growth in productivity, both of large firms and SMEs, stagnated in the 1990s. After 
entering the 2000s and up to the Lehman shock, the growth rate of large firms’ productivity 
increased  again  due  partly  to  an  increase  in  exports,  while  that  of  SMEs’  productivity 
continued  to  be  more  or  less  flat  (Chart  2).  Therefore,  during  that  period,  the  profitability 
difference  between  the  large  firms  and  SMEs  widened  more  than  ever.  However,  in 
retrospect,  the  increase  in  exports  during  that  period  was  partly  supported  by  the  credit 
bubbles in the United States and Europe as well as the substantial depreciation of the yen. 
Namely, in my view, the middle of the 2000s was a period especially in favor of large firms, 
and the strength of SMEs did not get weaker than it used to be and their underlying strength 
was  firmly  maintained.  In  fact,  there  have  recently  been  not  a  few  episodes  that  strongly 
impress  the  underlying  strength  of  SMEs,  such  as  “only  one”  companies  that  have  honed 
their skills and leaped to the world level and “competitiveness in the field,” or genbaryoku, 
that enabled a rapid recovery from the earthquake disaster. 
What is necessary for the revival of Japan’s economy is that individual firms continue to meet 
challenges  so  that  such  underlying  strength  will  be  exerted  as  the  strength  of  Japan’s 
economy to the maximum extent. 
The first challenge is to utilize the wide trend of globalization (Chart 3). SMEs that started to 
export or make foreign direct investment have achieved a relatively high rate of productivity 
growth, compared with those that did not. In that regard, according to the White Paper on 
Small  and  Medium  Enterprises,  while  the  average  productivity  growth  rate  of  SMEs  that 
made foreign direct investment was about 1.8 percent, the growth rate of those did not was 
about 1.0 percent. Utilization of imports, incorporation of inbound foreign tourists, utilization 
of  foreign  personnel,  and  transactions  with  foreign  firms  are  also  effective  ways  to  utilize 
globalization. With an increasing unification of markets at home and abroad, there are plenty 
of catalysts for growth around us in terms of personnel and goods. 
The second challenge is to tap domestic demand (Chart 4). While various areas, including 
environment  and  energy,  can  be  considered,  aging  and  the  demographic  vortex  are  also 
creating great business opportunities. Looking at the entry rate of SMEs by industry, recently, 
the entry rate has been relatively high in such industries as medical and welfare services, in 
addition  to  information  and  communications,  diet,  accommodations,  and  education  and 
learning support that have started to incorporate the elderly as new customers. People who 
were called baby-boomers are known to have a high propensity to consume, compared with 
the  previous  or  next  generations.  Inclusive  of  such  generation,  now  called  the  “active 
seniors,”  those  60  years  old  or  older  already  account  for  more  than  40  percent  of  private 
consumption. 
In meeting new challenges, it is important to utilize the strength unique to SMEs. Merits of 
SMEs are “quick in decision-making” and “can turn on a dime.” Because of their small size, 
SMEs can make bold decisions according to changes in the surrounding environment, and 
thus have potential for a great leap forward. “Able to make finely-tuned responses” is also a 
merit  of  SMEs.  I  have  heard  that,  as  aging  progresses,  the  locally-based  business  of 
providing services by visiting homes has been received well. Such face-to-face business is a 
promising area for SMEs that large firms cannot easily imitate. 
Firms’ challenges sometimes bring changes to regional economies. For example, we have 
often heard an opinion that how to maintain local employment will become an issue as for the 
outward shift of firms’ production bases. However, in tandem  with exploitation of overseas 
demand, if the review of a division of labor at home and abroad as well as an enhancement 
of  domestic  business  is  pursued,  that  will  consequently  have  a  positive  impact  on  local 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
employment. On that point, the White Paper on Small and Medium Enterprises pointed out 
that “in firms that made direct investment overseas, the number of workers once decreases 
by  about  10  percent  after  the  investment,  but  in  six  to  seven  years,  domestic  workers 
increase compared with firms that did not make investment” (Chart 3). What is important is to 
consider, from a long-term perspective, how a firm can grow and the regional economy can 
be  vitalized.  I  hope  people  here  representing  the  regional  economy  and  the  Chamber  of 
Commerce in each region will exert strong leadership. 
Conduct of monetary policy 
IV. 
Finally, let me talk about the Bank of Japan’s recent monetary policy conduct. 
The Bank recognizes that Japan’s economy is faced with the critical challenge of overcoming 
deflation  and  returning  to  the  sustainable  growth  path  with  price  stability.  Based  on  the 
recognition, the Bank implemented in February and March 2012 the following two measures. 
In  February,  the  Bank  clarified  its  monetary  policy  stance  and  further  enhanced  monetary 
easing (Chart 5). Specifically, the Bank introduced “the price stability goal in the medium to 
long  term”  and,  on  that  basis,  will  aim  at  achieving  the  goal  of  1  percent  in  terms  of  the 
year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI, and will continue with the powerful easing until it 
judges the 1 percent goal to be in sight. And to confirm the policy stance not only by word but 
also by action, the Bank decided to increase the total size of the Asset Purchase Program by 
purchasing an additional 10 trillion yen in government bonds. 
Subsequently, in March, to support private firms’ efforts to strengthen the growth potential, 
the  Bank  decided  to  substantially  enhance  the  fund-provisioning  measure  to  support 
strengthening the foundations for economic growth, “the Growth-Supporting Funding Facility” 
in short, both in terms of the yen and a foreign currency (Chart 6). The Growth-Supporting 
Funding Facility was introduced two years ago as a measure for the Bank to provide financial 
institutions making investments and loans that contribute to Japan’s economic growth with 
long-term  and  low  interest  rate  funds.  The  March  decision  has  two  points.  First,  the  Bank 
established  special  rules  for  a  new  lending  arrangement  of  500  billion  yen  for  small-lot 
investments  and  loans  that  had  not  been  deemed  eligible  in  the  past  being  less  than 
10 million  yen.  Regional  financial  institutions  have  been  expressing  that,  even  among 
small-lot  borrowers,  there  were  not  a  few  SMEs  that  could  make  a  great  leap  forward 
depending on their efforts to meet the challenges. Such opinion was a trigger for setting the 
special  rules.  Second,  the  Bank  established  a  new  U.S.  dollar  lending  arrangement  of 
1 trillion  yen  equivalent  (12  billion  U.S.  dollars)  for  financial  institutions’  investments  and 
loans denominated in foreign currencies. That aimed at supporting the efforts to strengthen 
domestic growth potential by utilizing the trend of globalization. In that regard, it is not only 
large firms but also SMEs that have been making efforts in overseas expansion and import 
increase.  Therefore,  the  Bank  crafted  the  arrangements,  including  setting  a  maximum 
amount of foreign currency-denominated loans per project, so that the new arrangements will 
not  be  used  heavily  on  large  projects  but  to  a  wide  range  of  projects  including  small  and 
medium ones. 
The Bank believes that, in order for Japan’s economy to overcome deflation, the efforts to 
increase  the  economy’s  growth  potential  and  support  from  the  financial  side  are  both 
necessary. The February and March measures implemented on the basis of such recognition 
are a policy package toward overcoming deflation. The Bank considers that those measures 
will  work  together  to  encourage  moves  to  achieve  the  goal  of  overcoming  deflation  and 
returning to the sustainable growth path with price stability. 
Concluding remarks 
I  have  today  mainly  spoken  about  the  challenges  facing  Japan’s  economy  and  efforts  to 
meet them. While the severe business environment has been continuing since the burst of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
the bubble in the 1990s, even against such a backdrop, I have heard that there are many 
SME  managers  who  promote  the  utilization  of  women  and  the  elderly  and  actively  pursue 
“work-life-balance.”  Such,  on  the  surface,  behind-the-scenes  activity  will  also,  through 
increasing  the  retention  rate,  consequently  lead  to  an  improvement  in  productivity  and  an 
increase  in  competitiveness.  Furthermore,  such  efforts  have  been  providing  many  people 
that  have  the  will  and  ability  to  work  with  various  employment  opportunities  that  suit 
individual lifestyles and life stages. Japanese SMEs are an engine for the richness of public 
life that cannot be measured only by numbers, such as GDP and productivity. Also from such 
a perspective, unless SMEs get vitalized, Japan will not be vitalized. The Bank will steadily 
support firms’ activities through taking appropriate policy action if necessary in the powerful 
monetary easing stance.  
  6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  7
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 9
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
