Andreas Dombret: Europe’s sovereign debt crisis – causes and possible 
solutions 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, to the Deutsche Alumni, Frankfurt am Main, 20 December 2011. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen 
Thank  you  very  much  for  inviting  me  to  speak  to  the  Deutsche  Alumni  here  today.  The 
second  half  of  2011  has  certainly  not  been  the  best  of  times  for  the  euro  area  and  for 
financial stability. 
The  financial  crisis  has  now  entered  into  a  fourth  stage.  The  first  stage  was  the  subprime 
crisis which struck the US real estate market. At its heart were those financial products which 
spread  US  housing  loans  across  the  world.  The  second  stage  was  the  loss  of  confidence 
within the international financial system following the Lehman Brothers bankruptcy and the 
subsequent  global  economic  crisis.  The  third  stage  has  been  the  ongoing  European 
sovereign  debt  crisis  which  began  in  Greece  in  May  2010.  It  was  initially  perceived  as  a 
problem  of  what  was  known  as  the  “euro-area  periphery”.  Now,  in  the  fourth  stage  of  the 
financial crisis, however, this designation no longer holds. 
How things now stand 
The sovereign debt crisis has now spread to the core of the euro area. This has affected the 
funding conditions for governments and banks alike. The European financial system faces a 
serious loss of confidence. 
Against this background, the risks to the German financial system have risen perceptibly as 
well. And yet, since the beginning of 2009, the German financial system has become much 
more resilient. Banks have more – and better-quality – capital. Domestic credit risk is at its 
lowest  level  in  three  years.  Funding  vulnerabilities  have  also  been  reduced.  Customer 
deposits, regarded as a stable source of funding for banks, have gone up markedly. 
However, the high sovereign debt, part of which is on banks’ books, now poses a significant 
risk to financial stability – one that not even Germany’s financial system can avoid. This is 
made particularly clear by the latest Financial Stability Review published on 10 November by 
the Bundesbank. 
The  sovereign  debt  crisis,  though,  has  not  only  hit  the  financial  system,  but  is  also 
increasingly  impacting  negatively  on  the  real  economy.  Although  the  corporate  sector  has 
still been assessing the economic situation in Germany positively, it expects the situation to 
deteriorate in the future. Hard indicators are showing a similar picture: exports, for instance, 
went down distinctly in October, which will put a damper on economic output. On the whole, 
the Bundesbank, in its current forecast for 2012, is expecting Germany’s economy to grow 
by 0.6%. 
However,  since  the  domestic  factors  for  an  upswing  remain  intact,  we  expect  Germany  to 
turn  onto  a  recovery  path  before  the  end  of  next  year.  Supported  by  an  expansionary 
monetary policy and a growing global economy, growth in 2013 should then return to 1.8%. 
This  means  that,  in  the  next  two  years,  the  German  economy’s  capacity  utilisation  would 
therefore be normal. A probable average increase of 2.5% for this year is likely to be followed 
by a return to a much lower cost of living in the coming two years, which the Bundesbank 
currently expects to be 1.8% in 2012 and 1.5% in 2013.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
This  forecast,  of  course,  is  based on  the  assumption  that  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  will  be 
gradually  overcome  and  will  not  continue  to  escalate.  This  crisis  is,  and  will  remain,  the 
single greatest risk to the financial system and the real economy. 
For this reason, I would now like to take a closer look at the sovereign debt crisis, focusing 
on three questions. First, what actually caused the crisis? Second, how do we contain the 
crisis? Third, where do we want to go with monetary union in the long run? 
The causes of the sovereign debt crisis 
Unsound  economic  developments  had  apparently  been  brewing  in  several  euro-area 
countries for many years. These include, in particular, excessive lending, asset price bubbles 
and  a  loss  of  competitiveness.  These  structural  deficits  were  the  breeding  ground  for  the 
sovereign debt crisis. 
The actual weak link at the launch of monetary union, however, was the combination of a 
single monetary policy and decentralised fiscal policy. Monetary policy is set at the European 
level – by the European Central Bank. By contrast, responsibility for fiscal policy rests with 
the  individual  member  states,  ie  at  national  level.  This  severance  of  responsibilities  was 
already  at  the  centre  of  the  debate  when  monetary  union  was  being  established.  In  a 
currency  area  with  a  decentralised  fiscal  policy,  the  member  states  have  an  increased 
incentive to borrow. Any country that goes deeper into debt does not face the consequences 
by itself, as these are spread across the entire currency area – for example, through every 
country’s interest rates increasing. 
The founding fathers of monetary union therefore created a framework of rules to prevent, or 
at  least  correct,  such  unsound  developments:  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  This  was 
intended  to  keep  national  fiscal  policies  in  check.  One  of  its  tenets  was  that  annual 
government  budget  deficits  should  not  exceed  3%  of  gross  domestic  product.  A  complex 
procedure was performed regularly to monitor member states’ compliance with this limit. The 
penalties for breaching the deficit limit could be escalated all the way to financial sanctions. 
There is one more key building block in the edifice of the euro area alongside the Stability 
and  Growth  Pact:  the  no-bail-out  principle,  which  forbids  member  states  from  assuming 
liability for the debts of other member states. The guiding principle of monetary union was 
therefore 
the 
consequences  of  their policies  and  financial  market  agents’  individual  responsibility  for  the 
consequences of their investment decisions. 
Despite these rules, however, member states’ borrowing has not been effectively contained. 
Why  not?  Mainly,  because  the  rules  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  were  not  only 
circumvented  but  even  bent.  This  was  possible  thanks  to  a  crucial  flaw  in  the  system: 
countries  that  violated  the  deficit  limit  were  not  automatically  punished.  Instead,  the  other 
member states voted on a sanction. And this – to quote the ECB’s former chief economist 
Otmar Issing, led to a situation in which sinners passed judgement on fellow sinners. This, of 
course, encouraged a “you scratch my back and I’ll scratch yours”. Put differently: “I won’t 
punish you today if you don’t punish me tomorrow.” 
Looking  back,  it  must  also  be  noted  that  the  financial  markets  did  not  have  the  desired 
disciplining effect on fiscal policy. Investors turned a blind eye to the misbehaviour of some 
member states for far too long. By the time the interest rates on government bonds started to 
rise, the horse – in this case, the Greek minotaur – had already bolted.  
And, once the horse has bolted, the no-bail-out principle is gone with it. As I’m sure you will 
remember, no member state is allowed to assume liability for another’s debts. This principle 
was,  at  the  very  least,  stretched  quite  far  when  assistance  was  granted  to  Greece.  This, 
however, was not entirely unjustified: the euro-area countries are now so closely integrated 
that  problems  in  one  country  can  spread  quickly  to  envelop  the  entire  euro  area,  in  a 
responsibility:  member  states’ 
responsibility 
individual 
individual 
for 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
phenomenon known as contagion. When push came to shove, it was deemed necessary to 
help other member states. This is quite understandable in the short term. However, in the 
long run it is dangerous if countries with a debt problem can expect to receive help no matter 
what. This can raise the spectre of a dangerous spiral of more and more assistance and less 
and less confidence in the will of the affected countries to amend their ways. 
Routes to a stable monetary union 
And such a loss of confidence is just what we are facing right now. The public, and also the 
markets,  have  lost  faith  –  in  politics,  but  also  in  the  architecture  of  monetary  union.  The 
question is: how do we go about restoring confidence? 
Let me begin by stating clearly what won’t work. Confidence cannot be sustainably restored 
by putting more and more money on the table – for instance, by constantly ramping up the 
rescue funds. This strategy ultimately has its limits – be they political or financial. And the 
proposal of circumventing financial limits by switching on the printing presses is dangerous. 
Of  course  the  resources  of  a  central  bank  are,  in  theory,  nearly  limitless.  Using  them  to 
finance  sovereign  debt,  however,  does  not  solve  problems  but  instead  creates  new  ones. 
Such  an  approach  would  endanger  the  key  foundation  of  a  stable  currency:  the 
independence  of  a  central  bank  that  is  dedicated  to  price  stability.  This  would  throw 
overboard the very things that need saving. 
And, as I said earlier: money can’t buy you confidence. The only thing that can be bought is 
time.  With  the  EFSF  and  the  forthcoming  ESM,  instruments  to  do  just  that  have  been 
created.  However,  this  bought  time  must  also  be  used  to  eliminate  the  root  causes  of  the 
crisis. From this we can derive three main things that, in my opinion, need to be achieved. 
Firstly,  government  budgets  need  to  be  put  back  in  order.  This  goes  for  all  euro-area 
countries, but is particularly incumbent on those countries which have time and again put off 
the necessary adjustments. Efforts are apparently being made at the political level to step up 
pressure from other member states and the European Commission. 
Secondly, the countries affected by the crisis need to conduct structural reforms in order to 
become  more  competitive  and  to  promote  economic  growth.  Such  reforms  are,  naturally, 
difficult and painful. The Irish case shows, however, that they are possible, and the German 
case shows that they pay off in the long run. 
And, thirdly, we need a stable architecture for monetary union. Instead of constantly patching 
up  the  results  of  fiscal  policy  mistakes  and  insufficient  implementation  of  the  Stability  and 
Growth Pact, monetary union has to be “reinvented” – such that sound fiscal policy is also 
truly guaranteed in future. In my view, there are two options open to the euro area: either we 
can return to the founding principles of monetary union agreed at Maastricht, or we should 
venture the step towards a deeper European integration which also includes fiscal policy. 
Returning to the founding principles of monetary union 
Regarding the first option – returning to the founding principles of monetary union – I do not 
share the frequently voiced fear that the current framework is unsuited to monetary union. 
However, it clearly needs adjustment, of course. There are three key points here. 
Firstly,  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  must  be  given  “teeth”.  In  particular,  a  stronger 
automatism is needed to punish breaches of the deficit and debt limits.  
Secondly,  the  no-bail-out  principle  needs  to  be  reinforced:  no  member  state  should  be 
permitted to assume liability for the debt of another member state. Financial market investors 
will  only  punish  bad  fiscal  policy  behaviour  in  a  timely  manner  if  they  expect  to  lose  their 
money. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Thirdly, the euro area needs a permanent crisis mechanism. Recourse could be taken to this 
mechanism  if  a  crisis  erupts  and  financial  stability  throughout  the  euro  area  is  at  risk. 
However, there are three important aspects to note: assistance to individual countries must 
be  tied  to  strict  economic  and  fiscal  policy  conditionality;  it  must  be  only  granted  with 
appropriate  interest  rate  premiums;  and,  in  the  event  of  a  default,  private-sector  investors 
have to bear their losses themselves. 
In view of these exigencies, some encouraging decisions were taken at the EU summit on 
8 and  9 December.  They  included  the  introduction  of  debt  brakes  which  should  be  firmly 
enshrined  in  national  law.  At  the  same  time,  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  is  likely  to  be 
better  protected  from  political  influence  in  the  future.  If  a  country  violates  the  pre-defined 
deficit limit, it will, unlike in the past, be automatically punished; it will be much more difficult 
to  avoid  sanctions.  That,  too,  is  an  improvement.  And  –  depending  on  the  design  and 
implementation  –  this  could  represent  a  major  step  towards  a  “Maastricht  Plus”  model. 
However, it is only a small step towards deeper European integration – I will come back to 
this point shortly. By no means, however, is this a fiscal union in the narrow sense of the 
term. The important thing now, naturally, is not to allow the agreements made to be watered 
down – either in the specific arrangements or their subsequent application. 
Deepening European integration 
Besides strengthening the existing framework of monetary union, there is an alternative route 
to  stabilising  the  euro  area.  This  route  would  involve  deepening  European  integration. 
However,  it  would  not  necessarily  also  mean  the  wholesale  transfer  of  fiscal  policy  from 
national to European level. National parliaments could retain their independence in deciding 
on  revenue  and  spending;  European  involvement  would  only  affect  borrowing  and 
indebtedness. What kind of involvement could this be? 
It  would  be  important  to  set  strict  deficit  and  debt  limits  at  the  European  level  for  national 
budgets. These limits would apply at all national levels; in Germany, this would encompass 
central, regional and local government, as well as the social security systems. The European 
rules would have to be combined with appropriately strict powers of intervention, as this is 
the only way to make them enforceable. One thing ought to be made clear: member states 
that  do  not  comply  with  the  predefined  deficit  and  debt  limits  would  lose  their  fiscal  policy 
sovereignty.  Ultimate  budget-setting  authority  would  therefore  no  longer  rest  with  national 
parliaments but at the European level. 
The EU summit decisions, however, still do not give Europe the right to take over national 
fiscal policy in the event of persistent fiscal policy misbehaviour. If, for instance, Eurobonds 
were  to  be  issued  in  such  a  framework,  there  would  be  a  mismatch  between  liability  and 
control:  all  euro-area  countries  would  be  jointly  liable  for  the  debts  of  other  euro-area 
countries but would not be able to keep them in check. In this framework, mutual assistance 
must  be  granted  only  as  a  last  resort,  must  be  strictly  conditional  and  must  involve 
considerable interest rate premiums, in order to give countries an incentive to balance their 
government budgets. 
fiscal  policymakers  are  ultimately  also  responsible 
Financial market reform as a necessary addition 
National 
for  convincing  market 
participants  to  invest  in  their  sovereign  bonds.  The  recent  past  has  served  at  a  painful 
reminder that berths at the “safe haven” of sovereign bonds have to be defended time and 
again. This is also true of Germany. The auction of ten-year Bunds at the end of November, 
failed to attract sufficient bids despite all-time low interest rates, may very well be interpreted 
as a shot across the bow, yet its importance should definitely not be overrated.  
In  addition,  rating  agencies  have  issued  warnings,  with  Germany  no  longer  being  left  out. 
The  timing  of  some  of  these  announcements  is  certainly  debatable  –  and,  in  my  opinion, 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
often questionable. However, this should not divert our attention from the responsibilities of 
fiscal  policymakers.  Introducing,  through  regulatory  measures,  special  rules  for  developing 
sovereign  bond  ratings  does  not  seem  a  particularly  appropriate  solution,  at  any  rate. 
Instead, we should reduce references to ratings in regulations wherever possible. 
I should also mention that significant progress has already been made in the area of financial 
market regulation, too. Given the fact that regulatory flaws were among the main causes of 
the  financial  crisis,  this  was,  in  my  opinion,  of  paramount  importance.  The  reform  of  the 
capital framework, which will improve the quantity and quality of banks’ capital and thus their 
capacity  to  absorb  losses,  is  certainly  a  particularly  welcome  development.  Increasing  the 
amount of losses the banks’ investors are able, and required, to bear, reduces the danger of 
taxpayers  once  again  having  to  foot  the  bill.  The  phenomenon  of  systemically  important 
banks,  meanwhile,  shows  that  Basel  III  is  by  no  means  the  end  of  the  road.  The 
internationally agreed rules for dealing with the “too-big-to-fail” issue now have to be rapidly 
implemented at national level in an internationally consistent manner. The complex oversight 
and, if necessary, regulatory treatment of the shadow banking system remain atop the reform 
agenda. Although the current zero weighting of government bonds likewise sets the wrong 
incentives, it should only be adjusted going forward, predicated on precise studies. 
Looking at the financial markets and their regulation, however, I would like to mention one 
more thing. The sovereign debt crisis is shining a new light on a commonly held assumption, 
namely, that crises are caused by unfettered markets and can be avoided only by giving the 
state  more  space.  However,  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  has  shown  quite  clearly  that  even 
states are fallible. 
Of course, the crisis has opened our eyes to the blind faith in the market that has sometimes 
prevailed; however, statism and dirigisme are by no means the right path to take. Instead, we 
should  return  to  a  founding  tenet  of  the  social  market  economy:  individual  responsibility. 
Those who take risks must also face the consequences. Reviving attaching more importance 
to this principle this would represent major progress – including with respect to the sovereign 
debt crisis. 
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen, I have touched upon various aspects which I think are essential for 
resolving  the  sovereign  debt  crisis.  At  the  EU  summit  in  early  December,  policymakers 
decided  to adopt  a  fiscal  pact  designed  to  strengthen,  and  in  some  cases  go  beyond,  the 
Maastricht  Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  This  is  a  good  first  step;  however,  it  must  not  be 
watered  down  once  again  during  its  concrete  implementation.  The  Bundesbank  will  not 
cease to call for this concrete implementation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
