Vítor Constâncio: Financial stability – measurement and policy 
Speech by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the high 
level  conference  on  “Financial  stability  –  methodological  advances  and  policy  issues”, 
Frankfurt am Main, 14 June 2012. 
 Ladies and gentlemen,  
After a productive day, it is with great pleasure that I welcome you to this dinner. Before we 
get  started,  let  me  offer  a  few  thoughts  regarding  macro-prudential  research,  the  current 
stage of financial stability analysis at the ECB and policy conduct in Europe.  
The  sources  and  the  propagation  of  the  financial  crisis  highlighted  the  need  for  putting  in 
place  robust  policy  infrastructures  to  safeguard  financial  stability  and  for  macro-prudential 
policies to address systemic risk. In this light, new institutions have been put in place, such 
as  the  European  System  of  Financial  Supervision  and  the  Financial  Stability  Oversight 
Council in the United States, and regulatory reforms are taking shape, notably Basel III and a 
host of other initiatives under the leadership of the Financial Stability Board.  
This progress notwithstanding, it needs to be kept in mind that in the macro-prudential field 
we  are  in  a  much  less  comfortable  position  than  in  the  monetary  policy  field,  in  particular 
concerning  widely  accepted  scientific  foundations  and  long  experience  with  tested  policy 
instruments. 
Against  this  background,  I  will  start  by  providing  a  brief  overview  of  the  recent  macro-
prudential research. I will then focus on some of the main analytical tools for financial stability 
analysis at the European Central Bank (ECB). I will conclude by referring to a key aspect of 
our  future  regulatory  framework  in  Europe,  namely  the  set  of  macro-prudential  policy 
instruments  embedded  in  the  Capital  Requirements  Directive  (CRD)  IV,  and  how  these 
instruments should be made compatible with the requirements for both safeguarding financial 
stability and further developing the Single Market for financial services. 
Progress in macro-prudential and financial stability-oriented research  
1. 
The theoretic foundations in the macro-prudential field are still at a largely rudimentary state 
compared  to  other  research  areas.  This  notwithstanding,  significant  advances  in  macro-
prudential  research  have  been  made  in  recent  years;  in  particular  fuelled  by  the  lessons 
learnt during the financial crisis which underscored the need to take a more systemic view to 
monitoring and assessing risks and vulnerabilities within the financial system and beyond. 
The papers presented at today and tomorrow’s conference provide some useful snapshots of 
the recent academic advances in the field of macro-prudential, and more broadly, financial 
stability analysis. 
One  promising  area  of  research  deals  with  early  warning  models  and  systemic  risk 
indicators, which was the theme of Sessions I and II this morning.  
In  recent  years  the  value  of  early  warning  indicators  has  increased  thanks  to  improved 
methodologies and the use of less exploited data sources. It should also be added that from 
a policy perspective the focus has been shifted somewhat from predicting crises to predicting 
growing  imbalances  and  highlighting  underlying  vulnerabilities.  As  I  believe  was  also 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
illustrated by Atish Ghosh this morning, this change of focus has most likely contributed to 
the greater effectiveness of new early warning tools.1 
Recent research shows how the predictive information can be improved by using individual 
balance sheet data of financial firms combined with traditional macro-financial variables. As 
for example illustrated by Claudio Borio and co-authors and by Alessi and Detken, the merit 
of private credit and liquidity gaps and the role of global variables in early warnings has been 
confirmed, while the performance of bank solvency and liquidity ratios in this regard is still 
under debate.2 
For  what  concerns  systemic  risk  indicators,  valuable  information  for  policy-makers  comes 
from the measurement of the current level of systemic financial stress. A popular means of 
assessing the systemic importance of a financial institution is to look at the sensitivity of its 
value at risk (VaR) – i.e. its tail dependence – to shocks to the whole financial system. This 
has  been  proposed  by  the  CoVaR  approach  of  Adrian  and  Brunnermeier  or  by  similar 
models  of  cross-sectional  measures,  like  the  Co-Risk  used  by  the  IMF  and  based  in  CDS 
premia3  or  the  Systemic  Expected  Shortfall  (SES)  predicted  by  the  Marginal  Expected 
Shortfall (MES) of an institution and its leverage developed by Acharya and co-authors and 
by Brownless and Engle.4 CoVar calculations are being used by the FSOC in the US. We at 
the ECB use different types of indicators to try to gage systemic risk as I will explain in a 
moment.  
A key element of this kind of systemic risk indicators is to account for the network relations 
and clusters of systemic risk spillovers, as for instance demonstrated by Nikolaus Hautsch 
and  Kay  Giesecke 
for 
interconnectedness may also help improving the predictive power of early warning models. 
This  is  clearly  illustrated  by  the  ECB  presentation  this  morning  by  Peltonen  et  al6  which 
shows the usefulness of adding contagion to a regular Early Warning Systems improves the 
performance  of  the  model  proving  that  it  would  have  been  successful  in  predicting  bank 
distress when the financial crisis was approaching. 
A second important research area deals precisely with the assessment of contagion risks, 
which  was  addressed  in  Session  III.  Contagion  within  the  financial  system  can  occur  in 
several  ways,  as  illustrated  by  Franklin  Allen  this  afternoon.7  Most  commonly,  shock 
propagation  within  the  financial  system  is  thought  to  occur  via  interbank  networks  or  via 
Importantly,  allowing 
their  presentations 
this  morning.5 
in 
                                                 
1   See IMF (2010) “The IMF-FSB Early Warning Exercise: Design and Methodologies Toolkit”, September. 
2   See e.g. Borio, C. and P. Lowe (2002), “Asset prices, financial and monetary stability: Exploring the nexus”, 
BIS  Working  Paper  No.  114;  Borio,  C.  and  M.  Drehmann  (2011),  “Towards  an  operational  framework  for 
financial stability: “fuzzy” measurement and its consequences”, BIS Working Paper No. 284.; Alessi, L. and 
C. Detken (2009), “Real-time early warning indicators for costly asset price boom/bust cycles”, ECB Working 
Paper No. 1039. 
IMF (2009) “Assessing the systemic implications of financial linkages” Global Financial Stability Report, April 
2009, pages 73–110. 
3  
4   See, for instance, Adrian, T. and M. Brunnermeier, “CoVaR” (2008), Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff 
Reports,  No  348,  September;  Acharya,  V.V.,  L.H.  Pedersen,  T.  Philippon  and  M.  Richardson  (2010), 
“Measuring  Systemic  Risk”,  New  York  University  Working  Paper;  Brownlees,  C.T.  and  R.F.  Engle  (2010), 
“Volatility, Correlation and Tails for Systemic Risk Measurement”, New York University Working Paper. 
5   See  Hautsch,  N.,  J.  Schaumberg  and  M.  Schienle  (2012),  “Financial  network  systemic  risk  contributions”, 
working paper. 
6   See  Betz,  F.,  Oprica,  S.,  Peltonen,  T.A.,  Sarlin,  P  (2012)  “Predicting  bank  distress  and  identifying 
interdependencies among European Banks”, mimeo. 
7   See Allen, F., A. Babus and E. Carletti (2012), “Asset commonality, debt maturity and systemic risk”, Journal 
of Financial Economics, Vol. 104, pp. 519–534. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
revealed 
financial  crisis  has 
important  deficiencies  of 
common asset exposures. Depending on the structure of the network, even small shocks to 
central hubs in the network can result in serious propagation throughout the system.  
In most cases, during normal times, financial network structures are typically fairly robust to 
shocks  and  thus  allow  for  a  better  diversification  of  risk.  However,  this  notwithstanding, 
shocks to particular elements of the network can trigger major contagion within the system. 
This is a key feature of the so-called “robust yet fragile” complex networks; also alluded to by 
Doyne Farmer this afternoon.8 
From  a  broader  financial  stability  perspective,  it  is  however  not  sufficient  to  be  able  to 
monitor  systemic  risks  and  their  potential  spillover  effects  within  the  financial  system  were 
they  to  occur.  Financial  stability  analysis,  and  macro-prudential  policy  actions,  is  as  much 
about assessing the implications of ruptures in the financial system on the wider economy. 
From  this  viewpoint,  the  development  of  macro-financial  models  linking  financial 
instability and the performance of the economy is of the essence.  
The  global 
the  standard 
macroeconomic models in capturing financial instabilities. Realistic characterisations of such 
instabilities  include  bank  defaults,  financial  market  illiquidity,  extreme  events,  and  related 
non-linearities.  Especially,  the  modelling  of  bank  defaults  within  a  general  equilibrium 
framework  is  crucial  to  allow  for  a  proper  characterisation  of  financial  instability.  However, 
none of these elements feature in the macroeconomic models regularly used for forecasting 
and  monetary  policy  analysis  and  only  recently  has  more  emphasis  been  given  to  better 
developing the role of financial sectors in these models.  
Another fundamental link which until recently has been missing in macro-financial models is 
to allow for heterogeneity, and interlinkages, between the agents within the financial sector . 
Against this background, efforts by economists such as Gertler and Kiyotaki to incorporate 
interbank markets within Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium (DSGE) models are much 
welcome.9  Also  worth  noting  is  the  model  by  Goodhart,  Kashyap  et  al  which  includes  the 
presence  of  a  shadow  banking  system  holding  securitised  assets  issued  by  the  traditional 
banking system that are subject to default.10  
A  lot  of  attention,  for  example  illustrated  in  the  analysis  by  Adrian-Shin11,  has  also  been 
devoted  recently  to  the  debt  and  leverage  ratios  of  financial  intermediaries  and  to  their 
variation  over  the  business  cycle.  In  answering  to  the  question  of  which  financial  frictions 
matter, Adrian, Colla and Shin (2012)12 point to the importance of including in a model with 
financial-real  feedbacks  the  pro-cyclical  leverage  cycle  and  the  co-existence  of  loans  and 
bonds that tend to be substitutes in a recession even if spreads on both tend to increase. 
Geanakoplos  has  shown  that  variations  in  leverage  have  a  huge  impact  on  asset  prices 
potentially contributing to economic bubbles and busts.13 Leverage cycles have only recently 
started being incorporated in macro-financial models. One prominent example is the model 
                                                 
8   See  Caccioli,  F.,  J.D.  Farmer,  N.  Foti  and  D.  Rockmore  (2012),  “Stability  of  the  Austrian  banking  system”, 
unpublished paper. 
9   See Gertler, M. and N. Kiyotaki (2010), “Financial intermediation and credit policy in business cycle analysis”, 
in B. Friedman and M. Woodford (eds.), Handbook of Monetary Economics, Edition 1, Volume 3, October. 
10   See  Goodhart,  C.A.E.,  A.  Kashyap,  D.P.  Tsomocos,  and  A.P.  Vardoulakis  (2012),  “Financial  Regulation  in 
General Equilibrium”, NBER Working Paper No. 17909. 
11   See Adrian, T. and H.S. Shin (2010), “Financial intermediaries and monetary economics”, in B. Friedman and 
M. Woodford (eds.), Handbook of Monetary Economics, Edition 1, Volume 3, October. 
12   Adrian, T., Colla, P. and Shin, H. S. (2012) “Which financial frictions? Parsing the evidence from the financial 
crisis of 2007–09” Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Staff Reports, revised version March 2012. 
13   See Geanakoplos, J. (2009), “The leverage cycle”, in D. Acemoglu, K. Rogoff and M. Woodford (eds.), NBER 
Macroeconomics Annual, Vol. 24. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
by  Brunnermeier  and  Sannikov  which  includes  time-varying  margin  requirements  set  by 
financial intermediaries and thus exacerbates the impact of asset prices over the business 
cycle  as  they  trigger  “margin  spirals”  that  may  cause  long-lasting  adverse  feedback  loops 
between the financial sector and the real economy.14 
A  final  research  area  which  I  would  like  to  highlight  concerns  the  interactions  between 
macro-prudential  policies,  including  financial  regulation,  and  other  policies  such  as 
monetary policy as well as the impact these policies might have on the financial system and 
the real economy. Monetary policy impacts in a fundamental way financial stability: it affects 
asset prices; influences liquidity conditions and has a bearing on risk taking since low short 
term  interest  rates  lead  directly  to  expectation  of  profitable  exploitation  of  a  steeper  yield 
curve  and  consequently  tend  to  increase  leverage  with  more  risk.15  As  Adrian  and  Shin 
(2009) underline what is significant in this “risk-taking channel” (Borio and Zhu (2008)16) is 
that the short term interest rate has a direct effect on monetary and financial conditions not 
waiting for the indirect effect on medium term rates. 
On  the  other  hand,  looking  to  historical  experiences  with  macro-prudential  tools,  being 
dynamic  provisions  in  Spain  or  loan-to-Value  ratios  in  Korea,  or  to  the  implications  of 
different models, one conclusion we can draw is that those instruments are not sufficiently 
strong to tame the financial cycle. One interesting aspect of the model by Goodhart, Kashyap 
et  al  (2012)  ,  that  I  already  quoted,  is  precisely  that  its  simulations  show  that  none  of  the 
analysed instruments (dynamic provisions, loan-to-value ratios, capital requirements, liquidity 
coverage  ratios  and  margin  requirements  on  repos  used  by  shadow  banks),  would  not  be 
enough, even combining some of them, to smooth the financial cycle. The difficulty comes 
from  the  fact  that  the  boom  brings  large  increases  in  asset  prices  and  this  provides  a 
misplaced  sense  of  wealth  improvements  and  a  temptation  to  further  leveraging.  In  this 
context, they nevertheless conclude that dynamic provisioning and liquidity requirements can 
be  the  more  effective  tools  but  still  insufficient  as  the  Spanish  experience  shows.  Banks 
became more resilient but the bubble was not prevented. 
All these points indicate that there  must be a role for monetary policy to address financial 
stability considerations even when the priority target of monetary policy is price stability as 
this goal is affected in the medium term by financial instability. Traditionally monetary policy 
is  only  concerned  about  price  stability,  particularly  in  the  inflation  targeting  regime,  even  if 
central banking has since the XIX century cared for financial stability in the form of lender-of-
last-resort for banks in times of liquidity distress. This asymmetric policy of only “mopping-up” 
with liquidity in financial market downturns but ignoring the risks of the upside booms creates 
moral hazard and provides a significant “liquidity subsidy” to the financial sector.  
The  arguments  against  doing  otherwise  have  been  centred  in  the  difficulty  of  “identifying 
bubbles”  or  in  the  danger  of  “pricking  bubbles”.  Nevertheless  the  on-going  debate  is  not 
anymore  about  “pricking  bubbles”  but  concerns  the  inclusion  of  financial  conditions  in  the 
optimal monetary rules as in the models developed by Christiano, Motto, Rostagno (2009), 
                                                 
14   See  Brunnermeier,  M.  and  N.  Sannikov  (2012),  “A  macroeconomic  model  with  a  financial  sector”,  Working 
paper. 
15   See Adrian, T. and H.S. Shin (2010), “Financial intermediaries and monetary economics”, in B. Friedman and 
M.  Woodford  (eds.),  Handbook  of  Monetary  Economics,  Edition  1,  Volume  3,  October.;  Maddaloni,  A.  and 
Peydro,  J.-L.  (2010),  “Bank  risk-taking,  securitization,  supervision  and  low  interest  rates:  evidence  
from 
Studies, 
http://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/scpwps/ecbwp1248.pdf;  Jimenez,  G.,  Ongena,  S.,  Peydro,  J.-L.  and 
Saurina,  J. (2012),  “Credit  Supply  and  Monetary  Policy:  Identifying  the  Bank  Balance-Sheet  Channel  with 
Loan  Applications”,  American  Economic  Review,  http://www.tilburguniversity.edu/webwijs/files/center/ 
ongena/preprints/jopscc.pdf. 
standards”, 
Financial 
Review 
lending 
Euro 
area 
and 
US 
of 
16   See Borio, C., Zhu, H. “Capital regulation, risk-taking and monetary policy: a missing link in the transmission 
mechanism?” BIS WP n. 268, December. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Curdia  and  Woodford  (2010)  or  Gertler  and  Karadi  (2011)).17  The  new  models  are 
nevertheless  not  mature  enough  and  do  not  include  all  relevant  financial  frictions.  A  pure 
“leaning  against  the  wind”  policy  is  possible  but  has  limitations  although,  in  any  case, 
monetary  policy  should  become  less  asymmetric  and  complement  the  indispensable 
regulatory and macro-prudential policies.  
While these reflections only provided a snapshot of the plethora of research currently being 
undertaken in the field of financial stability analysis, in my view these are some of the key 
elements.  It  also  broadly  reflects  our  own  efforts  here  at  the  ECB  to  further  develop  and 
implement an appropriate financial stability analytical toolkit. This is the topic to which I now 
turn.  
The ECB’s tools for financial stability analysis 
2. 
Beyond  the  academic  research,  a  lot  more  analytical  macro-prudential  work  is  undertaken 
here at the ECB, as it’s the case at other central banks. Our main aim with this work is to be 
in  a  position  to  carry  out  systemic  risk  assessments  in  real  time,  directly  and  regularly 
supporting policy discussions. For this purpose, we have at our disposal a number of tools 
and  techniques  to  help  us  form  a  comprehensive  view  of  prevailing  systemic  risks  and  to 
help  assessing  and  quantifying  the  impact  of  these  risks,  were  they  to  materialise,  on  the 
banking sector and ultimately on the real economy.  
More concretely, we structure our financial stability analysis in the usual way with three broad 
elements.  The  first  entails  an  identification  of  important  sources  of  system-wide 
vulnerabilities based on an analysis of the individual and collective strength of the different 
parts  of  the  financial  system  –  institutions,  markets  and  infrastructures.  The  second  is  an 
assessment of the potential costs – to the real economy – should some combination of the 
identified risks and vulnerabilities materialise. A proper indicator of systemic risk should entail 
both  of  these  properties,  the  probability  of  an  adverse  event  occurring  and  the  potential 
impact  of  such  an  event  occurring.  A  last  element  is  methodologies  examining  network 
fragilities and contagion. 
Starting with the identification of potential sources of systemic risk, our analysis focuses on 
two broad types of indicators: 
The first set of indicators characterise the current state of financial stress in the financial 
system,  i.e.  indicators  that  works  as  “thermometers”  of  the  level  of  tension  in  the  financial 
system. As crises tend to exhibit many different manifestations, it is obvious that no single 
metric can gauge the current level of systemic stress. In practice, we cross-check and report 
on a variety of complementary indicators. Let me mention a few examples.  
One class of approaches employed in practice here at the ECB can be classified as “market 
based indicators” – that is, with a focus on signals from both financial markets and financial 
institutions. At least four examples of distinct indicators in this category can be mentioned. 
First, general financial market stress is quite accurately captured by the so-called coincident 
indicator of systemic stress, or “CISS”, which succinctly synthesises the interaction of stress 
across  key  market  segments  also  taking  into  account  explicitly  the  correlation  structure  of 
different  segments.18  A  second  indicator  in  this  class  of  measures  focuses  specifically  on 
systemic stress within the banking sector – examining the onset of systemic stress through 
                                                 
17   See Christiano, L, Motto, R., and Rostagno , M (2010) Financial factors in economic fluctuations” ECB WP 
n. 1192; Cúrdia, V. and M. Woodford (2010) “Credit spreads and monetary policy” Journal of Money Credit 
and Banking, 42 (6, Supp.); Gertler, M. and P. Karadi (2010) “A model of unconventional Monetary Policy”, 
mimeo. 
18   See  Holló  D,  M  Kremer  and  M  Lo  Duca  (2012),  “CISS  –  a  composite  indicator  of  systemic  stress  in  the 
financial system”, ECB Working Paper No 1426 (March). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
the lens of joint probabilities of default on the basis of CDS pricing of financial institutions.19 A 
third  group  of  market  based  indicators  focus  squarely  on  liquidity  conditions  –  either  in 
specific  market  segments  (e.g.  the  money  market)  or  across  financial  market  segments.20 
Lastly, novel methods such as self-organising financial stability maps provide an alternative 
means  of  gauging  systemic  stress  through  visual  means  –  thereby  providing  a  useful 
complement to numerical signalling methodologies.21 
Another  separate  class of  indicators  we  regularly  report  characterising  the  current  state  of 
financial  stability  can  be  classified  as  “structural  indicators”  –  that  is,  examining  potentially 
excessive leverage and credit developments – as well as disequilibria in specific asset price 
segments  in  specific  economies  or  sectors.  Examples  of  indicators  in  this  category  are 
numerous,  but  clearly  encompass  models  of  credit  booms  as  well  as  various  estimates  of 
valuation  in  real  estate  markets.22  Both  such  sets  of  indicators  can  provide  indications  of 
buildup of imbalances but suffer from one drawback. Assumptions need to be made about 
what defines excessive developments. These assumptions, accordingly, must be robust as 
otherwise they risk being challenged by addressees of policy recommendations.  
The  second  set  of  indicators  more  explicitly  strives  to  predict  vulnerable  states  of  the 
financial  system,  i.e.  early  warning  indicators  –  be  in  the  form  of  univariate  indicators, 
multivariate models or early warning systems. The key feature of all the categories of early 
warning  indicators  is  that  their  signals  are  evaluated  in  an  early  warning  framework,  thus 
historically measuring the performance in terms of correctness and timeliness of the signals, 
potentially taking into account the relative preferences of the policy maker between type 1 
and  type  2  errors.  This  is  an  active  field  at  the  ECB  –  a  representative  example  in  this 
respect would be the work of Alessi and Detken arguing that the global credit gap is the most 
robust early warning indicator for costly aggregate asset price booms or the work of Lo Duca 
and Peltonen building on systemic risks stemming from a combination of domestic and global 
macrofinancial vulnerabilities.23  
Of course, the triggers and exact timings of crises are extremely difficult to predict. However, 
the  underlying  vulnerabilities,  at  least  based  on  past  experiences,  seem  often  to  be 
detectable – one needs to at least control for “known knowns” or “known unknowns”. Indeed, 
many crises follow a very similar pattern featuring excessive leverage. Accordingly, the fact 
that early warning seems possible has practically become part of the layman’s lexicon – not 
least given widespread even popular appeal of analyses on historical crises (e.g. Reinhart-
Rogoff).  Despite  these  strides,  much  remains  to  be  done  until  policymakers  can  be  fully 
confident enough to implement and make use of robust early warning systems. 
Let me move to the assessment tools. One of the major tools to perform financial stability 
assessments is stress testing, primarily of the banking sector, but also conducted for the 
insurance sector – including sensitivity and scenario analyses. Stress testing tools allow for 
evaluating  the  impact  on  banking  sector  solvency  of  severe,  but  plausible  macro-financial 
                                                 
19   See,  for  instance  Box  8  in  the  June  2012  ECB  Financial  Stability  Review,  “Systemic  Risk  Measure  –  A 
portfolio probabilistic perspective on measuring default risk”. 
20   See regime-switching methodology in Box 4 of the June 2012 Financial Stability Review, “Addressing stress in 
interbank markets and the role of unconventional monetary policy measures” and general liquidity indicator in 
Box 9 in ECB, Financial Stability Review, June 2007, “Understanding financial market liquidity”. 
21   See  P.  Sarlin  and  T.A.  Peltonen,  “Mapping  the  state  of  financial  stability”,  ECB  Working  Paper  Series, 
No 1382, 2011. 
22   On  credit,  see  for  instance  Schwaab  B,  S  Koopman  and  A  Lucas  (2011),  “Systemic  risk  diagnostics: 
coincident indicators and early warning signals” ECB Working Paper No 1327 (April); for commercial property 
prices, see Box 6 in the December 2011 ECB Financial Stability Review or for residential property prices, see 
Box 3 in ECB, Financial Stability Review, June 2011. 
23   See Lo Duca M and T Peltonen (2011), “Macro-financial vulnerabilities and future financial stress: assessing 
systemic risks and predicting systemic events”, ECB Working Paper No 1311 (March). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
scenarios  that  reflect  key  systemic  risks.  On  this  basis,  we  use  our  (top-down)  stress  test 
tools  to  rank  the  impact  of  prevalent  macro-financial  risks  in  order  to  gauge  the 
resilience of the banking sector. 
The  top-down,  or  macro-prudential,  stress-testing  framework  developed  by  the  ECB  has 
proven  particularly  valuable  during  the  financial  crisis  and  the  euro  area  sovereign  debt 
crisis.  Systemic  risks  emerged,  intensified  and  evolved  rapidly,  calling  for  a  flexible  and 
operational tool that could deliver quantified impact assessments in a timely fashion. The tool 
is  comprehensive  enough  to  cover  individual  banks  and  it  incorporates  real-financial 
interactions as well as network models to assess contagion risk. 
These  features  notwithstanding,  and  despite  its  increasing  prominence  in  financial  stability 
analysis  and  communication,  stress  testing  has  its  limits.  Notably,  even  state-of-the-art 
stress testing frameworks are characterised by substantial methodological limitations. 
The  major  challenges  facing  stress  testers  today  range  from  dealing  with  the  inevitable 
subjectivity  related  to  scenario  building,  how  to  model  and  integrate  in  a  consistent  way 
within the framework elements, such as endogenous bank responses, interbank spillover and 
macroeconomic  feedback  effects.  Many  of  the  available  models  also  have  difficulties 
capturing well the often non-linear tail risk effects that the scenarios are typically meant to 
reflect. Finally, stress test results are only as good as the data available, which in particular 
for central banks and other macro-prudential authorities without supervisory access is a key 
deficiency. 
Finally, let me add that even though our top-down stress testing framework is far from perfect 
and suffer from many deficiencies, it has proved a useful tool to challenge the more granular 
bottom-up  approaches,  such  as  the  EBA  EU-wide  stress  tests,  and  especially  to  detect 
outlier responses by individual banks in the latter case. 
The last broad element of ECB financial stability analysis is the rapidly burgeoning literature 
on contagion.  I  reviewed  some  ECB  work  in  this  area  in a  speech  last  October.24  In  that 
speech, I mentioned several analytical perspectives we use to examine contagion in all its 
forms  relevant  for  the  ongoing  sovereign  crisis  in  the  euro  area  –  highlighting  models 
capturing the interaction between sovereigns, as well as that between sovereigns and banks. 
Such models make use of multiple techniques to uncover contagion – namely, multivariate 
frequency  decompositions, 
regime-switching  approaches  and  exploiting  generalised 
measures of risk aversion in entity-specific frameworks. Clearly, the issue of contagion is not 
distinct from that of network analysis. While work in this area is broad, I can point to some 
recent ECB work featured in our latest Financial Stability Review – in which tools and results 
are presented regarding applications of network analysis both for actual collateral holdings 
and  simulated  interbank  networks.25  Ultimately,  work  in  this  field  remains  still  relatively 
nascent and I am sure more highly relevant applications will follow with time.  
3. 
The macro-prudential policy framework and instruments in the EU Single 
Market 
Let me now turn to the design of a macro-prudential policy framework and the definition of a 
policy toolkit that is expected to be available for authorities to address the identified systemic 
risks in Europe. 
                                                 
24   See  “Contagion  and  the  European  debt  crisis”,  Keynote  lecture  by  Vítor  Constâncio,  Vice-President  of  the 
ECB  at  the  Bocconi  University/Intesa  Sanpaolo  conference  on  “Bank  Competitiveness  in  the  Post-crisis 
World” Milan, 10 October 2011. 
25   See Special Feature C of the June 2012 ECB Financial Stability Review, “Evaluating interconnectedness in 
the financial system on the basis of actual and simulated networks”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Since  the  outbreak  of  the  financial  crisis,  policy  makers  have  gradually  placed  more  and 
more emphasis on a macro-prudential approach of financial regulation. The first step in this 
process was the establishment of the Financial Stability Board as a global coordinating body 
which was followed by setting up authorities with explicit macro-prudential mandates at the 
national level as well. An important milestone in this process was the establishment of the 
ESRB  in  Europe  last  year.  Besides  its  role  in  facilitating  discussion  on  macro-prudential 
mandates  and  institutional  set-up  at  the  national  level,  the  ESRB  plays  a  key  role  in 
developing a toolkit of macro-prudential policy instruments that national authorities can use 
within the European legal framework. 
In this context, a major policy challenge Europe is currently facing is the implementation of 
the Basel III standards in a way that would allow authorities to use policy tools for macro-
prudential  purposes  as  well.  I would  like  to  highlight  in  this  regard  that  Basel  III  already 
includes some elements of a specific macro-prudential toolkit, such as the counter-cyclical 
capital buffer, which requires banks to build up capital buffers in periods of excessive credit 
growth. These buffers can then be released in stress situations, which would help institutions 
to avoid becoming constrained by regulatory requirements and may thus enhance their ability 
to maintain lending activity. 
However, when having a closer look at the Basel III agreement, we have to acknowledge that 
most  elements  of  the  new  framework  are  traditionally  considered  as  micro-prudential  in 
nature.  The  capital  and  liquidity  rules  are  designed  so  as  to  address  risks  at  the  level  of 
individual institutions. Still, depending on how these instruments are calibrated, they could, in 
principle,  be  also  used  to  address  macro-prudential  concerns  and  mitigate  systemic  risks. 
This is a topical issue from a policy perspective in Europe, given that discussions are at their 
final phase on the implementation of Basel III through the so called “CRD IV”, which includes 
a proposal for a directive and a regulation. Importantly, the regulation will introduce a new 
feature  in  financial  regulation,  namely  that  the  prudential  standards  laid  down  in  this 
legislative proposal will be directly applicable in all EU member states. 
You  may  already  be  aware  of  the  concerns  that  have  recently  been  raised  by  some 
authorities and member states with regard to their ability to use the policy tools falling under 
the  regulation  for  macro-prudential  purposes.  Concretely,  they  claim  that,  if  capital  and 
liquidity rules and other micro-prudential instruments are introduced as elements of a “single 
rulebook”,  this  would  imply  a  “maximum  harmonisation”  of  prudential  requirements. 
Consequently, member states may be legally prevented from adopting more stringent rules, 
even if systemic risks would justify that. 
I share these concerns. However, I would also like to highlight some issues that I consider as 
a prerequisite for the conduct of efficient macro-prudential policy in a single market. 
First,  as  regards  the  “single  rulebook”,  the  ECB  has  expressed  on  many  occasions  its 
support towards this approach. We have underlined that the “single rulebook” contributes to 
a  consistent  implementation  of  prudential  measures  in  the  Single  Market,  improves 
transparency and ensures a level playing field for financial institutions. By avoiding regulatory 
arbitrage  and  distortions  to  competition,  the  “single  rulebook”  is  also  beneficial  from  the 
perspective of financial integration in Europe. 
At  the  same  time,  however,  let  me  also  underline  significant  risks  to  financial  stability  can 
emerge  when  systemic  risks  identified  at  the  national  level  may  impact  other  jurisdictions 
through  spillover  effects  and  common  exposures  of  financial  institutions.  It  is  therefore  of 
paramount  importance  that  national  authorities  have  the  possibility  to  impose,  in  a  well 
identified subset of instruments, more stringent rules than those defined by the regulation.  
Given that member states may well be at different stages of the economic and financial cycle 
within  Europe,  and  there  are  also  significant  differences  in  the  structural  features  of  the 
financial sector across EU countries, authorities should have the control over an appropriate 
set of tools to address both the cross-sectional and the time dimension of systemic risks as 
well. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
In  my  view,  the  appropriate  macro-prudential  regime  in  a  single  market  should  have  three 
main features: 
First, adjustments in the prudential rules for the identified subset of instruments should only 
be  possible  in  the  direction  of  strengthening  the  harmonised  minima.  These  instruments 
could  include  capital  and  liquidity  ratios,  leverage  and  limits  to  large  exposures  (Loan-to-
Value or Debt-to Income ratios are not limited by the CRD IV).  
Second, only calibrations should be subject to upward adjustment, while definitions should 
remain intact so as to ensure that ratios are comparable across institutions and countries, 
thus respecting the principle of a single EU rulebook.  
Third,  this  macro-prudential  regime  should  be  subject  to  strict  safeguards,  under  the  ex-
ante coordination of the ESRB in order to avoid, or at least to minimise, possible unintended 
consequences and spillover effects. These safeguards should include the identification and 
assessment  of  the  macro-prudential  concerns  in  the  respective  countries  both  by  national 
authorities and the ESRB, in particular when spillover effects are expected. Furthermore, the 
implementation  of  macro-prudential  measures  should  be  subject  to  close  monitoring  and 
regular evaluation by the ESRB as well as to disclosure requirements.  
I’m of the view that if these principles are respected, we can set up a framework that would 
enable us to mitigate the build-up of excessive risks in the financial system and to contribute 
to the smooth functioning of the financial system and the Single Market in Europe. 
Against this backdrop, let me finally say a few words about the recent developments in this 
field in Europe. 
First, after months of extensive discussion in European bodies and forums, a compromise 
has been reached at the European Parliament on 14 May and at the last ECOFIN meeting 
on 15 May on CRD IV. This is a very important development and I look forward to successful 
trialogues  between  the  Council,  the  Parliament  and  the  Commission.  Rapid  progress  and 
agreement  on  clear  rules  of  the  game  are  crucial  also  with  a  view  to  meeting  the  G20 
commitments on the timely and comprehensive implementation of Basel III. 
Third, as regard the proposed regulation as approved by the Council, the compromise text 
now includes elements that would allow national authorities to apply measures falling under 
the “single rulebook” for macro-prudential purposes. Overall, this is a welcome development. 
My critical remark in this regard is that the text of the regulation should state clearly that only 
the calibrations or quantitative limits can be tightened while definitions should remain intact, 
since this is the only way to ensure direct comparability or prudential ratios across the EU. I 
also think that the list of measures was enlarged too much and, for instance, in this context I 
do not agree with the proposal that the risk weights of certain exposures can be changed as 
this would distort comparability of such ratios across member states. 
Let me conclude by saying that finding the right balance between the principle of a “single 
rulebook” and the required flexibility to implement macro-prudential measures at the national 
level is and remains a key policy challenge for decision makers in Europe. However, looking 
at  the  developments  in  financial  markets  and  the  recent  policy  initiatives  in  this  field,  I’m 
convinced  that  the  establishment  of  an  efficient  and  well-functioning  macro-prudential 
framework may substantially contribute to the smooth functioning of the single market and 
the  strengthening  of  the  financial  stability  framework.  The  latter  would  be  particularly 
beneficial  for  the  euro  area  where  the  risks  to  financial  stability  can  be  transmitted  even 
faster than elsewhere and a lack of trust in part of the financial system can be felt across the 
entire currency area. Safeguarding financial stability in the euro area demands a euro area-
wide perspective where an effective macro-prudential framework – on the preventative side – 
is  accompanied  by  a  well-functioning  resolution  mechanism  –  on  the  crisis  management 
side.  
In that respect, as you know, the ECB supports the establishment of a financial union for the 
euro  area,  based  on  three  elements:  a  European  deposit  insurance  scheme,  a  European 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
Resolution  Fund  and  a  euro  area  banking  supervisory  authority.  Very  briefly,  this  would 
entail: first, a single deposit insurance scheme that applies to all banks of the euro area so as 
to avoid unfair completion; second, that a subset of euro area financial institutions that are 
systemically important or operating significantly cross-border would be subject to a European 
Resolution  Fund;  and  third,  that  the  same  subset  of  systemically  important  financial 
institutions  would  be  subject  to  a  euro  area  banking  supervisory  authority.  The  Resolution 
Fund would be only for institutions at the point of non-viability that need to be resolved and 
not for bailouts of “going concerns” so as to minimize the need for public funds. The possible 
moral hazard risks of having a single deposit guarantee to all banks without many of them 
being  subject  to  European  supervision  would  have  to  be  addressed,  for  instance,  by 
imposing  that  after  the  need  for  paying  insurance  the  country  where  that  would  have 
happened would have to contribute at least with 50% of the replenishment of the fund. 
Besides contributing to a clear commitment to the future of the euro project one key benefit 
of  all  these  arrangements  would  be  to  ensure  that  the  euro  area  banking  and  financial 
system can be separated from the financial situation of the sovereigns. With this a major step 
would  be  accomplished  to  overcome  the  present  European  crisis  by  consolidating  in  a 
concrete way the future of our monetary union. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
