Stefan Ingves: Financial crises and financial regulation – thoughts after 
five turbulent years 
Speech by Mr Stefan Ingves, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank and Chairman of the Basel 
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  to  the  Swedish  Economics  Association,  Stockholm, 
13 June 2012. 
 Palmstruch and the Bank of the Estates of the Realm 
In  1656,  Johan  Palmstruch  founded  Sweden’s  first  bank,  Stockholms  Banco.  In  1661,  to 
facilitate the handling of money, Palmstruch launched the first banknotes. They were initially 
successful. But it all ended in a bank failure after Palmstruch became tempted to issue too 
many  banknotes  in  relation  to  the  underlying  value  that  was  deposited  in  the  bank.  In 
response to this failure, the Riksdag resolved to form the Bank of the Estates of the Realm in 
1668.  This  bank  was  later  renamed  the  Riksbank  and  is  today  the  world’s  oldest  central 
bank.  
Palmstruch’s story illustrates the importance of price stability – and also the risks of financial 
instability.  
Today, I would like to discuss financial crises and financial regulation from the perspective of 
the  national  economy.  I  want  to  explain  the  value  of  orderly  and  well-reasoned  financial 
regulations for the prevention of financial crises. Banks are not normal companies. For one 
thing, banks in crisis can result in very large costs for the entire economy. The public sector 
thus has an obligation towards the citizens to attempt to prevent and manage financial crises 
to the best of its ability.  
I will start by touching on the benefits and risks of a financial system, and how these can be 
balanced against each other. I will then go on to describe the global financial crisis and how it 
was met. Following this, I will discuss how the global financial crisis turned into a euro crisis, 
and the role the banks are playing in this crisis. In the final part of my speech, I will try to 
provide some answers as to how society can better avoid crises like this in the future. 
The economic balance between benefit and risks in the financial sector 
I have elsewhere described the banking system as a motorway junction for the economy. In 
the banks, and, more generally, in the financial system, households’ and companies’ income 
and expenditure meet like a flow of traffic coming from all  directions. A robust structure is 
needed  to  make  this  interaction  proceed  smoothly.  When  a  lot  of  traffic  is  moving  at  high 
speed, the structure must also have a clear focus on safety. The higher the speed limit, the 
greater the safety margins must be. 
Banks are important to the national economy 
The Riksbank defines financial stability as the maintenance of the financial system’s basic 
functions and its resilience to disruptions. 
The system converts savers’ money into productive investments, ensures that we can pay 
each other when we exchange goods and services, and allocates risk among those who are 
willing to take risks and those who are not.  
The  banks  are  the  single  most  important  providers  of  these  basic  functions.  The  banks’ 
income  largely  consists  of  payments  by  consumers  to  the  banks  for  their  specialisation  in 
these functions. This income also reflects the fact that the banks borrow over the short term 
–  for  example  through  our  wage  accounts  –  and  lend  over  the  longer  term  –  for  example 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
through our mortgages. As it is cheaper to lend over the short term than the long term, the 
banks also earn money this way. 
In comparison with companies in other sectors, the banks have little equity. To some extent 
this is natural, in that the banks’ core activity is borrowing money, which is to say taking on 
debt.  Leverage  means  that  the  banks  can  earn  a  lot  of  money  by  maintaining  low 
equity/assets ratios. Of course, leverage applies to all companies, but, as we will see, banks 
can have particular reason to take greater risks than other companies. 
Vulnerability and contagion risks demand special bank regulations 
The combination of the banks’ central functions and their high indebtedness creates risks. 
This is a matter of credit risk – the risk of not getting the money you lent back again – and of 
liquidity risk – the risk of being unable to borrow money. The banks are vulnerable due to 
their high levels of indebtedness.  
Problems at one bank also risk spreading to other banks. This kind of contagion can happen 
on both the asset and liability sides of a bank’s balance sheet. Deposit and lending surpluses 
in different parts of the world are managed on a global interbank market. The banks’ assets 
thus largely consist of loans to other banks. The banks’ liabilities largely consist of loans from 
other banks.  
The banks are dependent on confidence – illustrated, in its most classic form, by a bank run. 
Rumours that a bank is facing problems can lead people to want to take their money out, 
which may give the bank problems – even if it had no problems to start with.  
So banks have a series of characteristics that distinguish them from normal companies. If a 
normal company is unable to meet its payments, it will have to file for bankruptcy. If a bank 
defaults on its payments, the consequences for the financial system – and the real economy 
– can be enormous.  
This means that it is difficult to let banks go bankrupt, at least if these banks are large and 
times  are  troubled.  So  other  disciplinary  mechanisms  must  be  found  –  such  as  tougher 
regulation  and  thorough  supervision.  Special  legislation  covering  banks  in  distress  is  also 
needed.  
Of course, bank regulations are primarily a way of allowing the public sector to safeguard the 
public  interest.  But  the  regulation  of  banks  is  also  a  way  of  mitigating  principal-agent 
problems between a bank’s management and borrowers on the one hand, and the bank’s 
owners and lenders on the other. For this second category, it is often difficult or expensive to 
monitor the risks on the bank’s asset side. 
One  important  aspect  of  bank  regulation  is  the  requirement  for  the  amount  of  capital  the 
banks  should  maintain.  As  capital  adequacy  requirements  play  a  central  part  in  the 
discussion of financial stability, I would like to examine them in a little more depth. 
There is a difference between the private and social benefits and costs of financial 
regulation 
Demands for bank regulation are not infrequently met with resistance from interested parties 
who  claim  that  regulation  is  too  expensive.  Not  least,  this  resistance  is  aimed  at  higher 
requirements for banks’ capital adequacy, as the interested parties claim that capital is more 
expensive than loans. But in this context, it is important to make a distinction between private 
costs  and  social  costs.  Higher  capital  adequacy  requirements  entail  private  costs  for  the 
banks.  But  we  public  sector  participants  should  primarily  be  discussing  the  social 
consequences.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
One  cornerstone  of  modern  financial  research  is  the  basic  theory  that  was  established  by 
Modigliani and Miller over 50 years ago.1 This says that the value of a company does not 
depend on how that company is funded – under certain assumptions. In principle, the model 
shows that the form of funding is only significant if there is a difference between the debts of 
companies  and  those  of  private  individuals.  And  there  is,  of  course  –  a  limited  liability 
company is basically a means of protecting its owners from the private consequences of the 
company becoming bankrupt. Being able to fund a business operation through borrowing is, 
of  course,  necessary  and,  in  most  cases,  effective.  In  efficient  markets,  lenders’  risks  are 
handled by means of interest rates and contract clauses. The limited liability company is thus 
a  historically  wealth-generating  social  institution.  Nevertheless,  the  example  illustrates  that 
the higher cost of funding through equity is more a matter of private than social costs. 
Another  factor  that  separates  the  costs  for  own  and  borrowed  funds  is  the  tax  system. 
Companies may deduct interest on loans, but pay corporate tax for profits on equity. But this 
is just a private economic difference – from the social perspective, the only difference is the 
subsidisation of debt-financing in preference to equity. 
This specifically applies to banks that may be systemically important – it would be socially 
costly to allow them to file for bankruptcy. So the market often expects that the state will save 
a bank that is on the ropes, one way or another. These so-called implied guarantees create 
even greater differences between social and private costs, and risk leading the banks to take 
even greater risks.  
Banks  are  vulnerable,  contagious  and  sometimes  systemically  important.  There  are  great 
differences  between  private  and  social  cost-benefit  calculations.  Economic  theory  and 
empirical  experience  gives  us  good  reason  to  regulate  banks.  But  the  difference  between 
social and private costs also makes clear that many well-motivated social measures will meet 
with resistance from private interests. 
The global financial crisis illustrated these risks all too clearly 
The global crisis painfully demonstrated the risks of banking activities and financial instability. 
Of course, experience from the crisis lies behind the comprehensive agenda of regulations 
that has been developed in recent years. 
So I thought I would describe the course of the crisis, how authorities met it, and the lessons 
we believe we have learned.  
into  so-called  structured  products,  sometimes 
The risks were realised during the crisis of 2007–2009 
The  factor  that  triggered  the  global  financial  crisis  was  the  increasing  problems  in  the 
US mortgage  sector  in  2007.  These  problems  then  spread,  as  many  mortgages  had  been 
repackaged 
the  point  of  being 
unrecognisable. These instruments were held by a number of agents – and the complexity of 
the  instruments  made  it  difficult  to  see  which  agents  had  major  or  minor  problems.  At  the 
same  time,  many  banks  had  low  equity/assets  ratios.  When  the  problems  spread  in  the 
financial sector, even relatively limited losses could thus lead to major problems. 
The  lack  of  transparency  and  weak  resilience  led  to  an  almost-total  lack  of  confidence 
between financial institutions in the autumn of 2008. Banks became hesitant to lend to each 
other.  As  the  banks  largely  obtain  funding  from  loans  from  each  other  and  other  financial 
to 
                                                 
1  Modigliani, F & Miller, M H (1958): “The Cost of Capital, Corporation Finance and the Theory of Investment”, 
American Economic Review 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
institutions, the lack of confidence led to a drying-up of liquidity within both the financial and 
real economies.  
The crisis was met in a somewhat similar way by the United States, Europe and 
Sweden  
On  the  whole,  the  financial  crisis  was  met  in  a  similar  way  by  all  OECD  countries.  The 
automatic stabilisers were put to work in fiscal policy, and many countries launched targeted 
fiscal policy stimulation measures to break the fall. The central banks reduced interest rates 
to  very  low  levels.  Almost  all  economies  also  took  measures  to  prevent  even  deeper 
problems in the financial sector.  
In the United States, where the crisis originated, the Federal Reserve and other authorities 
provided emergency liquidity assistance to the banks and other parts of the financial system. 
The  Department  of  the  Treasury’s  TARP  (Troubled  Assets  Relief  Program)  purchased 
problem assets from banks and other financial institutions. The guarantee programme for the 
banks’  deposits  was  expanded.  In  addition,  in  2009,  a  stress  test  was  carried  out  of  the 
19 largest US banks as of the spring of 2009. Ten of these banks were deemed to need new 
capital,  which  they  also  succeeded  in  raising.  It  seems  likely  that  this  test  helped  restore 
confidence in the equity/assets ratios of the US banking system.  
In Europe, the banks are more important for the supply of capital to the real economy than 
they are in the United States. So, on our side of the Atlantic, support was channelled via the 
banking system to a greater degree. The ECB has increased liquidity, partly by offering loans 
with  longer  maturities.  In  addition,  the  ECB  has  supported  the  markets  for  both  covered 
bonds and government securities and has thereby supported the banking system of the euro 
area. It has not been able to prevent European banks from encountering serious problems. 
Many  smaller  banks  –  and  a  number  of  major  banks  –  have  been  forced  to  close.  These 
liquidations  have  often  been  carried  out  with  governmental  participation  and  support.  The 
costs of government capital contributions and guarantees have been comprehensive. These 
lie behind a large part of the fiscal policy problems currently being faced by many European 
states, a subject I will return to. 
The most critical period for Swedish banks was between the autumn of 2008 and the spring 
of  2009.  The  liquidity  shortage  on  the  financial  markets  made  it  difficult  for  the  banks  to 
renew their loans. This was joined by the threat posed by the crisis in the Baltic countries and 
the  Swedish  banks’  exposures  there.  The  consequences  of  this  were  that  the  value  of 
Swedish bank securities fell drastically and demand for government securities rose. 
In this situation, the Swedish authorities implemented a series of measures: 
 
The Swedish National Debt Office issued extra treasury bills and, in practice, let the 
banks exchange their mortgage bonds for more liquid government securities. 
The  government  and  the  Riksdag  extended  the  deposit  guarantee  and  quickly 
passed laws enabling support to the banking sector. 
In addition to the repo rate cuts we implemented, the Riksbank provided liquidity in 
several ways. We lent money for longer periods, eased the policy for collateral and 
introduced more counterparties to supply more liquidity to the banking system. We 
created swap lines with the Federal Reserve and ECB to meet the banking system’s 
need 
in 
neighbouring  countries  by  creating  swap  lines  with  Iceland,  Latvia  and  Estonia. 
Finally, we also extended emergency loans to Carnegie and Kaupthing Sverige. 
foreign  currency.  We  also  contributed 
to  crisis  management 
for 
  4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The  Riksbank  no  doubt  considers  that  Sweden’s  crisis  management  was  successful.  And 
other  analysts  have  also  shared  this  assessment  –  including,  for  example,  Goodhart  and 
Rochet  in  their  review  of  the  Riksbank’s  work  carried  out  last  year.2  Unlike  other  central 
banks, we have also been able to phase out our crisis measures.  
The crisis has cost enormous amounts  
The  crisis  entailed  huge  costs,  both  for  society  as  a  whole  and  for  the  tax-funded  public 
sector. 
Andrew Haldane, Executive Director of Financial Stability at the Bank of England, has shown 
that the crisis cost UK taxpayers just over 1 per cent of GDP. The corresponding figure for 
the United States is just below 1 per cent, or USD 100 billion.3 Eurostat has calculated the 
figure for the EU as a whole at 0.7 per cent, or EUR 90 billion.4 
But these figures are only the direct public costs of keeping the financial system more or less 
on its feet. The real social costs of the crisis are significantly higher. Financial crises lower 
output and the growth path. In addition, a part of the effect is permanent, even if it is difficult 
to say how large a part. A historical estimate of the cost of financial crises, calculated as a 
present  value,  is  about  60  per  cent  of  GDP.  For  the  global  financial  crisis,  this  figure  is 
considerably higher.5 
The banks are playing an important role in the sovereign debt crisis 
The banks are also central to the problems that succeeded the global financial crisis, which 
is to say the sovereign debt crisis in the euro area. As I mentioned, several governments in 
Europe  were  forced  to  manage  problems  in  the  banking  sector,  often  at  great  expense. 
Those  countries  with  domestic  property  bubbles  were  hit  particularly  hard.  But  financial 
exposures to the United States and the other countries most affected by the crisis impacted 
the banking systems of several countries. These stresses led to financial problems in many 
European banks and countries, and, eventually, to the current sovereign debt crisis.  
The crisis has created a vicious circle between the real, financial and public 
economies 
The current European sovereign debt crisis has its origins in the period before 2007. In the 
absence of a common fiscal policy, budgetary discipline in the euro area should have been 
safeguarded  by  the  Stability  Pact.  But,  by  2003,  it  could  already  be  seen  that  the 
implementation of the Stability Pact was weak. The financial markets also treated the euro 
countries as a homogenous block for a long time. Consequently, warning signals in the form 
of interest rate differentials between countries were absent. 
When  the  global  financial  crisis  impacted  what  were  often  weakly-capitalised  banking 
systems,  and  the  ability  of  many  countries  to  support  their  financial  systems  became 
questioned, the crisis became acute. The crisis has often been described as a vicious circle 
between  the  real,  financial  and  public  economies:  weak  growth  in  the  economy  leads  to 
                                                 
2  Goodhart, C & Rochet, J-C (2011): “An evaluation of the Riksbank’s monetary policy and work with financial 
stability 2005-2010”. 
3  Haldane, A (2010): “The $100 billion dollar question”. 
4  This is reported in, for example, European Banking Federation (2011): “Facts and Figures 2011/2012”. 
5  Haldane gives an interval of 90–350 per cent for the global economy, depending on assumptions of the extent 
of the permanent effects. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
problems  in  the  banking  sector;  banking  problems  generate  costs  for  the  state;  the  public 
sector has to implement austerity measures to maintain credibility, and this reduces growth. 
This vicious circle also works in the opposite direction: problems in the banking sector spill 
over into lending and growth, which weakens public finances and the state’s ability to back 
up the banking system when necessary.  
Incidentally,  this  pattern  of  interaction  between  problems  in  the  financial,  real  and  public 
economies  recurs  throughout  history.  Reinhart  and  Rogoff  have  described  how  economic 
problems  and  bursting  speculation  bubbles  have  led  to  financial  crises  and  subsequent 
sovereign debt crises time and again over the last 800 years. 
Developments in the banking system, 2007 and on 
So  far,  the  European  banks  have  not  regained  their  credibility  in  the  same  way  as  the 
US banks  did  in  2009  and  the  Swedish  banks  did  in  1992  and  1993.  A  great  deal  of 
uncertainty still prevails over which European banks are robust in the long-term. 
According  to  one  estimate,  the  total  decline in the  value  of  assets  on the  European  credit 
markets amounted to EUR 184 billion by the summer of 2011. The same publication made 
the assessment that losses over the years to come could amount to over EUR 200 billion, of 
which EUR 125 billion would derive from losses linked to government securities.6 The IMF 
has calculated that the effects of the sovereign debt crisis may amount to EUR 300 billion.7 
Even so, the European banking sector was reported to have a larger balance sheet total in 
2010  than  in  2008.  This  reflects  the  fact  that  the  problem  assets  have  still  not  been 
addressed.  
For long periods, European banks have had problems obtaining funding on the market. This 
uncertainty  is  also  reflected  in  the  Riksbank’s  calculations  of  the  stress  index  for  Europe. 
(Figure 1) 
                                                 
6 Credit Suisse (September 2011): “European Banks”. 
7 IMF (September 2011): Global Financial Stability Report. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Figure 1: European stress index 
 State  support  to  the  banking  sector  has  been  significant.  In  addition  to  EUR  90  billion  in 
direct  public  expenditure,  governments  and  central  banks  have  paid  out  the  equivalent  of 
13 per cent of GDP, EUR 1.6 trillion, in emergency liquidity assistance and support for the 
banks. The total commitments amount to triple this figure.8 
The problems in the banking sector have still not been addressed  
The management of the present European banking problems can be contrasted with the way 
we handled the Swedish banking crisis twenty years ago. Of course, although we are often 
considered to have succeeded well in Sweden in 1992, this was due to a relatively beneficial 
political environment, rather than intellectual superiority. Even so, the differences illustrate an 
important  insight  from  economics  –  more  specifically,  the  significance  of  asymmetric 
information. 
Like other central banks, the ECB intervened in 2008 to support liquidity by various means, 
including  offering  loans  at  longer  maturities.  Unlike  in  Sweden,  these  extraordinary  loan 
facilities continue to be available. Furthermore, the ECB has supported the markets for both 
covered bonds and government securities. 
In a crisis situation, it is necessary to maintain liquidity among the banks. The Riksbank and 
other  Swedish  authorities  did  the  same  in  2008–2010.  In  1992,  the  Swedish  government 
issued  a  guarantee  for  the  banks’  commitments  aimed  at  preserving  confidence  in  the 
Swedish banking sector. 
But guaranteeing liquidity is not enough. Confidence in the European banking market is still 
low. Few lenders are prepared to lend to European banks on market terms over the longer 
term. This is where the theory of asymmetric information comes in. As nobody knows with 
certainty which banks will or will not remain solvent over the longer term, cautious investors 
                                                 
8  European Commission (2011): “State Aid Scoreboard: Report on state aid granted by the EU Member States, 
Autumn 2011 Update”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
will  treat  all  banks  as  high-risk  counterparties  –  in  the  same  way  as  the  car  buyers  in 
Akerlof’s “Market for lemons” treat all used cars as potential wrecks.9 
When we, in Sweden, introduced the bank guarantee in 1992, it was to win time while banks 
were closed down, divided up and recapitalised with government assistance. The banks that 
were  left  were  robust  and  able  to  regain  the  market’s  confidence.  This  action  reduced 
uncertainty and, in the course of time, contributed to keeping government expenditure down. 
In Europe, similar measures have only been carried out to a more limited extent. This delay 
and lingering uncertainty have contributed to the current sovereign debt crisis. Before these 
problems are brought to light and dealt with, it will be hard to see any long-term solution for 
the European banking sector.  
A new framework – the way forward 
At the same time as the crisis has to be managed, those of us interested in financial markets 
must think ahead and build a more robust framework. The world doesn’t need a new 2008. 
Encouragingly enough, we have taken important steps towards creating structures that may 
prevent new problems. But there is still a lot of work to do. 
The crisis taught us lessons about risks in the financial sector 
Obviously, the experience of authorities around the world in the crisis will form the basis of a 
new and more secure financial framework. Academic research has also contributed valuable 
insights.  
It is obvious that risks in the financial sector were underestimated before the global financial 
crisis.  One  underestimation  concerned  the  degree  of  correlation  of  risks  in  individual 
institutions. But  it  could  also  be  argued  that  we,  on  the  regulatory  side,  were  a  little  naive 
regarding the risk of moral hazard in the governance of banks. 
To generalise slightly, it could be said that, before 2008, we felt quite safe when we saw that 
the  risk  in  individual  institutions  looked  manageable.  Today,  we  know  better.  Even  an 
individually  well-diversified  bank  has  assets  that  could  be  highly  exposed  to  the  same 
macroeconomic risk. In addition, as the banks largely act as each other’s counterparties, one 
bank’s  problems  can  easily  become  another’s.  If  the  banks  providing  loans  suddenly  no 
longer  wish  to  continue  lending,  the  banks  that  have  borrowed  money  can  face problems. 
And,  if  they  are  not  affected  before,  the  other  banks  will  be  impacted  when  one  or  more 
banks rapidly need to sell their assets, pushing down the prices. To this can be added the 
vicious  circle  of  negative  effects  for  the  real,  public  and  financial  economies  that  I  have 
already discussed. 
To continue these generalisations, it could also be said that previously we usually believed 
that market discipline was enough to ensure that business incentives would correspond to 
socio-economic  efficiency.  Following  the  crisis,  we  know  that  this  is  not  the  case.  Private 
economic incentives for decision-makers in the banks can be so strong that market discipline 
is  not  always  enough  to  achieve  transparency  or  effective  risk  management  (to  take  two 
examples).  The  observation  that  US  subprime  loans  were  often  sold  with  the  same  credit 
rating as Swedish sovereign bonds should be a good enough example of this. The private 
benefits – or corporate profits, if you prefer – of debt-financing relative to equity lead to moral 
hazard. Risks can be passed on to lenders and taxpayers. The management of the banks 
have been rewarded according to return on equity. By using their own risk models, the banks 
                                                 
9  Akerlof, G (1970): “Market for ‘lemons’: quality uncertainty and the market mechanism”, Quarterly Journal of 
Economics. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
have been able to keep risk weights low, which has meant that they have not had to maintain 
so much equity. 
New  frameworks  are  being  established  on  the  basis  of  these  insights.  Here,  I  will  briefly 
explain  what  Basel  III  –  the  new  regulatory  framework  for  the  banks  –  entails.  I  will  also 
briefly discuss the thinking behind macroprudential policy, which has become something of 
an in-word in recent years.  
Basel III increases demands on the banks 
The most important areas of the global Basel III Accord deal with the quantitative demands 
for capital and liquidity being placed on the banks.  
The banks are to have sufficient equity… 
As financial crises can lead to considerable losses, the Basel Committee maintains that the 
banks need substantial resilience.  
So capital requirements are being increased in Basel III, above all for Common Equity Tier 
1.10  The  minimum  requirement  for  the  banks’  equity  is  being  set  at  4.5  per  cent  of 
risk-weighted  assets  –  more  than  double  the  requirement  under  Basel  II.  A  capital 
conservation buffer of 2.5 per cent, added to a counter-cyclical buffer, has created a stronger 
shock  absorber  than  previously  existed.  I  will  return  to  the  counter-cyclical  buffer  when  I 
discuss  macroprudential  policy.  The  capital  adequacy 
requirement  can  also  be 
complemented with a pure gross solvency measure, meaning that equity may not fall below 
3 per cent of total assets. 
All  in  all,  the  banks’  capital  position  will  be  strengthened  considerably  compared  with 
previous regulations, contributing to the boosting of confidence, both in the individual banks 
and in the system as a whole. 
…and carry out clear measures for liquidity 
In the light of the crisis of the autumn of 2008, the Basel Committee has decided, for the first 
time, on quantitative requirements for liquidity in the banks. Basel III works with two liquidity 
measures  –  one  short-term  and  one  long-term.  The  short-term  measure  is  based  on,  in 
principle, every bank having sufficient liquid assets to survive for at least 30 days. It is difficult 
to consider such a requirement as unreasonable. The long-term measure, in principle, limits 
the gap between the maturity of a bank’s assets and the maturity of its debts. So this limits 
the duration risk of the bank. 
In the end, Basel III will be implemented as national legislation 
The regulations I have just sketched will eventually enter national legislation. They are to be 
fully implemented by 2019, with several sub-targets on the way.  
In the EU, Basel III will be implemented through what is referred to as the CRR/CRD IV.11 
Those  of  you  who  have  followed  the  ongoing  negotiations  know  that  both  countries  and 
EU institutions have different views about how implementation should take place in the EU. 
An  important  dividing  line  has  been  to  what  extent  countries  should  be  able  to  stipulate 
higher requirements nationally than those formulated in the common EU regulations. 
                                                 
10  Basel III defines Common Equity Tier 1 as, in principle, share capital and retained profits (i.e. previous profits 
minus dividends). 
11  An abbreviation for the Capital Requirements Regulation and the Capital Requirements Directive. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
The Basel Committee has been clear that the regulations and the implementation of them 
form  a  minimum  standard.  As  you  know,  the  Riksbank  and  other  authorities  in  Sweden 
believe  that  there  are  good  reasons  for  moving  more  quickly  ahead  and  setting  higher 
requirements  than  the  minimum  regulations  in  Basel  III.  Our  reasons  for  this  are  that  the 
Swedish  banking  market  has  distinctive  features  that  entail  risks  and  that  there  is  no 
international framework for managing banks in crisis. Although banks live globally, they die 
locally. Ultimately, the Swedish banks are our responsibility.  
Macroprudential policy has become a distinct policy area 
Responsibility  for  the  national  banking  systems  leads  to  the  final  point  of  my  speech: 
macroprudential  policy.  The  crisis  has  taught  us  that  relatively  stable  institutions  do  not 
necessarily add up to a stable system, for the reasons I have already discussed. There is a 
clear need for a system perspective. This is the perspective of macroprudential policy. 
The idea behind macroprudential policy is that it should address risks in the financial system 
as a whole and thus complement microprudential focus on risks in individual institutions. The 
macroprudential policy analysis can be divided into two dimensions: the structural and the 
cyclical. 
The structural dimension addresses the concentration of risk and interlinking 
The structural (or cross-sectional dimension) relates to how the concentration of risk and the 
links between different parts of the financial system at any given time affect the risk of a crisis 
hitting the system as whole. I have already discussed the links between financial institutions 
and the contagion risks these entail. 
Existing  and  newly-invented  tools  have  been  proposed  and  applied  to  deal  with  these 
structural  risks.  The  former  include  stricter  capital  adequacy  requirements  and  limits  on 
activities and exposures. The newly-invented tools include plans to manage banks in crisis 
(so-called recovery and resolution plans), liquidity requirements and special capital adequacy 
requirements for institutions that are deemed to be systemically important. Work is underway 
within the framework of the Basel Committee to identify globally systemically important banks 
which  will  be  subject  to  stricter  capital  adequacy  requirements.  The  Swedish  authorities’ 
demand for a higher level of capital adequacy in our major Swedish banks is of course an 
example of the same thinking. 
The cyclical dimension addresses risk management over time 
The  cyclical  dimension  (also  referred  to  as  the  dynamic  dimension  or  the  time  dimension) 
relates  to  how  risks  in  the  system  as  a  whole  can  develop  over  time.  The  crisis  and  the 
period preceding it clearly illustrate the tendencies towards exaggerated cyclical behaviour 
that often characterise the financial markets. The demand for loans usually increases during 
periods  of  strong  growth,  and  the  perception  of  risk  often  appears  to  weaken.  When  the 
downturn comes, lending is tightened and many players want to sell their assets at the same 
time, which aggravates the downturn in both the financial and the real sectors. 
Cyclical  risks  can  also  be  met  using  existing  tools  or  tools  especially  designed  for  the 
purpose. A loan limit has been imposed on lenders in Sweden in the form of a mortgage cap. 
Although  Finansinspektionen  introduced  this  cap  for  consumer-protection  reasons,  the 
measure  can  also  be  used,  at  least  potentially,  for  counter-cyclical  purposes.  Liquidity 
requirements  also  have  a  cyclical  dimension.  The  Basel  III  regulations  comprise  a 
counter-cyclical buffer that should be built up in good times when lending is increasing faster 
than the trend. When a downturn comes, the authorities can then release the buffer, which 
gives the banks a safety margin and can counteract credit tightening. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
I  made 
the  remark 
that  a  separated  responsibility 
Macroprudential policy requires organisational development 
The advance of macroprudential policy has also led to organizational changes in supervisory 
work.  In  an  increasing number  of  countries,  individual  authorities,  or  authorities working  in 
collaboration, are being given direct responsibility for macroprudential policy. However, the 
question  of  the  responsibility  for  macroprudential  policy  analysis  and  tools  is  not  always 
simple. Macroprudential policy encompasses clear elements of both supervisory and central 
bank activities. I discussed this in my speech here at Nationalekonomiska föreningen a year 
ago.  Then 
for  monetary  and 
macroprudential policy, without any coordination, could result in a game between authorities, 
which could lead to an outcome not desired by any of the authorities. 
In the United Kingdom, sole responsibility has been given to the central bank. A Financial 
Policy Committee is to be set up alongside the existing Monetary Policy Committee. Such a 
solution  of  course  means  that  the  coordination  between  these  two  almost  parallel 
committees, although each with a different focus, becomes an important issue. 
In  the  EU,  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB)  has  been  set  up  at  the  ECB  in 
Frankfurt. Central banks and supervisory authorities are represented on the ESRB, but the 
central banks have the majority of the votes when decisions are made. 
In Sweden, Finansinspektionen and we at the Riksbank set up the Council for Cooperation 
on Macroprudential Policy in January this year. This council will discuss the assessment of 
risks in the financial system as a whole and discuss appropriate risk-prevention measures. 
The Council will also discuss analyses and the development of tools and methods in the area 
of  macroprudential  policy.  The  Council  is  a  temporary  solution  while  awaiting  a  more 
permanent  distribution  of  the  responsibility  for  macroprudential  policy.  At  present,  the 
Financial  Crisis  Commission  is  working  with  this  issue.  The  recently  appointed  inquiry  on 
capital  adequacy  regulations  will 
future 
counter-cyclical capital buffer. 
In our region, the cooperation between the Nordic and Baltic countries is also important in 
the  effort  to  discover  and  manage  systemic  risks.  This  cooperation  also  covers  plans  and 
preparations for dealing with potential crises.  
focus  specifically  on  responsibility 
the 
for 
A summary in three reflection 
Let me conclude where I started. Palmstruch discovered the benefits of a financial system, 
but  also  experienced  the  individual  temptations  associated  with  irresponsible  lending  and 
how dependent banking operations are on public confidence. Palmstruch also lived to see 
how the state – rather drastically – learned the lessons of this experience. 
In this speech I have provided an introduction to banks and financial regulation – why banks 
are  needed,  but  also  the  risks  they  entail.  I  have  argued  that  the  differences  between  a 
cost-benefit  calculation  at  the  social  and  private  levels  justifies  a  strict  regulation  of  the 
financial  sector  and  declared  that  such  regulation  will  always  meet  with  resistance.  I  have 
spoken about the global financial crisis, how it was met and how it became a debt crisis in 
the euro area. I have also spoken about the course we should take in the future, and why. 
If I were asked to sum up my speech in three reflections they would be as follows:  
 
We  have  to  distinguish  between  the  economic  costs  of  financial  regulation  at  the 
social and private levels. 
Problems in the banking sector cannot be resolved unless we do something about 
them. 
Banks  should  lend  a  little  more  of  their  own  money  and  a  little  less  of  everybody 
else’s. 
  Now I look forward to discussing this with you in the association. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
