Ewart S Williams: The benefits of having a Financial Services 
Ombudsman 
Feature  address  by  Mr  Ewart  S  Williams,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Trinidad  and 
Tobago, at the 9th Annual Breakfast Meeting, Office of the Financial Services Ombudsman, 
Port-of-Spain, 3 May 2012. 
 Thank you Suzanne for that perhaps too generous introduction. Thanks also for this invitation 
to  give  the  feature  address  at  this  Ninth  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Office  of  the  Financial 
Services Ombudsman (OFSO).  
I remember when the Office was established in 2003, there was a mixture of anticipation 
and  suspicion  on  the  part  of  the  public.  Some  of  the  economic  purists  saw  this  as  an 
attempt  to  interfere  with  the  market  mechanism.  Competition  in  the  marketplace,  they 
argued,  should  ensure  that  financial  institutions  provide  the  best  possible  service  to  their 
consumers, failing which the consumer would simply move to the next provider. At any rate, 
it was suggested, that any consumer who aggrieved always had recourse to the courts for 
redress.  It  is  now  widely  accepted  that  this  argument  is  flawed,  even  for  developed 
countries  where  markets  tend  to  be  more  competitive.  It  is  even  much  more  flawed  in 
developing  countries  where  market  failure  is  not  the  exception  but  the  norm,  and  where 
unchecked market forces invariably resulted in some customers being exploited. 
Fortunately the commercial banks, who were the first participants in the scheme, recognized 
that an independent Ombudsman was in the interest of the entire banking industry – both 
banks  and  customers  alike  –  and  they  agreed  to  the  Central  Bank’s  proposal  for  a 
voluntary scheme, not waiting to have it enshrined in the law. I am pleased to note that this 
scheme  has  not  only  survived,  but  has  become  an  important  part  of  our  financial 
architecture.  
Over the past decade or so, many advanced countries have made consumer protection and 
financial  literacy  important  elements  in  a  broader  strategy  aimed  at  long  term  financial 
stability.  Trinidad  and  Tobago  continues  to  be  in  the  forefront  of  this  movement  in  the 
Caribbean and perhaps among developing countries. 
Interest  in  consumer  protection  has  increased  significantly  since  the  onset  of  the  financial 
crisis  of  2007–2009,  as  a  result  of  which  many  advanced  countries  have  introduced  new 
legislation to protect consumers of financial services.  
In  2010,  the  United  States,  enacted  the  Consumer  Protection  Act  and  created  the 
Customer Financial Protection Bureau to ensure that markets for financial products and 
services  worked  in  a  fair,  transparent  and  competitive  manner.  In  the  UK,  the  Financial 
Services Authority has recently outlined a new consumer protection strategy which, inter alia, 
aims at:  
 
 
making retail financial markets work better for consumers, and  
facilitating  the  delivery  of  prompt  and  effective  redress  for  consumers  of  financial 
services.  
In  several  other  countries,  the  Office  of  the  Financial  Services  Ombudsman  is  part  of  the 
arsenal  of  consumer  protection.  We  can 
identify  Banking  and  Financial  Services 
Ombudsmen  in  at  least  thirty  countries  including  Australia,  the  United  Kingdom,  Canada, 
Netherlands, and South Africa.  
The Financial Services Ombudsman, in any country, focuses on an issue that is intrinsic to 
human  interaction  –  i.e  CONFLICT  –  and  it  operates  against  the  reality  that  there  is  an 
asymmetry  of  information  and  power  between  the  financial  institution  and  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
consumer,  which  works  to  the  advantage  of  the  former.  And  this  is  particularly  true  in 
developing  countries  and  with  respect  to  the  smaller  less  financially-sophisticated 
consumer. 
What the Ombudsman’s Office does is to provide an accessible, cost-effective and common 
sense  approach  to  dispute  resolution.  The  Ombudsman  is  there  to  be  of  assistance  to 
financial  consumers,  who  would  otherwise  find  it  difficult  to  advocate  their  cause;  or 
consumers who are unable or unwilling to engage in slow, costly litigation. 
In  a  sense,  the  function  of  the  Ombudsman  is  to  defend  the  rights  of  the  consumer  of 
financial  services.  But  the  Ombudsman  should  also  stress  that  consumers  have 
responsibilities.  
It is the consumer’s responsibility, for example, to provide complete and accurate information 
on his financial status: to read and to try to understand the agreements he signs and to take 
responsibility for his financial decisions. Against this background, the Ombudsman  should 
be prepared to be honest and forthright with any consumer whose complaint is deemed to 
have no merit.  
The  Ombudsman  could  also  be  of  tremendous  benefit  to  the  financial  service  provider,  in 
this sense. A complaint could be one of the most direct ways of saying that there is need 
for  improvement.  Accordingly,  financial  institutions  could  use  consumer  complaints  as 
opportunities for change. Since the Ombudsman keeps a record of complaints, the Office 
could potentially provide an impetus for reforming banking practices.  
My point is that the benefits to be derived from the Financial Ombudsman, are there to 
be shared by both the financial sector and the small consumer.  
Its value to the consumer is in providing an accessible low-cost approach to resolving 
complaints.  To  the institution,  it  provides  an  impetus  to  act  in  a  responsible  manner  and, 
where appropriate, to improve its systems and procedures.  
While there is a tendency to see the Ombudsman as a champion of the consumer, its real 
value  is  in  providing  a  fair  and  balanced  approach  to  investigating,  without  pre-judging  or 
advocating  the  cause  of  either  side  of  the  dispute.  I  can  tell  you  that,  all  over  the  world, 
Ombudsmen  vigorously  defend 
their 
independence is the source of their legitimacy; it is what defines their credibility.  
The  mandate  of  our  Financial  Services  Ombudsman  is  to  facilitate  the  resolution  of 
complaints from individuals and small businesses with respect to services provided by the 
banking and the insurance sectors. 
In  the  case  of  the  banks,  the  Ombudsman  is  empowered  to  treat  with  specific  types  of 
complaints involving deposit and loan accounts; investment services, trusts and mutual 
funds. However, the rules specify that the complaint must not be related to interest rates, 
fees and charges and other pricing decisions. 
The  Ombudsman’s  jurisdiction,  in  the  case  of  the  insurance  sector,  covers  life  policies, 
individual  annuity  products,  fire  and  general  insurance  and  third  party  property  damage 
claims (up to $50,000), under motor insurance policies. Outside the terms of reference 
are complaints involving a company’s risk management policies, product pricing or interest 
rates. 
The  rules  specify  that  the  complaint  must  first  be  referred  to  the  financial  service 
provider for resolution and only if the complainant is not satisfied, could the Ombudsman 
be approached. 
It  is  important  to  note  that  the  complainant  does  not  surrender  his/her  legal  rights  by 
approaching  the  Ombudsman.  If  not  satisfied  the  complainant  is  always  free  to  take  legal 
action. 
for  good  reason  – 
independence  and 
their 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The limited jurisdiction of the Ombudsman scheme is an obvious weakness and a source 
of  considerable  irritation  to  complainants.  However,  even  on  matters  strictly  outside  its 
jurisdiction,  our  OFSO  has  sought  to  intervene  on  behalf  of  aggrieved  consumers  by 
bringing the parties together to search for a solution. In many cases the strong relation 
of trust developed between the OFSO and the service providers, has facilitated resolution of 
complaints that fall outside the formal terms of reference of the Ombudsman scheme.  
Mis-understanding of the role and function of the OFSO and confusion about the procedures 
to  be  followed  in  making  complaints  were  some  of  the  initial  challenges  faced  by  the 
Ombudsman scheme. As Suzanne noted the OFSO has taken steps to address these issues 
through  various  public  awareness  programmes.  Most  notably,  the  OSFO  is  now  giving 
greater focus to financial education.  
The  results  achieved  by  the  OFSO  since  its  inception  have  been  formidable  by  any 
standard. 
The total number of complaints against the banks received by the OFSO was, 585. However 
only 215 or less than 40 per cent fell within the “terms of reference”. 
It is interesting to note that, in the case of the commercial banks, the Ombudsman scheme 
prompted  the  establishment  on  strengthening  of  formal  internal  dispute-resolution 
mechanisms.  This,  I  would  assume,  has  led  banks  to  be  more  attentive  to  customer 
complaints  so  as  to  pre-empt  the  visit  to  the  Ombudsman.  Data  provided  by  the  banks 
themselves  indicate  that  they  handled  internally  close  to  two  thousand  complaints, 
between 2008 and 2011.  
The  number  of  qualifying  complaints  against  the  insurance  companies  referred  to  the 
Ombudsman Office amounted to about 2000, over the period 2005 through 2011, the vast 
majority of which (about 95 per cent) related to motor vehicle insurance. Unlike in the case of 
the  commercial  banks,  we  have  no  systematic  information  on  the  number  of  complaints 
handled  internally  by  the  insurance  companies.  A  few  companies  have  established  formal 
dispute-resolution  mechanisms.  The  majority,  however,  depend  on  informal  ad  hoc 
arrangements. The absence of effective internal mechanisms to deal with complaints may be 
one factor contributing to the larger number of complaints against the insurance companies. 
Data from the Ombudsman’s Office point to a very impressive resolution rate of 94 per cent 
in  respect  of  commercial  bank  complaints  and  97  per  cent  in  respect  of  insurance 
complaints. 
Mr. Douglas Camacho alluded to it and I share the view that the large number of complaints 
against insurance companies compared to the banks may have much to do with the following 
three factors: i) the more robust regulatory regime concerning the commercial banks, whose 
legislation is more current than that of the insurance sector  ii)  a  stronger  compliance 
culture resulting from decades of central bank supervision, compared to only seven years 
for  the  insurance  sector  and  iii)  the  lower  capital  and  entry  requirements  faced  by  the 
insurance sector and particularly the general companies.  
The  area  of  motor  vehicle  claims  presents  by  far  the  greatest  challenge  for  the 
Ombudsman’s Office and is the area of greatest concern for consumers. Of the close to 2300 
complaints processed  by  the  OFSO  over  the  past  seven  years,  about two-thirds involve 
5 of  the  29  operating  insurance  companies.  The  inescapable  reality  is  that,  while  most 
insurance companies operate in a reputable and responsible manner, there are a few that 
adopt questionable industry practices, oft-times exploiting the antiquated and grossly 
inadequate insurance legislation. 
As  an  example,  in  order  to  capture  market  share,  some  companies  are  prepared  to 
under–price  premiums,  while  operating  with 
reserves. 
Consequently,  these  companies  face  serious  problems  in  meeting  consumer  claims.  As  a 
result,  the  bulk  of  the  insurance  complaints  reaching  the  Ombudsman  are  for  unfair 
inadequate  claims 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
claims  practices  such  as;  forcing  legitimate  claims  to  litigation;  under-payment  of  claims 
and unreasonable delays in paying claims.  
The new Insurance Act, which is currently before Parliament, will seek to address this issue 
by  requiring  that  every  insurance  company  involved  in  general  insurance  carry  a  full-time 
actuary who will certify the adequacy of claims reserves.  
I would like to provide some thoughts about the way forward for the Ombudsman Scheme, 
but I would like to couch these against the background of the new global approach to 
financial sector stability espoused by the foremost authority on these matters – the Group 
of G20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors.  
This  approach  says  that  traditional  regulatory  and  supervisory  frameworks  adopted  by 
oversight bodies are not sufficient for financial stability but rather should be complemented 
by  “strengthened,  dedicated  and  proportionate  policy  action  geared  to  enhance  financial 
consumer protection”.  
The G20 explains that the enhanced focus on consumer protection is made necessary by the 
increased  complexity  of  financial  products  and  rapid  technological  change,  all  against  the 
background of the prevailing low level of financial literacy. 
The  G20  emphasizes  that  these  factors  could  increase  the  risk  that  consumers  face  with 
respect to fraud, abuse and misconduct. In particular, low income and less experienced 
consumers are more prone to these risks.  
In  these  circumstances,  the  G20  suggest  that  financial  consumer  protection  should  be 
integrated with financial literacy policies. The Group calls for, inter alia, legal recognition 
of  consumer  financial  protection,  oversight  bodies  with  the  necessary  authority  and 
resources to carry out their mission, improved financial education, and adequate complaints 
handling and redress mechanisms.  
The  G20  makes  a  number  of  specific  recommendations  but  cautions  that  the  approach 
should be tailored to the specific country circumstances.  
Against this background, I would like to make three suggestions for upgrading our existing 
regime of financial consumer protection.  
Firstly, it is time that the existing voluntary Ombudsman regime be enshrined into law. 
While  the  voluntary  arrangement  confirmed  the  “buy-in”  by  the  financial  services  firms,  it 
limited the jurisdiction of the Ombudsman, since the Office’s “terms of reference” was limited 
to the least common denominator – that is to the areas on which there was total agreement 
among  the  service  providers.  This  left  a  significant  area  of  complaints  outside  of  the 
jurisdiction  of  the  Ombudsman.  Giving  statutory  backing  to  the  Ombudsman  scheme  will 
also facilitate the introduction of appropriate sanctions for non-compliance.  
The second imperative, in my view, (and it follows logically from the first) is to extend the 
scope of complaints that come under the authority of the Ombudsman. The numbers 
tell the tale – only about one-third of all the complaints that reach the Ombudsman actually 
qualify  under  the  terms  of  reference.  This  limited  jurisdiction  is  perhaps  the  greatest 
threat to the credibility of the scheme. 
Third,  in  order  to  deliver  this  expanded  mandate  the  OFSO  would  need  to  be  better 
resourced, with a range of competencies sufficient to deal with the rapidly-evolving financial 
services  industry.  Adequate  resources  and  competence  would  strengthen  the  credibility  of 
the institution in the eyes of both consumers and the service providers.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  would  like  to  end  by  congratulating  Ms.  Suzanne  Roach,  the 
current  Ombudsman,  her  predecessors,  and  their  respective  staffs,  for  shaping  a 
formidable institution that has gained considerable respect from both the providers and the 
consumers of financial services. Let me also thank the banking and the insurance sectors for 
their unstinting support for the Ombudsman scheme.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
I really believe that the Ombudsman’s office has earned the right to move to the next level 
and assume a more prominent role in the country’s strategy for achieving financial stability. 
I wish the Ombudsman and her staff continued success and I thank you all for your kind 
attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
