DeLisle Worrell: Central Bank of Barbardos – serving the nation 
Welcome remarks by Dr DeLisle Worrell, Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados, at the 
Frank Collymore Literary Endowment Awards, Bridgetown, 7 January 2012. 
 In  my  introduction  of  Professor  Cardinal  Warde,  who  gave  last  year’s  Sir  Winston  Scott 
Memorial lecture, I paid tribute to the vision of the Central Bank’s first Governor, Sir Courtney 
Blackman,  who  recognised  that  the  Bank  was  more  than  a  financial  institution;  it  was  an 
organic part of the society and its culture, in its every dimension. Governors that followed him 
have remained faithful to that vision.  
If anything, over the years we have fortified our vision of full involvement in the culture and 
intellectual life of our country. As you may have heard, the Bank has set out to become a 
centre  of  Emotional  Intelligence,  and  to  guide  our  behaviour  accordingly.  Emotional 
Intelligence speaks to the realisation that the organisation is its people, and its performance 
requires  sensitivity  to  their  humanity  and  aspirations.  Our  consultant  in  this  endeavour, 
Eliseus  Joseph,  recently  referred  me  to  an  article  in  the  Nov  2011  issue  of  the  Harvard 
Business Review entitled “How great companies think differently”. One characteristic of great 
companies,  those  who  endure  and  thrive  over  the  years  while  others  fail,  is  said  to  be 
“concern  for  public  2  issues  beyond  the  boundaries  of  the  firm,  ...  consider(ing)  societal 
interests along with their business interests”.  
What we have come to understand is that the Central Bank is a community of individuals, 
serving the wider society that is the nation, and we must serve the nation in whichever ways 
our resources and varying talents permit. Our mandate is economic and financial policy, but 
we do not conduct those policies in a vacuum; we are to advise on policies for the betterment 
of the Barbadian society, and all its members. As I have been at pains to emphasize on more 
than one occasion, the outcome of any policy action depends on the individual responses of 
every producer and every consumer. That is why the Bank, and all of us who work for the 
Bank, must be fully involved with the life and culture of our society.  
The FCLE awards must therefore be seen as an essential part of our life and work at Central 
Bank of Barbados. I want to say a special thanks to the Endowment Committee, so many of 
whom are personal friends, for their sterling work over the years. We have made this small 
award an institution, and we appreciate how important it is that the award should endure. We 
aren’t going to hit the jackpot every year, but it is thrilling when we have a year like this, with 
2 outstanding offerings so good the committee could not choose between them. We would 
like to flatter ourselves that this small contribution has helped to stimulate and sustain the 
creative  impulse  in  our  country.  Our  heartiest  congratulations  to  the  winners,  and  our 
deepest  thanks  to  all  who  submitted  their  work,  on  behalf  of  the  staff,  management  and 
Board  of  the  Central  Bank.  Let  me  also  say  how  grateful  we  are  to  Lynn  Nottage,  whose 
address this evening we eagerly look forward to, for being with us on this occasion, and for 
her classes earlier today for aspiring writers.  
Thank you all. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
