H R Khan: Musings on the FEDAI, the forex market and the Indian rupee 
Keynote address by Shri H R Khan, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
7th  Annual  Conference  of  the  Foreign  Exchange  Dealers  Association  of  India  (FEDAI), 
Zurich, 5 April 2012. 
 The  speaker  acknowledges  the  valuable  contributions  of  Shri.  G  Padmanabhan,  Shri.  G  Mahalingam,  Shri. 
Chinmoy Kumar, Shri. Rakesh Tripathy, Shri S. C. Rath and Shri. Surajit Bose. 
Dr.  T  V  Nagendra  Prasad,  Charge  d’Affairs,  Embassy  of  India,  Mr.  Phillipe  Welti,  former 
Ambassador  of  Switzerland  to  India  &  Bhutan,  Mr.  Beat  Siegenthaler,  Executive  Director, 
UBS, Ms. Varsha Vasant Purandare, Chairperson, Foreign Exchange Dealers Association of 
India (FEDAI), Mr. D. G. Patwardhan, Chief Executive Officer, FEDAI, Mr. N. S. Venkatesh, 
Chairman, The Fixed Income Money Market and Derivatives Association of India (FIMMDA), 
Mr.  C.E.S  Azariah,  Chief  Executive  Officer,  FIMMDA,  Mr.  G  Mahalingam,  Chief  General 
Manager, Reserve Bank of India, and distinguished delegates to the 7th Annual Conference 
2012 of FEDAI. 
It  is  a  pleasure  to  be  with  you  in  this  beautiful  city  of  Zurich  and  discuss  some  of  the 
contemporary issues which are likely to pave way for the new order that is being ushered in 
for creating a more robust, more transparent and less risky financial sector. As you would be 
aware, a host of committees under the aegis of the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), 
which is headquartered close to Zurich in Basle, are rewriting rules governing the banking 
and market practices and India is a part of most of these committees. The regulatory regime 
of the international financial architecture is undergoing a metamorphosis post recent global 
financial crisis. In this scenario, it is perhaps appropriate that a forum like this reviews the 
relevance of the existing order, with particular reference to our foreign exchange market, in 
the light of fast changing developments around us. 
I shall start my address by revisiting the role of the FEDAI. I shall focus more generally what 
should be the role of a Self-Regulatory Organization (SRO) in today’s context and particularly 
what should be the role of FEDAI in the changed environment of our forex market. Moving 
over to some of the core issues relating to the forex market in India, I will briefly touch upon 
some of the recent measures taken by the Reserve Bank. Finally, I will briefly discuss the 
issue of internationalization of Indian Rupee, a subject which is assuming critical importance 
in the context of search for alternative reserve currencies and the role for currencies of major 
Emerging Market Economies (EMEs) like China and India. 
Evolution of FEDAI in the changing environment of Indian forex market 
As you may be aware, in the early post-Independence years, under the Foreign Exchange 
Regulation  Act  (FERA),  1947,  a  few  foreign  banks,  designated  as  Exchange  Banks  were 
permitted to transact foreign exchange business. The terms and conditions for undertaking 
such  business  were  being  laid  down  by  the  then  Exchange  Banks’  Association.  With  the 
increase  in  India’s  foreign  trade,  several  scheduled  commercial  banks  were  authorized  by 
the Reserve Bank to deal in foreign exchange business. This led to the formation of FEDAI 
on  August  16,  1958  with  a  mandate  to  lay  down  the  terms  and  conditions  which  were 
mandatory  in  nature  for  the  Authorized  Dealers  (ADs).  With  developments  in  the  Indian 
foreign exchange market and growth in external trade, the role and responsibility of FEDAI 
underwent changes. I am happy to note that FEDAI, through its members, continues to play 
a pivotal role in dissemination of the foreign exchange related banking expertise across the 
country which has led to significant improvement in the customer service. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Let me now highlight two important milestones in the evolution of Indian forex market. In the 
year  1994,  an  Expert  Group  on  Foreign  Exchange  Market  in  India  was  set  up  under  the 
Chairmanship  of  Shri.  O.  P.  Sodhani,  the  then  Executive  Director,  Reserve  Bank  of  India 
(popularly  known  as  the  Sodhani  Committee).  The  Committee  had  made  wide  ranging 
recommendations  ranging  from  methodology  for  correct  computation  of  Open  Exchange 
Position  to  introduction  of  Rupee  based  options  and  these  suggestions  had  laid  the 
foundation for a modern foreign exchange market in India. FEDAI played an important role in 
supporting the Reserve Bank in implementing these pioneering measures and suggestions 
aimed  at  major  reforms  in  the  market.  The  second  milestone  was  the  replacement  of 
restrictive FERA with the Foreign Exchange Management Act (FEMA) in the year 2000. This 
provided  further  fillip  to  the  development  of  the  foreign  exchange  market  which  can  be 
gauged  from  the  rise  in  the  average  daily  forex  market  turnover  from  approximately 
US$ 6 billion  in  2000  to  nearly  US$  60  billion  in  2010–11.  This  figure  excludes  the  daily 
turnover  in  the  exchange  traded  currency  futures  market  which  would  add  up  to  another 
US$ 5 to 7 billion a day. The depth of the foreign exchange market can also be gauged from 
the fact that the bid offer spread in USD INR pair is now around half a paisa. The average 
daily  foreign  exchange  turnover  has,  however,  showed  a  dip  since  the  second  half  of 
December 2011. One plausible reason for the decline could be the administrative measures 
taken by the Reserve Bank of India to moderate the excessive volatile conditions prevalent in 
the foreign exchange market but I will touch upon this issue a bit later in my address. 
Future role and responsibilities of FEDAI 
Having briefly touched upon the significant role played by the FEDAI so far, let me now turn 
to  the  possible  future  role  and  responsibilities  of  the  FEDAI  with  special  focus  on  should 
FEDAI become a full-fledged SRO. 
Many countries rely on self-regulation because expansive resources are required to regulate 
the financial markets effectively, especially in large and complex markets. With the existence 
of  an  effective  SRO,  often  referred  to  as  frontline  regulator,  the  statutory  regulator  (the 
Regulator)  relies  on  the  SRO  to  carry  out  supervision  of  operations  and  activities  of  the 
market participants. The supporters of the idea of self-regulation claim that it offers significant 
advantage over direct government/statutory regulation. This can be attributed to the fact that 
SROs have thorough domain knowledge of their respective area and regulatory framework 
within which they operate. Therefore, they are considerably more flexible, context-driven and 
are  able  to  respond  faster  to  the  changes  in  market  conditions.  This  also  allows  the 
Regulator to spare its resources more on identifying and responding to major systemic risks 
and to other priorities outside the ambit of self-regulation. It is believed that self-regulation 
system  works  effectively  because  of  the  business  incentive  to  operate  in  a  fair,  financially 
sound and competitive marketplace. The critics, on the other hand, argue that private profit 
seeking enterprises cannot be trusted to regulate their own activities as such self-regulation 
tends to create an illusion of regulation. In addition to the conflict of interest, critics of self-
regulation  point  to  certain  other  inefficiencies,  such  as,  widespread  collective  action 
problems,  lack  of  effective  enforcement  capabilities,  inability  to  gain  or  maintain  legitimacy 
and the failure of accountability. 
Having weighed the views of the supporters and critics of the SRO system and in view of the 
increasing  complexities  of  financial  markets  and  activities,  it  is  important  to  realize  and 
emphasize  that  industry  self-regulation  cannot  fully  replace  government  regulation  and 
supervision of the financial services sector. At the same time, it may not be out of place to 
say that co-operation amongst the statutory regulators and SROs in an increasingly complex 
financial  environment 
longer  an  option  but  a  necessity.  Co-ordination  and 
communication should be structured to address potential problems before they occur. One of 
the important regulatory lessons learnt from the recent global financial crisis is the need for a 
concerted  response.  The  Government  or  the  Regulator  alone  cannot  provide  an  effective 
response.  Active  engagement  of  market  participants, 
industry 
in  particular 
through 
is  no 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
organizations, such as, SROs and other industry bodies with some self-regulatory capacity, 
is essential to craft practical regulatory responses and to act effectively on policy changes. 
In this era of fast paced liberalizations and developments, FEDAI should gradually assume 
the  role  of  a  full-fledged  SRO.  Typically,  a  generic  and  effective  SRO  in  its  template  of 
elements cover, inter alia, internal rulemaking process, authorisation and access to market-
place,  including  fitness/qualification  standards  for  market  intermediaries,  surveillance  of 
market  activities,  administration  of  dispute  resolution,  sharing  information  and  cooperating 
with other SROs and the regulators, etc. SROs enable members to exercise self-discipline, 
make  regulations  more  responsive  to  market  demand  and  also  promote  innovation  and 
development in a market based approach. This is critical for the development of the financial 
markets in order to make them competitive, regionally and globally, and improve standards of 
conduct by self-regulation. 
Developmental role of FEDAI 
When  the  Reserve  Bank  issues  instructions,  it  is  expected  that  the  instructions  are 
understood, interpreted and implemented in a uniform and customer friendly manner by all 
ADs  without  building  up  system  level  stresses.  In  the  absence  of  unambiguous  clarity  of 
instructions  to  the  base  level  official,  the  objectives  of  various  measures  initiated  by  the 
Reserve  Bank  may  not  yield  the  desired  results.  With  the  advent  of  FEMA  which  aims  at 
facilitating  external  trade  and  payments  besides  promoting  orderly  development  and 
maintenance of forex market in India, the economy has been witnessing rapid liberalizations. 
In  such  a  scenario,  FEDAI  needs  to  monitor  the  level  of  customer  service  and  consumer 
protection  provided  by  its  members  and  try  to  fill  the  gaps  arising  out  of  inadequate 
knowledge or operational bottlenecks. The Reserve Bank has been emphasizing the need 
for  designing  some  basic  training  module  covering  the  rules  &  regulations  and  also  the 
operational guidelines for the frontline staff at the branch and corporate office levels. Such a 
module will help them in improving the foreign exchange related customer service, reduce 
incidents  of  complaints  and  bring  down  the  level  of  correspondence  seeking  clarifications 
both within the bank and from the Reserve Bank. Member banks of FEDAI and the Reserve 
Bank  have  since  formed  a  Group  which  is  working  to  develop  an  elearning  module  to 
address these concerns. Another related area where FEDAI is expected to play an important 
role is in framing of a Citizens’ Charter in the area of foreign exchange business. 
Role of market participants – freedom with responsibility 
Let me now turn to the second part of my address, perhaps more relevant to many in the 
audience in our current context. 
An  efficient  market  not  only  requires  proper  infrastructure,  knowledge,  skills  and  enabling 
environment  but  also  a  great  degree  of  market  discipline  reflected  through  responsible 
behaviour  by  all  the  market  participants.  As  was  experienced  during  the  recent  global 
financial crisis, among other reasons, the greed of insensitive financial engineers for short 
term  gains  caused  huge  financial and  economic  damages  to  some  of  the  most  developed 
nations  and  markets.  This  has,  in  fact,  become  a  major  focus  of  discussions  across  the 
jurisdictions after the financial crisis. 
In  the  past,  it  has  been  argued  that  market  discipline  can  play  a  key  role  in  incentivizing 
market  participants to  limit  their  excessive  risk  taking activities.  The  events  of  the  last  few 
years, however, have proved the inadequacy of market discipline. Bankers have been found 
to  be  actively  engaged  in  risktaking  activities  disguised  as  value-creation.  Time  and  again 
market participants have engaged in herd behaviour and put the financial system at risk, at 
times by encouraging speculative build-up in the name of hedging for risk management. The 
events of the past few years tell us that market discipline expressed via market prices cannot 
be expected to play a major role in constraining risk taking. Therefore, the primary constraint 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
needs to come from regulation and supervision. Since the ADs are the major players in the 
domestic  foreign  exchange  market  in  India,  one  would  expect  much  higher  responsibility 
from them. Reserve Bank has come across instances where a few banks failed to live up to 
that  kind  of  expectations  and  have  deviated  from  the  ethics  by  misselling  forex  derivative 
products which resulted in enormous problems for the banks as also for the corporates some 
of  which  were  carried  away  by  the  greed  of  making  money  from  activities  other  than  their 
core business operations. 
As you may recall, the existing guidelines on OTC foreign exchange derivatives were revised 
in  December  2010  in  the  context  of  developments  in  the  international  and  as  well  as  the 
domestic  markets.  The  revised  guidelines  put  more  emphasis  on  the  suitability  and 
appropriateness  aspects  of  products  being  offered.  Market-makers  have  been  advised  to 
undertake  derivative  transactions  with  a  sense  of  responsibility  and  cautioned  to  avoid, 
among  other  things,  misselling.  These  products  are  to  be  offered  to  corporates  who 
understand  the  nature  of  the  risks  inherent  and  have  a  well  laid  down  risk  management 
policy.  Such  policy  must  clearly  lay  down,  inter-alia,  guidelines  on  risk  identification, 
management and control, prudent accounting and disclosure norms and must be capable of 
ascertaining the mark to market positions on an on-going basis. In fact, the Reserve Bank 
has made it mandatory for the market participants to offer a tool or a calculator which would 
enable the corporate to mark to market these products on a continuous basis. Though the 
objective of the policy is prudential in nature as it protects the market participant against the 
credit, reputation and legal risks, it is important to realize that the policy protects the interest 
of the corporates as well. 
Let  me  also  reiterate  that  banks  need  to  closely  monitor  the  un-hedged  foreign  currency 
exposures of corporates as they had hedged approximately only 60 per cent and 38 per cent 
of  their  trade  and  non-trade  related  exposures  respectively  till  December  2011.  Excessive 
risk taking by corporates could lead to severe distress to them and large credit loss to the 
banks in event of sharp adverse movements in currencies. In 2008, it was conveyed to the 
banks that they should have a Board approved policy covering un-hedged foreign exchange 
exposure of all the clients including Small and Medium Enterprises. Banks while extending 
fund  and  non-fund  based  credit  facilities  to  corporate,  should  rigorously  evaluate  the  risks 
arising out of un-hedged foreign currency exposure of the corporates and price them in the 
credit  risk  premium  as  we  have  recently  reiterated 
the 
announcements made in the Second Quarter Review of the Monetary Policy 2011–12. 
During the recent episode of excessive volatility leading to sudden and sharp depreciation of 
Indian  Rupee  against  US  Dollar,  it  was  noticed  that  the  flexibility  given  to  banks  for  fixing 
their intra-day limits, which were in many cases, significantly higher than their net overnight 
open positions limits, were often being used for building up speculative positions and taking a 
directional  bet  on  Rupee.  The  facilities  given  to  corporates  by  way  of  cancellation  and 
re-booking  of  their  forward  contracts  and  booking  of  forward  contracts  under  past 
performance criterion were also not being used in the right spirit. As you would appreciate 
such  speculative  forces  tend  to  be  self-reinforcing  and  often  result  in  a  situation  where 
exporters  keep  on  deferring  their  receipts  and  importers  rush  in  to  buy  forwards,  thus 
aggravating the situation in hand. The administrative measures undertaken by Reserve Bank 
in the month of December 2011 were aimed at curbing these speculative behaviour of such 
entities.  The  measures  did  achieve  the  intended  policy  objectives  and  also  led  to  an 
immediate fall in the volumes of the markets. The actual hedging requirements of the real 
sector, however, were not left unattended as we subsequently relaxed some of the measures 
to accommodate customer needs. Within the overarching prerequisite of facilitating genuine 
hedging  needs  of  the  customers,  Reserve  Bank  would  consider  relaxations,  in  particular 
those relating to intra-day position limits, in a calibrated manner at appropriate time. 
Let me assure you that Reserve Bank will continue with its calibrated and gradual approach 
towards liberalisation of the foreign exchange market in India but at the same time we will 
expect  greater  degree  of  responsibility  and  accountability  from  all  the  participants.  In  the 
in  our  circular 
following 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
context of our measured approach to market liberalisation, there has been a lot of debate on 
scope  of  wider  usage  of  Indian  Rupee  both  in  the  region/abroad,  or  in  other  words, 
internationalization of Indian Rupee. I will now briefly touch upon the issue in the third and 
last part of my address. 
Challenges for Internationalization of Indian Rupee 
In view of the recent crisis in the financial market which resulted in a slowdown in the world 
economy,  some  views  have  emerged  from  various  quarters  on  whether  the  Indian  Rupee 
could play a larger role as an international currency. This issue assumed a topical and, if I 
may add, patriotic significance when the symbol for Indian Rupee was unveiled amidst huge 
media publicity. Proposals for use of local currencies of the EMEs under bilateral and multi-
lateral  arrangements  including  the  initiatives  taken  by  China  for  Yuan  and  the  recent 
suggestions  emanating  from  BRICS  nations  have  provided  renewed  focus  to  this.  It  is  a 
known  fact  that  wide  acceptance  by  participants  in  trade  and  financial  markets  makes  a 
currency  a  popular  option  for  trade  settlement  and  for  maintenance  of  reserves.  The 
characteristics  which  a  currency  needs  to  possess  before  it  could  become  popular  as  a 
transactions  currency  would  include  free  convertibility,  ability  to  invest,  borrow,  issue 
marketable instruments, significant volumes of international trade in different regions, stability 
of the exchange rate, the currency being a favoured choice for invoicing which would, inter-
alia depend on the mutual negotiating strength of trading partners, availability of deep foreign 
exchange  markets,  cost-effective  hedging  facilities  including  forward  cover,  availability  of 
efficient banking arrangement/market infrastructure, etc. 
Based  on  the  analysis  of  Prof.  Peter  Kenen  of  Princeton  University,  we  can  lay  down  the 
following seven broad prerequisites for the process of internationalization of a currency. 
i. 
institutions/official 
imposed  on  holding 
the  domestic  currency  and  derivative 
Domestic  entities  are  permitted  to  invoice  some  of  their  exports  in  the  country’s 
currency,  and  similarly  foreign  entities  are  also  allowed  to  invoice  their  exports  in 
that country’s currency; 
There  should  be  no  restrictions  on  any  entity,  domestic  or  foreign,  to  buy/sell  its 
country’s currency in the spot and forward markets. In other words, there should be 
freedom of foreign-exchange trading by domestic and foreign entities and no limits 
be 
instruments 
denominated in it; 
individuals,  are 
Foreign  entities/financial 
permitted to hold the country’s currency and financial instruments denominated in it 
as a part of prudent investment strategy/the official reserves; 
Foreign  entities,  including  official  institutions,  are  able  to  issue  marketable 
instruments  in  the  country’s  currency.  These  may  include  both  equity  and  debt 
instruments, not only in the country’s domestic markets but also in foreign markets, 
including, the home country markets of the foreign entities; 
The issuing country’s own financial institutions and other entities are able to issue in 
foreign markets instruments denominated in that country’s currency; 
International and regional financial institutions are able to issue debt instruments in 
a country’s market and use its currency in their financial operations; 
The  currency  may  be  included  in  the  “currency  baskets”  of  other  countries,  in 
consideration of their own exchange-rate policies. 
institutions,  and 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
Measured against the above pre-requisites for internationalization of currency, Indian Rupee 
is  certainly  far  away  from  any  meaningful  internationalization.  Of  course,  a  few  measures 
taken in the recent years deserve some attention. Since the introduction of FEMA, the Indian 
Rupee  invoicing  is  a  permitted  form  of  invoicing  under  the  current  trade  and  FEMA 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
regulations.  In  order  to  facilitate  greater  use  of  Indian  Rupee  in  trade  transactions,  the 
Reserve Bank of India has now allowed non-resident importers and exporters to hedge their 
currency risk in respect of exports from and imports to India, invoiced in Indian Rupees. In 
this regard, forward foreign exchange contracts with Indian Rupee as one of the currencies 
and foreign currency – Indian Rupee options are the available products for the purpose of 
hedging the risks. Non-resident exporter/importer can avail of the facility either directly from 
ADs  in  India  or  through  their  banker  overseas.  The  AD,  on  the  basis  of  the  documentary 
evidence  and  undertakings  provided  by  the  non-resident,  has  to  be  satisfied  of  the  bona-
fides  of  the  customer  as  well  as  of  the  transaction.  As  with  all  other  hedging  facilities 
available to non-residents, these contracts once cancelled cannot be rebooked. We would be 
happy to have your feedback on this particular measure announced by the Reserve Bank of 
India as it is almost nine months since the same was announced. 
Eligible  borrowers  have  been  permitted  to  avail  of  ECBs  designated  in  Indian  Rupee  from 
their  foreign  equity  holders  under  the  automatic/  approval  route.  In  order  to  hedge  the 
currency  risk  arising  out  of  such  ECBs,  forward  foreign  exchange  contracts  with  Indian 
Rupee as one of the currencies, foreign currency-Indian Rupee options and foreign currency-
Indian Rupee swaps have been permitted. 
The debate on internationalization of a currency often goes hand-in-hand with that on capital 
account convertibility. It is a known fact that capital controls can co-exist with an international 
currency. Economic history is rich with examples of countries, especially advanced countries 
with  an  international  currency,  imposing  a  variety  of  capital  controls  to  stem  the 
depreciation/appreciation of their currencies and/or to regulate short-term capital flows. While 
internationalization  of  a  currency  is  not  a  pre-requisite  for  capital  account  convertibility,  its 
large scale externalization has the potential to impose significant costs, especially over the 
medium- to long-term as the real and financial sectors of a country grow and develop strong 
linkages with the world economy. 
The pace and the process of internationalization of a currency is of course dependent on the 
acceptable degree of capital account convertibility. This, in turn, involves the extent to which 
non-residents are allowed to participate in the domestic forward foreign exchange markets to 
obtain  cover  and  invest  in  the  domestic  markets  for  any  Indian  Rupee  balances  that  they 
may accumulate. At the same time, the benefits and costs of the Indian Rupee becoming an 
international  currency  needs  to  be  reckoned.  The  benefits  broadly  include  reduction  of 
exchange risk for domestic exporters/importers as risks would instead have to be taken by 
the  overseas  party  and  extensive  use  of  Indian  Rupee  by  non-residents  would  mean 
increased  seigniorage.  Domestic  entities  can  also  access  international  financial  markets 
without  exchange  rate  risk  and  can  avail  of  larger  amounts  of  investment  at  a  lesser  cost 
than in the domestic market. Expanded investor base and reduction in the cost of capital may 
help both the financial sector intermediation and the real sector. Governments, particularly 
those with high fiscal deficit, may benefit by foreign participation in its debt market and get 
the benefit of higher flows to finance the current account deficits. The costs would include 
difficulty in managing the implications for monetary policy and exchange rate management 
besides 
framework  higher 
internationalization  would  severely  limit  either  the  country’s  flexibility  to  influence  the 
monetary condition, such as, interest rate, money supply. or manage exchange rate under 
stress situations. Coming to the issue of benefit to domestic entities/government by way of 
easy access to external resources, the huge risk in terms of increased vulnerabilities arising 
out of sudden stops, panic outflows unrelated to fundamentals of the economy, speculative 
bets by large pools of international funds, loss of confidence in the context of size of reserves 
in  relation  to  external  debt,  particularly  short  term  debt,  have  to  be  reckoned  with.  These 
vulnerabilities have now been accentuated in the context of the recent global financial crisis. 
It is also imperative to understand that unlike countries with current account surpluses, India 
generally  has  a  sizeable  quantum  of  current  account  deficit.  The  exchange  rate  of  Indian 
Rupee  remains  susceptible  to  ebb  and  flow  of  external  capital,  especially  outflows  during 
the  administrative  costs.  Under 
the  “Impossible  Trinity” 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
periods of stress. Given the growing level of our twin deficits of fiscal and current account 
hasty internationalization could only add to our external sector vulnerabilities. As has been 
witnessed  in  the  past,  sudden  reversal  of  capital  flow  imparts  significant  volatility  to  the 
exchange  rate  which  at  times  needs  to  be  curbed  by  the  Reserve  Bank.  In  the  event  of 
internationalization of the Indian Rupee, the exchange rate would be largely determined by 
the sentiments of the market forces and the present policy measures to curb such volatilities 
may not prove to be as effective as they are today. These are some initial thoughts on the 
subject  which  you  would  be  discussing  in  detail  tomorrow.  We  would  look  forward  to 
views/suggestions that would emerge from the deliberations of the panel here and thereafter, 
particularly  if  we  can  identify  some  low  risk  but  macro-economically  beneficial  areas,  such 
as, progressive use of Indian Rupee in trade account given the need to further boost to our 
exports sector. 
Concluding thoughts 
Economy  and  financial  markets  of  India  are  in  the  midst  of  rapid  transformation  due  to  its 
increasing linkages with the rest of the world. In keeping with the changing needs, Reserve 
Bank of India has been striving for more simplification, liberalization and rationalization of the 
policies  and  the  processes  in  the  area  of  foreign  exchange  administration  without 
jeopardizing  the  financial  stability.  Market-players,  therefore,  now  have  more  freedom  to 
undertake transactions as compared to the earlier days. These flexibilities, however, should 
be utilized in a responsible manner that is transparent, fair and beneficial to the customers 
and the economy as a whole and not mis-utilized for short term gains of a few market-players 
with  adverse  consequential  effects  on  our  financial  sector.  Therefore,  the  role  of  FEDAI 
assumes greater significance in the present context. There is, thus, a need to have a closer 
look at the working and functions of FEDAI and strategize on how to transform it to a full-
fledged  and  responsive  SRO.  This  would  be  a  win-win  proposition  for all  the  stakeholders 
including the banks, customers and the regulators like the Reserve Bank of India. I am sure 
that  the  deliberations  in  this  conference  will  generate  practical  ideas  on  the  future  role  of 
FEDAI,  especially  as  we  continue  to  make  progress  in  our  calibrated  approach  towards 
capital account convertibility coupled with the measures being taken to deepen and broaden 
our forex market and facilitate greater use of Indian Rupee, particularly in the trade account. 
I  wish  you  all  the  very  best  for  productive  business  sessions  followed  by  the  pleasure  of 
exploring the sublime and scenic beauty of Switzerland.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
