Emsley Tromp: Start walking the talk – improving female labor force 
participation 
Speech by Dr Emsley Tromp, President of the Central Bank of Curaçao and Sint Maarten, on 
the  occasion  of  the  9th  Annual  Women  Conference  “About  women  and  influence”, 
Willemstad, 3 March 2012. 
 Good morning Ladies and Gentlemen 
First, allow to me to congratulate BIS Inc and, in particular, Mrs. Reina Joe for organizing this 
important  annual  event.  I  believe  that  the  “About  Women”  Conferences  not  only  empower 
and  inspire  women,  but  they  also  provide  us  with  more  insights  into  the  position  and 
important role of women in today’s society. This year’s topic “About Women and Influence” is 
fascinating as it focuses on what factors influence a professional woman’s work and private 
life and how she influences the society. In today’s address, I would like to focus on several 
factors that influence a professional woman’s career path, including those factors that affect 
the balance between paid work and other aspects of life. However, I would like to start by 
sharing with you the most important life lesson a woman has taught me.  
The woman who has influenced my life the most is my grandmother. She has shaped my 
philosophy and beliefs. As a matter of fact, my grandmother also influenced my  economic 
thinking and my views on how to address many of our social problems. The main lesson she 
taught me was never to depend on others to achieve something in life. The only person who 
owes  you  anything  is  YOU!  Therefore,  you  are  responsible  for  your  family,  your  own 
professional career, your health care, your retirement, and your insurance. As long as you 
can work, you should work. Do not depend on the society, on the social safety nets to take 
care of you or your family. The social safety nets are for those who are truly needy and are 
not  able  to  work.  My  grandmother  also  taught  me  that  every  person’s  achievements  or 
possessions  in  life  are  the  sum  total  of  his  struggle,  agonies  and  triumphs.  You  are 
responsible for your life, and your success depends on the choices you make. Therefore, you 
should always autograph your work with excellence. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  believe  that  my  grandmother,  who  will  turn  99  this  year,  was  a 
visionary. Today, as life expectancies are increasing and birth rates falling, the population in 
many countries is aging. Because of this aging of the population and its pressure on fiscal 
spending,  many  promises  that  were  made  to  our  seniors  are  no  longer  sustainable.  Many 
welfare  states  are  shifting  clearly  from  collective  social  solidarity  towards  more  individual 
responsibility.  This  shift  is  most  noticeable  in  the  health  care  insurance  and  the  pension 
schemes.  Like  most  countries  in  the  world,  Curacao  is  no  exception.  The  population  in 
Curaçao is aging, and this trend is generating considerable fiscal spending pressures. 
If we are to avoid a situation where the financial soundness and accountability of its social 
security system is no longer guaranteed, Curaçao needs to take measures in both the short 
term  and  the  medium  term.  The  Social  Security  Bank  (SVB)  in  Curaçao  has  already 
indicated in its latest multi-annual budget that if no structural measures are taken in the short 
term,  the  old-age  (AOV)  fund  of  Curaçao  will  be  depleted  by  next  year.  Ladies  and 
gentlemen, this is assuming an average GDP growth rate of 2% a year and an aging rate of 
4% a year. However, we all know that even the most optimistic growth forecast, projects an 
anemic growth of 0.3% at best. 
Over the years, several reports have been presented concerning the reform of the systems 
of social security and health care in our country. The recommended measures have included 
increasing the statutory retirement age and reforming the health care system by increasing 
insurance  premiums  and  improving  efficiency  in  the  health  care  sector.  Notwithstanding 
these measures, a trade-off between collective social solidarity and individual responsibility 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
will have to take place in Curaçao to mitigate the increasing pressure of the aging population 
on  the  social  security  and  health  care  systems.  In  this  context,  increasing  the  labor  force 
participation,  including  female  participation,  is  crucial.  When  people  are  active  in  the  labor 
market,  they  can  bear  their  own  individual  responsibility.  Also,  studies  have  shown  that 
increasing  female  labor  force  participation  can  lead  to  per  capita  income  growth  and  a 
reduction in poverty. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  according  to  the  labor  force  statistics  of  the  Central  Bureau  of 
Statistics  (CBS),  the  overall  employment  situation  of  women  in  Curacao  did  not  evolve 
significantly  between  2003  and  2009.  Women’s  participation  in  the  labor  market  was 
43 percent on average, lower than the 48 percent average participation of males. Meanwhile, 
unemployment  among  women  is  still  higher  (11.3%),  albeit  declining,  than  among  men 
(7.9%).  The  question  arises  as  to  what  can  be  done  to  increase  the  female  labor  force 
participation, thereby closing the male – female labor force gap. 
To  answer  this  question,  we  need  to  have  more  insights  into  what  factors  determine  a 
woman’s  decision  to  join  the  labor  force.  According  to  labor  supply  theory,  female  labor 
participation depends on the market value of time versus the opportunity cost of time in the 
household. One important determinant for the market value of time is education. Meanwhile, 
the opportunity cost of time in the household is determined by variables such as the number 
of  children  and  the  household’s  wealth.  For  women  who  are  better  educated,  the  market 
value  of  time  is  higher.  Hence,  for  these  women,  the  opportunity  costs  for  staying  out  of 
employment  –  the  amount  of  money  they  would  sacrifice  to  stay  at  home  –  is  higher. 
Therefore,  we  expect  a  higher  employment  rate  among  the  better  educated.  We  can 
conclude from this theory that education is crucial to promote female labor participation. 
It should be noted in this context that empirical research has shown that female education is 
a key source of support for long-term economic growth because education is linked to higher 
productivity and higher returns on investment. 
Ladies and gentlemen, in addition to this “price of time effect”, the “income effect” states that 
women  whose  husbands  have  higher  incomes  may  be  able  to  afford  to  stay  at  home. 
Traditionally, the better educated woman has a higher earning husband. Consequently, while 
her higher education encourages her to work, her husband’s income discourages her from 
joining  the  labor  force.  Conversely,  in  the  case  of  the  lower  educated  woman,  her  low 
earning power will discourage employment at the same time that her husband’s low income 
will stimulate her labor participation. 
Empirical  research  across  countries  has  shown  that  cultural  factors  largely  determine 
whether the “price of time effect” or the “income effect” dominates. For example, in Sweden, 
the  price  effect  has  a  larger  impact  on  a  woman’s  decision  to  work  than  her  husband’s 
income. In Germany, in contrast, the higher the education of the husband, the less likely the 
woman is employed. 
Despite  cultural  differences,  women  around  the  world  still  find  it  difficult  to  find  a  balance 
between paid work and family life. Traditionally, women are still predominantly responsible 
for  the  household  tasks  in  addition  to  child  caring  and  care  of  the  elderly.  Even  in  more 
gender-balanced countries, such as European countries, women still dedicate twice as much 
time to domestic tasks as men do. Consequently, women often have to choose between paid 
work and family, or they have to prioritize one over the other at some stage in their lives. For 
men, this seems to be less complicated as their participation in household tasks is far less 
than  that  of  their  female  partners.  In  my  opinion,  however,  decisions  to  sacrifice  a 
professional  career  for  family  life  are  not  the  prerogative  of  women  alone  –  men  have  to 
make these decisions as well. If family life does not impede men from pursuing a successful 
career, then it should not prevent women either. I believe that today, both men and women 
should  bear  the  responsibility  of  earning  the  household  income  and  share  the  family 
responsibilities. Together, they should make choices and decisions on how they will organize 
their family life while pursuing professional careers. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  as  already  noted,  female  labor  force  participation  is  heavily 
determined by female education and cultural attitudes. Other factors that influence women’s 
decision  concerning  whether  to  work  or  stay  out  of  employment  include  flexible  working 
arrangements,  the  tax  system,  the  availability  of  childcare  facilities,  and  access  to  public 
transportation. Both the government and employers can address these issues and, hence, 
improve female participation. 
In the area of education, we need more public investment in education and training to reduce 
the qualitative mismatch between demand and supply in the labor market. The investments 
in human capital must be targeted towards our youth as well as the unemployed population. 
In  addition,  our  education  and  training  system  should  focus  not  only  on  the  labor  force  in 
those sectors where our economy has a competitive advantage, but it should also focus on 
creating  a  skilled  labor  force  that  can  attract  knowledge-based  industries  and  services 
companies, particularly in high value-creating activities. 
Education is not only important for those entering or returning to the labor market, but it also 
determines the extent to which those already working can keep their jobs and advance their 
careers  in  a  constantly  changing  and  competitive  environment.  In  this  context,  both 
government  and  employers  can  stimulate  on-the-job  training  and  lifelong  education. 
Employers should consider their workforce as an asset. Investing in on-the-job training and 
lifelong education for their employees increases job satisfaction and productivity. Given the 
productivity  gains  to  be  had,  the  government  can  stimulate  on-the-job  training  and  lifelong 
education through, for example, tax incentives. 
Another important determinant of female labor force participation is the possibility of flexible 
working.  Flexible  working  can  offer  a  wide  range  of  options  including  part-time  working, 
flexible hours, and working from home. Flexible working has several benefits for employers. 
First, it helps retain staff and reduces absenteeism. Second, it also can translate into higher 
productivity.  In  this  context,  the  government,  being  an  important  employer,  can  lead  by 
example  and  provide  the  possibility  of  more  flexible  working  to  the  civil  servants.  Flexible 
working allows female employees to better balance their work and family life. Especially in 
the case of single mothers, flexible working can be decisive in whether to work or not. 
Ladies and gentlemen, as I mentioned earlier, the decision of whether or not to participate in 
the labor market depends to a great extent on its opportunity costs. Individuals balance the 
income from work against other sources of income or any costs involved. In this regard, the 
system  of  taxation  might  act  as  a  disincentive  to  work.  As  in  most  countries,  the  second 
earners in married couples are taxed more heavily than single individuals, discouraging their 
participation.  This  is  especially  the  case  in  the  middle  income  groups.  Hence,  the 
government should consider reforming the tax system so that it becomes more attractive for 
the second earner to join the labor force. 
For  many  women,  the  decision  to  participate  in  the  labor  force  also  depends  on  the 
availability and affordability of childcare facilities and public transportation. For example, in 
the tourism industry, where working hours are irregular, these two factors play an important 
role. In Curaçao, childcare is still relatively expensive and in most cases not available in the 
evening  hours.  Public  transportation  is  also  a  challenge  for  those  travelling  in  the  evening 
hours or from one side of the island to the other. Both the government and the employers 
can take actions in these areas. For example, employers could provide childcare facilities to 
their  employees,  either  for  free  or  at  reduced  costs.  The  government  could  also  stimulate 
employer support of childcare through tax incentives. 
As  for  public  transportation,  several  hotels  on  the  island  provide  transportation  to  their 
employees. However, I believe that government as the provider of public goods should be 
responsible  for  providing  public  transportation  that  is  safe  and  accessible  at  all  times. 
Therefore, a reform of our current public transportation system also is crucial to increasing 
women’s participation in the labor force . 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  with  over  200  employees,  the  Central  Bank  of  Curacao  and  Sint 
Maarten  is an  important  employer  on  the  island.  I  can  proudly  say  that  our  female  staff is 
highly  educated,  reliable,  and  very  committed  to  their  work.  For  that  reason,  more  than 
50 percent of our staff is female and, over time, its share has been increasing. Also, many 
women are in management positions within the Bank. 
At the Bank, we provide our staff with opportunities to further develop their knowledge and 
skills. Therefore, we offer our staff with the possibility of flexible working hours if employees 
are following a graduate development program.  
Also, our staff has the opportunity to attend courses at international institutions such as the 
International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, The US Security and Exchange Commission, 
The Federal Reserve Bank, The Bank of International Settlements, De Nederlandse Bank, 
the  Center  for  Monetary  Studies  for  Latin  America  and  the  Caribbean  (CEMLA)  and  other 
regional and international multilateral bodies. Every year we sign a career plan with our staff 
that includes the courses and seminars they should attend during that year to advance to a 
higher level. Because the balance between work and private life is important, the Bank has a 
system of flexible working hours that allows employees to pursue their professional career 
consistent with their private life. 
Ladies and gentlemen, as today’s audience comprises mainly professional women, I would 
like to conclude these remarks by sharing the following with you. In 2003, Fortune Magazine 
conducted interviews with women in top positions in business, academia, and government in 
the United States. Several of the interviewed women admitted that they had neither actively 
planned  their  career  development  nor  sought  promotion,  and  when  they  had  been  offered 
promotion,  they  had  hesitated  before  accepting  it.  In  some  cases,  they  had  even  turned 
down promotion when they thought it would conflict with their quality of life. It should not be a 
surprise to you, however, if I tell that this behavior is not unique to the United States. Here on 
the island as well, I have met many women demonstrating similar behavior. This constrain 
imposed by society on women, be it culturally or historically motivated, is not consistent with 
the progress we have made in terms of education and equality in other areas that concern 
our female citizens. It runs counter to their own self-interest and the interest of the society as 
a whole. 
We  have  argued  that  an  increased  female  labor  participation  rate  will  increase  per  capita 
income,  reduce  poverty  and  promote  long-term  economic  growth.  In  the  era  of  an  aging 
population,  upward  mobility  of  female  workers  through  the  career  ladder  will  encourage 
increased  participation  of  female  workers  and  therefore  broaden  the  economic  base  to 
sustain the social safety nets. I therefore would like to recommend that you all believe in your 
own  potential,  make  your  choices,  plan  your  career  path,  and  work  on  your  career. 
Remember that the only person who owes you anything is YOU. 
I would like to conclude with a final message to all women. For many years, women have 
fought for gender equality. Even though gender equality has not been achieved in all areas, I 
believe  that  much  progress  has  been  achieved.  However,  do  not  fight  only  for  equal  pay, 
fight also for equal responsibility. Be a woman of influence at home, at work, and in society. 
Start walking the talk. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
