Mario Draghi: The TARGET2-Securities Framework Agreement 
Address by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at the event marking 
the first signatures to the T2S Framework Agreement, Frankfurt am Main, 8 May 2012. 
 Ladies and gentlemen,  
I am very pleased to welcome you to Frankfurt today on the occasion of the signing of the 
T2S Framework Agreement by a first group of central securities depositories, or CSDs. 
T2S is an important project for the Eurosystem and for Europe. It is a key component of the 
European market infrastructure, and the Governing Council of the ECB remains committed to 
delivering it.  
I fully share this commitment, and I am glad to be here today representing the Eurosystem, 
together  with  fellow  Governor  Visco,  and  other  colleagues  from  National  Central  Banks. 
Allow me to thank them for taking the time to be here with us.  
I joined the Governing Council as Governor of Banca d’Italia in early 2006, and it was around 
that time that we started discussing T2S. It was in July 2006 that we decided to consult and 
involve European CSDs and market participants, to ensure that T2S would fulfil the needs of 
the market.  
The  main  reason  for  the  Eurosystem  to  embark  on  this  project  was  to  address  the  costly 
fragmentation of securities settlement market infrastructure, and to achieve greater technical 
harmonisation  in  the  European  securities  settlement  market.  T2S  allows  for  efficient  and 
integrated securities settlement.  
The fundamental objective of T2S is to contribute to making Europe a better place to invest, 
by fostering a single market in post-trade services. It will make financial markets safer and 
more efficient, and it will increase transparency in the post-trade environment. 
Ultimately, investors will benefit from lower cross-border transaction and liquidity costs and 
from  better  investment  possibilities.  Issuers  will  benefit  from  deeper  and  more  diversified 
sources of funding.  
T2S is important for Europe. It will be a major contribution to the strengthening of the Single 
Market.  
The Single Market has already brought many benefits, which are, at times, forgotten or taken 
for granted.  
It is during times of crisis that we should not allow our commitment to the cause of further 
market integration to fade. It is during difficult times that we should remember the importance 
of cooperation and coordination.  
There has been much progress towards further integration in recent years. The most visible 
example  was  the  adoption  of  the  Single  Market  Act  in  April  2011  by  the  European 
Commission. A Single Market Act II will follow by the end of this year. But there are many 
other ongoing initiatives, some of which had been started even before the outbreak of the 
financial crisis. 
Europe’s new supervisory structure has been developed in acknowledgement of the fact that 
the financial system of the EU is now very much interconnected, and the externalities arising 
from it are no longer confined to the national level. There is also a comprehensive set of new 
legislation  which  aims  to  reform  financial  market  regulation,  covering  not  only  the  trading 
level, but also – for the first time – the infrastructure for clearing and settlement.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
All  these  initiatives  aim  to  create  a  level  playing  field  in  Europe,  to  remove  barriers  to 
competition, to facilitate cross-border business, and ultimately to strengthen the process of 
financial market integration.  
However, we should not forget that financial market integration needs to be complemented 
and  supported  by  the  integration  of  the  underlying  infrastructure.  The  Eurosystem’s  most 
fundamental contribution to integration in this field is the creation of T2S. 
T2S  is  therefore  part  of  this  important  integration  process.  It  brings  to  it  an  operational 
dimension. It provides the integrated infrastructure necessary for creating a single market for 
settlement services in Europe. 
For  this  reason,  the  European  authorities,  and  in  particular  the  ECOFIN  Council,  have 
expressed their support for this project on more than one occasion. 
Today’s event is therefore not only important for the market participants involved, but also for 
Europe. 
I would like to warmly congratulate the CSDs that are here with us today and have signed the 
T2S Framework Agreement. Without your valued support and active participation, T2S would 
simply not have been possible. 
I would also like to congratulate all those involved in the governance of T2S. It is thanks to 
the combined efforts of all the T2S governing bodies that we have been able to reach this 
milestone in the project. 
Today’s  signing  of  the  T2S  Framework  Agreement  will  mark  the  start  of  an  entirely  new 
phase of the project. From now on, the Eurosystem and the CSDs will be even more closely 
united  in  this  mutual  enterprise.  The  staff  of  our  respective  organisations  will  increasingly 
need to work together – like a single team – for the success of T2S.  
The time between now and the launch of T2S will pass by quickly. Much has already been 
achieved, but much of the hard work still lies ahead.  
I am confident that our common T2S endeavours will continue to be a success, and I look 
forward to continuing our cooperation with the CSDs and with market participants.  
Thank you very much for your attention. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
