Duvvuri Subbarao: The challenge of globalization – some reflections 
from the Reserve Bank perspective 
Address by Dr Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 37th Annual 
Convocation of the Indian Institute of Management, Bangalore, 30 March 2012. 
 Thank you for inviting me to address the convocation of IIM, Bangalore. It is an honour to 
which I attach a lot of value. 
First of all, heartiest congratulations to all the graduating students. Today marks a milestone 
in  your  lives.  You  will  be  leaving  college  with  a  degree  in  management,  and  not  just  any 
degree, but a degree from one of the most elite management schools in the country. You 
should be proud of what you have accomplished. 
Managing change 
As  I  see  all  of  you  graduating  students  in  front  of  me,  my  mind  goes  back  to  my  own 
graduation forty years ago, and to all the changes between my time and yours. The world 
has changed, India has changed, Bengaluru has changed and management education has 
changed in these four decades. Change, as they say, is the only constant in life. Managing 
change is by far one of the biggest challenges we face, both in our personal lives and our 
professional lives. 
Globalization 
One  of  the  big  changes  between  my  time  and  yours  is  globalization  –  the  reduction  in 
barriers  to  the  flow  of  goods,  money,  people  and  ideas  cutting  across  national,  linguistic, 
cultural and social boundaries. When I graduated forty years ago, India was one of the most 
closed economies in the world. Today, we are much more integrated into the world, indeed 
more integrated than we tend to acknowledge. Just imagine, when I went abroad for the first 
time, 35 years ago, we could take out just $20. Today, every Indian can take out $200,000 
per year under the Liberalized Remittance Scheme (LRS)1. That is a quantum change, not 
just in the numbers, but also in our world view. 
India’s global integration 
A metric frequently used to measure the degree of a country’s global integration is the ratio 
of external trade to GDP (Figure – 1). That ratio has gone up over four times, from 8 per cent 
of GDP in 1972 to 37 per cent in 2011. Over this period, flow of money around the world has 
far  outpaced  the  flow  of  goods.  So,  a  more  complete  measure  of  a  country’s  global 
integration is the two way flow of goods and finance in and out of a country. That ratio has 
moved up nearly eight times in these four decades, from 14 per cent in 1972 to 109 per cent 
in  2011.  What  this  means  is  that  India’s  trade  integration  has  been  deep;  but  its  financial 
integration has been deeper.  
                                                 
1   This is over and above what can be taken out for current account transactions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Figure – 1 
  Globalization – a double edged sword 
Globalization  is  a  double  edged  sword  –  it  offers  immense  opportunities  but  also  poses 
ruthless challenges. Nothing illustrates this better than the global financial crisis of 2008/09. 
Recall that in the years before the crisis – during the period of the “Great Moderation” – we 
had  steady  growth  in  advanced  economies  and  accelerating  growth  in  emerging  and 
developing economies, and low and stable inflation all around. This was a consequence of 
globalization – in particular, of the tremendous boost to world production and productivity as 
a result of India and China joining the world labour markets. If the Great Moderation was the 
positive  side  of  globalization,  the  financial  crisis  of  2008/09  and  the  Great  Recession  that 
followed were its negative side. That a bubble in a quintessentially non-tradeable sector like 
housing snowballed into a global financial crisis, taking a devastating toll on global growth 
and welfare, is a demonstration of the ferociousness of the forces of globalization. 
Managing globalization 
With degrees in hand today, you will be entering a world that is more globalized than the one 
I had spent my career in. Globalization, as we just noted, comes with benefits and costs. No 
matter  what  career  you  pursue  or  where  you  choose  to  work,  you  will  have  to  learn  to 
manage  globalization  in  ways  that  will  maximize  its  benefits  and  minimize  its  costs.  I  can 
hardly presume to give you a primer on that. I will attempt something less ambitious. I will 
bring the issue closer home and explain to you how we, in the Reserve Bank, confront the 
dilemmas of globalization. Before I do that though, I want to visit the debate on globalization 
just to set the context. 
Debate around globalization 
To  simply  say  that  globalization  has  been  a  contentious  issue  will  be  banal.  The  debate 
surrounding  globalization  has  been,  in  turn,  lively,  passionate,  acrimonious,  ill-defined, 
chaotic,  noisy,  constructive,  untidy,  and  amorphous.  What  adjective  you  choose  defines 
where you stand on the debate. But what is even more striking is that this is a debate that 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
has  frowned  on  moderation.  For  its  supporters,  globalization  is  the  best  way  forward  for 
collective global prosperity and welfare. For its critics, on the other hand, globalization is an 
unmitigated evil. They evoke powerful images, say of sweat shops in developing countries, 
degradation of the Amazon rain forest, erosion of peasant farming in poor economies and 
acid rain around the world’s industrial towns to buttress their argument. 
Like most else in life, this debate too cannot be a binary issue. There is some validity to both 
sides  of  the  argument,  and  the  best  way  forward,  as  we  just  noted,  is  to  maximize  the 
positives and minimize the negatives.  
The globalization debate has been broad based straddling several issues and themes. Here 
are some of the important ones:  
i.  
ii.  
iii.  
Globalization exploits the poor and the weak, and destroys traditional livelihoods.  
It accentuates inequalities within and across nations.  
It  promotes  global  multinational  corporations  which,  driven  entirely  by  the  profit 
motive, are totally insensitive to the negative externalities they cause.  
It causes environmental degradation. 
It undermines the sovereignty of the nation-state.  
iv.  
v.  
I  do  not  propose  to  visit  these  issues.  This  is well-trodden  territory  and  I  do  not  have  any 
comparative advantage to add value to the debate. I do want to address just three questions 
though. I have chosen these three, in part because they are less familiar themes, and in part 
because the debates around these issues have been reshaped by some new developments. 
The three questions that I will address are: 
i.  
ii.  
iii.  
Is globalization inevitable?  
Is geography destiny?  
Can/should financial liberalization be shunned?  
Is globalization inevitable? 
There  is  a  widely  held  view  that  globalization  is  inevitable  in  today’s  world  of  rapid 
technological  progress  and  growing  embrace  of  economic  liberalization  by  countries.  Most 
people  who  hold  this  view  think  that  globalization  is  a  uniquely  twentieth  century 
phenomenon and that it is progressing on a linear upward path. 
That is a misperception. Far from being a twentieth century phenomenon, globalization has a 
long  history  dating  back  to  the  voyages  of  discovery  of  the  15th  and  16th  centuries  and 
colonization by the European powers in the following centuries. Colonies have gone, but the 
trade and commerce spawned by the colonial empires have largely endured. 
It is also not the case that globalization that started five hundred years ago has deepened on 
a steady, linear path. On the contrary, it has waxed and waned (Figure – 2). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Figure – 2 
Source: Maddison (2001 
 As the data in Figure – 2 show, for about 150 years starting 1870, globalization has steadily 
deepened, peaking at around the outbreak of the First World War. It declined in the inter-war 
period, as a result of both changing political equations and the devastating toll of the Great 
Depression. This trend reversed after the Second World War, with globalization, not only in 
trade but also in finance, picking up pace over the last six decades (Figure – 3). 
Figure – 3 
Deepening Financial Integration 
 [Source:  Crafts 
nations available at http://www.philiplane.org/EWN.html (2009)] 
till  1995  and  dataset  of  external  wealth  of 
(2000) 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The question is, is there something special about this wave of globalization that sets it apart 
from past episodes and makes it inevitable and irreversible? The two inexorable forces cited 
to  buttress  this  argument  are  technological  progress,  particularly  the  improvement  in  the 
speed and quality of communication and the dramatic decline in transport costs. 
It  is  true  that  technological  progress  and  declining  transport  costs  offer  opportunities  for 
increasing  the  benefits  of  trade  and  strengthen  the  case  for  globalization.  But  the  mere 
availability of opportunities is no guarantee that governments around the world will  remain 
committed to open trade and open finance. That commitment could easily run into sands of 
political compulsions if a country perceives that it is losing comparative advantage or if the 
costs of globalization are seen to exceed the benefits. So, a more nuanced position to take 
would  be  that  although  today’s  globalization  is  based  on  a  stronger  footing  because  of 
advances in technology and declining transport costs, political dynamics offer no guarantee 
that it will move along irreversibly. 
That takes me to the second question that I want to address, about the threat to globalization 
arising from political compulsions. 
Is geography destiny? 
In his best-selling book, Guns, Germs and Steel, Jared Diamond, an environmental biologist, 
argues that advanced civilizations originated and developed in Eurasia rather than in Africa, 
America  or  the  Pacific  because  the  former  had  the  advantage  of  highly  fertile  lands  and 
animals that could be domesticated. Having developed their agriculture by 1500, Europeans 
used their guns, germs and steel to dominate the rest of the world by military conquest and 
spread of disease. According to Diamond, it is not biology or race that explains the course of 
world history. Rather it is “geography” that determines the rise and fall of civilizations. 
This  “geography  is  destiny”  theory  which  ruled  for  much  of  our  recorded  history  is  now 
seriously challenged by the latest sweep of IT-enabled globalization. Received wisdom today 
is that geography is irrelevant. No longer is a country’s destiny tied down to its geographical 
location or its physical resources. 
In  the  era  of  knowledge-propelled  globalization,  it  is  possible  for  countries  to  overcome 
handicaps of geography by exploiting their comparative advantage in human resources. That 
blue-collar jobs shift across geographic boundaries in pursuit of cheap hands has long been 
part  of  conventional  wisdom.  But  what  is  new  is  that  increasingly  white-collar  jobs,  once 
considered  safe  from  foreign  competition,  are  now  being  offshored.  Hence,  the  new  catch 
phrases such as “death of distance” and “conquest of location”.  
The shifting comparative advantage is most visible in the services sector. No longer is it just 
low-end services such as data processing and call centres that are outsourced, but high end, 
skill-intensive services. Thus it is that financial analysts in Chennai provide tax consultancy to 
clients  in  Chicago;  engineers  in  Buenos  Aires  design  roads  and  bridges  for  Berlin;  and 
radiologists in Manila provide medical diagnostics for patients in Manchester. On the other 
hand,  it  is  low-end  services  such  as  laundry,  janitor  services  and  taxi  driving  that  remain 
location tied. 
This  trend,  running  counter  to  the  compulsions  of  geography,  could  have  significant 
implications for globalization. The theory has been, and still is, is that mature economies will 
outsource low end jobs to emerging and developing economies, and will themselves move 
up the value chain to more productive jobs. The outsourcing of high end jobs implies that this 
story is not running according to script. 
The  number  of  jobs  actually  outsourced  may  be  small,  but  the  mere  possibility  that  they 
could  be  outsourced  has  upset  an  unwritten  social  contract.  This  is  because  the  very 
possibility of outsourcing erodes the bargaining power of workers and forces them to keep 
their wage demands subdued. For example, in the US, over the last decade, the share of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
wages in national income has steadily gone down while the share of corporate profits has 
increased,  evidencing  the  declining  bargaining  power  of  workers.  If  this  trend  is  not 
corrected, workers could get restive and demand protectionist measures. What this means is 
that free trade has the potential to raise global welfare, but its progress could be impeded by 
political compulsions at the national level. Geography could then become destiny yet again. 
Can/Should financial globalization be shunned? 
There is an influential school of thought that takes a more nuanced approach to globalization 
– distinguishing between trade liberalization and financial liberalization. The argument is that 
while increased trade between countries is positive for both trading partners, the same need 
not necessarily be true of financial linkages. Hasty or imprudent financial liberalization, it is 
contended, is the main cause behind several financial crises over the last quarter century, 
including  notably,  the  Asian  crisis  of  the  late  1990s.  According  to  this  view,  while  trade 
liberalization  should  be  promoted  and  celebrated,  countries  should  be  cautious  about 
financial liberalization. 
This debate raises two questions. First, is financial liberalization inherently bad? And second, 
is  it  possible  to  pursue  trade  liberalization  without  financial  liberalization?  Let  me  briefly 
explain. 
In  support  of  trade  liberalization,  empirical  evidence  is  put  forward  showing  the  causal 
relationship  between  trade  openness  and  economic  prosperity.  It  is  also  argued  that 
openness 
terms  of  entrepreneurship,  productivity 
improvement and development of physical and social infrastructure. It is not clear why one 
should presume that financial liberalization does not offer similar collateral benefits. Indeed, 
financial  openness  helps  to  deepen  and  broaden  the  financial  markets,  enhances 
competition,  raises  efficiency  and  improves  corporate  governance  standards.  On  the  other 
hand, it is true that there are certain pre-conditions to be met for financial liberalization to be 
a  positive  force.  In  particular,  the government’s  fiscal  position  should be  sound,  regulation 
and  supervisory  systems  should  be  effective  and  there  should  be  capacity  for  instituting 
internal controls within financial institutions. 
My  broad  position  on  this  issue  is  that  financial  liberalization  can  offer  potentially  huge 
benefits,  including  collateral  benefits,  as  does  trade  liberalization.  What  is  important  to 
remember  though,  in  promoting  financial  liberalization,  is  that  the  financial  sector  has  no 
standing  of  its  own;  it  derives  its  strength  and  resilience  from  the  real  economy.  It  is  the 
needs  of  the  real  sector  that  should  drive  financial  sector  liberalization;  not  the  other  way 
round. 
trade  has  spillover  effects 
to 
in 
Reserve bank’s perspectives on globalization 
Let me now turn to the dilemmas we face in the Reserve Bank on account of globalization. 
Monetary policy formulation used to be much simpler when we were a relatively less open 
economy. Now that we are more integrated into the world, in making our policies we have to 
reckon with global developments over which we have no control. 
Impossible trinity 
In conceptual terms, the challenge that the Reserve Bank faces on account of opening up 
the  economy  is  best  explained  by  the  impossible  trinity  argument  which  asserts  that  a 
country  cannot  simultaneously  maintain  all  three  policy  goals  of  free  capital  flows,  a  fixed 
exchange  rate  and  an  independent  monetary  policy.  The  impossible  trinity,  as  students  of 
economics  have  learnt  for  over  a  half  century,  has  a  strong  theoretical  foundation  in  the 
Mundell-Fleming model developed in the 1960s. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 Given  the  Impossible  Trinity  trilemma,  countries  have  made  different  choices.  The  most 
common case, typical across advanced economies, is to give up on a fixed exchange rate so 
as  to  run  an  open  economy  with  an  independent  monetary  policy.  On  the  other  hand, 
economies that adopt a hard peg give up on the independence of monetary policy. Examples 
include the currency boards set up by Hong Kong and, for a time, Argentina. More recently, 
responding to a rapid appreciation of the Swiss Franc as a result of the safe haven effect, 
Switzerland declared its commitment to defend a pre-announced exchange rate. 
In contrast to advanced economies which opt for corner solutions, emerging economies here 
typically opted for middle solutions giving up on some flexibility on each of the variables to 
maximize overall macroeconomic advantage. 
India’s approach to the impossible trinity 
In India too, we have opted for a middle solution whose contours are the following: (i) we let 
our  exchange  rate  be  largely  market  determined,  but  intervene  in  the  market  to  smooth 
excess  volatility  and/or  to  prevent  disruptions  to  macroeconomic  stability;  (ii)  our  capital 
account  is  only  partly  open;  while  foreigners  enjoy  mostly  unfettered  access  to  our  equity 
markets, access to debt markets is restricted; there are limits how much resident corporates 
and individuals can take out for investment abroad, but the limits are quite liberal; and (iii) 
because of the liberalization on the exchange rate and capital account fronts, we may forfeit 
some monetary policy independence. What the middle solution also implies is that we have 
to  guard  on  all  the  three  fronts  with  relative  emphasis  across  the  three  pillars  shifting 
according to our macroeconomic situation. 
Capital flows 
What  does  the  impossible  trinity  mean  in  practical  terms?  Let  us  examine  this  in  terms  of 
capital flows. We do need capital inflows, of course, since we have a current account deficit 
(CAD). In an ideal world, we will want capital flows just about sufficient to finance our CAD; 
also we have an express preference for equity flows over debt flows and for long term flows 
over short term flows. But in the real world, we seldom find ourselves in such a sweet spot; 
capital flows are either too much or too little. 
When capital flows are far in excess of CAD, the exchange rate appreciates out of line with 
fundamentals.  And  if  the  flows  are  volatile,  that  will  be  reflected  in  the  exchange  rate 
movement  too.  The  Reserve  Bank  then  has  to  make  a  judgment  on  whether  or  not  to 
intervene in the forex market. This is not as straight-forward as it seems. If we intervene to 
buy  foreign  exchange  in  the  market,  volatility  may  be  smoothed  and  exchange  rate 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
appreciation  contained,  but  systemic  rupee  liquidity  goes  up,  and  that  could  add  to 
inflationary pressures. 
Inflation, as we know, results in a real appreciation of the currency. So, our effort to solve the 
problem  of  nominal  appreciation  of  the  currency,  lands  us  with  a  problem  of  real 
appreciation. 
To get around this problem, that is to contain inflationary pressures, we sometimes “sterilize” 
the excess liquidity. This may contain inflation pressures, but raises a host of other problems. 
Sterilization  puts  upward  pressure  on  interest  rates  which  erodes  our  competitiveness. 
Higher interest rates also attract more capital flows, thus again, in a curious variant of the 
Dutch  disease,  accentuating  the  very  problem  that  we  were,  in  the  first  place,  trying  to 
resolve. As you see, there are no straight-forward solutions – every solution raises a fresh 
problem. 
Volatile  capital  outflows  pose  similarly  complex  policy  choices.  In  this  case,  the  exchange 
rate  tends  to  depreciate,  again  out  of  line  with  fundamentals  exacerbating  inflationary 
pressures  and  also  hurting  the  government  and  corporates  who  have  external  debt 
obligations. In an outflow situation, financing of the current account deficit could also turn into 
a problem. 
Both when inflows and outflows are out of line with our requirement, the Reserve Bank has to 
make  a  determination  on  whether  or  not  to  intervene  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  to 
contain volatility and prevent instability. As I explained above, no option is totally benign; no 
matter what option we follow, there are costs. Our effort always is to make an assessment of 
the  forces  driving  the  capital  flows  and  act  only  to  smooth  volatility  in  the  exchange  rate 
movement and prevent disruptions to macroeconomic stability. In doing so, we have to be 
mindful  of  the  inflation  situation,  the  robustness  of  our  foreign  exchange  reserves,  and 
importantly, the credibility of our actions. 
Several episodes of volatile capital flows 
Capital  flows  have  been  a  particularly  contentious  problem  over  the  last  decade  when  we 
had episodes of both volatile inflows and outflows with the problem often reversing direction 
rather abruptly. Let me sketch this out to give you a flavour of the type of challenge we face. 
In the years before the global crisis – during the Great Moderation – we had capital flows far 
in  excess  of  our  CAD,  driven  by  excess  liquidity  in  the  global  system,  search  for  yield  by 
investors and the promise of India’s growth prospects (Figure – 4). The rupee appreciated 
steeply  denting  our  competitiveness.  The  Reserve  Bank  intervened  in  the  market  to  buy 
foreign exchange and also sterilized the resultant rupee liquidity. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Figure – 4 
  
The capital inflow problem turned abruptly into an outflow problem with the outbreak of the 
financial  crisis  in  September  2008.  Unnerved  by  the  extreme  uncertainty,  global  investors 
exited India, as they did other emerging economies, to return to safe havens. The sudden 
exit  put  downward  pressure  on  the  rupee,  and  this  time  round  we  had  to  intervene  in  the 
foreign exchange market to contain the volatile depreciation of the rupee. 
As the crisis started ebbing, the direction of the capital flows problem changed once again. 
The two speed recovery, quantitative easing by advanced economies, and importantly, their 
guidance that their easy monetary stance would prevail for an extended period drove global 
excess  liquidity  into  emerging  economies  pushing  up  their  exchange  rates.  This  was  the 
case  for  much  of  2010  and  early  2011.  Emerging  economies  had  to  combat  this  through 
currency interventions as well as capital controls. One of the main items for discussion at the 
G-20 meetings all through this period was ways to prevent these “currency wars”. Emerging 
economies  contended  that  financial  stability  is  a  global  public  good,  and  that  advanced 
economies, in particular, must be mindful of the spillover impact of their domestic policies. 
In  the  event,  the  “currency  wars”  were  short  lived.  As  the  euro-zone  sovereign  debt  crisis 
deepened  in  the  second  half  of  2011,  global  capital  reversed  direction  yet  again  exiting 
emerging economies in search of safe havens. Emerging economy currencies, including the 
rupee,  depreciated  significantly.  Between  August  4,  and  December  15,  2011,  the  rupee 
depreciated  by  over  15  per  cent  although  it  has  regained some  loss  since  then.  From  the 
Reserve Bank, we had to intervene in the market to smooth the volatility of the exchange rate 
movement. 
I  have  gone  at  some  length  to  narrate  the  developments  in  terms  of  capital  flows  to 
demonstrate that not only is the problem big in and of itself, but also that the problem can 
change direction abruptly owing entirely to external sector developments even as there is no 
change in our fundamentals. 
Globalization – challenges and opportunities 
You must by now have a fair idea of the type of challenges we face in the Reserve Bank on 
account  of  globalization.  You  must  recognize  though  that  as  much  as  globalization  poses 
complex policy challenges, it also offers immense opportunities. The economic reforms that 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
provided  the  platform  for  India’s  integration  with  the  global  economy  helped  in  raising  our 
growth rate and reducing poverty. Even as we are a large economy at an aggregate level, we 
are still a poor country as measured by per capita income and several social indicators. The 
challenge for your generation will be to accelerate India’s growth rate and make that growth 
inclusive. And you will need to manage that challenge in an increasingly globalizing India. I 
am  sure  you  will  find  being  a  part of  that  endeavour  intellectually  exciting  and  emotionally 
fulfilling. 
My best wishes to all of you for every success in your professional careers and for happiness 
and fulfillment in your personal lives. 
References: 
Crafts, Nicholas (2000): “Globalization and Growth in the Twentieth Century”, IMF Working 
Paper 00/44, International Monetary Fund, Washington DC. 
Diamond, Jared: Guns, Germs and Steel, Vintage, London, 1998 
Maddison, Angus (2001): The World Economy: A Millennial Perspective (Paris: OECD) 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
