Lesetja Kganyago: The impact of the Eurozone and global financial crisis 
on South Africa 
Speech by Mr Lesetja Kganyago, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at 
the Lereko Metier Capital Growth Fund Investor Conference, Magaliesburg, 1 March 2012. 
 Programme Director 
Chair and Directors of Lereko 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
All protocols observed 
The waves of the global financial crisis hit our shores as expected. The ferocity with which 
they hit our country was more pronounced than we could ever imagine. Fortunately, South 
Africa  had  built  strong  policy  anchors.  Nevertheless,  the  impact  reverberated  across  the 
entire economy. Tonight I would like to take you through our experience through the waves. I 
want to say a few things about the South African economy in the global financial crisis and its 
current  European  incarnation.  In  particular,  I  want  to  provide  some  perspective  on  the 
economy’s  resilience  to  global  shocks  and  how  our  macroeconomic  policy  settings  enable 
the economy to weather global storms.  
A crisis in waves 
The global economic crisis came in waves. The initial surges were relatively supportive of the 
economy. Rising commodity prices in the period from 2003 to 2008 increased the terms of 
trade of the economy in a strong and sustained way, boosting export revenue and making 
rising import prices tolerable. Over this period, 2003 to 2008, the terms of trade increased by 
7.1 percent. 
A  steady  flow  of  saving  from  non-residents  into  rand-denominated  assets  contributed  to 
cheap financing and with a stronger currency made possible the importation of considerable 
capital  equipment,  a  less  costly  infrastructure  build  programme,  and  improved  welfare  for 
households  as  imported  consumer  goods  became  less  costly.  From  2003  to  2008,  real 
household  consumption  growth  averaged  5.8  percent.  Real  gross  fixed  capital  formation 
grew by an annual average of 12.6 percent. Compared with the 1990s, average annual real 
GDP growth was 4.6 percent over this period. The manufacturing sector alone had real fixed 
capital  formation  growth  averaging  3.7  percent  a  year  and  grew  by  an  annual  average  of 
about 4.0 per cent.  
The second wave was much less benign. This was the sustained rise in global food prices, 
which generated strong upward pressure on domestic food prices and eventually the overall 
price level. Headline inflation rose strongly, peaking at 11.1 per cent in September 2008. The 
rise  in  inflation  and  subsequent  monetary  policy  response  (the  policy  rate  increased  from 
7.0 per  cent  to  12.0  per  cent  between  May  2006  and  June  2008)  sharply  worsened  the 
financial  conditions  of  South  African  households  and  corporates  that  had  increased  their 
levels of indebtedness in the period prior to 2007. The various positive factors of the 2003 to 
2007 period had resulted in a sharp rise in indebtedness which could not be sustained as 
growth and income in the economy slowed and inflation increased. Indebtedness of South 
African  households  had  increased  from  54.5  percent  of  disposable  income  in  2003  to 
82.3 per cent by 2008.  
The  slowly  unfolding  financial  crisis  in  the  United  States  and  the  eventual  shock  of  the 
Lehman  bankruptcy  in  October  2008  hit  an  already  weakening  economy.  As  credit  was 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
restricted globally and trade volumes collapsed around the world, the value of real exports of 
goods  and  services  from  South  Africa  fell  by  19.5  percent  in  2009.  For  many  economies, 
including South Africa, the decline in trade triggered the actual recession as it led to sharp 
contractions in output and labour retrenchment. South Africa’s quarter on quarter annualised 
growth in gross domestic product contracted by 1.7 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2008, 
falling to –6.3 and –2.8 per cent in the first and second quarters of 2009 respectively. The 
economy’s real GDP growth rate was –1.5 per cent in 2009 and 2.9 per cent in 2010.  
Stronger commodity prices in the boom period had pernicious effects as the crisis unfolded. 
Exogenous shocks from food and oil prices combined with domestic inter-sectoral dynamics 
pushed nominal wage settlements to very high growth rates given the slowing economy. Unit 
labour costs increased sharply as a result.  
The labour market outcomes in South Africa were severe. While about 1.6 million net jobs 
were created in the period 2003 to 2007, from 2008 to 2010 roughly 800 000 net jobs were 
lost. Job losses were heaviest in construction, retail, and financial services, which were the 
major job gainers in the boom period. A key distinction between South Africa and most other 
countries’  experiences  in  the  crisis  has  been  the  extent  of  job  destruction,  particularly 
considering the relatively shallow recession we experienced.  
Stronger  economic  performance  in  2010  gave  way  to  much  more  volatile  real  economy 
outcomes  in  2011.  Some  of  this  had  to  do  with  adverse  international  economic  events, 
including the tsunami in Japan and sharply elevated oil prices due to the conflict in Libya and 
political uncertainty as the Arab Spring unfolded. But a large portion of the domestic output 
volatility  was  related  to  domestic  factors,  including  the  debate  on  nationalisation  of  mines, 
work  stoppages  in  manufacturing  industries,  health  and  safety  shutdowns,  and  a  lower 
output in an agricultural sector that had grown very rapidly in previous years. The marginally 
stronger  growth  rate  in  2011  (estimated  at  just  over  3  percent)  compared  to  2010 
(2.9 per cent) was due to better outcomes in tertiary sectors, particularly trade, catering and 
accommodation, transport, storage and communications, and financial services, underpinned 
by sustained growth in government spending.  
How did we respond to the crisis? 
Given the unfolding of the shocks hitting the South African economy, the monetary and fiscal 
policy  responses  were  largely  reactive.  The  main  forward-looking  macroeconomic  policy 
setting and decisions were made some years earlier, and enabled a sustained moderation in 
the  economic  effects  of  the  crisis.  Like  many  other  emerging  market  economies,  capital 
inflows  and  upward  pressure  on  the  exchange  rate  played  a  complicating  role  in  how  the 
economy responded to the shocks and to policy.  
The  inflation  targeting  framework,  put  in  place  in  2000,  had  largely  aligned  inflation 
expectations of economic agents with the Reserve Bank’s forecasts. With a change in policy 
on  exchange  market  intervention,  the  IT  framework  also  allowed  the  currency  to  float  and 
absorb  major  shocks  without  forcing  major  interest  rate  adjustments.  This  cushioning  role 
was critical at the time of the Lehman crisis, because it allowed the monetary authorities to 
continue  lowering  interest  rates  as  inflation  moderated  even  as  investors  sold  rand 
denominated assets in the near-panic selling of “risky” assets of the time. Post-Lehman the 
value of the rand against the US dollar declined by about 35 per cent as did the currencies of 
many emerging market economies. 
South Africa’s sound fiscal position and the high level of commodity prices implied a return of 
capital into the economy once risk perceptions had moderated. Over the course of 2009, the 
rand  strengthened,  averaging  R8.44  to  the  US  dollar  in  the  year,  and  beginning  2010  at 
R7.37. The underlying real equilibrium exchange rate of the rand was high because of the 
terms of trade and sound policy.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The  initial  sharp  depreciation  of  the  currency  might  have  generated  stronger  economic 
outcomes for exporting and import-competing sectors, but it is likely that the net effect of a 
persistent  depreciation  on  the  economy  would  have  been  negative  at  the  time.  It  is  also 
important to remember that these competitiveness gains would have been very small due to 
the  sharp  moderation  in  consumer  spending  and  the  fall  in  foreign  demand  for  all 
South African  exports.  In  other  words,  South  African  exporters  outside  of  the  commodity 
sector  might  have  benefited  marginally  from  higher  domestic  prices,  but  only  for  a  short 
period as their input costs escalated. As those costs rose, the likely interest rate response to 
the  inflationary  effects  of  the  exchange  rate  drop  would  have  squeezed  domestic  demand 
even  as  rising  inflation  appreciated  the  real  exchange  rate  and  reduced  the  initial 
improvement in competitiveness.  
South  Africa’s  policy  discourse  at  the  time,  centered  on  the  need  for  a  fiscal  stimulus 
response  to  the  fall  in  foreign  demand  and  slowing  domestic  economy.  This  was 
incompatible however with a macroeconomic response to those advocating a moderation in 
the appreciation of the currency as it rebounded from the overshot depreciation in late 2008. 
In  addition  to  the  positive  economic  factors  driving  the  resumption  of  capital  inflows  –  the 
sound public debt position and high commodity prices – the high inflation rate and growth in 
unit labour costs were driving up the real effective exchange rate. The current account deficit 
remained  high  as  a  result  of  growth  in  gross  domestic  spending  exceeding  growth  in 
domestic production.  
These  factors  meant  that  monetary  policy  alone  –  lowering  the  policy  rate  to  reduce  carry 
trade – could not have prevented the appreciation of the nominal and real exchange rates. 
To  prevent  the  real  appreciation  would  have  required  macroeconomic  policy  tightening  to 
rein  in  domestic  expenditure  and  moderate  inflation.  In  practice  this  meant  either  that  the 
foreign  currency  public  debt  would  have  to  increase  by  the  amount  the  authorities  were 
willing to intervene in the foreign exchange markets, or fiscal policy would have to adjust to 
find the resources for foreign currency purchases out of current spending or from increased 
revenue. Short of increased borrowing and the implications for long-term interest rates, the 
other options entailed reducing public spending on current programmes or tax increases.  
The approach taken was to provide funding to purchase foreign currency inflows from foreign 
direct investment. Where there has been insufficient rand available for this purpose, forward 
market foreign currency swaps were conducted to finance the reserve purchases.  
Even the efficacy of macroeconomic policy adjustment to achieve the real depreciation is in 
doubt. Despite the sharp punctuations of risk aversion resulting in sales of emerging market 
assets, global macroeconomic rebalancing has been marked by a sustained flow of capital 
out of some advanced economies and into faster growing and higher return emerging and 
developing economies. For economies like South Africa that for one reason or another are 
seen as good investment destinations, this flow is unlikely to dry up soon. The corollary is to 
take a bet that China’s growth rate will slow permanently, resulting in much lower commodity 
prices, and hence a fall in South Africa’s terms of trade. This seems an unlikely bet to take. 
In  that  global  context  so  heavily  influenced  by  China  as  the  world’s  primary  driver  of 
economic growth, adjustment to the nominal exchange rate might be expected to generate 
further portfolio capital inflows.  
Another  alternative  was  for  the  imposition  of  capital  controls  or  taxes  on  capital  inflows  to 
reduce  the  return  on  rand-denominated  assets.  Such  controls  were  put  in  place  in  some 
countries,  primarily  Brazil.  These may  have  adjusted  the composition  of  inflows somewhat 
towards more foreign direct investment, although the evidence provides little grounds for a 
robust  assessment  one  way  or  the  other.  Like  the  option  of  a  fiscal  contraction,  the 
imposition  of  taxes  on  capital  inflows  would  force  a  reduction  in  domestic  spending  and 
would  need  to  be  large  enough  to  tighten  policy  to  offset  the  inflationary  impact  of  eased 
policy rates.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Perhaps  the  remaining  option  at  the  macroeconomic  level  would  have  been  to  fix  the 
exchange rate against another currency. With lower inflation rates in major currencies, this 
would have likely resulted in the need to tighten monetary policy immediately. From a policy 
perspective, fixing the nominal rate would also have severely limited South Africa’s options 
and  forced  domestic  monetary  and  fiscal  settings  to  adjust  domestic  demand  to  maintain 
whatever  currency  peg  was  chosen.  Imposing  domestic  economic  volatility  to  solve 
exchange rate volatility would be a strange choice to make.  
On  balance,  it  is  unclear  that  any  of  the  macroeconomic  options  not  taken  would  have 
resulted  in  better  economic  growth,  investment  or  employment  performance  than  actually 
occurred.  It  is  possible  that  somewhat  tighter  fiscal  policy  and  somewhat  looser  monetary 
policy  could  have  resulted  in  a  slight  change  in  the  balance  of  production  between  traded 
and non-traded goods, but the economy-wide economic growth rate would likely have been  
lower and fewer jobs created. The non-traded goods sectors have tended to grow faster than 
traded goods and are more labour intensive, irrespective of the strength of global demand. 
The  floating  exchange  rate  has  enabled  South  Africa  to  weather  the  global  crisis  without 
having  to  impose  jarring  interest  rate  hikes, meaning  that  households  and  firms  could  pay 
down debt more rapidly and the recovery initiate sooner. Perhaps more importantly, a series 
of clear constraints to growth in traded goods sectors have been identified for some years 
and new ones have emerged to frustrate sustained growth in output.  
The  capital  flows  challenge  needs  fresh  thinking.  Over  the  medium  term,  to  moderate  the 
real  exchange  rate,  we  need  fiscal  and  monetary  policy  settings  that  reflect  that  policy 
objective and seek to achieve it. For fiscal  policy this means a credible consolidation path 
and a return to sustainable public debt levels. It also implies that public spending be directed 
at  addressing  South  Africa’s  competitiveness  challenges  and  infrastructure  needs.  Getting 
these  areas  of  policy  right,  in  turn,  implies  that  foreign  investment  will  start  to  shift  in 
composition  towards  greater  FDI  relative  to  portfolio  investment  and  in  a  wider  range  of 
industries.  More  efficient  infrastructure,  more  competitive  firms  with  sustained  productivity 
growth, and more skilled labour are as integral to achieving a permanently more competitive 
economy as forward-looking fiscal and monetary policy settings.  
How  we  address  our  home-grown  economic  challenges  is  not  to  suggest  that  global 
difficulties  can  be  left  unattended.  Three  serious  disorders  confront  the  short  and  medium 
term. The first is the effects of macroeconomic policy making in advanced economies. These 
policy settings, intended to resolve the combination of slow growth and over indebtedness, 
and conducted in a globalised world economy; contribute at some level to the flow of capital 
into emerging markets and the developing world.  
Like the experiences of the Asian crisis over a decade ago, for some economies these flows 
run the risk of pushing economies into very poor decisions of what to do with the surplus of 
capital.  Capital  pushed  into  uses  where  the  returns  are  speculative  and  high  will  tend  to 
result in inefficient use of capital and cause foreign currency liabilities that cannot be met. For 
other economies, such as South Africa, the flow of capital may ease the adjustment process 
by enabling a faster consolidation away from unsustainable fiscal positions.  
But  they  also  can  result  in  Dutch  Disease  effects,  particularly  as  in  South  Africa,  where 
shocks  affecting  one  sector  are  transmitted  to  others  via  input  pricing  and  sector-level 
collective bargaining. The trade channel works in the opposite direction. The markedly slower 
economic growth of advanced economies will result in lower exports in the short term and will 
accelerate the shift in exports towards more rapidly growing regions. China is the  
fastest  growing  export  destination  for  South  Africa,  while  India  and  a  number  of  African 
countries  are  also  receiving  a  rising  volume  of  exports.  The  slowing  advanced  economies 
however also pose a less obvious trade challenge to South Africa’s manufacturing ambitions. 
The  market  space  for  South  Africa’s  relatively  high  cost  and  specialised  manufactures  will 
narrow and competition will increase with Asian competitors.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
For the time being, job creation is more likely to rebound in sectors that did well prior to the 
crisis,  and  indeed  this  is  what  we  have  seen  over  the  course  of  2011.  Public  sector  job 
creation has been strong in 2010 and 2011, which has given way to stronger private sector 
job  creation  in  the  second  half  of  2011.  Stronger  public  and  private  investment  should  be 
expected to result in better employment creation over the medium term.  
The second disorder is in financial markets in advanced economies. High debt levels in the 
developed  world  and  the  European  sovereign  debt  crisis  have  triggered  unconventional 
policy responses and a variety of risks is evident. The most troubling is the possibility of the 
current  financial  crisis  intensifying  sharply  and  resulting  in  even  more  credit  contraction, 
sales  of  assets,  and  eventually  stronger  real  economy  effects.  A  severe  worsening  in  the 
growth  prospects  for  Europe  would  result  in  a  calamitous  fall  in  demand  for  exports  from 
around the world. A global recession could ensue from this kind of risk. South Africa’s trade 
exposure  to  Europe  is  about  27  percent  of  total  exports.  A  second  and  more  plausible 
scenario  is  for  a  sustained  period  of  very  weak  credit  extension  in  Europe  due  to  the 
combination  of  the  Basel  III  capital  requirements  and  exposure  to  sovereign  debt  in 
peripheral  European  economies.  This  outcome  might  play  itself  out  as  a  serious  drag  on 
European growth, with GDP growing at roughly half the average rate achieved over the last 
twenty years.  
A third possibility would be for financial contagion to affect emerging market economies. In 
this instance, countries with financial and/or economic vulnerabilities would experience local 
currency asset sales, capital flight, and knock-on effects into confidence of consumers and 
businesses  in  the  real  economy.  Such  effects  would  very  likely  occur  in  the  event  of  a 
financial and economic meltdown in Europe, but would not necessarily only come out of such 
a combination of circumstances.  
The private sector in emerging economies remains in deficit to the rest of the world and only 
Asian  emerging  economies  have  net 
foreign  asset  positions.  As  European  banks 
recapitalise,  the  resulting  deleveraging  could  reduce  foreign  funding  for  emerging  markets 
significantly. European banks provide about 30 per cent of Latin American bank credit and 
40 per cent of Eastern Europe’s so that a contraction in EU bank loans to these countries  
could  constrain  their  economic  growth  significantly.  The  prolonged  global  crisis  and  the 
vulnerabilities created or exposed by policy efforts in South Africa and elsewhere to address 
the  crisis  have  to  some  extent  increased  the  risk  of  financial  contagion.  In  that  context, 
reducing vulnerabilities must be a key priority for the monetary and fiscal authorities.  
To conclude, SA fared better than many peers. Going forward, reducing vulnerabilities would 
entail strengthening our three key anchors.  
South Africa has almost no direct financial exposure to institutions in Europe, in part because 
of  limited  direct  institutional  linkages  and  in  part  due  to  our  pre-existing  macro-  prudential 
policy framework, a key anchor. Nonetheless, reorganisation of the regulatory approach to 
the financial sector is underway to strengthen the capacity of regulators to address sector-
specific  challenges  that  may  arise  in  the  future  and  enable  appropriate  responses  in  the 
event of shocks. Basel 2 provides the basic template for our domestic regulatory initiatives, 
even as discussions on Basel 3 plus appropriate flexibility for emerging market economies 
are ongoing.  
On the fiscal policy side, the medium term expenditure framework sets out a consolidation 
path  that  caps  the  rise  in  the  public  debt  at  comparatively  low  levels.  As  the  economic 
recovery proceeds, the fiscal position will show further sustained improvements as we have 
seen in the latest budget numbers.  
Lastly monetary policy: the financial shocks that South Africa will face in future will continue 
to be best addressed with a flexible inflation targeting framework that allows the currency to 
cushion  the  domestic  economy  from  volatility.  Forward  looking  inflation  expectations  and 
transparency  by  the  monetary  authorities  hold  the  key  to  minimizing  exchange  rate 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
pass-through to domestic inflation. This will not always work as well as we would like, but is 
far better than the alternative of having to move domestic interest rates on a frequent basis to 
try to maintain a stable exchange rate. Underlying the sustainability of these macroeconomic 
policies must be efforts to improve productivity, skills development, and improve the flexibility 
of wages and prices. Stronger economic growth, sustaining people in jobs and more rapid 
job creation are our best defences against the economic shocks of the world in which we live.  
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
