Paul Tucker: Shadow banking – thoughts for a possible policy agenda 
Speech by Mr Paul Tucker, Deputy Governor for Financial Stability at the Bank of England, 
at the European Commission High Level Conference, Brussels, 27 April 2012. 
 It  is  excellent  that  the  EU  Commission  has  published  a  consultative  paper  on  shadow 
banking  and  is  holding  this  conference  today.  The  Commission’s  paper  fits  well  with  the 
approach that the G20 Financial Stability Board is taking. The issues here are very important 
since,  as  the  international  community  reregulates  the  banking  industry,  more  activity  is 
almost bound to be booked outside banking.  
We need at some point to move on to policy. I am therefore going to use today’s occasion to 
put on the table some thoughts for a possible concrete policy agenda. I am doing so in the 
spirit of wanting to help nudge this work into its next stage. And I should be clear that the 
FSB, where our work is led by Adair Turner, have not yet articulated our collective preferred 
policy approach. 
The  definition  of  “shadow  banking”  employed  by  the  FSB  and  the  EU  Commission  is, 
paraphrasing,  credit  intermediation,  involving  leverage  and  maturity  transformation,  that 
occurs  outside  or  partly  outside  the  banking  system.1  That  is  very  close  to  the  definition  I 
used in a speech two years ago calling for work on shadow banking, except that in addition 
to leverage and maturity transformation I include “monetary services”.2 
I want to make three broad points about this. First, it is very clear that “shadow banking” is 
not the same as the non-bank financial sector. This is not a debate about the appropriate 
regulatory framework for the whole of finance. For example, the vast majority of hedge funds 
are not shadow banks, and don’t trade in the credit markets or especially illiquid markets.  
Second, non-bank intermediation of credit is not a bad thing in itself. Indeed, it can be a very 
good thing, helping to make financial services more efficient and effective and the system as 
a whole more resilient. We must remember that as we make policy. 
But, as we know from this crisis and from previous ones, true shadow banking can weaken 
the system.  
Regulatory  arbitrage,  which  is  always  with  us,  can  distort  and  disguise  channels  of 
intermediation.  
That  leads  me  to  my  third  general  point.  Shadow  banking  comes  in  lots  of  shapes  and 
colours. There are degrees to which any particular instance of shadow banking replicates 
banking. The liquidity offered by some shadow banks relies pretty well entirely, and more or 
less openly, on committed lines of credit from commercial banks. In these cases, the liquidity 
insurance offered by the shadow bank is “derivative”; there is a real bank in the shadows. But 
for other shadow banks, liquidity services are offered without such back-up lines. In those 
cases,  claims  on  the  shadow  bank  have,  in  effect,  become  a  monetary  asset.  Examples 
probably  include  money  market  mutual  funds  and  an  element  of  the  prime  brokerage 
services offered by securities dealers to levered funds.  
                                                 
1  See  Section  1,  Financial  Stability  Board,  “Shadow  Banking:  Scoping  the  Issues”,  April  2011;  Section  3, 
European  Commission  ,  “Green  Paper  on  Shadow  Banking”,  March  2011;  and  also  Turner,  “Securitisation, 
shadow banking and the value of financial innovation”, April 2012. 
2  My  definition  was:  instruments,  structures,  firms  or  markets  which,  alone  or  in  combination,  replicate,  to  a 
greater  or  lesser  degree,  the  core  features  of  commercial  banks:  monetary  or  liquidity  services,  maturity 
mismatch and leverage. See Tucker, P M W, “Shadow Banking, Financing Markets and Financial Stability”, 
January 2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
With that brief bit of scene setting, I will quickly set out my current thinking on policy. The 
objective should not be to curb non-bank finance in general, but to recognise where a form of 
intermediation is banking in substance or in the risks it creates for the system as a whole.  
Shadow banks that are really part of banks 
Many  examples  of  shadow  banking  are  sponsored  by  banks  or  are  operated  by  them,  or 
both.  They  are  effectively  part  of  their  “parent”  bank.  In  the  run  up  to  the  present  crisis, 
prominent  examples  were  Structured  Investment  Vehicles,  ABCP  conduits,  and  money 
funds. Many benefitted from financial support from their “parent” during 2007–08. For such 
situations, the following could usefully apply: 
 
Shadow banking vehicles or funds that are sponsored or operated by banks should 
be consolidated on to bank balance sheets 
Consolidation  might  require  changes  in  accounting  rules.  That  could  take  time.  These 
vehicles and funds should nevertheless be treated as consolidated in the application of Basel 
3 regulatory capital requirements etc. If necessary, Pillar 2 should be used to achieve that. 
(The Basel Supervisors Committee will, I hope, consider this in its contribution to the FSB 
work).  
Banks’ provision of committed lines of credit to independent shadow banks 
Even  where  a  shadow  bank  is  not  de  facto  or  de  jure  part  of  a  banking  group,  many  are 
fundamentally  dependent  on  banks  –  through  committed  lines  of  credit.  Anyone  running  a 
maturity mismatch is exposed to liquidity risk – liabilities being called before assets fall due or 
before they can be sold in an orderly way. Banks can provide insurance against such liquidity 
risk because their deposit liabilities are money; they can lend simply by expanding the two 
sides of their balance sheet simultaneously, creating (broad) money. But, for the system as a 
whole  –  ie  taking  a  macroprudential  perspective  –  providing  committed  lines  to  shadow 
banks is riskier than providing such lines to non-bank businesses. Shadow banks are liable 
to call on their lines just when the banking system is coming under liquidity pressure itself. 
That should be reflected in regulatory policies on banks’ liquidity exposures. I suggest that: 
 
the  draw-down  rate  assumed  in  the  Basel  3  Liquidity  Coverage  Ratio  should  be 
higher  for  committed  lines  to  financial  companies  than  for  lines  to  non-financial 
companies. That is, banks should hold more liquid assets against such exposures. 
Without a policy of that kind, there will be a strong incentive for maturity-transformation to be 
undertaken off bank balance sheets but with an umbilical cord back to the banking system. It 
should apply not only to vehicles used for securitisation but more generally.  
Money funds 
Money funds do not use committed lines of credit from banks. Claims on money funds have, 
in effect, become monetary assets in the hands of savers. In parts of the world, especially 
the US, they are treated like current accounts. Given the restrictions on their asset holdings, 
they resemble narrow banks, in mutual-fund clothing. But for a normal mutual fund, as an 
open-ended investment vehicle, the value of investments in it fluctuates with the value of the 
vehicle’s asset portfolio. By contrast, most money funds hold themselves out as offering par 
under any circumstances; when they “break the buck”, they must unwind. Their investors run 
at that prospect; and so the funds themselves are flighty investors. Compared to most types 
of shadow banking, money funds do not borrow – in the usual sense. But by promising par, 
they  are  in  effect  incurring  debt-like  obligations.  And  they  can  be  exposed  to  leverage.  At 
least in the run up to the crisis, some invested in levered paper, some of it in what amounted 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
to Russian Doll shadow banking – a money fund buys short-term ABCP backed by CDOs, 
etc.  
What I suggest here is that: 
 
Money Market Funds should be required to choose between being 
– 
– 
Variable Net Asset Value (NAV) funds or Constant NAV funds  
Any remaining CNAV funds should be subject to capital requirements of some 
kind 
All should be subject to “gates” or other measures that can be used to delay 
withdrawals, to make runs less likely. 
 That package would not completely prevent runs; regular mutual funds can suffer runs. But it 
would make them somewhat less brittle.  
Europe should want a global standard or at least a globally consistent approach to money 
funds. Much the largest money-fund industry in the world is based in the US. But it is not 
confined  to  domestic,  US  intermediation.  It  is  internationally  active  –  lending  to  banks, 
corporates and sovereigns around the world. That underlines the importance of the outcome 
of the deliberations of the SEC and of the US Financial Stability Oversight Counsel in this 
area. We have to hope that the US authorities will take action – making not only their own 
domestic financial system safer, but the global system safer.  
If, against our hopes and expectations, that proves not to be the case, authorities in Europe 
and  elsewhere  will  need  to  think  through  what  if  any  measures  we  could  sensibly  take  to 
make our part of the global financial system more resilient to the faultline that the money fund 
industry currently represents. One possibility would be for  
 
bank  supervisors  to  limit  the  extent  to  which  banks  could  fund  themselves 
short-term  from  US  money  funds  and  from  other  fragile/flighty  sources,  including 
CNAV money funds domiciled elsewhere. 
I  should  stress  that  such  a  policy  need  not  be  targeted  at  US  funds  per  se.  It  is  also  a 
question of the prudence of the banks that borrow. So it could be cast in terms of the liability 
structure  and  sources  of  funding  of  the  banking  system.  The  Basel  3  Net  Stable  Funding 
Ratio may help a bit with this.  
And I should add that on some fronts – notably transparency – Europe should aim to catch 
up with the progress the US has already made.  
Securities dealers, finance companies 
Some  shadow  banks  are  “businesses”,  not  funds  or  vehicles.  These  non-bank  financial 
intermediaries  finance  themselves  externally  in  the  markets.  Some  such  financing  is 
short-term and so effectively runnable, as events showed. In those cases: 
 
If  they  are  financed  materially  by  short-term  debt,  they  should  be  subject  to 
bank-type regulation and supervision of the resilience of their balance sheets.  
That would apply to some kinds of finance company. It might apply to securities dealers too.  
In  the  EU,  many  dealers  are  “investment  firms”  and  so  are  already  subject  to  the  same 
Directives  as  banks  on  capital  adequacy.  That  is  not  true  of  finance  companies  in  many 
jurisdictions. 
Perhaps  there  should  be  a  size  threshold  for  applying  bank-style  capital  and  liquidity 
regulation to such non-bank banks.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Securities dealers and the “rehypothecation” of client assets 
That last set of points was about firms acting as principals. Major issues arise from the use of 
client assets – money and securities – to finance the principal risk-taking of some financial 
firms.  This  has  become  apparent  from  the  Lehman  and  MFG  bankruptcies.  Quietly  in  the 
background,  something  extraordinary  has  happened  over  the  past  decade  or  so.  Let  me 
explain.  
You place £X of your securities portfolio with your broker/dealer in safekeeping (as a sub-
custodian  in  a  way).  You  borrow  a  much  smaller  amount  of  money  from  your  broker  and, 
reasonably  enough,  they  take  some  of  your  securities  as  collateral;  in  effect,  they  have 
financed your holding of that part of your securities portfolio. An observer might think the rest 
of  your  portfolio  would  sit  in  a  segregated  client  account.  Not  a  bit  of  it.  Unless  you  have 
been very careful, the broker/dealer has repoed out your securities for cash, and used the 
proceeds  to  finance  its  own  businesses.  To  make  this  simpler,  imagine  you  have  placed 
surplus cash with your broker-dealer. As likely as not, it is being used to finance the dealer’s 
business.  
Whether we are talking about your cash or your securities, if you can call them on demand 
and  they  are  being  used  to  finance  your  broker’s  business,  that  used  to  be  called  ..... 
banking.  
I suggest the following in this area:  
 
Only  banks  should  be  able  to  use  client  moneys  and  unencumbered  assets  to 
finance their own business to a material extent; and that should be a clear principal 
relationship. Legal form should come into line with economic substance. 
For non-banks, any client moneys and unencumbered assets should be segregated 
and  should  not  be  used  to  finance  the  business  to  a  material  extent.  It  should, 
however, remain permissible for non-banks to lend to such clients on a collateralised 
basis to finance their holdings of securities (“margin lending”). 
 This is an area where regimes vary enormously around the world or are non-existent. For 
example,  the  US  domestic  regime  is  stricter  on  this  than  Europe.  We  need  a  global 
discussion.  
Securities lending, repo and collateralised-financing markets 
So far I have discussed funds or vehicles or firms that are in economic substance shadow 
banks. We also need to think about the markets that firms and vehicles can use to develop a 
de facto banking business. Perhaps the key such markets are securities lending and repo – 
or, more generally, collateralised borrowing.  
Before proceeding I must stress that these markets are vital to efficient capital markets.  
The  crucial economic  function  of  market-making  entails intermediaries  going  short,  and  so 
needing  to  cover  their  position  by  borrowing  securities.  And  repo  has  enriched  the  money 
markets.  
But it is also true that anyone holding a securities portfolio can build themselves a shadow 
bank using the securities lending and repo markets. One simply lends out the securities at 
call for cash, and then one employs that cash by making loans or buying credit-assets with a 
longer maturity. This is leverage and maturity mismatch.  
That example assumes the shadow-banking business is built by the investor who holds the 
securities outright. But, of course, nothing is so simple. The first lender of securities might 
lend  against  securities  collateral  and  do  no  more;  that  is  relatively  common  in  European 
markets.  But  the  entity  that  has  borrowed  those  securities  could  themselves  repo  out  the 
borrowed securities for cash, and employ the cash in a lending or credit-asset business. And 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
so  on  –  ie  at  any  point  in  the  chain  of  securities  lending,  an  intermediary  can  build 
themselves  a  shadow  banking  business.  Such  chains  can  prove  fragile  for  all  sorts  of 
reasons  –  because  many  securities  are  at  call,  and  because  many  secured  lenders  try  to 
realise their collateral instantly upon default.  
It is also worth mentioning that some asset managers have no – zero – appetite to hold the 
underlying  paper  outright  in  the  event  of  their  counterparty  defaulting,  either  because  the 
assets are not covered by investment mandates or the fund managers do not know how to 
manage them, etc.  
What I suggest on this front is: 
 
There  should  be  greater  market  transparency,  perhaps  ideally  via  a  Trade 
Repository with open access to aggregate data, so that the world can see what is 
happening  in  these  very  important  but  opaque  financing  markets.  (That  would  be 
helpful for market participants themselves). 
Financial firms and funds should not be able to lend against securities that they are 
not permitted or proficient enough to hold outright.  
Non-bank financial firms should be regulated in how they employ cash collateral. 
The authorities should be able to step in and set minimum haircut or margin levels 
for the collateralised financing markets (or segments of them). (That would need to 
be pursued at international level.3 It might be linked to central bank haircuts). 
  Some of those points are aired in the FSB’s report on securities lending and repos published 
today4 and will, I hope, be explored intensively in the coming months. 
I  will  expand  slightly  on  the  last  point  in  my  list.  The  amount  of  leverage  available  in  the 
system  depends,  of  course,  to  a  significant  degree  on  the  haircuts  applied  in  chains  of 
secured financing transactions; leverage is the reciprocal of the haircuts. The resilience of 
the  system  is  therefore  impaired  when  a  bout  of  exuberance  drives  down  haircuts.  The 
authorities need to be ready to place constraints on that – through minima that either apply 
continuously or are specially introduced when conditions are overheating.  
There is already an official exercise underway to frame the determination of minimum margin 
levels in the parts of the derivatives market that will not be centrally cleared. At some point 
down the road, this will need to be brought into a coherent framework with any measures on 
the  collateralised-financing  market.  Doing  so  would  require  deciding  whether  to  apply  the 
same or different approaches to the inter-dealer market and dealer-customer transactions.  
Conclusion: innovation, evolution and surveillance 
Those are just a few thoughts for debate, based on some current manifestations of shadow 
banking. I have not even covered the existing waterfront. For example, we need policies on 
those  levered  credit  funds  that  offer  near-instant  withdrawal  rights.  In  the  EU  distinctions 
need  to  be  made  within  the  Alternative  Investment  Fund  Managers  Directive  and  UCITs 
regime, which allows risky structures to be branded as retail products. 
But it would be foolhardy to imagine that we can frame policies today that will stand the test 
of  time.  The  financial  system  will  evolve,  and  we  need  to  permit  innovation.  A  policy 
framework  on  shadow  banking  therefore  needs  to  be  adaptive.  And  it  mustn’t  try  to  shut 
                                                 
3  See  Committee  on  the  Global  Financial  System,  “The  role  of  margin  requirements  and  haircuts  in 
procyclicality”, March 2010. 
4  See “Securities lending and Repo: Market Overview and Financial Stability Issues”, and interim report of an 
FSB group chaired by my colleague David Rule. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
everything down. As I said at the outset, non-bank finance is not intrinsically a bad thing. We 
will  need  effective  surveillance  of  what  is  going  on  and  what  concentrations  of  risk  are 
emerging – through outfits like the FSB’s committee on vulnerabilities and, in the EU, through 
the European Systemic Risk Board. And we will have to make discerning policy judgments 
that are explained and consulted upon. That is exactly what the EU, alongside the FSB, is 
now embarked on.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
