Mark Carney: Summary of the latest Monetary Policy Report 
Opening  statement  by  Mr  Mark  Carney,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  the  press 
conference following the release of the Monetary Policy Report, Ottawa, 18 April 2012. 
 Good morning. Tiff and I are pleased to be here with you today to discuss the April Monetary 
Policy Report, which the Bank published this morning. 
 
If  sustained, 
these  oil  price  developments  could  dampen 
The  profile  for  global  economic  growth  has  improved  since  the  Bank  released  its 
January MPR. Europe is expected to emerge slowly from recession in the second 
half of 2012, although the risks around this outlook remain high.  
The profile for U.S. growth is slightly stronger. This reflects the balance of somewhat 
improved labour markets, financial conditions and confidence on the one hand, and 
emerging fiscal consolidation and ongoing household deleveraging on the other. 
Economic activity in emerging-market economies is expected to moderate to a still-
robust pace over the projection horizon, supported by an easing of macroeconomic 
policies.  
Commodity  prices remain elevated owing to improved global economic prospects, 
supply  disruptions  and  geopolitical  risks. In  particular,  the  international  price  of  oil 
has  risen  further  and  is  now  considerably  higher  than  that  received  by  Canadian 
producers. 
the 
improvement in economic momentum. 
Overall,  economic  momentum  in  Canada  is  slightly  firmer  than  the  Bank  had 
expected  in  January.  The  external  headwinds  facing  Canada  have  abated 
somewhat,  with  the  U.S.  recovery  more  resilient  and  financial  conditions  more 
supportive than previously anticipated.  
As a result, business and household confidence are improving faster than forecast. 
The  Bank  projects  that  private  domestic  demand  will  account  for  almost  all  of 
Canada’s economic growth over the projection horizon. 
Household spending is expected to remain high relative to GDP as households add 
to their debt burden, which remains the biggest domestic risk. Business investment 
is projected to remain robust, reflecting solid balance sheets, very favourable credit 
conditions, continuing strong terms of trade and heightened competitive pressures. 
The contribution of government spending to growth is expected to be quite modest 
over the projection horizon, in line with recent federal and provincial budgets. The 
recovery in net exports is likely to remain weak in light of modest external demand 
and  ongoing  competitiveness  challenges,  including  the  persistent  strength  of  the 
Canadian dollar. 
The Bank projects that the economy will grow by 2.4 per cent in both 2012 and 2013 
before moderating to 2.2 per cent in 2014. The degree of economic slack has been 
somewhat smaller than anticipated, and the economy is now expected to return to 
full capacity in the first half of 2013. 
As a result of this reduced slack and higher gasoline prices, the profile for inflation is 
expected to be somewhat firmer. After moderating this quarter, both total and core 
inflation  are  expected  to  be  around  2  per  cent  over  the  balance  of  the  projection 
horizon  as  the  economy  reaches  its  production  potential,  the  growth  of  labour 
compensation remains moderate, and inflation expectations stay well-anchored. 
         BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
     Despite recent improvements to the outlook for the global and Canadian economies, 
risks remain elevated.  
The three main upside risks to inflation in Canada relate to the possibility of higher-
than-expected  oil  prices,  stronger-than-expected  growth  in  the  U.S.  economy  and 
stronger momentum in Canadian household spending. 
The  two  main  downside  risks  to  inflation  in  Canada  relate  to  a  reintensification  of 
sovereign debt and banking concerns in Europe, and the possibility that growth in 
Canadian household spending could be weaker than projected. 
Overall, the Bank judges that the risks to the inflation outlook in Canada are roughly 
balanced over the projection period. 
Reflecting  all  of  these  factors,  the  Bank  yesterday  maintained  the  target  for  the 
overnight rate at 1 per cent. In light of the reduced slack in the economy and firmer 
underlying inflation, some modest withdrawal of the present considerable monetary 
policy  stimulus  may  become  appropriate,  consistent  with  achieving  the  2  per  cent 
inflation target over the medium term. The timing and degree of any such withdrawal 
will be weighed carefully against domestic and global economic developments. 
With that, Tiff and I would be pleased to take your questions. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
