Gill Marcus: South Africa’s new banknotes 
Address by Ms Gill Marcus, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the launch of 
the communications campaign for the Mandela banknote series, Pretoria, 5 September 2012. 
 Good morning and thank you for being with us today. I know a number of you have travelled 
from abroad to be here, and we appreciate your attendance and participation. 
Today  is  a  momentous  occasion.  The  South  African  Reserve  Bank  is  launching  a 
communication campaign to showcase the country’s new banknote series and to inform the 
public about the unique features of South Africa’s new banknotes. 
The front of the new banknotes feature the image of South Africa’s first democratically elected 
President, Nelson Mandela. The reverse side of each denomination features an image of one 
of the “big five” animals. The new notes have the same denominations, sizes and colours as 
the existing series, which was adopted twenty years ago. 
The  design  and  production  of  this  new  series  of  banknotes  has  been  a  long  but  exciting 
journey for the Reserve Bank and our key partners in the public and private sectors. 
A  country’s  currency  is  a  fundamental  component  of  its  national  identity.  It  should  be  a 
reflection  of  its culture and heritage. South Africa’s banknotes have reflected aspects of its 
culture and  heritage since the inception of the South African rand in  1961. In  earlier days, 
South African banknotes featured such diverse images as that of Jan van Riebeeck, and later 
the  “Big  Five”.  What  will  surely  become  known  as  the  “Mandela  banknote  series”  reflects 
South Africa’s pride as a nation and pays tribute to a much-loved world icon. 
To give a brief history of South African banknotes: 
About  230  years  ago  the  Dutch  Governor  Joachim  van  Plettenberg  first  introduced  paper 
money in the Cape. All the notes had to be handwritten because there was no printing press 
in the Cape. The money featured a government fiscal hand stamp that showed the value of 
the money and the authority date of the issue. It was only in 1803 that notes were printed, but 
they  still bore  the fiscal hand stamp. The early  currency, including the  rix  dollar and  stiver 
denominations,  played a significant role in the early economic development of our country. 
South Africa later used the British pound sterling as its currency until 1961, when the rand 
was introduced. The “big five” theme was adopted after the unbanning of political parties and 
the release of political prisoners, reflecting what was considered as a design that would be 
acceptable to  all South  Africans. The currency was last upgraded in  2005 when enhanced 
security features on the “Big Five” banknote series were added. Internationally, it is regarded 
as best practice for central banks to upgrade the security features of their banknotes every six 
to  eight years. This  is  to  combat counterfeiting, which diminishes the value of  real money, 
robs  countries  worldwide  of  billions  of  rand  annually,  and  tarnishes  the  credibility  of  a 
currency, thereby impacting on the growth of that economy. 
One  of  the  responsibilities of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank  is  to  protect  the  value  and 
integrity  of  the  South  African  currency.  Through  this  comprehensive  communication 
campaign,  we  want to  ensure that all our citizens and organisations familiarise themselves 
with the look and feel of the new banknotes, and reinforce the culture of knowing our money. I 
also want to emphasise that the current notes remain legal tender and are of equal value to 
the new note. So whether you have the existing R200 note or a R200 Mandela note, they are 
both worth the same. 
This is the launch of the communication campaign about the new banknotes, which we plan to 
introduce into circulation before the end of this year. The date on which these notes will be 
available and co-circulate with the current note for a while will be made public in due course. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Before then, much remains to be done and the SARB Team is hard at work with many of you 
to make this happen in a seamless manner. 
I would like to thank all our partners: the cash industry, including commercial banks and cash-
in-transit companies; the retail sector; government departments; the Society for the Blind; and 
the Pan South African Language Board for their sound support and willingness to a play an 
important role in informing the broader South African public about the country’s new banknote 
series. 
We  will  now  share  with  you  the  details  and  roll-out  of  the  new  banknote  communication 
campaign. Through the campaign we hope to reach all South Africans and ensure that they 
are aware of the new banknotes and, more importantly, that they can recognise and become 
familiar with the key security features. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
