Mark Carney: Summary of the latest Monetary Policy Report 
Opening statement by Mr Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of Canada and Chairman of 
the Financial Stability Board, at the press conference following the release of the Monetary 
Policy Report, Ottawa, 18 July 2012. 
 Good morning. Tiff and I are pleased to be here with you today to discuss the July Monetary 
Policy Report, which the Bank published this morning. 
 
Global growth prospects have weakened since the Bank released its April MPR. The 
economic  expansion  in  the  United  States  continues  at  a  gradual  but  somewhat 
slower pace, while developments in Europe point to a renewed contraction.  
In  China  and  other  emerging  economies,  the  deceleration  in  growth  has  been 
greater  than  anticipated,  reflecting  past  policy  tightening  and  weaker  external 
demand.  
This slowdown in global activity has led to a sizeable reduction in commodity prices, 
although  they  remain  elevated.  The  combination  of  increasing  global  excess 
capacity over the projection horizon and reduced commodity prices is expected to 
moderate global inflationary pressures.  
Global  financial  conditions  have  also  deteriorated  since  April,  with  periods  of 
considerable volatility.  
While  global  headwinds  are  restraining  Canadian  economic  activity,  domestic 
factors are expected to support moderate growth in Canada. The Bank expects the 
economy to grow at a pace roughly in line with its production potential in the near 
term, before picking up through 2013.  
Consumption  and  business  investment  are  expected  to  be  the  primary  drivers  of 
growth, reflecting very stimulative domestic financial conditions. However, their pace 
will  be  influenced  by  external  headwinds,  notably  the  effects  of  lower  commodity 
prices on Canadian incomes and wealth, as well as by record-high household debt. 
Housing activity is expected to slow from record levels.  
Government spending is not projected to contribute to growth in 2012. It is expected 
to contribute only modestly thereafter, in line with plans to consolidate spending by 
federal and provincial governments.  
Canadian exports are projected to remain below their pre-recession peak until the 
beginning  of  2014.  This  reflects  the  dynamics  of  foreign  demand  and  ongoing 
competitiveness challenges, including the persistent strength of the Canadian dollar. 
The Bank projects that the economy will grow by 2.1 per cent in 2012, 2.3 per cent 
in 2013 and 2.5 per cent in 2014. The economy is expected to reach full capacity in 
the second half of 2013, thus operating with a small amount of slack for somewhat 
longer than previously anticipated. 
Core inflation is forecast to remain around 2 per cent over the projection horizon as 
the economy operates near its production potential, growth in labour compensation 
stays moderate and inflation expectations remain well anchored. Given the recent 
drop  in  gasoline  prices  and  with  futures  prices  suggesting  persistently  lower  oil 
prices, the Bank expects total CPI inflation to remain noticeably below the 2 per cent 
target over the coming year before returning to target around mid-2013. 
The inflation outlook in Canada is subject to significant risks. 
          BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
   The three main upside risks to inflation in Canada relate to the possibility of higher 
global inflationary pressures, stronger Canadian exports and stronger momentum in 
Canadian household spending. 
The three main downside risks to inflation in Canada relate to the European crisis, 
weaker  global  momentum  and  the  possibility  that  growth  in  Canadian  household 
spending could be weaker. 
Overall, the Bank judges that the risks to the inflation outlook in Canada are roughly 
balanced over the projection period. 
Reflecting  all  of  these  factors,  the  Bank  yesterday  maintained  the  target  for  the 
overnight rate at 1 per cent. To the extent that the economic expansion continues 
and the current excess supply in the economy is gradually absorbed, some modest 
withdrawal  of  the  present  considerable  monetary  policy  stimulus  may  become 
appropriate, consistent with achieving the 2 per cent inflation target over the medium 
term.  The  timing  and  degree  of  any  such  withdrawal  will  be  weighed  carefully 
against domestic and global economic developments. 
With that, Tiff and I would be pleased to take your questions.  
 2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
