Vítor Constâncio: Towards a European Banking Union 
Lecture by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the start of 
the academic year of the Duisenberg School of Finance, Amsterdam, 7 September 2012. 
 Introduction  
1. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I feel honoured to have been invited to the opening ceremony of the Duisenberg School of 
Finance,  a  prestigious  name  that  evokes the first  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank 
with  whom  I  had  the  privilege  to  work  in  the  initial  stages  of  the  launch  of  the  euro  as  a 
member  of  the  Governing  Council.  My  presence  here  today  is  also  a  simple  gesture  to 
render my homage to his memory as a great contributor to the European ideal.  
I would like to focus my remarks on the underlying reasons for the decision to set-up a Single 
Supervisory Mechanism as a major step towards a European Banking Union that was taken 
at the European Summit in June 2012.  
What is the meaning of a Banking Union? In my view it involves a transfer to the European 
level  of  the  regulatory  and  institutional  framework  responsible  for  safeguarding  the 
robustness and stability of the banking sector.  
The first pillar is regulation. It is already largely at the European Union level, particularly with 
the  concept  introduced  by  Tommaso  Padoa-Schioppa  of  the  “single  rulebook”  for  the 
27 Member States, which is based on the principle of maximum harmonization coupled with 
a wider use of directly applicable regulations.  
Accordingly, what is now at stake in forming a Banking Union goes much further. It implies 
also achieving a European dimension for the main components of the institutional framework 
for implementing, monitoring and enforcing regulation, both in normal times and in situations 
of  stress.  According  to  theory  and  historical  experience,  this  includes:  Bank  Supervision, 
Bank  Resolution  and  Bank  Deposit Insurance. These  are  precisely  the  components  of  the 
Integrated Financial Framework that has been presented to the June European Council by 
President Van Rompuy in his Report “Towards a genuine Economic and Monetary Union”. 
I  would  like  to  be  clear  that  I  refer  to  providing  a  European  dimension  to  the  institutional 
framework  and  not  to  a  centralization  of  the  competences  pertaining  to  a  Banking  Union. 
Even a fully federal system implies, by nature, decentralization of tasks between the federal 
and  the  lower  levels.  In  Europe,  subsidiarity  and  proportionality  are  key  constitutional 
principles  in  the  exercise  of  European  competences,  which  are  particularly  crucial  for  a 
well-functioning Banking Union.  
The June Euro Area Summit initiated the construction of a Banking Union with the agreement 
on the establishment of a Single Supervisory Mechanism, with the involvement of the ECB. 
The  reference  to  the  ECB  and  the  statement  that  the  Commission  will  “bring  forward 
proposals under Article 127 (6) of the Treaty” mean that there is a direct link to EMU. As it is 
well known, Article 127(6) provides that the Council by unanimous vote may “confer specific 
tasks  upon  the  European  Central  Bank  concerning  policies  relating  to  the  prudential 
supervision of credit institutions.” Accordingly, the single supervision will refer mainly to the 
euro area as the ECB can only have binding powers in relation to the 17 members that have 
adopted  the  euro.  The  focus  on  EMU  is  appropriate  for  several  reasons,  which  I  will 
elaborate  in  my  remarks.  However,  this  does  not  exclude  possible  mechanisms  for  other 
EU countries  to  be  involved  in  the  single  supervisory  mechanism,  if  so  foreseen  in  the 
Council Regulation activating Article 127.6 of the Treaty. This could facilitate further financial 
integration in the single market as a whole. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The Statement of the June Euro Area Summit also makes clear that the single supervisory 
mechanism is directly related to the decision to grant the possibility of direct recapitalization 
of banks by the European Stability Mechanism. This new and important step in the effort to 
de-link  the  vulnerabilities  of  sovereigns  from  euro  area  banks  implies  an  allocation  of 
supervisory functions to the European level. Therefore, European recapitalization creates an 
immediate need for European banking supervision. Later in this talk, I will argue why I think 
that there are very good reasons for the involvement of central banks in the supervision of 
banks. It is essential that both of these elements – recapitalization and supervision on the 
European level - are implemented as expediently as possible.  
is  necessary  because  of 
Why the single monetary policy needs a Banking Union  
2.  
The decisions taken at the June Euro Area Summit are part of the long term reflections on 
the future of the Monetary Union,  which are addressed by President Van Rompuy Report. 
They  are  also  clearly  motivated  by  the  challenges  that  we  face  in  addressing  the  ongoing 
crisis.  The  recognition  of  the  negative  effects  of  the  feedback  loop  between  banks  and 
sovereigns  led  to the  decision  to  admit  direct  European  bank  recapitalization  by  the  ESM. 
This, in turn, motivated the decision to create a single supervisory mechanism.  
The  deeper  rationale  is  however  the  need  to  construct  a  Banking  Union  for  ensuring  a 
successful  and  well-functioning  Monetary  Union.  Let  me  highlight  the  following  arguments 
supporting this concept. 
increasing 
First,  a  single  supervisory  mechanism 
interconnectedness between  financial  institutions  and markets  across  the  euro  area  over 
the  past  decade,  be  it  through  internationally  active  banking  groups,  bilateral  trading 
exposures,  or  presence  in  the  same  market  segments.  The  recent  financial  crisis 
demonstrated how quickly and powerfully problems in the financial sector of one country can 
spread to another. This is especially the case in a monetary union. As a result, problems in 
the banking sector might originate at the national level, but are more and more likely to affect 
other countries of the euro area as well, and may quickly threaten the stability of the entire 
euro area banking system. Such developments and the underlying financial structures can 
best  be  assessed  by  a  central  authority  rather  than  through  cooperation  between  national 
ones.1 
Seen from another perspective, the high degree of interconnectedness affects the impact of 
supervision and other national policies not only on the domestic banking sector, but also, as 
an  externality,  on  other  countries.  This  has  been  captured  by  the  so-called  “financial 
trilemma”. The concept of the trilemma is adapted from the famous “monetary trilemma” on 
the impossibility of simultaneously achieving three objectives: a fixed exchange rate, capital 
mobility,  and  national  monetary  policy.2  In  a  very  similar  way,  but  applied  to  international 
finance,  as  put  forward  by  Dirk  Schoenmaker  (2011)  following  a  model  by  Xavier  Freixas 
(2003)3  a  “financial  trilemma”  has  been  defined,  which  illustrates  the  impossibility  of 
achieving  three  objectives  in  an  environment  with  globalized  financial  markets.  These 
the 
                                                
1   See, e.g. Gros, D (2012), “An incomplete step toward Banking Union”, CEPS discussion paper. 
2   First put forward in Padoa-Schioppa, Tommaso (1982) “Capital mobility: why is the Treaty not implemented?” 
Address to the Second Symposium of European Banks and reproduced in Padoa-Schioppa (2000) “The road 
to monetary union in Europe” OUP. See also Paul Krugman (1987) “Economics integration in Europe: some 
conceptual  issues”  in  T.  Padoa-Schioppa  “Efficiency,  stability  and  Equity”  OUP  and  Obstfeld,  M, 
J. Shambaugh, and A. Taylor (2005), “The Trilemma in history: tradeoffs among Exchange rates, Monetary 
Policies, and Capital Mobility”, Review of Economics and Statistics 87, 423–438. 
3   Schoenmaker, D. (2011): “The Financial Trilemma”, in Economics Letters, 111 pages 57–59; Freixas, Xavier 
(2003)  Crisis  management  in  Europe.  In:  Kremers,  J.,  Schoenmaker,  D.,  Wiert,  P.  (eds)  2009,  “Financial 
Supervision in Europe” Edward Elgar p. 141–165. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
objectives  are:  first,  financial  stability;  second,  financial  integration;  and  third,  maintaining 
national financial policies.  
[Slide 1: The financial trilemma]  
According to  the financial  trilemma,  it  is  not  possible  to  achieve  all  three  objectives  at  the 
same  time.  The  reasoning  behind  is  that  with  increasing  financial  integration,  pursuing 
national  financial  policies  will  generally  not  lead  to  financial  stability,  because  national 
policies  seek  to  benefit national  welfare,  while  not  taking  into  account  externalities  of their 
supervisory  practices  on  other  countries.4  This  leads  to  an  under-provision  of  financial 
stability as a public good.5 A lesson of the trilemma is that it is beneficial for the provision of 
financial  stability  to  replace  national  policies  with  policies  at  the  supranational  level,  thus 
geographically  aligning  supervisory  incentives  with  the  effect  such  supervision  has  on  the 
financial sector as a whole.  
Second, the events of the past few years have demonstrated that Monetary Union in Europe 
requires a high degree of financial integration, in which financial institutions diversify their 
assets  and  liabilities  across  euro  area  countries.  This  is  essential  for  an  effective 
transmission of monetary policy. Until the start of the financial crisis and in particular until the 
beginning  of  the  sovereign  debt  crisis,  there  was  good  progress  in  all  aspects  of  financial 
integration. Unfortunately since then we have been facing a continuous development in the 
opposite  direction  with  fragmentation  of  markets  along  national  borders.  Even  more  than 
that, we observe a reversal of flows with capital going to core countries and away from the 
periphery. 
One  example  of  very  quick  initial  integration  was  the  euro  area  money  market  which 
nevertheless  has  shown  recently  a  much  higher  dispersion  of rates,  reduced  cross  border 
volumes  with  a  virtual  stop  to  peripheral  countries.  Chart  2  illustrates  how  quickly  and 
profoundly interest rates in the short-term money market converged after 1999 and how the 
dispersion exploded following the crisis.  
[Slide 2: Convergence and fragmentation of money market rates] 
Money  markets  trade  an  extremely  homogeneous  good  –  central  bank  money  –,  and  the 
changes made to the infrastructure (payment systems) were sufficient to establish a unified 
market with a single price. In other market segments, prices somewhat converged, but not 
fully. We  are  all  aware  how  an  exaggerated  initial  convergence  of  sovereign  bonds  yields 
changed into an abnormal dispersion.  
[Slide 3: Evolution of sovereign bond yields] 
Also, remuneration of bank deposits or interest rates paid on corporate loans for instance, 
started  to  diverge  markedly  across  countries.  At  the  same  time,  banks  have  started  to 
reverse  the  diversification  of  their  portfolio  across  borders  in  recent  years,  especially  in 
detriment of stressed countries.  
[Slide 4: Cross border credit exposures and cross-border share of assets] 
In  general,  the  crisis  led  to  more  disintegration. This  can  be  seen for  instance  in  the  right 
hand chart, which illustrates the importance of foreign bank subsidiaries and branches in the 
total assets of the banking sector: there was a steep increase in integration in the first years 
of the euro, but after the Lehmann failure, integration declined consistently. 
                                                
4   Holthausen,  C.  and  T.  Ronde  (2004):  “Cooperation  in  international  banking  supervision”,  ECB  Working 
Paper 245. 
5   On financial stability as a public good, see for instance Beck et al (2010): Bailing out the Banks: Reconciling 
Stability and Competition An analysis of state-supported schemes for financial institutions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Imperfect  financial  integration  in  a  currency  union  of  course  complicates  the  task  of  the 
central bank in a very direct way: it becomes more difficult to achieve similar impact in the 
transmission  of  monetary  policy  and  to  ensure  uniform  levels  of  interest  rates  across 
countries. Thus, the tendency towards less financial integration has unwanted effects also for 
the conduct of our monetary policy. It is essential to reverse this fragmentation and restore 
the proper transmission mechanism of monetary policy. This does not imply that we should 
eliminate  or  artificially  reduce  the  spreads  of  debt  instruments  across  countries  that  are 
justified  by  pure  credit  risk.  However  it  is  certainly  within  the  remit  of  monetary  policy  to 
intervene to mitigate risk premia that are related with fears of a break-up of the euro area and 
have been identified in several analysis.6 This provides the rationale for the new programme 
of  Outright  Monetary  Transactions  (OMT)  that  we  announced  yesterday.  A  necessary 
condition for OMT is strict and effective conditionality attached to an appropriate European 
Financial Stability Facility/European Stability Mechanism (EFSF/ESM) programme. The joint 
work of conditionality and bond market interventions can achieve, we hope, the elimination of 
the  tail  risk  linked  with  a  break-up  fear  that  has  been  pervasive  in  the  aggravation  of  the 
sovereign debt crisis.  
Besides  supporting  an  effective  monetary  policy,  a  Banking  Union  -  comprising  single 
banking supervision, common resolution schemes, and a unified deposit insurance - would 
further  foster  further  the  integration  of  the  single  financial  market.  It  is  my  conviction  that 
these elements would not only support the conduct of the single monetary policy, but also 
significantly contribute to breaking the home-bias in banking activity and to allowing banks to 
further diversify their portfolios across the euro area. Last but not least, a Banking Union will 
also contribute to the vital delinking of sovereigns and banks that has been so detrimental 
during the crisis. 
The third reason why a Banking Union is beneficial to a Monetary Union is that the natural 
bias of national supervision, both in lender and borrowing countries, allowed the creation of 
large macro imbalances in several segments of the euro area. Indeed, a major lesson of the 
crisis is that financial supervision lagged behind financial integration and this contributed to 
the build-up of macroeconomics imbalances. Let me illustrate this with a few numbers. 
[Slide 5: Evolution of public debt levels] 
This chart shows the evolution of public debt levels since the inception of the euro in 1999 of 
a  few  selected  euro  area  countries.  As  it  can  be  seen,  and  perhaps  contrary  to  public 
perception, overall government debt levels went down in the first years of Monetary Union, 
that  is,  in  the  period  1999  until  2007,  by  around  5.6%.  Notably,  we  can  see  significant 
reductions in Italy (-14.8%), Spain (-35.3%), and Ireland (-10%). The resulting debt levels of 
several countries were still high in 2007, and in two cases far above 60%. Still, it cannot have 
been  the  overall  increase  of  public  debt  alone  that  led  to  the  eruption  macroeconomic 
imbalances. It was the crisis, as can be seen from the chart that led to sharp increases of 
public debt across all countries only after 2008. The dangerous feedback effects between the 
state  of  sovereigns  and  their  local  banking  systems  emerged  only  after  the  start  of  the 
financial crisis. It operated in both directions: either the support of banks overburdened the 
sovereign  or  the  sovereign  weakness  led  the  domestic  banks  to  take  on  more  recently  a 
higher share of national public debt.  
This  is  seen  in  the  following  chart  that  shows  the  pattern  of  domestic  banks´  holdings  of 
national debt going down until 2009 and then increasing afterwards.  
[Slide 6: Public debt held by domestic banks] 
                                                
6   See Cesare, A., Grande, G., Manna, M. and Taboga, M. (2012) “Recent estimates of sovereign risk premia for 
euro-area countries.” Bank of Italy, Questioni di Economia e Finanza, Occasional Papers n. 128. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
An aside aspect shown by the chart is that public debt was not taken predominantly by the 
domestic banking sectors until 2009 as the domestic share declined until then, indicating the 
progress  of financial  integration  across member  States  during  many  years. To  understand 
what happened in the run up to the crisis it should be highlighted that until 2007 the evolution 
of public debt in the countries now under stress was financed mostly by external investors 
and not by resident financial institutions.  
Another aspect that is sometimes also ignored refers to the fact that the banks’ portfolio of 
domestic  public  debt  is  not  very  high  in  percentage  of  total  bank  assets  and  even  now  is 
generally below the historical average.  
[Slide 7: Public debt held by domestic banks in % of Total Assets] 
The  points  I  just  made  seem  to  run  counter  to  the  idea  that  the  macro  imbalances  in 
peripheral countries was mostly driven by the public sector. As seen in the charts, with the 
possible exception of Greece, that seems not to have been the case. I will show in a moment 
that  the  imbalances  came  mostly  from  the  private  sector  expenditure  behaviour  laxly 
financed by the financial sector. This fact is in turn connected with another major lesson of 
the  crisis  that  reveals  also  a  shortcoming  in  the  initial  design  of  the  monetary  union:  the 
notion that it was enough to discipline public finance, through the Stability and Growth Pact, 
to avoid major imbalances in the euro area.  
This mistake is surely related to two features of the dominant economic thinking at the time:  
first that the private sector is essentially stable and self-correcting composed of fully 
• 
rational  agents  always  optimizing  inter-temporally  with  knowledge  of  the  future 
probability distributions to infinity of economic returns and variables. In such a world 
no defaults are admitted or dangerous bubbles possible. Only the public sector can 
create instability. 
second, that finance does not matter for real economy fluctuations. After the Real 
Business Cycles school, the rational expectations hypothesis and the intertemporal 
optimization paradigm, money and finance were considered not relevant anymore. 
Later, in the new Keynesian consensual macro model money crept back in through 
the  introduction  of  wage  and  price  rigidities,  allowing  for  short-term  real  economy 
effects  of  monetary  policy.  On  the  contrary,  finance  became  invisible  with  the 
Efficient  Market  Hypothesis  ensuring  a  reliable  plumbing  as  servant  of  the  real 
economy.  Banks  and  their  credit  activity  and  capital  markets  and  their  financing 
were  not  considered  significant  sources  of  instabilities  with  real  economy  effects. 
They were absent from macroeconomic models.  
 This vision about the way the economic was supposed to work was discredited with the crisis 
but surely influenced the initial concept that it was enough to discipline the public sector. We 
know  that  in  the  end  the  SGP  did  not  ensure  that  discipline  and  some  countries  deviated 
from  prudent  fiscal  policy.  Nevertheless,  what  was  more  relevant  to  explain  the  macro 
imbalances  relates  to  the  explosion  of  private  debt  in  the  peripheral  countries financed  by 
domestic  banks  which  were  themselves  mostly  funded  by  other  European  financial 
institutions and markets.  
[Slide 8: Public and Private debt] 
Contrary  to  public  debt  levels,  the  overall  level  of  private  debt  increased  in  the first  seven 
years  of  Monetary  Union  by  14  percentage  points  or  27%.  The  increase  was  much  more 
pronounced in Greece (+217%), Ireland (+101%), Spain (+ 75.2%), and Portugal (+49%), all 
of which are countries that have been severely under pressure during the recent crisis.  
Another illustration of the role played by private indebtedness is provided by an analysis of 
the evolution of the financial balances (savings-investment) of the different economic sectors 
including the external one.  
[Slide 9: Financial balances by sector] 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
The  Chart  shows  how  in  Spain,  Ireland  and  Portugal  it  was  the  increase  in  the  deficit  of 
non-financial firms until the onset of the crisis that contributed, in turn, to the increase of the 
external deficit, whereas in Greece the public deficit had a bigger influence.  
The willingness of banks, domestic and foreign, to fund private agents was essential for the 
creation of the large macroeconomic imbalances and the housing price bubbles that we have 
witnessed. These were fuelled by excessive credit growth. This also implies that supervisors, 
at  least  in  some  areas,  appeared  to  have  been  overly  lenient  with  the  banking  sector.  To 
some  extent,  this  is  due  to  the  promotion  of  national  champions  and  the  objective  of 
supporting the local banking system. Some empirical support for this line of argumentation 
comes from the US. A recent study shows, for the US, that local supervisors tend to be more 
lenient  with  banks  than  federal  supervisors  are:  they  downgrade  less  frequently.7  The 
authors justify this behaviour, among other factors, by regulatory capture. And indeed, there 
is  no  reason  to  believe  that  these  findings  would  be  any  different  for  other  industrialized 
countries,  including  the  euro  area.  Therefore,  following  this  argumentation,  placing 
supervision  at  the  European  level  would  help  to  alleviate  national  bias  and  possible 
regulatory capture. 
3.   The ECB’s involvement in a Banking Union 
There  are  good  reasons  developed  in  the  academic  literature  for  allocating  the  task  of 
banking supervision either to the central bank or to a separate supervisory authority. Some of 
these  arguments  have  already  been  put  forward  in  a  2001  paper  of  the  ECB,  which 
concluded  that  national  central  banks  should  have  a  fundamental  role  in  prudential 
supervision in the euro area.8 
Let me turn first to the benefits of allocating supervisory powers to the central bank. 
• 
A first argument why the combination of both supervision and monetary policy under 
one roof is beneficial results from the fact that being responsible for monetary policy 
creates for the central bank an intrinsic and deep interest in a stable financial 
system.  Such  stability  can  be  jeopardized  through  the  failure  or  break-up  of  an 
individual financial institution. If a banking failure occurs, the financial system might 
be  destabilized  through  contagion  which  could  arise  through  several  possible 
channels:  one  such  channel  could  be  through  bilateral  exposures  to  the  failing 
institutions.  Other  channels  could  be  related  to  informational  contagion  such  as 
uncertainty  about  such  bilateral  exposures,  or  uncertainty  about  the  nature  of  the 
shock that hit the institution. Moreover, those direct channels might be amplified if 
resolution  mechanisms  are  complex, 
too  much 
uncertainty. A central bank has an interest in avoiding the risk of such a destabilizing 
situation  because  of  its  mandate  for  price  stability:  since  the  transmission  of  its 
monetary policy relies in the first instance on the smooth functioning of the money 
markets.  Money  markets  are,  however,  one  of  the  first  markets  to  be  affected  if 
there are doubts about the solvency of an institution. This was clearly witnessed in 
August 2007, when the emergence of first doubts about the exposure of individual 
European banks to the US sub-prime mortgage market led to a temporary standstill 
of that market.9  
lengthy  or  surrounded  by 
                                                
7   Agrawal,  S.,  D.  Lucca,  A.  Seru  and  F.  Trebbi:  “Inconsistent  regulators:  evidence  from  banking”, 
Working Paper 17736. 
8   ECB (2001): “The role of central banks in prudential supervision”. 
9   See Cassola, Durre, and Holthausen (2011): “Monetary Policy Operations: experiences during the crisis and 
lessons learnt”, Proceedings of the Sixth ECB Central Banking Conference “Approaches to monetary policy 
revisited – lessons from the crisis”. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    Second, there is a close relationship between micro-prudential control of individual 
financial  institutions  and  the  assessment  of  risks  to  the  overall  financial  system, 
which  constitutes the central  bank’s  macro-prudential  responsibility.  Even  in  those 
countries where the central bank is not involved in individual bank supervision, the 
central  bank’s  responsibility  for  systemic  stability  is  unchallenged.  This  is  one 
reason  why  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB)  that  was  established  in 
2010 with a mandate for macro-prudential oversight, is chaired by a central banker 
(the President of the ECB). The assessment of systemic risk would quite naturally 
be facilitated if supervisory information about individual institutions was used.  
Further information-related synergies exist between the supervision of banks and 
the oversight of payment systems, which is a task usually allocated to the central 
bank.  The  ECB,  for  instance,  is  responsible  for  the  oversight  of  all  large-value 
payment systems operating in the euro area. Moreover, it is the owner of the largest 
of those systems, the TARGET2 system. 
Fourth, central banks have a lot of expertise on the financial sector, because of 
their  role  in  monetary  policy  and  oversight  as  well  as  their  general  interest  in 
financial stability. These roles imply a constant monitoring of different segments of 
the financial market in order to assess the transmission of monetary policy impulses, 
regular interactions with counterparts to their monetary operations, and operational 
and oversight activities in large-value payment systems. Such knowledge is likely to 
be crucial in situations of financial stress, and enables central banks to be able to 
assess  such  situations  more  quickly  and  profoundly  than  other  institutions  with 
different  mandates  and  functions.  Thus,  if  a  central  bank  were  entrusted  with 
supervisory  powers,  it  would  be  able  to  react  relatively  quickly  in  case  of  an 
imminent  banking  failure.10  This  ability  would  be  particularly  relevant  in  financial 
crisis  times,  in  which  a  number  of  institutions  would  be  on  the  brink  at  the  same 
time, but in which there is great uncertainty about the depth and impact of the crisis 
in general, and about individual banks’ solvency in particular. Such a situation would 
require particularly careful monitoring and expertise, which the central bank is in a 
relatively good position to deliver. I would like to stress that also in the case that the 
organizational  structure  of  the  central  bank  was  such  that  the  tasks  of  monetary 
policy  and  supervision  were  operationally  strictly  separated,  the  transfer  of  such 
knowledge  about  the  state  of  different  financial  market  segments  could  be 
institutionalized quite easily. 
A fifth argument is that the operational independence of the supervisory agency is 
important  for  effective  supervision.  Here,  I  refer  to  independence  from  political 
interference,  and  I  have  in  mind  situations  in  which  local  politics  may  have  an 
interest  in  the  avoiding  bank  resolutions  for  political  reasons.  This  independence 
would  be  emphasized  by  allocating  the  supervisory  responsibility  to  the  central 
bank. 
Let  me  now  turn  to  arguments  about  potential  downsides  of  having  central  bank 
involvement  in  banking  supervision?  The  following  arguments  have  been  made  in  the 
literature: 
1. 
First, there is the issue of reputation risk of the central bank (an argument brought 
forward  by  Charles  Goodhart):11  the  monetary  policy  function  of  the  central  bank 
requires that it maintains a high level of credibility and reputation, since it is essential 
                                                
10   This point has also been made by Cecchetti, S. (2007): “Why central banks should be financial supervisors” 
Vox EU article. 
11   Goodhart (2000): “The organizational structure of banking supervision”, Occasional Paper 1, Financial Stability 
Institute, Basel. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
2. 
to  keep  expectations  of  rising  inflation  at  bay.  According  to  this  argument,  if  the 
central bank is in charge not only of price stability but also of banking supervision, 
poor supervisory performance (in particular, the occurrence of banking failures with 
notable  economic  consequences)  would  damage  the  reputation  of  the  supervisor, 
and this may damage also the central bank’s reputation as a competent monetary 
authority. This could endanger price stability, the central bank’s main concern. In my 
view,  this  risk  is  overemphasized.  The  tasks  of  maintaining  price  stability  and  of 
supervising  banks  are  very  different  in  nature,  and  their  results  are  easily 
measurable and distinguishable. If a central bank has a record of having achieved 
price stability over a longer period of time, then instability in the banking sector might 
complicate  its  price  stability  mandate,  but  it  would  not  create  doubts  about  its 
commitment to further pursue this task. I am fully convinced that the public will be 
able  to  distinguish  between  the  two  functions,  and  that  repercussions  from  the 
reputation gained in one or the other function would be minimal. 
A  second  argument  against  allocating  supervisory  powers  at  the  central  bank 
concerns  possible  conflicts  of  interest  between  the  different  central  bank 
functions.  At  the  heart  of  this  argumentation  is  the  question  whether  the  central 
banks’ concern for the health of banks would jeopardize its price stability objective. It 
could do so for instance by creating an environment of low interest rates with the 
aim of supporting the banking sector’s health, or by using its capabilities for money 
creation to support individual banks. However, is it really conceivable that a central 
bank  that  is  in  charge  of  banking  supervision  takes  these  routes?  To  me,  the 
solution to these concerns lies in the organizational structure of the central bank. A 
situation, in which the central bank puts at risk price stability in favour of financial 
stability, is not conceivable if the central bank is given a clear hierarchical mandate 
that  places  price  stability  before  other  concerns.  Internal  procedures  can  be,  and 
should be, designed in a way that this is efficiently implemented. Of course, central 
banks  may  in  crisis  times  be  involved  in  lender-of-last-resort  functions.  But  they 
might take on this role regardless of whether they have a supervisory mandate or 
not. And I should emphasize that such forms of liquidity support would in any case 
be very limited both in its frequency – central banks should take on this role only in 
case of a severe financial crisis – as well in duration. These limitations, connected 
with a recessionary situation, ensure that extended liquidity support would have no 
inflationary impact. 
In  practice,  the  allocation  of  supervisory  responsibilities  is  handled  very  differently  across 
countries, even within the euro area. At present, a majority of euro area central banks, that 
is, 12 out of 17 National Central Banks have full supervisory powers while 2 others are also 
involved in supervisory tasks.  
Around a decade ago, the situation was quite different, and there was a tendency towards 
separation of the two functions. The recent trend, however, points towards combining both 
functions under one roof. This trend reversal can be observed also outside the euro area. For 
instance,  in  the  UK,  the  FSA  was  founded  in  the  late  1990s,  but  recent  proposals  aim  at 
re-allocating it under the umbrella of the Bank of England. In the US, the FED was also given 
an extension of its mandate regarding supervision. 
Indeed, the experience during the financial and sovereign debt crises has demonstrated the 
benefits of including banking supervision under the central bank’s purview. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Elements of a Banking Union 
4.  
All the arguments I summed up above support the notion of having a supra-national, euro 
area  wide supervisory authority.12  As  I  have  argued,  this  would  be  beneficial  in  order  to 
foster  further  financial  integration,  to  deal  with  the  high  degree  of  connectivity  between 
financial  sectors  across  borders,  and  would  break  the  close  link  between  banks  and  their 
sovereigns. 
The  precise  set-up  of  the  future  supervisory  arrangements  is  still  to  be  decided.  Let  me 
express my personal views on the main principles that should guide such arrangements in 
order to achieve the objectives that I have outlined. 
First, it is crucial to ensure that there are no loopholes of supervisory responsibilities. The 
euro area supervision should be conferred with a complete set of tasks and responsibilities, 
in a clear and unambiguous manner.  
Second, as I mentioned at the beginning of this talk, supervision should be conducted in line 
with  the  principles  of  subsidiarity  and  proportionality.  This  implies  that  the  operational 
conduct  of  supervisory  tasks  should  be  decentralized  to  the  largest  extent  with  national 
supervisors. Ideally, the single supervisory mechanism will consist of a network comprising 
the ECB and national supervisors.  
Third,  supervision  should  encompass  all  euro  area  banks  in  a  way  that  the  home/host 
distinction  will  cease  to  exist  in  the  euro  area,  where  all  banks  will  become  “domestic”, 
equally subject to euro area supervision. This is essential from a supervisory and financial 
stability perspective, as well as to preserve the level-playing field among banks. The fact that 
the  ECB  would  have  ultimate  legal  responsibility  does  not  imply  that  all  banks  will  be 
supervised  from  Frankfurt  and  that the  ECB  will  have  to  hire  an  army  of  supervisors. The 
degree  of  intensity  of  supervision  at  the  centre  will  be  closely  related  to  the  systemic 
relevance  of  banks.  In  this  framework,  the  ECB  would  be  closely  supervising  only  the 
significant  cross-border  banking  groups.  Local  supervisors,  operating  under  the  umbrella, 
guidance  and  monitoring  of  the  ECB,  would  conduct  the  supervision  of  the  overwhelming 
majority  of  credit  institutions.  Crucially  though,  the  ECB  would  maintain,  the  ultimate  legal 
responsibility, which would include the right to exercise at any moment a closer supervision 
of any institution or group of institutions if it finds it appropriate. This approach would ensure 
the harmonization and the level playing field in the implementation of the single supervisory 
mechanism and will be enough to overcome any inefficient national bias in conducting bank 
supervision.  
Fourth,  as  I  also  argued  already,  there  should  a  clear  organizational  separation  between 
monetary policy and supervision. This can be realized at all organizational layers, from the 
analytical  and  informational  level  to  the  decision-making  level.  In  a  recent  interview 
Commissioner  Barnier  referred  that  the  Commission´s  proposal  includes  the  creation  of 
Supervisory Board in the ECB which goes in the right direction.  
Fifth,  euro  area  supervision  should  be  conducted  in  independence,  in  line  with  the 
Basel Core Principles, and also be subject to high standards of democratic accountability to 
ensure confidence in the conduct of this public function in the euro area. 
Sixth, 
the  deepening  and 
reinforcement of the single financial market. This implies that the role of the EBA should be 
fully  safeguarded  as  regulator  and  as 
the 
implementation of the “single rulebook” by all supervisors.  
The  euro  area  supervisory  jurisdiction  will  need  to  be  matched  by  two  further  institutional 
evolutions.  
the  single  supervisory  mechanism  should  contribute 
the  entity  responsible 
for  monitoring 
to 
                                                
12   ECB (2001): “The role of central banks in prudential supervision”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
The first of these is the move towards a unified bank resolution scheme. Quite naturally, 
this is an integral element of the Banking Union, which must have a resolution authority to 
close or restructure banks whenever appropriate. Again, it is not sufficient that banks operate 
in  an  environment  only  with  somewhat  harmonized  rules  about  bank  resolution.  It  is 
necessary  that  there  is  a  unified  legal  framework  that  clearly  and  unequivocally  specifies 
rules and procedures in case of a bank resolution.  
An effective euro area wide resolution scheme would be an essential element of a Banking 
Union  because  it  would  be  able  to  deal  with  large  and  complex  banking  groups.  Indeed, 
banks  and  banking  groups  have  continuously  grown  over  the  past  decades.  Reasons  are 
mainly returns to scale in the banking industry which make larger banks more efficient than 
smaller ones, but also a tendency of national governments to promote and protect national 
champions. In some cases, banks have grown so much that their failure would, on the one 
hand, endanger the financial system of several countries at the same time, but on the other 
hand, be too large for the national government of the home country to be supported in case 
of  stress13  and  thereby  causing  or  exacerbate  funding  problems  of  the  sovereign,  which 
might further destabilize the banking sector.14 For both reasons, a euro area wide resolution 
authority would be very beneficial. This Resolution Authority should be totally separated from 
the Supervisor and would be merged in the future with deposit insurance into an European 
Deposit  Insurance  and  Resolution  Authority  (EDIRA)  similar  to  the  FDIC  in  the  US.  Of 
course, it is essential that such an authority has sufficient power and resources in order to 
deal with widespread instability in the banking sector. 
The  problems  with  cross-border  banks  are  indeed  quite  complex.  The  resolution  case  of 
Fortis  in  2008,  a  Belgian/Dutch  financial  conglomerate  with  substantial  subsidiaries  in 
Belgium, the Netherlands and Luxembourg, illustrates the tension between the cross-border 
nature of a group and the domestic focus of national legal frameworks and responsibilities for 
crisis management. To start with, there were no bank resolution frameworks in place in the 
Netherlands and Belgium, which would have provided the authorities with resolution powers 
and tools to resolve individual banks in a manner that maintains financial stability in urgent 
situations,  overriding  the  rights  of  shareholders.  This  severely  limited  the  options  for  the 
authorities. In addition, the supervisory authorities assessed the situation differently despite 
having  a  long-standing  relationship  in  ongoing  supervision  and  information  sharing.  The 
differences in the assessment of available information and the sense of urgency complicated 
the finalization of the whole process. 
The  precise  design  of  a  bank  resolution  scheme  is  a  highly  political  decision,  since  it 
inevitably  implies  redistributive  effects,  since  stakeholders  in  different  countries  can  be 
affected  in  quite  different  ways.15  I  fully  agree  with  the  principles  laid  out  in  the  recent 
Commission´s  proposal  with  its  broad  approach  about  early  intervention  powers  and  the 
general bail-in rules with a precise definition of the pecking order of different type of creditors 
and depositors.16 
I should stress that when I am talking about a resolution scheme, I am not referring to the 
bailing out of banks with public money. Resolution is for institutions that have reached the 
point of non-viability and includes the sale or merger of the institution or the creation of a bad 
                                                
13   Demirguc-Kunt, A. and H. Huizinga (2012): “Do we need big banks? Evidence from performance, strategy and 
market discipline”, mimeo. 
14   Gros, D. and D. Schoenmaker (2012): “Cleaning up the mess: Bank resolution in a systemic crisis”, Vox EU, 
6 June. 
15   Pisani-Ferry, J., A. Sapir, N. Veron and G. Wolff (2012): “What kind of European Banking Union?”, Breughel 
Policy Contribution, issue 2012/12. 
16   See  Beck,  T.,  D.  Gros,  and  D.  Schoenmaker  (2012):  Banking  Union  instead  of  Eurobonds  –  disentangling 
sovereign and banking crises’, Vox EU, 24 June. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
/ good  bank  with  or  without  a  bridge  bank  or, finally,  the  orderly  liquation  of  what  is  really 
non-viable.  An  effective  resolution  regime  –  interacting  with  applicable  scheme  and 
arrangement for the protection of depositors – should ensure the continuity of systemically 
important financial functions and allocate losses to the shareholders and creditors, and not 
rely  on  public  solvency  support.  As  the  experience  of  the  FDIC  in  the  US  shows  public 
money  may  be  temporarily  necessary  but  not  in  relevant  amounts.  This  explains  why  the 
creation of a European Resolution Authority with a European Resolution Fund on the basis of 
industry contributions does not depend on the deepening of the fiscal union as some have 
argued.  
The  other  element  that  should  complement  supervision  and  bank  resolution  in  a  Banking 
Union concerns a deposit insurance scheme.  
Such  a  scheme  would  have  several  benefits.  It  would  be  commensurate  to  the  European 
supervisory regime, and ensure that decisions that are taken at the supranational level affect 
depositors  in  all  countries  in  the  same  way,  thus  ensuring  a  level  playing-field:  depositors 
would be treated in a uniform way across countries, independently of their location and the 
location of the bank they have entrusted their savings to.17  
The  scheme  would  thereby  also  foster  financial  integration.  To  achieve  this,  indeed  more 
than  a  harmonization  of  local  frameworks  would  be  needed,  but rather  the  setting  up  of a 
euro  area  wide  deposit  protection  agency.  In  particular  in  times  of  widespread  financial 
instability, deposit insurance payoffs depend not only on the legal framework they are based 
on,  but  also  on  the  ability  of  the  deposit  insurance  fund  to  cope  with  large-scale  banking 
failures.  Doubts  on  this  ability,  for  instance  due  to  concerns  on  the  fiscal  health  of  the 
sovereign, could easily reinforce (local) bank runs.  
At  the  moment,  deposit  protection  schemes  in  the  euro  area  are  still  fragmented  along 
national  borders. While  there  have  been  waves  of  harmonization  -  for  instance  in  2009,  a 
uniform  minimum  coverage  of  EUR  100,000  was  introduced  -,  they  still  display  significant 
regional differences. 
From a central bank perspective, the establishment of a common deposit insurance scheme 
is  of  less  urgency  than  the  other  components  of  a  Banking  Union.  I  also  understand  the 
concerns with potential liabilities to be incurred in a moment of financial crisis. The fact that 
the rationale of deposit insurance schemes is linked to the few bank failures that may occur 
and for which the accumulated funds paid in by the sector may be sufficient, it is perhaps not 
accepted  in  the  present  situation  on  the  basis  of  fears  of  tail  risks  which  require  larger 
resources. This  means  that  its  implementation  will  take  more  time,  even  if  it  is  mention  in 
President  Van  Rompuy  Report  as  a  component  of  a  deeper  integrated  financial  sector 
framework. A European deposit insurance scheme is an important element that that should 
be pursued further, as it will be important to fend off bank runs and thus enhance trust in the 
European banking sector.  
In my view, the careful design of the different elements of a Banking Union is indispensable 
for its success. It is essential that it creates the right incentives for both bank managers and 
authorities  to  contribute  to  the  goal  of  financial  stability,  by  truthful  reporting  of  facts  and 
effective cooperation between authorities, be they national or European. Finally, I regard it as 
important  that  in  the  future  such  a  framework  does  not  apply  only  to  large,  internationally 
active banks, but would universally cover all banks that are operating in the euro area. This 
would  be  important  to  establish  a  level  playing  field  between  different  types  of  banks  and 
banking activities, and leave as little room as possible for regulatory arbitrage. 
                                                
17   See Lannoo (2012) on benefits of a common deposit insurance fund. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
Conclusions 
5.  
Together,  the  various  elements that  integrate  the  concept  of  a  Banking Union  constitute a 
solid  and  consistent  framework  that  will  foster  financial  integration  and  be  supportive  of 
Economic and Monetary Union. They would overcome a shortcoming of the initial design of 
the monetary union that allowed financial supervision to lag behind monetary and financial 
integration. Their implementation will also contribute to address the current crisis by helping 
to separate banks from the sovereigns and reverse the on-going fragmentation of markets 
along national borders. This in turn will help to restore the proper functioning of the monetary 
policy transmission mechanism. In particular, the new structure of the supervisory framework 
would reflect and complement the single market in financial services. I regard as normal that 
the  ECB  will  be  given,  according  to  the  European  Summit  decisions,  a  major  role  in  the 
supervisory  framework.  It  is  with  an  acute  sense  of  responsibility  and  awareness  of  the 
involved  risks  that  I  look  to  the  new  competences  about  to  be  bestowed  on  the  ECB, 
confident that our Institution will continue to serve well the inspiring goals of our European 
Union.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, I thank you for your attention. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
  14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
  16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 17 
  18 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 19 
  20 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 21 
