Erdem Başçi: Latest economic outlook and macroeconomic 
developments in Turkey 
Panel speech by Mr Erdem Başçi, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, at 
the Conference on “Policy responses to commodity price movements”, Istanbul, 7 April 2012. 
 Distinguished Guests, 
The  global  economic  developments  observed  during  the  last  decade  are  influential  on  the 
commodity  prices.  Some  of  these  developments  were  real  factors  directly  affecting  the 
supply  and  demand  of  these  commodities.  On  the  demand  side,  significant  growth  in 
demand for energy, food and raw materials of developing countries, led by China and India, 
became an important factor in commodity markets in recent years. Likewise, the discrepancy 
between the paces of recovery of developed and developing countries in the aftermath of the 
global  crisis  and  the  global  monetary  expansion  are  observed  to  have  reflections  on  the 
demand for commodities.  
The increasing income in developing countries enjoying robust growth broadly decreases the 
price  sensitivity  of  commodity  demand.  As  a  result  of  production  capacity  shortfalls  of 
exporting  countries  in  the  short  run  and  these  countries’  reluctance  to  increase  their 
production capacity, prices sometimes display excessive increases in the event of a setback 
in supply. 
On the other hand, the robust economic growth potential of developing countries implies that 
the demand for raw materials will continue to be strong also in the medium term. The key 
solution  for  imports-dependent  countries  due  to  having  little  natural  resources  lies  in 
increasing  the  productivity  in  agriculture  and  energy  sectors.  Increases  in  productivity 
especially in the agricultural sector are of vital importance and thus call for prompt action for 
the developing countries that are witnessing a shift in employment from agriculture to non-
agriculture sectors. In a similar sense, measures for achieving more effective use of energy 
by  companies  and  households,  and  for  increasing  the  use  alternative  energy  sources, 
especially renewable energy, should be the another issue among the priorities on the part of 
both advanced and developing countries, dependent on imported energy inputs.  
Esteemed Participants, 
A  comprehensive  literature  has  been  guiding  central  bankers  as  to  the  type  of  monetary 
policy responses to be given to commodity price changes. The central banks following to the 
widely  accepted  advice  put  forth  by  this  literature  endeavor  to  contain  the  second-round 
effects of the commodity price increases, rather than the first-round effects. It is inevitable for 
commodity price increases to be reflected directly on prices, because of the high weight of 
goods  linked  to  energy  and  other  commodities  in  consumer  price  indices.  That is  why  the 
first-round  effects  cause  fluctuations  in  inflation.  Nevertheless,  temporary  movements  in 
commodity prices, unless they affect the general pricing behavior, do not affect the medium-
term  outlook,  but  just  remain  as  relative  price  changes.  That  is  why  those  central  banks 
pursuing monetary policy with a medium-term perspective prefer to refrain from sharp policy 
responses to the abovementioned first-round effects.  
Understanding the sources of the price fluctuations prior to making decisions is a prerequisite 
for policy makers. Commodity price changes with relatively more of a permanent nature may 
distort the general pricing behavior and initiate a wage-price cycle. This may entail prolonged 
upward movement in inflation in general and, accordingly, the high costs associated with this. 
Therefore, to be able to contain the potential second-round effects due rises in commodity 
prices, it is important for central bankers to pay close attention to core inflation indicators and 
inflation expectations, and shape their communication policy in this direction. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
We, as the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey (CBRT), are also in the position to carry 
out the abovementioned analyses. As a matter of fact, in our Inflation reports as well as the 
Summary of the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) meetings, we share with the public, our 
assessment of the nature of commodity price changes.  
In the Inflation Report published in January 2012, we made the following assessment on oil 
prices: 
“Another risk factor in the forthcoming period is the uncertainty regarding oil prices. Although 
the  weak  course  of  the  global  economy  dampens  commodity  prices,  recent  manifesting 
problems  regarding  oil  supply  pose  upside  risk  to  energy  prices.  Should  such  a  risk 
materialize,  the  CBRT  will  not  react  to  temporary  price  movements,  yet  the  Bank  will  not 
tolerate any deterioration in expectations.” 
Likewise, at the Monetary Policy Committee meeting held on 27 March; after pointing out that 
“uncertainties in oil prices pose upside risks to the inflation outlook”, we underscored “[…] we 
will  continue  to  closely  monitor  supply-side  developments  and  we  will  not  tolerate  any 
deterioration in inflation expectations”. 
In view of the current level of inflation, I would like to re-underline on this occasion that it is 
essential  to  eliminate  upside  risks.  To  this  end,  last  month,  we  implemented  a  “strong, 
effective and temporary” monetary tightening in order to eliminate the impact of recent cost 
developments on inflation expectations. We will closely monitor factors affecting inflation in 
the  forthcoming  period  and  additional  monetary  tightening  (AMT)  will  be  repeated  when 
deemed necessary. 
  Dear Participants, 
At this point, I would like to give you a quick overview on the monetary, financial and fiscal 
policies that Turkey has implemented for economic stability. The global demand shock that 
came after Lehman crisis brought steep declines in commodity prices with it. In response, 
expansionary  monetary  policy  as  well  as  supportive  fiscal  and  financial  policies  were 
implemented at the same time. In terms of monetary policy, interest rate cuts and injection of 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
liquidity into the markets, and in terms of fiscal policy, temporary cuts in consumption taxes 
could  be  mentioned  as  examples  of  the  overall  accommodative  policy  stance  in  Turkey  in 
20091.  
With the help of these policies, the dynamics of the economy in Turkey turned to positive in 
2010;  however,  the  increase  in  foreign  capital  inflows  due  to  the  exceptionally  loose 
monetary  policies  by  the  advanced  economies  led  to  an  excessive  credit  growth  and  an 
appreciation pressure on the Turkish currency, widening the external deficit. In response to 
these  developments  that  have  repercussions  on  the  current  account  and  the  financial 
stability,  CBRT  responded  by  widening  the  overnight  interest  rate  corridor  with  the  aim  of 
deterring short-term foreign capital inflows. Additionally, as part of the restrictive fiscal and 
financial  policies,  macroprudential  measures  were  implemented  in  collaboration  with  other 
regulatory institutions and fiscal discipline was strengthened through tax hikes.  
 When we come to 2011, Euro area debt crisis took over the markets; however, commodity 
prices displayed an upward trend as the global monetary expansion and its effects on the 
markets  still  continued.  Decreasing  risk  appetite  led  to  capital  outflows  from  developing 
economies.  As  the  increasing  energy  prices  and  the  pass-through  from  the  depreciating 
currency started to put excess pressure on the consumer price inflation, CBRT responded 
this  time  with  AMT  complemented  with  measures  relaxing  the  financial  markets’  liquidity 
needs.  On  the  fiscal  front,  cuts  in  wage  and  corporate  income  taxes  differentiated  across 
regions have been put in place last week to support the economy that is already growing at a 
moderate pace. 
                                                 
1   On March 15, 2009 Special Consumption Tax (SCT) rates were decreased on vehicles to %18 from %37, and 
on durable goods and other electrical household appliances to %0 from %6.7. These rates were increased on 
vehicles to %28, on durable goods to %2 and on other electrical household appliances to %6.7 on 16 June, 
2009. By October 1, 2009, SCT rates  were brought back to the levels before March 2009. Similarly, Value 
Added Tax (VAT) rates on furniture and IT products  were slashed to %8 on March 30, 2009, before being 
raised back to the initial rate of %18 on October 1, 2009.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
 Dear Participants, 
So  far  I  have  touched  on  the  impacts  of  movements  in  commodity  prices  on  inflation  and 
economic  growth.  Now  I  will  talk  about  the  impact  of  fluctuations  in  commodity  prices  on 
foreign trade balances. The dependency of the Turkish economy on energy imports makes 
the current accounts balance more sensitive to changes in commodity prices. Uncertainties 
regarding the global economy in recent years and the exceptionally loose monetary policies 
adopted  by  advanced  economies,  such  as  the  United  States,  Japan  and  the  Euro  Area, 
foreshadow the high probability of continued excess volatility in commodity prices. 
In  the  face  of  these  developments,  we  welcome  the  recent  concrete  steps,  as  part  of  the 
medium  term  program  in  Turkey,  towards  reducing  the  dependence  on  energy  imports  by 
shifting  to  domestically  produced  and  renewable  energy  sources.  These  measures  will 
hopefully ease the susceptibility of the current account to commodity prices in the long run. 
The key question in the short-run is how to smooth out the impact of the commodity prices on 
the domestic economy in the short to medium term, while there is a heightened degree of 
uncertainty regarding financial and real factors. In Turkey, ex-refinery fuel prices, in addition 
to the 18 percent-Value Added Tax (VAT), are also subject to the Special Consumption Tax 
(SCT). Special Consumption Tax, which is not only a fixed tax but also comprises a major 
part of the final prices of fuel products, helps to smooth out significant fluctuations in crude oil 
import prices. Thus, consumers are less affected by such fluctuations. 
Esteemed Guests, 
It seems that uncertainties regarding commodity prices will continue to be an important factor 
to be considered carefully in policy implementations in the forthcoming period, too. I believe 
that  the  papers  presented  in  this  conference  will  guide  us  in  overcoming  the  policy 
challenges  we  will  face  along  the  road.  Thank  you  very  much  for  your  interest  and 
participation. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
