B Mahapatra: Highlights and rationale of the recommendations of the 
working group to review the existing prudential guidelines on 
restructuring of advances 
Keynote address of Mr B Mahapatra, Executive Director of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
round  table  on  the  highlights  and  rationale  of  the  working  group  to  review  the  existing 
prudential guidelines on restructuring of advances by bank/financial institutions, organised by 
the  Centre 
(CAFRAL),  Mumbai, 
13 September 2012. 
for  Advanced  Financial  Research  and  Learning 
 The contributions made by S/Shri M. P. Baliga and M. K. Poddar are gratefully acknowledged. 
I  am  indeed  grateful  to  the  CAFRAL  for  inviting  me  here  to  discuss  the  highlights  and 
rationale  of  the  recommendations  of  the  working  group  to  review  the  existing  prudential 
guidelines on restructuring of advances by banks and financial institutions, which I chaired. 
The working group was represented by eminent bankers, accountants, rating agency, Indian 
Banks’ Association (IBA) and the Reserve Bank of India (RBI). The working group submitted 
its report to the RBI on July 18, 2012, which placed it in its website on July 20, 2012 for wider 
comments.  Comments  have  poured  in  from  various  sources  –  banks,  IBA,  industry 
associations, individual professionals, etc.; the print media have also covered it extensively. 
One group of commentors have expressed reservations on some of the recommendations of 
the  working  group;  the  other  commentors,  particularly  the  print  media,  have  generally 
appreciated  the  recommendations.  I,  as  the  chairperson  of  the  working  group  accept  the 
brickbats and bouquets with all humility. I am grateful to CAFRAL for organising this round 
table  and  giving  me  an  opportunity  to  explain  the  highlights  and  rationale  of  the 
recommendations of the working group. 
Approach of the working group 
Let me at the outset admit that restructuring of loans and advances is a legitimate banking 
practice. The need to set up the working group arose with a view to aligning our restructuring 
guidelines with the best international practices and accounting standards. Another motivation 
for setting up the working group was to clarify certain instructions which were perceived to be 
ambiguous. 
The working group approached the whole issue from societal point of view that restructuring 
served a useful purpose as it protects the productive assets of the economy. It also helps the 
borrowers to recover from temporary problems and provides incentives to banks to nurture 
such  borrowers  by  allowing  them  regulatory  forbearance  of  keeping  the  account  as 
“standard”  or  unimpaired.  It  has  been  demonstrated  that  the  relaxation  given  to  banks  in 
August  2008  for  restructuring  of  loans  helped  them  and  their  borrowers  to  tide  over  the 
impact of the global financial crisis. 
However, the working group observed that there has been an extraordinary rise in the level 
of  restructured  “standard”  assets,  even  surpassing  the  quantum  of  gross  NPAs  of  the 
banking  sector.  As  seen  from  an  updated  table  below,  standard  restructured  assets 
continuously exceeded the gross NPAs since 2010: 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 On top of that a rating agency has estimated that restructured standard assets may increase 
sharply  to  reach  Rs.  3,25,000  crore  by  March  2013.  Public  sector  banks  bear  a 
disproportionate burden of the restructured loans. 
Gross NPA ratio, which was hitherto the main financial ratio to gauge the level of impairment 
in  the  banking  sector  assets,  is  now  being  complemented  with  the  ratio  of  restructured 
standard  advances  to  gross  advances  as  a  measure  of  latent  impairment  of  the  banking 
sector’s financial assets. This is in view of the perception by some of the market players that 
a  significant  portion  of  these  standard  advances  are  actually  impaired  or  will  turn 
non-performing with passage of time. The credibility of the Indian banking system is at stake. 
The Economist (London), in its August 18–24, 2012 issue has also commented that India’s 
public sector banks are sitting on something unpleasant (restructured loans). Our own Indian 
economic  daily,  the  Economic  Times  on  September  9,  2012  commented  that  the  present 
practices are completely defeating restructuring. 
Regulatory forbearance 
The  concept  of  standard  restructured  assets  arose  when  the  RBI  allowed  project  loans  to 
retain  their  standard  asset  classification  on  extension  of  their  repayment  schedule  in 
May 1999. That is if in the opinion of the bank the bottleneck in achieving regular commercial 
production was of a temporary nature not indicative of any long-term impairment of the unit’s 
economic  viability  and  the  unit  was  likely  to  achieve  cash  break-even  if  some  time  was 
allowed. This was extended to treatment of restructured accounts in March 2001. With the 
issue  of  comprehensive  guidelines  on  restructuring  in  August  2008,  this  regulatory 
forbearance  was  made  available  to  all  types  of  loan  restructuring  except  commercial  real 
estate exposures, capital market exposures and personal and consumer loans. 
As  a  basic  premise  it  should  be  understood  that  the  need  for  restructuring  arises  when  a 
standard  account  borrower  faces  difficulties  in  repayment  and  such  an  account  should  be 
classified  as  impaired  on  restructuring.  The  working  group  studied  the  international  best 
practices in this regard and observed that restructured accounts are classified as impaired if 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
the  restructuring  (i)  is  on  account  of  financial  stress  of  the  borrower  or  due  to 
delays / non-payment as per contractual terms by the borrower; and (ii) the modification of 
terms is non-commercial, i.e., disadvantageous to the lenders. 
The  working  group  also  observed  that  as  per  International  Accounting  Standards,  loan 
accounts are generally treated as impaired on restructuring. It also noted that “Definition of 
Default”  under  the  Internal  Ratings  Based  (IRB)  approach  of  Basel  II  for  computation  of 
capital requirement for credit risk, identified restructuring as an event of default irrespective 
of  the  asset  classification.  The  working  group  also  took  note  of  the  fact  that  the  capital 
market  and  the  rating  agencies  viewed  any  restructuring  of  an  account  as  an  event  of 
impairment  even  if  the  regulators  allowed  the  accounts  to  retain  the  “standard”  asset 
classification status. Therefore, the working group opined that for consistency, restructuring 
should  be  treated  as  an  event  of  impairment  or  default  and  hence  the  account  should  be 
downgraded to sub-standard or NPA category. 
The  working  group  was  conscious  of  the  consequences  of  aligning  our  restructuring 
guidelines with this best practice at this juncture when the impact of global financial crisis is 
substantial and a new crisis in the form of European sovereign debt crisis is still unfolding. 
Doing  so  immediately  might  act  as  a  disincentive  to  banks  to  restructure  viable  accounts 
which could lead to substantial distress to the borrowers and increase in the non-performing 
assets and provision requirements for the banks. 
The working group, therefore, recommended that the asset classification benefit available on 
restructuring of advances be done away with, say, after a period of two years. 
Banks are perhaps not happy with this recommendation, as observed from their comments. 
However,  other  stakeholders  like  print  media,  rating  agencies  and  certain  individual 
professionals  have  welcomed  this  recommendation.  Some  comments  in  the  newspapers 
have  even  advocated  forthright  implementation  of  this  recommendation  without  waiting  for 
two years. 
Provisioning buffer 
The working group also estimated that a significant portion of restructured standard assets 
turn  into  NPAs  subsequently  as  some  of  these  accounts  were  ab-initio  weak  and  the 
due-diligence carried out for viability studies were not proper. June 2012 Financial Stability 
Report of the Reserve Bank estimated that 15% of such loans may turn into NPAs while the 
working group took a more conservative view under a stressful scenario and estimated that 
25–30% of such loans may slip into non-performing category. This assumption was based on 
the fact that restructurings have taken place only in the recent past with long moratorium and 
repayment holidays and the repayment behaviour of such borrowers is still not known. 
In  view  of  the  above,  the  working  group  recommended  a  higher  general  provisioning 
requirement on restructured standard assets i.e., from the existing 2% to 5%. This will ensure 
the pre-existence of a buffer when such loans slip into non-performing category. However, 
the  working  group  felt  that  a  forthright  increase  in  such  provisioning  requirement  will 
adversely impact the balance sheets of the banks and therefore a calibrated approach was 
adopted  to  coincide  with  the  two-year  transition  period  given  for  withdrawal  of  regulatory 
forbearance on asset classification. For the present “stock” of restructured standard assets 
the general provision was proposed to be increased from 2% to 3.5% in the first year and 
from 3.5% to 5% in the second year. However, the new restructured standard assets (“flow”) 
will straightaway attract provision of 5%. 
Infrastructure sector loan restructuring 
While the working group recommended doing away  with the asset classification benefit on 
restructuring in a phased manner, it was sensitive to the current economic situations and the 
importance of the infrastructure sector in the country’s development. The working group was 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
also  aware  of  the  delays  and  uncertainties  associated  in  obtaining  clearances  for 
commencing commercial operations by the infrastructure entities. 
The  working  group,  therefore,  felt  that  extant  asset  classification  benefits  to  infrastructure 
project  loans  due  to  change  in  date  of  commencement  of  commercial  operations  (DCCO) 
may  be  allowed  to  continue  for  some  more  time  in  view  of  the  delays/uncertainties 
associated in obtaining clearances for such projects. However, the working group was of the 
view that this limited forbearance should be used judiciously and it must have disincentives 
to  disallow  misuse  of  the forbearance. Therefore,  standard  asset  provision  of  5% for  such 
infrastructure loans has been recommended. 
The working group also observed that internationally regulatory forbearance was offered in 
times of financial and economic crisis in order to alleviate their adverse impact on real and 
financial  sector.  However,  in  India  these  have  become  a  kind  of  standing  instruction 
applicable  at  all  times.  The  working  group,  therefore,  recommended  that  the  Government 
and the RBI should come out with a framework which will precisely and objectively define a 
severe  crisis  (like  the  2008  financial  crisis)  requiring  both  the  Government  and  regulatory 
intervention. The framework should also broadly indicate the fiscal and regulatory measures 
to  be  taken  under  such  conditions  in  the  phases  of  (i)  crisis  containment  and  (ii)  debt 
restructuring.  The  rationale  for  this  recommendation  was  that  any  regulatory  forbearance 
should be used as a special tool only in the times of crisis. Such phases were clearly seen in 
India during the 2008 financial crisis, when Government and RBI both intervened in the real 
and financial markets with incentives and regulatory forbearance. 
The working group also observed that the requests for special dispensations and one-time 
measures are frequently made to RBI for restructuring of a particular sector of economy or 
industry  on  the  basis  that  such  sectors  were facing  extraordinary  stress  or  unprecedented 
adverse  conditions.  In  view  of  such  frequent  requests,  the  one-time  measures  lose  their 
meaning and these also have adverse impact on the regulatory safeguards of the banking 
system.  In  view  of  this  the  working  group  felt  that  the  requests  for  such  regulatory 
forbearance  should  not  be  made  a  regular  feature  and  any  such  forbearance  should  be 
accompanied with fiscal incentives to ensure the viability of the sector after restructuring. 
Up-gradation of restructured NPA accounts 
The  issue  of  up-gradation  of  an  account  downgraded  on  restructuring  arises  with  the  first 
recommendation  of  the  working  group  of  withdrawal  of  regulatory  forbearance  in  asset 
classification. The extant RBI guidelines prescribe that all restructured accounts which have 
been  classified  as  non-performing  assets  upon  restructuring,  would  be  eligible  for 
up-gradation to the “standard” category after observation of “satisfactory performance” during 
the “specified period”. Further, “specified period” is defined as a period of one year from the 
date when the first payment of interest or instalment of principal falls due under the terms of 
restructuring package. 
It was observed by the working group that in some cases of restructuring of multiple credit 
facilities  with  moratorium  on  payment  of  principal  as  well  as  major  portion  of  interest, 
accounts were upgraded on the basis of payment of interest on a small portion of the debt, 
say  funded  interest  term  loan  (FITL),  for  the  specified  period.  The  working  group  further 
noticed that the account may still have its inherent credit weakness as payment of a small 
portion of interest does not show the “satisfactory performance”. Therefore, it was felt that 
the specified period should be redefined by taking this aspect into consideration. 
The  working  group  studied  the  international  best  practices  in  this  regard.  For  instance  to 
upgrade a restructured account in Australia, a satisfactory performance is to be observed for 
six months or three repayment cycles, whichever is longer whereas in Thailand satisfactory 
performance  over  three  consecutive  months/three  instalments  is  required.  France,  while 
allowing  restructured  accounts  to  be  upgraded  on  account  of  satisfactory  performance, 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
requires  that  these  accounts  be  reclassified  into  a  specific  sub-category  of  performing 
accounts until they are paid in full. 
The working group had two options. One option was that “specified period” may be redefined 
in cases of multiple credit facilities on restructuring as “one year from the commencement of 
the first payment of interest or principal, whichever is later, on the credit facility with longest 
period of moratorium”. Another option was that an objective criterion of repayment should be 
used  for  deciding  the  satisfactory  performance.  For  this  purpose,  it  was  suggested  that  a 
minimum  of  10%  of  debt  repayment  should  be  made  mandatory  for  up-gradation  of  an 
account classified as NPA to standard category. 
The working group examined the above two options and concluded that the first option was 
more prudent as it will ensure that all facilities of a restructured loan performed satisfactorily 
before upgrading a restructured account to standard category. The working group, therefore, 
recommended  that  for  the  purpose  of  upgrading  restructured  NPA  account  with  multiple 
credit facilities, “specified period” should be redefined as “one year from the commencement 
of  the  first  payment  of  interest  or  principal,  whichever  is  later,  on  the  credit  facility  with 
longest period of moratorium provided other outstanding loans/facilities in the account also 
perform satisfactorily. 
It  may  be  recalled  here  that  RBI’s  first  instructions  on  asset  classification  of  restructured 
accounts, issued in April 1992, specifically prescribed that an asset, where the terms of the 
loan agreement regarding interest and principal have been renegotiated or rescheduled after 
commencement  of  production,  should  be  classified  as  sub-standard  and  should  remain  in 
that  category  for  at  least  two  years  of  satisfactory  performance  under  the  renegotiated  or 
rescheduled terms. Our present recommendation in this regard is not too harsh or very new. 
Distribution of losses 
Now, I will explain the rationale behind the recommendations which are aimed at rationalising 
the  distribution  of  losses  between  the  borrower  and  the  lender.  It  was  observed  that  an 
excessively debtor-oriented approach has the aspects of moral hazard as it may encourage 
the  debtor  to  take  excessive  risks  in  the  knowledge  that  the  burden  of  any  losses  will  fall 
disproportionately on creditors. In India, while the banks make the provision for diminution in 
fair  value  of  advances  as  a  result  of  restructuring  and  sometimes  take  a  burden  of 
low-yielding preference shares, borrowers fulfil their obligation by bringing only 15% of the 
bank’s sacrifice and that too in two phases. 
Promoters’ sacrifice 
It  was  felt  that  any  sacrifice  on  the  part  of  the  lenders  due  to  restructuring  should  be 
accompanied with increased stake of the borrower in the business. This becomes important 
for  instilling  financial  discipline  in  the  borrower  as  he  will  be  more  concerned  about 
preserving  the  value  of  his  stake  in  the  business.  It  was  observed  that  the  regulatory 
prescription of promoters’ sacrifice at 15% of the lenders’ sacrifice was not sufficient enough 
and in some cases even this 15%  was not properly accounted for. Therefore, the working 
group recommended that this 15% was the bare minimum and banks may prescribe a higher 
sacrifice by the promoters. 
Further,  it  was  also  felt  that  the  sacrifice  by  the  promoters  should  also  be  linked  with  the 
quantum  of  the  restructured  loan.  Therefore,  the  recommendation  in  this  regard  is  that 
promoters’ contribution should be prescribed at a minimum of 15% of the diminution in fair 
value or 2% of the restructured debt, whichever is higher. 
Banks and also other stakeholders have welcomed this recommendation in their comments. 
Some  have  even  suggested  that  if  there  is  a  case  of  diversion  of  the  funds,  then  such 
borrowers  should  be  compelled  to  bring  back  the  funds  along  with  the  amount  of  their 
sacrifice. I will like to state that our instructions in this regard are not new and instructions 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
regarding  promoters’  contribution  were  first  issued  in  November  1985  guidelines  on 
rehabilitation of sick industrial units. 
Another related recommendation in this regard is making it mandatory for the promoters to 
extend their personal guarantee in all cases of restructuring. At present, personal guarantee 
by  the  promoter  is  one  of  the  conditions  for  getting  the  asset  classification  benefit  except 
when  the  unit  is  affected  by  external  factors  pertaining  to  the  economy  and  industry. 
However, the working group observed that some promoters do not agree to extend personal 
guarantee under any circumstances. It was also observed that the criteria, “external factors 
pertaining to the economy and industry” was subjective and it made it difficult for the banks to 
press  for  promoters’  personal  guarantee.  Considering  that  the  restructuring  of  debt  by 
lenders benefits the company and promoters and also leads to sacrifice by lenders, it was 
important  to  ensure  promoters’  “skin  in  the  game”  or  commitment  by  stipulating  personal 
guarantee. 
The working group discussed that in case personal guarantee is made mandatory, promoters 
will  be  ensuring  that  only  viable  packages  are  submitted  for  restructuring.  In  view  of  the 
foregoing,  the  working  group  recommended  that  RBI  may  prescribe  that  the  promoters’ 
personal guarantee as a mandatory requirement for all cases of restructuring, i.e., even if the 
restructuring  is  necessitated  on  account  of  external  factors  pertaining  to  economy  and 
industry.  The  working  group  also  recommended  that  RBI  may  prescribe  that  corporate 
guarantee cannot be a substitute for the promoters’ personal guarantee. 
Provision for diminution in the fair value of restructured advances 
Reduction in the rate of interest and/or reschedulement of the repayment of principal amount, 
as  part  of  the  restructuring,  results  in  diminution  in  the  fair  value  of  the  advance.  Such 
diminution  in  value  is  an  economic  loss  for  the  bank  and  will  have  impact  on  the  bank’s 
market value of equity. Banks are, therefore, required to measure such diminution in the fair 
value  of  the  advance  and  make  provisions  for  it  by  debit  to  Profit  &  Loss  Account.  Such 
provision should be held in addition to the provisions as per existing provisioning norms for 
advances. Our extant instructions are very clear in this regard. 
The working group examined the present method of calculating erosion in the fair value of 
the  advance  as  the  difference  between  the  fair  value  of  the  loan  before  and  after 
restructuring,  and  found  the  same  to  be  appropriate.  However,  it  was  felt  that  there  are 
certain ambiguities and inconsistencies across the banks and the same were required to be 
removed.  Accordingly,  the  working  group  recommended  that  RBI  may  provide  some 
illustrative examples on calculation of the fair value of accounts on restructuring. 
The working group also recommended continuance of the existing instruction that if a bank 
finds  it  difficult  to  compute  diminution  in  fair  value  of  advances  extended  at  small/rural 
branches, it will have the option of notionally computing the diminution amount at 5% of the 
total exposure, in respect of restructured accounts where the total dues to the bank are less 
than Rs. 1 crore. 
Conversion of debt into shares/preference shares 
The  next  major  highlight  of  the  report  is  regarding  arresting  the  trend  of  the  banks  being 
burdened with shares/preference shares of non-viable companies as a result of restructuring 
of  their  debt. The  working group  observed  that banks  were  adversely  affected  in  cases  of 
conversion  of  a  large  portion  of  debt  into  equity  and  /  or  preference  shares.  The  working 
group noticed that the trend of such conversion has increased recently, especially in cases of 
large exposures restructured under CDR mechanism. The working group observed that such 
conversions were akin to writing off the debt as in many cases the preference shares carried 
zero or low coupon, added with the fact that they had no market value as also they did not 
carry voting rights unlike the equity shares. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
In  view  of  the  above,  the  working  group  felt  that  there  should  be  a  ceiling/restriction  on 
conversion  of  debt  into  zero  /  very  low  interest  preference  shares.  Another  view  was  that 
RBI should  prescribe  a minimum  coupon  (say  yield  on  364  days  TBs)  on  such  preference 
shares. 
The working group also observed that in some cases of restructuring, unreasonable losses 
were allocated to the lenders as a result of conversion of debt into equity shares at a very 
high premium over the current market price. It was also observed that the lenders suffered 
heavy losses due to further decline in the market prices of such shares. In view of this, the 
working  group  felt  that  RBI  may  prescribe  that  conversion  of  debt  into  equity  shares  on 
restructuring cannot take place at off market rates, i.e., at a price which is higher than the 
latest available market price. The working group felt that the conversion into unlisted shares 
should be restricted due to the limited exit options available to banks for unlisted shares. The 
working group recommended that any conversion of debt into equity should be done only in 
the  case  of  listed  companies.  There  are  suggestions  to  take  up  the  issue  with  SEBI  for 
rationalising the norms on conversion price of debt into equity in cases  of restructuring by 
banks.  The  working  group  recommended  that  conversion  of  debt  into  equity/preference 
shares should, in any case, be restricted to a cap (say 10% of the restructured debt). 
We  have  received  very  favourable  comments  in  this  regard.  Some  have  suggested  that 
conversion of debt into preference shares should not be permitted at all. 
Exit option 
Another important recommendation of the report arose from the observation that banks were 
stuck  with  accounts  which  were  restructured  on  being  found  viable,  but  later  turned  to  be 
slow  in  achieving  the  projected  viability  ratios.  In  some  cases  promoters  did  not  bring  the 
funds  as  promised  and  the  required  equity  could  not  be  raised  due  to  depressed  market 
conditions  or  due  to  the  company’s  deteriorating  financial  health.  The  working  group 
observed that although the extant guidelines on restructuring provided the banks freedom to 
decide, especially, in cases of CDR accounts, to either proceed legally under SARFAESI or 
DRT or take up the account for restructuring, if found viable. However, once restructured, the 
unviable accounts became a real burden, as with increased stakes the banks found it difficult 
to  abandon  them  and  initiate  recovery  because  the  collaterals  deteriorated  in  value  with 
passage of time. 
The  working  group  discussed  the  need  for  faster  exit  options  in  light  of  the  international 
resolution  mechanism  and  recommended  that  exit  options  to  banks  in  cases  of  non-viable 
accounts should  be  made  more  comprehensive. The  working group  observed  that  in  such 
cases, banks should be advised to assess the situation early and use the exit option with a 
view to minimise the losses. The working group also agreed that the terms and conditions of 
restructuring should inherently contain the principle of “carrot and stick”, i.e., it should also 
have disincentives for non-adherence to the terms of restructuring and under-performance. 
Right of recompense 
The  working  group  also  stressed  the  importance  that  banks  should  recover  the  sacrifices 
made by them once the account under restructuring turns around and starts making profit. It 
was  observed  that  banks  generally  waived  the  benefits  accruing  to  them  from  right  of 
recompense  at  a  later  stage  or  the  borrower  contested  the  amount  of  recompense.  RBI 
guidelines make the “right of recompense” clause mandatory in cases of CDR restructuring 
and  CDR  Cell  has  framed  their  own  guidelines  in  this  regard  in  terms  of  the  powers 
delegated to them. 
It was noticed by the working group that due to the current guidelines issued by the CDR Cell 
that  recompense  be  calculated  on  compounding  basis  and  that  100%  of  recompense  so 
calculated  is  payable,  exit  of  companies  from  CDR  system  was  not  happening.  In  view  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
this,  the  working  group  while  recommending  that  recompense  clause  be  made  mandatory 
also felt that CDR Standing Forum/Core Group may take a view as to whether this clause 
may be made somewhat flexible in order to facilitate the exit of the borrowers from CDR Cell. 
However, it also felt that in any case 75% of the amount so calculated should be recovered 
from  the  borrowers  and  in  cases  of  restructuring  where  a  facility  has  been  granted  below 
base rate, 100% of the recompense amount should be recovered. 
The  working  group  also  recommended  that  the  present  recommendatory  nature  of 
“recompense” clause should be made mandatory even in cases of non-CDR cases. 
Assessing the viability for restructuring of accounts 
Viability  is  the  most  important  and  prime  criteria  for  an  account  to  be  taken  up  for 
restructuring. It has been observed that many unviable accounts were projected as viable on 
the basis of over optimistic financial projections and some kind of financial engineering. Our 
extant guidelines allow the banks to examine the viability of accounts for restructuring on the 
basis  of  broad  parameters  prescribed  by  RBI  and  benchmarks  decided  by  the  banks 
themselves. 
The  working  group  observed  that  while  restructuring  of  advances  on  solo  basis,  banks, 
particularly at branch or controlling office level where sufficient skill is not available, generally 
do not establish the viability of the account as rigorously as being done under CDR. Also, the 
working group observed that in case of solo restructuring, while proper and intensive viability 
study  might  be  done  for  medium  and  large  accounts,  for  small  accounts  viability  study  is 
generally very limited. 
Presently,  the  RBI  has  prescribed  certain  very  broad  illustrative  viability  criteria  –  the 
parameters may include the Return on Capital Employed, Debt Service Coverage Ratio, Gap 
between the Internal Rate of Return and Cost of Funds and the amount of provision required 
in  lieu  of  the  diminution  in  the  fair  value  of  the  restructured  advance.  The  working  group 
discussed  the  need  for  prescribing  certain  objective  criteria  and  indicative  benchmarks  by 
RBI,  like  those  adopted  by  the  CDR  Cell,  for  restructuring  of  accounts  by  banks  so  as  to 
ensure that accounts where the viability is in doubt do not get restructured. It was also felt 
that any benchmarks prescribed by RBI will bring uniformity and objectivity while assessing 
the viability for restructuring the accounts. 
The  working  group  recommended  prescription  of  suitable  benchmarks  by  RBI  for  the 
restructuring carried out by individual banks. 
The  working  group  also 
for 
non-infrastructure  accounts  and  ten  years  for  infrastructure  accounts  becoming  viable  on 
restructuring was too long and banks should take it as an outer limit. It was felt that in times 
when  there  is  no  general  downturn  in  the  economy,  the  viability  time  span  should  not  be 
more  than  five  years  in  non-infrastructure  cases  and  not  more  than  eight  years  in 
infrastructure cases. We have received several comments in this regard. While some have 
welcomed this step, a few have advocated that RBI should leave such matters to the banks. 
time  span  of  seven  years 
the  prescribed 
that 
felt 
Disclosures 
At present banks are required to disclose in their published Annual Balance Sheets, under 
“Notes on Accounts”, information relating to number and amount of advances restructured, 
and  the  amount  of  diminution  in  the  fair  value  of  the  restructured  advances  under  the 
following categories: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
Standard Advances Restructured, 
Sub-Standard Advances Restructured, and 
Doubtful Advances Restructured. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Under  each  of  the  category  above,  advances  restructured  under  CDR  Mechanism, 
SME Debt  Restructuring  Mechanism  and  other  categories  are  required  to  be  shown 
separately. 
The disclosures made by the banks in their balance sheets as regards restructured accounts 
are used by market players and analysts for assessing the financial condition of the banks. In 
terms of present guidelines banks are required to disclose annually all accounts restructured 
in their books on a cumulative basis even though many of them would have subsequently 
shown satisfactory performance over a sufficiently long period. As such the present position 
of disclosures are quite stringent and do not take into account the fact that in many of these 
accounts the inherent weaknesses in the accounts have disappeared and the accounts are 
in fact standard in all respects. 
However, it has been observed that some banks do not disclose the restructured accounts 
on a cumulative basis. This may be because of the fact that our August 2008 guidelines have 
not explicitly stated that such disclosures should be on a cumulative basis and our previous 
instruction  was  about  disclosing  “accounts  restructured  during  the  year”.  In  view  of  such 
ambiguities prevailing and in order to maintain uniformity in disclosure of accounts, it was felt 
necessary to clearly prescribe the disclosure requirements. 
It  was  decided  to  take  into  account  the  presence  of  inherent  credit  weakness  in  a 
restructured account as a criterion for disclosure. However, deciding the presence of inherent 
credit  weakness  itself  required  some  kind  of  objective  criteria.  It  was  felt  that  satisfactory 
performance of a restructured account for a sufficient period of time should be taken as an 
indication that the account has overcome its inherent credit weakness. 
Our May 2011 circular prescribed higher provisioning for restructured accounts classified as 
standard  either  ab-initio  or  on  up-gradation  from  NPA  category.  Simultaneously,  our 
instructions on capital adequacy prescribed additional risk weights for restructured accounts 
of certain types of loans. These higher provisioning and additional risk weight cease to be 
applicable after periods prescribed in this regard. The working group felt that once the higher 
provisioning and additional risk weights cease to be applicable for these accounts, they may 
be treated on par with normal standard accounts. 
Therefore, the working group recommended that once the higher provisions and risk weights 
(if  applicable)  on  restructured  advances  (classified  as  standard  either  ab-initio  or  on 
upgradation from NPA category) revert back to the normal level on account of satisfactory 
performance during the prescribed period, such advances should no longer be required to be 
disclosed  by  banks  as  restructured  accounts  in  the  “Notes  on  Accounts”  in  their  Annual 
Balance Sheets. Accordingly, the working group also suggested a format for the disclosures 
of restructured accounts. 
Roll-over of short term loans 
Another important recommendation of the working group was that RBI should clarify that the 
cases of roll-over of short term loan, where proper pre-sanction assessment has been done 
and  no  concession  has  been  provided  due  to  weakness  of  the  borrower,  should  not  be 
considered as restructured account. The need for this recommendation arose as the banks 
felt such short term loans (STLs) were like any other need based working capital facility and 
their  roll-overs  were  due  to  genuine  reasons  in  many  cases.  Such  STLs  were  financed 
generally as a result of operational needs which cannot be anticipated in advance. 
A  view  was  expressed  that  such  roll-over  of  short  term  loans  might  be  construed  as 
restructuring in view of the RBI’s current definition of a restructured account that where the 
bank, for economic or legal reasons relating to the borrower’s financial difficulty, grants to the 
borrower  concessions  that  the  bank  would  not  otherwise  consider.  Restructuring  would 
normally  involve  modification  of  terms  of  the  advances/securities,  which  would  generally 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
include,  among  others,  alteration  of  repayment  period/repayable  amount/the  amount  of 
instalments/rate of interest (due to reasons other than competitive reasons). 
The working group was of the view that roll-overs should not be treated as restructuring if the 
same is done on the strength of the borrower’s balance sheet, i.e., if the loans are not rolled 
over due to the weakness in the balance sheet but due to temporary needs of the borrower. 
However,  there  was  also  an  apprehension  that  such  a  facility  might  not  be  used  for  the 
intended aim in future, especially, when the working group was making recommendation to 
do away  with the asset classification benefit on restructuring. Therefore, it was added that 
such roll-overs should only be need based and there should be a cap, say two or three times, 
on such roll-overs. 
There are recommendations of the working group which aim at rationalising some existing 
instructions  and  bringing  level  playing  field  to  some  extent  between  CDR  and  non-CDR 
restructurings. Both these recommendations are relevant till the asset classification benefit is 
available  on  restructuring.  The  first  is  regarding  incentive  for  quick  implementation  of 
restructuring package. 
Incentive for quick implementation of restructuring 
As regards CDR restructuring, RBI guidelines provide incentive of asset classification benefit 
for quick  implementation  if  restructuring  package  is  implemented  within  120  days  from  the 
date  of  approval  by  the  CDR  mechanism;  whereas  under  non-CDR  restructuring  incentive 
under  quick  implementation  of  the  restructuring  package  is  allowed  if  the  restructuring 
package is implemented within 90 days from the date of receipt of application. The working 
group felt that the present prescription does not provide sufficient time for viability study for 
restructuring of advances under non-CDR mechanism as both the viability study as well as 
implementation of the package was to be carried out within 90 days from the date of receipt 
of  application.  Whereas,  in  cases  of  restructuring  under  CDR  mechanism,  banks  got 
separate  times  for  viability  study  and  implementation  of  package,  which  itself  is  120  days 
from the date of approval of package. 
Therefore,  it  was  felt  that  as  90  days  period  after  receipt  of  application  is  considered 
insufficient  for  properly  ascertaining  the  viability  of  the  account,  the  period  for  quick 
implementation under non-CDR mechanism should be increased to 120 days from the date 
of application. 
Repeated restructuring 
Another  such  recommendation  is  regarding  a  special  forbearance  granted  to  CDR 
mechanism whereby a second restructuring is not considered as a repeated restructuring if 
there  is  no  negative  NPV  on  discounting  of  pre  and  post-restructuring  cash  flows.  It  was 
observed that this special dispensation not only gave undue advantage to the restructuring of 
large corporate accounts but such special dispensation could result in repeated restructuring 
due to the dilution in the norm for CDR cases without attracting stricter asset classification 
and  provisioning  norms.  Therefore,  the  working  group  recommended  that  the  special 
dispensation  provided  to  CDR  Cell,  that  any  second  time  restructuring  under  CDR 
restructuring need not be considered as repeated restructuring if it does not lead to negative 
NPV, be withdrawn. 
Conclusion 
In conclusion, I would say that the working group tried to balance its recommendations in the 
light  of  international  best  practices  and  accounting  standards  and  the  societal  need  to 
preserve  the  value  of  productive  assets  of  the  economy  and  distribute  the  losses  fairly 
between the borrower and lenders. In view of the present domestic as well as international 
macroeconomic  situation,  the  working  group  has  recommended  a  gradual  and  calibrated 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
transition within a two-year period. The working group has also tried to harmonise some of 
the procedures applied to CDR restructuring to non-CDR restructuring. The Reserve Bank 
will take appropriate decision on the recommendations based on the comments received. 
I sincerely hope that I have done a good job if I have clarified the rationale and philosophy 
behind the recommendations of the working group. I value your feedback and wish the round 
table all success. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
