Ignazio Visco: The sovereign debt crisis and the outlook for Italy 
Address by Dr Ignazio Visco, Governor of the Bank of Italy, to the 18th Congress of Financial 
Markets  Operators  organised  by  ASSIOM  FOREX  (the  Financial  Markets  Association  of 
Italy), Parma, 18 February 2012. 
 Last November the spread between the yield on ten-year BTPs and their German equivalent 
reached 550 basis points; yesterday at the close it stood at 365 points; in the first six months 
of 2011, it had been mostly below 200 basis points. Tensions remain high in the international 
financial markets.  
The  difficulty  in  resolving  the  Greek  crisis,  evident  again  in  recent  days,  is  transmitting 
turbulence  to  the  entire  European  market.  Investor  uncertainty  over  Italian  government 
securities  has  eased  with  respect  to  the  worst  moments  of  the  crisis,  but  has  not 
disappeared. 
The markets’ attention is now focused on Italy’s ability to make further determined progress 
in  the  restoration  of  its  public  finances  and  simultaneously  stimulate  its  economic  growth 
potential  through  structural  reforms.  The  path  has  been  set  with  clarity  of  purpose; 
international  public  opinion  acknowledges  as  much;  it  must  now  be  followed  with 
perseverance  and  resolution.  But  no-one  can  succeed  on  their  own.  To  lower  the  risk 
premiums  on  the  government  securities  of  the  countries  engaged  in  financial  stabilization 
and the revival of output, decisions must be taken by common accord. The determination of 
all  to  reinforce  the  European  construction  is  essential.  In  recent  months  Italy’s  economic 
policy  has 
financial  sustainability  which  were  once  deemed 
inconceivable, for example regarding the pension system. Equally bold steps are expected 
on other, decisive fronts, to which the Government is already committed: the efficiency of the 
taxation system and the fight against tax evasion; the public sector spending review, which 
will analyze every item to identify possible redundancies and savings; and the simplification 
of  laws,  institutions  and  practices  that  are  blocking  the  country’s  energies,  reducing  firms’ 
competitiveness and frustrating the expectations of the younger generations. 
taken  steps 
towards 
The sovereign debt crisis and the outlook for Italy 
1. 
For two years now the global financial crisis has found a new and dangerous focus in the 
euro area. The turbulence was initially confined to Greece, whose budget situation had long 
been  obscured  by  the  official  statistics;  it  then  spread  to  Ireland,  which  suffered  the 
consequences of the profound crisis in its banking sector, and to Portugal, penalized by its 
foreign trade deficit.  
The  limits  of  euro-area  governance  have  become  apparent.  Multilateral  monitoring  of 
national economies failed to ensure sufficiently prudent budgetary policies in good times, and 
underestimated  the  macroeconomic  imbalances  of  several  countries.  The  initial  lack  of 
satisfactory  instruments  for  managing  and  resolving  sovereign  debt  crises  has  been 
compounded  by  the  faltering  and  scarcely  effective  progress  of  the  Greek  aid  programme 
and the drawn-out negotiations for governance reform. 
Tensions in the financial markets assumed systemic proportions from the summer onwards, 
following the announcement of private-sector involvement in the proposed resolution of the 
Greek  crisis,  despite  this  being  presented  by  the  Eurogroup  as  a  unique  and  exceptional 
case. The turbulence spread to Spain, which suffered the consequences of a fall in property 
prices, and Italy, with its high public debt and weak growth prospects in the medium term. 
The  financial  markets,  which  had  long  underestimated  the  possibility  of  default  by  a 
sovereign  issuer  in  the  euro  area,  to  the  point  of  tacitly  ruling  it  out,  now  began  to  give 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
excessive  credit  to  this  scenario,  involving  countries  whose  fundamentals  warranted  less 
negative  assessments.  The  markets  –  operators,  analysts  –  clearly  struggle  to  produce  a 
sound  interpretation  of  all  the  available  information,  which  is  sometimes  incomplete  or 
lacking  in  transparency;  above  all  in  the  phases  of  acute  uncertainty,  operators  tend  to 
engage  in  the  kind  of  herd  behaviour  that  fuels  financial  contagion.  In  turn  economic 
policy  –  particularly  in  the  institutional  context  of  the  single  currency  –  is  hard  put,  in  its 
regulations and interventions, to respond rapidly to fluctuations in the prevailing opinions in 
financial  markets,  to  curb  excesses,  and  to  channel  its  response  towards  a  stable  and 
effective equilibrium. 
To  assess  sovereign  risks  in  a  timely  and  independent  fashion,  taking  account  of  the 
conditions and prospects of the public finances, the level and trends in private sector debt, 
and countries’ growth prospects, is clearly no easy task. It requires the commitment of very 
substantial  resources  and  the  rating  agencies  have  not  always  been  up  to  the  mark. 
Appropriate  standards  must  be  defined;  there  is  a  need  for  transparent  working  relations 
between the agencies and independent, national and supranational institutions, charged with 
carrying out analogous assessments. The measures adopted by Italy during the summer to 
bring  budget  balance  forward  to  2013  and  the  acceleration  of  the  EU  governance  reform 
process with the definition of the “Six-Pack” in the autumn, did not succeed in alleviating the 
tensions in the financial market. Instead, the concerns over the adequacy of the European 
financial support mechanisms and the fears over the weakening of the international economy 
prevailed.  
There was a sharp worsening of wholesale funding conditions for banks in Italy and the other 
countries exposed to tensions, whose creditworthiness has been treated as equal to that of 
their respective governments. US money market funds basically stopped buying commercial 
paper; unsecured bond issues dried up. Strong fears were aroused by the large volume of 
bank bonds maturing in the first part of 2012. In Italy, as in other euro-area countries, funding 
difficulties  were  increasingly  affecting  credit  supply  conditions.  There  was  a  real  risk  of  a 
severe restriction of funding for the economy. 
The  Governing  Council  of  the  European  Central  Bank  lowered  the  rate  on  the  main 
refinancing operations rate by 25 basis points in November and again in December, bringing 
it  down  to  1.0  per  cent.  In  December,  the  Council  also  introduced  three-year  refinancing 
operations, announced an expansion of the range of assets eligible as collateral, and halved 
the  compulsory  reserve  coefficient.  Carrying  out  its  function  as  supplier  of  liquidity  to  the 
banking  system  with  determination,  the  ECB  countered  the  banks’  fund-raising  difficulties 
and the restriction of credit. 
The action of the ECB, the incisive budget measures taken in the countries suffering from the 
worst financial turmoil, and the reaching of an agreement for stronger cooperation under the 
fiscal  compact  have  succeeded  more  recently  in  easing  the  strains  in  the  government 
securities market and in banks’ balance sheets. 
Monetary policy alone cannot resolve the crisis. Along with a consolidation of public finances 
there  must  be  structural  reforms  for  vigorous  and  balanced  growth;  the  rules  of  the  fiscal 
compact must be rapidly implemented. The financial support mechanisms at European level 
must  be  made  to  work  with  greater  agility  and  more  effectively;  the  adequacy  of  their 
intervention  capacity  must  be  ensured.  The  threat  of  dangerous  contagion  must  be 
definitively dispelled by resolving the problem of Greece. 
In 
three  budget  correction  packages  passed  between  July  and 
December  2011  should  lead  to  a  primary  surplus  on  the  order  of  5  per  cent  of  GDP  in 
2013 and a reduction in the debt ratio. The adjustment will come mainly from an increase in 
revenue  but  expenditure  savings  will  increase  over  the  three  years  2012–14.  The  pension 
reform will immediately reinforce the financial sustainability of the pension system by setting 
stricter  requirements.  In  the  medium  term  the  Italian  economy’s  capacity  for  strong  and 
stable  growth  must  be  restored,  by  making  firms  more  competitive.  GDP  is  still  5  points 
Italy 
the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
below  the  level  reached  in  2007,  before  the  crisis;  households’  real  disposable  per  capita 
income is down by 7 points and industrial output by a fifth. The deficit on the current account 
of the balance of payments remains large.  
The  reforms  decided  must  be  rapidly  completed  and  put  into  effect,  in  particular  those  to 
make  the  regulatory  and  administrative  structure  favourable  rather  than  unfriendly  to 
economic growth: the liberalization of important service sectors, the effective simplification of 
administrative  acts,  the  better  functioning  of  the  labour  market,  special  attention  to  human 
capital  and  innovation,  and  faster  responses  by  the  judicial  system.  Even  if  the  effects  of 
individual  interventions  will  arrive  gradually,  a  comprehensive  and  wide-ranging  plan  can 
have  a  positive  influence  on  expectations  in  the  short  term  and  so  stimulate  aggregate 
demand and a recovery in investment. 
The point is to create favourable conditions for those who invest and create jobs in Italy not 
with  subsidies  but  by  furnishing  suitable  intangible  infrastructure;  not  through  the  shadow 
economy but by cracking down on tax evasion. Society pays a high price for corruption and 
crime  in  general  in  the  form  of  deteriorating  civic  life  and  lost  economic  development. 
Combating them, and especially their financial implications, will remove one of the brakes on 
growth.  
Economic  growth  favours  the  consolidation  of  the  public  finances,  which  in  any  case  are 
already on a sustainable path, even under unfavourable assumptions concerning growth and 
interest  rates.  With  modest  real  growth  of  around  1  per  cent  and  a  spread  on  ten-year 
government bond yields stable, if high, at 300 basis points, primary surpluses of 5 per cent of 
GDP, as forecast for 2013, will reduce the debt ratio by more than is required by the new 
European budget rules. 
This year will be a year of recession. As we indicated in the forecasting scenarios set out in 
our  Economic  Bulletin  in  January,  we  expect  a  year-on-year  decline  in  gross  domestic 
product of about 1.5 per cent. But it is important to look ahead, to act in such a way that as 
conditions in the financial and credit markets return to normal it will be possible to stabilize 
economic activity in Italy already by the second half of 2012 and return to growth next year. 
2. 
Bank liquidity, the extraordinary measures of the Eurosystem and credit to the 
economy 
Italian banks are sound, but they have been especially hard hit by the sovereign debt strains. 
Since last summer short-term fund-raising in dollars and funding on the bond market have 
slowed to a trickle, while the fall in government securities prices and the raising of margin 
requirements by the main lenders have limited the banks’ access to repos. 
One  factor  in  market  instability  and  the  consequent  funding  difficulties  has  been  the 
operation of automatic mechanisms. This occurred, for instance, on 9 November, when the 
French  central  counterparty,  LCH  Clearnet  SA,  drastically  raised  its  margin  requirements 
against positions in Italian securities, in line with the sovereign risk framework of the British 
member  of  the  Clearnet  Group.  Italy’s  Cassa  di  Compensazione  e  Garanzia,  linked  to 
Clearnet through an interoperability agreement, had to adapt in order to avoid jeopardizing 
the  orderly  functioning  of  the  market.  Afterwards,  the  competent  authorities  asked  the  two 
central  counterparties  to  review  the  decision  and  to  develop  a  common  methodology  for 
assessing sovereign debt risks. The process must be based on an adequate statistical base, 
avoid automatic links with rating agencies’ assessments, and curb the potential pro-cyclical 
effects. 
In  the  course  of  2011,  while  residents’  deposits  and  bonds  held  by  households  remained 
stable, Italian banks’ overall fund-raising from customers and the markets slowed and from 
November started to contract. For 2011 as a whole, it declined by 2.8 per cent. At the same 
time, the banks’ recourse to Eurosystem refinancing increased considerably. A real risk was 
emerging  that  the  difficulties  of  raising  funds  in  the  international  markets  would  result  in  a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
contraction of lending, aggravating the cyclical downturn and inevitably triggering feed-back 
effects on the banks’ balance sheets. 
Until November Italian banks’ lending to the non-financial private sector continued to expand, 
although  at  diminishing  rates.  In  December,  however,  loans  to  firms  contracted  by  about 
€20 billion. The decline is very large by historical standards, although it may have depended 
in  part  on  the  usual  volatility  of  end-year  data.  Lending  to  households  diminished  only 
slightly. 
Preliminary data indicate a slight further contraction in credit in January. 
Certainly  firms’  demand  for  credit  has  declined,  given  the  poor  state  of  the  economy,  but 
surveys of banks and firms indicate a tightening of credit supply terms as well. The Italian 
banks participating in the Eurosystem’s quarterly Bank Lending Survey confirm that the rise 
in  lending  rates  and  the  strains  on  credit  supply  are  due  mainly  to  serious  difficulties  in 
raising funds in the markets as well as to growing credit risk. 
Firms are now facing the second tightening of lending terms within just a few years. Once 
again  the  banks’  ability  to  assess  creditworthiness  correctly  and  not  withdraw  financial 
support  from  solvent,  creditworthy  customers  will  be  crucial.  Adequate  and  stable  lending 
volume is essential to the banks themselves. 
In its first three-year refinancing operation on 21 December, the Eurosystem supplied banks 
with a total of €490 billion. Considering the contraction in the volume disbursed through other 
operations, the net increase in the resources provided to the banking system amounted to 
about €200 billion.  
This liquidity is circulating. Most of the funds re-deposited with national central banks did not 
come from the same banks that had obtained them from the Eurosystem. 
With  this  first  three-year  operation,  Italian  banks  received  gross  funding  of  €116  billion, 
corresponding to net refinancing of €60 billion. The inflow of long-term liquidity substantially 
eased  the  funding  tensions.  The  second  three-year  refinancing  operation,  scheduled  for 
29 February, will further sustain the supply of credit. 
The operations of the Eurosystem are currently on a full allotment basis; banks’ refinancing 
capacity accordingly depends on the availability of collateral. In recent months Italian banks 
have significantly increased the collateral pool at the Bank of Italy, to about €280 billion at the 
end of January. Their eligible uncommitted assets on the same date are estimated to have 
amounted  to  €77  billion  after  the  application  of  haircuts.  Since  the  total  exposure  to  the 
Eurosystem amounted to about €200 billion, the Italian banking system’s capacity for further 
refinancing can be estimated at more than €150 billion. 
Following  the  recent  decisions  of  the  ECB’s  Governing  Council,  we  have  joined  other 
national  central  banks  in  announcing  measures  aimed  at  further  expanding  the  range  of 
assets banks can use as collateral for refinancing operations. In just a few days Italian banks 
will  be  able  to  deposit  a  broader  range  of  bank  loans  meeting  clearly  defined  eligibility 
criteria, with the Bank of Italy bearing the related risks. 
To  reconcile  the  objective  of  increasing  banks’  access  to  refinancing  with  the  need  to 
preserve the solidity of the central bank’s balance sheet, the new eligible collateral will be 
selected  rigorously.  In  particular,  it  will  include  bank  loans  with  a  very  low  probability  of 
default, not exceeding 1 per cent. As a result of the above changes, once haircuts have been 
applied, Italian banks’ total eligible assets will increase by another €70–90 billion to a little 
under  €450  billion.  This  may  permit  a  progressive  reduction  in  the  importance  of 
government-guaranteed  bank  bonds,  the  volume  of  which  is  about  €60  billion  after  the 
application of haircuts. 
The introduction of new collateral eligibility criteria and the ample supply of long-term liquid 
funds  are  helping  to  restore  a  uniform  transmission  of  monetary  policy  in  the  various 
euroarea countries. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The  injection  of  three-year  liquidity  has  already  helped  to  attenuate  the  tensions  on  the 
money market. Compared with the days preceding the operation, three-month and one-year 
Euribor rates have fallen by about 40 and 30 basis points respectively, largely owing to the 
reduction in risk premiums. After rising to as high as one percentage point, the differentials 
between the overnight rates on the interbank markets of the countries most severely affected 
by the tensions and the euroarea average have fallen to zero. 
The spreads on credit default swaps for Italian banks have also fallen significantly, although 
they remain higher than they were up to the middle of 2011. At the end of January a large 
Italian bank returned to the international market with an issue of unsecured bonds that was 
favourably  received  by  investors;  the  yield  was  not  significantly  higher  than  that  on  Italian 
government securities. 
Banks’ profitability and capital strengthening 
3. 
In 2009 the financial crisis and the recession caused a sharp fall in Italian banks’ profits. In 
contrast with what happened in the other main European countries, the recovery in 2010 and 
2011 was modest and the outlook for this year is not good. 
Banks’ profit and loss accounts are affected in the first place by the difficulties facing a large 
part  of  Italian  industry.  In  addition  to  these  cyclical  problems,  Italian  banks  are  faced  with 
others  of  a  more  structural  nature  related  to  the  relatively  limited  diversification  of  their 
sources of income and the high level of their costs. 
Low profit margins reduce the resources with which to strengthen banks’ capital and make it 
more difficult to raise funds on the market, thus diminishing the ability of the banking system 
to  support  the  economy.  Profitability  can  be  increased  by  improving  the  quality  of  the 
services supplied, thus permitting revenues to be expanded and diversified. The progress of 
technology and the public’s growing ability to use it can foster a rationalization of production 
processes  and  distribution  networks;  significant  cost  savings  can  also  be  achieved  by 
simplifying corporate governance. 
The  medium-term  objectives  for  profitability  must  be  revised  taking  into  account  the 
far-reaching changes that have occurred in recent years. Profit levels such as those seen in 
some parts of the international banking industry before the crisis are not compatible with the 
stability  of  the  financial  system.  More  efficient  and  stable  banks  can  raise  capital  more 
cheaply. 
Basel III requires banks to operate with more and higher quality capital than in the past; in 
periods of rapid credit expansion it requires them to build countercyclical capital buffers; it 
sets a limit on their leverage ratio; and it introduces new liquidity ratios, so as to make banks’ 
balance  sheets  more  resistant  in  the  short  term  and  better  balanced  in  the  medium  term. 
Additional capital requirements are now planned for banks that could pose a threat to global 
systemic stability if they were in difficulty; effective and credible resolution mechanisms in the 
event of a crisis, including clear provisions on burden sharing, are likely to avoid costs being 
charged to the public or reduce them to a minimum. 
The  new  regulatory  framework  confirms  the  favourable  treatment  of  loans  to  small  and 
medium-sized  enterprises  already  established  by  Basel  II.  In  many  cases  such  firms  have 
opportunities  to  grow.  Lending  to  well-capitalized  firms  deemed  to  be  able  to  exploit 
economies of scale or scope carries lower capital charges for banks that use internal rating 
systems, so that loans can be granted at relatively low interest rates. In the years leading up 
to the crisis we saw just how damaging a race to the bottom between financial systems in 
both  regulation  and  supervision  can  be.  Therefore,  when  Basel  III  is  transposed  and 
implemented in the EU and in the other G20 countries, its objective of creating a level playing 
field for all banks must be fully respected. 
We have asked Italy’s leading banks to strengthen their capital considerably in recent years. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
risk 
relates 
to  exposures  at 
They  have  complied,  even  in  difficult  times,  mainly  by  raising  funds,  to  a  value  of  almost 
€20 billion, on private capital markets. 
Much ground has been covered in just a few years. The core tier 1 ratio of the five largest 
banking groups has reached an average of 9.5 per cent of risk-weighted assets, compared 
with 5.7 per cent at the end of 2007, on the eve of the crisis. The gap, now narrower, that 
remains  between  the  capitalization  of  our  leading  banks  and  the  average  capitalization  of 
their main foreign competitors partly reflects differences in the way risk-weighted assets are 
calculated in the various systems.  
Work  to  reduce  these  differences,  which  we  strongly  support,  is  now  under  way  at 
international level and will include peer review mechanisms. In Europe, the adoption of the 
single rulebook will be a step in the same direction. 
When  evaluating  banks’  capital  adequacy  we  also  take  account  of  their  overall  leverage. 
From  this  point  of  view,  Italy’s  banking  system  is  extremely  sound.  The  ratio  of  total 
balance-sheet  assets  to  tier  1  capital  of  our  leading  banks  is  less  than  20,  against  an 
average of 33 for the principal European banking groups. 
The  Recommendation  on  banks’  capital  issued  by  the  European  Banking  Authority  on 
8 December as part of a broad package of measures approved by the European Council at 
the end of October aims to enhance the system’s ability to withstand the high sovereign risk 
tensions  and  potential  additional  shocks.  It  does  not  change  the  current  prudential  and 
accounting  rules;  it  does  not  discourage  investment  in  sovereigns  as  the  capital  buffer 
against  sovereign 
the  end  of  September.  The 
EBA’s Recommendation calls for a strengthening of capital, not a reduction of assets. 
The  measure  was  decided  in  exceptional  circumstances,  necessitating  a  difficult  trade-off 
between  dispelling,  firmly  and  promptly,  any  market  doubts  about  the  soundness  of 
European banks and avoiding pro-cyclical effects. The EBA and the national authorities have 
repeatedly  emphasized  that  the  Recommendation  is  a  temporary  measure  and  will  not  be 
repeated. The EBA has decided to postpone the next stress test exercise on the European 
banking system to 2013. 
The optimal sequence for the measures taken by the European Council would have been to 
strengthen the EFSF and make it fully operational and to activate the system of European 
public guarantees for new medium- and long-term bank liabilities before or at the same time 
as the EBA issued its Recommendation. Had Europe’s intervention capacity been reinforced 
immediately, this would have reduced uncertainty over the course of the sovereign debt crisis 
in Europe and thus improved both the valuation of sovereign bonds and the banks’ ability to 
raise funds on the market.  
The EBA has agreed to re-examine the need for a sovereign buffer once the EFSF is up and 
running and sovereign bond prices are picking up. 
The  Italian  banks  that  took  part  in  the  EBA  exercise  can  strengthen  their  capital  base  as 
required  without  reducing  their  lending  to  the  economy.  One  leading  bank  has  already 
successfully completed a large capital increase, which alone will cover nearly all its capital 
requirements  and  make  good  almost  half  of  the  Italian  banks’  overall capital shortfall.  The 
capital strengthening must proceed, however. We expect the banks’ forthcoming decisions 
regarding their dividend policy and executive compensation to take account of this. The Bank 
of Italy is about to issue guidelines to the banks in this regard. 
It is important that the banks prepare for the introduction of Basel III, which will be phased in 
between  next  year  and  2019.  Experience  of  recent  years  has  shown  that  it  is  within  the 
banking system’s capacity to achieve a reasonable strengthening of the capital base. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Banking competition and customer protection 
4. 
In a legal order that recognizes the entrepreneurial nature of banking, competition is the most 
effective  means  of  protecting  savings  and  safeguarding  customers,  to  the  benefit  of  the 
system’s  stability.  In  addition  to  prudential  supervision,  the  Bank  of  Italy  is  entrusted  with 
tasks  and  responsibilities  concerning  transparency  and  correctness  in  bank-customer 
relations as regards banking products. In recent years we have significantly stepped up our 
commitment on this front.  
In the face of inefficiencies, it is necessary to shun the temptation to impose price caps or 
prohibitions  on  banks;  however  commendable  the  intent,  these  would  merely  scratch  the 
surface of the problems, determining non-optimal pricing policies, impeding innovation and in 
some cases even reducing competition. Competition develops if the market is transparent, 
supply  is  diversified  and  switching  costs  are  low  –  all  necessary  and  mutually  reinforcing 
factors. 
This  is  the  thrust  of  the  measures  introduced  by  law  in  recent  years:  cost-free  withdrawal 
from  all  contracts  of  indeterminate  duration  with  banks,  hence  including  current  accounts; 
portability of real-estate mortgage loans; simplified procedures for transferring mortgages. 
The rules laid down by the Bank of Italy in exercising its powers of customer protection have 
the  same  thrust.  We  have  demanded  greater  clarity  and  comparability  of  the  information 
provided by banks, especially on the costs of their products. Measures have been introduced 
to make the costs of loans and current account overdrafts more transparent and comparable. 
Banks  have  been  warned  on  more  than  one  occasion  that  they  must  comply  with  the 
substance of these rules, and enforcement action has followed. 
Among the latest legislative measures, the prohibition on simultaneously holding corporate 
office  in  competitor  firms  is  intended  to  prevent  the  risk  of  collusive  conduct  in  boards  of 
directors;  the  measures  that  favour  the  use  of  electronic  payment  instruments  aim  at 
reducing  the  use  of  cash,  as  in  the  other  European  countries;  the  terms  and  conditions 
applying to loans and breaches of overdraft ceilings will be more transparent. The Bank of 
Italy is in full accord with the spirit of these measures and is prepared to do its part for their 
implementation by rapidly overcoming any doubts of interpretation regarding the exact scope 
of some prohibitions. 
 The  Eurosystem  will  continue  to  counter  the  malfunctioning  of  the  markets  and  provide 
support to bank liquidity and lending. But to bring government securities prices back to levels 
consistent with the fundamentals of the euro-area economies, thereby eradicating the chief 
cause of the difficulties of the banking system, it is essential that national policies continue to 
be directed to stability and growth, which are not conflicting objectives, and that the reforms 
of European economic governance be implemented swiftly. 
The  abundant  liquidity  made  available  by  the  Eurosystem  in  December  and  with  the 
upcoming end-of-month operation, though not a cure in itself, is nevertheless crucial in the 
present phase. It has averted the imminent risk of an acute funding crisis with repercussions 
on  credit  and  severely  destabilizing  consequences;  it  makes  it  possible  to  maintain  a  high 
level of financing for the economy. 
Banks will have to demonstrate that they are able to perform their credit allocation function 
well, under conditions of sound and prudent management, with keen discernment. Their very 
raison d’être demands it; it is essential that the economy not be starved of credit, allowed to 
waste away, dragging down the prospects of the banking system with it. At the same time, it 
is necessary to intensify the efforts to strengthen balance sheets and eliminate the structural 
problems that weigh on the efficiency and profitability of the Italian banking system. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
We firmly believe that we both can and must have confidence in the ability of our banks to 
rise to this challenge; and we are equally confident that an economic policy aimed at financial 
stability and directed to promoting an environment conducive to balanced growth will allow 
greater opportunities for investment and a rapid return to creating new permanent jobs. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
