Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Oil revenue management 
Remarks by Mr Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile, Governor of the Bank of Uganda, at the Oil 
Revenue Management Seminar, Kampala, 27 February 2012. 
 Honorable Ministers,  
Honorable Members of Parliament  
Your Excellencies the Ambassadors  
Ladies and Gentlemen  
It is with great pleasure and that I welcome all of you to this important policy seminar on Oil 
Revenue Management, and especially those who have travelled from abroad, who include 
distinguished academics and experts from the petroleum and financial sectors. I would like 
express  my  gratitude  to  the  Government  of  Norway  and  Stanbic  Bank  for  sponsoring  the 
seminar and to the African Economic Research Consortium for organizing it.  
This seminar is motivated by the recent discovery of oil in commercially exploitable quantities 
along the Albertine Graben in Uganda; discoveries which have understandably raised public 
expectations as to the benefits which these resources may generate for Ugandans. Over the 
medium  to  long  term,  the  public  revenues  from  oil  exports  could  provide  Uganda  with  an 
unprecedented  opportunity  to  step  up  the  pace  of  its  economic  development,  especially 
through investments to alleviate binding constraints to growth and structural transformation.  
Managing  the  revenues  generated  by  a  non  renewable  resource,  whose  future  value  is 
highly  uncertain,  is  a  very  complex  challenge.  It  is  a  challenge  which  requires  carefully 
crafted economic policies to guide the saving and investment of these revenues, short term 
macroeconomic management and public financial management, as well as the discipline to 
implement  good  policies  in  the  face  of  strong  incentives  to  do  otherwise.  The  undoubted 
potential  that  the  oil  discovery  holds  for  accelerated  economic  and  social  development  in 
Uganda will only be realized if the revenues from oil are effectively managed.  
Last  October,  Professor  Paul  Collier  delivered  the  Bank  of  Uganda’s  Josepth  Mubiru 
Memorial Lecture. In that lecture he gave us a salutary warning when he told us that: “the 
historical record of oil discoveries in poor countries is deeply worrying. Often oil leads to the 
curse  of  plunder:  the  few  expropriating  revenues  that  should  benefit  the  many  and  the 
present  generation  unsustainably  consuming  revenues  that  should  benefit  the  future.  To 
avoid  such  a  fate,  this  unprecedented  opportunity  requires  distinctive  and  sometimes  non 
obvious economic policy responses”. We should take these words to heart. In this seminar, 
we are privileged again to have the opportunity to learn from the experience of Norway, a 
country which is acclaimed world wide as a success story in translating its natural resource 
endowments into social and economic benefits for its people in a sustainable manner. The 
success of Norway has been built on the foundation of effective revenue management, well-
defined 
investment  strategies,  sound  macroeconomic  management,  efficient  public 
institutions with well-defined domains of responsibility, accountability and transparency, good 
governance and well-defined property rights.  
I  would  like  to  highlight  three  issues  which  will  be  especially  critical  to  the  sound 
management of oil revenues in Uganda, and which I am sure will receive a lot of attention in 
this seminar.  
First,  the  revenues  accruing  directly  from  oil  are  finite;  our  oil  reserves  will  be  eventually 
exhausted.  This  means  that,  if  the  oil  revenues  are  consumed  rather  than  being  invested, 
living standards in Uganda may rise in the short term but this will not be sustainable. If the oil 
revenues  are  to  be  harnessed  to  generate  a  sustainable  increase  in  living  standards,  a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
substantial part of them must be invested outside the resource sector in physical, human and 
environmental capital, including education, health care, roads and railways. By saving and 
investing the revenues from its non renewable oil resources in an optimal manner, Uganda 
can expand its stock of capital and thus lay the foundations for higher output and improved 
living standards over the long term.  
The  optimal  use  of  oil  resources  requires  policymakers  to  reach  often  politically  difficult 
decisions  in  response  to  questions  such  as:  What  is  the  appropriate  balance  between 
consuming and saving resources? And how quickly should the resources which are saved be 
invested in physical capital formation in Uganda? The answer to the latter question depends 
on  the  capacities  of  our  economy  to  implement  investment  projects  efficiently;  capacities 
which are currently very weak, as is evident from the poor implementation record of many 
donor  funded  projects.  There  are  pressing  demands  to  invest  more  in  infrastructure, 
especially in the transport and power sectors, but before we scale up public investment, we 
need to invest resources in strengthening our capacities to implement public capital projects; 
capacities for project evaluation, public procurement, project management, etc. If we ramp 
up public investment too quickly, at a rate which outstrips our implementation capacity, we 
risk wasting our precious resources on public projects which have very low or even negative 
rates of return.  
The second issue which I want to highlight pertains to the potential for Dutch disease. The 
spending  of  oil  revenues  is  likely  to  cause  a  real  exchange  rate  appreciation,  which  could 
damage the competitiveness of the non oil traded goods sectors of the economy, including 
both  exporters  and  manufacturing  firms  which  compete  with  imports.  The  faster  is  the 
expansion of public spending out of oil revenues, the more disruptive will be the consequent 
Dutch  disease  impact.  We  must  be  very  careful  to  try  and  avoid,  as  much  as  is  possible, 
rendering our non oil traded goods industries economically unviable, because that would be 
very detrimental to long term growth and structural transformation. If Dutch disease drives up 
the  costs  of  producing  traded  goods  in  Uganda,  the  competitiveness  of  traded  goods 
industries can only be maintained if these industries can become more efficient, for example 
by raising the productivity of labour.  
Thirdly,  oil  prices  are  inherently  volatile.  This  poses  acute  problems  for  the  short  term 
management  of  fiscal  policy.  In  particular  the  volatility  of  oil  revenues  often  leads  to 
procyclical  public  spending  which  amplifies  the  business  cycle  and  thus  destabilises  the 
macroeconomy.  To  avoid 
from 
contemporaneous oil revenue receipts, in a manner which is consistent with long term fiscal 
sustainability. Again, this presents political challenges because of the need to maintain fiscal 
discipline  during  periods  of  above  normal  oil  revenue  receipts,  when  optimal  fiscal  policy 
dictates  that  Government  budget  balances  should  improve,  but  when  pressures  for  more 
public spending will intensify.  
Good  public  policy  decisions  are  more  likely  to  be  taken  and  implemented  if  they  are  a 
product  of  well  informed  public  policy  debates;  debates  which  involve  public  officials,  the 
academic community, the business sector and civil society. I hope that this seminar, which 
includes participants from the Parliament, Government, the business sector, academia and 
civil society, will strengthen our understanding of the critical issues relevant for oil revenue 
management and will help to promote public debate about these issues.  
Distinguished  delegates,  I  would  now  like  to  invite  the  Honorable  Minister  of  Finance, 
Planning and Economic Development to officially open this seminar.  
 
to  de-link  public  spending 
is  necessary 
this, 
it 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
