Andreas Dombret: The role of the state in the financial system 
Dinner  speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the ifo/ CESifo/ Bundesbank Conference, Munich, 14 September 2012. 
 Of scientists and drivers 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Please let me welcome you to tonight’s conference dinner. Having discussed complex issues 
all day, you now really deserve the opportunity to socialise with one another. 
But before you do so, and before we start enjoying our dinner, please let me tell you a short 
anecdote: 
In 1919, the physicist Max Planck was awarded the Nobel Prize for his work on the quantum 
theory.  As  a  consequence,  he  toured  Germany,  having  to  give  countless  speeches  about 
quantum  physics.  It  is  said  that  he  complained  about  these  many  talks  to  his  driver.  The 
driver therefore suggested: 
“By now, I have heard your talk so often that I can give it myself. Why don’t we 
change places? I’ll pretend to be the physicist and give the talk while you pretend 
to be the driver.” 
Next  time,  the  driver  gave  the  talk  –  and  his  performance  was  quite  convincing  –  while 
Planck sat in the audience. All went well until someone from the audience posed a question. 
Naturally, the driver was unable to answer it. But instead of admitting this, he replied: 
“Your  question  seems  ridiculously  easy  to  me.  I  believe,  even  my  driver  can 
answer your question.” 
And his “chauffeur” did so. 
Please,  do  not  misunderstand  me:  Considering  the  first-class  participants  list  of  this 
conference and the high quality of the papers selected, I am convinced that the academics at 
this conference will speak with the authority of people who absolutely know their trade. I have 
no doubt whatsoever on this score. 
However,  I  have  to  admit  that  when  following  the  discussion  in  the  media  about  the 
European debt crisis it is sometimes hard to separate the “drivers” from the real academics. I 
get the impression that everyone has an opinion on these topics – and that everyone has 
stated that opinion at least once. 
Take,  for  instance,  the  discussion  about  a  banking  union  in  Europe.  This  topic  has 
stirred  –  quite  understandably,  I  may  add  –  quite  some  unrest  in  the  German  economic 
community. Petitions were launched, and provocative counter-petitions were issued, in some 
cases endorsed by some of the exact same academics. 
This  seems  striking,  given  that  they  were  signed  by  well-respected  academics.  However, 
these petitions are perhaps not as incompatible as it might appear. Obviously, one comes to 
different  conclusions  if  the  reasoning  is  based  on  different  assumptions.  And  the  different 
assumptions stem from the various interpretations of the results of the European summit in 
June. 
The core statements of the petitions about the banking union are not disputed. For me, these 
core  statements  are:  “There  should  not  be  unconditional  collective  accountability  for  the 
debts  in  the  euro  area”  and  “Banking  supervision  in  Europe  needs  to  be  harmonised  and 
improved.” And although not everybody may agree with the style and details of the different 
petitions, most people probably concur with these two main messages. I, for my part, concur 
with both statements. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Both messages are related to a question which is central in economics – and which is also a 
topic  for  our  conference:  What  role  should  we  assign  to  the  state?  And  what  role  should 
markets play? 
The Role of the state 
Ten or even five years ago, the opinion in the academic world was relatively unanimous with 
respect to the role of the state in the banking sector: The state and regulators were seen as 
an obstacle to economic growth, and state-owned banks were perceived as the flotsam and 
jetsam of free market economies. “Let the market deal with the issues of the financial sector, 
and  capital  and  risks  will  be  efficiently  allocated,”  most  academics  argued.  A  saying 
attributed to the well-respected former Bavarian prime minister Franz-Josef Strauss comes to 
mind: “A dog is more likely to put away a sausage for a rainy day than the state is to save 
money.” 
Then came the financial crisis. The distrust in the state among mainstream academics has 
remained. However, there is now distrust in markets as well, perhaps surpassing distrust in 
the  state.  In  the  academic  community  and  the  media,  there  has  been  a  debate  about 
excessive bonuses for bankers, about distorted incentives for risk-taking in banks and, last 
but not least, about the role of rating agencies. 
To  my  mind,  the  crisis  has  shown  that,  like  it  or  not,  the  state  is  needed  as  the  ultimate 
guarantor  of  systemically  important  functions  of  the  banking  sector.  In  a  systemic  crisis, 
deposit  insurance  schemes  can  succeed  only  if  the  state,  and  thus  the  taxpayer,  credibly 
guarantees  the  liabilities,  as  illustrated,  for  example,  by  the  TV  appearance  by  Chancellor 
Merkel  and  Finance  Minister  Steinbrück  in  2008,  in  which  they  guaranteed  all  banking 
deposits in Germany. 
At  that  time  there  were  fears  of  a  self-fulfilling  run  on  private  deposits  –  clearly  a  case  of 
market failure – which were discussed at length in economic literature. So there was a good 
reason for government to step in. The government also had the power to impose restrictions 
on  the  banks’  actions,  if  necessary.  And  the  unity  of  liability  and  control  represents  an 
important condition to limit the moral hazard implications of such a guarantee. 
Another  example  is  the  international  discussion  on  large  banks.  Due  to  their  systemic 
importance and interconnectedness, no state can afford to let them descend into disorderly 
default. Therefore, resolution regimes are currently being discussed by international fora, so 
that, in principle, also large banks can exit the market without causing systemic disruptions. 
In this respect, i.e. by establishing a clear framework to limit financial stability risks, I believe 
the  state  has  its  role.  This  is  exactly  where  regulation  comes  in:  An  appropriate, 
internationally  harmonised  regulation  as  well  as  resolution  schemes  endeavour  to  ensure 
that “too-big-to-fail” banks do not abuse their status. 
There are some parallels between these considerations and the challenges of the debt crisis. 
Nowadays,  views  such  as:  “Markets  help  to  discipline  fiscal  policies,  which  is  what  we 
urgently need to resolve the crisis” do not seem to be very popular. However, popular or not, 
what  matters  is  whether  or  not  this  statement  is  true.  It  may  well  not  be  true  all  the  time. 
However, to me there seems to be more truth in this view than in many so-called “solutions” 
implying ever-increasing unconditional financial “assistance”. Many of these proposals ignore 
moral hazard implications and might therefore simply postpone solutions. They might even 
increase the problems they are meant to tackle in the long run. 
Financial assistance is necessary to buy time – nothing more and nothing less. It cannot be a 
long-term  solution.  Such  a  long-term  solution  can  only  be  achieved  through  fiscal 
consolidation and structural reforms. 
As with banks, we cannot ignore or deny the systemic importance of certain countries within 
the euro area. And in the same manner, it is vital to ensure that politicians cannot use this 
status to delay necessary steps simply because these steps are unpopular. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
To reach an appropriate assessment, it is also essential to know whether we are currently 
still in a situation in which markets can successfully exercise their disciplinary powers – or 
whether  we  already  have  moved  to  a  full-blown  systemic  crisis  in  which  the  threat  of 
self-fulfilling downward spirals calls for massive intervention. 
But  even  if  this  were  the  case  –  and  let  me  make  this  very  clear  –  it  would  be  up  to 
democratically  elected  governments,  and  not  up  to  central  banks,  to  take  the  necessary 
action. Central banks can give advice – but only governments have the authority, conferred 
by their democratic legitimacy, to make changes to regulatory systems. 
I  am  sure  that  the  programme  of  this  conference  so  far  has  provided  enough  material  for 
interesting  discussions  tonight  and  for  the  rest  of  what  will  undoubtedly  be  a  fruitful, 
productive and successful conference tomorrow. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
