Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Taking the next steps at a time of change 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (the central 
bank of the Philippines), at the Philippine Financial Market Forum “The way forward: building 
opportunities – riding on the wave of emerging market growth”, Makati City, 18 June 2012. 
 Distinguished guests, my colleagues in the financial market, friends from media, ladies and 
gentlemen, good afternoon. 
I  am  happy  to  join  you  again  and  have  this  opportunity  to  discuss  the  prospects  of  our 
financial market. Forums such as this seem to be occurring more frequently these days. To 
me, this is a strong indicator of interest in the Philippines.  
This interest is not without basis. Consider this…. despite the volatility in oil prices and global 
uncertainties,  domestic  inflation  has  remained  manageable.  Interest  rates  have  been  at 
historic lows. This has had the upside of sustaining consumption expenditures which in 2011 
accounted for 70.8% (in real terms) of GDP. Government spending has since picked up while 
the fiscal deficit has remained under tight control. With the balance of payments remaining 
positive and remittances sustained, we now find gross international reserves at record highs. 
Such an economic environment translated to a 3.7% growth in GDP for 2011. Building on 
this, our first quarter GDP growth rate has been reported at 6.4% year-on-year. This is the 
highest in Southeast Asia thus far and second only to China’s 8.1 percent in all of Asia. 
It  is  important  to  point  out  that  these  are  not  one-off  gains.  The  sovereign  rating  and  the 
accompanying outlook have been upgraded by various rating agencies in the last two years, 
re-affirming  the  consistency  of  our  economic  gains.  We  are  likewise  heartened  to  read  of 
recent  public  comments  by  a  number  of  analysts  who  see  the  Philippines  getting  another 
upgrade this year.  
I believe we would all be in agreement when I say that, these favorable indicators have come 
from our collective investments in focused policy reform and implementation, post-1997. As 
policy  makers  kept  their  eyes  on  the  inflation  ball  and  sustained  the  will  to  reduce  our 
dependence  on  external  debt,  the  private  sector  also  remained  engaged  in  policy 
development  and  prudently  sought  growth  opportunities.  For  certain,  this  partnership  has 
brought our country to its current position of relative economic strength.  
You have aptly chosen as your theme “The Way Forward: Building Opportunities – Riding on 
the Wave of Emerging Market Growth”. Data from the BIS shows that the growth pattern in 
the  EMEs  has  changed  since  the  height  of  the  crisis.  Overall,  exports  and  industrial 
production  are  weakening  while  household  consumption  continues  to  hold  up  well.  In 
emerging Asia, consumption contributed 4.25% and investment 2.75% to growth last year. 
The  Philippine  experience  certainly  reflects  this.  The  shift  in  focus  to  stimulating  domestic 
demand has certainly made emerging markets more resilient than advanced economies.  
This  is  not  to  say,  however,  that  we  should  be  complacent.  Markets  can  turn  quickly  and 
difficulties can be protracted. Was it not only 48 months ago that the sale of Bear Stearns 
was  finalized  (on  May  30,  2008)  to  stem  the  tide  of  market  collapse?  Yet  when  Lehman 
Brothers  announced  nine  days  later  that  it  incurred  a  USD2.8  billion  loss  for  its  second 
quarter  results,  the  chain  of  ensuing  global  difficulties  could  not  have  been  rationally 
foreseen by any model or analysis. In other words, ladies and gentlemen, things can quickly 
change.  
If institutions and the sovereign are to be best positioned at a time of change, we need to be 
cognizant  of  what’s  driving  the  momentum  for  change…From  our  perspective,  three  main 
themes stand out. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
First,  liquidity.  In  thinking  about  the  growth  agenda,  we  need  to  pay  particular  attention  to 
both the potential capital flows and the movements in domestic liquidity, as these are closely 
related to maintaining stable monetary conditions.  
Europe  is  said  to  be  deleveraging.  As  central  Europe  deleverages  away  from  peripheral 
Europe, it is likely that at least some of the funds would be headed towards Asia. However, if 
core Europe deleverages absolutely, then we might see a liquidity squeeze, not only in Asia 
but  across  the  globe  as  well.  Capital  flows  impact  exchange  rates,  interest  rates,  trading 
volumes  and  future  demands  on  currency  withdrawals.  These  are  not  small  concerns,  as 
these can quickly become the stimuli for systemic risk. The BSP is thus always watchful.  
On the other hand, there is sufficient domestic liquidity. You may have heard me say this on 
a number of occasions in the past. As I see it therefore, the issue of a liquidity squeeze and 
contraction of trade credits because of deleveraging in Europe is not our primordial concern. 
The strength of the Philippine banking system at the height of the global financial crisis was 
precisely  the  ability  to  source  deposits,  create  loans  while  at  the  same  time  continuously 
improving  the  quality  of  the  credit  portfolio.  There  is  always  of  course  that  temptation  to 
deploy funds to cover costs. Ultimately, it is an issue of credit underwriting for banks. So, I 
say to our banks, now is not the time to put our avowed strength at risk. 
What  I  would,  however,  encourage  our  banks  to  do  at  this  time  is  to  seriously  consider 
channeling liquidity to productive investments, such as the PPP program, instead of simply 
placing funds in financial instruments or engaging, even indirectly, in activities like shadow 
banking.  Communication  lines,  roads,  bridges  and  airports…  these  are  the  kinds  of 
investments that affect the quality of growth and define our competitiveness.  
Second,  financial  stability.  Through  the  crisis,  we  managed  continued  real  GDP  growth 
because our financial markets were broadly in order. This is why financial stability is now the 
overarching policy issue. Instead of looking at growth only as a higher number, we need to 
go  beyond  the  bottom  line  and  the  balance  sheet.  Specifically,  we  must  appreciate  how 
things relate to one another, arresting any buildup of system-wide risks that may be brewing 
underneath. This leads to an agenda that oversees corporate leverage, nonbank sources of 
credit, real  estate  expansion,  and  corporate governance  as much  as  it does for managing 
liquidity, yield curves, loans, and bank capital.  
For  banks  in  particular,  your  relationship  with  other  financial  institutions  and  with  nonbank 
corporates  will  be  under  increased  scrutiny  under  Basel  3.  Consistent  with  the  stability 
agenda,  the  new  Basel  Accord  covers  a  lot  of  ground  on  counterparty  risks  and  systemic 
connectedness. While many have complained that this will likely increase the cost of doing 
business, we must remind the market that there is a price for taking on more risk, because 
ultimately,  the  costs  of  a  financial  blow-out  are  borne  not  just  by  the  banks,  but  by  the 
economic community as a whole.  
The third theme is the issue of economic integration, which is high on the agenda of Asia. 
ASEAN  is  consolidating  to  take  a  collective  approach  from  capacity  building  to  capital 
markets  to  liberalization.  One  may  wonder  why  this  should  be  high  on  the  Asian  agenda, 
given the experience in the Eurozone. The answer is simple – we need to learn from others 
in  the  region,  we  need  to  understand  how  individual  markets  work,  so  we  can  better 
appreciate what opportunities (and threats) reside in our own backyard. Integration is not just 
the  usual  line  that  markets  will  be  extended  or  that  market  guidelines  will  be  harmonized. 
Rather, this goes to the heart of regional policy cooperation. During a time of crisis possible 
conflicts  could  arise  between  sovereign  policy  packages  and  regional  stability  efforts.  It  is 
therefore imperative that before that time comes, practicable regional safety nets are already 
in place. Often, the problems an individual country faces are the same problems faced by the 
region  as  a  whole,  regardless  of  the  individual  country  circumstance.  The  efforts  to 
strengthen regional cooperation in Asia are steady. The recent enhancements in the CMIM, 
of which the Philippines is a part, certainly move the region closer to this goal.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Friends,  these  three  themes  comprise  a  full  list  of  things  to  consider  as  we  mull  the  way 
forward. While there are a number of clear opportunities that the country’s current position of 
relative strength affords us, there remain serious storm clouds in the external environment. 
Europe continues to struggle to find the appropriate policy balance – between the short-run 
remedy to stop the contagion and the long-term cure to ensure sustainable growth. Today, 
the  market  welcomed  the  results  of  the  Greek  vote.  But  participants  remain  cautious  and 
watchful of the next steps of the ECB, other major central banks, as well as the IMF towards 
reaching  a credible  resolution  to  the  EU  debt  crisis.  As for  the  US, the economic fortunes 
there  are just  as  unclear. These  two  are  not  inconsequential  jurisdictions. Taken  together, 
the  US  and  the  EU  represent  14%  of  incremental  global  GDP  between  2007  and  2011, 
increasing to 16% if measured in purchasing power parity terms.  
As Europe and the US face increased financial market difficulties, the feedback loop will take 
the Philippines through episodes of volatile capital flows, adjustments in liquidity, stresses in 
credit underwriting – all of which could affect economic growth. Ladies and gentlemen, this 
simply highlights that the challenges in offshore markets should be onshore concerns. 
In our role as bank regulator, our concern is with respect to the potential ramifications of all 
these developments on banks. We have been doing a lot of pencil pushing. Under different 
simulated stress scenarios, the banking system CAR falls but still remains above the national 
standard  of  10%.  The  numbers  may  be  reassuring,  but  these  should  not  lead  to 
complacency. 
Friends, while uncertainties surround us today, there are many things that are looking up… 
Business  confidence 
resilient… 
Unemployment  remains  low  and  is  declining…  Inflation  expectations  continue  to  be  firmly 
anchored, with the forecast close to lower end of target range of 3–5%, so interest rates can 
be seen to be stable… BoP is seen to post a surplus of $2.6 billion. Foreign reserves are 
projected to continue to rise to about $77.5 – 78 billion in 2012 while debt service is expected 
to  remain  stable,  or  even  decline… With  these,  the  peso  can  be  expected  to  trade  within 
reasonable ranges.… Banks are seen to remain in good health. 
Ladies and gentlemen, if you are to build opportunities and ride on the wave of our current 
position of strength, you need to recognize that the choices you make today will have lasting 
consequences….  This  was  what  your  policy  makers  did  in  1997.  We  took  on  the  difficult 
reforms  to  correct  structural  vulnerabilities  then.  Thus  we  developed  the  defenses  that 
ensured resilience through the crisis of today. It hasn’t been easy getting to where we are 
today. So your role in this uneven operating environment is to safeguard the gains so far, for 
it is these hard-earned gains that will allow you to take advantage of the opportunities going 
forward.  In  support,  you  can  be  assured  that  the  BSP  will  craft  the  requisite  enabling 
monetary, external and banking sector policies. 
There  is  no  magic  formula  that  will  allow  us  to  accomplish  all  these  effortlessly.  The  key, 
however, remains to think of the bigger picture – no longer just in terms of individual pay-offs 
but rather on how our respective actions can produce the shared goal of a strong, steady and 
upward economic growth trajectory that benefits the greater majority.  
rising…  Private  consumption  continues 
to  be 
is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
