Benoît Cœuré: Financing the economy of the euro area – the European 
Central Bank’s role 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the Association Française des Tresoriers d’Entreprises (AFTE), Paris, 11 April 2012. 
 I wish to thank Simone Manganelli for his contributions to the speech. I remain solely responsible for the opinions 
contained herein. 
Ladies and gentlemen,  
It is a pleasure for me to be here at the Association Française des Trésoriers d’Entreprise. 
The topic I have chosen for my address today is the role that the ECB has played – and will 
play – in ensuring that the real economy of the euro area continues to receive the funding it 
needs to function properly and how this is linked to the ultimate objective of maintaining price 
stability  in  the  medium  term.  I  will  focus  in  particular  on  the  latest  round  of  non-standard 
measures – the three-year refinancing operations which were conducted in December and 
February. I will start by describing the risks that the euro area economy was facing in the last 
quarter of 2011. At that time the banking system had funding difficulties, and we were on the 
brink  of  a  credit  crunch.  If  a  crunch  had  occurred,  it  could  have  had  devastating 
consequences  for  many  firms  and  households;  their  access  to  financing  would  have  been 
restricted. I will then describe how the injection of long-term liquidity has helped to avoid a 
sudden curtailment of financing to the private sector by alleviating funding pressures on the 
banking system. I will go on to consider some of the challenges the Eurosystem is likely to 
face in the near future.  
Credit developments to households, non-financial corporations and small and 
medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) 
During the last quarter of 2011, monetary and credit developments to the private sector were 
exceptionally weak. The annual growth rate of monetary aggregates declined significantly in 
December,  and  it  was  mirrored  by  similar  developments  in  lending  to  the  private  sector, 
especially  loans  to  households  and  non-financial  corporations.  Clearly,  as  the  sovereign 
crisis intensified it impeded banks’ support for the real economy.  
The annual growth rate of banks’ credit to the private sector decreased in the last quarter of 
2011,  reflecting  monthly  negative  outflows  and  reaching  troughs  comparable  with  those 
prevailing  in  2008–2009.  In  particular,  the  rate  of  growth  of  loans  to  households  declined, 
reflecting  both  demand-side  factors  (such  as  a  deterioration  in  the  prospects  for  the 
economy,  and  notably  the  housing  market)  and  supply-side  factors  (such  as  increasing 
funding difficulties for banks) (Slide 1). Incidentally, these developments masked significant 
cross-country  heterogeneity,  as  some  countries  saw  an  increase  in  flows  supported  by 
government  measures  aimed  at  the  housing  market.  The  annual  growth  rate  of  loans  to 
non-financial  corporations  declined  as  well,  reflecting  particularly  weak  quarterly  flows 
(Slide 2).  There  was  considerable  cross-country  heterogeneity  in  this  case  too,  with  net 
redemptions taking place mainly in certain countries and loans to non-financial corporations 
continuing to grow in others.  
The worrisome picture of monetary developments was confirmed by the results of the Bank 
Lending Survey for the fourth quarter of 2011. Euro area banks tightened credit standards 
compared with the previous quarter for both loans to non-financial corporations and loans to 
households,  and  to  a  lesser  extent  for  loans  for  consumer  credit.  Furthermore,  survey 
participants expected a further tightening of credit standards in the first quarter of 2012. Even 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
if the tightening was slower than during the 2007–2008 financial turmoil, it was starting from 
considerably tighter credit standards. 
Although  it  is  always  tricky  to  disentangle  supply-side  from  demand-side  factors,  banks 
explained their changes in credit standards mainly by primarily referring to increased funding 
costs  and  balance  sheet  constraints,  which  were  compounded  by  a  rapidly  deteriorating 
economic  environment.  The  funding  situation  of  euro  area  credit  institutions  worsened 
noticeably in the second half of 2011, as shown by the rise in withdrawals of deposits held by 
non-euro  area  residents  with  euro  area  banks  and  difficulties  in  issuing  longer-term  debt 
securities. This caused banks to make greater recourse to Eurosystem operations.  
The decline in credit to the private sector was accompanied by an increasing reluctance on 
the  part  of  the  euro  area  private  sector  to  invest  in  financial  assets;  it  severely  hampered 
banks’ access to financing via the secured money market, due to an increase in haircuts and 
a deterioration of the available collateral.  
While  market-based  funding  was  becoming  ever  scarcer  for  banks  in  the  euro  area  (as 
investors  were  growing  increasingly  nervous  about  the  escalation  of  the  sovereign  crisis), 
banks were also facing regulatory and market pressures to strengthen their capital position.  
In  short,  back  in  December  2011,  even  though  there  was  significant  cross-country 
heterogeneity, the overall picture was rather gloomy. There were clear signs that supply-side 
factors were making banks less willing to lend to the non-financial private sector, and that 
banks may have entered a vicious circle which could compromise their ability to supply credit 
to the economy, both in the short and the long run. The additional negative impact on banks’ 
balance sheets of rapidly declining sovereign bond prices made the situation even worse. 
Banks typically have three ways to adjust to pressures on their funding and capital positions: 
they can sell assets, raise capital or reduce lending. Let’s look at each of these options in 
turn. 
In  an  environment  of  extreme  uncertainty  and  high  risk  aversion,  risky assets  can only  be 
disposed of at very low prices, possibly considerably below their book value. Fire sales would 
weigh  on  profits,  further  deteriorating  banks’  capital  positions,  generating  in  the  process 
negative  externalities  and  sub-optimal  collective  behaviour.  Therefore,  to  be  successful, 
significant reductions on the assets side of the banks’ balance sheet require a stabilisation of 
the economic and financial environment.  
Raising capital is also challenging in an unstable environment. Uncertainty about the pricing 
of  the  risky  assets  and  the  overall  risk  surrounding  the  valuation  of  banks  makes  it 
particularly difficult to attract new equity investors. Raising capital in such circumstances may 
not be accepted by shareholders as it may send a negative signal to the markets and lead to 
a drop in share prices. And, compared to 2008–2009, credible government support for banks’ 
capital positions was less available.  
This  left  banks  with  the  third  option,  namely,  to  reduce  lending.  Banks  could  easily  stop 
rolling over their loans or granting new ones. This strategy, however, while optimal from an 
individual  bank’s  perspective,  would  lead,  if  pursued  collectively,  to  a  credit  crunch,  with 
significant negative consequences on the real economy and additional strains on the banking 
sector.  
A  credit  crunch  would  have  been  particularly  dangerous  for  small  and  medium-sized 
enterprises (SMEs), given their heavy reliance on bank funding. It is no exaggeration to say 
that SMEs form the backbone of Europe’s economy, accounting for approximately two-thirds 
of employment. Let me give you a few statistics: SMEs constitute about 99% of all firms in 
the  euro  area,  employ  72%  of  the  euro  area’s  labour  force  and  generate  around  60%  of 
value added. They have significantly higher gross job creation (and destruction) rates than 
large enterprises. At the same time, SMEs tend to face more stringent financial constraints, 
have  a  higher  cost  of  external  finance  and  exhibit  higher  debt  levels  than  large  firms. 
According to the most recent survey on SMEs conducted by the Eurosystem, in the second 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
and third quarter of 2011 access to finance remained one of their most pressing problems. 
To  put  things  into  perspective,  bear  in  mind  that  the  number  of  firms  concerned  about 
financing was actually lower in 2009, a period when economic activity in the euro area was 
very  weak.  According  to  the  survey,  bank  financing  (via  overdrafts,  credit  lines  and  bank 
loans) remained the most important source of external financing for SMEs. In addition, 20% 
of  the  respondents  perceived  a  further  decline  in  banks’  willingness  to  provide  loans. 
Therefore,  after  the  improvement  registered  in  2010,  SMEs  were  experiencing  once  again 
significant constraints in obtaining financing. 
In the light of this evidence, the concrete risk that the increasing pressures on banks’ funding 
and capital positions could lead to a significant curtailment of banks’ lending activity in some 
countries was judged to be extremely high in December 2011. In particular, a dangerous loop 
involving  low  economic  activity,  funding  stress  for  banks  and  a  reduction  in  lending  had 
increased the downside risks to price stability. It was therefore a top priority to break this loop 
before it spiralled out of control. 
Launch of new non-standard measures and their impact 
Faced  with  this  critical  situation,  the  Eurosystem  adopted  a  two-pronged  strategy.  First,  it 
offered  ample  liquidity  at  very  long  maturity  to  prevent  funding  issues  from  igniting  a 
potentially  destructive  deleveraging  process.  Second,  it  widened  the  eligible  collateral  to 
facilitate access to the liquidity and the provision of credit to SMEs.  
Specifically, on 8 December 2011, the ECB announced the following initiatives. 
First, the ECB said it would launch two longer-term refinancing operations (LTROs) with a 
maturity  of  36  months.  The  LTROs  were  to  be  conducted  as  fixed-rate  tender  procedures 
with  full  allotment,  with  the  interest  rate  fixed  at  the  average  rate  of  the  main  refinancing 
operations  over  the  life  of  the  respective  operation.  To  increase  the  flexibility  of  the 
operations and to cater for different liquidity needs, counterparties were offered the option to 
repay after one year any part of the allotted amounts.  
Second,  the  ECB  decided  to  increase  collateral  availability  by  allowing  national  central 
banks,  among  other  things,  to  accept  as  collateral  additional  performing  credit  claims  (i.e. 
bank loans) that satisfy specific eligibility criteria. As an example, the Banque de France has 
accepted  real  estate  residential  loans  with  a  mortgage  or  first-rank  privilege,  credit  claims 
denominated in US dollars and export credit claims guaranteed by Coface. Also, in addition 
to the ABSs that were already eligible for Eurosystem operations, the ECB would accept as 
eligible collateral ABSs with a second best rating at issuance and over the lifetime of A- or 
above, the underlying assets of which comprise residential mortgages and loans to SMEs. 
Additional  credit  claims  not  complying  with  the  regular  minimum  credit  quality  threshold 
applied  to  collateral  eligible  for  Eurosystem  credit  operations  are  subject  to  increased 
haircuts to aim at achieving risk equivalence with the regular set of eligible collateral. 
The Eurosystem allotted €489 billion with the first three-year LTRO on 21 December 2011. 
Accounting for other operations that matured and settled within that week, however, the net 
liquidity  increase  was  €210  billion.  In  the  second  three-year  LTRO,  on  29  February,  the 
Eurosystem  provided  credit  institutions  with  an  additional  gross  amount  of  €530  billion. 
Again,  taking  into  account  maturing  operations,  the  net  liquidity  injection  was  around 
€311 billion. Counterparties bidding in the three-year LTROs can be divided into two groups: 
one group consists of many small banks, bidding for comparatively small amounts, while the 
other group comprises large banks and accounts for the main share of the overall allotment 
amount. A distinctive feature of the second operation was the higher number of bidders, 800, 
as opposed to 523 in the first operation. The majority of bidders in the second LTRO were 
small banks from euro area countries where the economic conditions are stronger, with more 
than  half  of  the  bidders  bidding  for  €50  million  or  less.  A  reasonable  interpretation  of  this 
outcome  is  that  the  Eurosystem  has  also  been  successful  in  reaching  smaller  financial 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
entities, which had more time to prepare their bids in the second operation than in the first, 
and which are essential for providing credit to SMEs.  
Analysis  of  the  main  determinants  of  banks’  bidding  behaviour,  combined  with  anecdotal 
information provided by banks, confirms that the funding issues I referred to earlier were of 
vital importance. As an illustration, Slide 3 shows a positive relationship between spreads on 
bank  bonds  at  issuance  and  the  amounts  bid  by  banks  in  both  three-year  LTROs  as  a 
percentage  of  their  total  assets.  The  slide  suggests  that,  for  those  banks  with  access  to 
longer-term funds in the bond market, there was a strong correlation between their cost of 
funding  and  their  bidding  behaviour.  Banks  without  outstanding  debt  securities  bid  on 
average  even  more  aggressively.  Overall,  our  internal  analysis  shows  that  the  most 
aggressive bidders were characterised by larger amounts of debt maturing in the next three 
years  and  a  shorter  average  maturity  of  the  outstanding  debt.  The  results  of  the  Bank 
Lending Survey further reinforce this interpretation. 
This  evidence  supports  the  Governing  Council’s  view  that  banks  were  facing  significant 
funding  problems  and  that,  by  removing  impediments  to  their  ability  to  finance  the  real 
economy, the three-year LTROs helped to avoid a dangerous credit crunch in the euro area. 
The large injection of liquidity via the three-year LTROs had an immediate impact on many 
market segments. By reducing concerns over the liquidity situation faced by banks and by 
cutting banking sector systemic risk (which is reflected, for instance, in a sharp decline in EU 
bank CDS premia), the LTROs contributed to reopening funding markets.  
In money markets, the EURIBOR-OIS spreads have reversed their widening trend from last 
year,  by  narrowing  substantially,  thereby  suggesting  that  the  operations  have  successfully 
lowered risk premia. More generally, the whole euro money market curve has flattened. In 
the secured segment, repo rates in selected euro area government bonds, which had been 
progressively  increasing  since  August  2011  compared  with  those  based  on  collateral  from 
AAA  countries,  declined  and  continued  to  remain  low,  indicating  that  the  funding  of  Italian 
and  Spanish  government  bond  positions  in  the  repo  market  has  become  much  cheaper. 
Although turnover in the repo market has remained relatively subdued, there are signs of a 
moderate pick-up in the volume in Spanish and Italian markets from their levels at the end of 
2011.  The  widespread  perception  of  lower  liquidity  risk  and  improved  capital  adequacy 
thanks to the European Banking Authority capital exercise also brought a welcome reduction 
in US dollar funding costs via the FX swap market. US prime money market funds increased 
their exposure to euro area banks in January 2012 for the first time since April 2011, with an 
additional increase of 21% between the end of January and mid-March, and exceeding 12% 
of total assets under management.  
Euro area banks’ issuance of medium and long-term debt picked up in the first two months of 
2012 compared with the subdued levels in the second half of 2011. In this period, euro area 
banks  issued  about  €50  billion  in  senior  unsecured  debt,  which  is  about  as  much  as  was 
issued  in  the  entire  second  half  of  2011.  Banks  also  issued  €35  billion  in  covered  bonds. 
While term debt issuance was mostly concentrated in some AAA euro area countries in the 
early  phase  of  market  reopening,  the  issuer  base  broadened  thereafter.  In  particular, 
February  saw  the  issuance  of  senior  unsecured  debt  by  some  large  banks  from  Italy  and 
Spain, as well as some increased covered bond issuance by large banks and new issuance 
by “second-tier” lenders from these countries. 
In another sign of improving funding conditions, the cost of medium and long-term funding 
has decreased since December 2011, as illustrated by the drop in European debt yields for 
financial and non-financial corporations (Slides 4 and 5). Unsurprisingly, the change in yields 
was  particularly  pronounced  for  the  lower-rated  bonds,  confirming  that  the  LTROs  have 
managed to sharply reduce risk premia. The resulting perception that liquidity risks for euro 
area banks have diminished and that capital adequacy has improved thanks to the capital 
exercise might also have contributed to the recent strong performance of the stock markets 
of many euro area countries (Slide 6).  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Euro  area  sovereign  bond  markets  have  rebounded  dramatically.  Yields  of  shorter-term 
notes  and  bills  have  declined,  with  two-year  government  bond  yields  of  Italy,  Ireland  and 
Portugal declining by over 400 bps since 8 December 2011. Longer-term government yields 
have declined as well, although not to the same extent as shorter-term yields (Slide 7). The 
positive  secondary  market  developments  were  accompanied  by  favourable  primary  market 
activity with sustained demand in auctions of T-bills and shorter bonds in several euro area 
countries.  
All in all, there is now strong preliminary evidence that the three-year LTROs have helped the 
banks to reduce liquidity risk and therefore allowed them to smooth the deleveraging process 
over  a  longer  period  of  time  and  maintain  exposures  to  SMEs  –  at  least  in  some  cases. 
Anecdotal evidence also points to the return of some institutional money market investors, 
with quite a number of banks reporting that funds (also unsecured) are becoming available 
again  at  somewhat  longer  maturities.  While  banks  seem  to  have  used  the  funds  obtained 
from the first three-year LTRO mainly for refinancing purposes, when looking forward to the 
next six months, they now seem to expect a stronger use of these funds for granting loans. 
Whether  these  expectations  will  materialise  remains  an  open  question  and  the  Governing 
Council will closely monitor these developments. 
Challenges ahead 
A side effect of the three-year LTROs is that the banking system in the euro area is now in a 
situation of abundant excess liquidity. “Excess liquidity” (defined as the difference between 
outstanding  open  market  operations  and  the  liquidity  needs  from  autonomous  factors  and 
reserve requirements) currently stands at around €800 billion and is expected to remain at 
roughly this level at least until the end of January 2013, when banks will be able to exercise 
the  option  of  early  repayment  on  the  first  three-year  LTRO.  The  leeway  for  a  reduction  in 
outstanding refinancing operations before that date currently amounts to around €100 billion, 
and the scale on which banks will exercise early repayment options is difficult to anticipate at 
the current juncture. As a consequence, the balance sheet of the Eurosystem has grown to 
€3 trillion. This large increase is a symptom of malfunctioning money markets and reflects 
the  fact  that  the  Eurosystem  has  replaced  much  interbank  activity.  When  the  situation 
stabilises  and  money  markets  go  back  to  functioning  normally,  the  balance  sheet  of  the 
Eurosystem  will  also  go  back  to  its  normal  size.  To  this  respect,  the  Eurosystem  is  often 
compared  with  other  major  central  banks.  Such  comparisons  however  disregard  the  initial 
size of balance sheets, as the Eurosystem holds a large volume of assets that have nothing 
to  do  with  monetary  policy.  In  early  March,  the  ratio  of  monetary  policy  instruments  to 
regional GDP was 15% for the Eurosystem, 19% for the Federal Reserve System and 21% 
for the Bank of England.  
This  large  amount  of  excess  liquidity  has  drawn  criticism  of  two  different  kinds.  Some 
observers  have  argued  that  since  banks  are  re-depositing  with  the  ECB  large  amounts  of 
liquidity,  the  injected  liquidity  is  not  circulating  within  the  system  and  therefore  the  ECB’s 
actions  will  be  ineffective  in  preventing  deflationary  pressures.  Others,  however,  have 
warned that since these large amounts of excess reserves may remain in the system for a 
relatively long time, if they are not appropriately absorbed they will hamper the ECB’s ability 
to keep inflationary pressures in check. These fears are of course contradictory. In order to 
dispel them, let’s look more closely at the channels of transmission through which the excess 
liquidity circulates in the system. 
The  first  criticism  –  that  large-scale  use  of  the  deposit  facility  demonstrates  the 
ineffectiveness  of  ECB’s  measures  –  reflects  a  fundamental  misunderstanding  of  the 
functioning of the operational framework of the ECB. By an accounting identity, any amount 
of liquidity injected in excess of the liquidity needs of the banking system will be necessarily 
re-absorbed via the deposit facility. The increase in the deposit facility does not provide any 
information whatsoever about how banks use the funds borrowed from the central bank.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
For  instance,  a  bank  which  has  borrowed  from  the  ECB  can  use  the  funds  to  grant  a 
mortgage to a client, who in turn uses that credit to pay construction workers, who in turn 
may buy a car, and so on. After each transaction, the buyer transfers the amount from his or 
her bank account to the seller’s bank account. The liquidity can circulate many times before 
eventually appearing on the balance sheet of a bank with a liquidity surplus, which will be 
deposited  back  with  the  ECB.  Of  course,  at  the  other  extreme  is  the  bank  which  borrows 
from the ECB and immediately deposits the amount with the central bank. In this case, the 
liquidity did not circulate at all.  
In  both  cases,  the  amount  deposited  with  the  ECB  would  be  exactly  the  same  and  it  is 
therefore wrong to assume from the large use of the deposit facility that the liquidity is not 
circulating. In fact, we know that the banks which are depositing with us are not the same as 
those  which  are  borrowing,  indicating  that  the  liquidity  is  somehow  circulating  within  the 
banking  system  before  coming  back  to  us.  We  have  no  information  however  (besides 
anecdotal evidence) about the speed at which this liquidity is circulating, and through which 
channels. 
Let me turn now to the second criticism – namely that excess liquidity will generate inflation. 
It  is  important  to  recall,  first,  that  the  three-year  LTROs  have  helped  avoid  a  disorderly 
deleveraging which may have led to deflation. Let’s analyse now the arguments behind the 
fear that the LTROs may have, however, increased the upside risks to price stability. Central 
bank  reserves  represent  one  of  the  many  assets  in  the  balance  sheet  of  a  bank.  Up  to  a 
certain  amount,  banks’  demand  for  central  bank  reserves  is  completely  inelastic  (due  to 
central  bank  reserve  requirements,  internal  and  external  liquidity  regulation  and  other 
factors).  Beyond  this  amount,  however,  the  decision  to  hold  excess  reserves  responds  to 
risk-return considerations as for any other asset: if a bank decides to hold a certain amount 
of excess reserves, it is because their risk-adjusted return dominates that of other assets.  
As I mentioned earlier, while an individual bank can decide to hold less excess reserves, in 
the short run the banking system as a whole cannot dispose of excess reserves. Since, in 
equilibrium, supply must equal demand, if interest rates on central bank deposits (the risk-
free remuneration of excess reserves) are at levels such that demand for reserves exceeds 
supply, banks will be willing to hold on to the excess reserves present in the market. This is 
likely to be the case in a situation of high risk aversion, where – like today – the risk premia 
demanded to hold risky assets are so high that their risk-adjusted return is lower than that 
offered by the deposit rate.  
If, however, banks become more willing to accept risks, their demand for excess reserves for 
a given deposit rate will decrease and they will look for more attractive alternative uses for 
these funds: riskier assets and/or loans. Since the banking system as whole cannot return to 
equilibrium (after the three-year LTROs, the supply of reserves is inelastic in the short term), 
this behaviour will put pressure on asset prices and (as soon as the economy reaches its full 
potential) on consumer prices as well, unless an appropriate monetary policy stance is taken.  
These effects and the speed at which they may materialise are difficult to quantify as cases 
of protracted periods of excess liquidity have been rare in the past. The experience of Japan 
does not suggest direct effects on inflation. In the United Sates and United Kingdom, there is 
also no clear-cut evidence so far of a pick-up in monetary and credit aggregates spurred by 
excess  liquidity.  However,  it  is  fair  to  say  that  in  case  of  a  sustained  and  more  robust 
recovery in economic activity, excess reserves may have a potential macroeconomic impact 
by  allowing  a  build-up  of  significant  asset  price  misalignments,  or  by  distorting  the  banks’ 
incentive  to  supply  funding  to  the  economy.  Moreover,  in  the  face  of  asset  market 
fragmentation, such asset price misalignments are more likely to build up in countries where 
banks have ample liquidity positions. 
There  is  nothing,  however,  in  this  reasoning  that  prevents  the  ECB  from  tackling  these 
effects by increasing policy rates, whenever the Governing Council deems it necessary to do 
so.  Our  operational  framework  makes  it  possible  to  steer  a  whole  range  of  money  market 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
rates  in  line  with  the  desired  monetary  policy  stance.  In  fact,  if  the  ECB  decides  to  the 
change its key policy rates, or even hints at it, the indexation of the interest rate charged on 
our  refinancing  operations  will  immediately  affect  present  and  future  funding  conditions  for 
banks, favouring inter alia the exit of some of the LTRO bidders. Furthermore, in our corridor 
system, the deposit rate puts an effective floor under short-term unsecured money  market 
interest rates. 
Higher interest rates will reduce demand for loans, as the net present value of the project of 
the marginal investor becomes negative. Higher interest rates will also decrease the demand 
for risky assets, as the remuneration of risk-free assets increases. Eventually, for sufficiently 
high  interest  rates,  inflationary  pressures  will  subside  and  the  system  will  return  to 
equilibrium.  
It  can  still  be  argued  that  there  is  significant  uncertainty  as  to  how  an  environment  of 
abundant  excess  liquidity  affects  the  transmission  mechanism  of  monetary  policy.  In 
particular, heterogeneity in the economic conditions of euro area countries may be magnified 
by the excess liquidity, which tends to flow to countries where the economic conditions are 
stronger. However, should this uncertainty weaken our ability to maintain price stability, the 
ECB has the necessary instruments to absorb the excess liquidity. In this respect, it is worth 
recalling  that  we  have  been  sterilising  the  liquidity  created  with  the  government  bond 
purchases  under  the  Securities  Markets  Programme  for  almost  two  years.  By  auctioning 
weekly fixed-term deposits, the ECB has been successfully absorbing substantial amounts of 
liquidity. In addition, the ECB has the right to issue debt certificates, and, if necessary, we 
could  also  decide  to  increase  banks’  reserve  requirements  again.  Reverting  to  the  2% 
reserve requirement ratio that prevailed until December 2011 would reduce excess reserves 
by approximately 100 billion euros. So, we are well equipped to cope with any issues arising 
from excess liquidity. 
There  is  a  third  concern  which  I  would  like  to  touch  upon,  and  which  I  consider  to  be  a 
serious one: the risk of moral hazard behaviour triggered by the non-standard measures. The 
large liquidity injections have avoided so far a disorderly deleveraging of the banking sector 
in  the  euro  area  as  well  as  a  dangerous  credit  crunch,  but  they  have  not  removed  the 
underlying causes of the turmoil. If governments and banks would stop or slow down their 
consolidation efforts and structural reforms, this would undermine the positive effects of the 
liquidity operations. 
Following the signs of improvement in the financial environment, it is therefore essential for 
banks  to  strengthen  their  resilience  further,  even  by  retaining  earnings.  The  soundness  of 
banks’ balance sheets will be a key factor in facilitating an appropriate provision of credit to 
the economy. Very low interest rates and ample liquidity conditions may be disincentives for 
banks  to  avoid  recognising  the  loss  by  rolling  over  loans  extended  to  borrowers  who  are 
unable  to  pay  back  the  principal  (the  so-called  “evergreening”  of  loans).  It  is  critical  that 
banks  readily  exploit  the  current  relatively  favourable  conditions  to  meet  capital  adequacy 
objectives and improve their funding profile. 
Similarly,  to  promote  sustainable  growth  and  to  support  confidence  and  competitiveness, 
governments  need  to  continue  their  efforts  towards  restoring  sound  fiscal  positions  and 
improving competitiveness. Many governments have already made significant steps and the 
efforts must continue unabated. 
Finally, a fourth concern relates to the risk of persistent market fragmentation. The ECB has 
used conventional and non-conventional measures to restore the transmission channels of 
monetary  policy  and  make  sure  that  the  impulse  stemming  from  it  is  transmitted  more 
uniformly  across  the  17  economies  of  the  euro  area.  The  large  size  of  the  Eurosystem’s 
refinancing operations and the resulting expansion in its balance sheet are a reflection of the 
impairments  which  still  hamper  the  proper  functioning  of  capital  markets  in  the  euro  area. 
Today, it is of utmost importance to address these impairments, otherwise we will loose the 
benefits of the freedom of capital movements which was why monetary union was needed in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
the  first  place.  There  will  be  no  lasting  recovery  of  growth  if  European  households  and 
corporations cannot tap a common pool of savings. 
To  operate  smoothly,  be  more  resilient  to  crises  and  better  support  long-term  growth, 
Economic and Monetary Union has to become a true financial union. I will list here some of 
the key features of the much-needed “Financial Compact”. Repairing the single market for 
capital is a collective endeavour in which the ECB has a role to play – but to be fully effective 
that  role  needs  to  be  coordinated  with  the  European  Commission,  European  Supervisory 
Authorities and market  participants themselves. Breaking the feedback loop between bank 
and sovereign credit should also be a priority. To this effect, steps should be taken towards a 
unified regime for bank resolution and beyond that, towards establishing a single European 
banking  resolution  authority.  Finally,  the  “Financial  Compact”  should  also  include  the 
completion of the single euro payment area.  
Payments are at the very heart of a corporate’s activity and I am not sure that they always 
get  the  attention  they  deserve.  Nowadays,  more  than  50%  of  the  trade  of  the  27  EU 
countries takes place within the EU – and that trade is mainly based on cashless payments. 
With  the  introduction  of  the  single  currency  there  could  no  longer  be  any  differentiation 
between national and cross-border euro payments: they should all be “domestic”. The Single 
Euro Payments Area project, in short “SEPA”, came to fill this void; its aim is to establish a 
single market for retail cashless euro payments by overcoming technical, legal and market 
barriers, so that people can make euro payments throughout Europe as easily, securely and 
efficiently as within their own countries.  
Using the SEPA payment instruments, companies can make all euro-denominated payments 
centrally,  from  a  single  account,  using  the  same  format.  This  opens  up  the  possibility  of 
consolidated payments, of liquidity management in one location and of optimising the cash 
flow. The European Commission has stepped in with the Payment Services Directive which, 
among other changes, ensures that the full amount of a transaction is transmitted and that 
payments are executed more quickly, thus saving time and money. As the transition to SEPA 
had  to  speed  up,  the  European  Council  adopted  in  February  2012  a  new  regulation 
establishing 1 February 2014 as the deadline for the migration to SEPA of credit transfers 
and direct debits made in euro. This means that users, including corporates, need to migrate 
too!  SEPA  is  also  about  innovation;  the  project  is  active  in  innovative  fields  such  as  e-
invoicing and e-reconciliation within Europe, which can offer huge savings for corporates in 
the handling of payments. The ECB, in its role as a co-chair of the SEPA Council together 
with the European Commission, stands ready to pursue a dialogue with all stakeholders on 
these important matters. 
Conclusion 
Let me to bring my remarks today to a conclusion. In the last quarter of 2011 the euro area 
economy was facing increasing cross-countries heterogeneities and, overall, a clear risk of a 
credit crunch. The increasing pressures on banks’ funding and capital positions could have 
led to a scaling-back of banks’ lending activity to the private sector. The result could have 
been a vicious cycle involving low economic activity, increased funding stress for banks and 
a  further  reduction  in  lending,  eventually  leading  to  significant  downside  risks  to  price 
stability.  The  actions  of  the  ECB  have  helped  to  break  this  cycle  and  to  bring  confidence 
back into the euro area financial system.  
The large amount of liquidity now present in the system is a consequence of these actions. It 
represents the symptoms of a malfunctioning interbank market, which, if left untreated, could 
have led to a credit squeeze. The ECB’s ability to maintain price stability remains intact: we 
will have the possibility to adjust the interest rates and, if necessary, we have at our disposal 
a range of tools to actively absorb the excess liquidity.  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The  ECB  has  addressed  the  immediate  symptoms,  but  monetary  policy  cannot  cure  the 
underlying causes. The situation in financial markets has reached a turning point but recent 
market developments have highlighted that it remains fragile. All the relevant players must 
act  responsibly  by  taking  the  necessary  steps.  Banks  need  to  meet  capital  adequacy 
objectives, improve their funding profile, and start lending again. Governments must build on 
the steps already taken to restore sound fiscal positions and support long term growth. At the 
ECB we will continue to closely monitor further developments. We will do whatever it takes to 
fulfil our mandate of delivering price stability over the medium term for the 330 million people 
of the euro area.  
Thank you for your attention.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
   10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   11
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13
