Masaaki Shirakawa: Toward stronger growth – challenges facing Japan’s 
economy 
Speech by Mr Masaaki Shirakawa, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting held by the 
Yomiuri International Economic Society, Tokyo, 6 September 2012. 
 Introduction 
It is a great honor to be invited to this meeting hosted by the Yomiuri International Economic 
Society today. 
Both the global economy and Japan’s economy currently face mounting challenges. Looking 
back, it has already been six years since U.S. housing prices peaked, five years since the 
subprime  mortgage  problem  surfaced  in  the  form  of  what  has  come  to  be  known  as  the 
Paribas shock, and about four years since the Lehman shock. Thanks to aggressive policy 
implementation  by  authorities  and  other  measures following  the  Lehman  shock,  the global 
economy  succeeded  in  avoiding  a  downturn  as  significant  as  the  Great  Depression  in  the 
1930s. Nevertheless, the pace of recovery in advanced economies thereafter has remained 
very sluggish, unlike anything they have experienced since World War II. 
Taking the year 2007 – that is, prior to the Lehman shock – and setting the level of GDP at 
100, the current level stands at 113 for the global economy as a whole and 102 for advanced 
economies (Chart 1). While these latest figures correspond to those seen in the mid-1990s, 
in terms of timing when compared with Japan’s post-bubble period, the pace of recovery in 
real GDP for the United States and Europe is either comparable to or even worse than that 
for Japan in the period leading up to the mid-1990s (Chart 2). Moreover, the emergence of 
such a situation, regardless of the advanced economies’ highly aggressive policy conduct, 
suggests the severity of the situation we face today. 
As for fiscal policy in advanced economies, the amount outstanding of government debt has 
been  increasing  substantially  against  the  background  of  massive  fiscal  deficit.  Turning  to 
monetary policy, central banks continue to implement extraordinary measures, including the 
zero  interest  rate  policy,  a  commitment  to  maintaining  low  interest  rates,  the  significant 
expansion  of  central  bank  balance  sheets,  and  purchases  of  risk  assets.  The  long-term 
interest  rates  of  advanced  economies  are  at  historically  low  levels.  Meanwhile,  the 
coexistence of the sovereign and financial crises continues in the euro area. These types of 
crises  used  to  be  widely  regarded  as  phenomena  unique  to  developing  or  emerging 
economies  during  the  post-war  period.  Such  a  conventional  view,  however,  has  been 
overturned. 
In retrospect, considering that the period leading up to the mid-2000s had been referred to as 
the  age  of  “Great  Moderation” for  its  continued  high growth,  low  inflation,  and  low  interest 
rates, times have certainly changed. And now, reflecting on the past quarter-century with a 
fresh eye, bubbles and financial crises have been emerging more frequently worldwide over 
time,  with  Japan’s  economic  bubble  in  the  late 1980s, the  Asian financial  crisis  in  the  late 
1990s, and the global financial crisis in the 2000s, to name a few. 
Against these backgrounds, historical precedents have been drawing increasing attention as 
topics for economic debate in recent years. This trend appears to reflect the growing sense 
of  awareness  that  the  global  economy  and  financial  conditions  are  in  the  midst  of  drastic 
changes. If this really were the case for the era we live in, it might be a sign that adopting 
historical as well as medium- to long-term perspectives is key to taking appropriate action in 
response  to  problems  facing  the  economy.  Time  has  revealed  that  the  decline  in  Japan’s 
economic growth rate over the past two decades is the result of the delay in the post-bubble 
disposal of nonperforming loans as well as the delayed responses to rapid globalization and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
the aging and declining population. If the gravity of such problems had been recognized at an 
earlier  stage,  allowing  for  swifter  responses,  the  developments  that  followed  might  have 
turned out differently from what we find today. The most powerful lesson Japan has learnt in 
the past 20 years is that we must act on the basis of medium- to long-term perspectives in 
order for the economy to grow at a sustainable pace. In view of this, my address to you today 
is entitled “Toward Stronger Growth: Challenges facing Japan’s Economy”, and this will take 
into account medium- to long-term perspectives. 
Recent developments in Japan’s economy 
I. 
As the starting point of my talk, let me kick off with the recent developments and the outlook 
for  Japan’s  economy.  In  its  Monetary  Policy  Meeting  held  last  month,  the  Bank  of  Japan 
judged  that  Japan’s  economic  activity  had  started  picking  up  moderately  as  domestic 
demand remained firm, mainly supported by reconstruction-related demand, while overseas 
economies had not yet emerged from a deceleration phase and overseas demand had been 
somewhat weak. The real GDP growth rate was 5.5 percent and 1.4 percent year on year in 
the  first  and  second  quarter  of  2012.  Among  the  G7  economies,  Japan  registered  much 
faster growth in the first half of this year. Looking ahead, the economy is expected to return 
to  a  moderate  recovery  path  as  domestic  demand  remains  firm  and  overseas  economies 
emerge  from  the  deceleration  phase.  This  outlook  rests  on  whether  domestic  demand 
remains firm while overseas economies emerge from the deceleration phase. 
As for domestic demand, there are factors on the one hand that will eventually subside, such 
as  effects  stemming  from  subsidies  for  purchasing  environmentally-friendly  cars.  On  the 
other hand, there are factors that are more fundamental to maintaining firmness in domestic 
demand, such as creating new business to meet demand associated with the aging of the 
population. In terms of reconstruction-related demand, this is not just a matter of repairing 
facilities  and  housing  damaged  by  the  earthquake  or  tsunami,  together  with  the  pent-up 
demand following the disaster. It is more broad-based and includes the demand associated 
with  consumers’  conscious  will  to  prevent  disaster,  as  well  as  firms’  increased  needs  for 
building  disaster  prevention  centers  or  business  continuity  centers  and  shifting  their 
resources to renewable sources of power. As such, we would expect firmness in domestic 
demand to continue for some time to come, although there is evidence of certain factors that 
require attention, such as weak bonuses this summer. 
In overseas economies, deceleration has continued for somewhat longer than expected and, 
reflecting such developments overseas, exports and industrial production both appear to be 
somewhat weak. Against this background, we downgraded our assessment in the Monetary 
Policy  Meeting  last  month  by  saying  that  “the  pick-up  in  exports  has  moderated,  and  the 
recent reading on production has been relatively weak”. Subsequent readings showed that 
real exports and industrial production in July were somewhat weak. On the whole, there is a 
wide range of uncertainties about the outlook for the economy. As I recently talked about the 
short-term outlook for economic developments, I wish to pick up today on some underlying 
factors that are essential to assessing the outlook for economic activity and prices, and to 
conducting policy, while taking into account the medium- to long-term perspectives. 
There  are  six  topics  on  which  I  wish  to  elaborate:  the  first  is  the  mechanism  of  Japan’s 
economic  growth  before  the  Lehman  shock;  the  second  is  the  recent  development  and 
outlook for  overseas  economies;  the  third  is  the  growth  potential  of  Japan’s  economy;  the 
fourth is deflation; the fifth is a stronger yen; and, the sixth is the fiscal situation  in Japan. 
After covering all these topics, I will explain the recent conduct of the Bank’s monetary policy. 
Mechanism for economic recovery in Japan before the Lehman shock 
II. 
Let me start with the first topic – namely, the background explanation of economic recovery 
in Japan before the Lehman shock. The reason I chose to open with this topic is that there 
are several clues to draw from when formulating a process for generating economic recovery 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
after the Lehman shock. Looking at the turning points of economic expansion and recession, 
as  announced  by  the  Cabinet  Office,  the  previous  economic  recovery  started  in  January 
2002 and ended in February 2008. While the average growth rate during these years was not 
high, compared with those in the past, the duration of economic expansion lasted six years 
and a month, the longest period of economic expansion in the post-war era, longer than the 
“Izanagi Boom” (Chart 3). There are three reasons behind this. 
The first is that the balance-sheet adjustment, which had weighed on Japan’s economy after 
the bursting of the bubble, ended. In particular, the completion of resolving excess debts at 
the beginning of the 2000s had a non-negligible impact. 
The second reason is the long-lasting high economic growth in the global economy (Chart 4). 
The average growth rate of the global economy from 2004 to 2007 was 5.0 percent, which 
was  much  higher  than  the  average  rate  of  3.0  percent  in  the  1990s.  These  periods  were 
often  referred  to  as  the  “Great  Moderation”,  where  inflation  remained  low.  Under  such 
circumstances,  optimism  about  the  economic  outlook  prevailed  around  the  globe,  and  a 
boom in the real estate market and a rise in durable goods consumption took place in the 
United  States  and  Europe.  On  the  financial  front,  financial  institutions  increasingly  favored 
taking risk, and a rapid expansion of leverage – i.e., the accelerated expansion of credit – 
occurred.  In  retrospect,  the  high  economic  growth  in  the  global  economy  during  those 
periods was largely sustained by the creation of credit bubbles. 
The third reason is the increase in exports under a depreciating yen. The yen appreciated 
somewhat  in  the  first  half  of  the  periods  under  quantitative  easing,  but  subsequently 
depreciated after 2005 – in particular, from 2006, when the quantitative easing was lifted, to 
2007  (Chart  5).  This  reflects  active  carry  trades  against  the  background  of  continued 
extremely  low  interest  rates  in  Japan,  while  interest  rates  started  to  rise  in  overseas 
economies  due  to  high  growth  rates.  Supported  by  the  continued  weaker  yen,  exports 
increased  markedly,  particularly  in  the  automobile-related  area  and  in  capital  goods  and 
equipment (Chart 6). 
After  the  Lehman  shock,  two  out  of  three  factors  –  namely,  high  growth  in  overseas 
economies and the yen’s depreciation – no longer hold. Setting the level of real GDP in 2007 
(i.e., a year before the Lehman shock) at 100 and looking at its development since then, the 
present  level  of  Japan’s  economy  is  99.  This  falls  short  of  the  pre-Lehman  level.  In  an 
international  context,  the  present  level  is  97  for  Great  Britain,  99  for  the  euro  area,  and 
102 for the United States; hence, Japan stands somewhere in the middle of the advanced 
economies (Chart 7). In terms of per capita GDP, the picture is somewhat different. The level 
of economic activity falls short of those before the Lehman shock in any country or region. 
Amongst all, Japan has registered the smallest decline. Furthermore, in terms of real GDP 
per working-age person, only Japan exceeds the level seen before the Lehman shock. This 
reflects the effect of the rapid aging of the population, but I will come back to this topic later 
on. 
Overseas economies 
III. 
Let  me  now  move  on  to  the  second  topic,  i.e.,  the  recent  development  and  outlook  for 
overseas  economies.  This  is  the  major  factor  that  could  change  the  course  of  Japan’s 
economy.  Overseas  economies  started  decelerating  since  the  second  half  of  last  year, 
mainly due to the European debt problem, and still have not emerged from a deceleration 
phase. Accommodative financial conditions are an important factor for sustaining economic 
recovery, but there is a wide range of uncertainties, including when those economies might 
emerge from the deceleration phase. 
Current situation and outlook for the overseas economies 
As  for  the  U.S.  economy,  borrowing  the  terminology  from  Chairman  Bernanke’s  recent 
speech, there are three “headwinds” that are restraining economic activity. Specifically, these 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
are the headwinds coming from the housing market, the fiscal situation, and the European 
debt problem. Among the three, it is heartening that the adjustment in the housing market is 
making progress at a gradual pace, though it still weighs on the economy. Concerning the 
fiscal situation, the “fiscal cliff” is a problem; hence, the pace of economic recovery entails a 
wide range of uncertainties. 
The European economy continued to be stagnant in the midst of the sovereign debt crisis. 
After 2010, not only did Greece, Ireland, and Portugal receive support from the EU and the 
IMF, but the fiscal problems are now spreading to the larger southern European economies 
of Spain and Italy. Yields on government bonds in those countries rose, or, in other words, 
bond prices fell. The assets of financial institutions deteriorated, generating instability in their 
respective  financial  systems.  As  a  result,  firms’  and  households’  confidence  and  financial 
conditions deteriorated substantially, exerting downward pressure on the real economy. The 
slowdown  in  the  real  economy  and  the  instability  in  financial  systems  created  an  adverse 
feedback  loop  on  the  fiscal  problem  by  reducing  revenues  and  increasing  the  burden  of 
bailing  out  financial  institutions.  As  such,  Europe  currently  faces  a  difficult  situation  as  a 
result  of  the  adverse  feedback  loop  among  the  fiscal  situation,  the  financial  system,  and 
economic activity. 
Lastly, as for China, its economy has gone through a somewhat longer deceleration phase. 
While  there  are  signs  of  improvement  in  domestic  demand,  such  as  investment  in 
infrastructure and real estate sales, we should  maintain a vigilant watch on whether it can 
make a smooth transition towards a sustainable growth path. In terms of the future for the 
Chinese  economy,  its  exports  to  Europe,  which  have  a  large  weight,  require  attention. 
Another  important  issue  is  the  evaluation  of  rising  real  income  as  a  result  of  a  number  of 
policy  measures  –  such  as  monetary  easing,  the  advanced  execution  of  building 
infrastructure, and the stimulus consumption package – as well as declining inflation rates. 
From a somewhat long-term perspective, the most important point is whether China would 
succeed in making a smooth transition from high economic growth to moderate growth. The 
high-growth period in Japan started in the middle of the 1950s and ended at the beginning of 
the 1970s. The average growth rate between these periods was 9.7 percent, nearly identical 
to the 10.1 percent registered by the Chinese economy since the 1990s (Chart 8). As was 
the case in Japan, the transition from high economic growth to stable growth will not be an 
easy path. 
From  such  a  perspective,  in  comparing  recent  indicators  between  Japan  and  China,  per 
capita GDP in China is approximately 5,500 U.S. dollars, almost the same as that in Japan in 
the middle of the 1970s. The share of business fixed investment relative to GDP in China is 
significantly  higher  than  that  of  Japan  during  the  high-growth  era.  As  for  labor  or 
demographic changes, the “Lewisian Turning Point” – that is, when the excess labor surplus 
in  rural  areas  eventually  disappears  –  and  demographic  changes  in  the  working-age 
population are important issues (Chart 9). Once the “Lewisian Turning Point” occurs, it will 
increase  upward  pressure  on  wages,  and  the  pick-up  in  labor  productivity  is  likely  to 
decelerate. While the jury is still out on whether the Chinese economy has passed this point, 
the  working-age  population  will  start  to  decrease  around  2015  and  the  aging  of  the 
population  will  proceed  at  a rapid  pace.  In  Japan,  there  was  a  time  lag of  about  30  years 
from the “Lewisian Turning Point” to a decrease in the working-age population; it might be 
that China will experience such changes in relatively short periods of time (Chart 10). 
Effect of the bursting of the credit bubble on the overseas economies 
As I explained so far, the U.S., European, and Chinese economies fluctuate by their intrinsic 
factors.  On  the  other  hand,  they  are  also  driven  by  a  common  factor.  In  this  regard,  it  is 
useful to examine the global economy from a broad perspective. On this point, the impact felt 
around the globe from the bursting of the credit bubble in the mid-2000s is an important point 
to  consider.  As  for  the  headwinds  against  the  U.S.  economy,  the  collapse  of  the  housing 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
market was caused by the bursting of the bubble, and the problem associated with the “fiscal 
cliff” is largely regarded as an aftereffect caused by the bursting of the bubble. 
European financial institutions suffered massive losses from the U.S. subprime loan problem. 
At the same time, the bubbles in the real estate markets of some peripheral countries burst, 
creating grave  damage to  the  balance  sheets  of the  respective  governments  and financial 
institutions.  Let  me  come  back  to  the  European  debt  problem  later,  when  I  will  talk  about 
monetary unions, which are unique elements in Europe that have made it more difficult and 
complex  to  address  the  bursting  of  bubbles.  Emerging  economies  have  grown  at  the 
potential rate, in large part due to their intrinsic factors. However, they are not immune from 
the aftereffects of the bursting of the bubbles in advanced economies (Chart 11). 
As  we  have  seen,  problems  emerge  in  different  ways  between  advanced  economies  and 
emerging economies. From the perspective of the effect of the bursting of the bubble, which 
is the common factor surrounding the global economy, what should  we  expect in terms of 
policy-making and business management? The research done by Professors Reinhart and 
Rogoff, who analyzed the financial crisis, is worth noting.1 These two professors looked back 
at the episodes of serious financial crises in 14 countries after World War II, including the 
experience of the Japanese bubble, the Nordic banking crisis, and the Asian currency crisis. 
They showed that per capita real GDP had declined from its peak to the bottom in almost two 
years.  Furthermore,  they  showed  that  it  had  taken  4.4  years  on  average  to  recover  the 
pre-crisis level of economic activity. 
Taking  into  account these  past  episodes  and  ongoing  events  –  namely,  the  large  bubbles 
burst  in  the  United  States  and  Europe  –  and  given  that  it  takes  time  to  establish  a  new 
growth model in economies including Japan and emerging countries, it is important to realize 
that  the  situation  of  subdued growth  in the global  economy  is going to  last for  some time. 
Under such circumstances where the subdued growth is less than satisfactory according to 
the  previous  criteria,  excessive  policy  measures  intended  to  engender  higher  growth  may 
end up failing to achieve such policy goals, and we may be left with a number of distortions. 
The common challenge facing each country after the Lehman shock is to make the utmost 
efforts to achieve sustainable growth by conducting macro-policies subject to the structure of 
each economy at the time, and to proceed with economic and fiscal reforms in each country 
and region in order to raise economic growth in the medium to long term. On this front, the 
challenge differs from one country to the next. Emerging economies should aim to achieve 
balanced  growth  by  cultivating  domestic  demand,  which  has  the  potential  to  grow  while 
relying  less  on  overseas  demand.  Moreover,  while  the  speed  of  aging  may  differ,  Japan, 
advanced economies, and some emerging countries in Asia face the challenge of addressing 
their aging populations. Lastly, innovation in the area of natural resources and energy is a 
challenge that needs to be tackled through the collective wisdom of all human beings in order 
for the global economy to achieve sustainable growth. 
European debt problem and its challenges 
The key to understanding the current state of the global economy is the adjustment after the 
bursting  of  bubbles.  Let  me  now  describe  the  European  debt  problem,  which  goes  well 
beyond the post-bubble adjustment. 
Since the introduction of a single currency – the euro – in 1999, some countries were able to 
raise funds at lower rates than those justified by their economic strength, and this led to rapid 
accumulation of external debts. In those countries, wages have risen at a faster pace than 
productivity  growth,  and  consequently  the  competitiveness  of  industries  has  declined. 
Nonetheless,  as  a  result  of  the  euro  area  having  adopted  a  single  currency,  there  is  no 
                                                
1  Reinhart,  Carmen  M.,  Kenneth  S.  Rogoff.  2009.  This  Time  Is  Different:  Eight  Centuries  of  Financial  Folly. 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
option to recover balances or mitigate severe adjustment pressure by depreciating its own 
currency. This makes it even more difficult to resolve the problem in the area. 
Against  such  a  background,  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  undertook  two  longer-term 
refinancing  operations  (LTROs)  with  a  maturity  of  36  months,  which  provided  virtually 
unlimited  liquidity  in  the  euro  area.  In  addition,  central  banks  including  the  Bank  of  Japan 
arranged the coordinated U.S. dollar fund-supplying action. Owing to these policy measures, 
financial chaos – as we saw at the time of the Lehman shock – has been avoided so far. 
The  liquidity  provision  by  central  banks  can  only  provide  a  temporary  reprieve  –  in  other 
words, it is a measure to “mitigate the pain” or “buy time”, so to speak. Central banks’ actions 
themselves will not solve the problem. Thus, two things are necessary to stop the adverse 
feedback loop among the fiscal situation, the financial system, and the real economy. 
First,  economies  with  fiscal  problems  must  proceed  with  drastic  fiscal  reforms  as  well  as 
economic  structural  reforms,  such  as  reforming  the  labor  market  and  maintaining  and 
strengthening the soundness of financial systems. 
Second,  Europe  as  a  whole  must  set  out  clearly  the  future  of  economic  integration  and 
reconstruct a sustainable single currency zone. Europe, as part of its process of creating a 
European  banking  union,  is  considering  the  establishment  of  a  single  supervisory 
mechanism. Conditional on the establishment of such a mechanism, a principle is currently 
being discussed that allows the European Stability Mechanism (ESM) to inject capital directly 
into  financial  institutions.  In  addition,  in  order  to  strengthen  the  fiscal  consolidation  of  the 
respective countries in the region, the European authorities are in the process of drafting a 
road map that sets out the deadline for achieving such a target. 
These are the challenges – that have been recognized by the public – beyond a “monetary 
union”, and European authorities share a broad sense of the necessary direction to follow. At 
the same time, these are essential and difficult tasks that will define the future of Europe’s 
economy, society, and politics. For that reason, there are a number of issues that ought to be 
resolved, and it will be difficult to form consensus in such a short time. 
While a difficult task, the European monetary union has progressed over the years under the 
grand  vision  to  realize  peace,  prosperity,  and  stability  in  the  region  through  political  and 
economic  integration.  In  order  to  realize  this  vision,  a  strong  political  will  is  imperative.  I 
sincerely  hope  that the European  authorities  – by  taking  advantage  of the  responsiveness 
that has been nurtured and the mutual trust that has been established through the course of 
history in Europe – will take bold measures to address the fundamental problem. 
IV. 
Growth potential 
Japan’s growth potential 
So far, I have addressed the issue of overseas economies. I would now like to change the 
subject  to  the  domestic  economy  and  present  the  third  topic:  Japan’s  growth  potential,  or 
potential growth rate. 
To have some idea of where the potential growth rate lies is vital both in terms of making 
policies  and  managing  firms.  This  is  because  the  output  gap  of  Japan’s  economy  has 
tightened to about –2 percent at present, and the economic growth rate over the next 10 or 
20 years is largely underpinned by the potential growth rate. Both monetary policy and fiscal 
policy are aimed at stimulating demand by closing the output gap, and neither is quite able to 
raise potential growth. 
To understand potential growth, let us look back at the long time-series of real GDP growth 
rates in Japan. While it was around 4.4 percent in the 1980s, real GDP declined gradually, 
reaching around 1.5 percent in the 1990s and around 0.6 percent in the 2000s (Chart 12). 
The real GDP growth rate can be decomposed into the growth rate of the workforce and the 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
growth  rate  of  real  per  capita  GDP,  i.e.,  the  growth  rate  of  value-added  productivity.  The 
decline in real GDP from the 1980s to the 1990s owes much to the declining growth rate of 
value-added  productivity  (Chart  13).  This  is  mainly  due  to  the  remnants  of  the  bubble;  in 
other words, economic activity stagnated during the course of removing excesses in terms of 
business equipment and debts that had accumulated during the bubble period. However, its 
decline from the 1990s to the 2000s owes much to the fact that the working-age population 
started to decrease, rather than increase, while the growth rate of value-added productivity 
stopped declining. The decline in the workforce reflects the rapid aging of the population that 
is in progress. 
What  is  going  to  happen  in  the  next  10  years?  Assuming  that  the  labor  participation  of 
male/female workers and that of different age groups remain constant, the future course of 
the working-age population can be calculated with great accuracy. In the 2010s and 2020s, it 
is expected to decline by 0.6 percent and 0.8 percent, respectively. Meanwhile, value-added 
productivity  for  the  last  20  years  is  0.9  percent  on  average.  Taking  the  average  between 
2000 and 2008 – excluding the 1990s when the aftereffects of the bursting of the bubble still 
remained  –  value-added  productivity  becomes  1.4  percent.  Assuming  that  it  will  grow  at  
1.0–1.5 percent, the economic growth rate will be 0.4–0.9 percent and 0.2–0.7 percent in the 
2010s and 2020s, respectively. 
This computation is mechanical, and I do not place absolute significance on these numbers. 
Nevertheless,  I  still  believe  that  they  are  useful  in  terms  of  being  able  to  grasp  future 
economic growth in a situation where no efforts were made to change the status quo. 
Measures to raise Japan’s growth potential 
Between the two components that constitute economic growth, the way in which value-added 
productivity  is  assumed  warrants further  discussion.  Value-added  productivity  per  working-
age person in Japan is at a level comparable to other major economies. In fact, it is even 
higher than some other countries. While it is lower than emerging economies, this reflects the 
difference in economic structure between the economies that are in the process of catching 
up  and  those  that  have  matured.  It  is  rather  unrealistic  to  expect  that  value-added 
productivity  in  Japan  will  pick  up  at  a  rate  similar  to  those  in  the  high-growth  era.  It  may 
sound as though I am trying to emphasize that we should accept low growth as fate. This is 
not my intention. 
Changing the demographic trend itself, were it possible, would take a long time. Thus, we 
must face the reality that aging will proceed anyway, and make efforts to carry out structural 
reforms in view of the aging society. This is the only way to reinvigorate Japan. It is not only 
the  declining  population  or  aging  itself  that  lies  behind  the  low  growth  rate.  The  lack  of 
advancing  structural  reforms  to  create  higher  value-added  in  response  to  demographic 
changes is at its core. When thinking in such a way, it becomes clear where we should be 
headed in order to raise economic growth. 
The first move would be to increase labor participation, or to increase the share of those who 
actually  work  relative  to  the  working-age  population.  In  order  to  do  so,  it  is  necessary  to 
make  serious  efforts  to  lay  the  foundation  for  allowing  more  females  and  the  elderly  to 
participate in the labor market. Leaving the current labor participation as it is, the working-
age population would decline by 0.6 percent in the next 10 years. If the labor participation of 
female workers became as high as that in Sweden, for instance, the working-age population 
would rise, rather than decline.2 
                                                
2  Please see Masaaki Shirakawa, “Japan’s Economy and Monetary Policy” (Speech at a Meeting Held by the 
June  4,  2012. 
Naigai 
http://www.boj.or.jp/en/announcements/press/koen_2012/data/ko120604a1.pdf 
Josei  Chousa  Kai  <Research 
Institute  of 
in  Tokyo), 
Japan> 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
The  second  is  to  exert  efforts  to  raise  or  at  least  stop  a  further  decline  in  value-added 
productivity. The emphasis here is on productivity that requires efforts to raise it. If firms raise 
their  profitability  by  cutting  wages  and  suppressing  input  prices,  this  will  only  end  up 
suppressing household income and the profit base of suppliers; hence, the value-added in 
the  economy  as  a  whole  will  not  increase.  Therefore,  in  order  to  raise  value-added 
productivity,  one  has  to develop  new  goods  and  services  that  meet the potential  needs  at 
home and abroad, initiate successful business models, and raise value-added productivity. 
Here, the spirit of challenge on the part of firms plays an important role. There are two ways 
in which firms can make a maximum contribution: the first is to generate highly value-added 
goods  and  services  by  capturing  overseas  demand  and  cultivating  domestic  demand;  and 
the second is to shift their human, commodity, and financial resources to areas that have the 
potential  to  increase  demand.  In  order  to  encourage  firms  to  demonstrate  their  spirit  of 
challenge,  it  is  necessary  to  lay  the  foundation  through  initiatives  such  as  deregulation. 
Turning areas where potential demand has not been cultivated due to existing regulation into 
growing markets may well be a big opportunity for Japan’s economy. At the same time, the 
society’s willingness to accept such challenges is also important. 
Deflation 
V. 
When I talk about the importance of raising the growth potential, the likely response might be 
that overcoming deflation is also important. Indeed, this is an important issue, but we need to 
think carefully about what it means to overcome deflation. Next, I would like to present the 
results  of  the  Opinion  Survey  on  the  General  Public’s  Views  and  Behavior.  The  Bank 
conducts this survey on a quarterly basis, based on the responses collected from individuals 
who are chosen through a stratified two-stage random sampling method. This survey is an 
opinion poll designed to gain insight into the general public’s perceptions on their household 
circumstances, including questions with regard to the perception of price levels (Chart 14). 
According to recent survey results, among the respondents who felt that prices have gone 
up, more than 80 percent viewed the price rise as “rather unfavorable”. In contrast, among 
the respondents who felt that prices have gone down, about one third of them deemed the 
price decline as “rather favorable”. While the exact number changes from one survey to the 
next, the responses have tended to be rather stable. 
Reading  the  newspaper,  in  contrast,  one  often  comes  across  an  article  stressing  the 
necessity to overcome deflation and representing this as the voice of the general public in 
Japan. Given that deflation is a state in which prices keep declining, these two outcomes are 
inconsistent with each other. How can we reconcile these outcomes? In my view, the answer 
lies  in  the  fact  that  “deflation”  means  different  things  to  different  people.  Some  use  this 
terminology  in  the  context  of  consecutive  declines  in  prices,  while  others  believe  it  means 
deteriorating economic activity and the rest view it as declining wages. There are even those 
who use deflation in the context of falling asset prices. 
According to the opinion survey that I have just mentioned, most Japanese people are not 
hoping that prices would simply rise. If prices rise while real GDP remains stagnant, this will 
lead to higher nominal GDP, which represents a situation where costs rise in a number of 
items and cost-push inflation prevails. This does not lead to a higher living standard. In the 
minds  of  most  people,  overcoming  deflation  is  not  simply  a  state  in  which  prices  rise  in 
general,  but  rather  one  where  better  economic  conditions  are  realized  by  increasing 
corporate profits, employment, and income. In economists’ jargon, it represents a rise in the 
real GDP growth rate. When the real GDP growth rate rises, the demand and supply balance 
improves,  generating  upward  pressure  on  prices  and  wiping  out  deflation.  The  question  is 
how  to  raise  the real  GDP  growth rate. There  is  a  combination  of forces  that  needs to  be 
addressed:  first,  strengthening  the  economy’s  growth  potential;  and  second,  providing 
support from the financial side. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
VI. 
Stronger yen 
Recent developments in foreign exchange rate and its background 
Related to the current economic developments, I would now like to talk about the problem 
associated with the stronger yen, the fifth topic of my speech today. This is the issue that I 
have been asked about most frequently. 
Looking  at  the  foreign  exchange  developments  after  the  Lehman  shock,  the  tide  changed 
from a weaker yen up until then to a stronger yen. The effective exchange rate, weighted by 
trade volumes, shows that the yen and the Swiss franc appreciated sharply while the euro 
depreciated  (Chart  15).  The  U.S.  dollar,  while  it  appreciated  temporarily  after  the  Lehman 
shock,  has  been  depreciating  moderately  on  the  whole.  Meanwhile,  the  Korean  won 
depreciated sharply after the Lehman shock and has remained at that depreciated level. 
In the foreign exchange market, a large volume of transactions takes place on a daily basis, 
and  capital  transactions  account  for  98  percent  of  total  transactions  (Chart  16).  In  the 
formation  of foreign  exchange rates, capital  transactions  play  an  important  role. There  are 
basically two types of capital flows behind the stronger yen following the Lehman shock. The 
first  is  the  reversal  of  yen  carry  trades  that  had  actively  taken  place  before  the  Lehman 
shock. Prior to the Lehman shock, a very low interest rate was observed in Japan, but now 
interest rates around the globe have also become extremely low. Second, overseas investors 
have become more risk averse against the background of uncertainties about the outlook for 
the  global  economy  as  well  as  the  European  debt  problem,  and  the  yen  has  become  a 
safe-haven currency that is more likely to be purchased under the current situation. In a case 
where the European debt problem raises urgent concerns, the currency of the country with 
abundant overseas assets – which is the outcome of the past current account surplus – is 
regarded as a safe-haven currency. 
Effects of foreign exchange rate movements and responses 
A stronger yen creates a significant impact on the economy and prices. The way in which its 
effect is realized depends on economic conditions and the passage of events. At present, the 
stronger  yen  causes  a  decline  in  exports  and  corporate  profits  as  well  as  deterioration  in 
business  sentiment;  hence,  I  recognize  that  the  negative  effect  is  dominant.  Indeed,  in 
domestic demand driven sectors such as retail sales, the decline in import prices has been 
beneficial, and the stronger yen also reduces costs associated with energy-related imports 
under the current circumstances. Taking into account all of the negative and positive effects 
together, the  Bank judges  it  necessary  to  watch  more  carefully  for  negative  effects  on  the 
economy  and  prices,  given  that  the  outlook  for  the  global  economy  faces  significant 
uncertainty.  In  particular,  under  the  current  circumstances  where  there  is  a  wide  range  of 
uncertainties regarding the outlook of overseas economies – not to mention the outlook for 
the  European  debt  problem  –  we  need  to  closely  monitor  developments  including  the 
accelerated outward shift of Japanese firms to overseas and the decline in medium- to long-
term growth expectations. 
As  foreign  exchange  rates  are  important  variables  in  the  management  of  firms,  the  sharp 
volatility  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  creates  a  problem  in  terms  of  firms’  ability  to 
respond  to  such  changes.  Towards  the  middle  of  the  2000s,  when  the  yen  depreciated 
sharply,  production  shifted  back  to  Japan  and  the  rising  trend  in  the  overseas  production 
ratio came to a halt. Now that the yen is appreciating, a swing in the foreign exchange rate 
makes it more painful for firms to adjust to these changes. 
As announced in the statement of G7 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors, both 
the  Government  and  the  Bank  of  Japan  judge  that  excess  volatility  and  disorderly 
movements in exchange rates have adverse implications for economic and financial stability. 
In  response  to  disorderly  movements  in  foreign  exchange  rates,  the  government  has 
intervened  in  foreign  exchange  markets  at  a  time  judged  to  be  the  most  effective.  As  for 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
monetary policy, which will be addressed later, the Bank has been implementing monetary 
easing, taking account of the implication of the deceleration in overseas economies and the 
stronger yen on the outlook for Japan’s economy and prices. 
Sometimes we hear the view that the Bank should purchase foreign bonds with the objective 
of weakening the yen. However, this is identical to intervention in foreign exchange markets. 
It  is  clearly  stipulated  in  the  law  that  the  Bank  shall  buy  and  sell  in  the  foreign  exchange 
markets as an agent handling national government affairs when the purpose of the buying 
and selling is to stabilize the exchange rate of the Japanese currency. As such, this should 
be discussed in the context of whether or not it is necessary for the government to intervene 
in the markets. 
In terms of a response to the stronger yen, together with government initiatives, how firms 
react to such changes is also important. Under the floating exchange rate system, firms at 
home and abroad have been making efforts to minimize the effects stemming from exchange 
rate  moves.  Above  all,  in  order  to  cope  with  foreign  exchange  movements,  one  has  to 
develop goods and services that are highly competitive. 
On this point, the Swiss experience is a good example. Over the last 10 years, the Swiss 
franc has appreciated more than the yen, but in terms of value, the Swiss exports, mainly of 
medical  goods  and  watches,  increased  by  much  more  than  those  of  Japan  (Chart  17).  In 
evaluating the competitiveness, the international competitiveness coefficient – the net export 
value relative to the sum of export and import values – is calculated for Japan’s merchandise 
representatives. Among them, there are items that continue to be highly competitive under 
the appreciating yen, but there are also other items that lost competitiveness even before the 
yen’s appreciation started (Chart 18). 
In  the  short  run,  the  volatility  associated  with  foreign  exchange  movements  affects  the 
competitiveness, and we are fully aware that it is all the more difficult for firms, particularly 
small firms, to respond to the rapid appreciation of the yen. Nonetheless, from a somewhat 
long-term  perspective,  the  competitiveness  that  enables  one  to  succeed  in  the  globalized 
economy comes from having differentiated products as well as highly value-added products.  
Fiscal sustainability 
VII. 
Next,  I  will  talk  about  fiscal  sustainability  –  the  sixth  topic  of  my  speech  today.  This  is  a 
particularly important issue for Japan from a somewhat long-term perspective. 
When the fiscal balance deteriorates over the long run, there are only three ways to regain 
fiscal sustainability in terms of logical consequences and historical experience. The first is to 
regain  fiscal  sustainability  by  raising  economic  growth  and  reforming  revenue  and 
expenditure. The second is simply to default. The third is to create higher inflation, wiping out 
the debts. If no effort is being made to restructure the fiscal system, or if improving the fiscal 
balance in the future rests on unrealistic assumptions about high economic growth, it will not 
be possible to make both ends meet and investors will be left with two  remaining options: 
either default or suffer high inflation. Defaulting sovereign debts will jeopardize the stability of 
the  financial  system  by  generating  large  losses  on  financial  institutions.  Inflation  will 
jeopardize  price  stability.  In  either case, the  stability  of  the  economy’s  own  currency  –  the 
most essential prerequisite for stability of the economy and society as a whole – will be lost, 
causing  grave  damage  to  the  possibility  of  achieving  sustainable  economic  growth.  In 
perhaps a less extreme scenario than the one described above, when  there is uncertainty 
with regard to fiscal sustainability, firms and households will be concerned about the future 
and become more likely to reduce their expenditure. It is for this very reason that maintaining 
fiscal sustainability is vital to realizing sustainable growth of the economy. 
Related  to  this,  I  am  often  asked  why  Japan  finances  itself  smoothly  and  long-term  yields 
remain low and stable, despite the fact that Japan has a large fiscal deficit and the ratio of 
government debt outstanding to GDP is extremely high compared to other countries. There 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
are two reasons. First, there is confidence in the market that Japan has the will and ability to 
eventually address fiscal consolidation. The second reason is that investors anticipate that 
yields have been stable thus far and will continue to be so. It may be hard to believe at this 
juncture, but in the euro area, every country issued bonds at the same level as Germany up 
until a few years ago. 
Of these two reasons, I believe that the first one is more convincing as an explanation of why 
a  severe  fiscal  situation  does  not  lead  to  higher  bond  yields  in  the  market.  In  essence, 
confidence is firmly embedded in the minds of market participants that Japan has the will and 
ability  to  address  fiscal  consolidation.  Nonetheless,  such  strong  will  and  ability  eventually 
have  to  be  proven  by  the  track  record.  From  a  medium-  to  long-term  perspective,  it  is 
particularly  important  to  maintain  the  market’s  confidence  by  steadily  making  progress 
toward fiscal consolidation. At the same time, in the making of monetary policy, it is important 
to maintain the market’s confidence that a central bank conducts its policy  with the aim of 
achieving sustainable growth with price stability. In that context, let me emphasize that the 
Bank of Japan’s purchase of government bonds will never be intended to be construed as 
financing government debt. 
In terms of improving the fiscal balance, one often hears the view that raising the nominal 
growth rate is important. I find this to be rather misleading. Whether or not the fiscal balance 
improves rests heavily on how the rise in nominal growth rate is achieved. When the nominal 
rate  rises  as  a  result  of  higher  inflation,  tax  revenue  increases,  but  at  the  same  time, 
expenditure also increases due to higher wages and costs. Until now, the government bonds 
already issued at higher rates have been refinanced by those newly issued at lower rates, 
and  the  total  interest  payments  of  government  bonds  have  been  reduced.  Going  forward, 
however, not much from such a refinancing effect can be counted on (Chart 19). Under such 
circumstances,  higher  inflation  will  lead  to  an  increase  in  interest  payments,  a  factor  that 
increases  government  expenditure.  Thus,  simply  raising  inflation  will  not  lead  to  an 
improvement in fiscal balances (Chart 20). 
In  contrast,  when  a  rise  in  the  nominal  growth  rate  is  accompanied  by  a  rise  in  the  real 
growth rate, government expenditure does not increase, due to rising costs, and the fiscal 
balance improves through an increase in tax revenue. An increase in nominal growth – the 
key to successful fiscal consolidation – has to be accompanied by an increase in real growth. 
Accordingly, when the real growth rate rises, prices will rise and the nominal growth rate will 
rise  as  well.  In  this  sense,  strengthening  the  growth  potential  is  also  important  from  the 
perspective of improving the fiscal balance. 
VIII. 
The Bank’s conduct of monetary policy 
Pursuing powerful monetary easing 
Based  on  the  current  state  of  the  global  economy  and  Japan’s  economy  as  well  as 
challenges they face, I would now like to talk about the Bank’s conduct of monetary policy. 
The  Bank  of  Japan  recognizes  that  Japan’s  economy  faces  the  critical  challenge  of 
overcoming deflation and returning to a sustainable growth path with price stability. Based on 
that  recognition,  the  Bank  has  been  conducting  powerful  monetary  easing.  At  present,  its 
powerful  monetary  easing  is  being  pursued  in  the  context  of  “comprehensive  monetary 
easing policy”. Let me first elaborate on this. 
Comprehensive  monetary  easing  was  introduced  in  October  2010,  almost  two  years  ago. 
Essentially, it was an ingenious means to generate further accommodative effects when the 
overnight call rate – the Bank’s target rate – had already been at virtually zero percent. The 
first aspect of such ingenuity comes from the clarification of the policy time horizon; that is, to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
clearly state that for the time being the Bank will proceed with powerful monetary easing with 
the  aim  of  achieving  the  goal  of  1  percent  inflation  –  in  terms  of  the  year-on-year  rate  of 
increase in the CPI – until it judges the 1 percent goal to be in sight.3 Another aspect of the 
ingenuity is the establishment of a program under which not only JGBs and T-Bills but also 
various  types  of  risk  assets  can  be  purchased,  including  CP,  corporate  bonds,  exchange-
traded  funds  (ETFs),  and  Japan  real  estate  investment  trusts  (J-REITs).  This  program  is 
aimed at encouraging a decline in longer-term market interest rates and a reduction in risk 
premiums. 
The total size of the Program initially started off with about 35 trillion yen, and it will reach 
about 70 trillion yen by cumulatively expanding the amount of the Program. At present, the 
Bank is in the process of increasing the size of the Program in order to reach 70 trillion yen. 
The size of the Program as of August 31 was about 58 trillion  yen,  which implies that the 
Bank will purchase more than 10 trillion yen worth of financial assets from now on (Chart 21). 
In this way, the Bank will steadily increase the size of the Program and proceed with further 
monetary easing in a continuous manner; thus, the effects of monetary easing will strengthen 
with every passing day as this process continues. The Bank will proceed with the monetary 
easing in a continuous manner by steadily increasing the amount outstanding of the Asset 
Purchase Program. 
Accommodative financial conditions and measures to take advantage of these 
conditions 
Under such powerful monetary easing, stability in financial markets and the financial system 
has  been  maintained  even  during  the  period  when  they  faced  strong  headwinds  –  that  is, 
when  the  Great  East  Japan  Earthquake  and  the  European  debt  problem  hit  the  markets. 
Firms’ funding  costs  have  declined,  and  the  sense  of  security  regarding the  availability  for 
funds  is  firmly  secured.  In  fact,  the  average  contract  interest  rates  on  new  loans  and 
discounts – both the short- and long-term rates – have registered an unprecedented level of 
almost 1 percent, even lower than that registered during the first half of the 2000s, the era of 
quantitative easing (Chart 22). Under such circumstances, the average interest rate paid by 
firms declined to 1.49 percent. Given that the firms’ profitability relative to total assets, i.e., 
the ROA, was 3.24 percent, this is at an extremely low level (Chart 22). In short, firms have 
been able to raise ample funds at a rate substantially lower than their profitability. 
As  such,  financial  conditions  in  Japan  are  accommodative.  Thus,  the  first  stage  of  the 
monetary  transmission  mechanism  –  namely,  the  effect  of  monetary  easing  permeating 
financial markets – is well under way. Once firms and households take advantage of such 
accommodative  financial  conditions  and  embark  on  business  investment  and  consumer 
spending,  the  second  stage  of  the  transmission  mechanism  –  namely,  financial  conditions 
permeating economic activity and prices – will strengthen. 
What  is  important  at  this  juncture  is  to  carry  out  measures  to  support  strengthening  the 
foundations  for  economic  growth,  as  I  emphasized  before.  The  growth  rate  rises  when 
investment  at  home  draws  investors’  attention  by  means  of  drastic  deregulation,  or  when 
new markets or goods and services are cultivated through firms’ innovative efforts. As firms’ 
efforts bear fruit, the public’s expectation for rising corporate profits and household income 
strengthens,  and  this  will  eventually  lead  to  higher  demand  for  the  funds.  In  this  way, 
accommodative financial conditions will be able to fulfill their original purpose of stimulating 
aggregate demand to the maximum extent. Once such a virtuous cycle manifests itself, the 
aggregate  supply  and  demand  balance  improves,  and  it  is  likely  that  the  inflation  rate  will 
start to rise. While keeping such a mechanism in mind, on a number of occasions, I have 
                                                
3  Please see Masaaki Shirakawa, “The Bank of Japan’s Efforts toward Overcoming Deflation” (Speech at the 
in  Tokyo),  February  17,  2012.  http://www.boj.or.jp/en/announcements/ 
Japan  National  Press  Club 
press/koen_2012/data/ko120217a1.pdf 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
been emphasizing that in order for Japan’s economy to overcome deflation and return to a 
sustainable growth path with price stability, we need two things: first, having a wide range of 
economic  agents  exert  efforts  to  strengthen  the  economy’s  growth  potential;  and  second, 
support from the financial side. 
In  strengthening  the  growth  potential,  firms  play  a  pivotal  role.  At  the  same  time,  it  is 
important  to  provide  the  grounds  for  letting  them  meet  the  challenge  to  cultivate  new 
markets.  Based  on  such  recognition,  the  Bank  has  embarked  on  a  highly  extraordinary 
measure  for  a  central  bank  since  June  2010:  that  is,  the  establishment  of  the  “Fund-
Provisioning  Measure  to  Support  Strengthening  the  Foundations  for  Economic  Growth” 
(Chart 23). Under this measure, the Bank provides long-term funds at low rates to financial 
institutions carrying out lending or investment in support of strengthening the foundations for 
Japan’s economic growth. The Bank strongly believes that such a measure plays a catalytic 
role in allowing financial institutions to proceed with their voluntary efforts. 
In June 2011, the Bank introduced a special scheme, as part of its overall support measures, 
that established a new line of credit for equity investments and asset-based lending (ABL), 
which, unlike traditional lending, uses assets that are closely tied to firms’ businesses – such 
as  their  inventories,  equipment,  and  machines,  as  well  as  accounts  receivables  –  as 
collateral.  The  advantage  of  ABL  is  that  it  creates  ways  for  firms  without  conventional 
collateral  or  guarantees to  gain  access  to  loans.  In  addition,  in  March  and  April  2012,  the 
Bank  established  and  expanded  special  rules  for  small-lot  investments  and  loans  –  those 
less than 10 million yen – as well as special rules for U.S. dollar lending arrangements. At 
present, the total size of the measure stands at 5.5 trillion yen. With such measures initiated 
by the Bank, private financial institutions have started making their voluntary moves, and I 
judge that our measures are serving as a catalyst by encouraging the private sector’s efforts 
to  strengthen  growth  potential.  In  sum,  the  Bank  of  Japan’s  message  –  that  is,  that 
strengthening  the  growth  potential  is  all  the  more  important  and  financial  institutions  must 
play their respective roles – has been well-received. 
The Bank of Japan has been providing the utmost support as a central bank, including the 
development of unconventional policy tools in the sphere of monetary policy. While attention 
tends to focus on discussions on monetary policy surrounding interest rates and quantitative 
issues when it comes to central bank policies, central banks are capable of making a wider 
range of contributions. At present, the Bank of Japan pays the most attention to maintaining 
the stability of financial markets and the financial system even if nervousness regarding the 
European debt problem increases. 
The Bank continues to conduct monetary policy in an appropriate manner. The Bank will also 
do  its  utmost  to  ensure  the  stability  of  Japan’s  financial  system  while  giving  particular 
attention to developments in global financial markets, where nervousness with respect to the 
European situation continues to be seen.  
Concluding remarks 
Let me conclude. Today, I have touched on a number of issues, but the most important topic 
that I wanted to emphasize in my speech is that we must make serious efforts to strengthen 
the growth potential of Japan’s economy. In order to advance efforts on this front, the most 
important  thing  is  to  understand  that  the  real  problem  facing  Japan’s  economy  is  the 
declining growth rate. This appears to be better understood in the public domain, but it has 
not reached a satisfactory level. 
At the outset of my speech, I reviewed the past 20 years of Japan’s economy. Be it the non-
performing loan problem or the rapid aging of the population, it took some time to recognize 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
them,  and  as  a  result,  the  response  had  been  delayed.4  We  must  not  make  the  same 
mistake again. 
Another thing that we should do, and that is important in terms of strengthening the growth 
potential, is to assess the strength of Japan’s economy dispassionately and try not to fall into 
excessive  pessimism.  During  my  earlier  description  of  the  situation  surrounding  the  global 
economy,  I  referred  to  the  challenge  facing  the  United  States,  Europe,  and  China.  Each 
country or region has its own difficult problems to overcome. From an objective perspective, 
we may be underestimating the potential strength of Japan’s economy. First and foremost, 
Japan  is  at  the  center  of  Asia,  the  growth  engine  for  the  global  economy.  In  finance, 
Japanese financial institutions ended the disposal of non-performing assets as early as the 
beginning  of  the  2000s,  and  they  now  enjoy  high  credit  rating  standards  relative  to  their 
overseas competitors (Chart 24). 
There  are  areas  one  can  find  in  firmness  of  domestic  demand  where  changes  could  be 
turned  to  advantages.  Knowing  that  consumption  by  the  elderly  aged  over  60  years 
constitutes more than 40 percent of total consumption, and that potential demand is being 
created to develop new energy and environment-related businesses in the aftermath of the 
earthquake, such big changes provide good opportunities for cultivating new markets. 
It has been almost 20 years since the bubble burst in Japan. The next 20 years will surely be 
different if we accurately recognize the problem we currently face and make serious efforts to 
strengthen growth potential. 
Thank you very much.  
                                                
4  As  for  the  nonperforming  loan  problem,  it  was  the  summer  of  1992  when  the  possible  injection  of  public 
money was first discussed in public. A large-scale injection of public money was carried out in 1998, nearly 
eight years after the bursting of the bubble. A similar story applies to the response to the aging and declining 
population. While  the  working-age  population  started  to  decline  in  1996,  this  coincided  with  a  period  when 
people suffered from the severe effects of the bursting of the bubble. At that time, neither the general public 
nor economists recognized the implication of demographic changes (i.e., aging and a declining population) for 
Japan’s economy to the much fuller extent that we do at present. 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
   16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 17 
   18 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 19 
   20 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 21 
   22 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 23 
   24 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 25 
   26 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
