Gill Marcus: Transparency, communication and democracy 
Address  by  Ms  Gill  Marcus,  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  to  the  South 
African National Editors’ Forum (SANEF) at the Nat Nakasa Awards, Durban, 28 July 2012. 
 Good  evening  and  thank  you  for  the  opportunity  to  address  you  this  evening.  You  as 
members of the media are at the forefront of information dissemination. You pursue stories, 
are seminal in bringing issues to the attention of the public, and help inform and shape the 
discourse  in  society.  And  therefore  you  have  a  heavy  responsibility  to  ensure  that  your 
reports  are  accurate  and  the  information  conveyed  in  such  a  manner  that  the  reader  and 
ordinary citizen has the ability to interpret and judge for themselves. But it is not just a matter 
of getting the correct facts, it is also how you analyse and convey such facts that is important. 
Differences  in  nuance  or  how  a  headline  is  phrased  can  change  or  shape  the  readers’ 
interpretation of seemingly objective facts. What a democratic country needs is an informed 
public,  a  public  that  is  knowledgeable  and  able  to  express  views  precisely  because  it  is 
knows what is happening, both globally and domestically. 
In  1976  Erich  Fromm,  recognised  as  one  of  the  world’s  most  influential  thinkers  on  social 
issues, when outlining what could be done to create a better society, wrote in To Have or To 
Be:  “A  system  of  effective  dissemination  of  effective  information  must  also  be  established. 
Information is a crucial element in the formation of an effective democracy … the so-called 
great newspapers inform better, but they also misinform better; by not publishing all the news 
impartially;  by  slanting  headlines  in  addition  to  writing  headlines  that  often  do  not  conform 
with their accompanying text; by being partisan in their editorials, written under the cover of 
seemingly  reasonable  and  moralising  language.  In  fact,  the  newspapers,  the  magazines, 
television and radio produce a commodity: news, from the raw material of events, and barely 
gives the citizens an opportunity to penetrate through the surface and recognise the deeper 
causes of events … The information problem must be solved in a different way if  informed 
opinion and decision are to be possible.”  
Transparency  and  communication  have  become  integral  to  modern  central  banking,  and 
although part of our communication is directly with the markets or the public, it is generally 
reported by the media as well. In this way how you report may impact on the interpretation 
and understanding by the public of our communications. 
More  open  communication  by  central  banks  is  a  relatively  recent  phenomenon.  In  his 
colourful  narrative  “Lords  of  Finance”,  Liaquat  Ahamed  describes  central  banks  as 
“mysterious  institutions,  the  full  details  of  their  inner  workings  so  arcane  that  very  few 
outsiders, even economists, fully understand them”. Karl Brunner, writing in the early 1980s, 
rather  unflatteringly  referred  to  the  “mystique”  of  central  banking  that  “thrives  on  the 
pervasive impression that Central Banking is an esoteric art … The esoteric nature of the art 
is  moreover  revealed  by  an  inherent  impossibility  to  articulate  its  insights  in  explicit  and 
intelligible  words  and  sentences”.  Similarly,  when  a  US  senator  said  that  he  understood  a 
comment made by Federal Reserve Bank Chairman Alan Greenspan, Greenspan famously 
replied: “If you understood what I said, I must have misspoke”. 
However,  Greenspan  was  in  fact  at  the  forefront  of  what  Alan  Blinder  called  the  “quiet 
revolution”  or  the  opening  up  of  central  banks  during  the  1990s.  As  recently  as  the  early 
1990s, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) of the US Fed would meet and not in 
fact announce its monetary policy decision. Market watchers would then have to deduce from 
the Fed’s actions in the money markets what the stance of monetary policy actually was. 
The “quiet revolution” is in fact about central banks not being so quiet anymore, and central 
banks  are  now  anything  but  arcane.  Transparency  and  its  corollary,  communication,  have 
become fundamental to central banking operations and strategy. The South African Reserve 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
involves  regular 
Bank  has  not  been  left  behind  in  these  developments,  with  a  marked  evolution  towards 
greater  transparency  and  more  open  communication,  particularly  since  the  introduction  of 
inflation targeting in 2000.  There are two broad thrusts to our communication. The first is to 
create greater awareness about what the Bank does, what it should do, what it cannot do, 
and  what  it  should  not  do.  The  second  relates  to  the  predictability  and  transparency  of 
monetary policy. I will make a few comments on both of these issues. 
With respect to communicating what the central bank does, this is particularly important in the 
current climate of heightened global uncertainty and fragility. Central banks are being viewed 
as  having  powers  way  beyond  their  capabilities,  and  as  more  and  more  governments  hit 
fiscal  constraints,  central  banks  are  seen,  in  my  view  somewhat  unreasonably,  as  the 
saviours  of  last  resort  or  of  only  resort.  Central bank  mandates  are becoming  increasingly 
blurred as they are expected to, inter alia, simultaneously control inflation, generate growth, 
solve the unemployment problem, control interest rates,  control exchange rates and capital 
flows,  build  reserves  and  ensure  financial  stability.  Some  areas,  such  as  macroprudential 
policies, are still unchartered territory. But it is important that central banks have clear and 
achievable mandates, and for these to be communicated. Central banks build up credibility 
by achieving their goals, but can lose credibility and indeed legitimacy if they fail to achieve 
goals that society believes they ought to achieve but are beyond their capabilities. In South 
Africa,  there  have  been  periods  when  this  lack  of  understanding  of  the  role  and  scope  of 
monetary policy resulted in the Bank becoming a lightning rod for all that was wrong in the 
economy, and unrealistic demands and expectations resulted. 
In  order  to  try  and  contribute  to  this  better  understanding  of  the  role  of  the  Bank,  we 
introduced  an  outreach  programme  which 
interaction  with  various 
stakeholder  groups  including  political  parties,  trade  unions,  business  groupings,  different 
sectors of the  economy and  civil society.  The Governors  and senior  staff speak  at various 
forums and universities. Numerous meetings and interactions with investors, both domestic 
and  foreign,  take  place  on  a  continuous  basis.  We  try  to  be  as  accessible  as  far  as  is 
reasonably possible,  but at the same time ensuring an appropriate black-out  period before 
MPC meetings. As part of our outreach programme we convene an economists’ round table 
on  alternate months to the  MPC,  where  economists  and analysts from  various  sectors are 
invited to discuss topical issues with the Governors and other senior staff of the Bank. The 
aim  of  this  outreach is  not  to  preach  or  to  take  instructions.  It  is  an  interactive  process  of 
sharing information and ideas. We do not always agree. But we have found that the process 
has  increased  knowledge,  mutual  understanding  and  respect.  Furthermore,  in  conjunction 
with  the  release  of  the  Bank’s  Monetary  Policy  Review  we  arrange  a  series  of  Monetary 
Policy Forums in 10 venues around the country, and each MPF is attended by at least one 
member  of  the  MPC.  This  gives  stakeholders  and  the  general  public  the  opportunity  to 
interact with policy-makers. 
The  issue  of  communicating  monetary  policy  and  in  particular  the  future  monetary  policy 
stance  is  perhaps  more  contentious.  The  modern  view  is  that  central  banks  should  not 
surprise  the  markets,  but  should  rather  guide  them.  This  then  implies  more  predictability 
which requires transparency and greater emphasis on communication. Improved and more 
open  communication  with  respect  to  monetary  policy  has  therefore  been  one  of  the  main 
thrusts of central banking reform in the past two decades. 
Innovations  in  transparency  and  communications  at  the  Bank  include  the  MPC  statement 
issued  at  a  press  conference  after  each  MPC  meeting;  the  publication  of  the  Bank’s 
forecasting model; and publication of the Bank’s forecasts for inflation and GDP growth.  
Furthermore  the  Monetary  Policy  Review  (MPR),  which  is  published  twice  a  year,  gives  a 
more  in-depth  guide  to  our  thinking  about  monetary  policy.  More  recently  we  have  been 
giving the market more guidance as to how we view the risks to our forecasts. A number of 
independent academic studies have confirmed the increased predictability of monetary policy 
in South Africa. A study by Janine Aron and John Muellbauer at Oxford University shows that 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
the  forward  rate  agreements  (FRAs)  have  anticipated  repo  rate  changes  well  since  the 
introduction  of  inflation  targeting.  More  recently  Monique  Reid  and  Stan  du  Plessis  at 
Stellenbosch University have shown that the MPC has succeeded in signaling its likely future 
policy decisions with consistency over the inflation targeting period. 
Explaining our actions is a central part of our communications. Again, this is a break with the 
traditional  past,  as  illustrated  in  the  earlier  quote  by  Brunner.  In  a  similar  vein,  Ahamed 
describes how Montagu Norman, governor of the Bank of England between 1920 and 1944, 
when  asked  by  a  parliamentary  committee  what  his  reasons  for  a  particular  policy  were, 
tapped  the  side  of  his  nose  three  times  and  said:  “Reasons,  Mr  Chairman?  I  don’t  have 
reasons. I have instincts”. In today’s world of central banking  and monetary policy making, 
reasons  are  critical  as  they  guide  markets  as  to  the  thinking  of  the  policy  makers.  Sound 
policy-making cannot be subject to ad-hockery. To be sure, subjective judgment comes into 
any  decision-making  involving  forward-looking  analysis,  but  it  has  to  be  backed  up  with 
sound and consistent theoretical basis or logic. 
While  it  is  generally  accepted  that  transparency  is  the  way  to  go,  there  is  less  agreement 
about the limits to transparency and there will be disagreements over where to draw the line. 
One area where there has been a radical departure in communication by some central banks 
has  been  the  guidance  given  with  respect  to  the  future  path  of  interest  rates.  This  has 
become a contentious issue and at this stage there is no generalised agreement as to “best 
practice”. Some central banks reveal a bias in their thinking about future interest rates or the 
balance  of  risks  with  respect  to  their  forecasts.  Broadly  speaking,  an  upside  risk  to  an 
inflation forecast which is already close to the upper end of the target range could reflect a 
higher probability that the next interest rate move would be up, although it does not reveal 
anything  about  the  timing,  the  extent  or  the  path  over  the  forecast  period.  An  upside  risk 
however could also mean that a possible rate cut could be delayed. We have moved in the 
direction of revealing our risk perceptions, and recent MPC statements have indicated how 
the MPC views the balance of risks to inflation and growth forecasts. 
A different approach is taken by central banks in New Zealand, Norway and Sweden, where 
the  expected  path  of  official  interest  rates  is  revealed.  This  is  an  extreme  form  of 
transparency, but the jury is still out as to how helpful this actually is. Initially the skepticism 
around this approach related to the risk that market participants and the general public would 
interpret this as an unconditional commitment to act in the way specified. To date, this does 
not appear to have been a problem in these countries, despite the fact that these forecasted 
future  paths change frequently.  That  they change frequently should  not  be a  surprise:  any 
future path would be conditional on the current circumstances remaining the same, and as 
we know, things do not remain the same, particularly in the current crisis environment that we 
find ourselves in. 
The  eminent  monetary  economist  Charles  Goodhart  argues  that  it  is  not  so  much  the 
understanding of the conditional nature of the forecasts but more their usefulness, as a lot 
depends  on  the  relative  accuracy  of  these  forecasts.  As  he  argued  in  a  recent  Financial 
Times article: “If official predictions contain additional information beyond that already implied 
by market forecasts of the term structure of short-term interest rates, then well and good. If 
not, then all central banks are doing is exposing that they are as clueless about the future as 
the rest of us”. Similarly, Otmar Issing, a former Executive Board member of the ECB, has 
recently  argued  that  in  the  context  of  the  financial  crisis  and  the  subsequent  elevated 
uncertainty  about  the  impact  of  the  crisis  on  potential  growth,  it  is  difficult  to  see  how 
signaling  the  future  path  of  interest  rates  based  on  such  “shaky  ground”  can  reduce 
uncertainty and guide expectations. 
Research  undertaken  by  Goodhart  shows  that  in  the  short  run  i.e.  over  the  next  three 
months,  and  to  a  lesser  extent  over  the  subsequent  quarter,  the  central  bank  may  have 
inside  information  about  its  own  future  actions.  But  beyond  that,  he  argues,  the  extra 
informational  content  of  central  bank  forecasts  is  zero,  and  that  pressures  to  push  central 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
banks in the direction of publishing their interest rate forecasts are, in his view, “retrograde”. 
He argues further that the move by the FOMC to publish individual (but not attributed) views 
of when interest rates should change reveal such wide divergences as to be unhelpful. 
The reality is that the further we go into the future, the less confident we can be about our 
future  actions. I  do  not know  what  the  world  will  look  like in  a  years’ time.  It follows  that  I 
cannot be certain what the domestic economy and therefore domestic interest rates will be. I 
could  give  you  my  best  guess,  or  a  forecast  based  on  all  available  information  and 
reasonable  assumptions,  but  this  is  likely  to  be  wrong.  Monetary  policy  operates  in  an 
uncertain environment all the time. We are constrained by the unknown, in the same way that 
the rest of the market is, and unfortunately central bankers are not bestowed with superior 
foresight. Yet we take decisions looking into this unknown future, while trying to see through 
the prevailing noise and uncertainties. And in acting in this way we also influence, however 
slightly, that future. 
At best, as Goodhart suggests, central banks can focus on a range of possible outcomes (not 
focus on point forecasts), on potentially varying scenarios and on the need for flexibility, not 
pre-commitment, to respond as the unknowable future unfolds. 
We are  treading  carefully  in  this  respect,  as  signaling  is  difficult  because  of  its  conditional 
nature. However there have been times when we have given direction. For example, at the 
time of the May MPC meeting, the market appeared to be focused on the timing of the next 
interest rate increase, and we felt it was important to signal that the risks to the interest rate 
outlook  were  not  only  on  the  upside,  and  that  should  the  global  environment  deteriorate 
significantly, the MPC would be prepared to respond by reducing the policy rate. Hence our 
statement  that  the  MPC  stood  ready  to  move  in  either  direction,  as  appropriate.  In  other 
words  we  were  communicating  that  should  inflation  move  out  of  the  target  range  on  a 
sustained basis, the MPC would be prepared to tighten policy, but in the event of  a severe 
global  downturn,  monetary  policy  could  in  fact  be  eased.  Judging  by  the  response  of  the 
FRAs  at  that  time  to  our  signal,  it  seems  that  we  were  heard.  The  FRAs  declined  and 
reflected a high probability that the repo rate would be reduced before the end of the year, 
but expected the rate cut to come later. But it is again important to stress that this was not a 
commitment  to  lower  interest  rates.  Rather,  it  was  a  signal  that  should  the  circumstances 
arise, we would be prepared to act. The reason for the signal was that we believed that the 
probability of this scenario unfolding was not negligible. And our concerns about the global 
economy were expressed strongly in our statement. 
At  the  subsequent  meeting,  we  felt  that  the  inflation  and  growth  dynamics  had  changed 
sufficiently  to  justify  further  monetary  accommodation.  Since  then,  there  has  been  much 
speculation as to whether the interest rate reduction was the beginning of a new interest rate 
cycle or whether this was a one-off move. At the beginning of an interest rate cycle, it is easy 
to forecast and signal the direction and timing of the next move. But the turning points are 
always more difficult to call. We view the recent move as part of the easing cycle that began 
in the wake of the crisis. We had previously thought that we were at the bottom of the interest 
rate cycle, but events unfolded in an unexpected way. Further easing, however, cannot be 
taken for granted and will be contingent on changing global conditions, further inflation and 
growth developments. 
I should emphasise that it is also important for the markets to pick up the signals from the 
changing fundamentals in the economy. If the fundamentals or circumstances change all of a 
sudden, this may lead to a change in policy. But our reaction should only be a surprise to the 
market if the market has not interpreted correctly how the initial surprise will impact on Bank 
thinking. Of course, if we act in an inconsistent way, then we would create further uncertainty. 
That would not be our intention. But there may be times when our signals may have been 
misinterpreted, and it may then be necessary to correct that misconception. The central bank 
must have credibility and act in a consistent manner in response to various shocks, as far as 
is  possible.  And  part  of  successful  communication  would  be  that  markets,  analysts  and 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
yourselves  would  expect  us  to  respond  to  significantly  changed  circumstances,  and  would 
not be surprised when we did so. 
However,  central  bank  communication  is  not  the  only  source  contributing  to  market 
expectations of monetary policy.  Hervé Hannoun of  the Bank for International Settlements, 
for  example,  has  argued  that  large  global  financial  institutions,  through  their  research  and 
analyses  to  clients  and  to  the  media,  also  influence  public  and  market  expectations  of 
monetary  policy,  to  the  extent  that  they  could  be  trying  to  influence  or  lead  central  bank 
thinking. In some instances it could be argued that their interpretation of what central banks 
are  saying  becomes  more  important  than  what  central  banks  are  actually  saying.  It  is 
therefore important that central banks retain their independence from the markets. We must 
hear  what  the  markets  are  saying,  and  communicate  with  the  markets,  but  in  the  end  we 
need  to do  what  we  think  is right, irrespective  of  what the market thinks,  and  not slavishly 
follow the market. After all, the “market view” is an outcome of often widely differing views. 
Central banks are institutions that must act  in the interests of the country as a  whole,  and 
they are able to do so precisely because they do not have a profit motive. 
We should  also  bear  in  mind  that  our  communication  is  not  only  with  the  market  but  with 
society as a  whole. The “person on the street” is directly or  indirectly affected by what  the 
Bank  does, and  is therefore  also  interested  in what  it says  and  does. Here the role of the 
press is critical, not only for reporting directly what we have said, but also for interpretation, 
as the interpretation given by the press can become the conventional wisdom. 
To  contribute  to  journalistic  excellence  and  a  deeper  understanding  of  economic  and 
monetary  policy  the  Bank  has,  for  a  number  of  years,  sponsored  the  training  of  financial 
journalists at Rhodes University and the University of the Witwatersrand. We need to have an 
informed public in the sense that they should have a good idea of what to expect from central 
banks, and not to raise expectations of what a central bank cannot in fact do. Unfortunately, 
as I noted earlier, during the crisis the pressures on central banks have multiplied, as have 
the expectations. 
George Akerlof and Robert Shiller, in their book Animal Spirits, identified five psychological 
factors  that  were  important  to  understand  animal  spirits  which,  they  argue,  drive  almost 
everything  and are more than just confidence as measured by confidence indicators. They 
argue “that declining animal spirits are the principal reason for the recent severe economic 
crisis …” and see no clear indication that these spirits are yet revived. The news media are 
singularly lacking in any explanation for the recent resurgence of the world economy beyond 
the  improvement  in  the  leading  indicators,  such  as  stock  market  prices  and  retail  sales 
numbers … “The five psychological factors are confidence, fairness, corruption and bad faith, 
money  illusion  and  stories  …  (and)  that  human  interest  stories  give  vitality  and  emotional 
resonance to economic views that drive animal spirits …” 
They use the example of the US TV show, The Apprentice, and how this story spread rapidly 
all  over  the  world  through  local  remakes  during  a  time  of  economic  expansion,  with  the 
substitution of a local tycoon or personality – as for instance in South Africa where this role 
was  filled  by  Tokyo  Sexwale.  They  go  on  to  ask:  “With  such  contagion  around  the  world, 
during  the  boom,  of  such  a  motivational  TV  story,  is  there  any  reason  to  doubt  that  the 
contagion of stories has economic significance, or that there could be worldwide fluctuations 
in animal spirits? … The stories people tell are also stories about how the economy behaves 
…” 
When we consider the above example of The Apprentice, what is not reflected is the question 
of power relations, how the power of the media is used to give voice to certain views, how 
this reinforces or reflects power relations in society. In The Apprentice what is also conveyed 
is  the  authority of  the tycoon, and how the  “boss”  behaves: it  conveys  the power  relations 
very  clearly  in  the  pay  off  line  “You’re  fired!”  The  voice  that  is  aired  also  determines  the 
parameters of the debate, so we need to ask: where is the voice of the powerless? And what 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
lessons  about  voice,  power  relations  and  responsibility  have  been  learned  from  The 
Apprentice and the appalling revelations of the News of the World/Murdoch inquiry? 
Therefore in conclusion before an audience of media professionals, is it not appropriate for 
each  of  us  to ask  ourselves:  what  is  the story we  tell,  whose  story  do  we  tell,  how do  we 
convey the news, how do we impart information, what role do we play in creating an informed 
and  knowledgeable  citizenry,  and  how  do  we  ensure  that  it  is  not  our  own  goals  and 
objectives that we project on a society hungry for information and a greater understanding of 
what is really going on. 
Finally,  to  remind  all  present  that  later  this  year  the  Bank  is  introducing  a  new  bank  note, 
which has the image of Nelson Mandela on the front of all denominations, while the big five 
animal theme has been redesigned and retained for the reverse side of the notes. We will be 
conducting an extensive media campaign to ensure the South African public is aware of the 
new note,  which will co-circulate with the current note, and is of equal value. We count  on 
your  support  to  help  ensure  an  informed  public,  so  that  we  protect  the  integrity  of  our 
currency. 
Thank  you  for  inviting  me  tonight,  and  for  enabling  an  ongoing  conversation  in  the  very 
challenging times we live in. 
References 
Ahamed, L. 2009. Lords of finance: the bankers who broke the world. Penguin Books. 
Akerlof, G. and R. Shiller. 2009. Animal Spirits: how human psychology drives the economy, 
and why it matters for global capitalism. Princeton University Press. 
Aron,  J.  and  J.  Muellbauer.  2009. The  development  of  transparent  and  effective  monetary 
and exchange rate  policy. In South African economic policy under democracy,  ed. J. Aron, 
B. Kahn and G. Kingdon, Oxford University Press. 
Blinder, A. 2004. The quiet revolution: central banking goes modern. Yale University Press.  
Fromm, E. 1976. To have or to be? Harper and Row. 
Goodhart,  C.  2012.  Longer  term  forecasts  are  a  step  backwards.  Financial  Times, 
1 February. 
Hannoun, H. 2012. Monetary policy in the crisis: testing the limits of monetary policy. Speech 
to the 47th  SEACEN Governors’ Conference, Seoul, 13–14 February, Bank for International 
Settlements. 
Issing, O. 2012. Central banks – paradise lost. CFS Working Paper No.2012/06, Centre for 
Financial Studies. 
Reid, M. and S. du Plessis. (2010). Loud and clear? Can we hear when the Reserve Bank 
speaks? South African Journal of Economics 78(3).  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
