Mario Draghi: For a European public space 
Remarks  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  on  receiving  the 
M100 Media Award 2012, Potsdam, 6 September 2012. 
 Dear Minister Schäuble,  
Dear Lord Mayor Jakobs, 
Dear Mr van Dülmen,  
Dear Paul Achleitner, 
Dear Luca di Montezemolo,  
Distinguished friends, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I  am  enormously  grateful  to  the  Board  of  M100  Sanssouci  Colloquium  for  bestowing  this 
award on me.  
It  is  an  honour  to  be  recognised  as  a  contributor  to  the  European  project,  and  to  join  the 
company  of  such  illustrious  previous  recipients.  Working  for  Europe  is  not  only  my 
profession,  but  also,  on  a  personal  level,  a  driving  mission.  And  in  these  difficult  times  
– when, unfortunately, we are rarely sans souci – striving to build a strong, united and stable 
Europe is more important than ever.  
I  would  like  to  thank  Minister  Schäuble  very  warmly  for  his  presence  tonight  and  his  very 
moving speech. Wolfgang is among the most important European leaders we have. Over the 
past  20  years,  he  has  worked  relentlessly  to  advance  the  cause  of  European  integration, 
sometimes against strong resistance.  
Wolfgang does not grow weary of reminding us of the benefits of the European project. His 
deeply anchored aspiration “to think Europe further” – Europa weiterzudenken – has been 
rewarded  with  the  renowned  Karlspreis  in  May  this  year.  We  are  privileged  to  have  such 
leaders as him today. 
I  also  would  like  to  thank  Potsdam  Lord  Mayor  Jakobs  and  Mr  van  Dülmen  of  the 
M100 Sanssouci Colloquium for their words and their hospitality and the entire M100 board 
for their trust. And of course, I would like to thank Paul Achleitner and Luca di Montezemolo 
for their very kind words in support. You all have been very generous to me.  
It  is  no  secret  that  the  course  of  European  integration  is  currently  difficult.  The  global 
economy is facing serious challenges. These challenges are not all of Europe’s making, as 
some  observers  would  have  us  believe.  But  Europe  is  perhaps  experiencing  them  more 
acutely  than  others.  The  reasons  for  this  are  complex.  But  one  part  of  the  explanation  is 
clear: the original institutional design of the euro area did not meet expectations. 
In the euro area we have a single monetary policy, but our economic and financial policies 
are only loosely coordinated. This is because the euro area is a union of nation-states with 
strong national traditions and preferences. While there was sufficient consensus to share a 
currency, economic and financial policies remained organised largely at the national level.  
The global crisis has revealed the vulnerabilities in this arrangement. Loose coordination of 
policies  neither  ensures  stability  nor  does  it  facilitate  effective  crisis  management.  The 
institutional design of the euro area therefore has to be reviewed to put our economic and 
monetary union (EMU) on a more secure footing.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
But how should this be done? There are two possible paths. The first is to go “back to the 
past”, to make the original design work better. The second is to develop a new architecture 
that properly reflects lessons of the crisis. 
In my view, the first path is not viable. We have seen that the euro area is too interconnected 
for economic and financial policies to be a purely national responsibility. We must find ways 
to guarantee that national decisions do not harm other members of the monetary union. In 
the  event  of  a  crisis,  there  should  be  effective  mechanisms  for  crisis  management.  And 
where  necessary,  this  means  going  beyond  coordination,  because  this  is  a  matter  of 
europäische Innenpolitik. 
We have also seen that maintaining stability requires common institutions that can react to 
events.  The  euro  is  the  world’s  second  most  important  currency.  It  makes  up  25%  of  the 
world’s foreign exchange reserves. 1.5 trillion euros are traded daily on the world’s foreign 
exchange  markets.  And  it  is  used  daily  by  the  330 million  citizens  of  the  euro  area.  A 
currency  that  plays  a  central  role  in  the  lives  of  so  many  people  has  to  be  managed  with 
effective decision-making. 
The second path, designing a new architecture, is therefore the only way forward. The key 
challenge today is to present a vision to Europe’s citizens of what this would entail – which is 
precisely the theme of this conference.  
Together with the Presidents of the European Council, the European Commission and the 
Eurogroup, I have been given the task of working on such a vision for the next decade. We 
have aimed to be as pragmatic as possible: to establish what are the minimum requirements 
to  make  the  euro  function  to  its  full  potential.  And  our  conclusions  are  both  realistic  and 
attainable. 
Member States will have to pool more sovereignty in selected policy areas. This is a clear 
lesson of the crisis. But we will not need to cede all powers to Brussels. Sovereignty will only 
be pooled where it is essential to ensure a stable and prosperous monetary union. This will 
be accompanied by broad democratic participation and legitimation.  
Our  vision  for  EMU  has  four  pillars  –  fiscal  union,  financial  union,  economic  union  and 
political union. Progress on all four should be made simultaneously. The first three pillars will 
help to steer fiscal, financial and economic policies in a sustainable way. They will also help 
to create institutions commensurate with the degree of monetary integration in the euro area.  
But today I would like to focus briefly on the fourth pillar, political union. This pillar is essential 
for engaging euro area citizens more deeply and making the other three pillars legitimate.  
Some  observers  argue  that  because  of  the  common  decision-making  implied  by  the  other 
three pillars, political union has to come first. I do not agree. Political integration can and will 
develop  in  parallel  with  economic  integration.  Over  the  past  60  years  of  European 
integration, this has always been the sequence.  
For  example,  public  engagement  with  euro  area  issues  has  naturally  deepened  through 
responding to the crisis. To commit money via the European Stability Mechanism, Member 
States  have  had  to  explain  the  responsibilities  of  euro  membership  to  their  citizens. 
Parliaments  are  now  taking  a  sharper  interest  in  European  affairs.  Closer  economic 
integration has de facto strengthened democratic engagement. 
But  this  does  not mean  that  we  should  not  strive  to  strengthen  democratic  participation  in 
Europe further. Democratic engagement already takes place through the Council of Ministers 
–  where  citizens  are  represented  by  elected  ministers  –  and  the  European  Parliament  – 
where  citizens  elect  their  MEPs  directly.  But  more  has  to  be  done  to  make  the  voice  of 
Europe’s citizens heard. We need what in Germany is called demokratische Teilhabe. 
And this is where you are needed. I would like to ask all of you – journalists and publishers 
but  also  policy  makers  and  academics  –  to  help  to  develop  a  genuine  European  public 
space, eine europäische Öffentlichkeit.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Most of us in Europe are exposed mainly to our national media in our national languages. 
These  media  naturally  define  our  perspective:  our  sense  of  the  “public”  tends  to  stop  at 
national  borders.  But  this  no  longer  describes  reality. What  is  happening  in  other  Member 
States matters to all of us. Problems that cross borders require citizens to find consensus 
around common solutions. 
Again, the crisis is itself having an effect. For example, newspapers in some countries now 
take  a  keen  interest  in  the  welfare  systems  of  other  countries.  Citizens  closely  follow  the 
elections of ministers they would previously have never heard of.  
Certainly,  there  is  an  unwelcome  side  to  this  related  to  the  potential  for  reviving  outdated 
national stereotypes. But there is also a positive side insofar as it leads citizens in the euro 
area to develop a sense of belonging together and to care about decisions in other regions. 
One way to strengthen this trend would be to exchange more media between countries. And 
here I would like to invite your contribution. 
Could  you  consider,  for  example,  publishing  what  we  might  call  “imported  pages”  from 
foreign newspapers? This would allow citizens to get a better sense of how issues are seen 
in  other  countries;  it  would  increase  cultural  sensitivity;  and  it  could  generate  Europe-wide 
debates  that  divide  along  policy  lines  rather  than  national  lines.  Over  time,  such  debate 
would help to put European decision-making on a more legitimate footing. 
“Imported pages” are but one idea, a starting point. It is with your dedication and creativity 
that more such ideas can be developed. It is a privilege to be part of the European project, 
for  citizens  and  journalists  alike.  But  it  is  also  comes  with  responsibilities,  for  citizens  and 
journalists alike.  
Ultimately, a genuine European public space is essential for supporting the long-term vision 
of  the  euro  area.  Citizens  need  to  be  in  basic  agreement  that,  within  a  monetary  union, 
certain economic models are no longer possible. They must understand that there are limits 
to  national  discretion  in economic  policies  that  affect the  area  as  a  whole.  In  other  words, 
there needs to be a new consensus on economic policies that will reinvigorate the European 
social model and make it fit for the 21st century.  
This  is  a  discussion  we  must  begin  today.  Setting  EMU  on  a  path  towards  stability  is 
essential so that we can move permanently beyond the crisis. It will send a clear signal to 
citizens and financial markets that the euro area is committed to staying the course. And it 
will remove any grounds for doubting the euro’s future.  
There  are  many  reasons  to  be  optimistic  that  Europe  will  find  this  path.  The  pattern  over 
recent  decades  has  always  been  to  move  forward  towards  a  stronger  and  more  united 
Europe. When  we  have  faced  challenges,  we  have  invariably  found  solutions.  Those  who 
have predicted the worst have turned out to be mistaken. 
What’s  more,  the  solutions  we  need  do  not  require  extreme  approaches  or  impossible 
choices.  They  require  a  structured  and  achievable  path  towards  completing  EMU.  This  is 
fully within our reach today.  
I am confident that one day I can return to this beautiful historical setting sans souci.  
In the meantime, I am most grateful for your support.  
Thank you once again for this award and your kind words tonight and thank you very much 
for your attention.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
