Željko Rohatinski: Restoring the luster of the European economic model 
report 
Speech by Dr Željko Rohatinski, Governor of the Croation National Bank, at the presentation 
“Restoring  the  luster  of  the  European  economic  model  report”,  World  Bank,  Zagreb, 
4 June 2012. 
 1.  
The  transformation  of  the  initial  financial  shock  into  the  years-long  recession,  the 
shift of the heart of the problem from the banking sector to public finances and the switch of 
focus from the USA to Europe show the extent to which the current crisis has undermined 
the  very  foundations  of  the  functioning  of  western  economies  in  the  last  thirty  years.  Both 
essentially and conceptually. 
2.  
This  has  not  spared  even  “the  real  convergence  model”,  which  is  the  economic 
cornerstone  of  the  projected  functioning  of  the  European  Union  and  its  monetary  union  in 
particular. 
The model was based on a political consensus. It was a hybrid between American liberalism 
targeting primarily economic efficiency and the European tradition of social welfare states. 
The  model  functioned  relatively  well  “in  good  times”  but  showed  all  its  deficiencies  and 
weaknesses “in bad times”. 
This mostly refers to its considerably limited capacity to coordinate the effects of elements 
within  the  Union  that  are  vastly  heterogeneous  in  production,  technological,  social  and 
psychological terms. 
3.  
Therefore,  with  the  outbreak  of  the  crisis,  the  process  of  economic  convergence 
among  the  EU  member  states  has  turned  into  the  process  of  their  divergence  and  strong 
polarisation of interests. 
4.  
It  follows  that  the  model  needs  to  be  upgraded  and  reformed.  This  particularly 
relates  to  mitigating  the  dichotomy  between  uniform  monetary  policy  and  relatively 
autonomous fiscal, development and social policies of the member states. 
5.  
In general and in case of EU member states in particular, it is hard to agree with the 
metaphor of Nobel Laureate P. Krugman about a car which is technically in good condition 
but stops suddenly when its battery goes dead. One has only to install a new battery (by this 
Krugman implies an increase in aggregate demand by expansionary fiscal policy) for the car 
to continue moving normally. 
It would be more accurate to say that the car has serious construction errors: 
(a) 
a  volatile  fuel  system,  where  the  tolerance  of  cyclical  increases  in  speculative 
elements,  both  on  the  side  of  supply  and  demand,  leads  to  the  emergence  of 
“balloons” and engine overheating; 
difficulties  in  the  transmission  of  fuel  to  wheels  as  numerous  institutional  and 
noninstitutional  transfers,  without  economic  justification,  result  in  significant  fuel 
losses; and  
an untuned steering mechanism, where a combination of a liberal financial system 
and  populist  elements  in  national  economic  policy  diminishes  the  efficiency  of 
prevention and brake mechanisms. 
Equally difficult is to agree with the alleged alternative “either savings or growth” or 
6.  
with  its  causally  undetermined  antithesis  “both  savings  and  growth”.  These  two  categories 
(c)  
(b) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
are communicating vessels – sustainable economic growth can not be attained without the 
necessary level of savings. 
7.  
How can this be achieved starting from the current situation? An economy in crisis is 
like  an  organism  being  eaten  by  poisonous  substances  –  in  this  case,  fundamental 
imbalances leading to large deficits and debt paths unsustainable in the long run. 
This  organism  can  not  be  treated  by  injecting  new  doses  of  poison  (i.e.  by  additionally 
increasing  imbalances)  but  only  by  injecting  an  antidote  (savings)  to  dissolve  existing 
imbalances,  put  a  stop  to  their  harmful  effects  and  gradually  eliminate  them  from  the 
organism. This is the very essence of broadly defined “savings” and has no alternative. 
8.  
This  is  the  path  that  should  be  taken  by  Croatia  –  a  combination  of  structural 
reforms,  restrictive  fiscal  policy  and  reasonably  expansionary  monetary  policy  –  so  as  to 
effect  a  dynamic  redistribution  of  limited  funding  from  consumption  to  investment  and  use 
this investment to initiate sustainable economic growth aided by low inflation and exchange 
rate stability. 
Such a policy would also create a favourable environment for foreign capital inflows in the 
form of direct investment and not loans. 
9.  
I believe that this line of thought closely resembles the views of the World Bank. I 
hope that the Croatian Government and the CNB headed by a new Governor will take that 
path. 
I would like to express my gratitude to everyone, notably to the Croatian public for its support 
over the past twelve years. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
