Sanusi Lamido Sanusi: Neither the Washington nor Beijing Consensus – 
developmental models to fit African realities and cultures 
Speech  by  Mr  Sanusi  Lamido  Sanusi,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Nigeria,  at  the 
Eirenicon  Africa  Public  Lecture  Series  (EAPLS),  held  at  The  Royal  School  of  Medicine, 
London, 27 March 2012. 
 Introduction  
1.0 
The need for radical re-thinking on development strategy is imperative for African countries 
to be relevant in the global economy. This is further reinforced by the stark reality of extreme 
poverty in Africa. Over the years, the share of Africa in global trade remained insignificant 
despite the implementation of the policies that were recommended by international financial 
and development institutions, such as the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World 
Bank. The dismal performance of African economies calls to question, the effectiveness of 
the economic ideologies being prescribed by international institutions, and points to the need 
for a paradigm shift in order to achieve sustainable development. Over the last quarter of a 
century, Africa has been at the receiving end of liberal orthodoxy from these institutions that 
have persistently advocated, amongst others things, privatization of state-owned enterprises, 
free trade, intellectual property rights protection and deregulation of foreign direct investment 
(FDI) as requirements for developing countries to grow and develop. This policy prescription 
was what John Williamson coined the “Washington Consensus”. This neo-liberal ideology is 
reflected in the policies of the Bretton Woods Institutions: the IMF, the World Bank and the 
World Trade Organization (WTO). Specifically, both the IMF and the World Bank condition 
their offer of assistance to developing countries on the strict adherence to the Washington 
Consensus policies. The Consensus had continued to be under severe criticism because the 
performances of countries that adopted its doctrine, especially in Sub-Saharan Africa, Latin 
America and the former Soviet bloc showed that it had failed to deliver sustained growth as 
promised by its promoters.  
The  remarkable  economic  growth  of  China  in  the  past  30  years,  with  the  country  having 
declined to adopt the original and extended framework of the Washington Consensus, has 
raised further doubt on the unassailability of its capabilities. The significant economic miracle 
of  China  which  has  been  described  as  the  “Beijing  Consensus”  by  Joshua  Cooper  Ramo, 
represents  a  symbol  of  China’s  success  and  a  challenge  to  the  Washington  consensus 
normative power. The Beijing consensus is enshrined in three principles of innovation, Chaos 
management promotion and theory of self-determination. These tenets are embedded in the 
policies of China that features incremental reform, innovation and experimentation, export-
led  growth,  state  capitalism  and  authoritarianism.  Though  the  Beijing  consensus  had 
recorded remarkable success, it has, however, been argued, that it might not be sustainable 
in the long-run because it maintains large state-owned sectors and authoritarianism, which 
runs  contrary  to  people’s  aspirations,  as  the  series  of  revolutions  in  the  North  African 
countries have shown (Williamson, 2012).  
In addition, a historical review of how the advanced countries developed shows that they did 
not adopt policies that they are recommending for the developing countries. As pointed out 
by  Ha-Joon  Chang  (2003),  some  of  the  policies  that  the  Bretton  Wood  institutions  kick 
against today, were the very policies they adopted for their development. For example, the 
WTO currently opposes the use of export subsidy and protection of infant industry, whereas 
the United Kingdom and the United States embraced these policies in their early stages of 
development.  There  is  therefore,  the  need  for  pragmatic  policies  and  institutions  that  best 
suit  the  developmental  stages  and  realities  of  developing  countries  in  order  to  achieve 
sustainable and fast growth, and for the benefits of developed countries in the long-run (Ha-
Joon, 2003).  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Against  the  apparent  failure  of  the  Washington  Consensus  as  applied  in  developing 
countries, and the possibility of the un-sustainability of the Beijing consensus in the long-run, 
there  must  be  a  paradigm  shift  in  Africa’s  development  strategy  for  sustainable  economic 
development.  The  new  approach  should  identify  development  paths  that  focus  on  a 
pragmatic  commitment  to  progressive  change  as  a  possible  alternative  to  the  current 
development strategy. The question remains whether Africa can leverage on its potentials of 
huge  natural  resources,  regional  market  size  and  human  resources  to  formulate  a  radical 
development  strategy  that  fit  its  realities  and  cultures  without  adopting  the  tenets  of  the 
Washington and the Beijing consensus.  
The objective of this paper is to present my views on this contentious issue. Following this 
introduction, section 2 explains the Washington and the Beijing Consensus’ developmental 
ideologies  and  some  related  trade  theories.  Section  3  reviews  the  consensus’  and 
development  in  African  economies;  Section  4  discusses  the  lessons  from  the  growth 
strategies  by  China  and  India.  Section  5  highlights  a  new  development  strategy  for  Africa 
while section 6 reviews Nigeria’s recent developmental approach. Section 7 addresses some 
likely challenges to the new paradigm and section 8 concludes the paper.  
2.0 
The Washington and Beijing consensus’: Developmental ideologies  
The Washington consensus  
The phrase Washington Consensus was first coined by John Williamson in 1989 in his work 
where he showed the inadequacy of Latin American reforms and identified areas that needed 
further  improvement.  It  simply  expressed  the  widely  held  view  in  Washington  and  by 
international development institutions that there is a path that developing countries’ economic 
reforms should follow to absorb aid efficiently. The Washington consensus contains ten rules 
namely,  fiscal  discipline,  tax  reform,  re-ordering  public  expenditure  priorities,  competitive 
exchange  rate,  privatization,  trade  liberalization,  liberalizing  interest  rates,  deregulation, 
liberalizing  of  inward  FDI  and  property  rights.  These  rules  mirrored  the  tenets  of  liberal 
market-oriented capitalism and policies of the then Ronald Reagan and Margaret Thatcher 
governments  which,  were  strong  promoters  of  capitalism  and  neo-liberal  ideology.  Neo-
liberal ideology derived its tenets from the work of 18th century Economist, Adam Smith, who 
advocated  free  trade  among  nations  as  a  way  of  promoting  global  growth.  The  policy 
prescriptions  of  conditioning  aid  and  compelling  developing  countries  to  open  their  capital 
accounts  and  promote  unhindered  movement  of  portfolio  investment  across  international 
borders by the IMF and World Bank have close similarities to the tenets of the Washington 
consensus.  
Beijing consensus  
The Beijing consensus emanated from the published work of Joshua Cooper Ramo in 2004, 
where he described the social and economic transformation of China as the new physics of 
power  and  development.  Transformation  under  the  consensus  was  embedded  in  three 
principles  namely  Innovation,  promoting  works  through  Chaos  management  and  self-
determination  (Kennedy,  2008).  By  the  first  component,  China’s  economic  success  was 
rooted  in  constant  innovations  that  improved  its  total  factor  productivity,  while  the  second 
represents  China’s  quest  for  economic  development  which  was  not  limited  to  growth  but 
equitable distribution of wealth. The third component symbolizes the ability of China to chart 
and maintain her developmental polices as a model for other countries to follow and emulate 
(Kennedy, 2008). Therefore, the term Beijing consensus was the sum of the five pillars of the 
economic policies of China over the years which included incremental reform, innovation and 
experimentation, export-led growth, state capitalism and authoritarianism (Williamson, 2010). 
The next sub-section briefly examines some related theories of trade from which neo-liberal 
ideology derived its tenets.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Trade theories  
2.1 
Free trade originated from the traditional theory of comparative advantage which asserts that 
nations  tend  to  gain  from  trade  if  they  specialize  in  the  export  of  commodities  they  can 
produce at the cheapest cost. The benefits from trade arise among unequal trading countries 
because of differences in comparative advantage. An extension of the theory of free trade is 
the  neo-classical  factor  endowment  trade  theory,  propounded  by  Eli  Hecksher  and  Bertil 
Ohlin-  Swedish  economists.  The  theory  postulates  that,  under  the  assumptions  of  equal 
factor  prices  and  equal  technological  possibilities,  a  country  with  relatively  cheap  labour 
enjoys  relative  cost  and  price  advantages  over  nations  with  relatively  high  labour  cost  in 
producing  labour-intensive  goods,  the  converse  holds  for  a  country  that  enjoys  relatively 
cheap capital. Therefore, developing countries should specialise in the production of labour-
intensive products, and export the  surplus in return for import of capital-intensive products 
from  developed  countries.  The  basic  conclusions  from  these  theories  were  that,  countries 
stand  to  gain  from  free  trade  and  that  output  increases  in  a  free  trade  environment, 
Furthermore, identical technology in a free market equalises factor prices across participating 
nations and free trade increases the share of national income accruing to labour. Finally, free 
capital flow and human resources benefit nations (Todaro and Smith, 2009). The Washington 
consensus derived its tenets from these neo-classical ideologies. However, some  of these 
neo-classical ideologies have been challenged by the new development thinking in the light 
of the reality in the contemporary world, especially in developing countries.  
3.0 
The consensus’ and development in African countries  
Implications of the consensus’ for development in Africa  
3.1 
Although, most African Countries have continued to apply the principles of both consensuses 
in  their  economic  policies,  the  road  to  development  remains  bleak  with  very  little 
consideration  for  their  growth  potentials.  According  to  Manuel  (2003),  one  of  the  most 
important  drawbacks  of  the  Washington  Consensus  was  that,  while  it  provided  a  good 
mixture of reforms to stabilize an economy and encouraged private sector activities, it did 
very little to help resolve structural and institutional constraints on growth. He noted 
that part of Africa’s growth problems were the incentives and disincentives embedded in the 
global  environment,  which  had  reduced  the  continent  to  mere  exporter  of  primary 
commodities.  
The continent’s economic growth has been grossly inhibited by a global trade system inimical 
to the full exploitation of its comparative advantage. Furthermore, limited market access for 
low-cost  textiles,  cotton,  and  agricultural  products  and  competition  from  heavily  subsidized 
exports  from  industrialized  economies  has  effectively  prevented  growth  (Manual,  2003). 
Thus, unable to produce capital intensive goods, African countries have been reduced to net 
importers  of  finished  products.  Hence,  for  African  economies  to  achieve  their  growth 
potentials,  they  should  be  able  to  utilize  their  export  earnings  to  broaden  their  production 
base and productivity.  
The  primary  commodities  that  are  sources  of  export  earnings  have  become  highly 
susceptible to price volatility and adverse shifts in the terms of trade. Price volatility has not 
only  resulted  from  adverse  weather  conditions and  other  supply  shocks,  but  also  from  the 
secular  decline  in  real  prices  caused  by  structural  oversupply  in  commodity  markets  from 
output in the advanced economies (Kahl, 2004). Furthermore, the lack of support for price 
stabilization  through  commodity  agreements  by  the  international  community  hinders 
favourable pricing.  
While the World Bank and IMF are constantly discouraging the use of subsidies in African 
countries  in  line  with  one  of  the  tenets  of  the  Washington  Consensus,  the  developed 
countries have continued to use subsidies to stabilize their economy, particularly in critical 
sectors such as the agricultural sector. For instance, the 2002 cotton subsidies to the US and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
EU producers distorted world prices with the adverse loss in revenue to Africa being more 
than the total Highly Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) debt relief initiative during the period. 
Such  occurrences  have  the  potential  of  further  building-up  external  debt  stock  due  to  the 
fiscal insolvency that could arise from limited export revenue and declining terms of trade.  
Manuel  (2003)  argued  that  the  reliance  on  a  single  commodity  export  partly  reflects 
inadequate  external  incentives  to  diversify  production.  Consequently,  the  Washington 
Consensus tenet of broadening the tax base and lowering marginal tax rates would continue 
to  be  extremely  difficult  to  achieve  in  Africa  due  to  the  massive  dependence  on  a  single 
source of tax revenue.  
Trade liberalization as required by the Washington Consensus further compounded Africa’s 
problems as African countries have been unable to develop efficient and low cost industries 
that  could  compete  favourably  in  the  global  market.  Thus,  while  many  countries  outside 
Africa have been able to liberalize foreign trade to increase their share of global trade, Africa 
had  witnessed  declining  terms  of  trade  with  adverse  effects  on  export  revenue  and  real 
exchange rate.  
Although,  the  Washington  Consensus  could  be  said  to  have  improved  macroeconomic 
stability  in  Sub-Sahara  Africa  (SSA),  it  had  not  facilitated  the  solution  to  development  in 
Africa and developing countries in general. This observation was supported by Woo (2004), 
who  elucidated  that  although  Indonesia,  Korea  and  Thailand  implemented  the  Washington 
Consensus type of policies to counter the Asian financial crisis, they suffered deeper output 
losses for a longer period than Malaysia, which adopted capital controls instead.  
The ability of the Beijing Consensus to ensure sustainable economic development in Africa is 
also in doubt. Williamson (2012) argues that the Beijing Consensus could best be described 
as protecting China’s “self-interest” rather than a genuine concern for Africa’s developmental 
needs. For instance, Chinese loans and grants to Africa were closely linked with trade and 
investments in Chinese commodities. In 2004, the Chinese government granted Angola long-
term non-concessional loan of US$2 billion on the condition that 70 per cent of the total loan 
contracts would be awarded to Chinese companies. The loan was also conditioned on the 
fact that China would import 10,000 barrels of crude per day from Angola throughout the loan 
tenure. The terms of the loan clearly showed that it was not designed to have  meaningful 
impact on the citizens and poverty alleviation through domestic job creation. To support the 
notion  that  Beijing  consensus  is  more  of  “self-interest”,  Lammers  (2007)  noted  that,  the 
Chinese development assistance and soft loans to Africa had given China the opportunity to 
explore  Africa’s  oil-fields  as  experienced  in  Angola  and  Sudan.  So  also  were  access  to 
fishing waters in Sierra-Leone and Gabon, and agricultural land in Zambia and Zimbabwe.  
The performance of African economies under the consensuses  
3.2 
Available statistics revealed that Africa had largely under-performed when compared to other 
developing  regions.  Economic  growth  in  Sub-Saharan  Africa  (SSA)  had  been  low;  with  an 
average  real  gross  domestic  product  (GDP)  growth  rate  of  2.6  per  cent  in  the  1980’s 
compared  to  6.7  per  cent  in  developing  Asia  over  the  same  period.  The  global  oil  price 
shocks that occurred in the early 1980s worsened the economic performance in most African 
economies  and  led  to  the  adoption  of  economic  measures  in  the  spirit  of  the  Washington 
consensus.  Noteworthy,  is  the  Structural  Adjustment  Program  (SAP)  with  key  policy 
measures  designed  to  achieve  economic  stabilization  and  enhance  efficiency  in  resource 
allocation  mainly  through  economic  restructuring  and  macroeconomic  balance.  During  this 
period, the growth rate of SSA declined precipitously from  2.3 per cent in 1985 to 0.8 per 
cent in 1986, whereas Developing Asia recorded a growth rate of 6.1 per cent in 1986.  
In the 1990’s, the economic performance of SSA declined further to an average of 2.4 per 
cent, while that of Developing Asia improved to 7.4 per cent. Although, the performance of 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
SSA  strengthened  in  the  2000’s,  Developing  Asia  continued  to  outperform  SSA.  Thus,  in 
2011, Developing Asia growth rate stood at 8.2 per cent, while that of SSA was 5.2 per cent.  
Inflation rate  
The  consumer  price  inflation  of  SSA  had  been  within  tolerable  limits  and  relatively  stable 
compared to the episodes of unprecedented high inflation rates in three-digit experienced in 
Latin America and the Caribbean region, between 1983 and 1994. This arose from severe 
debt  crisis,  excessive  import  dependency,  increased  international  commodity  prices  and 
structural bottlenecks. For SSA, the highest inflation rate recorded was 46.1 per cent in 1994, 
induced  by  agricultural  supply  shocks  and  inflation  inertia.  The  inflationary  pressure  had 
since reversed as the consumer price inflation declined from an average of 24.4 per cent in 
the  1990’s  to  10.3  per  cent  in  2000–2009.  However,  SSA  inflation  rates  had  consistently 
remained above world inflation rate since 1991.  
Investment flows  
The foreign direct investment boom that began in the early 1990’s was mainly channeled to 
emerging  economies,  Developing  Asia  and  Latin  America/Caribbean  economies.  In  the 
1990’s,  FDI  (net)  in  developing  Asia  and  Latin  America/Caribbean  economies  stood  at 
US$40.4 billion and US$33.3 billion, respectively. It was however a modest US$2.5 billion in 
SSA.  The  share  of  SSA  in  global  FDI  flows  fell  from  an  average  of  4.0  per  cent  from  
1980–1989 to 1.5 per cent in 1990–99 and thereafter rose to 3.4 per cent in 2000–2009. In 
contrast, the share of developing Asia in global FDI flow increased steadily, reaching a peak 
of 28.3 per cent in the period 1990–1999. The dismal performance of SSA in attracting FDI 
had been attributed to political and economic instability, corruption and the high cost of doing 
business.  Furthermore,  the  endorsement  of  Bilateral  Investment  Treaties  (BITs),  Double 
Taxation Treaties (DTTs) and the adoption of multilateral agreements under the Multilateral 
Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA), have yielded minimal improvement in inflow.  
The  performance  of  the  region  had  however,  improved  modestly  in  recent  years,  owing 
largely to the economic reform initiatives to improve the investment climate. These included 
the  privatization  of  state-owned  enterprises,  establishment  of  export  processing  zones, 
improvements  in  infrastructure  and  review  of  FDI  regulatory  frameworks.  FDI  net  flows  of 
US$16.9 billion were thus recorded in the period 2000–2009, this was however, lower than 
the amount recorded in Asia, Latin America and the Caribbean economies. On annualized 
basis, SSA’s share increased slightly from 3.1 per cent in 2010 to 4.0 per cent in 2011.  
Lessons from the growth strategies by China and India  
4.0 
A review of the strategies adopted by China and India in achieving their impressive growth 
revealed  that  both  countries  insulated  their  economies  from  international  trade  through 
import  tariffs,  export  subsidies,  and  quantitative  restrictions,  in  addition  to  the  provision  of 
subsidies  to  the  manufacturing  sector.  Extensive  regulation  of  economic  activities  was 
enforced until 1991. State control of the financial sector and financial flows was adopted to 
manage the economy and guide resources to priority sectors.  
In China, gradual economic reforms were adopted in which government promoted synergy 
between social division of labour and growing national market. Through this mechanism, it 
was easy to harness the expanding skilled manpower from massive push for education; the 
country  also  adopted  large  social  division  of  labour  and  favoured  foreign  capitalists  to 
promote  national  development.  China’s  promotion  of  Township  and  Village  Enterprises 
(TVEs)  also  aided  the  country’s  rapid  development.  This  programme  was  introduced 
between 1978–1983 under Household Responsibility System reform where the control over 
agricultural  surpluses  was  handed  over  to  households  and  communities.  The  reform  was 
further complemented  by fiscal decentralization and the use of fiscal residual for bonuses. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Fiscal  decentralization  enabled  local  governments  to  have  autonomy  and  contribute  to 
national  economy  directly,  while  fiscal  residual  bonus  rewarded  communities  according  to 
their contribution to the national economy. Through these reforms, TVEs became the central 
strategy  to  explore  entrepreneurship  energies  in  order  to  achieve  national  developmental 
objectives.  China’s  developmental  path  moved  from  agriculture  into  manufacturing,  before 
transiting to the services sector. In summary, China’s policies were embedded in incremental 
reforms, 
innovations  and  experimentation,  export-led  growth,  state  capitalism  and 
authoritarianism.  
The  Indian  model  leaned  towards  a  shift  to  services  sector  and  ICT,  as  its  growth  was 
induced  by  rapid  growth  in  technological  advancement  in  the  services  sector  through  the 
mechanism  of  free  market,  education  and  innovation.  The  country’s  developmental  path 
directly  transformed  into  the  services  sector  from  the  agricultural  sector,  with  the 
manufacturing sector remaining light.  
Commonly,  China  and  India  based  their  industrialization  on  short-term  autarky  policies 
involving state control on investments and import quotas with rapid swing from agriculture. 
They ensured that industrial development in the private sector were kept within the national 
plan to prevent the diversion of foreign exchange and other investment funds to non-socially 
desirable  sectors.  Large-scale  infrastructural  developments  were  also  undertaken.  Both 
nations  have  evidently  surpassed  the  performance  of  most  countries  that  adopted  the 
Washington and Beijing consensus’ policies.  
This  posts  the  need  for  a  paradigm  shift  in  Africa’s  developmental  efforts  that  have  not 
achieved  set  objectives.  Most  African  countries,  including  Nigeria  share  certain  similarities 
with  the  two  countries  in  terms  of  their  large  population,  massive  supply  of  relatively 
educated  and  cheap  labour,  and  existence  of  huge  domestic  markets  essential  for  the 
attraction  of  foreign  investment.  For  Africa  to  emerge  from  the  present  economic  problem 
there is need for development strategies that fit into the unique nature of the continent. This 
requires  a  clear  break  from  the  past  and  a  change  in  vision.  In  adopting  alternative 
strategies, planners must take cognizance of differences in its social-economic and political 
structures. A wholesome adoption of both the Chinese and Indian models is not advisable 
given  that  the  world  economy  has  changed  significantly  from  what  it  was  when  these  two 
countries  adopted  their  respective  models,  but  beneficial  strategies  within  the  two  models 
could  be  adopted.  A  valuable  alternative  model  for  Africa  therefore  must  be  unique  to  the 
nature of its economies.  
A new developmental strategy for Africa  
5.0 
Based on the experiences of China and India, and taking cognizance of the realities of the 
African economic setting, there is need to fashion a new developmental strategy for Africa. 
The  thrust  of  such  developmental  strategy  must  be  focused  towards  harnessing  the 
continent’s rich natural resources, and managing them in such a way as to become a major 
player in the global economy without sacrificing the need for an inclusive development. This 
can be done through government intervention and later adoption of free market to promote 
economic growth. To this end, some of the strategies that can kick start Africa’s economic 
transformation are suggested below:  
Regional integration  
Regional  integration  is  indeed  the  continent’s  biggest  challenge,  even  though  several 
countries  in  Africa  belong  to  one  regional  grouping  or  the  other.  Although  there  has  been 
some achievements across some of these groupings such as the free movement of persons 
and  customs  union  in  the  Economic  Community  of  West  African  States  (ECOWAS),  and 
common currency in the West African Economic and Monetary Union (UEMOA), Southern 
African  Development  Community  (SADC),  Southern  African  Customs  Union  (SACU)  and 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
East African Community (EAC). These achievements have to be strengthened and replicated 
across Africa to further promote the inter-complementarity of goods, trade facilitation and free 
movements  of  the  factor  of  production,  amongst  others.  The  process  of  integration  would 
also  assist  in  regional  infrastructure  development  in  critical  areas  like  energy,  transport, 
communication/ICT  systems,  roads  and  rail  transportation.  This  would  reduce  production 
costs  and  increase  economic  activities  across  the  continent.  In  addition,  it  would  also 
strengthen Africa’s political voice, improve collective negotiations to achieve more favourable 
outcomes  on  the  external  front.  Other  benefits  would  include  enhanced  access  to 
international markets and fair price for resource exploitation as well as attracting investment 
flows to the continent.  
Investment in human capital  
Africa  has  a  young  population  compared  to  the  ageing  societies  across  the  world.  Skill 
acquisition  is  critical  to  turn  this  resource  into  wealth.  For  example,  for  the  manufacturing 
sector  to  take  off,  the  new  development  strategy  must  avoid  the  current  fragmented 
approach  to  education  which  is  not  adapted  to  the  developmental  needs  of  the  African 
economies,  hence,  emphasis  should  be  placed  on  tailoring  education  to  growth  sectors. 
Education and training in cutting edge technologies would enable countries to adjust more 
swiftly to the challenges of globalization as enterprises become more flexible and better able 
to  absorb  new  technologies.  As  such  an  integrated  approach  to  education  would  enhance 
human  resources  development  and  create  sufficient  skilled  manpower  desired  for  the 
enhancement  of  industrial  production.  In  particular,  acquisition  of  requisite  skills  is  also 
crucial  for  the  development  of  Africa’s  informal  sector,  which  account  for  the  lion  share  of 
employment. In the short-term, technical and vocational skills are critical for building agro-
allied industries using basic technology.  
Utilization of natural resources for development  
Aside  human  resources,  the  continent  should  leverage  on  the  vast  endowment  of  natural 
resources  like  land,  water  resources,  solid  minerals,  oil  and  gas  and  renewal  energy  to 
launch itself into the next development phase. Unproductive practices such as land tenure 
system  must  be  discarded,  while  property  rights,  and  rule  of  law  must  be  enforced. 
Agreements  on  mining  rights  must  ensure  fair  pricing  and  sustainability  of  these  natural 
resources.  
Institution of good governance and zero tolerance for corruption  
Institutional development and good governance anchored on the rule of law are paramount 
for  sustainable  development.  Strong  political  commitment  on  the  part  of  the  relevant 
authorities is also quintessential. Enhancing the operation of public enterprises is essential to 
address corruption and improve efficiency. Like China, African countries should encourage 
the adoption of a zero tolerance policy against corruption by instituting severe punishment to 
penalize and control/eliminate corruption.  
Some likely challenges to the new paradigm  
7.0 
In order for Africa to succeed under the proposed new economic development paradigm, the 
continent  must  cultivate  a  sense  of  urgency  in  overcoming  some  of  the  likely  challenges 
currently confronting it. These challenges include:  
Corruption  
The  high  incidence  of  corruption  constitutes  a  major  challenge  to  the  successful 
implementation  of  any  new  development  strategies  in  Africa.  The  effects  of  corruption  are 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
multi-dimensional. Corruption promotes the diversion, depletion and misallocation of scarce 
resources, as well as increase in the costs of production of goods and services. It results in 
inefficient  state  ownership,  excessive  private  accumulation  and  widening  inequalities.  The 
lack  of 
transparency  and  accountability  associated  with  corruption  prevents  public 
participation in the decision-making process thus, limiting positive developmental outcomes. 
The multiplicity of functions and the wanton duplication of agencies in some African countries 
equally  promote  wastages  and  inefficiencies  in  the  management  of  resources.  Corruption 
also distorts fiscal discipline and impedes institution of good corporate governance practices.  
Market access  
Low  level  of  inter-complementarity  of  African  goods  limits  the  ability  of  the  continent  to 
support  a  high  level  of  intra-African  trade.  This  results  from  the  production  of  the  same 
category  of  goods  –  primary  goods,  in  addition  to  the  fact  that  they  service  the  same 
international  market.  There  is  a  strong  need  therefore  for  diversification  of  the  production 
base  in  Africa.  Market  access  is  also  greatly  reduced  by  the  existence  of  sanitary 
phytosanitory measures conditions under the WTO, which promotes conditions that African 
countries cannot meet. There is need for the revaluation of the international trade rules that 
have limited the bargaining power of the continent. Due to the weaknesses of the domestic 
production  base,  African  countries  are  unable  to  reciprocate  the  most  favourable  nation 
status in countries with which they sign bilateral trade agreements, and also fully participate 
in  preferential  trade  agreements  such  as  the  African  Growth  and  Opportunity  Act  (AGOA) 
and Economic Partnership Agreement (EPA).  
Technological constraints  
The low technology base in Africa is a major constraint to development. Old technologies are 
often deployed with over-reliance on traditional methods of production which results in low 
productivity  and  competitiveness  due  to  the  lack  of  economies  of  scale.  African  countries 
have  also  been  unable  to  develop  cutting  edge  technologies  owing  to  weak  research  and 
development.  This  results  from  poor  funding  of  research  institutes  and  science  education. 
There  is  need  therefore  for  better  funding  of  research  initiatives  in  order  to  stimulate 
technological advancements.  
Structural/institutional constraints  
The  lack  of  critical  infrastructure  such  as  transport  and  communication  networks  does  not 
support the growth of economic activities in Africa. The inadequate supply of electricity, for 
example, leads to increase in production costs thereby rendering products expensive. Most 
of  the  existing  legal  infrastructure  that  is  vital  for  the  enforcement  of  competition  laws, 
bankruptcy  and  other  commercial  laws  are  weak  and  inadequate.  Rule  of  law,  property 
rights,  among  others  must  therefore  be  firmly  rooted  to  provide  the  enabling  legal 
environment for Africa’s development.  
Information/Data constraints  
Many development projects are poorly implemented due to lack of data, which often lead to 
insufficient  knowledge  on  the  magnitude  developmental  challenge.  The  poor  data  base  is 
largely due to lack of adequate infrastructure and skills for data mapping and analysis. There 
is  need  to  focus  on  addressing  these  challenges  to  aid  effective  policy  formulation  and 
implementation.  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Access to credit  
Entrepreneurs  and  investors  are  exposed  to  limited  credit  channels  which  constrains 
competitive business expansion and productivity growth. Increases in foreign capital inflows 
and developmental aids have reversed following the global financial crisis. FDI inflows are 
relatively low making long-term investment difficult. There is need to re-engineer the credit 
market in Africa so that the needs of entrepreneurs can be adequately met.  
Climate change/natural disasters  
The  impact  of  climate  change  and  global  warming  that  mostly  emanates  from  the 
industrialized  countries  makes  Africa  vulnerable  to  counter-productive  forces.  Rising 
incidence  of  natural  disasters  including  droughts,  floods,  tropical  storms,  soil  erosion  and 
landslides are major threats to human life and property imposing huge social and economic 
losses. The lack of capabilities to accurately predict, monitor and mitigate the above sources 
of environmental degradation has severely constrained development efforts in Africa.  
Trade retaliation  
Africa’s  attempt  to  protect  infant  industries  may  provoke  retaliations  from  trading  partners 
that could further shrink the market for Africa’s exports. Subsidies and fiscal incentives for 
domestic  producers  may  induce  tariff  changes  that  could  limit  trade  with  other  countries. 
Trade retaliation is no doubt a major threat to the new development strategy for Africa.  
Violent conflicts  
The  prevalence  of  conflicts  and  social  instabilities  are  among  the  major  problems  turning 
African countries into fragile states. The continent has the high concentration of the world’s 
poorest  people  with  little  or  no  social  safety  nets.  Civil  unrests,  inter-religious  and  ethnic 
conflicts are prevalent in most of the countries. There are numerous cases of domestic and 
imported security problems as exemplified by the recent war in Libya and the political crisis; 
as well as the terrorist attacks across the continent. The inability to resolve conflicts erodes 
the  desired  sense  of  equity,  fairness,  motivation,  consensus  building,  ownership  and 
participation in the development process. Poverty and inequality may also pose challenges to 
the new development strategies that require painful sacrifices.  
Environmental issues  
Inadequate access to modern and safe energy sources and the excessive use of firewood in 
rural Africa distorts ecological balance and stifle growth. Ecological hazards like soil erosion, 
floods,  desertification,  ocean/desert  encroachment  and  deforestation  are  among  the  major 
development  constraints  in  Africa.  Poor  sanitary  conditions,  gas  flaring/carbon  emissions, 
lack of access to safe drinking water, poor quality healthcare and poor nutrition all need to be 
addressed for development to take off.  
Physical/human capital  
Knowledge  gaps  are  prevalent  in  Africa  and  are  generally  known  to  constrain  investment 
growth  by  diminishing  returns  to  capital.  Knowledge  is  a  vital  input  into  the  production 
process  and  can  be  shared  without  necessarily  increasing  costs  or  diminishing  the 
facilitator’s  intellect.  Investments  in  human  capital  are  needed  for  management  expertise, 
product  and  process  innovations  and  overseas  marketing  channels.  Increased  knowledge 
can  boost  productivity  with  limited  amount  of  resources.  Knowledge  is  also  essential  for 
capacity building and product development and is thus a key catalyst to development.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
Conclusion  
8.0 
Africa with its huge natural resources, regional market size and human resources ought not 
to be a marginal player in the global economy. Neither the Washington Consensus nor the 
Beijing Consensus can bring about the desired change. The implications of the structure of 
African economies need to be critically appraised in order to identify an appropriate African 
Consensus  –  for  its  development  model.  In  this  regard,  a  developmental  strategy  for  the 
continent  would  include  a  framework  that  embrace  competitive  regional  and  international 
trade, development of critical infrastructural, harnessing of the potential of the huge natural 
resource endowment, including abundant labour force and large domestic market.  
References  
Aggrey,  N.  (2011):  Can  Africa  Compete  in  International  Trade  using  Technology  as  a 
weapon? Africa Trade Forum.  
Chang, H. (2003): Kicking Away the Ladder: The “Real” History of Free Trade. FPIF Special. 
Report. Available at: www.fpif.org.  
Durlauf, S and Qyuah, D. (1998) “Why do growth rates differ?” in Taylor and Woodford (eds), 
Handbook of Macroeconomics, North-Holland Temple.  
Fernandez,  R.  and  J.  Portes,  (1998),  «Returns  to  Regionalism:  “An  Analysis  of  non-
traditional Gains from Regional Trading Arrangements” World Bank Economic Review, pp. 
197–220.  
Kahl, Brian (2004) “African and the Washington Consensus” From Diversity in Development-
Reconsidering  the  Washington  Consensus.  FONDAD,  The  Hague,  December,  2004, 
www.fondad.org.  
Kennedy, S. (2008): The Myth of the Beijing Consensus.  
Kremer,  M.,  van  Lieshoust,  P.  and  Went,  R.  (2008):  Under-explored  Treasure  Troves  of 
Development  Lessons-Lessons  from  the  Histories’  of  Small  Rich  European  Countries 
(SRECs).  
Lammers,  Ellen  (2007)  “How  Will  the  Beijing  Consensus  Benefit  Africa?”  www.the 
brokeronline.eu/en/Articles.  
Manuel,  Tervor  A.  (2003)  “Africa  and  the  Washington  Consensus:  Finding  the  Right  Path” 
Finance and Development September 2003.  
Naim  S.  (2000).  The  Concept  of  Sovereignty  in  the  Age  of  Globalization.  Local  Societies, 
Globalization,  and  the  Environment:  Challenges  and  Alternatives,  Beirut:  Notre  Dame 
University Press, pp. 81–85.  
O’Connor,  D.  and  Lunati  R.  (1999)  “Economic  Opening  and  the  Demand  for  Skills  in 
Developing  Countries:  A  Review  of  Theory  and  Evidence”.  (Technical  Paper  No.  149.) 
Organization  for  Economic  Co-operation  and  Development,  Development  Centre,  Paris. 
http://www.oecd.org/dev/publication/tpla.htm.  
Paul  Collier  and  Jan  Willem  Gunning  (1999).  “Explaining  African  Economic  Performance,” 
Journal of Economic Literature, American Economic Association, vol. 37(1), pages 64–111, 
March.  
Puga,  D  and  Venables,  A.J.  (1998)  „Trading  arrangements  and  industrial  development”, 
World Bank Economic Review, 12, 221–249.  
Regional  Roundtable  for  Africa,  2002  World  Summit  on  Sustainable  Development  Report, 
Cairo,  Egypt, 
2001.  www.un.org/jsummit/html/prep_process/africa 
/africa_roundtable_report.htm.  
25–27, 
June 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Integration 
in  Regional 
Stiglitz, J. E. (1998) “Towards a New Paradigm for Development: Strategies, Policies, and 
Processes”, Prebisch Lecture at UNCTAD, Geneva, October 19.  
Schiff,  M.  and  L.  Winters  (1998),  “Dynamics  and  Politics 
Arrangements: An Introduction,” The World Bank Economic Review, Vol. 12.  
Shankar, R. and Shah, A. (2001) Bridging the Economic Divide within Nations: a Scorecard 
on  the  Performance  of  Regional  Development  Policies  in  Reducing  Regional  Income 
Disparities, World Bank Working Papers Series.  
Singh, A. (1994). Openness and the market-friendly approach to development: learning the 
right lessons from development experience. World Development, 22 (12).  
Venables, A.J, (2000) “Gainers and losers from regional integration agreements”, CEPR dp 
no 2568, http://econ.lse.ac.uk/staff/ajv/jpap4.pdf.  
Williamson, J. (2012): Is the “Beijing Consensus” Now Dominant? Asia Policy, no 13.  
Woo, Wing Thye (2004) “Some Fundamental Inadequacies of the Washington Consensus: 
Misunderstanding the Poor by the Brightest” Hong Kong Institute of Economics and Business 
Strategy, The University of Hong Kong.  
World  Bank  (1997).  Global  economic  prospects  and  the  developing  countries.  Washington 
DC: World Bank.  
World Bank. 2000. Securing our Future in the Global Economy. World Bank, Latin American 
and the Caribbean Region, Flagship Report. Washington, D.C. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
