Njuguna Ndung’u: Developments in Kenya’s insurance industry sector 
Remarks by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the launch of 
Continental Reinsurance brand and products, Nairobi office, Nairobi, 5 July 2012. 
 The Chairman, Continental Re, Nigeria 
Distinguished guests,  
Ladies and Gentlemen.  
Many  thanks  indeed  to  Continental  Reinsurance  for  having  invited  me  here  today  at  this 
auspicious  occasion  where  Continental  Re  is  launching  its  brand  in  Kenya.  It  is  extremely 
heartening to see such a strong attendance for this breakfast meeting.  
Firstly, allow me to spend a few moments to reflect upon the future of the Kenyan insurance 
industry  based  on  my  experience,  and  to  provide  some  thoughts  and  advice  on  where 
reinsurers such as Continental Reinsurance can contribute additional value in the sector.  
The Kenyan insurance market wrote KShs. 100 billion of Gross Direct Premiums in the year 
2011.  It  has  grown  at  an  average  rate  of  16%  p.a.  over  the  last  5  years.  The  market 
comprises  of  45  insurance  companies,  transacting  long-term  and  short-term  insurance 
business.  In  addition,  there  are  over  140  insurance  brokers  operating  in  the  Kenyan 
insurance market. Competition is strong and therefore clear market positioning is essential.  
I  am  standing  here  today  wearing  two  hats:  one,  as  Regulator  of  the  banking  sector  and 
secondly, as a Board Member of the IRA. I have seen that there is a strong requirement for 
products that are driven by a real need from customers – products that appeal to a specific 
demand. I am happy to note therefore that the industry is addressing the matter of innovation 
and  are  designing  new  products  particularly  targeting the  lower  market.  This  is the  way  in 
which the insurance industry will be able to enhance the level of financial inclusion among 
the population.  
By way of example, let us look at the agricultural sector – which, comprises a vital 80% of our 
economy with a 26% contribution to GDP. Insurance and reinsurance should play a bigger 
role  in  the  development  of  the  agricultural  sector  in  Kenya.  I  am  sure  that, Weather-index 
micro insurance schemes are making a measurable impact where payouts enable farmers to 
recover  from  what  would  otherwise  be  financial  disaster.  For  instance  in  August  last  year, 
3,380  farmers  received  compensation  for  the  loss  of  their  crops,  totalling  approximately 
KShs. 150 million. The transfer of weather risk away from these farmers to the international 
insurance  markets  strengthens  the  resilience  of  farmers  and  agricultural  businesses  to 
weather impacts. It provides additional – and  important – security which also supports our 
Kenyan economy.  
A great benefit for the development of micro insurance is the deepening of penetration per 
capita.  Currently  most  micro  insurance  schemes  are  run  as  small  pilot  type  arrangements 
and continue to face a number of regulatory and operational challenges.  
I  am  informed  that  a  policy  framework  paper  has  now  been  developed  by  the  micro 
insurance  working  group  set  up  by  the  Insurance  Regulatory  Authority  and  the  same  has 
been  forwarded  to  the  Ministry  of  Finance  for  further  attention.  In  this  regard,  the  Minister 
during  his  budget  speech  recognized  micro  insurance  as  a  standalone class  of  insurance, 
giving it the prominence that is deserves.  
Ladies and gentlemen, insurance penetration in Kenya is 3% – high by  African standards, 
but with a long way to go still. I appeal to leaders and operators in the sector to harness the 
growth  opportunities  and  to  think  forward,  to  think  innovatively.  For  example,  the  recent 
discovery  of  oil  and gas  in  Kenya  has  marked a  significant  opportunity for  this sector. We 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
have  had  the  chance  to  see  how  other  African  countries  have  tackled  the  discovery  of 
important natural resources, and the onus is now firmly on us to learn from their successes, 
and from their mistakes. We know, for example, that there is long way to go to prepare our 
country  for  the  technical  intelligence  required  to  provide  security  around  the  multitude  of 
issues  that  accompany  a  discovery  of  this  kind.  I  request  the  insurance  and  reinsurance 
market to test out the structures in place for oil and gas insurance. We need to be prepared 
as an industry and as a country in order that we safeguard against future potential issues 
resulting from the mining of our natural resources.  
In  this  regard  Mr.  Chairman,  I  wish  to  applaud  Continental  Reinsurance’s  steps  in 
progressing product innovation and development including Oil and Gas, and look forward to 
learning from your experience.  
Lastly, ladies and gentlemen, I urge the insurance industry to position itself for the economic 
integration in the East African Union. As you are already aware, the common market protocol 
of the East African Community (EAC) creates a big market full of opportunities. This is the 
way to go in terms of integration and expansion within the EAC and beyond. Indeed today’s 
occasion  is  a  realization  of  that  spirit  as  we  congratulate  Continental  Re  (a  Nigerian 
company) on their authorization to transact fully reinsurance business in Kenya. This trend is 
the beginning of what I predict will be the future of the insurance and reinsurance market in 
Africa-spreading across countries with free movement and with the opportunity to exploit full 
cross-border  growth.  I  therefore  challenge  the  industry  to  prepare  for  this  eventuality  in  a 
timely manner.  
Once  more  ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  would  like  to  thank  the  Continental  Reinsurance 
company on this auspicious occasion and to wish them all success.  
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
