Daniel K Tarullo: Dodd-Frank Act implementation 
Testimony  by  Mr  Daniel  K  Tarullo,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal 
Reserve System, before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, US Senate, 
Washington DC, 6 June 2012. 
 Chairman Johnson, Ranking Member Shelby, and other members of the committee, thank 
you for the opportunity to testify on the Federal Reserve’s implementation of the Dodd-Frank 
Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 (Dodd-Frank Act).  
As  we  approach  the  second  anniversary  of  the  Dodd-Frank  Act,  implementation  of  the 
financial  reforms  enacted  by  the  Congress  remains  a  formidable  task.  At  the  Federal 
Reserve, staff teams with a wide range of expertise continue to contribute to Dodd-Frank Act 
projects, many as part of joint rule-making efforts with other federal agencies. We have been 
working  to  put  final  Dodd-Frank  Act  rules  in  place  and  to  negotiate  and  implement 
international  reforms  compatible  with  various  Dodd-Frank  Act  provisions;  these  include 
enhanced  capital  requirements  for  systemically  important  banks,  liquidity  requirements, 
resolution mechanisms, and margining requirements for over-the-counter derivatives.  
As we continue rule implementation and the related international initiatives, we are trying to 
provide as much clarity as possible to financial markets and the public about the post-crisis 
financial  regulatory  landscape,  and  are  also  taking  the  time  to  consider  comments  and 
alternatives carefully. In addition, the Federal Reserve continues to work cooperatively with 
other  supervisors  to  ensure  that  prudential  supervision  is  conducted  in  a  manner  that 
supports these important reforms.  
As a final introductory point, it bears noting that both the Dodd-Frank Act reforms and the 
international regulatory reforms share an important feature – a strong focus on the largest, 
most  complex,  and  most  interconnected  financial  firms  and  the  systemic  risks  posed  by 
those firms. This effort reflects the provenance of both the Dodd-Frank Act and international 
reform initiatives, which were motivated largely by the failure or near failure of a number of 
major  financial  firms  and  the  significant  public  policy  problems  created  by  the  market 
perception that such firms are “too big to fail.” As the Federal Reserve implements reforms, 
we have maintained this core focus on the largest firms by proposing rules that try to mitigate 
the  systemic  risks  posed  by  those  firms  and  minimize  the  burden  on  smaller  entities, 
particularly community banks. Similarly, we seek to implement reforms in a manner that is 
faithful to statutory requirements and that maximizes financial stability and other economic 
benefits at the least cost to credit availability and economic growth.  
This  morning  I  will  briefly  describe  the  Federal  Reserve’s  progress  on  several  important 
Dodd-Frank  Act rules  and  recent  reforms to  the  international  bank regulatory  framework. I 
will also describe briefly the Federal Reserve’s role in supervising and examining the largest 
financial firms in cooperation with other federal and state supervisors.  
Enhanced capital standards 
While robust bank capital requirements alone cannot ensure the safety and soundness of our 
financial  system,  they  are  central  to  good  financial  regulation  precisely  because  capital  is 
available  to  absorb  all  kinds  of  potential  losses  –  unanticipated  as  well  as  anticipated. 
Indeed, the best way to safeguard against taxpayer-funded bailouts in the future is for our 
large financial institutions to have capital buffers commensurate with their own risk profiles 
and the damage that would be done to the financial system if such institutions were to fail. 
Recent events serve to remind us that the presence of substantial amounts of high-quality 
capital is the best way to ensure that significant losses at individual firms are borne by their 
shareholders, and not by depositors or taxpayers. Ensuring the capital adequacy of financial 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
firms requires both improvement of the traditional, firm-based approach to capital regulation 
and the creation of a more systemic, or macroprudential, component of capital regulation.  
With  respect  to  improving  the  traditional  approach  to  capital  regulation,  the  Federal 
Reserve’s  work  has  principally  involved  the  development  of  stronger  regulatory  capital 
standards  in  cooperation  with  other  supervisors  in  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking 
Supervision.  This  work  includes  the  so-called  Basel  2.5  reforms  that  strengthened  the 
market-risk  capital  requirements  of  Basel  II.  This  work  also  includes  the  Basel  III  reforms, 
which  improve  the  quality  of  regulatory  capital,  increase  the  quantity  of  required  minimum 
regulatory  capital,  require  banks  to maintain  a  capital  conservation  buffer  and, for the first 
time internationally, introduce a minimum leverage ratio. The Federal Reserve and other U.S. 
banking  agencies  are  moving  to  finalize  regulations  to  implement  Basel  2.5  in  the  United 
States and soon will be proposing regulations to implement Basel III.  
These  significant  changes  to  the  international  regulatory  capital  framework  have  been 
supplemented  by  an  important  element  of  the  Dodd-Frank  Act  known  as  the  “Collins 
Amendment.”  The  Collins  Amendment  provides  a  safeguard  against  declines  in  minimum 
capital  requirements  in  the  Basel  II  capital  regime  based  on  bank  internal  modeling.  The 
Federal  Reserve  and  other  U.S.  banking  agencies  issued  final  rules  to  implement  this 
provision in June 2011.  
Capital surcharges for systemically important financial firms 
The  recent  financial  crisis  also  made  clear  that  the  existing  international  regulatory  capital 
framework was not sufficiently responsive to macroprudential concerns, such as the threat to 
financial stability posed by systemically important financial institutions. Accordingly, in Basel 
Committee  deliberations,  the  Federal  Reserve  advocated  for  capital  surcharges  on  the 
world’s  largest,  most  interconnected  banking  organizations  based  on  their  global  systemic 
importance.  Last  year,  an  international  agreement  was  reached  on  a  framework  for  such 
surcharges, to be implemented during the same 2016–2019 transition period for the capital 
conservation  buffers  in  Basel  III.  This  initiative  is  consistent  with  the  Federal  Reserve’s 
obligation  under  section  165  of  the  Dodd-Frank  Act  to  impose  more  stringent  capital 
standards  on  systemically  important  financial  institutions,  including  the  requirement  that 
these additional standards be graduated based on the systemic footprint of the institution.  
Both the Dodd-Frank Act provision and the Basel framework are motivated by the fact that 
the  failure  of  a  systemically  important  firm  would  have  dramatically  greater  negative 
consequences  on  the  financial  system  and  the  economy  than  the  failure  of  other  firms. 
Stricter  capital  requirements  on  systemically  important  firms  should  also  help  offset  any 
funding advantage these firms derive from any remaining perceived status as too-big-to-fail 
and  provide  an  incentive  for  such  firms  to  reduce  their  systemic  footprint.  The  Federal 
Reserve’s  aim  has  been  to  fashion  the  enhanced  capital  requirements  of  section  165  and 
work toward an associated international framework in a simultaneous and congruent manner.  
Stress testing and capital planning 
Recent  improvements  to  the  regulatory  capital  framework  have  important  supervisory 
complements in the Federal Reserve's development of firm-specific stress testing and capital 
planning requirements. These supervisory tools serve two related functions. First, they make 
capital regulation more forward-looking by testing whether firms would have enough capital 
to remain viable financial intermediaries if they sustained hypothetical losses in asset values 
and  earnings  in  an  adverse  macroeconomic  scenario.  Second,  they  contribute  to  the 
macroprudential dimension of supervision by enabling simultaneous examination of the risks 
faced by all large financial institutions in a hypothetical adverse economic scenario.  
The Dodd-Frank Act creates two forms of stress-testing requirements. These requirements 
mirror the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program model, a 2009 effort led by the Federal 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Reserve  that  helped  restore  confidence  in  the  viability  of  the  banking  system  during  the 
financial crisis. First, the act mandates that the Federal Reserve conduct annual stress tests 
on all bank holding companies with $50 billion or more in assets to determine whether they 
have  the  capital  needed  to  absorb  losses  in  hypothetical  baseline,  adverse,  and  severely 
adverse  economic  conditions.  Second,  the  act  requires  both  these  companies  and  certain 
other  regulated  financial  firms  with  assets  between  $10  billion  and  $50  billion  to  conduct 
internal  stress  tests.  The  Federal  Reserve  must  publish  a  summary  of  results  of  the 
supervisory  stress  tests  and  issue  regulations  requiring  firms  to  publish  a  summary  of  the 
company-run stress tests.  
Regular and rigorous stress testing provides regulators with knowledge that can be applied 
to  both  microprudential  and  macroprudential  supervision  efforts.  Disclosure  of  the  general 
methodology and firm-specific results of our stress testing has additional regulatory benefits. 
First, the release of certain details about assumptions, methods, and conclusions exposes 
the supervisory approach to greater external scrutiny and discussion. Such discussions will 
almost  surely  help  us  improve  our  assumptions  and  methodology  over  time.  Second, 
because bank portfolios are difficult to value without a great deal of detailed information, the 
stress  test  results  should  be  very  useful  to  investors  in  and  counterparties  of  the  largest 
banking  firms.  Further,  I  believe  the  demands  of  supervisors  for  well-specified  data  and 
projections from firms have improved risk management at these firms. The stress testing that 
the Federal Reserve has instituted during the past few years has become an important part 
of  our  horizontal,  interdisciplinary  approach  to  supervising  the  largest  bank  holding 
companies.  
Firm-specific capital planning has also become an important supervisory tool. In November 
2011, the Federal Reserve issued a new regulation requiring large banking organizations to 
submit an annual capital plan. This tool serves multiple purposes. First, it provides a regular, 
structured, and comparative way to promote and assess the capacity of large bank holding 
companies to understand and manage their capital positions. Second, it provides supervisors 
with  an  opportunity  to  evaluate  any  capital  distribution  plans  against  the  backdrop  of  the 
firm’s  overall  capital  position,  a  matter  of  considerable  importance  given  the  significant 
distributions that some firms made in 2007 even as the financial crisis gathered momentum. 
Third, at least for the next few years, it will provide a regular assessment of whether large 
bank holding companies will readily meet the Basel 2.5 and Basel III capital requirements as 
they take effect in the United States.  
A stress test is a critical part of the annual capital plan review. But, as these three different 
purposes indicate, the capital plan review is about more than using a stress test to determine 
whether  a  firm’s  capital  distribution  plans  are  consistent  with  remaining  a  viable  financial 
intermediary in adverse economic conditions. As indicated during our capital plan reviews in 
both 2011 and 2012, the Federal Reserve may object to a capital plan because of significant 
deficiencies  in  a  firm’s  capital  planning  process,  as  well  as  because  one  or  more relevant 
capital ratios would fall below required levels under the assumptions of stress and planned 
capital  distributions.  Likewise,  the  stress  test  is  relevant  not  only  for  its  role  in  the  capital 
planning process. As noted earlier, it also serves other important purposes, not least of which 
is increased transparency of both bank holding company balance sheets and the supervisory 
process of the Federal Reserve.  
Enhanced liquidity standards 
As  with  capital,  the  financial  crisis  also  brought  attention  to  defects  in  the  liquidity  risk-
management practices of large financial firms. As seen during the crisis, a financial firm – 
particularly one with significant amounts of short-term funding – can become illiquid before it 
becomes insolvent, as creditors run in the face of uncertainty about the firm’s viability. While 
higher levels and quality of capital can mitigate some of this risk, it was widely agreed that 
quantitative liquidity requirements should be developed. The Basel Committee generated two 
liquidity  standards:  one,  a  Liquidity  Coverage  Ratio  (LCR)  with  a  30-day  time  horizon;  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
other, a Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR) with a one-year time horizon. However, insofar as 
this  was  the  first-ever  effort  to  specify  such  requirements,  the  Governors  and  Heads  of 
Supervision  of  the  countries  represented  on  the  Basel  Committee  determined  that 
implementation  of  both  frameworks  should  be  delayed  while  they  are  subject  to  further 
examination  and  possible  revision.  As  is  the  case  with  enhanced  capital  standards for the 
largest  banking  firms,  the  Basel  Committee’s  liquidity  initiatives  are  consistent  with  the 
Federal  Reserve’s  obligation  under  section  165  of  the  Dodd-Frank  Act  to  impose  more 
stringent  liquidity  standards  on  the  largest  bank  holding  companies  as  well  as  other 
systemically important nonbank financial firms.  
The LCR has been actively reconsidered within the Basel Committee over the last year or so. 
As this work proceeds, four types of changes appear particularly ripe for consideration. First, 
the  LCR’s  definition  of  high-quality  liquid  assets  should  be  broadened.  In  this  regard,  we 
support  efforts  to  move  away  from  the  current  credit  risk-based  approach  and  toward  a 
quantitative  liquidity-based  approach.  Second,  some  of  the  assumptions  embedded  in  the 
LCR about run rates of liabilities and the liquidity of assets might be grounded more firmly in 
actual experience during the crisis, as the LCR may overstate in particular the liquidity risks 
of  commercial  banking  activities.  Third,  additional  consideration  needs  to  be  given  to  the 
liquidity  risks  inherent  in  trading  activities  that  rely  upon  large  amounts  of  short-term 
wholesale funding. Fourth, the LCR could be better adapted to ensure usability of the high-
quality liquid asset buffer in appropriate circumstances: for example, by making credibly clear 
that  ordinary  minimum  liquidity  levels  need  not  be  maintained  in  the  midst  of  a  crisis.  As 
currently  constituted,  the  LCR  may  have  the  unintended  effect  of  exacerbating  a  period of 
stress by forcing liquidity hoarding. The Basel Committee will likely suggest a set of changes 
to the LCR later this year, with a goal of introducing the LCR in 2015. Work on the NSFR is 
on a considerably slower track; the current plan is for implementation in 2018.  
Enhanced prudential standards for the largest financial firms 
Sections  165  and  166  of  the  Dodd-Frank  Act  require  the  Federal  Reserve  to  establish  a 
broad  set  of  enhanced  prudential  standards,  both  for  bank  holding  companies  with  total 
consolidated assets of $50 billion or more and for nonbank financial companies designated 
by  the  Financial  Stability  Oversight  Council  (Council).  In  addition  to  enhanced  risk-based 
capital  and  liquidity  requirements  and  stress  testing,  the  required  standards  also  include 
single-counterparty  credit  limits,  an  early  remediation  regime,  and  risk-management  and 
resolution-planning  requirements.  Sections  165  and  166  also  require  that  these  prudential 
standards become more stringent as the systemic footprint of a firm increases.  
In  December,  the  Federal  Reserve  issued  a  package  of  proposed  rules  to  implement 
sections 165 and 166 of the Dodd-Frank Act. The Federal Reserve’s proposed rules would 
apply the same set of enhanced prudential standards to covered companies that are bank 
holding  companies  and  to  covered  companies  that  are  nonbank  financial  companies 
designated by the Council. As we made clear in the proposal, however, the Federal Reserve 
expects to tailor the application of the enhanced standards to different companies individually 
or  by  category,  taking  into  consideration  each  company’s  capital  structure,  riskiness, 
complexity,  financial  activities,  size,  and  any  other  risk-related  factors  that  the  Federal 
Reserve  deems  appropriate.  The  comment  period  for  our  enhanced  prudential  standards 
proposal  closed  on  April  30.  Nearly  100  comment  letters  were  received.  The  Federal 
Reserve is currently reviewing those comments carefully as we work to develop final rules.  
The Volcker Rule 
Section  619  of  the  Dodd-Frank  Act,  commonly  known  as  the  “Volcker  Rule,”  generally 
prohibits  banking  entities  from  engaging  in  proprietary  trading  or  acquiring  an  ownership 
interest  in,  sponsoring,  or  having  certain  relationships  with  a  hedge  fund  or  private  equity 
fund. In October, the Federal Reserve joined the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
(OCC), the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), and the Securities and Exchange 
Commission in seeking public comment on a proposal to implement the Volcker Rule. The 
Commodities  Futures  Trading  Commission  issued  its  substantially  similar  proposal  for 
comment shortly thereafter. Because of the importance and complexity of the issues raised 
by the statutory provisions that make up the Volcker Rule, the Federal Reserve and other 
agencies provided the public with a 120-day opportunity to submit comments. The comment 
period is now closed, and nearly 19,000 public comments were received. The agencies are 
now  working  together  to  review  and  consider  these  comments  and  put  final  implementing 
rules in place as soon as practicable.  
In April, after consultation with the other agencies, the Federal Reserve issued guidance on a 
Volcker Rule conformance period that was intended to help limit any confusion about when 
banking entities will need to comply with the final rules once issued. The Federal Reserve’s 
statement clarified that a banking entity has the full two-year period provided by the statute 
(i.e.,  until  July  21,  2014),  unless  that  period  is  extended  by  the  Board,  to fully  conform  its 
activities  and  investments  to  the  requirements  of  the  Volcker  Rule,  including  any  final 
implementing rules adopted by the agencies.  
Prudential supervision of large financial firms 
In the wake of the Dodd-Frank Act, the prudential supervision of the largest, most complex 
financial  firms  remains  a  cooperative  effort.  As  before,  the  law  mandates  that  a  variety  of 
federal and state supervisors execute particular supervisory and examination responsibilities 
for certain parts of a firm. This allocation of supervisory oversight among different agencies 
reflects,  among  other  factors,  the  historical  development  of  various  types  of  financial 
intermediaries in the United States and a series of legislative decisions about regulatory and 
supervisory structure.  
As  the  regulator  and  supervisor  of  bank  holding  companies,  the  Federal  Reserve’s  role  in 
this  statutory  arrangement  is  typically  that  of  consolidated  regulator  and  supervisor  of  the 
parent holding company. Accordingly, our supervisory program for such firms generally takes 
a  broad  view  of  the  activities,  risks,  and  management  of  the  consolidated  firm,  with  a 
particular focus  on  the capital  adequacy, governance,  and  risk-management  practices  and 
competencies of the firm as a whole.  
Many of the principal business activities of the largest financial firms are conducted through 
the functionally regulated subsidiaries of those firms, such as insured depository institutions, 
broker-dealers,  and  insurance  companies.  As  required  by  section  5  of  the  Bank  Holding 
Company  Act,  the  Federal  Reserve  generally  relies  to  the  fullest  extent  possible  on  the 
examination and supervision of those subsidiaries by the functional regulators. Together, the 
Federal  Reserve  and  other  functional  regulators  work  to  discharge  the  supervisory  and 
examination responsibility given to each agency for particular parts of a large financial firm in 
a  way  that  maximizes  the  expertise  and  resources  of  each  agency  and  best  ensures  the 
safety and soundness of the consolidated firm and each of its constituent parts.  
Just  as  the  financial  crisis  revealed  the  need  for  change  in  the  prudential  standards 
applicable to financial firms and activities, so too did it make clear that important changes in 
supervisory practices were needed to improve both the microprudential and macroprudential 
oversight of banks and bank holding companies. To that end, even before passage of the 
Dodd-Frank  Act,  the  Federal  Reserve  began  to  reorient  its  supervisory  structure  and 
strengthen its supervision of the largest, most complex financial firms.  
The  most  important  change  has  been  creation  of  the  Large  Institution  Supervision 
Coordinating  Committee  (LISCC).  The  LISCC  is  founded  on  several  principles:  that  large 
institution  supervision  should  be  more  centralized; 
it  should  conduct  regular, 
simultaneous,  horizontal  (cross-firm)  supervisory  exercises;  and  that  it  should  be  more 
interdisciplinary  than  it  has  been  in  the  past.  Thus,  the  LISCC  includes  senior  Federal 
Reserve  staff from  research,  legal  and  other  divisions  at  the  Board, from  the  markets  and 
that 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
payments  systems  groups  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  and  senior  bank 
supervisors from the Board and relevant reserve banks. Relative to previous practices, this 
approach to supervision relies more on quantitative methods for evaluating the performance 
and vulnerabilities of firms.  
To  date,  the  LISCC  has  developed  and  administered  various  horizontal  supervisory 
exercises, notably the capital stress tests and the related comprehensive capital reviews of 
the nation’s largest bank holding companies, and is now extending its activities to coordinate 
other  supervisory  processes  more  effectively.  It  also  has  focused  its  attention  on  potential 
implications for financial stability in the United States from stresses arising in Europe.  
Review of JPMorgan Chase & Co. trading loss 
In  response  to  the  significant  trading  losses  that  were  recently  announced  by  JPMorgan 
Chase  &  Co.  (JPMorgan)  as  a  result  of  trading  operations  at  the  London  branch  of  its 
national bank, the Federal Reserve – in its capacity as consolidated supervisor of the bank 
holding company – is working with the OCC, the regulator of the national bank, to review the 
firm’s response and remedial actions. In particular, the Federal Reserve has been assisting 
in the oversight of JPMorgan’s efforts to manage and de-risk the portfolio in question. As this 
process proceeds, we anticipate also working with the OCC and FDIC to identify the changes 
in risk measurement, management and governance that will be necessary to improve risk-
control  practices  surrounding  the  firm’s  trading  activities  and  to  address  trading  strategies 
that led to these losses.  
In addition, the Federal Reserve has been looking at other parts of the holding company to 
determine  if  governance,  risk  management  and  control  weaknesses  –  similar  to  those 
exposed by this incident – are present elsewhere. While we have, to date, found no evidence 
that they are, this review is not yet complete.  
Conclusion 
The  recent  financial  crisis  disrupted  the  financial  system  and  the  broader  economy  on  a 
scale  and  scope  not  seen  since  the  1930s.  Some  of  the  world’s  largest  financial  firms 
collapsed  or  required  government  assistance  to  stay  afloat,  sending  shock  waves  through 
the highly interconnected global financial system. Asset prices fell sharply, flows of credit to 
American families and businesses slowed dramatically, and millions of people lost their jobs. 
Extraordinary actions by governments around the world helped to provide stability, but more 
than four years after the onset of the crisis, the recovery is far from complete. It is critical that 
we complete the implementation of capital and other prudential measures to prevent another 
crisis and protect taxpayers from having again to recapitalize financial firms.  
Thank  you  very  much for  your  attention. I  would  be  pleased  to  answer  any  questions  you 
may have.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
