Daniel Mminele: Monetary policy implementation – the impact of the 
changing regulatory landscape on the policy transmission mechanism 
Address by Mr Daniel Mminele, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 
Rand Merchant Bank FICC Research Macro Forum, Cape Town, 31 May 2012. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Good morning and thank you to Rand Merchant Bank for inviting me to what has certainly 
been  an  enlightening  morning.  The  topic  I  have  been  asked  to  address  you  on  is  a  very 
interesting one from a central bank policy perspective, and relates to an area of our work in 
central banking which is still evolving, and the real impact of which remains uncertain.  
The  two  speakers  before  me  provided  some  interesting  insights  around  the  fiscal  and 
political dynamics locally, both areas which in the international context carry a fair share of 
the responsibility for the current sovereign debt crisis and financial market stresses. It seems 
quite appropriate to round off the day with a discussion on monetary policy, which has been 
playing  an  increasingly  central  role  in  recent  years,  given  the  limited,  and  in  some  cases, 
exhausted fiscal space, and a seeming lack of political will to meaningfully resolve the crisis. 
The result of this has been an unprecedented expansion in the demands on monetary policy, 
which necessitated an enlargement of the toolkit in a manner that one would have thought 
impossible only a few years ago. However, as we know, all actions have consequences, and 
while central bankers in many ways can be credited with coming to the rescue when fiscal 
policy no longer could, there are many challenges going forward, not least of which remains 
the illusion of unlimited intervention1 and potential for moral hazard, when to exit from these 
unconventional measures and ultimately how best  to exit without creating another crisis. It 
seems  we  keep  returning  to  this  question  of  “exit”,  only  to  get  derailed  again  by  a  further 
upset or deterioration in the global environment.  
In  my  remarks  today  I  will  touch  on  the  costs  of  an  unstable  financial  system  and 
developments  around  macro-prudential  policies,  before  I  discuss  the  impact  of  regulatory 
changes on the transmission mechanism.  
The costs of an unstable financial system 
2. 
The economic and social costs associated with an unstable financial system are well known. 
Fiscal policy went to extraordinary lengths to try and secure the stability of the real economy 
and the financial system, but in so doing, was sowing the seeds of the sovereign debt crisis. 
To remedy the situation in Europe, harsh austerity measures were implemented in order to 
put public finances on a sounder and more sustainable footing, and to inject the necessary 
confidence  into  financial  markets.  In  reality,  however,  while  one  cannot  doubt  that  such 
measures  were  implemented  with  the  best  of  intentions,  it  is  doubtful  that  the  desired 
outcomes  are  being  achieved,  and  in  some  instances  these  measures  turned  out  to  be 
self-defeating. Austerity measures came at the expense of growth, and as a consequence, 
public finances have not been able to recover as quickly as expected and fiscal deficit targets 
have  not  been  met.  The  result  has  been  that  the  debt  crisis  has  lingered  longer  than 
anticipated, and ultimately spread from peripheral Europe to other countries within the Euro 
zone.  Hence  there  is  an  argument  now  raging  between  those  who  continue  to  favour 
austerity  and  those  who  favour  less  austerity  and  more  stimuli  to  support  growth.  The 
                                                 
1  Monetary policy in the crisis: testing the limits of monetary policy, Herve Hannoun, Deputy General Manager, 
Bank for International Settlements 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
to  near  zero.  Central  banks 
austerity versus growth debate has found its way into the political discourse, such that the 
euro zone fiscal pact is now being challenged with the scales seemingly now tilted more in 
favour of growth rather than too much austerity. The ideal scenario would some combination 
of measures that support growth in the short term, but do not put fiscal sustainability in the 
medium term at risk.  
When  it  became  clear  that  fiscal  policy  had  been  exhausted  and  in  some  cases  over 
extended, monetary policy had to step in. Interest rates in a number of advanced economies 
had  already  been  cut 
to 
unconventional  measures  such  as  quantitative  easing  or  balance  sheet  policies2  and 
conducting large scale interventions in financial markets to resuscitate market segments that 
were no longer functioning. Liquidity was provided to the dysfunctional interbank and credit 
market to mitigate a credit crunch and to prevent a complete collapse of the global economy. 
These policies were used to stabilize financial market tensions and dampen the rise in credit 
and  liquidity  risk  premia.  In  short,  the  balance  sheet  policies  were  employed  to  target 
overnight and term money-market rates, long-term government bond yields and various risk 
spreads,  with  an  impact  on  a  wider  range  of  asset  prices.  Via  these  channels  the  central 
bank actions were meant to be eventually transmitted to the real economy. 
These policy actions by central banks have certainly played a significant role, by preventing a 
higher degree of financial instability and buying some time to get the needed repairs done. 
Unfortunately, it seems the time bought is not being used in the most opportune manner.  
themselves 
turning 
found 
Macro-prudential policy 
3. 
Given the severe repercussions of the financial crisis, the question arose as to whether “it is 
better to pick up the pieces after a bust or rather to try to prevent the build-up of bubbles”? 
Olivier  Blanchard3  stressed  that  “financial  intermediation  matters”  and  while  markets  are 
segmented  and  there  are  specialized  investors  operating  in  specific  markets,  they  are  all 
linked  through  arbitrage.  For  this  reason,  a  withdrawal  by  an  important  investor  from  a 
market  (segment)  might  create  severe  distortions  in  asset  prices  and  therefore  policy 
interventions  will  become  necessary  to  restore  dislocated  prices  and  to  align  them  with 
fundamentals. This was quite clearly played out during the US subprime crisis. In this context 
he argues in favour of preventative measures, rather than to be reactive.  
We have learnt firstly that systemic risk cannot be prevented by focussing only on regulation 
and  supervision,  and  secondly  that  achieving  price  stability  does  not  equate  to  achieving 
financial stability. Hence, the birth of macro-prudential policy which pursues financial stability 
as its objective, whereas the objective of monetary policy is price stability. The latter uses 
interest rates as its instrument, but it is well known that interest rates can be a blunt tool in 
dealing with excess leverage, extreme risk taking, or unwarranted deviations of asset prices 
from  fundamentals.  A  combination  of  monetary  and  regulatory  tools  is  needed,  such  as 
increases  in  regulatory  capital  ratios  when  leverage  is  deemed  too  high,  or  changes  in 
margin  requirements  to  reign  in  excessive  asset  price  moves.  It  is  true  also  that 
macro-prudential policy is not sufficient on its own to ensure financial stability, as we have 
seen with the euro zone debt crisis, where markets doubted the solvency of the sovereign 
and in this manner, fiscal policy led to financial instability. Nonetheless, I will focus purely on 
macro-prudential policy for now.  
                                                 
2  Balance sheet policies involve central banks using their balance sheets to influence broader economic and/or 
financial conditions, particularly when the policy rates have reached their zero limits. 
3  Chief Economist of the International Monetary Fund 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
instruments  should  be  used 
In an interview4, Olivier Blanchard notes that macro-prudential measures are likely to have a 
more targeted impact than the policy rate on the variables they are trying to affect. Whereas 
the  policy  rate  is  best  used  primarily  in  response  to  aggregate  activity  and  inflation,  the 
specific  macro-prudential 
to  deal  with  specific  output 
composition,  financing,  or  asset  price  issues.  The  two  policies  have  different  objectives, 
however,  the  implementation  of  macro-prudential  policies  will  have  an  impact  on  the 
transmission  mechanism  of  monetary  policy,  given  that  both  work  through  the  same 
channels (bank lending and balance sheets of financial institutions) and focus on the same 
institutions (monetary and financial).  
The question is whether macro-prudential policy will amplify or dampen interest rate cycles? 
Jaime  Caruana5  noted  that  the  troughs  may  become  less  extreme  as  macro-prudential 
policies  should 
reduce 
their  disinflationary 
consequences.  Similarly, 
that 
macro-prudential policy succeeds in restraining asset price and credit booms. On the other 
hand, by having to contribute to financial stability and thereby placing additional weight on 
the  risk  of  imbalances,  there  may  be  a  need  for  larger  interest  rate  increases  during 
expansions.  Interest  rates,  he  believes,  could  move  more  symmetrically  over  the  financial 
cycle and there would be reduced risk of hitting the zero lower bound and of having to resort 
to balance sheet policies. As I mentioned in my introduction, this is uncharted territory and 
there  is  still  much  research  which  is  going  into  this  topic.  South  Africa  has  not  used  any 
macro-prudential  tools,  but  a  number  of  changes  have  been  implemented  to  enhance 
macro-prudential  policy.  These  changes  include  an  elevation  of  the  Financial  Stability 
Committee to equal status as the Monetary Policy Committee, as well as the creation of a 
Financial  Stability  Oversight  Committee,  chaired  by  the  Governor  of  the  SARB  and  the 
Minister of Finance.  
the 
interest  rate  peaks  may  be 
less  severe,  assuming 
financial  crises  and 
likelihood  of 
The regulatory changes and impact on the transmission mechanism 
4. 
The  global  financial  crisis  has  forced  a  revision  of  the  international  regulatory  framework. 
Reform  is  being  implemented  in  a  number  of  areas,  including  the  strengthening  of 
macro-prudential  policies,  strengthening  the  supervision  of  individual  financial  institutions, 
oversight of key market infrastructures, and the monitoring of the financial markets. 
Basel  III  capital  and  liquidity  requirements  are  currently  the  most  prominent  regulatory 
changes with the greatest potential to impact the monetary policy transmission mechanism. 
Although Basel III is envisioned to increase the resilience of the banking system and in so 
doing, improve the effectiveness of the monetary policy transmission mechanism, and South 
Africa as a member of the G20, the Basel Committee for Banking Supervision and the FSB in 
principle  supports  these  regulatory  reforms,  there  are  nonetheless  risks  of  unintended 
consequences  associated  with  the  implementation  of  these  requirements.  Basel  III 
requirements are not of a macro-prudential nature, but like previous Basel requirements, are 
aimed  at  the  balance  sheets  of  commercial  banks  and  could  therefore  impact  economic 
activity  and  hence  monetary  policy.  I  would  like  to  focus  specifically  on  the  liquidity 
framework which requires banks to adhere to a new liquidity coverage ratio (LCR) to ensure 
that they have sufficient high-quality liquid assets to survive a month-long significant stress 
scenario. The LCR aims to ensure that banks maintain an adequate level of unencumbered, 
high-quality  liquid  assets  that  can  be  converted  into  cash  to  cover  net  outflows  during  the 
period of stress.  
                                                 
4 
Interview  with  Olivier  Blanchard,  IMF  Survey  Magazine,  IMF  Explores  Contours  of  Future  Macroeconomic 
Policy, February 12, 2010 
5  Monetary Policy in a world with macro prudential policy, Speech by Jaime Caruana, General Manager of the 
BIS, at the SAARCFINANCE Governors’ Symposium 2011, Kerala, 11 June 2011 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
In  South  Africa,  like  in other  countries,  the  Basel  III  liquidity  regulations  aim  to  reduce  the 
reliance  of  banks  on  short-term  funding.  South  Africa  has  very  large  and  persistently  high 
levels  of  income  inequality,  as  reflected  by  a  high  gini  coefficient  of  over  60.  It  is  not 
surprising  therefore,  that  households  saving  is  very  low,  and  that  a  large  portion  of  the 
population is unable to make a significant contribution to national savings. Gross saving by 
the  household  sector  has  been  around  1.6  per  cent  of  GDP  over  the  past  two  years. 
Consequently,  national  savings  are  concentrated  in  wholesale  savings,  resulting  in  a 
structural  constraint,  in  that  banks  rely  heavily  on  wholesale  funding  rather  than  retail 
deposits.  The  relatively  high  reliance  on  wholesale  funding,  increases  the  requirement  in 
terms of both the LCR and the other component of the liquidity framework under Basel III, 
namely  the  net  stable  funding  ratio  (NSFR)6  ,  and  therefore  will  result  in  a  higher  cost  of 
funding for domestic banks. There is a double whammy, however, because at the same time, 
the opportunity cost to acquire high quality liquid assets will imply that there will be a decline 
in  the  supply  of  loanable  funds.  Implementing  the  Basel  liquidity  risk  standards  in  South 
Africa  could  reduce  the  availability  of  long-term  credit,  particularly  in  South  Africa  where 
assets  that  meet  the  Basel  III  qualifying  criteria  for  the  new  LCR  are  in  short  supply 
(paradoxically  also  as  a  result  of  having  pursued  responsible  fiscal  policies  and  avoided 
excessive government debt). This intuitively would result in a reduction in broader economic 
activity,  without  raising  policy  rates,  and  would  possibly  compromise  the  transmission 
mechanism based on the prevailing monetary policy settings.  
South Africa implements monetary policy through a classical cash reserve system, where a 
liquidity shortage is created in the money market through the cash reserve requirement and 
other open market operations, such as the issuing of SARB debentures and reverse repos. 
Through the shortage, the Bank impacts on marginal cost of funding of commercial banks, as 
banks have to refinance this shortage at the SARB once a week at the repo rate. This places 
additional pressure on the demand for liquid assets, because banks refinance this shortage 
against eligible collateral, which is in addition to the assets needed for the prudential liquid 
asset  requirement.  I  should  add  that  one  of  the  national  discretion  options  available  to 
authorities  in  jurisdictions  with  inadequate  qualifying  liquid  assets  is  to  make  available  a 
committed facility from the central bank, from which commercial banks can draw in times of 
liquidity stress. As you are all aware, the Bank has recently announced its intention to make 
available  such  a  committed  liquidity  facility  against  eligible  collateral  to  all  South  African 
banks to help them meet the required LCR. This should help avoid any abrupt changes to the 
business  models  of  bank,  which  could  both  complicate  the  transmission  mechanism  of 
monetary policy and have a detrimental effect on the real economy. The bank is presently 
investigating  options  to also  deal  with  the challenges  presented  by  the  NSFR  should  it  be 
applied in its current form.  
In  addition  to  the  economic  impact,  the  LCR  may  have  a  host  of  other  unintended 
consequences, such as increasing the interlinkages with governments (although in theory it 
should  enhance  the  attractiveness  of  corporate  bonds  and  therefore  spur  activity  in  this 
segment of the market), encouraging disintermediation, as well as cross-border interlinkages, 
while inadvertently negatively impacting on liquidity in debt markets. Thus, under Basel III, 
banks may appear safer, but systemic risk may not necessarily be lower. 
In sum, faced with these structural constraints, the Basel III liquidity requirements may result 
in South African banks reducing their lending, and therefore the availability of credit to the 
real economy. This will most certainly have negative consequences for economic growth and 
employment creation, which will further reduce available savings. 
The  BIS  concedes  that  Basel  III  will  impact  on  the  transmission  mechanism  of  monetary 
policy, however, formal research studies are still in their infancy. While we understand the 
                                                 
6  This funding ratio calculates the proportion of long-term assets which are funded by long term, stable funding. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
qualitative  impact,  it  is  not  possible  to  measure  it  at  this  stage,  while  the  impact  will  differ 
according to each country’s initial conditions. These are the issues which central banks are 
grappling  with  today  and  the  challenges  they  present  for  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy 
going forward. 
The new Basel requirements do not suggest that there needs to be any changes to the South 
African  monetary  policy  implementation  framework,  unless  we  change  the  operating 
framework  from  the  current  classical  cash  reserve  system  to  an  overnight  targeted  rate 
framework.  South  Africa’s  money  markets  are  not  yet  sufficiently  developed  to  potentially 
justify a change from the current classical cash reserve system operating framework to an 
overnight target rate framework. This segment of the market needs to be developed much 
more,  and  this  forms  part  of  the  on-going  work  at  the  Bank  in  consultation  with  market 
participants  such  as  the  Money  Market  Subcommittee  of  the  Financial  Markets  Liaison 
Group. 
Thus, at least over the medium term, the monetary policy implementation framework in South 
Africa  is  unlikely  to  be  affected  by  these  regulatory  changes,  however,  they  will  have  an 
impact  on  the  monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism  and  therefore  on  monetary  policy 
and interest rates and need constant monitoring.  
Conclusion 
5. 
In  conclusion,  the  global  financial  crisis  has  forced  a  rethink  about  monetary  policy  and 
financial stability, resulting in new macro prudential frameworks. The consequences thereof 
are still unknown but could have significant implications for the conduct of monetary policy 
and the institutional set up of central banks. What is certain is that the operating procedures 
of  central  banks  will  become  much  more  complicated,  with  a  much  wider  variety  of  tools 
available. 
I thank you  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
