Yoshihisa  Morimoto:  Economic  activity  and  prices 
monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Yoshihisa Morimoto, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at a 
meeting with business leaders, Ishikawa, 2 August 2012. 
in  Japan  and 
I.  
Recent financial and economic developments 
 Global financial markets and overseas economies 
Global financial markets 
A.  
1.  
I would like to start with developments in global financial markets and overseas economies, 
which affect Japan’s economy.  
Global  financial  markets  have  recently  been  characterized  by  a  repetitive  pattern  of  rising 
and  declining  pessimism  reflecting  developments  in  the  European  debt  problem.  From the 
middle of 2011 toward the end of the year, strains in markets increased due to concerns over 
the  sustainability  of  public  finances  in  peripheral  countries.  From  the  turn  of  2012  toward 
early  spring,  there  were  phases  of  easing  strains  due  to  the  introduction  of  measures  to 
strengthen fiscal discipline in the member states of the European Union (EU), the decision on 
the second financial support program for Greece by the euro area member states and the 
International Monetary Fund (IMF), and the agreement to raise the lending capacity of the 
European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) and the European Stability Mechanism (ESM). 
Nevertheless,  markets  became  nervous  again  from  early  spring:  there  was  talk  of  a  euro 
crisis due to the turmoil in the domestic political situation in Greece, and in Spain yields on 
10-year  government  bonds  temporarily  rose  above  7  percent  due  to  concerns  about  the 
stability of its financial system.  
Subsequently,  a  new  government  was  inaugurated  in  Greece,  and  the  EU  and  eurozone 
summits at the end of June emphasized the need to strengthen growth and agreed to take 
steps  to  establish  a  single  supervisory  body  for  eurozone  banks  with  a  view  to  making  it 
possible  for  the  ESM  to recapitalize  banks  directly.  These  decisions  raised  hopes  that the 
vicious circle between uncertainty over Spain’s financial system and increasing government 
debt  would  be  broken, and  markets  temporarily  regained  stability.  This  situation,  however, 
did not last long. At present, yields on 10-year Spanish government bonds are hovering at 
around 7 percent. On the other hand, interbank funding markets have generally been stable 
since the beginning of 2012 due to the abundant liquidity provision by the European Central 
Bank  (ECB).  It  appears,  however,  that  it  will  take  some  more  time  until  uncertainties  are 
dispelled over the fiscal and economic structural reforms as well as over measures regarding 
the financial system in Europe. Thus, developments in the European debt problem continue 
to warrant careful attention. 
2.  
Under  these  circumstances,  overseas  economies  have  shown  some  improvement,  albeit 
moderate, but on the whole they have not emerged from a deceleration phase. By region, 
economic  activity  in  the  euro  area  continues  to  be  sluggish,  despite  signs  of  a  pick-up  in 
exports, because domestic demand in the area has been stagnant. Peripheral countries in 
particular have fallen into a vicious circle, in which the downturn in economic activity due to 
fiscal  austerity  measures  and  the  deterioration  in  financial  conditions  lead  to  a  further 
worsening of the financial conditions of governments and financial institutions. As a result, 
disparities between economic sentiment in core countries such as Germany and in peripheral 
countries are widening. For example, the unemployment rate in Germany stands at around 
5 percent, which is a historical low since the reunification of East and West Germany, while 
in Spain it has reached well over 20 percent and the youth unemployment rate is in excess of 
Overseas economies 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
50 percent. Moreover, the deterioration in the economies of peripheral countries is affecting 
business  sentiment  in  core  countries,  and  thus  the  European  economy  is  likely  to  remain 
sluggish for the time being. 
Next,  the  U.S.  economy  is  generally  continuing  to  recover  at  a  moderate  pace.  Private 
consumption has been firm due in part to an increase in real purchasing power reflecting the 
decline  in  gasoline  prices,  and  the  housing  market  has  shown  some  signs  of  picking  up. 
Business  fixed  investment  has  recently  maintained  its  uptrend  against  the  background  of 
solid  corporate  profits.  However,  signs  of  weakness  have  been  observed  in  business 
sentiment,  and  the  momentum  of  growth  in  employment  has  recently  been  slowing. 
Furthermore, amid persisting strains from balance-sheet adjustments, households and firms 
are  not  likely  to  increase  their  spending  due  to  concerns  over  the  adverse  impact  of  the 
European  debt  problem  as  well  as  uncertainty  regarding  the  “fiscal  cliff,”  that  is,  fiscal 
spending cuts scheduled to be implemented at the beginning of 2013 and the handling of tax 
cuts set to expire at the end of 2012. Taking these factors into account, the U.S. economy is 
likely to recover at only a moderate pace. 
Emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies  still  have  not  emerged  from  a  phase  of 
sluggishness,  but  on  the  whole  these  economies  have  maintained  relatively  high  growth 
backed by firm domestic demand. The pace of growth in the Chinese economy has slowed 
reflecting the deceleration in private real estate investment as a result of monetary tightening 
earlier, but there are also signs that the slowdown is bottoming out, such as the increasing 
trend in exports and bank lending. The Chinese government has accelerated approvals for 
infrastructure  investment  and  introduced  subsidies  for  energy-saving  electrical  appliances 
and other goods. With the pace of consumer price inflation decelerating, the authorities have 
also started stimulating the economy on the monetary front, lowering the benchmark lending 
rates for two consecutive months. Looking ahead, the growth rate of the Chinese economy is 
unlikely to reach dramatic levels, but it is  likely to rise gradually as these policy measures 
start producing effects. In the NIEs and the ASEAN economies, exports have been affected 
by the slowdown in Europe and China, but domestic demand has been firm on the whole, 
and production has been recovering moderately. As for the outlook, including other emerging 
economies such as Brazil, the growth rate of emerging and commodity-exporting economies 
will likely increase gradually reflecting accommodative financial conditions and a recovery in 
real purchasing power following a decline in inflation rates. 
Japan’s Economy 
 Economic activity 
B.  
1. 
I  will  now  explain  the  current  state  of,  and  outlook  for,  Japan’s  economy  based  on  the 
overseas economic developments I have just outlined. Until the beginning of autumn 2011, 
Japan’s economy picked up steadily following the plunge caused by the Great East Japan 
Earthquake,  which  struck  just  as  the  economy  was  recovering  from  the  Lehman  shock. 
Thereafter, however, it remained more or less flat on the whole until around the early spring 
of 2012 mainly due to the adverse effects of the slowdown in overseas economies and the 
appreciation  of  the  yen.  More  recently,  with  domestic  demand  remaining  firm  –  led  by 
reconstruction-related  demand  and  private  consumption  –  and  exports  continuing  to  show 
signs of picking-up, economic activity on the whole has started picking up moderately. 
The  firmness  in  domestic  demand  is  attributable  to  the  following  factors.  Demand  for 
restoration  and  reconstruction  of  social  infrastructure  and  of  disaster-stricken  facilities  and 
homes  has  led  to  increases  in  public  investment,  business  fixed  investment,  and  housing 
investment.  Reconstruction-related  demand  has  also  been  underpinned  by  changes  in  the 
behavior  of  firms  and  households  triggered  by  the  disaster.  Examples  are  efforts  to 
strengthen  the  earthquake  resistance  of  buildings  and  facilities  and  to  bolster  business 
continuity  systems,  investment  in  the  area  of  new  energy  sources,  and  the  purchase  of 
energy-saving  products.  Meanwhile,  private  consumption  has  been  boosted  by  pent-up 
demand, that is, a recovery in demand following the temporary restraint due to the effects of 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Prices 
the  disaster,  and  by  policy  measures  such  as  subsidies  for  purchasers  of  environmentally 
friendly cars. Private consumption has also been pushed up by an increase in spending on 
products and services provided by businesses targeting the elderly reflecting firms’ efforts to 
enhance their line-up in this area.  
Although  considerable  uncertainty  remains  regarding  the  outlook,  Japan’s  economy,  with 
domestic  demand  remaining  firm  and  overseas  economies  emerging  from  their  phase  of 
deceleration,  is  expected  to  return  to  a  moderate  recovery  path,  as  also  shown  in  the 
June 2012 Tankan (Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan) and the Regional 
Economic Report. Given this situation in demand at home and abroad, the economy is likely 
to register a relatively high rate of growth in fiscal 2012, supported by a gradually increasing 
momentum  in  the  virtuous  circle  of  growth  in  production,  income,  and  spending.  In  fiscal 
2013,  with  overseas  economies  continuing  to  see  relatively  high  growth  on  the  whole,  the 
economy is expected to be firm, although the growth rate is expected to be somewhat lower 
than that in fiscal 2012, because the positive effects from reconstruction-related demand will 
gradually diminish. In the Bank of Japan’s projection released in July 2012, the median of the 
Policy Board members’ forecasts for Japan’s real GDP growth rate is 2.2 percent for fiscal 
2012 and 1.7 percent for fiscal 2013. 
2.  
Next, I will talk about price developments. International commodity prices softened somewhat 
from autumn 2011, reflecting the slowdown in the global economy. After a slight rise in early 
spring of 2012, especially in crude oil prices against the backdrop of heightened geopolitical 
risk, they then fell back again through June 2012, and remained more or less flat thereafter. 
Most recently, prices of crude oil have bottomed out, while those of grains have risen due to 
unseasonable  weather.  As  for  the  outlook,  international  commodity  prices  as  a  whole  are 
expected to rise at a moderate pace in line with the growth in overseas economies. Under 
these circumstances, the year-on-year rate of change in the domestic corporate goods price 
index (CGPI) has recently been negative. The CGPI is expected to decline moderately for 
the  time  being  and  then  start  to  rise  slowly  reflecting  the  expected  moderate  increase  in 
international commodity prices and the improvement in the negative output gap.  
Turning to the consumer price index (CPI) for all items less fresh food, the year-on-year rate 
of  change  since  summer  2011  has  been around  0  percent  and  is  expected  to stay  at this 
level for the time being. Assuming that medium- to long-term inflation expectations remain 
stable, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI is expected to gradually rise to a range of 
above  0.5  percent  and  less  than  1  percent  in  fiscal  2013  as  the  negative  output  gap 
improves. Thereafter, it will likely be not too long before the rate reaches the Bank’s current 
“price  stability  goal  in  the  medium  to  long  term”  of  1  percent.  In  the  Bank’s  projection 
released  in  July  2012,  the  median  of  the  Policy  Board  member’s  forecasts  for  the 
year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (all items less fresh food) is 0.2 percent for fiscal 
2012 and 0.7 percent for fiscal 2013. 
Risks to the baseline scenario 
C.  
The baseline scenario for Japan’s economy described thus far is subject to both upside and 
downside  risks.  By  far  the  most  important  risk  is  uncertainty  regarding  the  outlook  for 
overseas economies, and particularly the European debt problem. Although concerns about 
the  stability  of  Spain’s  financial  system  had  temporarily  subsided  thanks  mainly  to  the 
agreement reached at the EU and eurozone summits, in order to fundamentally resolve the 
debt  problem  it  is  nevertheless  necessary  in  Europe  to  break  the  underlying  negative 
feedback  loop  among  fiscal  balances,  the  financial  system,  and  economic  activity.  At  the 
same  time,  it  is  crucial  that  countries  on  the  European  periphery,  whose  international 
competitiveness  has  declined,  steadily  work  on  fiscal  and  economic  structural  reforms. 
Moreover, as part of the efforts toward deeper integration in the euro area, discussions are 
ongoing within the EU with the aim of establishing a banking union and a fiscal union, and I 
believe  it  is  important  to  press  ahead  with  these  steps.  In  this  situation,  if  reforms  make 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
steady  progress,  this  would  strengthen  market  confidence,  which  in  turn  would  push  up 
global economic growth. However, in core countries such as Germany, there are concerns 
that the financial  burden  of  providing  support  to peripheral  countries  through, for  example, 
greater fiscal integration would increase. Hammering out concrete steps, therefore, is likely 
to  involve  a  great  deal  of  complication.  If  in  the  meantime  the  European  debt  problem 
worsens,  or  the  considerable  sense  of  uncertainty  continues  for  a  prolonged  period,  this 
could weigh on the economic recovery in other areas such as the United States and China. 
External demand for Japan’s exports is expected to once again become the driving force of 
Japan’s  economy  after  the  earthquake-related  reconstruction  demand  peaks  out,  but  if 
exports  remain  sluggish,  a  virtuous  circle  may  not  take  hold.  For  this  reason,  overseas 
economic developments warrant close attention. 
to 
Next, 
reconstruction-related demand as well as both upside and downside risks in how medium- to 
long-term  growth  expectations  will  be  affected  by  the  supply  and  demand  balance  of 
electricity and by innovation in energy-related technology. Another issue is the sustainability 
of Japan’s public finances, concerns over which restrain consumer spending due to anxiety 
about the future and affect long-term interest rates. Given that social security spending will 
continue to exert upward pressure on fiscal expenditure, it is necessary to push ahead with 
structural  reform  of  public  finances  on  both  the  expenditure  and  the  revenue  side  and 
maintain the public’s confidence in fiscal discipline. Efforts to restore Japan’s public finances 
are underway and are something that I will keep a close eye on. Both upside and downside 
risks persist also in import prices, particularly international commodity prices.  
include  uncertainty  with 
risks  stemming 
from  domestic 
factors 
regard 
Monetary policy 
II.  
Next,  I  would  like  to  turn  to  the  Bank’s  conduct  of  monetary  policy  under  the  current 
economic situation.  
In order for Japan’s economy to overcome deflation and return to a sustainable growth path 
with price stability, efforts to strengthen the economy’s growth potential and support from the 
financial side are of the utmost importance. Based on this recognition, the Bank is currently 
providing support to raise Japan’s growth potential through its fund-provisioning measure to 
support strengthening the foundations for economic growth, while at the same time pursuing 
powerful  monetary  easing  continuously  by  steadily  providing  funds  through,  for  example, 
purchasing financial assets. Moreover, the Bank is doing its utmost also to ensure stability in 
financial markets.  
In what follows, I will explain the Bank’s measures in greater detail. 
Pursuit of powerful monetary easing 
A.  
I will begin with the Bank’s pursuit of powerful monetary easing. In October 2010, the Bank 
introduced  the  comprehensive  monetary  easing  policy,  and  has  been  easing  financial 
conditions continuously since then. The comprehensive monetary easing policy consists of 
three  measures:  the  implementation  of  a  virtually  zero  interest  rate  policy  by  setting  the 
target for the policy rate, the uncollateralized overnight call rate, at around 0 to 0.1 percent; 
the purchase of financial assets and funds-supplying operation through the Asset Purchase 
Program (hereafter the Program); and the clarification of the policy time horizon, that is, the 
clarification that these measures will remain in place until the Bank judges that price stability 
is in sight. 
In this context, financial conditions in Japan have continued to ease. The overnight call rate 
has  been  below  the  0.1  percent  level.  With  regard  to  long-term  interest  rates,  yields  on 
Japanese  government  bonds  (JGBs)  with  a  remaining  maturity  of  three  years  or  less  are 
0.1 percent, and those on 10-year government bonds are at the lowest level in about nine 
years.  Firms’ funding costs  have  also  declined moderately,  as  shown, for  example,  by  the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
fact that the average contracted interest rate on new loans and discounts is in the region of 
only 1 percent.  
1.  
Clarification of the policy time horizon based on “the price stability goal in the 
medium to long term” 
Expansion of the Asset Purchase Program 
At  the  Monetary  Policy  Meeting  held  in  February  this  year,  the  Bank  introduced  “the  price 
stability  goal  in  the  medium  to  long  term”  as  a  part  of  its  efforts  to  further  clarify  its 
determination to overcome deflation. “The price stability goal in the medium to long term” is 
the inflation rate judged by the Bank to be consistent with price stability sustainable over the 
medium to long term. At present, the Bank judges “the price stability goal in the medium to 
long term” to be within a positive range of 2 percent or lower in terms of the year-on-year rate 
of change in the CPI and, more specifically, sets a goal of 1 percent for the time being. On 
this  basis,  the  Bank  has  stated  that  for  the  time  being  it  will  aim  to  achieve  the  goal  of 
1 percent inflation in terms of the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI through the pursuit 
of powerful monetary easing, which I mentioned earlier. As you can see, by presenting its 
commitment regarding the policy time horizon, the Bank has further clarified its determination 
to pursue monetary easing.  
2.  
The  Program  currently  implemented  by  the  Bank  was  established  to  further  enhance 
monetary  easing  by  encouraging  a  decline  in  longer-term  interest  rates  and  various  risk 
premiums in a situation where there was little room for a further decline in short-term interest 
rates.  Established  on  the  Bank’s  balance  sheet,  the  Program  is  used  to  purchase  various 
financial  assets  –  such  as  government  securities,  CP,  corporate  bonds,  exchange-traded 
funds (ETFs), and Japan real estate investment trusts (J-REITs) – and to conduct fixed-rate 
funds-supplying operation. Since the establishment of the Program, the Bank has expanded 
its  size  successively,  including  in  February  and  April  of  this  year,  so  that  the  outstanding 
amount of asset purchases would reach about 65 trillion yen by around the end of 2012 and 
about 70 trillion yen by around the end of June 2013, thereby contributing to the pursuit of 
powerful monetary easing.  
Furthermore, in April, in order to encourage a decline in longer-term interest rates, the Bank 
decided to extend the remaining maturities of JGBs and corporate bonds to be purchased 
under  the  Program from  “one to  two  years” to  “one  to three  years.”  And  in  July,  the  Bank 
decided  to  remove  the  minimum  bidding  yields  for  outright  purchases  of  treasury  discount 
bills  (T-bills)  –  which  had  previously  been  0.1  percent  per  annum  –  and  of  CP  in  order  to 
ensure that the outstanding amount of asset purchases under the Program would reach the 
planned  amount.  For  the  same  reason,  the  Bank  also  revised  the  categories  of  assets 
purchased and loans provided through the Program. The outstanding amount of the Program 
stood  at  53 trillion  yen  as  of  July  20,  and  the Bank  will  continue  to  proceed  with  powerful 
monetary  easing  by  steadily  increasing  the  outstanding  amount  of  the  Program  by  about 
17 trillion  yen  by  around  end-June  2013.  It  is  expected  that  the  effects  of  the  continuing 
purchases  of  financial  assets  under  the  Program  will  strengthen  further  as  the  economy 
recovers. 
B.  
The Bank’s efforts to support strengthening the foundations for economic 
growth 
I will now talk about the fund-provisioning measure to support strengthening the foundations 
for economic growth (hereafter the Growth-Supporting Funding Facility). 
The Bank introduced this measure in June 2010 to support strengthening the foundations for 
economic growth for the purpose of providing support for the critical challenge of enhancing 
the growth potential of Japan’s economy, and has been providing long-term funds at a low 
interest rate to financial institutions in accordance with their efforts in terms of lending and 
investment for strengthening the foundations for economic growth. The maximum duration of 
loans is four years, and the loan rate is currently set at 0.1 percent. The initial ceiling of the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
lending  arrangement  of  12  billion  U.S.  dollars  –  equivalent 
outstanding amount of loans was set at 3 trillion yen. Subsequently, in June 2011, the Bank 
introduced a new lending arrangement of 500 billion yen for the measure, through which it 
extends  loans  to  financial  institutions  for  their  equity  investments  and  asset-based  lending 
(ABL). The loans for ABL allow financial institutions to use their expertise to identify and lend 
to potential growth firms without conventional collateral or guarantees.  
In March 2012, the Bank decided to further enhance the Growth-Supporting Funding Facility 
by  (1)  increasing  the  ceiling  for  the  outstanding  amount  of  loans  from  3  trillion  yen  to 
3.5 trillion  yen;  (2)  establishing  special  rules  for  another  new  lending  arrangement  of 
500 billion  yen  for small-lot  investments  and  loans;  and  (3)  establishing special  rules for  a 
new  U.S.  dollar 
to 
1  trillion  yen  –  using  the  U.S.  dollar  reserves  already  held  by  the  Bank,  for  foreign 
currency-denominated investments and loans.  
The outstanding balance of the total loans disbursed by the Bank, including those extended 
under the special rules, stood at approximately 3.2 trillion yen as of the beginning of June. 
The  first  disbursement  of  U.S.  dollar  loans  under  the  special  rules  is  to  take  place  in 
September.  A  breakdown  of  financial  institutions’  individual  investment  and  lending  for 
strengthening the foundations for economic growth in the period April 2010–March 2012 by 
designated business area shows that almost 30 percent of the total funds was provided to 
“environment and energy business” and almost 20 percent was provided to “medical, nursing 
care,  and  other  health-related  business,”  but  funds  were  also  provided  to  business  areas 
falling  under  the  category  of  “others,”  such  as  lending  or  investment  to  revitalize  local 
industries.  A  wide  range  of  financial  institutions  have  been  making  a  variety  of  efforts 
targeting  their  specific  customer  base  or  the  region  they  serve,  such  as  establishing  new 
dedicated funds to support economic growth, so that the amount of lending and investment 
actually  provided  by  financial  institutions  using  the  Growth-Supporting  Funding  Facility 
greatly  exceeds  the  amount  of  loans  disbursed  by  the  Bank.  The  Bank,  with  its  steady 
disbursement of loans, will continue to support the flow of funds to growth areas in order to 
contribute  as  much  as  possible  as  the  central  bank  of  Japan  toward  strengthening  the 
foundations for economic growth. 
Measures to ensure financial market stability 
C.  
In addition to pursuing the measures just described, the Bank has been doing its utmost to 
ensure  financial  market  stability  by  making  use  of  various  funds-supplying  operations. 
Immediately  after  the  earthquake  in  March  2011,  the  Bank  provided  ample  funds  on  an 
unprecedented  scale,  exceeding  the  amount  provided  immediately  following  the  Lehman 
shock. When the European debt problem worsened at the end of November 2011, the Bank 
lowered  interest  rates  on  U.S.  dollar  funds-supplying  operations  as  part  of  coordinated 
measures among six major central banks in order to ensure stability in financial markets. At 
the same time, the central banks agreed to establish bilateral swap arrangements enabling 
the  provision  of  liquidity  in  any  of  their  currencies  in  addition  to  the  already  available 
U.S. dollar. 
III.  
Issues related to strengthening the growth potential of Japan’s economy 
The importance of strengthening the growth potential to overcome deflation 
A.  
Earlier,  I  touched  on  the  Bank’s  efforts  to  support  strengthening  the  growth  potential  of 
Japan’s economy. Let me elaborate on the challenges we face in strengthening the growth 
potential. Japan’s economic growth rate has been trending down due to the effects of the low 
birth  rate  and  the  aging  of  the  population  as  well  as  to  a  decline  in  its  international 
competitiveness. Consumption and investment have been restrained as a result of a decline 
in  households’  and  firms’  growth  expectations,  so  that  aggregate  domestic  demand  has 
remained  below  the  aggregate  supply  capacity  of  the  economy  for  a  prolonged  period, 
exerting  downward  pressure  on  prices.  With  economic  activity  picking  up, 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
the  output gap  – that  is,  the  difference  between  aggregate  supply  capacity  and  aggregate 
demand – has recently been narrowing. Nevertheless, aggregate demand continues to fall 
short of aggregate supply capacity by about 2 percent. While price developments are subject 
to  various  factors,  including  developments  in  international  commodity  prices,  in  order  for 
Japan’s economy to overcome deflation it is important to address the problem of insufficient 
demand, which is the key factor underlying deflation in Japan. At the same time, in order to 
achieve sustainable economic growth amid the low birth rate and aging of the population, it is 
important to maintain sufficient supply capacity to meet new sources of demand. 
Capturing global demand and creating demand through innovation 
B.  
To  resolve  the  problem  of  insufficient  demand,  it  is  essential  to  capture  global  demand, 
including  demand  from  emerging  economies,  and  to  tap  latent  demand  both  at  home  and 
abroad.  
With respect to capturing global demand to overcome the shortage of demand at home, in 
addition  to  making  efforts  to  increase  exports  it  is  important  to  increase  income  from 
overseas investment. While income from foreign direct investment is not included in GDP, it 
does  contribute  to  gross  national  income  (GNI).  Moreover,  advances  in  the  international 
division of labor likely contribute to strengthening the economy’s growth potential through the 
associated increase in exports of related goods and the shift of the domestic labor force into 
areas with growth potential. 
Tapping latent demand, the other essential element in addressing insufficient demand, also 
requires efforts on a continuous basis. Markets for new types of goods and services usually 
grow only slowly at the initial stage. They then enter a phase of rapid growth until demand is 
saturated and growth slows again. In order to maintain the growth potential of the economy 
as  a  whole,  it  is  therefore  important  to  continuously  secure  demand  both  at  home  and 
abroad.  To  this  end,  it  is  necessary  to  accelerate  innovation  that  taps  latent  demand  for 
goods and services and consequently creates demand, which will give depth to areas with 
growth potential. The demographic change resulting from the low birth rate and the aging of 
the  population  is  also  prompting  changes  in  the  demand  structure.  For  example, 
consumption  expenditure  by  households  headed  by  a  person  aged  60  years  or  older, 
including  the  baby-boomer  generation,  now  accounts  for  more  than  40  percent  of  total 
private consumption. Therefore, an important challenge is to supply goods and services that 
meet the needs of this generation in a timely manner. 
Corporate  profits  and  business  sentiment  at  Japanese  firms  have  been  on  an  improving 
trend recently. This reflects not only the positive effects of subsidies and earthquake-related 
reconstruction  demand,  but  in  my  view  also  shows  that  firms’  active  efforts  to  tap  latent 
demand and address social challenges are paying off. Examples are businesses targeted at 
the elderly and in the areas of information and telecommunications as well as environment 
and  energy,  where  challenges  in  terms  of  energy  creation,  energy  saving,  and  energy 
storage  need  to  be  addressed  with  urgency.  For  example,  in  the  automobile  industry, 
environmentally  friendly  cars  –  such  as  hybrid  cars  with  better  environmental  efficiency 
–  have  been  selling  briskly,  and  it  is  expected  that  related  markets,  such  as  those  for 
rechargeable batteries, will also expand. In the field of information and telecommunications, 
smartphones  are  coming  into  widespread  use,  providing  the  infrastructure  for  not  only  the 
distribution of digital books and music but also a whole range of new services. One example 
is the use of the Internet and the Global Positioning System (GPS) to provide services such 
as giving information on cafes and restaurants in the vicinity and guiding smartphone users 
there. In the convenience store industry, the number of stores was said to be near saturation 
at one time. However, by expanding the range of products and services aimed at women and 
the  elderly,  such  as  introducing  home  deliveries,  convenience  stores  have  been  able  to 
increase  their  sales  per  store.  Looking  ahead,  it  is  extremely  important  that  efforts  toward 
innovation do not come in spurts but are sustained across a wide range of fields.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
Maintaining the labor supply and improving productivity 
C.  
In  order  to  strengthen  Japan’s  growth  potential,  it  is  also  important  to  ensure  that  supply 
capacity is commensurate with demand. While the recent employment situation has been on 
an improving trend, labor supply still exceeds demand. There still remain problems that need 
to be solved, such as the extremely severe employment conditions for the young. However, 
Japan’s working age population will continue to decline, and in the medium to long term labor 
supply  may  fall  short  of  demand.  Economic  growth  can  be  decomposed  into  two 
components: the rate of growth in the number of workers and that in productivity per worker. 
Assuming  that  the  labor  force  participation  rate  remains  unchanged,  the  negative  growth 
contribution  of  the  decline  in  the  number  of  workers  is  forecast  to  increase  to  around 
1.0–1.5 percent by the 2030s. Meanwhile, the average annual increase in labor productivity 
has been around 1 percent in recent years, so if things remain the same, Japan’s potential 
growth rate will fall into negative territory. 
In order to mitigate the impact of these developments as much as possible, with regard to the 
labor  force,  it  is  important  to  increase  labor  market  flexibility  to  allow  workers  to  change 
industries more easily and to boost labor market participation of the elderly and of women 
who  wish  to  work  but  are  not  currently  working.  On  the  other  hand,  regarding  labor 
productivity  growth,  this  is  actually  quite  high  in  Japan  when  compared  with  other  major 
countries and may be difficult to raise further. However, since labor productivity is the ratio of 
aggregate value added to labor input costs, productivity growth could be improved if growth 
areas  provide  sufficient  opportunities  for  the  creation  of  high-value-added  goods  and 
services,  so  that  firms  can  generate  sufficient  profits.  This  could  then  produce  forward 
momentum  through  generating  income,  thus  mitigating  the  impact  of  the  decline  in  the 
working-age population. 
Given that Japan has a low birth rate and the fastest aging population in the world, achieving 
such a strengthening of the growth potential is extremely difficult and represents a challenge 
that  requires  the  efforts  of  the  nation  as  a  whole,  since  it  requires  raising  demand,  labor 
supply,  and  productivity  to  the  limits  of  Japan’s  potential.  Based  on  this  perspective,  the 
Japanese  government  has  compiled  the  “Strategy  for  Rebirth  of  Japan”  to  create  an 
environment allowing firms to meet the challenges of the task. The strategy places priority on 
eleven  areas.  These  areas  include  “green  innovations,”  which  focuses  on  Japan’s  aim  to 
lead the world in the energy revolution and create new industries and employment related to 
this field; “life innovations” with the aim of turning businesses related to medical services and 
nursing  care  into  growth  industries,  fostering  new  related  industries  and  markets,  and 
developing  markets  overseas;  human  resources  development;  and  turning  Japan  into  a 
tourism nation. In order to boost the efforts undertaken by firms, support from the financial 
side is essential, in addition to the creation of the right environment. With this in mind, the 
Bank will continue exerting itself in its role together with firms, financial institutions, and the 
government. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
