Ewart S Williams: Financial risk management 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Ewart  S  Williams,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Trinidad  and 
Tobago,  at  the  Caribbean  Centre  for  Money  and  Finance  Conference,  Port-of-Spain, 
26 March 2012. 
 Good Morning Ladies and Gentlemen 
Let me add my own words of welcome to all our participants of this very timely seminar on 
Financial Risk Management. As you know, the seminar forms part of a wider project involving 
the central banks in the Caribbean/CARICOM region. The project is being funded mainly by 
the  Inter-American  Development  Bank  (IDB)  that  has  partnered  with  the  University  of  the 
West  Indies  (UWI)  and  Caribbean  Centre  for  Money  and  Finance  (CCMF)  to  make  this 
initiative possible.  
I  would  like  to  say  a  special  word  of  welcome  to  former  President  of  the  Caribbean 
Development  Bank  and  now  acting  Executive  Director  of  the  CCMF,  Dr.  Compton 
Bourne and Mrs. Michelle Cross-Fenty, Country Representative of the IADB, which is a 
major sponsor of this Project. Welcome also to all our distinguished participants from our 
regional  Central  Banks  and  regulatory  bodies  and  from  the  international  and  regional 
financial institutions. I also thank the media for their presence.  
It is no secret, ladies and gentlemen, that our financial systems have been severely tested in 
the last few years by the outbreak of the global financial crisis whose powerful shock waves 
have not only rattled financial markets the world over, but also triggered a deep recession 
with which many countries are still grappling.  
For the most part, regional financial systems  displayed remarkable resilience to the global 
financial  crisis,  even  though  our  economies  were  buffeted  by  the  global  recession  that 
ensued.  
Regional financial systems, however, faced their own challenges arising from the collapse of 
the Stanford Bank and more notably, from the demise of the largest regional conglomerate, 
CL  Financial.  The  stresses  faced  by  CL’s  financial  subsidiaries  (Clico  Insurance,  Clico 
Investment Bank (CIB), British American and BAICO) tested the foundations of the regional 
financial system, which even so, proved to be resilient.  
Two aspects of what has become to be known as the “Clico crisis” are worth mentioning.  
The first is its regional reach: it entrapped in its net, not only Trinidad and Tobago, but also 
Barbados, Guyana and Suriname (that had Clico subsidiaries) as well as the OECS and the 
Bahamas, which housed BAICO insurance companies, all CLF subsidiaries.  
The second aspect that stands out is its tremendous cost. The bill is still accumulating but 
for the region as a whole, the cost could be somewhere in the vicinity of 10–15 per cent of 
regional GDP.  
For all its negatives, the Clico crisis served as an important wake-up call to the region. 
Coming on the heels of the global financial turmoil, it was a clear reminder of the need to 
strengthen  our  financial  and  regulatory  systems,  so  that  they  could  withstand  exogenous 
shocks and it underscored the idea that a co-ordinated regional approach was needed.  
It was against this background that the CARICOM Heads’ of Government, at their July 2009 
meeting requested regional central banks and other stakeholders to put in place a framework 
for  regional  financial  stability  to  increase  our  resilience  both  to  exogenous  shocks  and  to 
intra-regional stresses.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
It is worth noting, ladies and gentlemen, that the objective characteristics of our region make 
a strong case for the regional approach to financial stability. We are small economies, with 
extensive  economic  links,  with  high  vulnerability  indices,  compared  with  other  regional 
groups  (like,  for  example,  the  EU).  Moreover  our  islands  are  dominated  by  a  short  list  of 
over-lapping financial institutions.  
On the downside, however, we currently have no regional regulatory institutions. Specifically, 
we  have  nothing  like  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  which  has  some  regulatory 
authority. The closest we come to a regional regulatory authority is the ECCB, which covers 
only the OECS. What’s more, given the current state of the regional movement, I am not sure 
of the chances for a pan-caribbean regulatory authority.  
Putting  aside  this  issue  for  the  time  being,  I  would  like  to  address  the  question,  “What 
should be the main elements of a new regional financial stability infra-structure for the 
Caribbean region?”  
And, I would like to propose the following:  
  First – the region needs strengthened financial sector legislation, in the first round 
covering the banking system, the insurance and the credit union sectors;  
  Second – we need to substantially upgrade financial sector supervision;  
  Third – all countries should have deposit insurance;  
  Fourth – all countries should have national crisis management plans; and  
  Fifth  –  building  on  these  national  plans,  we  need  to  formulate  a  regional  crisis 
management plan.  
Permit me to say a few words about each of these elements.  
In  many  countries  in  the  region,  including  my  own,  financial  sector  legislation  is  grossly 
deficient when compared to what obtains in advanced or emerging market countries. We, in 
Trinidad  and  Tobago,  recently  introduced  a  modern  Financial  Institutions  Act  to  cover  the 
banking system and new insurance legislation is currently in Parliament. Some countries in 
the  region  have  been  upgrading  their  banking  legislation  but  the  situation  is  not  as 
promising  with  regard  to  insurance  legislation,  which  remains  woefully  outdated  in  the 
entire  region.  This  must  be  seen  against  the  background  that  both  the  Jamaican  financial 
crisis of the late 1990s and the Clico/BAICO regional crisis originated in the insurance sector.  
In  principle,  strengthened,  harmonized  legislation  would  be  the  ideal  to  forestall 
regulatory  arbitrage.  However,  the  obstacles  faced  by  the  CARICOM  Model  Financial 
Institutions  Bill  clearly  demonstrated  the  potential  challenges  likely  to  face  any  kind  of 
harmonized financial legislation.  
Countries in the region also need to  upgrade financial sector supervision, including the 
introduction of consolidated supervision. I am told that a first attempt is currently underway to 
conduct  a  supervisory  exercise  on  a  systemically 
institution,  with 
cross-border operations, involving supervisory teams from  different jurisdictions. This is an 
important initiative and I hope that over time these kinds of exercises could become routine 
examples of regional regulatory cooperation.  
More and more countries are adding stress-testing and the use of financial stability reports 
to  their  supervisory  tool  kit.  Properly  used,  these  could  provide  early  warning  signals  and 
improve the assessment of threats to the financial system. I know that the preparation of 
financial stability reports is an important component of the IDB-financed project, and I 
would like to return to this topic later.  
Deposit  insurance  schemes  could  contribute  significantly  to  the  maintenance  of  regional 
financial  stability,  as  they  protect  lower-income  depositors  and  prevent  bank-runs.  A 
harmonized regional deposit insurance scheme would be ideal but the obstacles would be 
important 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
formidable. National schemes should still be regarded as an important part of the regional 
stability infrastructure.  
Because  financial  instability  can  sometimes  arise  without  adequate  warning,  all  countries 
should have a national crisis management plan, to be able to move quickly and to contain 
the  potential  cost  of  a  national  financial  crisis.  Such  a  plan  invariably  requires  close 
coordination  between  the  various  national  regulatory  bodies,  the  Government  and  other 
stakeholders, and should constitute a kind of road map to the process of crisis-resolution. 
The element of certainty that such plans bring, bolsters consumer confidence and facilitates 
quick crisis resolution.  
A  regional  crisis  management  plan  is  another  indispensable  part  of  a  regional  financial 
stability, but it is the element that is likely to present the greatest challenges. The critical 
pre-requisites to such regional plan are (i) agreement on what constitutes a systemic threat 
to  the  regional  financial  system;  (ii)  the  existence  of  information  sharing  protocols  among 
regional  jurisdictions;  (iii)  agreement  on  the  strategies  to  be  considered  in  the  resolution 
process and on the guiding principles for cost-sharing in the event that public intervention is 
deemed necessary.  
A crisis management plan for our region is likely to face several challenges, among which 
are differences in legislation or supervisory approaches across the region; competing 
national priorities or differences in resource availability among the regional governments.  
The  implementation  of  a  regional  crisis  management  plan  requires  a  high  level  regional 
council with the authority to make binding decisions as to the use of resources. This could be 
another challenge in our current circumstances.  
I would like to make a few comments on one of the critical components of the IDB-financed 
project – the preparation of comparable regional Financial Stability Reports (FSR). We 
need  to  remember  that  these  reports  are  designed  to  serve  as  early  warning  signals  by 
pointing out to policy makers the key risks and vulnerabilities faced by policy makers. Most 
financial stability reports do this by reporting the latest level of key financial soundness ratios. 
There is a new body of research that suggests the assessment value of these reports could 
be enhanced by including at least a qualitative discussion of the near term outlook for these 
ratios based on various policy assumptions.  
I  fully  recognize,  of  course,  that  the  preparation  of  these  FSRs  is  resource  intensive  and 
particularly challenging for smaller central banks. Thus, conferences and seminars, like this 
one,  where  we  bring  our  ideas  and  experiences  together,  are  an  invaluable  learning 
opportunity. We need to leverage off each other if we are to do this exercise successfully. As 
all of you know all too well, the range of dis-aggregated commercial bank information that 
central banks in developed countries take for granted is sometimes difficult to collect in our 
region where the culture of disclosure is not deeply rooted. This makes our effort to develop 
FSRs all the more challenging but at the same time all the more necessary.  
Let me end by wishing you all two days of very stimulating discussions. I am confident that 
this conference will further our efforts at strengthening regional financial stability and I thank 
the CCMF and the IDB for making all this possible. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
