Matthew Elderfield: European banking regulation and the Eurozone crisis 
Address  by  Mr  Matthew  Elderfield,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland  and 
Alternate Chairman of the European Banking Authority, to the 4th CDU/CSU Congress in the 
Bundestag, Berlin, 26 March 2012. 
 its 
remit 
These remarks are the authors personal views and do not necessarily reflect those of the EBA or of the ESRB, of 
which Mr Elderfield is a member of the General Council. 
Thank you for the invitation to join you today to discuss European banking regulation. In my 
brief  time  for  opening  remarks  I  would  like  to  do  three  things:  explain  the  actions  the 
European  Banking  Authority  (EBA)  has  taken  to  address  the  eurozone  financial  crisis; 
discuss the limits of regulatory action due to the feedback loop characteristics of the crisis 
and  suggest  two  or  three  areas  to  explore  to  improve  the  current  policy  response  to  the 
crisis. 
The  formation  of  the  EBA  at  the  start  of  2011  was  a  very  significant  milestone  in  the 
development of European regulation and the single market in banking. The EBA is different 
from  its  predecessors  in  three  important  ways.  First,  its  actions  as  policy-maker  will  mean 
that  a  single  European  rule  book  will  become  a  reality  and  be  directly  binding  on  all  EU 
banks.  Second, 
for  supervisory  convergence  and  direct  operational  
responsibilities  –  such  as  its  role  in  colleges  of  supervisors  –  will  make  it  increasingly 
influential  in  how  supervision  works  on  the  ground  in  national  authorities.  And  third,  its 
responsibilities  for  crisis  management  mean  that  it  will  be  at  the  forefront  of  the  most 
important regulatory challenges of the day. 
This has, of course, been the case with the current Eurozone financial crisis, first through a 
series  of  stress  tests  and,  more  recently,  with  its  recommendation  to  create  a  temporary 
capital buffer to strengthen the European banking system. It is important to remember that 
the EBA’s actions on capital were taken in response to not only market concerns but also 
calls for strengthening of capital from leading international and European policy makers. Last 
autumn both the new Managing Director of the IMF and the European Systemic Risk Board, 
comprising  the  EU’s  central  banks  and  regulators,  made  strong  calls  for  increased  capital 
levels  at  Europe’s  banks.  EBA’s  Chairman,  Andrea  Enria,  showed  strong  leadership  to 
respond to those concerns by crafting a new initiative on capital which was adopted by the 
EBA’s members.  
Constructing  correctly  calibrated  regulatory  measures  involving  bank  capital  is  extremely 
challenging in the current financial crisis. This is principally because of the negative feedback 
loop  between  the  banking  sector,  sovereign  debt  and  the  real  economy.  There  are  two 
dimensions to this feedback loop problem: procyclicality – or the interaction between bank 
lending  and  the  real  economy  –  and  backstop  burdens  –  or  the  interaction  between  bank 
recapitalisation and sovereign debt sustainability. 
Procyclicality  is  the  phenomenon  by  which  banking  capital  rules  exacerbate  the  business 
cycle  by  encouraging  lending  at  a  time  of  growth  or  contracting  it  in  a  time  of  recession. 
Basel 3 aims to build up a countercyclical buffer to lean against the wind in good times and 
be eased to help growth in bad times. We are evidently in bad times now, so intriguingly this 
has prompted some to consider whether you should in fact be starting to release the buffer. 
Indeed,  you  could  probably  run  the  Basel  countercyclical  buffer  methodology  with  some 
plausible assumptions and get to the conclusion that for many countries we are well past the 
point where the buffer would be released. The problem, of course, is that the buffer is not in 
place to be eased and, indeed, that there is still a further strengthening of capital required 
under Basel 3. In addition, market expectations are for more capital faster. Where they can, 
banks are responding by racing to meet the new Basel standard well ahead of the five year 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
transitional period. In this respect, what the regulator has given – a transitional period to ease 
the  impact  of  the  new  rules  –  the  market  has  taken  away.  A  fair  minded  regulator  should 
acknowledge that was a concern identified by industry some time ago. 
All these considerations led the EBA to be very careful in design of the buffer in two respects. 
We  made  it  clear  that  in  calculating  the  capital  buffer  the  determination  of  sovereign  debt 
exposure  would  be  fixed  at  one  point  in  time,  so  there  was  no  advantage  and  therefore 
incentive to dispose of sovereign debt holdings. And we provided tight guidelines limiting the 
capacity of banks to meet the capital requirement through deleveraging activity – reducing 
lending – that would hurt the real economy. 
We have now seen the banks’ plans to meet the EBA’s aggregate €115 billion requirement. 
The assessment is encouraging, with banks’ providing a margin for error, with very limited 
deleveraging planned and with overwhelmingly most of the required minimum  met by new 
capital rather than reduced assets. However, EBA will of course monitor developments very 
closely. 
Where should we go next in terms of policy responses? The European banking regulators’ 
room  for  manoeuvre  is  in  fact  very  constrained  by  the  two  dimensions  of  the  negative 
feedback  loop  problem.  The  central  dilemma  is  that  for  microprudential  regulators  more 
capital is a good thing – but that from a macroprudential perspective there is a concern about 
how  fast  to  get  that  and  at  what  cost.  Perhaps  the  safest  course  of  action,  then,  is  for  a 
breathing  space  in  terms  of  further  initiatives  on  the  capital  front.  The  EBA’s  decision  to 
postpone its next stress test exercise into 2013 is therefore a sensible development. 
There is also an argument for breathing space to let the political decisions on the sovereign 
debt crisis be fully implemented, both with respect to fiscal discipline and to building a firewall 
with adequate resources and sufficient operational flexibility. Indeed, if this does happen, and 
has  a  sustained  positive  impact,  it  could  eventually  give  scope  to  the  EBA  to  revisit  the 
necessity for the full scale of the current capital buffer. 
I would like to see that we use this breathing space wisely to consider the future design of 
stress tests and the operational flexibility of firewall structures. It seems that the role of the 
stress test as a diagnostic tool needs to be reasserted. Recent EU stress tests have evolved 
into what might be described as a “capital shortfall” calculation: setting a single scenario and 
a  specially  created  threshold  to  effectively  prescribe  additional  capital  even  where  not 
required  by  EU  law  or  Basel  rules.  Interestingly,  the  US  stress  tests  are  now  focused  on 
dividend  and  share  repurchase  approval  rather  than  closing  a  capital  gap  in  a  prescribed 
timeline. The EU stress test approach therefore is in addition to – and potentially cuts across 
– the new Basel 3 minimum capital requirements which are coming in anyway. Also, I fear 
that  trying  to  satisfy  insatiable  market  expectations  of  conservatism  in  a  stress  test  risks 
being very procyclical. 
Stress tests were originally conceived as diagnostic tools, considering a range of scenarios 
and  providing  the  basis  for  management  and  supervisory  judgement,  rather  than  as  an 
automatic capital formula. Given that the introduction of Basel 3 already requires increased 
capital and in light of the changing balance of risks of procyclical regulatory action, it would 
be sensible to recalibrate the European approach to stress testing in the next period.  
What  about  the  second  negative  feedback  problem  that  I  mentioned,  which  might  be 
described  as  “backstop  burdens”.  The  problem  here  is  if  countries  with  sovereign  debt 
concerns  need  to  borrow  more  to  recapitalise  their  banks,  which  harms  their  debt 
sustainability  and  therefore  exacerbates  the  euro  crisis,  impacting  the  real  economy  and 
feeding back to the banks. A former US Treasury Secretary colourfully spoke of the need for 
a bazooka – a big gun – to sort out the crisis, by which he meant using a vast amount of 
money  to  convince  markets  the  problem  has  been  solved.  But  for  countries  with  debt 
problems, they need to borrow more to afford the ammunition for the bazooka and their debt 
sustainability  position  gets  worse.  The  room  for  manoeuver  for  ever  tougher  capital 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
standards is therefore constrained. In this respect, the feedback loop will only be broken by 
investment, rather than borrowing, from outside the loop. 
Thus,  while  the  debate  around  firewall  structures  is  normally  about  the  sensitive  issue  of 
size, I would suggest that having sufficient operational flexibility in any new mechanism is an 
equally important objective. Finding mechanisms for investment in banking systems without 
adding to sovereign debt must surely be a desirable policy goal to be considered carefully. 
This  might  be  done  through  European  firewall  mechanisms  or  other  structures.  I  was 
interested  in  the  reported  comments  of  Hans-Peter  Keitel,  president  of  the  Federation  of 
German  Industries,  about  the  benefits  of  investment  in  (rather  than  more  loans  to)  debtor 
countries such as Greece. This seems a sensible initiative to be developed. Investment in 
stressed  banking  systems  would  help  break  the  feedback  loop  and  provide  commercial 
opportunities at the same time. 
Let  me  conclude  by  once  again  acknowledging  the  good  work  done  by  the  European 
Banking Authority in the current crisis. But let us also recognise the limits of further action on 
regulatory capital to address the crisis. We should use a breathing space to refine the policy 
instruments at hand in a way that can help break the feedback loop that is doing so much 
damage to all the member states of the Eurozone. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
