Prasarn Trairatvorakul: Trust as a pillar of the industry 
Keynote  speech  by  Dr  Prasarn  Trairatvorakul,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  The 
Asian Banker Summit 2012 “Trust as a Pillar of the Industry”, Bangkok, 26 April 2012. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is an honor to join all of you today, and to welcome leaders of Asian banking community to 
Bangkok. The theme of this year conference, “Trust as a pillar of the industry”, highlights the 
fact  that  the  global  financial  market  stands  at  an  important  cross-road.  The  topic  of  trust 
inevitably arises after a crisis. The cross-road is about how to reform regulation, that is, how 
to re-regulate. 
This is the juncture which we have reached today, with reforms proposals such as those by 
the Basel Committee, the Financial Stability Board, or Dodd-Frank Act in the US. All these 
are attempts to rebuild trust and confidence. 
It is well known that Trust is the cornerstone of the financial industry. But it should also be 
added that, Trust alone is not enough. We also need to have a good dose of healthy 
skepticism.  The  reason  for  this  is  that  we  must  avoid,  on  the  one  hand,  overly  trusting 
market mechanism, or on the other hand, overly trusting in regulation. This is because of the 
rapid changes in the financial system and how risk is transmitted. 
The  last  crisis  showed  how  financial  innovation  and  complexity  of  bank  business  model 
overtook  risk  management  and  regulation  in  the  west.  In  Asia,  economic  and  financial 
liberalization is a powerful driving force that is reshaping our financial landscape today. This 
could potentially open up the gap between risk and our ability to manage it. 
So what should be our strategy to build trust, but avoid being blinded by our sense of 
security? 
The  strategy  to  deal  with  this  is  to  have  Trust  that  is  counter  balanced  by  well  informed 
debate on risk management, supervision, and good governance. So, we need a good dose 
of well-informed skepticism, as well as financially literate public. 
Let me turn to the progress on the global efforts to reform regulation. Where are we 
today? 
In all of these reforms – be they Basel or FSB – the questions we ask are these. Have we 
done enough to rebuild “Trust” and secure financial soundness? Is the international standard 
right for the local context? Are there unintended consequences, i.e. the bad side-effects? 
Getting it right, with the right balance, and right timing is very difficult. This is especially so 
when the dust has not settled, and the real economy is still vulnerable. Indeed, five years 
after  the  crisis  erupted in  the  US,  we  are  still seeing  the spread  of  impact  in  Europe,  and 
deleveraging of European banks. 
From Thailand’s own bitter experience of the 1997 crisis, the combined impact of all 
the  economic  and  financial  sector  reforms  was  hard  to  gauge  beforehand.  And 
certainly,  the  design  of  reform  package  did  not  anticipate  the  effect  of  the  contagion 
spreading to the rest of Asia and our trading partners. The key lesson is that, even in our 
best effort to get the reform right, we may still fumble. 
So, how should Asia think about the impact of the global regulatory reform? 
For Asia, although the banking system has been quite resilient to the crisis, these regulatory 
reforms carry high stake for us, especially for our future developments. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The reforms such as Basel III are, to a large extent, designed to correct major weaknesses in 
Basel II that allowed the crisis to emerge in western countries. These weaknesses were such 
as undercapitalization, over-leveraging, inadequate liquidity, and procyclicality of the banking 
system. So, in so far as Basel III would make these banks safer, it would contribute to 
stability of the global economy. 
However,  the  weaknesses  that  were  targeted  by  Basel  III  did  not  cause  damage  in  Asia. 
This is mainly because the banking model here tends to be simpler, understandable, 
and traceable. The western system, on the other hand, is so complex that no one, not even 
the CEO, could understands the bank’s structure and activities. 
The  value  of  this  simpler  model  is  that  bankers  know  what  is  going  on  in  their  banks. 
Supervisors can keep very close eyes on their activities. As a result, banks in Asia were not 
as prone to the problem of massive over-leveraging, undercapitalization, or under pricing of 
risk of complex derivatives. So from this perspective, the significant improvement of Basel 
III  over  Basel  II  is  in  addressing  the  problem  of  procyclicality  and  adoption  of 
macroprudential  approach  in  our  policy  framework.  This  is  a  major  contribution  of 
Basel III going forward. 
The key emphasis of Basel III is to strengthen capital base. While this is important, I regard 
this as only a second line of defense. The first line of defense is a good risk management 
system, and strong governance. Asia’s simpler banking model, and reforms to strengthen 
bank  risk  management  and  risk-based  supervision,  help  to  foster  a  strong  first  line  of 
defense. 
But as I mentioned earlier, we would risk false sense of security if we believe we can depend 
just  on  our  simpler  banking  model.  With  economic  and  financial  liberalization,  especially 
propelled  by  the  regional  economic  integration  such  as  ASEAN  Economic  Community  or 
AEC, that simpler banking model is changing. I will return to this issue later. 
For now, let me return to Basel III and the potential side-effects for Asia?  
There are some concerns about unintended consequences from Basel III that bankers and 
regulators in Asia have voiced to the standard setters. I will, at this time, not comment on 
those issues which are not concluded such as liquidity rule. 
One  of  the  most  important  and  immediate  consequences  would  be  impact  on  trade 
finance which is a critical issue for emerging economies and Asia. This is because our 
economies  and  financial  structure  is  more  dependent  on  it,  compared  to  some  western 
economies. 
Let me elaborate. International trade is a major driver of GDP as our  export is part of the 
global and increasingly integrated regional supply chain. However, many of our exporters are 
SMEs  not  large  conglomerate.  These  local  SMEs  rely  on  bank  financing,  as  our  financial 
system  remains  more  bank-based  than  market-based.  Supplier  of  trade  financing  is  still 
banks  in  western  countries,  especially  European  banks.  The  deleveraging  of  European 
banks can reduce the supply of trade financing and impact growth and development. 
To  address  this,  it  is  important  that  Basel  Committee  recognizes  that  trade  financing  has 
relatively  large  impact  on  Asia,  compared  to  the  western  economies  for  which  Basel  III  is 
mainly geared. Treatment of trade financing in leverage ratio framework will create incentive 
for  banks  to  shift  away  from  trade  financing  towards  other  types  of  financial  transactions, 
including derivatives which have lower impact on leverage ratio, but can earn higher return. 
This is because they are assigned lower credit conversion factor even though trade financing 
is  less  complex,  more  familiar,  has  low  liquidity  risk  as  they  are  self-liquidating,  and  most 
importantly, it clearly serves real sector. 
We  believe  these  rationales  argue  for  a  more  appropriate  treatment  of  trade  financing  to 
ensure  that  the  Basel  III  framework  is  appropriate  for  Asia.  The  current  effort  of  FSB  to 
survey unintended consequences of reforms on emerging market is welcomed. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Before  ending  this  note  on  Basel  III,  let  me  touch  on  Thailand’s  own  take  on  these 
developments. 
For  Thailand,  we  aim  to  adopt  the  Basel  III  framework  in  accordance  with  Basel 
Committee timeline. 
After industry consultation, we believe that Thai banks will be well placed to implement the 
Basel  III  framework  as  their  capital  positions  are  well  above  the  minimum  requirements  of 
8.5%. The Basel III framework will help strengthen the bank’s capital and risk management. 
One of the major improvements of Basel III from Basel II is consideration on cyclicality, with 
requirement for conservation and countercyclical buffer. However, we believe that prudential 
measures, such as conservative provisioning designed to be countercyclical, should also be 
given due credit for achieving the same aim when implementing Basel III buffers. This would 
help avoid the double requirement on capital maintenance. Of course, we strongly support a 
better treatment of trade financing, to ensure that Basel III is supportive of stable economic 
growth. 
On  the  last  note,  let  me  turn  to  a  key  trend  in  Asia,  “regional  economic  and  financial 
integration”.  Asia  faces  a  challenge  of  steering  a  balance  between  liberalization  and 
strengthening regulation. 
ASEAN  Economic  Integration  under  AEC,  which  sets  the  landmark  date  of  2015,  has 
progressed substantially on the free flow of goods and services, as well as direct investment. 
Financial sector integration is also set to speed up. The plan is to improve efficient and safe 
payments  system  in  the  region  to  facilitate  trade  and  retail  clients,  as  well  as  support 
payments and settlements of securities in our capital markets. 
The road for AEC goods and services to flow has been built, we are now making it better. 
Payments  should  be  easier,  cheaper,  faster,  safer,  and  embrace  e-technology  to  do  this. 
Banking  sector  integration  will  work  towards  allowing  entry  of  ASEAN  banks  into  other 
member countries. Currently we are discussing the prudential criteria for Qualified ASEAN 
Banks.  We  expect  to  reach  conclusion  by  the  end  of  this  year,  and  for  implementation  to 
begin in 2014. 
So,  given  that  the  road  is  built,  the  financial  intermediary  or  the  carrier  is  set  to  operate 
cross-border services more widely. The capital account liberalization is also being speeded 
up with removal of capital control, that is equivalent of having less customs and immigration 
check-point at our borders. The capital market integration will act as catalyst to speed up the 
developments by expanding products and competition, and flow of financial assets. 
The  AEC  will  also  serve  to  better  integrate  ASEAN  into  the  other  regional  economies  and 
supply chain, that is to integrate ASEAN plus 6. 
Thailand  is  prepared  for  this,  and  our  plans  are  being  implemented  on  track.  These  are 
Financial  Sector  Master  Plan  phase  II  for  banking  sector,  the  capital  market  development 
plan, the Payment Road Map. Our capital account liberalization plan is undergoing industrial 
hearing. 
These forces will shape the demand for financial services and supporting infrastructure going 
forward.  The  key  outcome  would  be  demand  for  broader  set  of  financial  products  and 
services  to  serve  regional  cross-border  trade  and  investment.  The  economic  growth  and 
growth of wealth in Asia will require better wealth management services. 
So, we have come full circle. The simple banking model that has served Asia well so far will 
not be adequate to serve our growing future needs. So our banks will have more products, 
more complex risk profile, more interconnected with global capital market, more reliance on 
IT infrastructure. The regulations being discussed at Basel and FSB will become increasingly 
relevant to us. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
To go forward, we need to create a trust in risk management system and supervision, not 
just in our country but also our neighbors in Asia. Having a global standard is a help in 
fostering this trust, if we and our neighbors adopt the same standard. The challenge also is 
that we also need to make the standard appropriate for us. To do this, both banks and 
regulators across the region need to work together. 
This symbiotic relationship is how we get the Trust and healthy dose of skepticism to keep 
our financial system safe and efficient. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
