Jens Weidmann: Lessons from the crisis for monetary policy and 
financial market regulation 
Keynote  speech  by  Dr  Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the 
Frankfurt Finance Summit, Frankfurt am Main, 20 March 2012. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Dear Professor Franke, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
First  of  all,  I  would  like  to  thank  you  for  the  opportunity  to  speak  here  today.  Through 
numerous collaborations, the Bundesbank has developed a close relationship with the House 
of Finance. The exchange between the two institutions has always proved rewarding; and it 
is a pleasure for me to follow up on this tradition today at the Frankfurt Finance Summit. 
Almost five years have passed since the eruption of the global financial crisis. Global efforts 
to resolve the crisis and to draw the right consequences have been exceptional in historical 
comparison, and our perception of the financial sector has changed profoundly. But many of 
the questions the crisis has raised have not been fully resolved. 
Among  others,  those  questions  refer  to  financial  developments  leading  up  to  the  crisis, 
chains  of  contagion  throughout  the  crisis,  as  well  as  consequences  of  policy  interventions 
taken. 
All of them have in common that they aim at a better understanding of the financial sector 
and are therefore closely related to its ever-changing economic role as an intermediary. 
There is no question that the role of the financial sector has undergone profound changes in 
the last decades. 
This is illustrated by the increase in value added by the financial sector as a percentage of 
GDP around the globe. In the US, this figure grew by 70% over the last 30 years. In Europe, 
the development is more heterogeneous: Spain witnessed a 32% growth in value added by 
the  financial  sector  as  a  percentage  of  GDP  from  1995–2007,  the  UK  a  46%  growth.  In 
contrast  to  that,  Germany  registered  a  drop  by  9%.  But  altogether,  the  figures  point  to  a 
general increase of the financial sector’s relative weight. 
In  addition,  more  and  more  financial  interaction  is  taking  place  within  the  financial  sector 
itself:  Financial  assets  held  by  the  financial  sector  have  increased  by  more  than  100%.  In 
comparison,  the  growth  in  total  financial  assets  held  by  households  and  non-financial-
corporations is significantly lower at around 50% and 70%, respectively. 
Two  starkly  different  explanations  for  this  phenomenon  are  currently  being  debated. 
According to the first paradigm, the role of the financial sector as financial intermediary has 
changed, resulting in additional functions being performed by the financial system for the real 
economy. The second – and quite popular – explanation argues that the increase in financial 
activity has merely been an exaggeration, as a consequence of which the financial system 
has, to a certain degree, uncoupled itself from the real economy and turned to unproductive 
activities. 
Each  line  of  argument  obviously  has  important  policy  implications  –  for  the  scope  and 
intensity  of  regulation  and  supervision,  but  also  for  other  policy  areas,  including  central 
banks. 
Drawing the right lessons from the crisis requires first of all a clear understanding of the role 
the financial system plays for the real economy. In my short remarks I will therefore take a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
somewhat more general approach that goes beyond monetary policy issues. I will argue that, 
firstly,  a  highly  developed  and  innovative  financial  system  is  indispensable  for  economic 
growth, but that there is also an inherent risk of exaggerations. 
Secondly, regulatory efforts therefore have to strike a delicate balance between constraining 
such exaggerations without stifling innovation and thereby hampering economic growth. 
And  finally,  given  that  the  crisis  has  laid  bare  serious  gaps  in  our  understanding  of  the 
financial  system,  I  will  conclude  by  outlining  some  fields  of  research  that,  at  least  from  a 
central bank’s viewpoint, are of particular interest. 
The role of the financial system 
2. 
The fundamental role of the financial system is to act as intermediary between borrowers and 
lenders. Services such as the transformation of maturity, denomination and liquidity allow for 
efficient capital allocation, thereby promoting innovation and growth. 
Furthermore,  the  financial  system  solves  adverse  selection  and  moral  hazard  problems 
between lenders and borrowers. This is of crucial importance for financing innovations and 
therefore  for  TFP-intensive  growth  which  we  depend  on  in  aging  highly  developed 
economies. 
Throughout history, this role of the financial system has never been static, but has become 
more and more complex in step with economic progress. In the process, the contemporary 
structure of the financial system has gradually evolved over the centuries. Banks perform the 
tasks associated with money and credit, the bond market provides financing for governments 
and large corporations, the stock market provides equity financing of joint stock companies, 
venture  capital  the  funding  of  nascent  businesses  –  and  a  myriad  of  financial  instruments 
allow us to trade and redistribute all kinds of risks. 
And it is a well-known fact that this process has, through history, been accompanied by the 
build-up and bursting of bubbles – usually at large, sometimes very large costs. Prominent 
examples include the Tulip Mania, the South Sea Bubble, the Roaring Twenties Bubble and 
the Dot-Com Bubble. 
Hence  there  has  always  been  a  trade-off.  On  the  one  hand,  financial  innovation  was  a 
precondition for rising prosperity and economic development. On the other hand, the fluidity 
and dynamism of financial transactions make the financial system prone to exaggeration and 
the emergence of speculative bubbles. 
The financial crisis is another illustration of this pattern, but a particularly severe one that has 
galvanised  policy-makers  into  reforming  financial  regulation.  But  what  are  the  lessons  we 
should draw? 
Lessons for financial regulation 
3. 
Regulatory reforms aim to improve the resilience of the financial system as a whole against 
shocks in the form of a default or the burst of a bubble. To achieve this, financial regulation 
has to prevent market forces from getting out of control. But it must not suppress financial 
innovation; otherwise we would eliminate its indispensable contribution to economic growth 
and development.  
The  European  sovereign  debt  crisis  has  raised  awareness  of  the  importance  of  financial 
markets and their disciplining effect. True, bond markets took note of differences in sovereign 
risks  much  too  late.  But  did  not  economic  policy  perform  even  weaker  in  preventing 
excessive deficits and the emergence of severe macroeconomic divergences? 
For this reason, I am sceptical about correcting undesirable results in the financial markets 
by direct prohibition or by suppressing market activities. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Instead, regulatory reform should reinvigorate the principle that risks and returns have to be 
closely aligned: Market participants must be held responsible for their actions, the possibility 
of losses or even default is a constitutive element of any functioning market, and the financial 
markets are no exception. 
The reforms initiated by the G20 reflect this approach. Measures like Basel III and the new 
macro-prudential  framework  explicitly  take  a  systemic  view  of  the  financial  system.  The 
resolution regimes for SIFIs, the measures adopted to increase transparency and to create a 
global level playing field strive for a closer alignment of risks and returns. The agenda has 
picked up on important past trends, such as the increasing role of non-bank-sector and the 
growing interconnectedness of financial markets. 
When  looking  at  the  experience  of  the  financial  crisis  and  the  channels  through which  the 
financial system affects economic growth, the case can be made that the two objectives of 
an  efficient  and  stable  financial  system  are,  to  a  significant  degree,  complementary.  Well 
designed regulatory reform can make the financial system more stable without cutting into 
sustainable growth. But the constant evolution of the financial system and the emergence of 
new instruments and players also imply that the regulatory framework will never be finalised 
once and for all. 
Unresolved questions 
4. 
Prudent  regulation  and  supervision  crucially  depend  on  a  sound  understanding  of  the 
financial  system.  Research  efforts  of  institutions  around  the  globe,  including  central  banks 
which also have a keen interest in these issues, have been remarkable. However, a deeper 
understanding  is  still  required  of  those  trends  in  financial  markets  that  led  to  financial 
instability – and monetary policy measures that sometimes took central banks to the limits of 
their mandate. I do not want to offer a research agenda, but let me pick out some areas that 
are particularly interesting for central banks: 
Securitisation,  for  example,  is  not  a  new  technique,  but  it  has  experienced  an  enormous 
upswing in recent decades. It is intended to disperse credit risk to those who are better able 
to assume such risks and absorb the corresponding losses, and as such it increases welfare. 
We know by now that securitisation can also increase risk-taking and thus the fragility of the 
financial  system  as  a  whole.  Some  elements  of  regulatory  reform  already  address  this 
problem. But the question remains whether we have done enough to reduce the drawbacks 
without sacrificing the benefits. 
Another  important  reason  for  financial  instability  with  potentially  serious  macroeconomic 
costs  continues  to  be  overextension  in  balance  sheets  in boom  periods,  which  is  often  an 
indication of excessive risk-taking. We have learned that this can be masked by a vigorous 
economy. It is therefore vital that we extend our knowledge of how to make disguised risks 
more transparent. 
Turning from the prevention of exaggerations to more direct countermeasures, we still do not 
know enough about the desirability of different forms of policy interventions. The search for 
the  optimal  mix  of  measures  of  ex-post  and  ex-ante  interventions  is  still  ongoing.  Further 
work needs to be done in order to establish whether macro-prudential regulation can solve 
the time consistency problems associated with ex-post interventions. 
This is a particularly relevant issue for central banks. Since the crisis began, functions have 
been  added,  especially  in  the  field  of  macro-prudential  policy.  As  you  are  well  aware,  the 
Bundesbank, too, stands ready and looks forward to assuming more responsibilities in this 
field. The challenge will then be to integrate these new tasks seamlessly with the functions 
central banks already perform. I think it is right to have central banks closely involved, given 
their expertise and the close linkages to other central bank functions; but there can be no 
doubt that the independence of central banks and our prime objective of maintaining price 
stability must not be compromised. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Additional issues have been raised by the European debt crisis. As regards macro-prudential 
policy, the distribution of competencies between the European and the national level and the 
various bodies is currently the subject of heated debate. Contagion effects of financial crises 
are  particularly  severe  in  a  monetary  union,  suggesting  a  more  centralised  approach.  But 
national  financial  systems  still  differ  significantly  within  the  euro  area,  and  member  states 
retain a large degree of autonomy in fiscal and economic policy, which favours the existing 
decentralised setup. 
An important channel of contagion has been the heavy concentration of sovereign debt at the 
respective  national  banks.  When  risk  perceptions  started  to  change,  banks  holding  large 
amounts  of  distressed  sovereign  debt  became  a  severe  burden  on  financial  stability.  We 
need to know more about how to best address this sovereign bank nexus. 
Conclusion 
5. 
Ladies and gentlemen,  
let me conclude. The financial system plays an indispensable role in fostering innovation and 
growth. This role has never been static: it is evolving constantly. And throughout history, this 
process has been accompanied by exaggerations.  
The  continuing,  never-ending  challenge  of  financial  market  regulation  is  to  limit  the  latter 
without stifling the undeniably beneficial forces at work in the financial system – we have to 
tame market forces and self-interest, but should not exorcise them. 
To do so, we have to expand our understanding of financial markets, which is still limited and 
lacking  in  a  number  of  policy-relevant  fields.  The  Bundesbank  is  closely  involved  in  this 
endeavour,  and  fora  such  as  the  Frankfurt  Finance  Summit  are  an  important  part  of  the 
process. 
Thank you for your attention, and I wish you a lively, interesting discussion. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
