Ardian Fullani: Overview of Albania’s banking sector 
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the  end-year  reception, 
organized by the Albanian Association of Banks, Tirana, 23 December 2011. 
 Dear bank executives, 
Dear participants,  
This  end-year  event  with  the  Albanian  Association  of  Banks,  turned  into  a  tradition  of 
communication between the banking sector and the Bank of Albania, provides an excellent 
opportunity to make a short resume of the results achieved by this sector in this year as well 
as to identify its challenges in the upcoming year.  
The banking sector managed to finish off 2011 successfully. Its role in supporting Albania’s 
economic  activity  was  crucial,  while  prudence  was  made  to  guarantee  its  financial 
soundness.  
In  this  regard,  the  supervisory  role  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  has  provided  an  extraordinary 
contribution. Banking supervision has been proactive and preventive by creating, at the same 
time, the necessary space for flexible banking activity management. Amendments to the law 
“On banks in the Republic of Albania”, a number of amendments to the banking regulatory 
framework as well as the physical interaction through on-site inspections have contributed to 
enhanced immunity and dampened negative effects generated by the global crisis. The Bank 
of  Albania  has  periodically  conducted  stress  tests  on  specific  banks  to  ensure  that  the 
banking sector’s security and functionality is never put in doubt. Currently, we are working for 
this  project  to  be  transformed  into  regional  cooperation  taking  into  account  that  same 
banking groups operate across the entire region. 
According to banks reporting at end-September 2011, banking sector total assets expanded 
9.5%  from  year  start  and  about  13%  from  the  corresponding  period  of  a  year  earlier.  The 
banking  sector  credit  portfolio  widened  9.6%  during  the  year  or  about  15%  year-on-year, 
constituting 49.1% of total assets. During the year, Lek-denominated loans increased more 
rapidly than foreign currency-denominated loans. The activity increase was sustained mainly 
by deposits increases, which constitute 81.4% of total liabilities. During the year, they were 
up 9.7% or 14.1% higher than the corresponding period of 2010. Liquidity ratios are stable 
and are expected to consolidate following recent regulatory requirements introduced by the 
Bank of Albania. As at September 2011, banking activity made a profit of ALL 1.3 billion and 
return on assets and capital was 0.2% and 1.9%, respectively. Capital adequacy ratio was 
15.1%, better than at the end of H1 2011. This was due to capital increase by some banks, 
following the Bank of Albania’s requirement.  
These developments confirm stable public confidence in the Albanian banking sector and the 
significant  contribution  of  the  banking  sector  to  fund  the  Albanian  economy  in  this  year. 
These  may  be  considered  as  precious  achievements  while  the  Albanian  economy  and  its 
economic agents faced with  more  challenges in 2011. Loan portfolio worsening and credit 
risk management requirements were matched by higher provisions by banks, which in turn 
contributed  to  worsened  financial  result.  In  response,  banks  managed  to  optimise  their 
operational  costs  and  improve  their  capital  ratios.  In  this  regard,  the  Bank  of  Albania  has 
emphasised  the  accurate  identification  of  the  credit  portfolio  situation,  asking  the  banks  to 
take firm action and recover their non-performing loans value.  
This may be realised through support to qualitative borrowers in temporary difficult situations 
as  well  as  through  execution  of  collateral  in  the  case  of  hopeless  borrowers.  Execution  of 
collateral  and  the  need  to  improve  the  relevant  legal  and  operational  framework  are 
considered as a priority by the Bank of Albania. Following recommendations from an earlier 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
forum  organised  on  this  topic,  the  Bank  of  Albania  is  fully  committed  so  that  other  public 
authorities address the issue with priority.  
Furthermore, in cooperation with the banking sector, the Bank of Albania has identified and 
undertaken  a  number  of  other  supervisory  and  regulatory  actions,  aiming  at  improving 
operational capitalisation situation and minimum liquidity requirement both in the national and 
foreign currencies. 
Next, some amendments to the Law “On banks in the Republic of Albania” were drafted and 
approved, which, in essence, complete and improve banking activity supervisory framework. 
These actions were pivotal for addressing an added risk perception due to international and 
regional financial developments. I take this opportunity to thank you for your cooperation and 
concrete actions with regard to the implementation of these new requirements, confident that 
you will fully accomplish them within the required timeframe.  
Dear bank executives, 
More  than  three  years  on  from  the  crisis  start,  global  economy’s  perspective  to  leave  this 
crisis behind remains unclear. Nonetheless, this is about a gradual and long process.  
Overall, financial institutions, in Europe and beyond, continue to face with the following: 
 
 
 
High uncertainties as regards exposure value in sovereign debt securities;  
Difficulties to ensure liquidity in wholesale markets;  
Reduction  of  crediting  volume  and  tightening  of  its  terms  to  fund  the  domestic 
economy;  
Higher capital requirements arising mainly from new regulatory rules by supervisory 
authorities.  
 The  need  to  reduce  investment  risk  in  sovereign  debt  is  accompanied  by  huge  efforts  on 
fiscal  consolidation  in  many  countries,  especially  in  Europe.  Hence,  EU  economic  growth 
expectations, including those for countries that had, insofar, posted above-average economic 
growth, were markedly down. It appears that the best solution for this situation will come only 
as a result of various countries’ ability to undertake, at this point, vital social and economic 
reforms as well as to provide financial support so that, on the one hand, financial stability is 
maintained and, on the other hand, private enterprises are provided with some relief, thus 
affecting their future economic development expectations.  
Albania’s economy maintained its positive growth rates during this period, to absorb external 
shocks. This flexibility is a precious characteristic that will continue to support the country’s 
economic  development  and  buffer  effects  from  various  shocks,  even  in  the  future.  It  is 
important  for  the  banking  sector  to  utilise  and  support  this  valuable  attribute  of  economic 
agents,  both  private  and  public,  offering  them  a  constant  satisfaction  of  their  needs  for 
funding  and  other  services.  This  action  should  rely  not  only  on  the  insofar-successful 
experience,  but  also  on  an  economic  logic,  while  only  a  few  countries  in  the  region  have 
retained their positive economic growth rates. Nevertheless, the economic environment will 
remain a challenging one and it should be assessed pragmatically. Various actions that may 
be  taken  should  be  oriented  by  the  concept  of  prudence  and  in  respect  of  regulatory  and 
supervisory framework requirements.  
I  would  like  to  underline  that  a  responsible  bank  management  during  this  period  will  be 
recognised  by  its  ability  to  control  and  administer  operational  risks  in  general  and  your 
swiftness to develop institution’s capacities to test the resilience and performance in various 
scenarios of potential future developments in particular. International standards require that 
the  focus  be  not  placed  on  planning  highly  probable  events,  but  on  the  assessing  the 
institutions’ resilience to relatively extreme and unfavourable developments.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Moreover, this process should be part of a broader and constant analysis that you need to 
conduct  with  a  view  to  assess  your  needs  for  stable  operational  capitalisation  and  define 
safeguarding  measures.  These  requirements  are  actually  present  in  the  regulatory  and 
supervisory  framework  and  the  Bank  of  Albania  stands  ready  to  share  with  you  its 
experience for effective development. 
In conclusion, allow me to say that the Bank of Albania is in the process of perfecting the 
supervision regulatory framework, in the context of its cooperation with the European System 
of Central Banks.  
However,  full  and  timely  respect  of  legal  and  regulatory  framework  requirements  on 
operational capitalisation and liquidity, as well as bank’s overall operational risk management 
methodology will continue to be an ongoing supervision priority.  
This process is oriented by the common objective to maintain banking and financial systems 
stability.  The  Bank  of  Albania  remains  committed  to  cooperate  with  the  banking  sector  to 
achieve successfully this objective. 
As in previous years, the Bank of Albania will make the appropriate decisions to ensure that 
its  fundamental  objectives  to  maintain  price  and  banking  sector  stability  are  constantly 
accomplished for the country’s stable growth in the long run.  
Thanking you for your valuable work, I wish you a New Year full of successes in your work 
and happiness in your families! 
Thank you! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
