H R Khan: The shrinking money and Reserve Bank of India’s monetary 
policy 
Address  by  Shri  H  R  Khan,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
10th National Management Seminar – 2011 on “The shrinking money: combating debt crisis 
and  inflation”  organized  by  The  Asian  School  of  Business  Management,  Bhubaneswar, 
10 December 2011. 
 The speaker acknowledges the valuable contributions of Shri. Sitikantha Pattanaik and Shri. Surajit Bose.  
When I received the invitation to speak in a seminar having the theme titled “The Shrinking 
Money:  Combating  Debt  Crises  and  Inflation”,  I  took  some  time  trying  to  understand  what 
exactly “shrinking money” could mean? In the global context, shrinking money could possibly 
be related to advanced countries’ fiscal excesses which have been fully accommodated by 
their  respective  central  banks  in  conducting  monetary  policies.  In  other  words,  despite 
inflationary  risks  in  the  medium-run  from  the  persistent  easy  monetary  and  liquidity 
conditions  created  by  their  central  banks,  monetary  policy  has  no  choice  but  remain 
subjugated  to  the  fiscal  excesses  and  the  impact  of  such  excesses  on  the  economy. 
Moreover,  monetary  policy  strategy  in  advanced  economies  has  explored  new  options, 
particularly after hitting zero nominal interest rate bound, such as “quantitative easing” and 
“twist operations” but their effectiveness in delivering a durable robust recovery in growth has 
belied  expectations.  In  that  sense,  it  could  be  “shrinking  scope  for  monetary  policy”  India, 
however, does not face these constraints in the conduct of its monetary policy. On a second 
thought,  therefore,  I  looked  for  an  answer  from  the  domestic  macroeconomic  context. 
Whether  shrinking  money  refers  to  “shrinking  value  of  money”  because  of  the  persistently 
high inflation that we have been experiencing for more than two years now? Is it about what 
monetary policy could do about inflation in an environment of large borrowing programme of 
the government and inadequate fiscal and other structural response to address the supply 
side pressures on inflation? I realised that it must be the second interpretation, since I am 
from RBI, an institution which has been subjected to intense public scrutiny in last about one 
year  or  so  for  its  monetary  policy  response  to  contain  inflation  and  anchor  inflation 
expectations.  
It would not be proper on my part to speak on what monetary policy should do in the near 
term,  particularly  when  the  mid-quarter  review  of  our  monetary  policy  is  due  on 
December 16. There are many market analysts who try to guess RBI’s actions ahead of the 
policy, and you all, being faculties and students of leading business schools, must be already 
having a sense of that from the financial dailies. I am sure many of you may be having your 
own assessment of the inflation situation and your own expectations from the RBI in terms of 
what it should or should not do. I would try to cover in my address the way we see the recent 
inflation path in terms of its determinants, and why monetary policy matters so much, even if 
that alone is not sufficient to ensure a low and stable inflation environment. Monetary policy 
can still ensure a fast softening of inflation but only at the cost of large sacrifice of growth, 
which is equally non desirable as high inflation. Low inflation and robust growth – both are 
essential  to  improve  economic  welfare.  Fiscal  policy  also  has  a  major  role  in  inflation 
management,  both  in  terms  of  containing  government  demand  in  the  short-run  and 
augmenting  the  supply situation in the  medium-term.  The  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy 
improves in a supportive fiscal environment. I will, therefore, also cover some of the fiscal 
issues in this address, and by doing so, I will try to touch upon some other dimension of the 
overall theme of this seminar.  
Let  me  start  with  the  oft  asked  question  of  why  inflation  has  persisted  despite  RBI’s 
significant anti-inflationary monetary policy response. When we say that inflation has been 
“high” over successive months over almost two years now, it has to be seen as a relative 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
concept. It could be high relative to either past averages or the inflation goal of the RBI. Prior 
to the global crisis, the average WPI inflation over the five year period 2003–04 to 2007–08 
was about 5.5 percent. Since January 2010, however, the WPI inflation has remained within 
a range of 8 to 11 percent in each of the 22 successive months. That is high relative to what 
we experienced before the crisis. Moreover, RBI’s monetary policy statements suggest that 
RBI’s monetary policy continues to aim at conditioning and containing perception of inflation 
in  the  range  of  4  to  4.5  percent.  The  recent  inflation  trend,  therefore,  is  clearly  above  the 
stated comfort level of the RBI. What explains then this persistence of high inflation? 
India was already dealing with double digit inflation when it had to face the contagion from 
the  global  financial  crisis.  India  avoided  a  financial  crisis  at  home,  but  there  was  some 
moderation  in  growth.  Along  with  the  beneficial  impact  of  sharp  moderation  in  global 
commodity prices, domestic slowdown in demand led to significant decline in inflation by the 
end  of  2008–09,  which  continued  in  the  first  seven  months  of  2009–10,  with  inflation 
hovering  at  below  2  percent.  In  fact  over  two  months  during  this  period,  the  year  on  year 
inflation  was  negative,  when  many  had  started  asking  RBI  whether  India  faces  the  risk  of 
deflation. How then the inflation situation deteriorated so fast thereafter? It happened over 
successive  phases,  with  contribution  to  the  inflation  build-up  coming  from  different  items 
covered in the WPI.  
In 2009–10, 22 percent deficiency in South-West monsoon came as a supply shock. Despite 
high food stocks and resilient agricultural sector output, the adverse expectations associated 
with this supply shock kept food inflation high throughout the year. Since non-food inflation 
was  very  low  in  the  first  half  of  2009–10,  in  some  of  the  months  during  this  period  the 
contribution of food inflation to headline WPI inflation was almost 100 percent. Why then food 
inflation has remained so high on a sustained basis, despite record food grains production in 
2010–11 and a normal South-West monsoon this year? Has the dynamics of food inflation 
changed in recent years? Some recent trends seem to suggest so, which include:  
(a)  The  growing  demand  supply  imbalance,  more  so  in  protein  based  food  items  – 
Production and productivity enhancement in food articles have not kept pace with increasing 
demand  and  income  level  of  the  growing  population  of  the  country.  As  one  would  expect, 
with rising per-capita income, the dietary pattern could also change, away from staples and 
in  favour  of  protein  rich  items.  This  is  what  being  experienced  in  India  in  recent  years 
consistent with the Bennet’s Law which suggests that as incomes increase, the proportion of 
starchy staples in the food basket declines relative to the share of more expensive sources of 
calories. Supply of protein based food items such as pulses, milk, eggs, meat and fish have 
not  increased  as  much  as  one  would  expect  in  response  to  higher  prices,  while  demand 
continues to grow. Data on expenditure pattern in both rural and urban areas suggest that 
the shares of expenditure on protein food in total expenditure have increased. At some point 
the  structural  imbalance  in  protein  involved  high  protein  inflation  in  the  range  of  25  to 
34 percent over successive eight months between November 2009 and July 2010. 
(b) Significant increases in rural wages, particularly in the post-MGNREGS period – Inclusive 
growth  is  essential  to  make  the  growth  process  sustainable  in  a  democracy  of  1.2  billion 
population, but  there  could  be  occasional  tradeoffs  between  inclusive growth  and  inflation, 
particularly when wage increases do not reflect corresponding increases in productivity, and 
higher  transfers  of  purchasing  power  do  not  accompany  measures  to  improve  the  supply 
situation of commodities on which these higher fiscal transfers could be spent. Data on the 
increase in rural wages over last several years suggest that the rate of increase has been in 
excess  of  comparable  consumer  price  inflation  in  rural  areas.  MGNREGS,  guaranteeing 
100 days of employment per year is in operation since 2006, and recently MGNREGS wages 
have been indexed to consumer price inflation in rural areas. The wage pressures in rural 
areas could be partly ascribed to MGNREGS, and the manifestation of wage pressures has 
been  in  the  form  of  significant  step  up  in  per-capita  expenditure  levels.  Available  data 
suggest that average nominal per capita expenditure increased sharply in the second half of 
last decade (2005–10) compared to the first half (2000–05), from 3.6 percent to 10.5 percent 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
in rural areas, and from 5.3 percent to 10.9 percent in urban areas. Wage increases at high 
rate in rural areas accompanied by a trend growth in agriculture sector of about 3 percent 
could exert both cost-push as well as demand-pull inflationary pressures. 
(c) Large increases in minimum support prices (MSPs) – In India, there is a long standing 
debate  on  the  role  of  remunerative  price  incentive  to  improve  production  of  farm  output, 
given the implications of such an approach for food inflation. Even when a segment of the 
population benefits from subsidised provision of food, large increases in MSPs could add to 
pressures  on  food  inflation  by  providing  a  floor  to  market  prices.  Even  though  there  have 
been occasional reports of procurement taking place at below MSP or market prices at times 
falling  below  the  announced  MSPs,  in  general,  market  prices  hover  at  or  above  the 
announced  MSPs.  In  recent  years,  the  rate  of  increase  in  MSPs  has  been  large.  For 
example, the average increase in MSPs for rice during 2007–2011 has been 13.6 percent, as 
against  1.8  percent  during  2003–07.  For  wheat,  over  the  corresponding  periods,  the 
increases  in  MSPs  have  been  11.3  percent  and  4.0  percent,  respectively.  High  MSPs 
generally reflect high input costs, such as wages, fodder, diesel oil, fertilizer and pesticides. 
When input costs increase, in the absence of remunerative price, farm production could be 
adversely impacted, which in turn could be inflationary. At the same time, higher MSPs that 
reflect higher input costs also become inflationary. The best possible solution to this logjam 
could be higher productivity, and raising productivity remains a major medium-term challenge 
for the agriculture sector in India. Among the G-20 countries India’s productivity in rice and 
wheat  is  one  of  the  lowest.  After  the  significant  increase  in  yield  following  the  green 
revolution, yield levels have stagnated relatively in recent two decades, while population and 
per-capita  income  have  increased  and  the  population  below  poverty  line  has  declined. 
Reflecting  this,  demand  keeps  rising  while  per-capita  availability  of  food  grains  has  not 
improved much. Higher productivity is the only means that could improve the income of the 
farmers while also helping in containing food inflation.  
(d)  High  global  food  prices  –  Even  when  much  of  India’s  food  grains  may  not  be  traded 
physically cross-border, international price trends do influence domestic prices. Global food 
prices had increased at a rapid pace before the global crisis, softened somewhat after the 
crisis, before rising back to the pre-crisis level in the recent period. Various estimates by the 
FAO  and  other  international  agencies  indicate  that  agriculture  prices,  which  reflect  the 
growing demand arising from food, fuel and feed requirements, would remain elevated over 
the medium term. What is important for India is that even when global food prices may drop 
below domestic food prices, import option for India as a means to contain food inflation could 
be  limited,  since  once  India  enters  the  global  market  on  the  buying  side,  that  could  raise 
global  prices.  Global  commodity  markets  track  demand-supply  positions  across  major 
countries  in  a  forward  looking  manner,  and  at  times  assessment  about  shortfall  in  supply 
relative to demand in one single country could inflate international prices. 
(e) Rigidities in supply chain – For a large country of India’s size and population, distribution 
networks  –  from  farm  gate  to  retail  level  –  occupies  a  central  role  in  the  determination  of 
prices at different levels, and hence in conditioning food inflation. The phenomenon of 1-2-3-4 
is often cited in this regard to show how while the farmer gets one Rupee and the consumer 
pays  four  Rupees,  the  intermediaries  pocket  the  rest.  In  an  inflationary  environment,  there 
could be a tendency to manage the supply chain to the advantage of the middle men. This 
calls for greater competition and stricter rules to deal with anti-competitive practices. Better 
transportation  and  warehousing  facilities  could  also  lower  costs  and  reduce  waste  of 
perishable  products.  Multi-brand  retail  has  been  seen  as  a  possible  means  to  improve  the 
supply  chain  that  will  be  beneficial  to  both  producers  and  consumers.  Given  the  current 
debate on the subject in India and varied international experience, multi-brand retail has to be 
seen as a potential instrument whose effectiveness, however, could be known only over time. 
Besides food, fuel has been another major source of price pressure, which is directly linked 
to international trends in crude petroleum prices. Indian basket crude price had scaled to as 
high as USD 132.5 per barrel in July 2008, i.e. just before the global crisis. The impact of the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
global crisis in the advanced economies was so strong, that it dragged international oil prices 
down  sharply,  and  the  Indian  basket  crude  price  fell  to  as  low  as  USD  43.2  per  barrel  in 
February  2009.  Since  then,  notwithstanding  the  persistence  of  weak  growth  momentum  in 
advanced economies, oil prices have bounced back to high level. In April 2011 Indian basket 
crude  price  reached  USD  118.6  per  barrel,  before  softening  thereafter  somewhat,  but  still 
remaining range bound at high level between USD 110 to 105 per barrel. 
In India, changes in international crude prices are not fully passed through to domestic prices 
of petroleum products, because of the administered pricing mechanism. While petrol prices 
have been deregulated since June 2010, prices of diesel, LPG and PDS kerosene are still 
regulated to insulate consumers against high global crude oil prices, which, however, inflate 
the subsidy bill with every increase in oil prices. While in the short-run the impact on inflation 
gets  suppressed  through  administered  pricing,  the  subsidy  induced  pressure  on  the  fiscal 
position  becomes  a  risk  to  the  inflation  situation  in  the  medium  run.  Moreover,  subsidised 
pricing does not encourage the desired level of energy conservation, which is critical given 
our high level of dependence on oil imports. According to the draft of the approach to the 
12th five  year  plan  (2012–13  to  2016–17),  India’s  import  dependence  on  oil  is  expected  to 
increase from 76 percent in 2010–11 to 80 percent by the end of the plan. During the same 
period,  import  dependence  in  natural  gas  is  projected  to  increase  from  19  percent  to 
28.4 percent and in the case of coal the increase will be from 19.8 percent to 22.1 percent. 
Current  assessments  about  oil  price  trends  in the  medium-run  suggest  that  oil  prices  may 
only firm up further rather than moderate. Despite a prolonged period of growth weakness in 
the advanced economies if oil prices have remained firm over successive months, when the 
global  economy  returns  to  a  durable  phase  of  higher  growth,  oil  prices  could  only  harden 
further, unless some technology breakthrough improves availability of alternative sources of 
energy  significantly,  which  though  looks  quite  unlikely.  The  extent  of  India’s  import 
dependence  on  oil  and  the  expected  trend  in  oil  prices  in  the  medium-run  suggests  that 
subsidised provision of fuel and power to 1.2 billion population could be possible only with a 
very  weak  fiscal  situation,  which  in  turn  will  be  inflationary  and  defeat  the  very  objective 
behind subsidised provision of fuel. Despite suppressed inflation resulting from administered 
pricing of certain items, because of the firm international oil prices, fuel group inflation has 
been in double digits for 21 consecutive months now. 
The  inflation  process  thus  started  from  primary  food  and  fuel,  and  these  two  together 
accounts for as high as 29 percent of total weights in WPI. The increase in these prices spills 
over  to  non-food  and  non-fuel  (or  the  core)  inflation  through  both  higher  input  costs  and 
higher  inflation  expectations  getting  reflected  in  wage  revisions.  In  the  presence  of  strong 
demand conditions, the spillover could be faster, to cause a generalised inflationary process. 
In  India,  non-food  non-fuel  manufactured  product  inflation  was  negative  in  the  first  half  of 
2009–10 and remained very low, i.e. less than 4 percent in the second half. In the first eight 
months  of  2010–11  also  it  hovered  in  a  range  of  5.3  percent  to  5.9  percent.  Since 
February 2011,  however,  it  has  remained  at  or  above  7  percent  over  nine  successive 
months, which is clearly above the RBI’s comfort level. 
Let me try to answer some obvious questions that the RBI has faced in recent years. Many 
have  raised  the  question  why  RBI  has  raised  its  policy  rate  13  times  when  much  of  the 
inflationary pressures are from food and fuel, which would not respond to monetary policy 
actions. Yes, it is correct to say that food inflation cannot decline because of higher policy 
rates but the rationale for monetary policy action has to be seen from two major standpoints. 
First,  a  generalised  inflation  process  cannot  persist  in  the  absence  of  aggregate  demand 
and, hence, if monetary policy succeeds in containing aggregate demand, that could help in 
softening  inflation.  Containing  non-food  non-fuel  manufactured  products  inflation  through 
policy induced moderation in demand is what monetary policy could achieve. Second, even 
when monetary policy cannot address food and fuel inflation directly, it can certainly prevent 
inflationary expectations getting worse under the influence of high food and fuel inflation. If 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
monetary policy could anchor inflationary expectations, then it can influence the wage and 
price setting behaviour in the economy, and thereby help in containing inflation. 
A  related  question  that  many  have  asked  is  how  effective  is  monetary  policy  in  India  and 
whether anti-inflationary policies entail large sacrifice of growth. One needs to understand in 
this  context  the  fact  that  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  depends  on  the  structure  of  the 
economy and the level of development of the financial sector. The composition of aggregate 
demand  would  broadly  suggest  three  types  of  demand,  i.e.  government  demand,  private 
consumption demand and private investment demand. Government demand is generally not 
very  sensitive  to  higher  policy  rates.  Private  consumption  demand  in  India  also  is  not 
financed by credit to the extent we see in advanced economies. Hence, private consumption 
demand may also not be very sensitive to higher interest rates. Private investment demand, 
however, may be relatively more sensitive to higher policy rates, and slowdown in investment 
demand has implications in terms of growth sacrifice. Recognising this, the RBI balances the 
growth-inflation goals in the conduct of its monetary policy. As long as the inflation process 
was largely driven by food and fuel inflation, RBI’s calibrated tightening was consistent with 
what monetary policy should do in the presence of supply shocks. When inflation became 
generalised  and  persistent,  the  RBI  had  to  raise  its  anti-inflationary  accent  of  monetary 
policy, recognising the sacrifice of growth at the margin. This was necessary given the risk 
high inflation itself could pose to growth in the near-term. In a high inflation environment, both 
saving and investment activities could get severely impacted. Empirical estimates for India 
suggest that India’s threshold inflation could be in the range of 4 to 6 percent, and inflation 
levels  exceeding  the  threshold  on  a  sustained  basis  is  harmful  to  growth.  Thus,  anti-
inflationary increases in policy rates may look anti-growth in the short-run, but such a policy 
stance is necessary for achieving low inflation and high growth objective in the medium run. 
Since monetary policy operates with a lag, it is this medium-term goal of non-inflationary high 
growth that explains the RBI’s monetary policy actions taken so far. Level of development of 
the financial sector is important for transmission of monetary policy actions. Large informal 
sector with limited access to formal finance could dampen monetary policy transmission, and 
given  the  large  degree  of  financial  exclusion  in  India,  the  RBI  has  placed  significant 
emphasis in recent years on financial inclusion, that is expected to raise the percentage of 
population participating in and benefiting from the formal financial sector. With better access 
to  finance,  growth  opportunities  could  be  better  harnessed  while  the  effectiveness  of 
monetary policy transmission could also be strengthened. Recognising the country specific 
lags  in  policy  transmission,  it  was  generally  expected  that  the  lagged  impact  of  monetary 
policy will soften demand, which in turn could help in containing inflation. Accordingly, while 
projecting the inflation to moderate to 7 percent by March 2012, the growth projection was 
revised  downwards  from  8  percent  to  7.6  percent  in  the  October  2011  monetary  policy 
statement.  That  downward  revision  was  consistent  with  the  expected  impact  of  past 
monetary  policy  actions  as  also  the  impact  of  deteriorating  global  economic  conditions  on 
domestic growth. The second quarter GDP growth for 2011–12 at 6.9 percent has magnified 
the growth concerns, given the continuous flow of negative news and assessments about the 
outlook in the advanced economies. One has to wait till December 16th to see how these 
recent developments are taken into the RBI’s assessment of the domestic macroeconomic 
outlook. 
Another development which has received significant public attention in past few  months is 
the depreciation of the exchange rate, and its inflationary impact working against what the 
tight monetary policy actions intend to achieve. It is important to recognise that in a largely 
market determined exchange rate regime, exchange rate could move in any direction; it is an 
exogenous  factor  as  far  as  inflation  management  is  concerned,  akin  to  other  exogenous 
determinants  of  inflation,  such  as,  commodity  prices  or  a  non-normal  monsoon.  RBI’s 
exchange rate policy is not guided by any specific level of the exchange rate that could either 
be beneficial to exports or help in containing inflation. Limiting volatility remains the primary 
policy objective of the RBI but the assessment of volatility is a dynamic process, depending 
on changing domestic as well as global conditions. Excessive volatility in exchange rate is a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
potential  source  of  macroeconomic  instability,  and  accordingly,  the  RBI  aims  at  containing 
volatility  to  ensure  a  stable  macroeconomic  environment.  The  RBI  has  a  range  of 
instruments  to  effectively  deal  with  excessive  volatility  in  the  exchange  rate  that  may  be 
viewed  to  pose  significant  risks  to  macroeconomic  stability.  The  Indian  rupee  has 
depreciated by about 15 percent against the US dollar since July 2011, and this has more 
than offset the beneficial impact of modest softening of global commodity prices on domestic 
inflation. Thus exchange rate depreciation has emerged as a new shock and is an area of 
concern. 
Many have questioned the effectiveness of monetary policy in an environment of higher than 
expected fiscal deficit level and borrowing programme of the government as also inadequate 
fiscal measures to improve the supply situation. No one can deny the importance of a sound 
fiscal environment for enhancing the flexibility  and effectiveness of monetary policy, but at 
the  same  time  India’s  fiscal  situation  should  not  be  seen  in  the  prism  of  sovereign  risk 
concerns  in  advanced  economies.  India  was  on  a  path  of  fiscal  consolidation  prior  to  the 
global  crisis,  following  a  rule  based  approach  under  the  FRBM  (Fiscal  responsibility  and 
Budget Management) Act that came into force on July 5, 2004. The combined gross fiscal 
deficit (of the central and state governments) declined significantly from pre-FRBM period of 
9.5 percent to 4.1 percent in 2007–08. To deal with the contagion of the global crisis and to 
avoid a sharp moderation in domestic growth, it became imperative to use adequate fiscal 
stimulus, which involved deliberate temporary deviation from the path of fiscal consolidation. 
Reflecting that combined gross fiscal deficit jumped to 8.5 percent in 2008–09 and further to 
9.3  percent  in  2009–10.  Since  then,  there  has  been  downward  rigidity  in  the  fiscal  deficit 
level. 
Centre’s gross fiscal deficit in 2010–11 at 4.7 percent of GDP may appear as a significant 
improvement over the budgeted 5.5 percent level and the 6.4 percent level in 2009–10. This 
improvement  however  reflected  one  off  revenue  proceeds  from  3G/BWA  auctions  as  also 
revenue  buoyancy  associated  with  cyclical  upswing  in  growth,  as  reflected  in  20  percent 
growth in nominal GDP relative to 12.5 percent budgeted growth in nominal GDP. Thus, the 
role of permanent or structural drivers of fiscal consolidation was rather weak. In 2011–12, 
developments  so  far  indicate  that  fiscal  deficit  target  of  4.6  percent  of  GDP  could  be 
breached,  which  will  have  implications  for  domestic  inflation.  The  moderation  in  private 
demand resulting from anti-inflationary monetary policy stance of the RBI will be partly offset 
by the expansion in public sector demand in terms of the size of the fiscal deficit. 
Despite  higher  fiscal  deficit  levels  since  the  global  crisis,  the  debt  levels  as  percentage  of 
GDP have not increased. In fact liabilities (of the centre and states) as percentage of GDP 
have declined from 71.4 percent in 2007–08 to 64.3 percent in 2010–11. High inflation and 
associated  higher  growth  in  nominal  GDP  has  contributed  to  this  moderation.  Besides  the 
level of liabilities relative to GDP, there are certain other features of India’s government debt 
that  merit  specific  attention  in  the  context  of  standard  vulnerability  assessments  about 
sovereign debt. In India a large of the public debt is held by residents; the weighted average 
maturity of debt above ten years for the Central Government is much more than what we see 
in  many  other  countries;  and  growth  in  nominal  GDP  has  generally  exceeded  the nominal 
interest  rates.  Notwithstanding  these  pro-debt  sustainability  features,  however,  in  nominal 
terms gross market borrowings of the central government had spiked from about Rs. 180,000 
crore  in  2007–08  to  Rs.  320,000  crore  in  2008–09.  Since  then,  the  size  of  the  borrowing 
programme  has  only  increased  further,  and  in  2011–12,  as  against  budgeted  gross 
borrowing programme of about Rs. 470,000 crore, an additional Rs 52,000 crore has been 
announced. This order of market borrowings, besides creating crowding-out concerns, also 
complicates  management  of  the  borrowings  in  a  tight  liquidity  condition.  It  was  highlighted 
often in the immediate aftermath of the global crisis that countries must improve their fiscal 
position to regain fiscal space so at to deal with future shocks to the economy. In India, with 
the more than expected moderation in GDP growth in the second quarter of 2011–12, and 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
given  the  persistence  of  headwinds  from  weak  global  macro-financial  conditions,  the 
importance of fiscal space would be better appreciated. 
In the context of the theme of the conference, some may ask this question whether one could 
hedge  the  inflation  risk  and  thereby  escape  the  shrinking  value  of  money.  In  India,  many 
seem to use gold as an inflation hedge, and high gold prices of recent years, as we know, 
has not deterred gold buying in India. The basic law of demand – i.e. when prices increase 
demand must decline – does not seem to apply to demand for gold by Indians. High inflation 
is a risk to financial savings, since it can reduce the value of savings accumulated over the 
years.  Making  financial  instruments  available  in  the  system  that  could  provide  an  effective 
hedge  against  inflation  assumes  importance  in  this  context.  The  Reserve  Bank  in 
consultation  with  the  Government  is  exploring  the  possibility  of  issuing  inflation  indexed 
bonds  (IIBs).  It  is  being  debated  whether  both  principal  and  interest  payments  should  be 
indexed  to  inflation,  and  whether  CPI  or  WPI  could  be  the  better  benchmark  for  indexing. 
Such an instrument could meet the requirements of savers and pensioners to some extent, 
but the best policy approach to deal with the risk of shrinking value of money would be to 
ensure a low and stable inflation environment. 
Concluding observations 
Shrinking value of money because of persistent high inflation explains the importance of anti-
inflationary  monetary  policy.  For  a  country  with  large  percentage  of  population  still  living 
below  the  poverty  line,  inflation  works  as  a  regressive  tax.  Economic  welfare  of  the 
population at large could be enhanced primarily through higher growth, that too in a low and 
stable inflation environment. That suggests why balancing growth and inflation becomes so 
important to monetary policy. It is a much more complex task than what may appear in any 
public  discussions.  To  ensure  that  the  grease  effect  of  modest  inflation  allows  economic 
growth and investment activities to materialise, inflation would have to be positive. A positive 
inflation within the threshold level would not mean erosion in purchasing power since higher 
growth  would  also  raise  the  income  levels,  and  as  a  result  net  purchasing  power  would 
increase.  Unless  the  benefits  of  growth  get  equitably  distributed,  this  net  increase  in 
purchasing power may not happen to all. At the aggregate level, some positive inflation that 
coexists with high growth could be welfare maximising. At high inflation, particularly above 
threshold level, growth may however, moderate, and both high inflation and low growth could 
erode welfare. 
Preventing such an outcome requires both monetary and fiscal policy to be countercyclical, 
besides enhancing capacity to deal with supply shocks that often weaken growth momentum 
while  raising  inflationary  pressures.  Take  for  example  the  fact  that  global  commodity  price 
index has gone up from about 98.2 in February 2009 to 182.9 in October 2011, implying an 
increase of more than 85 percent. During the same period, India’s WPI has gone up from 
122.9 to 156.8, i.e., an increase by about 27.6 percent. That certainly has led to shrinking 
value of money. Some of the supply side pressures on the value of money however require 
better  capacity  to  augment  the  supply  situation.  Moreover,  wages  in  rural  areas  and  staff 
remunerations  in  the  corporate  sector  have  grown  at  rates  higher  than  the  inflation 
experienced  in  the  recent  past.  The  erosion  in  purchasing  power,  therefore,  is  much  less 
than what may appear only from the inflation numbers. Nevertheless, inflation continues to 
be  above  the  comfort  level,  and  it  needs  to  be  contained.  RBI’s  monetary  policy  clearly 
recognises that, and its current anti-inflationary monetary policy stance reflects that. Recent 
evidence  of  growth  moderation  could  be  expected  to  dampen  demand  side  pressures  on 
inflation,  and  in  the  absence  of  major  supply  side  risks  from  global  commodity  markets, 
inflation  should  moderate  to  about  7  percent  by  March  2012.  I  hope  I  have  been  able  to 
explain the role of RBI in inflation management and also the role of several non-monetary 
factors in contributing to the shrinking value of money. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
