Narayana Kocherlakota: On the limits to monetary policy 
Executive summary by Mr Narayana Kocherlakota, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Minneapolis, of the 2nd Annual Hyman P Minsky Lecture, Washington University, St Louis, 
Missouri, 20 March 2012. 
 Slides  to  the  original  speech  can  be  found  on  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Minneapolis’s  website 
(http://www.minneapolisfed.org/news_events/pres/kocherlakota_minsky_speech_032012.pdf). 
Since the start of the Great Recession, employment has fallen considerably, while average 
inflation  has  been  near  the  Federal  Reserve’s  target  of  2  percent.  Given  the  Federal 
Reserve’s  dual  mandate  to  promote  price  stability  and  maximum  employment,  an  obvious 
question  is  “Why  does  the  Federal  Reserve  appear  to  be  doing  so  much  better  on  one 
mandate than the other?” 
In  this  speech,  I  present  a  simple  model  that  suggests  an  answer  to  this  question.  A  key 
feature  of  the  model  is  that  there  are  two  distinct  types  of  demand  shocks:  labor  demand 
shocks  and  product  demand  shocks.  The  labor  demand  shocks  reflect  factors  such  as 
adverse credit conditions and increased uncertainty that lead firms to demand fewer workers 
at a given real wage. The product demand shocks reflect factors such as a loss of wealth 
and a higher risk of job loss that lead households to demand fewer goods at a given real 
interest  rate.  Each  of  these  shocks  leads  to  a  fall  in  employment,  with  the  decline  in 
employment magnified by slow adjustments in the real wage. 
When  considering  these  shocks,  it  is  important  to  distinguish  how  monetary  and 
non-monetary policies influence the level of output and employment. In the model I employ, 
the Federal Reserve controls the real interest rate; lowering the real interest rate increases 
the demand for goods and services, and thereby influences national output and employment. 
The first implication of the model is that monetary policy can offset the impact of the product 
demand shocks on employment, but it cannot offset the employment loss due to the fall in 
labor  demand  and  any  associated  slow  real  wage  adjustment.  As  a  result,  the  level  of 
“maximum  employment”  achievable 
the  “full 
employment” of labor resources.  
A  second  implication  is  that  non-monetary  policies  specifically  designed  to  stimulate  the 
demand  for  workers  (such  as  government  subsidies  for  hiring)  can  offset  some  of  the 
employment  loss  due  to  the  labor  demand  shocks,  but  only  if  accompanied  by  monetary 
easing.  That  is,  monetary  and  non-monetary  policy  must  work  in  concert  to  reduce  the 
impact of a decline in labor demand; neither can do it alone.  
Returning  to  the  question  posed  at  the  beginning,  this  model  suggests  that  the  Federal 
Reserve  is  performing  about  as  well  as  it  can  on  both  mandates.  The  Federal  Reserve’s 
accommodative policy has offset much of the impact of product demand shocks and so has 
kept inflation near target. However, this policy has been unable to offset the large adverse 
shocks to labor demand. The model implies that, in terms of employment, there are limits to 
what monetary policy can achieve on its own.  
through  monetary  policy 
than 
less 
is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
