Duvvuri Subbarao: Reflections on leaders and leadership 
Edited  transcript  of  comments  by  Dr  Duvvuri  Subbarao,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of 
India, at the National Convention on Leadership at CII-Suresh Neotia Centre of Excellence 
for Leadership, Kolkata, 9 December 2011. 
 The intellectual support of Alpana Killawala and Suddhasattwa Ghosh in conceptualizing these random reflections 
is gratefully acknowledged and deeply appreciated.  
1. 
Thank  you  very  much  for  the  opportunity  to  speak  at  this National  Convention  on 
Leadership. As it happens, I have never thought explicitly or systematically about leadership 
as a subject. But ever since I got an invitation to speak at this conference from Shri Harsh 
Neotia about two months ago, I’ve  been trying  to think through the subject in a structured 
manner. My mind would refuse to focus though, and my thoughts would travel repeatedly, 
often unconsciously, to Mahatma Gandhi, by far the most influential, if also enigmatic, leader 
India has seen. 
Mahatma Gandhi 
2. 
Many of you may have seen Richard Attenborough’s Oscar-winning movie “Gandhi”. 
Some of you may be able to recall the opening scene of the movie. As the Mahatma’s funeral 
procession  moves  on,  we  hear  these  emotion-laden  words:  “The  object  of  this  massive 
tribute died as he had always lived – a private man without wealth, without property, without 
an official title or office.” 
3. 
As the cortege continues on its way, we see shots of marching soldiers, and faces of 
all  religions –  Hindus, Muslims,  Sikhs,  Christians  –  and people  from  all  regions,  all castes 
and  creeds.  The  voice-over  continues:  “Mahatma  Gandhi  was  not  a  commander  of  great 
armies nor ruler of vast lands; he could boast of no scientific achievements, no artistic gift. 
Yet men, governments and dignitaries from all over the world have joined hands today to pay 
homage to this little brown man in the loin cloth, who led his country to freedom.” 
4. 
To  this  moving  tribute,  I  must  add  what  Albert  Einstein  had  so  touchingly  and 
powerfully said of Gandhi: “Generations to come will scarce believe that such a man as this, 
in flesh and blood, ever walked on this earth.” 
5. 
These  words,  perhaps  more  than  anything  else,  sum  up  the  uniqueness  of  the 
Mahatma’s leadership. If you think about it, it is amazing that a man like that, dressed in no 
more than a loin cloth, and in a world where mass communication media had not developed, 
could  galvanize  300  million  people  across  all  strata  of  society,  and  inspire  the  trust  and 
confidence of an entire nation with no other weapon than sheer strength of character. What 
is  more,  even  today,  around  the  world,  the  Mahatma  is  a  role  model  for  value  based 
leadership, no matter that specific causes and contexts may be different. 
6. 
The  enigma  of  Mahatma  Gandhi  as  a  leader  illustrates  the  challenge  of  precisely 
defining  what  makes  a  leader.  That  is  what  makes  speaking  about  leadership  so  difficult. 
Speaking about leadership in a time of flux, at a time when such momentous changes are 
taking  place,  especially  in  the  global  economy,  is  an  even  more  daunting  task.  It  is  that 
formidable task the conference organizers have thrust upon me. 
Suresh Neotia leadership centre 
7. 
Before  getting  on  with  that  task,  I  must  acknowledge  my  association  with  Shri 
Suresh  Neotia  whose  name  this  leadership  centre  very  appropriately  bears.  Shri  Suresh 
Neotia, as many of you perhaps know, was till recently a member of the Reserve Bank of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
India’s  Central  Board  of  Directors.  In  our  Board  meetings,  and  in  my  interaction  with  him 
outside of the Board, I have always been impressed by his mature, balanced and insightful 
views,  and  by  the  way  he  always  held  larger  public  interest  as  the  only  guide  and 
determinant of public policy. The prestigious awards that he has won over the years, be it the 
Padma  Vibhushan  or  the  Harvard  Business  School-Economic  Times  Award  for  Corporate 
Excellence, are a tribute to his leadership and his contribution to the country. He runs several 
grass root social development projects, and he does so not to fulfil any prescribed norm of 
corporate social responsibility, but out of an innate empathy with the less privileged. 
Leadership in Bengal 
8. 
As I contemplate leadership in this wonderful city of Kolkata and in this intellectually 
vigorous  land  of  Renaissance,  Bengal,  my  thoughts  go  to  the  leaders  from  this  state  who 
have been influential and “made a difference”, not only at the national level, but at the global 
level too. Let us recall some of them to see the diversity of leadership models: 
 
Often called the “father of modern India”, Raja Ram Mohun Roy was a pioneering 
social reformer and a progressive thinker, certainly ahead of his time, who had the 
courage of conviction to challenge some egregious traditional Hindu social evils.  
Swami  Vivekananda  was  an  intellectual  leader  par  excellence.  Swamiji,  as  he  is 
popularly  known  in  Bengal,  not  only  interpreted  Hinduism  for  Indians  but  also 
deciphered India’s religiosity to the larger world. His inspiring speech at the World 
Parliament of Religions at Chicago in 1893 that started with “Sisters and Brothers of 
America” is considered an epitome of universal empathy.  
Sri Aurobindo synthesized eastern and western philosophies, religion, literature and 
psychology in his writings. 
Gurudev  Rabindranath  Tagore,  whose  150th  birth  anniversary  we  are  celebrating 
this  year,  was  a  remarkably  influential  thought  leader  whose  poignant  prose  and 
soul  stirring  poetry  are  a  testimonial  to  his  humanism  and  belief  in  universal 
brotherhood.  
Netaji  Subhash  Chandra  Bose  was  a  galvanizing  force  for  national  unity  and 
inspired profound love and loyalty in the Indian National Army (INA).  
Bengal  also  produced  fearless  revolutionaries  like  Kshudiram  Bose  who  gave  up 
their lives in the struggle for India’s independence.  
This great leadership tradition of Bengal was carried forward in post-independence 
9. 
India by luminaries like: 
 
Satyajit  Ray,  one  of  the  greatest  auteurs  of  20th  century  cinema,  who  put  Indian 
movies on the world celluloid map. His “Pather Panchali” set exacting standards for 
cinematic  artistry  and  will  go  down  in  the  history  of  cinema  as  one  of  the  most 
poignant tales ever told. 
Mother  Teresa  became  a  household  name  the  world  over  for  her  exemplary 
humanitarian work, her deep sympathy for the less privileged and less fortunate and 
her advocacy of the rights of the poor and helpless. 
Bengal’s very own son, Nobel Laureate Amartya Sen, is today one of world’s best-
known public intellectuals who has applied a consistent approach in his influential 
studies on social choice, welfare measurement and poverty.  
       2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
More questions than answers 
10. 
Interestingly,  at  a  conceptual  level,  all  these  leaders  from  Bengal  who  influenced 
thought  and  action  across  space  and  time,  and  their  diverse  leadership  styles  raise  more 
questions than answers: 
(i) 
(ii) 
What makes a leader? 
Is there a standard template for leadership? Are there any quintessential leadership 
qualities? 
Are leaders born or made? In other words, can leadership be taught? 
(iii) 
Are leaders contextual – products of space and time? 
(iv) 
These  are,  of  course,  relevant  and  important  questions,  but  they  defy  simple 
11. 
answers. As we’ve just seen, even a group of leaders from across Bengal pose a bewildering 
diversity in their world views, personality traits and leadership styles. Imagine spreading the 
net and looking at leaders across the world across and time. The challenge of distilling the 
essence  of  leadership  will  snowball  into  a  mind  boggling  task.  Be  that  as  it  may,  it  is  still 
possible  to  identify  some  fundamental  attributes  that  all  leaders  embody:  vision,  humility, 
determination, and above all, character. 
Steve Jobs 
12. 
With that framework in mind, let us turn to another admittedly enigmatic leader from 
an altogether different context, Steve Jobs. Ever since his death a couple of months ago, a 
lot has been written about Jobs, about his personality, his style of life and work and about 
how he changed the way we live in a fundamental way.  For all his achievements, Jobs is 
reputed  to  have  had  notoriously  anti-leader  personality  traits:  egomaniacal,  dictatorial, 
manipulative, rude, insensitive and downright obnoxious. And his trade mark top down style 
of management is about as heretic as it can get from a leadership perspective. 
13. 
So  what  made  Jobs  tick?  He  always  thought,  if  you  ask  customers  what  they 
wanted, they would only tell you, “better, faster, and cheaper”, which is that they would opt 
for “sameness”, possibly an improved version. They can describe their “wants” only in terms 
of what they are already using. This was not good enough for Jobs. He used his imagination 
and  lateral  thinking  to  go  beyond  “sameness”,  and  offered  quantum  changes  in  product 
concept and design. Much like the proverbial salesman who could sell a refrigerator to an 
Eskimo,  Jobs  could  make  people  not  only  want,  but  even  love  what  they  thought  were 
impersonal gadgets. 
14. 
Combining as he did, easy-to-use hardware with compelling software ecosystems, 
Jobs  was  a  blend  of  an  artist’s  touch  with  an  engineer’s  mind.  He  had  unflinching  faith  in 
himself and never lost his confidence or self-esteem even in moments of deep adversity. He 
was thrown out of Apple, a company that he famously built from scratch in a garage. A lesser 
man  would  have  been  shattered  and  departed  the  scene.  Not  Jobs  though.  He  not  only 
survived the adversity, but bounced back and turned around a bankrupt Apple into the most 
valuable company on the planet in what will go down as possibly the most remarkable “come 
back” tale in corporate history. 
15.  Jobs  prodded  and  pushed  people  to  the  limits  of  their  potential  and  inspired  into 
existence products that have since touched and transformed entire industries and lifestyles. 
His colleagues at Apple often refer to Jobs’ “reality distortion field”, a science fiction term that 
describes his belief that with passion and effort, it is possible to make anything – even the 
near-impossible  –  happen.  Indeed,  in  eulogies  after  his  death,  several  of  his  team  mates 
admitted that they accomplished things that they never suspected they were capable of. 
16. 
So, we have Mahatma Gandhi and Steve Jobs; two unlikely leaders with unorthodox 
leadership styles who have had profound influence on the way we live and think. It will be 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
interesting and instructive to compare and contrast their leadership models, but that is a task 
best left to experts. I will only say that what is common to Gandhi and Jobs, allowing for all 
the differences in the context they operated in, was their tremendous charisma and steadfast 
belief in themselves. 
Leadership and the global crisis 
17. 
Let me now shift tack and turn to leadership issues in macroeconomic management. 
The  2008  global  financial  crisis  has  taken  a  devastating  toll  in  terms  of  lost  growth  and 
foregone welfare. Reams have been written about the causes of the crisis – both root causes 
and proximate ones. Was failure of leadership among the root causes? This question has not 
received  as  much  attention  as  it  should  have.  Consider  the  following  evidence  of  flawed 
leadership. 
 
Leaders thought that financial engineering changed markets in a fundamental way, 
giving them near total resilience and making them immune to implosion, no matter 
the pressure of excesses. This flawed complacency betrayed lack of intelligence.  
Leaders got carried away by “irrational exuberance”, betraying lack of maturity. 
Leaders  failed  to  see  “black  swans”  –  low  probability  but  high  impact  events  – 
betraying lack of wisdom. 
Leaders did not see the warning signals of instability in real time thereby betraying 
lack of foresight. 
Leaders  failed  to  “lean  against  the  wind”,  thereby  betraying  lack  of  courage  and 
conviction.  
18. 
Admittedly,  the  above  narration  of  failure  of  leadership  as  a  cause  of  the  crisis  is 
sketchy. But the point to take away from this is the type of leadership qualities required to 
keep the financial system stable so that it can aid, rather than impair, the growth of the real 
sector. 
   Leadership role of RBI 
19. 
This may be an appropriate point to talk about leadership at the Reserve Bank of 
India.  All  of  you,  residents  of  Kolkata,  are  possibly  aware  that  RBI  was  born  here,  in  this 
historic city of Kolkata, in 1935. The building where RBI took birth 76 years ago, 8 Council 
House  Street,  is  today  a  heritage  building.  Over  the  last  76  years,  the  Reserve  Bank  has 
played  a  leadership  role  in  financial  sector  development  in  India.  Not  only  has  RBI 
established itself as a knowledge institution engaged in the macroeconomic management of 
the country, but also many of today’s leading national financial institutions – IDBI, NABARD, 
UTI, EXIM Bank, DFHI and DICGC – owe their origins to RBI. RBI has steered the financial 
sector to support real sector growth and development. The schemes it pioneered such as the 
Lead Bank Scheme and priority sector lending – have been aimed at ensuring that growth 
and development are equitable and inclusive. That several other countries emulated these 
programmes  is  a  testimony  to  their  value  and  resilience.  Driven  by  an  abiding  belief  that 
financial inclusion is a necessary condition for equality of opportunity, the Reserve Bank has, 
in recent years, been aggressively promoting financial inclusion. 
Former governors of RBI 
The  high  esteem  in  which  the  Reserve  Bank  is  held  today  owes  a  lot  to  the 
20. 
competence  and  professionalism  of  its  staff,  its  institutional  values  and  culture,  and 
importantly, the outstanding leadership of former Governors – twenty-one to date. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
When applauded for the law of gravity, Sir Isaac Newton, not one known for humility, 
21. 
famously said in a letter to his friend and rival Robert Hooke that, “If I had seen a little further, 
it’s because I am standing on the shoulders of giants”. I can quite relate to that statement. As 
the  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  in  these  exciting  times,  I  am  deeply  humbled  by  the 
intellectual reputation of the lineage of the Reserve Bank’s Governors. 
22. 
I would like in this context to recall the leadership role played by my distinguished 
predecessors as Governors of RBI not only to showcase their leadership accomplishments, 
but also because this recollection will afford us a peep into history. 
 
Sir Chintaman Deshmukh was the first Indian Governor of the Reserve Bank, who 
oversaw the transition of RBI from British rule to Independence and the division of 
the  assets  and  liabilities  of  the  Reserve  Bank  between  India  and  Pakistan 
consequent upon partition. He also helped smoothen the transition of the Bank from 
a shareholder’s institution to a State owned organization, when the Reserve Bank 
was nationalized in January 1949.  
Shri H.V.R. Iengar, who succeeded Sir Chintaman, introduced deposit insurance for 
bank deposits in 1962, making India one of the earliest countries to experiment with 
Deposit Insurance. That other countries emulated this initiative is a testimony to Shri 
Iengar’s innovativeness and foresight.  
Dr. L.K. Jha, by far the most distinguished and accomplished civil servant to occupy 
the  office  of  the  Governor,  was  responsible  for  giving  a  distinct  development 
orientation  to  RBI  policies.  The  Reserve  Bank  under  Dr  Jha’s  leadership  was  an 
influential force in shaping landmark policies for the devaluation of rupee, the Green 
Revolution, social control followed by nationalization of 14 major commercial banks.  
Dr.  IG  Patel’s  tenure  as  Governor  of  RBI  witnessed  the  demonetization  of  high 
denomination notes as well as the “gold auctions” conducted by the Bank on behalf 
of Government of India. Dr. Patel played a key role in negotiating IMF assistance in 
1981 to tide over the balance of payments constraints.  
All  of  us  of  course  know  the  contributions  of  our  Hon’ble  Prime  Minister 
Dr. Manmohan Singh who, after deftly steering the Reserve Bank as its Governor, 
went on to become India’s Finance Minister and put India on a path of historic and 
path breaking economic reforms.  
Dr.  R.N.  Malhotra,  who  served  as  the  Governor  during  the  Rajeev  Gandhi  years, 
gave a reform orientation to RBI. His tenure saw widening of the money market in 
India  and  introduction  of  new  instruments  recommended  by  the  Sukhomoy 
Chakravarty Committee on the Monetary System and the Vaghul Working Group on 
the Money Market.  
As  the  RBI  Governor,  Shri  S.  Venkitaramanan  played  a  leading  role  in  managing 
India’s deepest balance of payments crisis in 1991.  
Dr. C Rangarajan will be remembered for beginning the historic process of financial 
sector  reforms.  Through  his  leadership,  Dr.  Rangarajan  showed  how  monetary 
policy  has  a  key  role  in  economic  development.  He  will  be  most  remembered  for 
bringing an end to automatic deficit financing and thereby for setting the course for 
independent monetary policy.  
Dr. Bimal Jalan ably steered India to ensure that we were not affected by the Asian 
Crisis.  He  focussed  on  consolidating  the  gains  of  liberalization  and  economic 
reforms  including  developing  the  trade  sector  and  strengthening  our  balance  of 
payments position.  
My  immediate  predecessor  in  RBI,  Dr.  Y.V.  Reddy  carried  the  reforms  process 
forward. His leadership will be remembered for the sagacity and wisdom with which 
         BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
he  leaned  against  the  wind  to  zealously  guard  India’s  financial  stability  even  as 
much of the world fell prey to irrational exuberance.  
23. 
That trip down memory lane is not only nostalgic but is also a chronicle of India’s 
economic  history  and  a  portrayal  of  Reserve  Bank’s  illustrious  leadership  through  India’s 
post-independence history. 
Current challenges for RBI’s leadership 
24.  Let  me  now  shift  from  the  past  to  the  present.  Our  economy  is  going  through  a 
challenging phase. India clocked remarkable growth during 2003–08 setting off a nationwide 
aspiration for faster and more inclusive growth. That growth momentum was interrupted by 
the  global  financial  crisis  of  2008.  Now  in  the  post-crisis  period,  there  is  understandable 
anxiety about when and how we will return to a high growth trajectory. In that context, let me 
highlight some of the policy challenges that the Reserve Bank is confronting. 
 
from 
that  higher 
industry  and  business  sections, 
Price  Stability  and  Growth:  We  have  to  manage  the  balance  between  price 
stability  and  growth.  In  order  to  combat  inflation,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  had  to 
gradually  and  continuously  tighten  monetary  policy.  This  has  led  to  criticism, 
especially 
interest  rates 
engendered by our policy have curtailed growth. This grievance is legitimate, and to 
some extent, understandable. The Reserve Bank is sensitive to that criticism. But 
we are also sensitive to the “voices of the poor” about the burden of surging prices. 
The  voices  of  the  poor  do  not  of  course  have  the  same  opportunity  of  collective 
articulation, and we therefore have to make the extra effort to listen to this “silent 
constituency”. In any case, as historical evidence demonstrates, there is really no 
trade off between price stability and growth in the medium term. We need to bring 
inflation down to secure sustainable growth in the medium term. Some short-term 
sacrifice  of  growth  is  an  inevitable  cost  to  pay  for  price  stability  in  a  supply 
constrained economy. 
Financial  Stability:  Before  the  crisis,  financial  stability  was  not  so  much  on  the 
explicit  radar  screen;  it  used  to  be  inside  the  minds  of  policy  makers,  particularly 
central bankers. The crisis has taught us that financial stability has to be part of the 
explicit  policy  calculus  alongside  price  stability  and  macroeconomic  stability.  The 
crisis  has  also  taught  us  that  all  three  variables  –  price  stability,  financial  stability 
and growth – are interlinked and we cannot afford to compromise on any of them. 
The  challenge  for  all  central  bankers,  particularly  for  emerging  economy  central 
bankers, is to strike the right balance among the three variables depending on their 
specific macroeconomic context. For us in India, this is a more complex challenge 
as we have to ensure that credit is available for all productive activities at affordable 
cost so as to raise the potential output of the economy. We have, however, to do so 
without compromising the integrity of our financial system. 
Infrastructure  Financing:  Infrastructure  deficit  is,  by  far,  our  biggest  supply 
constraint. This is resulting in higher production costs and lower efficiencies. There 
are  no  two  views  about  the  need  to  raise  the  quantum  of  investment  in 
infrastructure. The 12th Plan, which will begin in April 2012, less than four months 
from  now,  is  projecting  investment  in  infrastructure,  over  the  five  year  period  
2012–17,  of  $1  trillion,  double  the  outlay  for  the  11th  Five  Year  Plan.  Mobilizing 
funding of this order is a challenge at all times, particularly so in our context where 
long term financing markets are not yet sufficiently deep, developed and open. So, 
the burden of financing infrastructure is falling largely on the banking system. The 
Reserve Bank has already relaxed regulatory norms to facilitate larger infrastructure 
financing  by  banks.  So,  a  big  challenge  going  forward  will  be  how  to  raise  the 
  6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
    quantum  of  institutional  financing  for  infrastructure  building  without  compromising 
the stability of the banking system.  
Financial  Inclusion:  As  I  said  before,  the  Reserve  Bank  is  leading  the  drive  for 
financial inclusion from the front. The initiative for financial inclusion is motivated by 
historical evidence that there is no economy in the world that has progressed from 
an agrarian system to a post-industrial modern society without broad based financial 
inclusion.  Financial  inclusion  enfranchises  the  poor  in  powerful  ways  –  by  giving 
them  opportunity  to  improve  their  incomes.  The  depth  and  extent  of  financial 
exclusion  in  the  country  is  staggering.  Only  about  30,000  out  of  the  nearly 
600,000 habitations in the country have a bank branch, and even where banks have 
penetrated,  it  is  not  certain  that  they  have  reached  out  to  the  poor.  It  is  our 
endeavour  that  every  household  in  the  country  must  have  a  bank  account,  and 
importantly  that  the  household  actively  uses  the  bank  account  to  access  all  the 
opportunities it offers. This requires awareness, planning, logistic support and above 
all a change in the mindset. This is a task to which the Reserve Bank has committed 
itself. 
Central  Banking  in  a  Globalizing  World:  Over  the  last  twenty  years,  India  has 
integrated  into  the  world  more  deeply  and  more  extensively  than  we  tend  to 
acknowledge. Globalization offers enormous opportunities, but it also poses ruthless 
challenges. India’s growth acceleration in the period 2003–08 was, in part, aided by 
globalization,  but  that  we  were  impacted  by  the  global  financial  crisis  was  also  a 
consequence  of  globalization.  That  is  a  telling  demonstration  of  the  costs  and 
benefits of globalization. We have to learn to manage globalization in such a way as 
to  minimize  the  costs  and  maximize  the  benefits.  For  policy  makers,  this  means 
taking into account the implication of developments around the world into our own 
policy calculus. For example, in the Reserve Bank, in making our monetary policy, 
our  regulatory  policy  and  our  external  sector  policies,  we  have  to  reckon  with 
policies  of  other  countries  as  well  as  global  developments.  As  India  further 
integrates into the world, the task of policy makers is going to get more complex and 
intellectually challenging. We have to build capacity and skills to be able to manage 
this task in the best interests of our country. 
Knowledge  Institution:  Going  forward,  the  competitive  advantage  of  nations  is 
going to be determined by how they perform in a knowledge economy. This requires 
that  institutional  structures  of  economic  management  will  have  to  reinvent 
themselves.  The  Reserve  Bank  has  to  reposition  itself  as a  knowledge  institution. 
Even at the risk of being clichéd, let me say that at the Reserve Bank, we need to 
“think global and act local”. The idea is not to fight globalization but to manage it to 
the country’s best advantage. Mahatma Gandhi said [and I quote], “I do not want my 
house to be walled in on all sides, and my windows to be stuffed. I want the cultures 
of all the lands to be blown about my house as freely as possible. But I refuse to be 
blown off my feet by any.” [unquote] The Mahatma’s exhortation is more true today 
than when he said it. 
We need to learn from the best in the world, but adapt our learning to the demands 
and  culture  of  a  maturing  and  emerging  economy.  We  need  to  be  constantly 
pushing the envelope, be at the frontiers of domain knowledge, oftentimes reinvent 
it,  but  all  the  time  remain  sensitive  to  the  core  concerns  of  an  emerging  market 
economy, one which is still home to hundreds of millions of poor people. 
Unsung heroes across India 
25. 
My  talk  on  leadership  will  be  incomplete  if  I  do  not  acknowledge  the  millions  of 
unsung  heroes  across  India  who  are  scripting  stories  of  hope  and  change  across  diverse 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
sectors,  through  diverse  means  in  diverse  situations  and  geographies.  Some  of  these 
leaders  may  be  engaged  in  raising  the  child  sex  ratio  in  a  region  where  female  feticide  is 
rampant, others may be providing safe drinking water through elevated hand pumps in flood-
hit  villages,  some  may  be  pioneering  village  health  worker  programmes  or  education 
initiatives  and  some  others  may  be  demanding  accountability  at  different  levels  of 
governance by invoking the Right to Information Act. 
26. 
Put together, these grassroots-level leaders are men and women, often young and 
always idealistic, who have chosen to walk a difficult and lonely path. We should consider 
ourselves lucky that they have made that choice. They work tirelessly, with commitment and 
dedication; they are self-effacing and care little for recognition. Their only motivation is to do 
good  to  society,  and  the  only  reward  they  look  for  is  a  better,  more  prosperous  and  more 
humane India. These unsung heroes often bring in true, tangible change; their achievements 
make  an  inspiring  tale  of  hope,  and  their  attitude  makes  a  persuasive  case  study  of  the 
power of positivity. They are all, each of them, great leaders of change and hope. 
Outreach 
27. 
Personally,  I  have  been  fortunate  to  witness  some  such  extraordinary  grass-root 
level work, in the course of my career as an Indian Administrative Service (IAS) officer, and 
in recent years, during the Outreach Visits that we had initiated as part of Reserve Bank’s 
Platinum  Jubilee  celebrations  in  2009–10.  These  Outreach  visits,  over  the  last  couple  of 
years,  have  taken  me  and  my  colleagues  to  villages  across  the  country  to  see  and 
understand  how  grassroots 
institutions  –  self-help  women’s  groups,  micro-finance 
institutions, non-government organizations, rural cooperatives, rural branches of regional and 
mainstream commercial banks – operate. Listening first-hand to the hopes and aspirations of 
village  India  has  truly  been  a  wonderful  experience  –  emotionally  fulfilling,  intellectually 
rewarding and professionally mind-expanding. I am deeply conscious that behind these rising 
hopes and aspirations are thousands of grassroot leaders. 
Conclusion 
28. 
I will now conclude. I will not, however, try to summarize what I’ve said over the past 
half  hour.  After  all,  what  I  said  constitutes  just  some  random  reflections  on  leaders  and 
leadership. The concluding message that I want to leave with you is that no matter where 
you work and where you live, you have to lead and “make a difference”. This is an obligation 
you  owe  to  your  country,  your  society,  your  local  community,  your  family  and  above  all  to 
yourselves. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
