Rundheersing Bheenick: Responding to the US FATCA – complain but 
comply? 
Keynote address by Mr Rundheersing Bheenick, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at the 
Seminar on Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act, organized by Grant Thornton Mauritius, in 
collaboration  with  Grant  Thornton  UK,  and  the  Mauritius  Bankers  Association,  Ebène, 
14 March 2012. 
 It is a great honour for me to be here this afternoon. I welcome the opportunity to address 
this forum on a subject that has led to so much heated debate and to such a huge outcry in 
the financial sector worldwide. The Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act (FATCA) has been 
badly-received,  described  in  uncomplimentary  terms,  and  attacked  from  many  quarters.  It 
has been hailed as: 
“A US-centric law”;  
“An attempt to convert foreigners into unpaid IRS agents”; 
“A kind of US backward imperialism”; 
 “…a murder weapon and the US government the assailant”; 
“An atomic bomb used to kill a fly”; and  
“One of the worst pieces of legislations to be revealed in recent times”. 
As you can see, FATCA does not leave anybody indifferent! The attendance this afternoon 
well reflects the extent of our concern here in Mauritius. 
What is this FATCA? A quick recap 
FATCA  was  enacted  on  18  March  2010  as  part  of  the  Hiring  Incentives  to  Restore 
Employment  Act.  It  seeks  to  identify  US  taxpayers  who  hold  financial  assets  in  non-US 
financial  institutions  and  other  offshore  accounts,  so  that  they  cannot  avoid  their  US  tax 
obligations. FATCA focuses on high net-worth individuals (the so-called “FAT-CAts”).  
What does compliance with FATCA involve? 
FATCA  requires  foreign  financial  institutions  (FFIs)  to  report  directly  to  the  US  Internal 
Revenue Service (IRS) certain information about financial accounts held by US taxpayers, or 
by  foreign  entities  in  which  US  taxpayers  hold  a  substantial  ownership  interest.  The  FFIs 
would have to enter into a special agreement with the IRS. In case any FFIs do not agree to 
comply, they would be subject to a 30 per cent withholding tax.  
Should we be scared of this so-called murder weapon? 
Well, the aim of FATCA is to collect taxes. It is the right of the US government, as it is of any 
government, to levy taxes on its citizens. The US Senate estimates revenue losses from tax 
evasion by US-based firms and individuals at around 100 billion dollars a year. Add in other 
countries, and the sums run into many billions more. As all of us are aware, tax transparency 
and  the  fight  against  cross-border  tax  evasion  have  been  key  topics  at  successive 
G20 Summits in Washington, London, Pittsburgh, Toronto, Seoul and Cannes.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Mauritius – a clean and transparent jurisdiction 
It is quite some time since Mauritius also embarked on a profound reform of its fiscal system 
to make it simpler, more effective and conducive to economic development. We offer certain 
fiscal  advantages  that  encourage  local  and  foreign  companies  to  set  up  business  in 
Mauritius. These include competitive corporate and income taxes of 15 per cent, no capital 
gains  tax  and  no  withholding  tax  on  interest  and  dividends.  At  the  same  time,  we  have 
enlarged our tax base. In fact, the idea to enlarge our revenue collection base dates back to 
1995  when,  as  some  of  you  will  recall,  I  was  wearing  the  hat  of  Minister  of  Finance.  The 
measures which I had then initiated paved the way for the introduction of the Value Added 
Tax.  The  sustained  reforms  to  our  tax  system  earned  us  commendable  rankings  in  the 
Paying  Taxes  2012  report,  conducted  jointly  by  the  World  Bank,  the  International  Finance 
Corporation and PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC) to compare tax systems in 183 economies 
around the world. In 2012, Mauritius improved its global position by two notches from 11th in 
2011 to 9th. And in Africa, Mauritius is No 1.  
Mauritius  is  by  no  means  a  tax  haven.  All  our  policy  decisions  and  actions  promote  the 
country as a clean and transparent jurisdiction. In 2000, when the Organisation for Economic 
Cooperation and Development (OECD), the chien de garde in the fight against tax avoidance 
and tax evasion, threatened to place Mauritius on the list of tax havens, we were one of the 
first countries to commit ourselves to eliminate any harmful tax practice from our tax regime, 
and to a programme of effective exchange of information in tax matters and transparency. 
We were in fact the first country to give such a commitment.  
We  took  significant  steps  to  enhance  our  exchange  of  information  and  our  legal  and 
regulatory framework. We currently have 36 Double Taxation Avoidance Agreements (DTAA) 
in  force,  and  there  are  three  others  awaiting  ratification.  The  first  DTAA  we  signed,  with 
Germany, dates back to March 1978. In December 2010, Mauritius signed a Tax Information 
Exchange Agreement with Australia and there are others in the pipeline. Mauritius has never 
refused  to  sign  an  exchange  of  information  agreement.  In  January  2011,  the  OECD 
commented  favourably  on  our  jurisdiction.  We  are  now  on  the  OECD  “White  List”  as  a 
jurisdiction with acceptable tax standards in compliance with OECD norms and best-practice 
principles.  We  fully  cooperate  with  other  competent  authorities  on  effective  exchange  of 
information.  And  we  are  recognised  by  the  World  Bank,  the  IMF,  and  the  Financial  Action 
Task Force (FATF) as a clean and transparent jurisdiction with a sound legal, regulatory and 
supervisory framework.  
For the last ten years, the Central Bank has taken measures to enhance KYC procedures for 
institutions  falling  under  its  purview.  We  have  issued  Guidance  Notes  on  Anti-Money 
Laundering  and  Combating  the  Financing  of  Terrorism  (AML/CFT).  Under  these  guidance 
notes, which comply with the International Standards of the FATF on AML/CFT, tax evasion 
is a predicate offence for money laundering.  
So, it is my considered view that there is no need for us to be scared of FATCA. You would 
agree that we have gone a long way towards enhancing the effectiveness of our jurisdiction 
in our fight against tax avoidance and tax evasion. However, I do concede that compliance 
with FATCA would entail a number of changes at the level of our financial institutions.  
What does complying with FATCA entail for Mauritius? 
As matters stand, complying with FATCA would involve breaching a number of local laws on 
privacy, confidentiality and equal opportunities. There would also be heavy cost implications. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
But non-compliance would be equally costly in that there would be a withholding on passthru 
payments1. 
However,  the  choice  that  we  are  faced  with  today  goes  beyond  purely  financial 
considerations. We have to look at the bigger picture. We cannot act in isolation. We live in a 
global world and we are impacted by measures that are taken elsewhere.  
When  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  came  up  with  the  Basel  II  framework,  many 
countries  found  that  the  requirements  of  Basel  II  were  too  cumbersome  and  costly.  Our 
banks  did incur  significant  costs in  beefing  up  their  risk  management  structures  to  comply 
with the Basel II Framework. But today it is clear that such investments have paid off. We 
can  boast  of  a  sound  and  resilient  banking  system.  We  have  not  suffered  from  any  bank 
failures as compared to more advanced countries.  
FATCA-Partnership Agreement 
Mauritius  has  never  been  one  to  shy  away  from  hurdles.  But  does  this  mean  that  our 
financial institutions should be transformed as revenue collectors for the US? In my opinion, 
the  best  way  to  tame  the  beast  would  probably  be  for  Mauritius  to  enter  into  FATCA 
Partnerships as other jurisdictions have done.  
You  would  be  interested  to  know  that  in  February  last,  five  European  countries  –  France, 
Germany, Spain, Italy and the UK – signed a deal with the US. They agreed that they would 
each enact legislation requiring their local FFIs to collect and report FATCA-style information 
to their local tax authorities. The European jurisdictions would then transfer the information to 
the  US.  Under  such  arrangements,  the  withholding  on  passthru  payments  would generally 
only apply to third-country non-participating FFIs. The obligations under the agreement are 
reciprocal.  
However, in order to enter into such a FATCA Partnership, Mauritius would need to amend 
its laws to address any conflict of laws issues that could arise. The advantage of entering into 
such  a  Partnership  is  that  Mauritius  would  not  only  avoid  any  potential  damage  to  its 
reputation, in case of non-compliance, but it may benefit from an enhanced “clean” image, 
since  compliance  with  FATCA  would  require  more  detailed  information-gathering  and  due 
diligence procedures. 
The downside of this is that Mauritius might well lose some of its US clients. However, if the 
tide is in favour of FATCA compliance, the US clients might well realize that they have no 
real alternative: opting for a non-FATCA-compliant jurisdiction might well be costlier as they 
would  be  hit  with  the  30  per  cent  withholding  tax.  At  any  rate,  the  attractiveness  of  the 
Mauritian financial sector lies in the fiscal and other advantages it has to offer, and not in any 
banking secrecy laws.  
Nonetheless,  Mauritius  cannot  blindly  rush  into  adopting  a  FATCA  Partnership  Agreement 
with the US. There is a host of questions that first need to be addressed. Are our financial 
institutions ready to respond to, and comply with, FATCA requirements? Does the Mauritius 
Revenue  Authority  (which  would  probably  be  the  authority  designated  to  conduct  these 
operations)  have  the  capacity  –  financial  and  otherwise  –  to  cope  with  the  requirements 
imposed by the proposed FATCA Partnership? In sum, are our institutions ready to rise to 
the challenge? 
This Seminar will help us in our search for answers to these and related questions. Let me 
commend Grant Thornton and the Mauritius Bankers Association (MBA) for this initiative. It 
will help to clear the air and point the way forward by helping our financial institutions, which 
                                                 
1  As per FATCA, a passthru payment is any withholdable payment or other payment to the extent attributable to 
a withholdable payment 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
would be impacted by FATCA, to gain an in-depth understanding of this piece of legislation. 
It is in this same perspective that the Bank of Mauritius and the MBA have recently set up a 
Joint Working Group to evaluate the impact of FATCA on banks in Mauritius.  
On a concluding note, may I draw your attention to the fact that so far, the US is the only 
country which taxes its citizens on the basis of nationality. Interestingly, outgoing President 
Nicolas  Sarkozy  has  recently  announced  that  should  he  win  the  presidential  elections, 
France would also tax its citizens on the basis of nationality. So it might well be that FATCA 
which had been accused of being “a kind of US backward imperialism”, might become the 
new reality, the new norm.  
One  final  comment,  whilst  I  understand  the  difficulties  that  our  institutions  might  face  in 
complying with FATCA, I have only one advice for them: Complain but Comply!  
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
