V K Sharma: Financial market volatility and the risk management 
imperative 
Address  by  Mr  V  K  Sharma,  Executive  Director  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
Bangalore Chamber of Industry and Commerce, Bangalore, 5 January 2012. 
 The views expressed are those of the author and not of the Reserve Bank of India. 
1. 
First of all, I would wish to thank Bangalore Chamber of Industry and Commerce for 
giving me this honour and privilege to address this very distinguished and august audience. I 
must congratulate and compliment  Bangalore Chamber of Industry and Commerce (BCIC) 
on conceiving, and organizing, this contextually, and topically, most appropriate and relevant 
Interactive Session on Forex Risk Management. What with the cataclysmic and apocalyptic 
events like the US downgrade and Eurozone sovereign debt crisis overwhelming the world 
and  India,  the  year  2011  was  characterized  by  unprecedented  and  excessive  volatility  in 
asset prices and currency values, catapulting the critical imperative of Risk Management to 
the  centre-stage  like  never  before.  Against  a  financial  backdrop  as  somber,  traumatic, 
portentous and sobering as this, today’s event has come not a day too soon! 
2. 
To be honest, I am also impressed, no less, by just the right focus, emphasis and 
clarity in the Preamble, Objectives and Key Takeaways of today’s Interactive Session, as set 
out by BCIC in their circular! However, if only to reinforce the context of today’s Interactive 
Session, I would like to share with this learned and discerning audience the commonalities 
between  the  crisis  of  2008–09  and  the  current  one.  Specifically,  the  rupee  depreciated 
against  the  dollar  by  about  24%  between  March  2008  and  March  2009  (Rs.39.80  to 
Rs.52.20)  with  the  volatility  doubling  to  about  12%  (as  measured  by  annualised  standard 
deviation of daily percentage changes). And during the current crisis, the rupee depreciated 
by almost 18% in less than 6 months between August 5 and December 15, 2011, with the 
volatility  almost  doubling  from  about  5%  to  12%.  Equally  deserving  of  the  attention  of  this 
learned  audience  is  the  fact  that  since  March  2010  to  date,  the  Reserve  Bank  hiked  key 
policy  rates  13  times,  raising  the  effective  policy  rate  from  3.25%,  (the  effective  rate  then 
being  the  Reverse  Repo  Rate)  to 8.5%  (the  effective  rate  currently  being  the  Repo  Rate), 
resulting in a cumulative tightening of 5.25% in a matter of a little over 1–1/2 years! Equally 
significantly,  global  commodity  prices  have  been  just  as  volatile  since  the  crisis  of  2008; 
crude  prices,  after  rising  steeply  to  US  $  147  per  barrel  in  July  2008  and  then  falling 
precipitously  to  $  32  per  barrel  in  December  2008,  have  risen  from  US  $  32  to  around 
US $100 now! The reason why I have broadened the canvas to also include interest rates 
and commodities is to approach the subject matter of Generic Financial Risk Management 
holistically, as it is not just currency risk alone, but interest rate and commodity price risks 
just as much, that represent significant sources of risk not just to businesses themselves but 
equally to financing banks and thus potentially to systemic financial stability! 
3. 
In  an  increasingly  globalised  trade  and  investment  environment,  business  and 
industry  have  inevitably  to  contend  with,  and  manage,  not  just  their  normal  core  business 
risks, but also financial risks like foreign exchange, interest rate, and commodity price risks. 
While it will be presumptuous on my part to even contemplate, much less attempt, telling this 
learned gathering how to manage their normal business risks, I do consider it my dharma to 
attempt  shining  light  on  financial  risk  management,  comprising  foreign  exchange,  interest 
rate and commodity price risks. 
4. 
Before  I  proceed  further,  I  would  like  to  put  the  subject  matter  of  Financial  Risk 
Management  in  appropriate  perspective.  Risk  Management  is  not  about  eliminating  ,  or 
which  is  the  same  thing  as  completely  hedging  out,  risk  but  about  first  determining  ,  like 
one’s pain threshold, risk tolerance threshold and then aligning an entity’s existing risk, be it 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
recognize, 
the  excruciating  and  wrenching  volatility,  experienced 
currency, interest rate or commodity price risk, with its risk tolerance threshold. Having said 
that, it would also be in order to have a sense of how risk itself is defined and measured. 
Risk is uncertainty of future outcomes such as cash flows. In finance theory and practice, it is 
typically measured by annualized standard deviation of a time-series of percentage changes 
in asset prices. While courting financial risks in pursuit of financial return is the staple and 
dharma  of  banking  and  finance  industry,  it  is  not  so  for  industrial  and  manufacturing 
businesses! The staple and dharma of business and industry is courting their normal core 
business risks in pursuit of delivering a market-competitive return on equity to shareholders. 
5. 
I turn now to the subject-matter proper of financial risk management. I propose to 
deal,  in  some  detail,  with  the  specifics  of  risk  management  strategies  for  hedging  foreign 
exchange, interest rate and commodity price risks. I would very strongly encourage business 
and industry to invariably hedge their actual risk exposures without exception as a base-case 
strategy. To say the least, this is by far the most conservative and prudent strategy. Indeed, 
in the background of the measures announced by the Reserve Bank of India on December 
15, withdrawal of the facility of cancelling and rebooking of forward contracts leaves no other 
option but to follow the base-case strategy. But as this learned and discerning audience will 
readily 
recently, 
unquestionably attests to the credentials of such a base-case strategy of being fully hedged. 
Of course, it does mean that risk is being completely eliminated and, therefore, so is being 
financial return. But then, this is just as well because, as I said before, this is not the dharma 
of business and industry whose cardinal principle it must be to earn their market-competitive 
return  on  equity  from  their  normal  core  business  risks  only  to  the  complete  exclusion  of 
foreign exchange, interest rate and commodities price risks! 
6. 
As  regards  forex  risk  exposure  of  business  and  industry,  I  would  like  to  take  this 
distinguished audience back in time to the late 1990s when the Indian corporate sector went 
in for large scale ECBs. These ECBs were almost completely for domestic rupee expenditure 
and were mostly un-hedged and LIBOR-linked-floating-interest-rate based. Indeed, so also 
was the case with the corporates in Thailand and Indonesia which became repositories of 
unhedged  currency  and  interest  rate  risk  exposures  creating  credit  risk  for  the  domestic 
banks.  The  saving  grace  was  that,  unlike  in  East  Asian  countries,  ECBs  by  corporates  in 
India  were  subject  to  overall  limits  under  Automatic  and  Approval  routes.  I  am  sure  the 
distinguished  audience  would  recall  that  such  un-hedged  and  floating-rate-based  foreign 
currency  exposures  culminated  eventually 
the  now-all-too-familiar  apocalyptic 
denouement,  entailing  forex  losses  in  India  and  the  East  Asian  Currency  crisis  in  India’s 
neighbourhood! I would, therefore, very strongly commend that business and industry be not 
tempted and enticed by nominally low interest rates and invariably rigorously evaluate such 
foreign  currency  borrowing  options,  benchmarking  them  against  the  comparable  rupee 
borrowings. Only if business and industry find the long-term foreign currency borrowing costs 
are lower, on a fully-hedged basis, than the comparable rupee borrowing costs, must they 
choose  such  borrowing  options!  I  also  regret  to  have  to  say  that  the  current  popular,  but 
uninformed and totally untenable, refrain has been that forward cover for foreign exchange 
for  longer  term  such  as  five  years,  or  so,  is  not  available;  what  is  available  is  out  to  one 
month, three months, six months and maximum one year and not beyond. But I would like to 
enlighten the discerning audience here that a long-term forward foreign exchange hedging 
solution can be easily customized by banks by recourse to what is known as rolling hedging 
strategy  which  simply  involves  simultaneously  cancelling,  and  rebooking,  a  short-term 
forward  exchange  contract  until 
Incidentally,  such 
simultaneous cancellation and rebooking of forward contracts for rollover is exempted from 
the  RBI  restrictions  introduced  on  15th  December,  2011.  Of  course,  precisely  the  same 
strategy can be replicated in the exchange-traded foreign currency futures markets as well. 
Contrary  to  the  popular  perception,  this  strategy  is  fairly  simple  and  perfectly  do-able  and 
locks  in  the  original  starting  spot  exchange  rate.  What,  in  other  words,  this  entirely 
unexceptionable,  and  highly  desirable,  strategy  does  is  substitute  volatility  of  the  spot 
exchange  rate  with  that  of  forward  margins  at  each  roll  over  date.  It  is  empirically,  and 
long-term  maturity. 
the  desired 
into 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
is  baiting 
the  overseas 
the  FCCB  borrower 
anecdotally, established that volatility of forward margins is far less onerous than that of the 
spot  exchange  rate.  Therefore,  I  would  very  strongly  encourage  business  and  industry  to 
routinely avail of this hedging solution both to cover forex risk of long-term imports and long-
term foreign currency borrowings. 
7. 
I turn next to the other very popular foreign currency funding option, namely, Foreign 
Currency Convertible Bonds (FCCBs). I must confess that I have been very intrigued by what 
I have read in business and finance newspapers. The sense that I got was that corporates 
use  FCCBs  to  raise  long-term  fixed  rate  foreign  currency  funds  hoping  that  overseas 
investors will exercise the option embedded in FCCBs and convert into equity! And precisely 
for this reason, it has been noticed that corporates do not make provision of domestic rupee 
and foreign currency resources!! In fact, such basic motivation underlying the FCCB-based 
funding strategy is completely antithetical to both corporate finance theory and international 
practice and turns the entire rationale of such funding strategy on its head! This is because 
the very raison d’être of FCCB funding option is to lower borrowing costs below that of an 
otherwise comparable plain- vanilla non-convertible foreign currency bond. The short point is 
that 
investor  with  an  equity  option 
kicker/appetizer, embedded in an otherwise comparable plain- vanilla non-convertible bond. 
Effectively, in this structure, overseas investor in FCCB purchases an embedded option and 
pays  an  option  premium  in  the  form  of  lower  coupon  on  FCCB.  I  hardly  need  belabor  the 
point that equity is always more expensive than debt capital of whatever kind, including even 
junk  /  high-yield  bonds!  So  I  would  urge  business  and  industry  to  fully  provide  domestic 
rupee/foreign currency resources to meet potential liability under FCCBs, rather than hope 
that  FCCBs  will  be  converted  which,  in  fact,  if  anything,  can  be  the  case  of  overseas 
investors, but certainly not, of issuers of FCCBs! 
8. 
Although as serious as foreign exchange risk, interest rate risk has not compelled as 
much attention in the Indian debt market space. If only to have a sense of how significant, 
and serious, it can be, I invite your attention to what I said about the key policy rates rising 
cumulatively  by  5.25%  since  March  2010  to  date!  Just  like  unhedged  foreign  currency 
exposure,  long-term  floating  rate  loans  represent  a  source  of  significant  risk  not  only  to 
businesses themselves, but equally to financing banks as they transfer interest rate risk from 
lenders to borrowers, effectively substituting interest rate risk of lenders with potential credit 
risk in terms of creating potential non-performing loans! At another level, as fixed rate loan 
has more certainty, and hence less risk, both for borrower and lender, it should be preferred 
both by borrowers and lenders alike. Thus, for interest rate risk management, the base-case, 
risk-neutral  strategy,  is  invariably  fixed  rate  long-term  funding  by  corporates.  Contextually, 
the current popular refrain in the policy debate is that absence of a competitive, liquid, deep 
and efficient corporate bond market has been the undoing of infrastructure financing which 
typically involves long-term fixed rate funding. And as to why banks cannot make long-term 
fixed rate infrastructure loans, the stock refrain is that this will create asset liability mismatch 
in banks’ balance sheets as their liabilities are mostly short-term. Even then banks have a 
combined infrastructure loan portfolio of about Rs.6 trillion (US $ 110 bn), representing about 
9%  of  the  total  bank  assets  in  India  of  Rs.71  trillion  (US  $  1.35  trillion).  As  against  this, 
corporate bond market is around Rs.9 trillion (US $ 170 bn). But this common and popular, 
but  again  uninformed  and  counter-intuitive,  refrain  that  banks  cannot  fund  long-term  fixed 
rate infrastructure assets is untenable in that banks have not thought of using a very “vibrant” 
Interest  Rate  Swap  (IRS)  market,  where  outstanding  notional  principal  amounts  aggregate 
Rs 60 trillion (US $ 1.14 trillion) (almost 82% of total banking assets in India as also of the 
nation’s GDP)! For banks can easily transform their short term liability into a long-term fixed 
rate  one  and  thus  create  a  synthetic  long-term  financing  solution  for  long  gestation 
infrastructure projects by doing the following: 
(i) 
Receive fixed rate for one year and pay floating overnight rate in the IRS market. 
(Assuming banks’ average liability is about one year). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
(ii) 
Receive  floating  overnight  rate  and  pay  5/10-year  in  IRS  market.  This  effectively 
synthetically transforms a one-year floating rate liability of bank into a synthetic 5/10-
year  fixed  rate  liability.  By  loading  margin  over  this  rate,  banks  can  make  a  5/10-
year fixed rate loan to an infrastructure company. And, significantly, considering that 
IRS trades about 140 to 150 basis points below sovereign yield, it is win-win for both 
banks and infrastructure companies who, even after bankers’ spreads/ margins, will 
be able to borrow at around 5/10 year Govt. bond yield (currently 8.40%). That is as 
simple  as  it  can  get  in  terms  of  creating  two-in-one  fixed-rate  long-term  market-
based financing solutions for infrastructure. 
Incidentally, another uninformed and untenable, refrain against use of IRS market is that this 
strategy  entails  “basis”  risk  and  “liquidity”  risk.  It  has  been  established  that  there  is  a 
statistically significant and positive correlation between one year IRS rate and one year bank 
deposit  rate  of  0.75  which  will  improve  further  to  near  perfect  level  of  0.90  to  1  once  this 
strategy  is  actively  engaged  in.  As  regards  “liquidity”  risk,  banks  have  never  so  far 
experienced this and will not as their deposits have grown by 18%-plus every year. Indeed, 
large corporates, can themselves do it in-house by accessing the Rupee Interest Rate Swap 
Markets.  As  I  said  before,  corporates  must  treat  fixed  rate  long-term  funding  as  the  base-
case, or risk-neutral, strategy. Considering that the five year OIS (Overnight Indexed Swap) 
have traded about 1% to 1.5% below the corresponding maturity government bond yields, 
corporates can, and should, swap their short-term floating-rate loans into fixed rate long-term 
loans and yet pick up the above negative yield spread, effectively borrowing long-term funds 
much  more  cheaply  than  perhaps  would  be  the  case  if  they  were  to  borrow  either  from 
banks, or for that matter, from the corporate bond market. This is totally risk free arbitrage 
strategy corporates can, and must, engage in. Of course, when this starts getting done on a 
large scale as it indeed should, but has not so far happened, such negative yield spreads will 
automatically  be  arbitraged  away.  In  fact,  CFOs  in  corporates  must  routinely  compare  the 
two fixed rate long-term funding options to continually assess if they can borrow fixed rate 
long-term  funds  cheaply  by  borrowing  in  the  short  term  market  where  they  might  have  a 
comparative advantage. But the reverse viz., corporates borrowing fixed rate long-term and 
swapping  loan  proceeds  into  overnight  floating  rate  funds  must  be  scrupulously  avoided. 
Nothing  supports  this  better  than  the  recent  period  of  tightening  cycle  which  caused 
overnight  floating  rates  to  go  up  from  3.5%  in  March  2010  to  8.5%  in  October  2011  i.e., 
effective cumulative rise in overnight interest rates of 5%! Having said that, it is both counter-
intuitive,  and  disturbing,  to  note  that  some  corporates  have  consistently  been  “receiving 
fixed”  and  “paying  floating”!  What  this  means  is  that  corporates  have  been  speculating  by 
courting interest rate risk by paying “overnight floating rate” and receiving “fixed rate”. Why I 
say this is for the reason that if corporates first borrowed fixed rate long-term funds and then 
swapped  them  into  overnight  floating  rate,  then  they  are  exposed  to  interest  rate  risk 
because of 5% increase in interest rates. On the other hand, if they speculate in IRS market 
without any underlying exposure in the fixed rate long-term loans, then they will obviously be 
paying overnight and receiving OIS fixed rates and, therefore, they lose both on the floating 
rate side as also on the fixed rate side because during the same period, five year OIS rates 
also increased, though only, by 0.6%. We thus see if they have speculated in interest rate 
markets, rather than hedge, they have lost both ways any which way one looks at it! What I 
have said about management of rupee interest rate risk applies just as much to floating rate 
Libor-linked  long-term  foreign  currency  loans  as  well  and  I  would,  therefore,  strongly 
commend to business and industry to go in for interest rate swap-enabled fixed rate long-
term financing both in domestic and foreign currencies. 
9. 
As  regards  commodity  prices,  business  and  industry  can  use  international 
commodity  exchanges  to  hedge  dollar  price  risk,  and  domestic  commodity  exchanges  to 
hedge  rupee  price  risk.  In  fact,  whenever  some  commodities,  like  crude  oil,  are  in 
backwardation  (the  futures  price  being  lower  than  the  current  spot  price),  in  addition  to 
buying  price  protection,  business  and  industry  also  earn  what  is  known  as  “rolling”,  or 
“convenience”, yield. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
By now, I am sure this learned audience must have got a fairly good sense of the 
10. 
repertoire  of  derivatives  to  choose  from  in  management  of  financial  risks  business  and 
industry need to contend with day in and day out. However, as regards derivatives, I would 
like  to  quote  Financial  Times  Columnist  Wolfgang  Munchau  and  Warren  Buffett  who 
famously  described  derivatives  “as  probably  the  most  dangerous  financial  products  ever 
invented”  and  “financial  weapons  of  mass  destruction”,  respectively.  I  would  beg  to  differ 
because, to my mind, they are as strong statements as saying that cars and driving are most 
dangerous  because  they  might  lead  to  accidents!  The  problem  is  not  so  much  with 
derivatives, or with cars, for that matter, but with how we use them!! In this context, as this 
distinguished audience is well aware, there have reportedly been massive derivatives-related 
losses  incurred  by  business  and  industry  in  India.  These  losses  arose  primarily  because 
derivatives  were  used  by  business  and  industry  not  for  hedging,  but  for  speculative, 
purposes. As reported in the media, huge losses were sustained by business and industry on 
account of complex structured and synthetic, but so much less transparent, derivatives. In 
other  words,  business  and  industry  must  go  in  for  plain  vanilla  derivatives  which  upfront, 
transparently, and explicitly, disclose cost of hedging strategy rather than arcane, complex, 
synthetic  and  structured  derivatives  which  camouflage  risk.  As  regards  prudent  use  of 
derivatives,  the  touch-stone  that  business  and  industry  can  use  with  profit  is  that  any 
derivatives strategy which promises reduction, or elimination, of hedging cost, or promises 
enhancing  income,  is  intrinsically  speculative  and  the  one  that  involves  incurring  hedging 
cost and promises no income enhancing is intrinsically a hedging strategy. 
11. 
To sum up, such is the insidiousness of risk that its under-pricing is perceived as 
low, or no risk, and, therefore, economic agents including banks, business and industry are 
caught unawares and unpleasantly surprised when risk suddenly eventuates. Therefore, to 
my  mind,  nothing  conveys  and  expresses  the  Risk  Management  mantra  more  trenchantly 
than the following: “Just as you make friends when you don’t need them, not when you need 
them and certainly not after you need them, so also you hedge when you don’t need it, not 
when you need it and certainly not after you need it”. Complete internalization and ingraining 
of  this  holistic  risk  hedging  culture,  attitude  and  temper  by  business  and  industry  will,  in 
equilibrium,  reduce  cost  of  both  debt  and  equity  capital  by  reducing  volatility  of  ROE  as 
markets will perceive them as much less risky and more safe! If I have succeeded in alerting 
and  sensitizing  the  learned  and  discerning  audience  to  the  Financial  Risk  Management 
imperative enough, I will feel vindicated that I have delivered on my dharma today. And, I 
have no doubt, if business and industry completely internalize and ingrain this mantra and 
dharma, they will exemplify the following fairy tale ending viz. “And they lived happily ever 
after”! Finally, with the fond hope that I have not unwittingly come across as pontificating on 
the  mantra  and  dharma  of  Financial  Risk  Management,  I  conclude  my  address  and  going 
forward wish business and industry a truly blissful Risk Management nirvana! 
12. 
Thank you all so very much indeed!! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
