Dimitar Bogov: Creating an environment for sustainable economic 
growth in Macedonia 
Opening  address  by  Mr  Dimitar  Bogov,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  the  Republic  of 
Macedonia, at the 13th Macedonian Stock Exchange Annual Conference, Skopje, 4 May 2012. 
 Honorable  Mr.  Zoran  Stavrevski,  Deputy  President  of  the  Government  of  the  Republic  of 
Macedonia and Minister of Finance,  
Honorable Mr. Ivan Steriev, Manager of the Macedonian Stock Exchange,  
Distinguished ladies and gentlemen,  
During  my  last  year’s  address  at  this  conference  I  announced  that  “the  National  Bank  will 
create  environment  for  sustainable  economic  growth  through  price  stability,  stable  Denar 
exchange  rate  and  stable,  competitive  banking  sector  which  will  produce  sound  credit 
growth.  In  order  to  achieve  this,  I  will  seek  to  conduct  policy  of  optimal  level  of  reference 
interest rate and optimal level of prudential banking regulation. In my view, optimal interest 
rate is the lowest interest rate that provides Denar exchange rate stability and price stability, 
and optimal prudent banking regulation is a regulation that provides necessary bank liquidity 
and solvency, without being a regulatory burden on the banks’ balance sheets”.  
Concerning the latter, in September last year, we integrated the Denar and foreign currency 
liquidity rate in a single liquidity rate. Simultaneously, we recognized a long-term character of 
twenty  percent  of  time  deposits  that  fall  due,  promising  that  this  percent  will  increase  in 
future. With these measures, we ensured larger liquidity management flexibility and higher 
income for the banks without deteriorating liquidity indicators.  
The recent redesign of monetary instruments and the yesterday’s cut of reference CB bills 
interest rate from  4%  to  3.75%  are  aimed  towards  conducting  of  policy  at  optimal  level  of 
reference interest rate. Allow me to elaborate.  
We were preparing the monetary instruments redesign for a longer time period, and made 
the  actual  redesign  when  we  considered  that  the  time  was  right.  The  economic  activity 
decelerates  because  the  euro  area  demand  is  lower  and  the  credit  growth  rate  is  below 
expectations. Moreover, data on the foreign exchange market and foreign reserves and on 
the trade deficit in the first quarter indicate balance of payments deficit lower than projected. 
The  inflation  rate  reduced  to  around  2%,  as  expected  for  this  year’s  average.  The  banks, 
instead  of  investing  the  household  savings,  that  increase  faster  than  expected,  in  lending, 
purchased CB bills, the amount of which increased by Denar 10 billion, i.e. one third in only 
three months, even though the capital adequacy and liquidity are at exceptionally high levels. 
The  net  external  borrowing  of  the  country  decreased  by  Euro  220  million  only  in  the  last 
quarter of the last year, and by Euro 280 million, or by one fourth, over the entire last year. 
Finally, immediately prior to our decision to redesign the monetary instruments, the Ministry 
of Finance announced cut of budget expenses by 5%. To summarize, we face low level of 
risk in the external and the banking sector, low to moderate level of risk in the public sector, 
the  Denar  exchange  rate  is  stable,  the  inflation  is  lower  than  in  the  euro  area,  and  the 
economic  activity  decelerates. What  would  be  more  suitable  in  a  situation  like  this than to 
send signal that there are conditions for enhanced banking activity without jeopardizing the 
stability?  
This is exactly the goal of our measures. It is not our intention just to conclude that the credit 
growth does not develop as expected, and to revise the rate downward all over again. We 
consider  that  the  credit  growth  could  range  around  7–8%  without  jeopardizing  price  and 
financial stability, and we clearly signalize this.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The question is whether the banks will follow our signal? The promptness and intensity of 
banks’  response  depend  on  the  power  of  monetary  policy  transmission.  The  recent 
researches conducted by my coworkers show that the power of monetary policy transmission 
in our banking system is limited. This was yet another reason to redesign the monetary policy 
instruments.  We  hope  that  the  new  monetary  framework  will  improve  the  monetary 
transmission. Otherwise, we will keep on advancing the monetary instruments setup.  
CB bills are the National Bank basic instrument used to absorb excess liquidity by banks. CB 
bills are not investment vehicles. In many countries there are no CB bills. When the National 
Bank intends to absorb more liquidity it could make the interest rate more attractive for the 
banks.  But,  if  it  considers  that  it  should  not  sterilize  such  excess  liquidity,  it  will  make  the 
interest rate less attractive or will restrict the amount allowed for the banks to subscribe.  
Distinguished ladies and gentlemen,  
At this very conference last year, I also said that the National Bank will not build its relations 
with  the  banks from the  position  of  arrogance. Quite  contrary,  the  banks  are  our  partners. 
Therefore,  the  National  Bank  will  keep  on  informing  and  consulting  with  the  commercial 
banks about the regulatory measures. In this respect, presently we analyze the latest request 
of the Banking Association concerning the treatment of foreclosures and we will soon launch 
a dialogue to find solution in favor of the Macedonian economy. Hence, there should not be 
any  doubt  that  in  future  the  National  Bank  will  “hear  the  voice”  of  the  banks.  But,  also,  it 
should be clear that the National Bank does not discuss the monetary policy measures with 
anybody,  not  even  the  banks,  before  it  makes  a  decision  to  adopt  them.  They  are  at  the 
absolute discretion of the National Bank. This is a worldwide practice. Neither the European 
Central Bank, nor the Czech Central Bank, nor any other central bank throughout the world 
consults or informs the commercial banks on the monetary policy measures before it makes 
the decision.  
Distinguished ladies and gentlemen,  
I dedicated most of my last year’s speech arguing that the stable Denar exchange rate is still 
the best solution for the Macedonian economy. In the public debate concerning this issue last 
year, on many occasions, I presented additional arguments that underpin my view. On this 
occasion I will discuss the two theses recently presented by the advocates of floating Denar 
exchange  rate.  The  first  thesis  is  that  the  floating  exchange  rate  will  ensure  more  relaxed 
monetary  policy,  and  accordingly,  higher  economic  growth.  The  second  thesis  is  that  the 
Denar exchange rate is not realistic, i.e. it is overrated. Yet, so far, I still have not heard any 
explanation  of  how  would  the  floating  exchange  rate  relax  the  monetary  policy,  nor 
arguments supporting the view that the Denar is overrated.  
Considering the first thesis, note that the exchange rate regime does not determine whether 
the monetary policy will be restrictive or relaxed. You could have floating rate and restrictive 
monetary policy, or fixed exchange rate and relaxed monetary policy. What is important for 
the monetary policy is whether there are imbalances in the economy or not. Just because of 
the absence of imbalances in the Macedonian economy, as I elaborated at the beginning, we 
can  afford  relaxed  monetary  policy.  Conversely,  due  to  the  nature  of  our  economy,  the 
floating exchange rate would fuel uncertainty and create imbalances and high inflation, the 
alleviation of which would require extremely restrictive monetary policy.  
Concerning the overrating of Denar exchange rate, I have presented, on several occasions, 
data on Denar real effective exchange rate that indicate quite the opposite. On this occasion 
I  will  only  refer  to  the  market.  It  is  the  market  that  determines  whether  a  commodity  is 
overrated or not. Since the beginning of August last year, the National Bank has only once 
sold  euros  on  the  foreign  exchange  market  in  the  amount  of  Euro  4.5  million,  and  has 
purchased euros, approximately twenty times, on the foreign exchange market in the amount 
of  Euro  170  million.  Even  countries  that  apply  floating  exchange  rate  much  frequently 
intervene by selling foreign currency on the foreign exchange market, in order to defend their 
currency.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Distinguished ladies and gentlemen,  
Euro area debt crisis is our greatest challenge in the period ahead. Due to the large scale 
trade,  the  recession  in  the  euro  area  which  is  very  likely,  has  adverse  effects  on  the  real 
sector of our economy. In such circumstances, other than the maintenance of inflation rate at 
the level of the euro area, we will use the monetary policy together with the macro-prudential 
policies to preserve the balances in the external and the banking sector.  
In a medium run, the challenges of the banking sector again arise from the euro area, related 
to the implementation of Basel 3 standards. It is very likely that it will cause “deleveraging” in 
the European banks, hitting seriously the lending activity of banks in the South East Europe. 
We closely monitor this process and get ready to respond adequately in order to protect the 
Macedonian  economy  against  severe  impacts.  Therefore,  the  cooperation  between  the 
National Bank and the commercial banks will be even more important.  
Thank you for your attention.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
