Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Role and opportunities of the financial system 
in supporting green technology 
Welcoming remarks by Mr Muhammad bin Ibrahim, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of 
Malaysia, at the Green Technology Financing Bankers’ Conference, hosted by the Central 
Bank  of  Malaysia  and 
Institute  of  Bankers  Malaysia  (IBBM),  Kuala  Lumpur, 
2 October 2012. 
the 
Ladies and gentlemen, distinguished guests, 
 Introduction 
I am pleased to welcome you today to the Green Technology Financing Conference jointly 
hosted  by  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  and  the  Institute  of  Bankers  Malaysia  (IBBM).  This 
conference  is  timely  and  provides  the  industry  with  valuable  opportunities  to  stay  abreast 
with key developments in green technology financing and discuss transformative solutions to 
grow this new era of financing in a sustainable manner. My remarks today will hence focus 
on how the financial system can play a catalysing role in the development of a vibrant and 
dynamic  green  technology  financing  ecosystem,  and  to  continuously  support  the  needs  of 
the economy in becoming a high value added high income economy by 2020. 
The world’s ecosystem is experiencing growing risks of climate change, resource depletion 
and  environment  degradation  which  have  far  reaching  and  irreversible  ramifications  for 
societies and economies. In the past 100 years, the global temperature has risen by 0.74°C 
as carbon dioxide intensity has increased largely due to increasing use of fossil fuels. More 
than 80% of our energy needs are currently derived from fossil fuels, exerting a huge burden 
on this non-renewable resource. The global forest acreage has reduced by 40% in the last 
300 years.  In many countries around the continents, hectares of forests are lost annually, 
resulting  in  severe  deforestation  issues  that  will  leave  adverse  consequences  to  future 
generations. Sustainable development is hence paramount, necessitating financial support, 
strong  political  will  and  fundamental  cultural  changes  to  create  the  necessary  enabling 
environment.  
Increased  awareness  for  sustainable  development  is  beginning  to  profoundly  change  the 
behaviour of consumers, who are beginning to demand for more green solutions. This trend 
and awareness has begun to shape preferences for goods and services, as evident from a 
survey  of  young  adults  conducted  by  the  Boston  Consulting  Group  where  73%  of 
respondents  stated  that  green  factors  are  amongst  the  key  considerations  in  making 
purchasing  decisions.  More  households  and  businesses  are  adopting  green  lifestyles  –  a 
trend  that  is  already  well-entrenched  in  many  advanced  countries  and  gaining  rapid 
momentum  in  several  developing  economies,  including  in  the  ASEAN  region.  The 
environmental products and services market globally is estimated to be worth USD1.4 trillion. 
The growth potential of this market is tremendous. On the financing side, the United Nations 
Environment Programme Finance Initiative has made important strides, working closely with 
the  financial  sector  to  develop  and  promote  linkages  between  sustainability  and  financial 
performance,  and  in  developing  models  for  best  practices  including  risk  management. 
Financial  institutions  themselves  have  taken  the  initiative  to  adopt  the  Equator  Principles, 
where  financial  institutions  commit  to  channel  financing  to  projects  which  are  both 
economically  viable  and  environmentally  sustainable.  Such  financing  are  also  in  line  with 
ethical  and  responsible 
long-term 
sustainability of this business.  
Governments  around  the  world  are  also  playing  a  critical  role  in  catalysing  sustainable 
development,  through  policies  and  regulations  that  encourage  the  adoption  of  green 
financing  principles, 
that  contribute 
towards 
the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
solutions.  South  Korea,  for  example,  has  adopted  a  shared  vision  for  green  growth  and 
established the Green Growth Institute to implement efforts to deal with climate change and 
resolve  environmental  and  energy  issues.  The  Philippines  introduced  new  legislation  on 
climate change and established a Climate Change Commission to coordinate, monitor and 
evaluate the government’s actions to mitigate and adapt to the effects of climate change. In 
Malaysia, sustainability represents one of the key principles underpinning the New Economic 
Model  and  has  been  identified  as  a  Key  Strategic  Reform  Initiative  which  has  led  to  the 
establishment  of  key  agencies  such  as  Malaysian  Green  Technology  Corporation  (MGTC) 
and  Sustainable  Energy  Development  Authority  (SEDA).  In  the  foreseeable  future,  green 
technology  will  be  a  driver  to  promote  sustainable  growth  and  development.   It  is  in  the 
financial  industry’s  interest  to  be  involved  and  engaged  in  its  rapid  development.   The 
Government has put in place, the necessary support, incentives and infrastructure. Therefore 
the  banking  industry  must  reciprocate  in  kind,  by  allocating  more  resources  and  putting  in 
place the required ecosystem to expand financing into this exciting new era of new financing.  
the 
liquidity  and 
infrastructures, 
improved  credit 
financial  system 
Role of the financial system in supporting green technology 
The financial system has played an important role over the last few decades, in facilitating 
the  economic  transformation  and  growth  of  the  real  economy,  by  channelling  investments 
into  productive  sectors.  This  role  has  been  significantly  fortified  by  a  strong  and 
well-capitalised  financial  system  in  Malaysia,  that  has  been  built  through  comprehensive 
reforms  undertaken  over  the  last  decade.  Our  financial  system  today  is  characterised  by 
solid  financials,  and  strengthened  risk  management  and  governance  practices.  Combined 
with  ample 
is 
well-positioned  to  support   new  areas  of  growth  that  are  viable  and  promising,  including 
those in the green technology sector. 
To meet the needs of the green technology sector, I would like to highlight two points that 
might  reduce  the  information  asymmetry  between  financial  institutions  and  businesses,  a 
pre-requisite for building a sustainable financing ecosystem for this sector. Firstly, financial 
institutions must have the capacity and capabilities, to assess the viability of projects despite 
the  complex,  diverse  and  rapidly-changing  nature  of  green  technology.  Secondly,  green 
businesses need continuing advisory support as they may be technically strong, but lack the 
capabilities to develop comprehensive business plans and cash flow projections, needed to 
demonstrate that a project is viable to financiers. 
Taking into considerations the two points I earlier raised, Bank Negara Malaysia has worked 
closely with the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Energy, Green Technology and Water 
to  establish  the  Green  Technology  Financing  Scheme  (GTFS),  a  framework  designed  to 
improve  the  preconditions  for  financial  institutions  to  finance  viable  and  innovative  green 
technology  companies.   This  is  achieved  through  arrangements  that  help  to  bridge 
information  gaps  between  financiers  and  businesses.  These  arrangements  also  involves 
credit  enhancements  and  financial  incentives,  to  address  current  market  short  comings  in 
meeting  a  legitimate  economic  need.  Also  critically  important  are  efforts  being  pursued  to 
strengthen  the  capacity  of  financial  institutions,  to  provide  continuing  advisory  support  to 
businesses that are mutually beneficial to both business ventures and financial institutions. 
Central to this effort is the certification process to verify that businesses which qualify for the 
GTFS  are  not  only  able  to  demonstrate  the  required  technical  capabilities,  but  are  also 
commercially  viable.  Other  complementary  efforts  include  education  and  awareness 
programmes, organised around the country to inform and update, financial professionals as 
well  as  businesses  on  the  latest  developments  in  the  green  technology  sector.   Likewise, 
courses offered by IBBM are designed to equip finance professionals to effectively assess 
the  viability  and  risk  of  green  technology  projects.  In  2010,  a  Joint  Action  Committee 
comprising  of  government  agencies  and  financial  institutions  was  formed  to  provide  an 
efficient  and  coordinated  platform  to  tackle  implementation  issues,  such  as,  on  the 
compliance and monitoring processes of green projects financed under the GTFS.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
As a result of these holistic efforts, green technology financing is beginning to gain traction 
amongst financial institutions. To date, the GTFS has supported RM805.5 million in financing 
to  65  companies,  operating  in  a  broad  range  of  green  technology  sub-sectors  which 
encompasses energy, buildings, transportation and water and waste management, reflecting 
a  year-on-year  growth  rate  of  130%  in  terms  of  total  financing  and  171%  in  terms  of 
companies  assisted.  While  still  small  in  aggregate  terms,  the  value  accumulated  by 
participating  financial  institutions  in  terms  of  greater  familiarity  with  green  technology 
applications,  and  their  potential  and  success  factors  for  commercialisation  is  an  important 
ingredient  in  positioning  financial  institutions  to  further  expand  financing  into  this  new  and 
increasingly important area of growth.  Therefore, the financial industry needs to do more.  
Opportunities moving forward 
Moving  forward,  the  finance  industry’s  ability  to  leverage  on  the  opportunities  in  green 
technology  financing  will  determine  the  pace  of  growth  in  the  green  technology  sector  in 
Malaysia.  The  SME  Masterplan  2012–2020  has  identified  potential  areas  such  as  solar 
power and energy efficiency products as well as other related services such as design and 
consulting of green solutions that could facilitate SMEs to move up the value chain. This is 
expected to contribute towards achieving the targets set under the SME Masterplan, where 
SMEs contribute 41% of GDP, 62% of total employment and 25% of total exports by 2020. 
Another  important  trend  is  that  with  higher  commodity  prices  and  advances  in  green 
technology solutions, price differentials between traditional solutions and green solutions are 
likely to narrow substantially over time. Under these conditions, the green technology sector 
is  expected  to  attract  significant  investments  across  many  sectors  which  will  produce  high 
value  added  outputs  and  create  high-income  employment  opportunities.  A  United  Nations 
study estimated that about USD76 trillion worth of investment is needed in green technology 
over  the  next  40  years  to  “avert  a  climate  change  catastrophe”  such  as  global  warming, 
resource  depletion  and  loss  of  biodiversity.  Already,  economies  that  have  invested 
strategically in the green technology sector are reaping the benefits. Germany, for example, 
which  produces  17%  of  the  world’s  green  technology  outputs  has  seen  an  increase  in 
employment  in  the  green  technology  sector  from  166,000  jobs  in  2004  to  an  estimated 
280,000 in 2011.  
Recognising  the  immense  potential  of  the  green  sector,  77  financial  institutions  from 
32 countries  have  adopted  the  Equator  Principles  to  enhance  their  capability  to  provide 
financing  to  ventures  which  are  both  economically  viable  and  environmentally  friendly. 
Adoption  of  the  Equator  Principles  allows  financial  institutions  to  play  a  leading  role  to 
promote  responsible  environmental  stewardship  and  socially  responsible  development. 
Furthermore,  training  and  access  to  the  tools  and  research  necessary  to  develop  the 
necessary expertise to adopt green financing is available through global initiatives such as 
the United Nations Environment Programme Finance Initiative. 
To  achieve  more  significant  progress  in  green  financing,  some  key  priorities  in  Malaysia 
could include the following:  
i. 
Financial institutions to constantly develop expertise in support of this sector. Green 
financing  teams  should  have  in-depth  knowledge  and  capacity  across  the  entire 
financing  process  flow  including  product  development,  promotions,  sourcing  of 
viable  projects,  effective  credit  assessment,  holistic  risk  management  and  robust 
monitoring.  The  larger  regional  reach  by  Malaysian  banks  will  also  enhance  the 
potential to access a wider talent pool from the region, catalyzing efforts to build a 
specialised  human  capital  team  needed  to  drive  the  green  technology  financing 
agenda. 
Government  policies  that  are  further  enhanced  to  spur  the  growth  of  the  industry 
and create larger consumer awareness. On the supply side, more efforts should be 
taken  to  build  a  highly  skilled  workforce  and  increase  collaboration  between 
ii. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
including 
initiatives  by  various  players 
research  institutions  and  businesses  to  commercialise  and  scale  up  innovative 
green technology research. On the demand side, to create incentives to encourage 
consumers  to  use  green  products  and  government  procurement  policies  which 
prioritise green solutions could be explored. 
A holistic governance structure and performance measurement system would be put 
in  place  to  drive  the  implementation  of  policies  and  ensure  that  green  and 
sustainability  outcomes  are  achieved.  This  could  potentially  bring  us  to  a  more 
transparent  reporting  of  green 
the 
Government, business and the financing community. 
As  Asia  becomes  increasingly  more  integrated,  economically  and  financially, 
Malaysian  financial  institutions  have  the  opportunity  to  leverage  on  regional 
networks  to  scale  up  their  business  and  serve  a  sustainably  growing  green 
technology  market  in  a  cost-efficient  manner.  This  regional  network  is  further 
strengthened through the collaboration among Asian countries to further the green 
agenda and sustainable development conferences such as the Asia Low Emission 
Development Strategies (LED) Forum, and the ASEAN Initiative on Environmentally 
Sustainable Cities.  
To create a more diverse and robust financing ecosystem for green ventures, the 
sukuk market and venture capital industry can play a more active role in supporting 
this sector. To promote long-term financing, the sukuk market presents an additional 
avenue  to  meet market demands.  Sukuk  which  uses  a  principles-based  approach 
on having real productive underlying assets is an ideal financing solution for green 
technology  projects  which  have  large  capital  outlays  and  long  gestation  periods. 
Another  is  the  promotion  of  a  vibrant  venture  capital  industry  in  Malaysia  to 
complement the banking system, as it has the potential to facilitate the development 
of  small  and  innovative  businesses  and  the  commercialisation  of  intellectual 
property.  
I  am  pleased  to  inform  you  that  the  recommendations  made  from  this  conference  will  be 
forwarded   to  the  Government  in  designing  a  conducive  ecosystem  that  will  accelerate 
Malaysia to the frontier of green technology. It is therefore imperative that recommendations 
devised are practical, effective and holistic. 
Conclusion 
There remain large untapped opportunities in the green technology sector in Malaysia. Swift 
action is necessary not only to address the growing demand for green technology, but also to 
address the increasing risks to the environment. The growth potential of green technology is 
boundless  with  prospects  and  expectations  to  contribute  significantly  to  the  country’s 
transformation into a high value-added economy. The financial system plays a pivotal role in 
this  transformation  and  today’s  conference  offers  an  important  platform  to  encourage  new 
paradigms and to develop concrete, transformative solutions moving forward. On that note, I 
wish you a productive and engaging conference. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
