Jörg Asmussen: Agenda 2013 – the next steps in completing EMU 
Speech  by  Mr  Jörg  Asmussen,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European  Central 
Bank,  at  the  “Internationaler  Club  Frankfurter  Wirtschaftsjournalisten”,  Frankfurt  am  Main,  
19 December 2012. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Thank you very much for inviting me to speak to you this evening. It is now almost one year 
since I started my term in the ECB Executive Board, and it is interesting to reflect on how 
Europe  has  changed  in  that  time. When I  joined  the  ECB  in  January,  the  situation  looked 
bleak.  The  first  3  year  LTRO  had  temporarily  calmed  the  markets,  but  many  informed 
commentators  were  predicting  a  very  difficult  year  ahead.  Putting  probabilities  on  a  euro 
break-up had become a cottage industry. 
Today, we have grounds to be cautiously optimistic. The fear of catastrophic tail risks has 
lessened.  This  is  in  part  due  to  actions  taken  by  the  ECB  to  ensure  monetary  policy 
transmission,  notably  through  our  OMT  programme.  But  it  is  also  due  to  very  important 
changes that have taken place in euro area governance. Of these, the most significant is the 
recognition by the euro area Member States that EMU is an incomplete project – and that it 
urgently needs completing. 
For this reason, the topic of my address will be that process of achieving a genuine EMU, 
focusing in particular the conclusions of the European Council last week. I will say upfront 
that this  outcome  is  not  the  definitive  vision  for EMU.  It  necessarily  balances  the  views  of 
European  policy  makers,  reflecting  what  is  realistic  in  the  current  political  circumstances, 
while  –  I  hope  –  remaining  sufficiently  ambitious  to  give  citizens  and  investors  a  sense  of 
direction of where the euro area is heading.  
Accordingly,  we  need  to  think  about  the  process  of  completing  EMU  in  two  phases:  those 
elements that can be implemented quickly and can make a real difference to the euro area 
already in 2013; and those elements where more progress needs to be made in the medium-
term as the integration process evolves. Let me begin by focusing on the first phase: the key 
elements for the year ahead. 
2. 
Key elements for 2013 
Completing financial market union 
a) 
Perhaps the most important element of agreed by the European Council is the commitment 
to  construct  a  real financial  market  union  in  the  euro  area. This  will  be  critical  in  2013  for 
three reasons.  
First, a stable and healthy banking system is necessary to restore normal monetary policy 
transmission across the euro area, and hence to ensure that the ECB’s low rates are duly 
passed on to all parts of the euro area. 
Second,  restoring  confidence  in  the  financial  sector  –  of  which  the  banking  system  is  the 
bedrock – is the only way to re-integrate the single financial market and therefore disentangle 
banks from their sovereigns. 
Third,  putting  in  place  a  less  risky  banking  system  and  fixing  the  credit  channel  are  key 
contributions to restarting growth across the euro area during 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Towards a Single Resolution Mechanism 
The agreement on a Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) by the EU Finance Ministers is 
an important first step towards a real financial market union. But it is only one component. A 
financial  market  union  has  to  involve  a  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  and  a  Single 
Resolution Mechanism (SRM). This is the only way to ensure that taxpayers do not end up 
paying for the mistakes of the private sector. Let me explain why. 
Banks that are “too big” or “too interconnected” to fail at the national level – making bailout 
the preferred strategy – would not benefit from this status at the European level. The SRM 
would have the legal and financial capacity, as well as independence, to ensure that viable 
banks survive and non-viable banks are closed down. 
Moreover,  banks  that  are  “too  complex”  to  resolve  via  cross-border  cooperation  –  making 
early  action  impossible  –  could  be  dealt  with  more  effectively  at  the  European  level.  The 
SRM would create an authority that could concentrate decisions on resolution and act pre-
emptively  and  quickly,  helping  to  preserve  the  value  of  the  banks  and  save  money  for 
taxpayers. 
Principles for European public support 
However,  a  strong  resolution  mechanism  cannot  remove  risks  for  taxpayers  entirely. 
Certainly,  any  costs  incurred  from  resolution  should  first  and  foremost  be  covered  by  the 
private  sector,  through  establishing  a  European  Resolution  Fund  raised  by  levies  on  the 
banking sector. But a real financial market union must also contain a public sector dimension 
at  the  European  level.  In  this  context,  the  European  Council  called  for  the  operational 
framework for direct bank recapitalisation by the ESM to be ready by the first semester of 
2013. 
I  am  aware  that  the  prospect  of  ESM  direct  bank  recapitalisation  raises  serious  concerns: 
that  European  taxpayers  will  end  up  paying  for the  bad  assets  accumulated  over  the  past 
decade;  that  mutualisation  will  become  standard  practice  for  dealing  with  banking  sector 
problems. But let me reassure you that these concerns can be contained with what I would 
see as the three key principles for European support.  
First, European support has to be accompanied by European control, meaning public funds 
can only be used after the SSM has effectively assumed its duties and on the basis of strong 
conditionality. 
Second, European support should only be granted to banks that are systemically relevant, or 
pose a serious threat to European financial stability, and therefore affect the common good.  
Third,  European  support  must  come  at  the  end  of  a  sequential  process,  involving  the 
following steps: 
• 
one,  the  beneficiary  banks  must  undergo  a  thorough  and  independent  economic 
evaluation of their assets to ascertain their real capital needs and reveal any legacy 
problems;  
two,  those  banks  must  be  assessed  to  have  a  viable  business  model  and  so  be 
deserving of additional capital, otherwise they should wound down; 
three, if the banks are to be kept going, private sector sources should be exhausted 
first – meaning bailing-in of shareholders and bondholders, and if needed, use of the 
bank-funded resolution financing; 
four,  if  there  are  still  capital  shortfalls,  the  financial  resources  of  the  beneficiary 
Member States should be drawn on;  
only in the very last step, would European public funds be used.  
    2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
This  pecking  order  underscores  that,  the  stronger  the  European  resolution  framework,  the 
lower  the  eventual  costs  for  European  taxpayers.  The  more  the  financial  sector  can  be 
bailed- in, the less it has to be bailed- out. We see in the US how this can work: the FDIC 
closed down more than 400 banks during the crisis, without any cost for taxpayers. This is 
the standard we should be aiming for in Europe – and a real financial market union is the 
only way to achieve it. 
Let me make a final point regarding the institutional set-up of the SRM and Resolution Fund, 
which is my own personal view: the ESM  would be well-suited to perform the tasks of the 
SRM and to house the European Resolution Fund raised from the banking sector. 
Building economic union 
b. 
The second key outcome of the European Council is the aim to strengthen economic union – 
particularly by ensuring that national economies can remain competitive and hence prosper 
within a single currency area. The importance of this issue for 2013 cannot be overstated, as 
it is critical to ignite growth and lower unemployment. We can see before our eyes a series of 
cases where quick implementation of targeted reforms could have a strong impact, even in 
the near-term. 
For  instance,  despite  the  recession  in  Italy,  unit  labour  costs  have  adjusted  by  only  0.1% 
relative to the euro area average since 2008. This is because many sectors of the economy 
are  sheltered  and  wages  do  not  respond  to  weak  productivity.  It  needs  product  market 
reforms to increase competition and reinvigorate its external competitiveness.  
In  Spain,  employment  is  struggling  to  rebound,  and  the  burden  on  unemployment  falling 
disproportionately on the young, because its two-tier labour market protects insiders. It needs 
labour market reforms to bring in outsiders and improve incentives to hire. 
The  Conclusions  propose  to  kick-start  this  much-needed  process  of  reform  through  three 
avenues. First, a renewed effort to complete the Single Market, in particular by opening up 
services and increasing labour mobility. Second, a thorough assessment, carried out in all 
euro  areas  countries,  of  the  compatibility  of  their  labour  and  product  markets  with 
membership of EMU. And third, for the issues identified in this assessment to be addressed 
through  the  new  concept  of  “Reform  Contracts”.  Let  me  elaborate  some  more  on  this  last 
point. 
The idea behind the “Reform Contracts” is that countries would commit to specific structural 
reforms  that  have  a  direct  positive  impact  on  competitiveness,  with  those  commitments 
formalised  in  a  legally  binding  contract.  The  contract  would  be  multi-annual  and,  to  foster 
national  ownership,  initiated  by  the  national  government  and  approved  by  the  national 
parliament.  If  the  terms  of  the  contract  were  met,  financial  support  would  be  provided, 
targeted  at  the  transitional  costs  arising  from  structural  reforms  –  for  instance,  re-training 
programmes for displaced workers.  
What  are the  benefits  of  this  approach compared  to  the  status  quo? In my  view  there  are 
three, although they depend very much on how the concept is eventually implemented. 
First, the contracts could be entered into as part of a concerted national reform effort, rather 
than being seen as an imposition from “Brussels” in the context of the EU procedures like the 
European Semester. 
Second, reform commitments could potentially be more precise, measurable and binding in 
the  contracts  than  under  those  existing  procedures.  However,  this  effect  would  quickly  be 
lost if it simply becomes another bureaucratic procedure.  
Third, and perhaps most importantly, because the contracts are multi-annual they could allow 
for deeper reforms than are possible under existing procedures. There have been a series of 
recent studies that suggest that competitiveness is not only about flexibility, but also strongly 
connected  to  governance.  We  see  clear  correlations  between  countries’  economic 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
to 
“go  deep”  and  address 
performance and their rankings in governance indices published by, among others, the World 
Economic  Forum  and  Transparency  International.  The  contracts  provide  an  opportunity,  if 
used  properly, 
to 
competitiveness. 
Building a stronger economic union along these lines is necessary to correct what might be 
called  an  “original  sin”  of  EMU:  the  fact  that  the  convergence  criteria  did  not  include  any 
structural  benchmarks  for  joining  the  euro,  and  hence  structural  policies  remained  mainly 
within the national remit.  
fundamental  barriers 
these  more 
Areas for further progress in the future 
3. 
What about those areas that were not outcomes of the European Council and where there is 
room for further progress in the future?  
The most important is greater sharing of sovereignty. The importance of credible governance 
has  been  starkly  demonstrated  during  the  crisis.  Countries  without  credible  policies  have 
been  forced  by  markets  to  consolidate  more  rapidly  than  others  in  the  downturn.  This  is 
because  markets  have  not  trusted  that  they  can  run  sufficient  surpluses  in  good  times,  or 
achieve  sufficient  growth,  to  lower  debt  levels  and  ensure  long-term  sustainability. 
Paradoxically, the lack of strong external constraints on fiscal and economic policies has led 
to countries losing substantive sovereignty in these areas.  
By the same token, countries now need to share more sovereignty in order to regain their 
sovereignty.  By  sharing  decision-making  with  the  European  level,  they  can  restore  their 
policy credibility with investors, while at the same time having a voice over where they are 
heading. This will mean going beyond the Maastricht logic of national responsibility for fiscal 
and  structural  policies,  and  committing  to  governance  arrangements  that  are  actually 
enforceable – for instance, allowing for intervention rights by the center to prevent unsound 
national budgets. 
Sharing sovereignty implies a number of other changes to euro area governance. First, there 
have to be strong institutions in order to exercise that sovereignty effectively. This will require 
a  stronger  Eurogroup.  Second, 
to  be  properly 
democratically  legitimated.  This requires  changes  in  the  way  the  citizens  participate  in  the 
European political process, in particular via the European Parliament. 
Let  me  stress:  while  I  would  have  liked  the  outcome  of  the  European  Council  to  be  more 
ambitious, these ideas are not intended as criticism of it. They are orientations to advance 
further  which  will  need  to  be  properly  fleshed  out  in  the  years  ahead  as  the  integration 
process evolves. This will require a Treaty change in the medium-term in order to complete 
EMU in a comprehensive way. 
institutions  have 
those  European 
Conclusion 
4. 
One year ago, the euro area was facing an uncertain future. But those painted a dark picture 
at that time have been proven wrong. One year later, Europe has proven its ability to act and 
we have begun to set the euro area on a more convincing path.  
It is now critical that, over the next year, we continue down this path and provide EMU with 
institutions  it  needs  to  advance.  Putting  in  place  a  genuine  financial  union  and  a  stronger 
economic  union  must  be  our  key  priorities  for  2013.  It  is  essential  that  the  appearance  of 
calm on financial markets does not distract from the urgent need to address the euro area’s 
fundamental challenges.  
Moreover, we should also not row back on what has already been achieved. Implementing 
the  Fiscal  Compact  and  adopting  the  “Two  Pack”  of  legislation  in  2013  are  essential  to 
strengthen the fiscal framework. We should not undermine this by re-opening discussions on 
what constitutes “good” or “bad” deficits by arguing for exemptions for public investment. All 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
deficits have to be financed on financial markets and increase public debt stocks – and this is 
the opposite of what we need next year. 
However,  this  focus  on  2013  does  not  mean  we  should  lose  sight  of  the  big  picture.  It  is 
instructive to notice how little markets are reacting to the “fiscal cliff” debate in the US, while 
they are jolted by the prospect of earlier than planned elections in Italy.  
Our  long-term  goal  is  a  situation  where  the  essential  functioning  of  the  euro  area  is 
unaffected by events in individual countries, because sovereignty is shared and exercised in 
strong common institutions – and those institutions have a longer time horizon than politics.  
This is what Jean Monnet understood when he said: 
“Rien n’est possible sans les hommes, rien n’est durable sans les institutions”. 
“Nothing is possible without men, but nothing is lasting without institutions”. 
These words have never been more true than today. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
