Sayuri Shirai: Demographic changes in Asia and Japan’s economic and 
financial developments 
Speech by Ms Sayuri Shirai, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting 
with business leaders, Kumamoto, 29 November 2012. 
 Introduction 
I.  
Good morning, everyone. My name is Sayuri Shirai, and I am a Policy Board member of the 
Bank of Japan. I am deeply honored to be able to speak to all of you, as you represent the 
administrative, economic, and financial communities in Kumamoto Prefecture.  
First, let me briefly outline the content of my presentation. It will be divided into two parts. In 
the  first  part,  I  will  focus  on  the  current  demographic  situation  and  review  demographic 
changes  in  Japan  and  other  Asian  economies,  as  well  as  associated  trends  in  household 
consumption patterns. After giving this background, the second part of my presentation will 
summarize  Japan’s  recent  economic  developments  and  price  movements,  as  well  as 
monetary policy and related issues. After I finish, I am looking forward to exchanging views 
with  you  about  my  presentation,  economic  performance  in  the  region,  and  measures 
undertaken to revitalize the economy.  
Economic growth and demographic changes in Asia 
II.  
As we are all aware, Japan is a society with a rapidly-aging population caused mainly by a 
low birth rate. It is also increasingly recognized that other Asian economies are soon about to 
follow  Japan’s  path.  Therefore,  I  would  like  to  look  at  this  issue  today  and  talk  about 
demographic  change,  as  well  as  the  demographic  outlook  in  the  region  over  the  next  few 
decades. 
Demographic dividend and demographic burden 
A.  
The world is increasingly concerned with demographic issues. This is because demographic 
changes  are  closely  associated  with  national  living  standards  and  economic  growth.  To 
understand the connection between living standards and economic growth, let us consider a 
hypothetical country in the early stage of economic development.  
Generally  speaking,  a  country  with  low  living  standards  and  an  inadequate  medical  and 
welfare  services  system  tends  to  face  slow  population  growth  largely  due  to  high  fertility 
counteracted by high child mortality rates. As the economy gradually develops, the country is 
likely  to  experience  a  decline  in  the  child  mortality  rate  and  resultant  rapid  growth  in  the 
“youth population” (those aged below 15). Subsequently, further growth of per capita income 
will reduce the fertility rate.  
When  the  fertility  rate  first  begins  to  decline,  a  country  generally  has  an  abundance  of 
relatively young workers, and the growth rate of the “working-age population” (aged 15 to 64) 
exceeds that of the total population.1 In other words, the youth and elderly dependency ratio 
(hereafter  called  the  “total  dependency  ratio”)  –  defined  as  the  ratio  of  the  combined 
population of the youth and the elderly (aged 65 and over) to the working-age population – 
tends to decline. During this period, the high growth rate of the labor force directly stimulates 
economic  growth.  Moreover,  the  working-age  population  tends  to  save  more  than  other 
generations  and  these  higher  savings  indirectly  contribute  to  economic  growth  through 
supporting  infrastructure  and  productive  investment  activities.  Considering  these  positive 
                                                
1   The ratio of the working-age population to the total population tends to rise as well. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
effects  of  demographic  change,  this  period  is  often  called  “the  period  of  the  demographic 
dividend.”2 
Eventually,  the  demographic  dividend  period  ends  and  a  country  enters  a  new  stage  of 
demographic  change.  In  this  new  stage,  a  country  faces  a  growing  number  of  elderly 
retirees. As the growth rate of the working-age population lags that of the total population, 
the total dependency ratio rises. During this period, the decline in the working-age population 
is likely to directly depress the economic growth rate. The economic growth rate may also 
decline  as  lower  national  savings  reduce  the  available  support  for  investment  activities. 
Because  of  these  possible  adverse  effects,  this  period  could  be  called  “the  period  of  the 
demographic burden.”3 
Japan in the stage of the demographic burden 
B.  
Summarizing the points made so far, the demographic dividend period starts when the total 
dependency  ratio  begins  to  decline,  and  the  demographic  burden  period  starts  when  this 
ratio begins to rise (after averaging out fluctuations driven by baby boom periods). Chart 1 
reports the general conditions and outlook for demographic changes. 
Japan  has  already  entered  the  demographic  burden  period,  based  on  United  Nations  data 
since  1950.  Since  the  second  half  of  the  1950s,  the  total  fertility  rate  has  almost  always 
declined, and reached 1.39 in 2011 (Chart 2).4 Over the same period, life expectancy at birth 
increased rapidly. Male life expectancy increased from 50.1 years in 1947 to 79.6 years in 
2010,  and  female  life  expectancy  increased  from  54.0  years  to  86.4  years  over  the  same 
period. In 1970 the ratio of the elderly population to total population exceeded 7 percent (the 
threshold  used  to  define  an  “aging”  society),  and  in  1995  it  exceeded  14  percent  (the 
threshold used to define an “aged” society). This shift from 7 percent to 14 percent took only 
25  years  in  Japan,  compared  with  61  years  in  Italy,  and  85  years  in  Sweden.  The  elderly 
population  ratio  currently  stands  at  23  percent  (as  of  2011),  which  puts  Japan  among  the 
nations with the highest longevity in the world (Chart 3). Reflecting both the rapid decline in 
the fertility rate and the rapid pace of aging, Japan entered the demographic dividend period 
around 1955 and transitioned into the demographic burden period around 1995. Thus, Japan 
is already more than 15 years into the demographic burden period (charts 4 and 5).  
 Demographic changes occurring in Asia 
C. 
Now,  let us look at demographic changes in other Asian economies. In contrast to Japan, 
most Asian economies are still enjoying the demographic dividend period (Chart 5). Asia’s 
remarkable economic success is widely attributed to an emphasis on education, high savings 
and investment ratios, export-oriented economic growth strategies, government-led industry 
promotions,  and  various  measures  to  attract  foreign  capital.  In  addition,  the  availability  of 
low-cost  labor  owing  partly  to  the  demographic  dividend  period  has  not  only  supported 
successful  economic  performance,  but  has  also  attracted  Japanese  outward  foreign  direct 
investment (FDI) to the region since the 1980s. 
However, divergent features related to demographic changes have recently begun to emerge 
in Asia. I think that the economies of the region can be divided into two groups: one group in 
                                                
2  
In  the  initial  stage  of  the  demographic  dividend,  a  country  faces  rapid  growth  in  the  population  of  young 
workers aged in their late teens to forties, a demographic segment with a tendency to form families. 
3   This period is likely to see rapid expansion of expenditure on pension benefits as well as medical and nursing 
services for the elderly. Consequently, the fiscal balance and social security system sustainability are likely to 
deteriorate. 
4   The total fertility rate refers to the number of children that would be born to a woman who lives through her 
child-bearing years and bears children in accordance with current age-specific fertility rates. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
an advanced stage of demographic change (the so-called “advanced group”) and a second 
group at a less advanced stage (the so-called “follower group”). 
Advanced group economies approaching the end of the demographic dividend period 
The  advanced  group  includes  the  so-called  newly  industrialized  economies  (NIEs),  which 
industrialized and achieved high economic growth much earlier than other Asian economies. 
The NIEs – which comprise Hong Kong, South Korea, Singapore, and Taiwan – experienced 
a rapid decline in the ratio of the young population to the total population due to a decreasing 
fertility rate in the 1970s. The group also includes China and Thailand. Hong Kong entered 
the  demographic  dividend  period  by  1965;  South  Korea  and  Singapore  followed  by  1970, 
Thailand by 1975, and Taiwan and China by 1980.5 Hong Kong and South Korea will exit the 
demographic  dividend  period  and  enter  the  demographic  burden  period  during  2010–15 
(charts 5 and 6). China, Singapore, Taiwan, and Thailand are likely to exit the demographic 
dividend  period  by  2015.  All  economies  in  the  advanced  group  will  enter  the  demographic 
burden period by 2020. 
When the demographic dividend period ended around 1990, Japan’s per capita income had 
already reached about 27,000 U.S. dollars – a level that ranked it among the high income 
economies. Similarly, the NIEs are likely to enter the new stage of demographic burden with 
per capita incomes already above 20,000 U.S. dollars. Economies with high income levels as 
well  as  an  adequate  social  capital  infrastructure  and  social  security  system  will  be  better 
prepared to cope with aging-related challenges.  
In contrast, China is projected to enter the demographic burden period when its per capita 
income remains in the range 8,000 to 10,000 U.S. dollars (according to the projection of the 
International Monetary Fund [IMF]) – the level that defines a medium income economy. This 
reflects the effect of China’s one child policy in rapidly reducing fertility rates since its launch 
in  1979  and  the  decline  in  the  youth  population  ratio  from  around  1980  (Chart  6). 
Simultaneously,  rapid  aging  has  already  made  China  an  aging  society,  and  the  elderly 
population  ratio  surpassed  the  7  percent threshold  by  2000.  This  means  China  is  likely  to 
face  aging-related  challenges  before  it  builds  an  adequate  social  capital  infrastructure  and 
social  security  system.  Unless  the  country  can  increase  the  workforce  participation  of  the 
elderly,  the  substantial  cost  of  aging  may  be  borne  by  the  government  and  younger 
generations.  The  ratio  of  the  elderly  population  to  the  total  population  is  only  about 
10 percent in China, which is well below the ratios of Japan (23 percent in 2011), Hong Kong 
(13 percent in 2010), and South Korea (11 percent in 2010). However, China is unique in the 
sheer size of its elderly population (about 100 million). Like China, Thailand is also likely to 
end its demographic dividend period while its per capita income remains at a medium level. 
Follower group economies enjoying the demographic dividend period 
The follower group also experienced a decline in the youth population ratio since the 1970s 
and  an  increase  in  the  elderly  population  ratio  since  the  2000s,  but  this  group  is  likely  to 
continue  to  enjoy  the  demographic  dividend  period  for  decades  to  come  (Chart  5).  The 
demographic dividend period began in India, Malaysia, and the Philippines by 1970 and in 
Indonesia  and  Vietnam  by  1975.  The  demographic  dividend  period  is  likely  to  end  in 
Indonesia by 2025, Vietnam by 2035, India by 2040, Malaysia by 2045, and the Philippines 
by 2050. These economies face a slower decline of the youth population ratio and a slower 
pace of aging than economies in the advanced group (Chart 7). Differences in fertility rates 
and life expectancy at birth cause different demographic patterns.  
                                                
5   While the total dependency ratio in China began to decline in 1970, the scale of the decline remained limited 
during the 1970s. Thus, the demographic dividend period is considered to have started in 1980, the year a 
clear declining trend was observed. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Demographic changes and expenditure patterns in Asia 
III.  
The  aforementioned  demographic  changes  affect  macroeconomic  performance  in  various 
ways. Typically, they affect economic growth through movements in labor supply, savings, 
and investment. Demographic changes also affect the sustainability of the fiscal balance and 
social security system. Today, I want to focus on the impacts of demographic changes on 
consumption movements.6 
 Japan’s expenditure patterns  
A. 
Having outlined demographic trends, I would now like to talk about historical movements of 
household  consumption  in  Japan.  Based  on  time  series  data  from  the  1950s,  per  capita 
domestic  final  household  consumption  expenditure  appears  positively  correlated  with 
per capita GDP or per capita disposable income. Per capita consumption expenditure rapidly 
expanded from the 1970s to the 1980s, when per capita income grew rapidly. The aggregate 
consumption  expenditure  data  also  exhibited  an  expansionary  pattern,  partly  due  to 
population  growth.  This  suggests  that  a  country  experiencing  rapid  income  growth  is  also 
likely  to  see  rapid  consumption  growth.  However,  once  per  capita  income  reaches  about 
3 million  yen  on  a  GDP  basis  –  or  2.5  million  yen  on  a  disposable  income  basis  – 
consumption appears to level out (Chart 8). This may reflect that Japan’s average income 
level  has  become  comparable  to  other  advanced  countries  and  so  marginal  consumption 
demand has weakened. Regarding future trends, the consumption level may decline as the 
decline of Japan’s total population from 2011 reduces the total number of consumers. 
Next, I want to explore the impact of demographic changes on consumption patterns. As the 
average  income  level  in  Japan  rose,  expenditure  on  durable  consumption  goods  also 
increased.  This  trend  was  observed  for  (a)  transportation  equipment  (including  passenger 
cars)  and  (b)  TVs  and  information/communication  equipment  (Chart  9).  Particularly, 
expenditure  on  transportation  equipment  rose  rapidly  in  the  second  half  of  the  1980s, 
probably reflecting a shift in consumer preferences from motorcycles to passenger cars and 
from low-quality cars to high-quality cars. Since then, expenditure on durable consumption 
goods  has  flattened.  The  number  of  new  passenger-car  registrations  has  declined 
moderately in recent years (Chart 10). The population’s declining trend that started in 2011 is 
likely to reduce the sales volume of durable consumption goods. 
Age-driven changes in Japan’s consumption structure  
B.  
While  consumption  appears  to  have  peaked  owing  to  the  constraints  imposed  by 
demographic changes, it is important to pay attention to the changing characteristics of the 
consumption  structure.  First,  the  elderly  are  becoming  a  major  consumer  generation.  The 
share of consumption by households whose heads are aged 65 and over has been rapidly 
rising  and  already  accounts  for  more  than  30  percent  of  total  consumption  (Chart  11).  If 
households  whose  heads  are  aged  60  and  over  are  added,  the  share  of  consumption  by 
elderly households exceeds 40 percent of total consumption. According to analysis based on 
household  survey  data,  elderly  households  tend  to  allocate  a  greater  proportion  of  their 
consumption  to  medical  and  nursing  services,  tourism,  social  expenses,  and  foods  than 
younger  households.  Meanwhile,  elderly  households  spend  less  on  education  and 
transportation/communication  (including  passenger  cars)  than  younger  households.  These 
                                                
6   Generally,  in  the  early  stage  of  the  demographic  dividend  households  tend  to  increase  their  demand  for 
durable consumption goods (such as cars and home electronics) and actively conduct residential investment. 
This is because households belonging to young generation are likely to form families. As a country passes 
through the demographic dividend period, a growing number of households complete the child rearing stage, 
and  so  more  money  can  be  allocated  to  savings  for  retirement.  During  the  demographic  burden  period, 
households, as population aging proceeds, may increase demand for medical care, nursing care, and house-
keeping services, as well as recreation, tourism, and cultural activities. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
consumption patterns make sense since many elderly households have already completed 
child  rearing.  Other  data  show  that  medical  and  nursing  related  expenditure  in  Japan 
increased cumulatively by more than 30 percent between 2000 and 2010. This increase is 
larger  than  in  other  advanced  countries.  For  example,  the  cumulative  increase  during  the 
same  period  was  25  percent  in  Germany  (with  an  elderly  population  ratio  of  20  percent), 
11 percent in France and the United Kingdom (each with 18 percent), and 16 percent in the 
United States (13 percent).  
In  other  words,  the market for goods  and  services  targeting the  elderly  is  likely  to  expand 
further  as  the  population  becomes  more  aged.  The  elderly  population  generally  has  lower 
income from  earnings  than  the  working-age  population.  However,  the  elderly  population  is 
often observed to have more varied consumption preferences and tastes, reflecting divergent 
asset sizes, health conditions, and living environment compared with the younger generation. 
Given the large and diverse potential demand of the elderly population, firms can pursue new 
business opportunities involving high quality goods and services that meet this demand. 
Furthermore,  I  would  also  like  to  look  at  the  pattern  of  residential  investment  –  a  major 
investment item for households – although it is not regarded as consumption. The size of the 
working-age population is positively correlated with total housing investment. Chart 12 shows 
that  private  housing  investment  has  clearly  declined  since  the  mid-1990s,  when  the 
working-age  population  began  to  decline.  In  the  present  era  of  declining  population,  the 
number of residential investment projects is unlikely to grow much. Instead, demand growth 
in  housing  is  likely  to  come  from  renovation  of  existing  houses  or  the  purchase  of  new 
houses that are suitable for elderly persons or located in convenient urban areas.  
Thus, I want to emphasize that the aging population can create new business opportunities 
for Japanese firms if they develop ways to tap this potentially large consumption market.  
The case of the NIEs: transforming to an aging society 
C.  
What about the consumption patterns of the NIEs in the advanced demographic group? As I 
have  highlighted,  since  these  economies  already  have  high  incomes,  their  consumption  is 
likely to grow further in the near future, as Japan previously experienced. According to the 
historical  data,  Japan’s  ratio  of  household  consumption  expenditure  to  GDP  dropped  from 
the  1950s  to  the  1960s.  This  happened  because  GDP  growth  exceeded  consumption 
growth. However, the ratio resumed a positive trend from the 1970s, when per capita income 
rose  rapidly  (Chart  13).  Thus,  the  ratio  of  consumption  to  GDP  has  room  to  grow  as  per 
capita income increases.  
Moreover, the life-cycle hypothesis indicates that the national savings rate is likely to decline 
and the consumption-GDP ratio is likely to increase as the elderly population grows.7 Thus, 
countries with large populations of youth and elderly tend to have a lower national savings 
rate than those with large working-age populations. In particular, the increase in the elderly 
population, whose life expectancy has been increasing, is likely to further reduce the national 
savings rate. 
Most  Asian  economies  are  still  enjoying  the  demographic  dividend  period,  and  population 
aging has not progressed as far as in Japan, Europe, and the United States. Therefore, their 
consumption-GDP  ratios  tend  to  be  much  lower  than  those  of  the  advanced  economies 
(Chart  14).  Above  all,  Asia  is  well  known  for  having  a  higher  propensity  to  save  than  any 
other region of the world. This saving habit not only stimulates investment but also creates a 
                                                
7   Over  their  life  cycle,  individuals  attempt  to  smooth  their  consumption  by  accumulating  savings  during  their 
working  years  and  using  those  savings  during  retirement.  Regarding  an  analysis  on  the  impact  to  the 
Japanese  economy  of  aging, see  Muto,  Ichiro,  Takemasa Oda,  and  Nao  Sudo,  “Macroeconomic  Impact  of 
Population Aging in Japan: A Perspective from an Overlapping Generations Model,” Bank of Japan Working 
Paper Series, No.12-E-9, 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
large current account surplus. Hong Kong is the most aged economy among the NIEs and is 
second to Japan in Asia, and its ratio of elderly persons to the total population approached 
14  percent  in  2010.  Hong  Kong’s  consumption-GDP  ratio  declined  in  the  1970s,  but  has 
increased since the late 1980s. As for South Korea, the consumption-GDP ratio remains low, 
but has increased during the 2000s. Singapore’s consumption to GDP ratio shows no signs 
of increasing. China and Thailand have shown divergent patterns despite their similar income 
levels. Overall, a clear rising trend is observed only for Hong Kong. 
Nonetheless, the consumption-GDP ratio in the NIEs is expected to grow further in the near 
future,  as  aging  accelerates  in  the  region.  The  Asian  Development  Bank  (ADB)  has 
conducted an interesting analysis on this subject.8 The study found that the impact of aging 
on  the  consumption-GDP  ratio  (or  on  the  savings-GDP  ratio)  is  smaller  (or  larger)  in  Asia 
than elsewhere. However, it also found that the consumption-GDP ratio tends to increase in 
Asia when population aging reaches a certain point. Asia’s relatively low consumption ratio 
may  reflect  that  the  pace  of  aging  is  slower  there  than  in  other  regions:  for  example,  the 
report  mentioned  that  the  elderly  population  ratio  is  only  9  percent  in  Asia  compared  with 
12 percent  globally.  Namely,  the  presence  of  a  relatively  large  working-age  population  in 
Asia  supports  the  tendency  to  save  rather  than  consume.9  The  ADB  concluded  that  the 
Asian  region  is  unlikely  to  stably  expand  consumption  and  domestic  demand  in  the  near 
future,  since  many  economies  remain  in  the  early  demographic  dividend  period.  In  other 
words,  it  may  take  time  for  the  region  to  reduce  its  current  account  surpluses  –  mainly 
caused by high saving rates – or re-balance the saving-investment relationship.  
In the Asian region, the NIEs are likely to re-balance the saving-investment relationship and 
experience increased demand for services, particularly since their faster aging may stimulate 
demand  for  related  services.10  The  demand  for  a  better  social  security  system  may  also 
encourage the government to provide more services for the elderly. The elderly population 
ratio in these economies is expected to reach a level comparable to the advanced countries 
by 2030. Thus, Japan, as a leader in the aging trend, may be able to develop creative goods 
and services that cater to the demand of the elderly population, which may eventually find 
markets 
increasingly 
internationalized  and  tradable,  penetration  into  other  countries  could  happen  relatively 
rapidly. 
in  other  aging  countries.  Given 
the  service  sector 
that 
is 
The case of China: rising income and growing consumption market 
D.  
China has developed its economy as a center for industrial production in the Asian region by 
utilizing its large pool of low-cost labor from rural areas. Thus, wage growth has long lagged 
labor productivity growth. The resultant low unit cost of labor appears to have contributed to 
household consumption growth lagging GDP growth (Chart 14). In recent years, the supply 
                                                
8   See Estrada, Gemma, Donghyun Park, and Arief Ramayandi, “Population Aging and Aggregate Consumption 
in Developing Asia,” ADB Economics Working Paper Series No. 282, 2011. 
9   As one of the factors contributing to the relatively low consumption-GDP ratio in Asia, it is noted that elderly 
persons in other regions tend to depend more heavily on pension benefits and income support provided by the 
public sector, while those in Asia tend to accumulate savings and assets prior to retirement. See Lee, Sang-
Hyop and Andrew Mason, “The Economic Life Cycle and Support Systems in Asia,” ADB Economics Working 
Paper Series No. 283, 2011. In other words, the Asian region tends to save more under an inadequate social 
security system and social capital accumulation. 
10   The share of services in GDP is found to be positively related with the level of per capita income. Eichengreen 
and  Gupta  (2009)  identified  two  waves  of  service  sector  growth:  the  first  is  related  to  lodging,  meal 
preparation,  housecleaning,  and  beauty  shops,  which  typically  generate  moderate  growth  until  per  capita 
income  level  reaches  about  1,800  U.S.  dollars;  the  second  is  related  to  financial  services,  computing, 
communication  services,  and  business  services,  which  support  accelerating  growth  once  income  reaches 
about  4,000  U.S.  dollars.  See  Eichengreen,  Barry  and  Poonam  Gupta, “The  Two Waves  of  Service  Sector 
Growth,” NBER Working Paper No. 14968, 2009. I believe there follows a third wave of service sector growth, 
based on aging-related services. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
of  low-cost  labor  from  rural  areas  has  become  limited.  As  a  result,  minimum  wages  have 
been rising in many areas. Further tightening of the supply-demand balance in low-cost labor 
is expected to ensure continuous wage growth, raising per capita disposable income and the 
presence  of middle  class  income  earners. The further  deregulation  of financial  and  capital 
markets  may  strengthen  those  markets  and  help  the  middle  class  accumulate  financial 
assets. All these factors are likely to contribute to near term consumption growth. 
If  this  growth  happens,  households  are  likely  to  expand  demand  for  durable  consumption 
goods (such as cars, air conditioners, microwaves, etc.); demand for such goods has high 
income  elasticity.  Residential  investment  is  likely  to  follow  this  trend.  According  to  “China 
2030,” a report compiled by the World Bank and China’s Development Research Center of 
the State Council, China is projected to experience rapid urbanization – the nearly 50 percent 
of  the  population  living  in  cities  in  2009  will  increase  to  nearly  two-thirds  by  2030.11  This 
implies about 13 million new urban residents each year – comparable in scale to Tokyo. It is 
reported  that  the  20  fastest-growing  cities  in  China  are  located  inland,  and  per  capita 
incomes in the interior cities are rapidly catching up with the coastal cities. If urbanization is 
accompanied  by  better  infrastructure,  demand  for  passenger  cars  is  likely  to  increase 
substantially  given  the  low  car  ownership  rate.  Accordingly,  demand  for  better  public 
services, recreation activities, education, and financial services is likely to grow further. The 
aforementioned report projects that the share of industry to GDP will shrink constantly from 
44 percent in 2015 to 41 percent by 2020, 38 percent by 2025, and 35 percent by 2030. This 
may  imply  that  some  production  locations  may  shift  to  other  Asian  economies  enjoying 
longer demographic dividend periods.  
Since it takes time to strengthen social capital infrastructure and the social security system, 
the consumption-GDP ratio may not rise as rapidly in China as in other countries even if the 
pace of aging accelerates. However, the aforementioned report projects that greater upward 
pressure on wages and the resultant rising share of household income in GDP will eventually 
reverse the steady decline in the share of household consumption in GDP. Accordingly, the 
share  of  services  in  GDP  is  also  projected  to  grow  steadily  from  48  percent  in  2015,  to 
52 percent  by  2020,  56  percent  by  2025,  and  61  percent  by  2030.  Meanwhile,  the 
investment-GDP  ratio  is  expected  to  decline  from  42  percent  in  2015  to  more  sustainable 
34 percent by 2030. 
It  is  important  to  note  that  these  projections  are  based  on  the  assumption  that  China  will 
implement  necessary  structural  and  policy  reforms  to  promote  a  more  market-oriented, 
innovative economy and maintain high productivity to generate economic growth. China also 
needs to implement measures to facilitate the portability of pension and social security rights 
and to further reform the hukou system. Also, the retirement age needs to be extended from 
60 years old for men and 55 years old for women, and elderly workers require employment 
opportunities and job training.12 The one child policy also needs to be further adjusted. 
In Japan, it only took 25 years for the elderly population ratio to increase from 7 percent to 
14 percent,  much  faster  relative  to  European  countries.  While  the  same  period  for  a  shift 
from  7  percent  to  14  percent  is  projected  in  China,  some  believe  that  it  could  be  even 
shorter. Thus, China faces many forthcoming challenges from its rapidly aging society. 
IV.  
Japan’s structural problems and the outlook for economic activity and prices 
In the first part of my presentation, I talked about past, current, and projected demographic 
changes  in  Japan  and  other  Asian  economies,  as  well  as  related  shifts  in  consumption 
                                                
11   See The World Bank, “China 2030: Building a Modern, Harmonious, and Creative High-Income Society,” The 
World Bank and Development Research Center of the State Council, the People’s Republic of China, 2012. 
12   In the case of blue-collar workers, the retirement age is 50 years old. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
patterns. In the next section, I will shed light on the outlook for Japan’s economic activity and 
prices.  But,  before  that,  I  would  like  to  point  out  various  structural  changes,  including 
demographic  changes,  which  have  affected  the  environment  surrounding  monetary  policy 
management. 
Why are the structural issues so important? 
A.  
As mentioned earlier, demographic changes are one of the most important ongoing structural 
issues  faced  by  Japan.  Simultaneously,  other  advanced  countries,  especially  in  Europe, 
have  begun  to  recognize  these  changes  as  important  medium-term  structural  issues. 
Recently, some central banks have increasingly confronted the need to better understand the 
impact  of  demographic  changes  on  macroeconomic  performance  and  even  on  the 
environment surrounding monetary policy management.  
Globally,  Japan  is  taking  the  lead  in  dealing  with  demographic  trends  and  associated 
macroeconomic issues. It is well known that Japan has seen a reduction of its working-age 
population in absolute terms since the mid-1990s. The trend of a declining total population 
began  from  2011.  As  a  result,  Japan  has  become  the  furthest  progressed  aging  society 
globally.  The  rapid  reversals  in  the  growth  rates  of  the  working-age  population  and  total 
population  seem  unprecedented  globally.  This  demographic  trend  has  already  exerted 
various negative impacts on Japan’s macroeconomic performance, and thus it is important 
for  the  Bank  of  Japan  (hereafter  called  “the  Bank”)  to  consider  new  impacts  on  the 
environment surrounding monetary policy management. 
Let  me  give  you  one  example.  Japan’s  output  gap  (or  the  aggregate  demand  and  supply 
balance)  has  remained  negative  almost  continuously  since  the  mid-1990s.  Generally,  the 
negative output gap is regarded to be caused by cyclical factors or temporary shocks to the 
economy (such as natural disasters). However, in the case of Japan, structural factors have 
also contributed to the long-standing negative output gap. In regard to cyclical and temporary 
factors, the output gap has deteriorated following a series of domestic and external shocks – 
such as the collapse of the asset bubbles in the early 1990s, the Japanese financial crisis 
and East Asian currency crises in the second half of the 1990s, the collapse of the IT bubble 
in the United States during the early 2000s, the global financial crisis of 2008, the European 
sovereign  debt  problems  since  2010,  the  Great  East  Japan  Earthquake  and  the  Thailand 
floods of 2011, and the spreading effects of recent developments in the relations between 
Japan  and  China.  These  continuous  shocks  have  prevented  the  negative  output  gap from 
narrowing quickly.  
On  the  other  hand,  Japan  faces  various  structural  issues  including  the  already-mentioned 
demographic changes and growing global competition. The aging population has contributed 
to  the  long-term  slowing  of  economic  growth.  Thus,  it  is  important  to  conduct  structural 
reforms to strengthen the potential for economic growth by enhancing productivity growth of 
the working-age population while increasing the labor participation rates for women and the 
elderly. However, the implementation of the necessary structural reforms for boosting growth 
and productivity has been sluggish. Issues related to mounting government debt and social 
security  reforms  have  also  generated  uncertainty  over  the  economic  outlook.  In  this 
environment,  firms  may  form  a  pessimistic  medium-  to  long-term  outlook  on  their  market 
growth  while  households  may  come  to  more  strongly  expect  limited  future  income growth. 
Consequently, firms and households may become cautious in expanding current investment 
and  consumption  activities.  If  the  adjustment  of  current  production  capacity  by  firms  in 
declining  industries  and  their  entry  into  newly  emerging  or  promising  industries  occur  very 
slowly,  these  structural  factors  may  persist  and  cause  long-standing  sluggish  domestic 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
demand. This slows the narrowing of the negative output gap. These structural factors have 
also contributed to generating depressed prices.13 
Nonetheless, I remain optimistic that deflation can be overcome in the medium term. This is 
because many Japanese firms are striving to become more innovative and competitive, and 
to  explore  new  sources  of  demand,  both  at  home  and  abroad.  With  their  high  technology 
level and experience, I believe Japanese firms can take the lead in developing innovative, 
higher  value-added  goods  and  services  in  the  areas  of  robotics,  medical  treatment  and 
elderly  care,  medical  supplies,  biotechnology,  energy-savings,  etc.  Many  newly-developed 
goods and services are likely to contribute to creating a more convenient, comfortable life for 
the elderly. Such business opportunities can also be explored globally – especially in Europe, 
where the pace of aging is rapidly progressing, and in the high-income aging economies in 
Asia.  
In line with this view, the government is also expected to support the business community by 
creating a more business-friendly environment. Financial institutions are expected to provide 
diverse,  new  types  of  financial  support  to  innovative,  viable  firms  that  tap  into  growing 
demand. Under this environment, the Bank will continue to support the business community 
by  ensuring  an  accommodative  monetary  environment  and  providing  long-term  funds 
through financial institutions (as explained later). Therefore, I would like to emphasize that 
the  baseline  scenario  of  the  outlook  for  Japan’s  economic  activity  and  prices,  which  I  will 
introduce shortly, is based on the assumption that various agents are making the expected 
efforts. 
B.  
The statement “Measures aimed at overcoming deflation,” jointly released by 
the Japanese government and the bank of Japan 
Based on the perspectives presented previously, I feel that the statement “Measures Aimed 
at  Overcoming  Deflation,”  jointly  released  by  the  Bank  of  Japan  Governor  Shirakawa, 
together with Mr. Maehara (Minister of State for Economic and Fiscal Policy) and Mr. Jojima 
(Minister  of  Finance),  is  very  significant.  Given  that  deflation  is  a  long-standing,  structural 
challenge,  it  is  important  that  both  the  Bank  and  the  government  confirm  their  mutual 
understanding of the causes of deflation and measures to overcome it.  
On the one hand, the Bank will continue to pursue its CPI-based inflation goal of 1 percent 
annually,  given  that  the  medium-  to  long-term  price  stability  goal  is  set  within  2  percent 
annual inflation. A monetary easing policy – based on the virtually zero interest policy and 
the Asset Purchase Program – will be pursued until the 1 percent inflation goal is in sight. 
Simultaneously, the government is expected to vigorously promote measures to help reduce 
structural constraints and thus strengthen Japan’s growth potential. I personally believe that 
this  statement  signals  to  the  public  a  strong  will  on  both  sides  to  overcome  deflation  and 
restore  sustainable  economic  growth  with  price  stability.  Therefore,  I  regard  this  action 
positively. 
Outlook for economic activity and prices: a baseline scenario  
C.  
Outlook for economy 
Japan’s  economy  grew  at  a  rate  of  about  3  percent  in  the  first  half  of  2012,  as  domestic 
demand  remained  firm,  while  both  public  and  private  reconstruction-related  demand 
increased  following  the  Great  East  Japan  Earthquake.  Since  then,  the  economy  has 
weakened  somewhat,  as  shown  by  a  marked  decline  in  exports  and  industrial  production. 
This reflects weakened demand from overseas economies – especially exports destined for 
                                                
13   For  example,  see  Shirai,  Sayuri,  “Have  Demographic  Changes  Affected  Japan’s  Macroeconomic 
Performance? – Some Implications for Monetary Policy –,” Speeches at the Bank of Finland, the Riksbank, 
and Stockholm University, Bank of Japan, 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
the  European  Union  (EU)  and  China.  The  implications  of  recent  developments  in  the 
relations between Japan and China have affected Japan’s economy in areas such as trade 
and  tourism.  Moreover,  weakness  in  the  manufacturing  sector  has  gradually  affected 
employment, as seen in a decline in overtime and the number of new job offers in the sector. 
Private consumption has also lost some of its momentum compared with the period leading 
up  to  early  summer,  partly  because  of  the  ending  of  subsidies  for  purchasers  of 
environmentally  friendly  cars.  As for  business fixed  investment, firms’  investment  plans for 
fiscal  2012  as  revealed  in  the  September  Tankan  (Short-Term  Economic  Survey  of 
Enterprises in Japan) – a survey conducted by the Bank – indicate relatively high growth for 
that time of year. Nevertheless, some manufacturing firms appear to have begun to postpone 
their business fixed investment plans. Considering this situation, the Bank has assessed the 
economy as weakening somewhat.  
Going forward, Japanese economic activity is expected to remain relatively weak for the time 
being. Both exports and industrial production are expected to decline against the background 
of  prolonged  deceleration  in  overseas  economies.  The  weakness  in  exports  and  industrial 
production will constrain business outlays in the manufacturing sector, and may lead more 
firms  to  postpone  their  business  fixed  investment  plans.  Domestic  demand  is  expected  to 
remain  resilient  on  the  whole,  mainly  supported  by  broad  reconstruction-related  demand, 
including  investment  related  to  disaster  prevention  and  energy.  Since  private  consumption 
has generally remained resilient, labor market conditions are likely to continue an improving 
trend. Nonetheless, the weak performance of the manufacturing sector is likely to deteriorate 
supply-demand imbalance in the labor market for the time being. Regarding per capita wage 
compensation,  firms’  poor  performance  during  fiscal  2011  caused  by  the  earthquake  is 
expected  to  suppress  winter  bonuses.  Meanwhile,  we  need  to  pay  closer  attention  to  the 
issue  of  how  long  the  adverse  impact  of  the  expiration  of  subsidies  for  purchasers  of 
environmentally  friendly  cars  will  last.  Therefore,  domestic  demand  is  unlikely  to  increase 
enough to offset the weakness in exports, and the economy is expected to remain relatively 
weak for the time being (Chart 15). 
Thereafter, as overseas economies gradually emerge from the deceleration phase, exports 
and industrial production are likely to start picking up and private consumption is expected to 
remain  resilient.  Residential  investment  is  likely  to  continue  to  show  a  mild  improvement 
partly because of reconstruction demand in affected areas and partly because of moderate 
growth  in  demand  for  condominiums  in  metropolitan  areas  based  on  the  low  interest  rate 
environment.  In  fiscal  2013,  the  economy  is  expected  to  grow  faster  than  its  potential,  as 
overseas  economies  gradually  pick  up  and  private  domestic  demand  increases  robustly, 
coupled  with 
from 
reconstruction-related public demand may diminish slowly. In the second half of fiscal 2013, 
a large front-loaded increase in demand prior to the consumption tax hike is likely to occur, 
thereby boosting growth temporarily but significantly.  
In fiscal 2014, the underlying trend of the economy – excluding fluctuations stemming from 
the consumption tax hike – is projected to be growth that slightly outstrips its potential. This is 
because overseas economies are likely to grow faster than the historical long-term average 
and  accommodative  monetary  policies  based  on  low  interest  rates  attract  a  more  positive 
response 
investment  activity  and  optimistic  growth  expectations. 
Nonetheless,  a  decline  in  demand  following  the  front-loaded  increase  prior  to  the 
consumption  tax  hike  is  likely  to  occur  in  the  first  half  of  fiscal  2014  and  this  will  limit  the 
growth rate for the whole of fiscal 2014 to slightly above 0 percent.  
Outlook for prices 
As for trends in the CPI (all items less fresh food), the year-on-year rate of decline – after 
reaching  a  historical  trough  of  2.4  percent  in  August  2009  –  has  continued  to  slow 
consistently since around end-2009 with a gradual improvement in the output gap. Against 
this  background,  the  CPI  has  remained  almost  unchanged  –  with  the  year-on-year  rate  of 
rising  corporate  profits  and 
income.  However,  support 
increased 
through 
labor 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
change of nearly 0 percent (Chart 15). From a somewhat long-term perspective, there is a 
slight positive correlation between the rate of change in the CPI and the output gap.  
Looking at the outlook for prices, the negative output gap is likely to remain relatively large 
for  the  time  being,  reflecting  the  aforementioned  economic  outlook.  Eventually,  the  output 
gap is expected to maintain a trend of moderate improvement, with some fluctuation caused 
by the effects of the hike in the consumption tax. Medium- to long-term inflation expectations 
can  be  assumed  to  remain  stable  throughout  the  projection  period,  given  that  the 
expectations  of  market participants  and  economists  have  been  stable  at  around  1  percent 
and  households  have  not  changed  their  views  significantly.  However,  a  moderate  drop  in 
medium- to long-term inflation expectations appears to have emerged very recently, so I will 
pay  close  attention  to  future  developments.  Households’  expectations  have  not  changed 
perceptibly,  and  the  future  outlook  is  expected  to  remain  stable.  As  for  international 
commodity prices, crude oil and crop prices have increased slightly because of heightened 
geopolitical risks and poor weather conditions. On average, however, prices are expected to 
remain  nearly  flat,  reflecting  the  deceleration  of  overseas  economies.  Thereafter,  they  are 
likely to rise moderately against the background of increased demand for food and energy 
arising from growth in emerging economies.  
The year-on-year rate of change in the CPI is expected to hover around 0 percent for the 
time being and then gradually rise as the output gap shrinks. In fiscal 2014, it is projected to 
move steadily closer toward 1 percent, the inflation goal set for the time being.  
Risk factors affecting the outlook 
D.  
Having talked about the baseline scenario, I would like to touch on risk factors concerning 
the  outlook for  economic  activity. While  both  upside  and  downside  risks  exist,  I  personally 
assess  the  downside  risks  as  greater.  The  main  downside  risks  include  (a)  possible 
downward  adjustments  related  to  overseas  economies,  including  issues  such  as  the 
sovereign  debt  problems  in  the  euro  area,  the  “fiscal  cliff”  in  the  United  States,  and  the 
continued slower economic growth in China, (b) uncertainty related to firms’ and households’ 
medium- to long-term growth expectations, which may be adjusted downward by the delayed 
efforts  of  various  agents  to  strengthen  the  growth  potential  of  Japan’s  economy,  (c)  the 
greater-than-expected  adverse  impact  of  the  consumption  tax  hike,  and  (d)  Japan’s  fiscal 
sustainability issues.  
Regarding the risks concerning the outlook for prices, I also assess that the risk balance is 
tilted to the downside, while the Bank’s projection could deviate either upward or downward. 
First,  the  responsiveness  of  prices  to  the  output  gap  may  be  less  elastic  than  projected. 
Thus,  careful  attention  should  be  paid  to  whether  firms  will  raise  prices  with  improved 
economic conditions as expected. Second, if firms and households increasingly expect the 
pace  of  price  increases  to  remain  slow  based  on  price  behavior  in  the  recent  and  more 
distant past, downward pressure may be exerted on both actual prices and wages (even if 
the  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  remain  stable).  Third,  there  is  a  possibility 
that  volatility  in  crude  oil  and  other  commodity  prices  may  fluctuate,  mainly  reflecting 
geopolitical risks and weather conditions. Fluctuations in foreign exchange rates could also 
affect consumer prices, both directly through changes in import prices and indirectly through 
changes in economic activity. 
 Conduct of monetary policy 
E. 
Finally, I would like to talk about the conduct of monetary policy. So far, financial conditions 
in Japan have been accommodative, as the Bank continuously pursues powerful monetary 
easing.  Specifically,  firms’  funding  costs  have  remained  low,  with  the  average  contracted 
interest rates on new loans and discounts – both short- and long-term rates – registering just 
1 percent. Issuing conditions for commercial paper (CP) and corporate bonds have remained 
favorable  thanks  to  resilient  demand  among  investors  –  notwithstanding  the  widening  of 
some  credit  spreads  because  of  worsening  corporate  performance.  A  range  of  indicators 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
reflecting (a) financial institutions’ lending attitudes as perceived by firms, as well as (b) the 
financial positions of firms have been above the historical average since 2000. Nevertheless, 
attention needs to be paid to the recent moderate deterioration of the financial positions of 
small  and  medium-sized  firms.  Overall,  business  credit  demand  has  been  recovering 
gradually,  mainly  for  funds  related  to  reconstruction  following  the  Great  East  Japan 
Earthquake  and  for  funding  of  corporate  takeover  activities.  Looking  at  funding  in  the 
corporate sector at home, the year-on-year rate of increase in outstanding bank lending has 
recently risen somewhat. The rate of change in outstanding CP issuance has generally been 
slightly positive.  
In response to what it perceived as a weakened economy, the Bank made two decisions on 
October  30  regarding further  monetary  easing  (Chart  16).  First,  the total  size  of  the  Asset 
Purchase Program was increased by about 11 trillion yen to reach approximately 91 trillion 
yen – from around 80 trillion yen previously. The Japanese government bonds (JGBs) and 
treasury  discount  bills  (T-Bills)  are  to  increase  by  about  5  trillion  yen  each,  CP  by  about 
0.1 trillion yen, corporate bonds by about 0.3 trillion yen, exchange-traded funds (ETFs) by 
about 0.5 trillion yen, and Japan real estate investment trusts (J-REITs) by about 0.01 trillion 
yen. The increased purchases are intended to be completed by around end-2013.  
Second,  the  Bank  decided  to  establish  a  new  lending  facility  called  the  fund-provisioning 
measure to stimulate bank lending (“Stimulating Bank Lending Facility”) to promote lending 
by financial institutions. The new facility will enable financial institutions to obtain long-term 
funds up to an amount equivalent to the net increase in lending at the interest rate equivalent 
to  the  Bank’s  target  for  the  uncollateralized  overnight  call  rate  (currently  0.1  percent  per 
annum). There will be no upper limit to the total funds provided by the Bank to the financial 
institutions  –  the  facility  is  unlimited.  The  duration  of  each  loan  will  be  one,  two,  or  three 
years, as requested by financial institutions, and the loans will be able to be rolled over for up 
to four years. The specifics of the facility are still under deliberation and will be announced in 
the  near  future.  However,  the  key  point  is  that  the  Bank  may  provide  substantial  funds  to 
support  financial  institutions’  efforts  to  increase  their  lending.  I  hope  that  this  facility  will 
encourage financial institutions to provide diverse and innovative financial services not only 
to existing customers but also to pioneering, newly-emerging firms. The Bank will designate 
this  facility,  together  with  the  fund-provisioning  measure  to  support  strengthening  the 
foundations for economic growth (“Growth-Supporting Funding Facility”) established in 2010, 
as the “Loan Support Program.”  
Finally, I would like to emphasize that the Bank recognizes that Japan’s economy faces the 
critical  challenge  of  overcoming  deflation  as  early  as  possible  and  achieving  sustainable 
growth  with  price  stability.  Given  that  Japan’s  long-standing  negative  output  gap  and 
resultant deflation reflect both cyclical and structural factors, overcoming this challenge will 
require a strong will, as well as collective efforts by firms, financial institutions, government, 
and the Bank. The Bank will continue to conduct monetary policy in an appropriate manner. 
Meanwhile,  I  will  continue  to  constantly  consider  how  the  Bank  can  best  respond  to  the 
current challenging environment.  
This brings me to the end of my presentation. Thank you very much for your kind attention. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
 14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
 16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 17 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   18 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  19 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   20 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 21 
  22 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  23 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   24 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 25 
