Andrew G Haldane: The Bank and the banks 
Speech by Mr Andrew G Haldane, Executive Director, Financial Stability, Bank of England, at 
Queen’s University, Belfast, 18 October 2012. 
 The views expressed within are not necessarily those of the Bank of England or the Financial Policy Committee. I 
would  like  to  thank  Bethany  Blowers,  Forrest  Capie,  John  Keyworth,  Victoria  Kinahan,  Emma  Murphy,  Varun 
Paul, Richard Roberts, and the staff of the Bank’s archives for their comments and contributions. 
In the light of the financial crisis, there is much to explain. Doing so is not just important for 
reasons  of  accountability  to  the  public.  Explaining  and  understanding  errors  of  the  past  is 
absolutely essential if policymakers are to learn lessons for the future. To misquote someone 
none of you have ever heard of, those who forget the errors of the past are doomed to repeat 
them. 
During  the  course  of  its  318-year  history,  the  Bank  of  England  has  had  plenty  of  crisis 
experience. And encouragingly, on my reading of history, there is evidence of it having learnt 
from this experience. In response, radical reform of the Bank’s policymaking framework has 
been  commonplace.  There  are  few  better  examples  than  the  radical  reform  of  the  Bank’s 
transparency and accountability practices over the past twenty-five years. 
Those  reforms  are  continuing  to  the  present  day.  A  wholly  new  framework  for  financial 
stability policy is being put in place in the UK, perhaps the most radical in the Bank’s history. 
I  will  discuss  that  framework  later  on.  This  framework  can  be  seen  as  an  evolutionary 
response  to  crisis  experience,  not  just  this  crisis  but  a  great  many  previous  ones.  It  is 
impossible to know if this framework will proof us against future crises. But in remembering 
those errors of the past, it gives us a fighting chance of not repeating them. 
So I want to take you on an historical journey charting the Bank of England’s role in financial 
crises and its response to them. Now, I know what you are thinking. The evolution of financial 
stability in the UK viewed through the lens of the Bank of England sounds deadly dull. So I 
am going at least to try to add a touch of colour to the events and personalities of the time. 
The very beginning 
Let’s start at the very beginning. The Bank of England was put on earth, way back in 1694, to 
do  none  of  the  things  it  does  today  –  namely,  preserving  monetary  and  financial  stability. 
Instead, it was a confection of the then monarchs, William III and Mary II, to pay for their war 
debts. At the time the Bank was little more than a branch, with a mere twenty staff. 
Pretty early in its life, however, the Bank began to involve itself in the business of banking. It 
began to grow its balance sheet by taking deposits from and extending loans to other banks, 
typically  by  the  practice  of  “discounting”  bills  of  exchange.  The  Bank  also  issued  its  own 
notes which, due to the implicit backing of the government, circulated as currency with the 
public. 
At  this  stage,  the  Bank  was  far  from  being  the  nationalised,  policymaking  body  we  know 
today.  Rather,  the  Bank  was  a  quasi-private  bank  conducting  its  business  for  quasi-
commercial  ends.  Other  banks  at  the  time  were  engaged  in  similar  commercial  pursuits, 
including  often  issuing  their  own  notes.  Except,  of  course,  they  lacked  the  government  as 
guarantor. 
This made for a competitive, and at times rather antagonistic, relationship between the Bank 
and the commercial banks. This strained relationship lasted for the whole of the 18th and a 
good  chunk  of  the  19th centuries. Was  the  Bank friend  or foe,  collaborator  or  competitor? 
The commercial banks did not know. And the Bank – private in name but public in finances – 
was itself in a state of mild schizophrenia. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
These psychological flaws were exposed in the middle of the 19th century. By then, the Bank 
had been granted monopoly rights to issue currency. Quite literally, this cut the commercial 
banks out of a lucrative money-making scheme. This did little to ease competitive tensions 
between the Bank and the banks. 
This tension bubbled over in the famous case of Overend and Gurney Bank. In the early part 
of  the  19th  century,  Overend  had  grown  rapidly  to  become  the  largest  discount  house  in 
London. If not too big to fail, it was certainly large enough to look after itself – as the Bank 
found out in1860. 
Two years earlier, the Bank had abolished the right of other banks to come to it for cash by 
discounting  bills.  The  banks  took  umbrage.  With  Overend  and  Gurney  playing  the  role  of 
shop  steward,  they  collectively  withdrew  £1.6  million  from  the  Bank  over  three  days  in  an 
attempt to bring the Bank, if not to its knees, then at least to its senses. Dark, anonymous 
messages were sent to the Bank, presumably not by Twitter, warning: “Overends can pull out 
every note you have”.1  
In the event Overend eventually caved, returning to the Bank the notes they had withdrawn 
apologetically – or at least semi-apologetically, as the notes actually came back cut in half. 
Six years later in 1866, when Overend and Gurney asked the Bank for an emergency loan of 
£400,000, the answer was “No”. 
The Bank won this battle, but was to lose decisively the war. Overend and Gurney failed. The 
City shook. Panic took hold. The Bank was forced to lend £4 million  – ten times the initial 
sum – to support other banks. There was a chorus of disapproval. The Bank’s role in crisis 
management would never be the same again. 
Supporting the financial system 
Criticism  of  the  Bank’s  role  in  the  Overend  crisis  came  prominently  from  Walter  Bagehot, 
then-editor  of  The  Economist  and  Bank-of-England  basher  of  his  day.  He  lambasted  the 
Bank’s  acting  “hesitatingly,  reluctantly  and  with  misgiving”.2  Henry  Gibbs,  Governor  of  the 
Bank  from  1875  to  1877,  highlighted  the  Overend  experience  as  “the  Bank’s  only  real 
blunder”.3  
Yet the Bank had also learned from this experience. It had discovered that its role could be 
neither commercial nor competitive. Instead its role was as guardian of the financial system 
as a whole, protecting banks from what is today called systemic risk. In Bagehot’s words, the 
Bank  should  act  as  last  resort  lender  to  solvent  institutions  against  good  collateral  at  a 
penalty rate. It has done so ever since. 
The  Bank  did  not  have  to  wait  long  to  put  its  new-found  role  into  practice.  On  Saturday 
8 November  1890  the  Bank  Governor  of  the  day,  William  Lidderdale,  summoned  his 
Directors.  This  itself  aroused  suspicion.  Bank  directors  were  never  seen  at  work  at  the 
weekend. They typically departed for the country around Friday lunchtime. (Let me tell you, 
things have changed for Bank of England Directors since then.) 
What  Lidderdale  told  his  Directors  was  electric.  There  were  serious  liquidity  problems  at 
another  big  and  famous  bank,  Baring  Brothers  and  Company.  But  the  Bank  had  not  the 
faintest  clue  as  to  Barings’  true  financial  position.  To  rectify  that,  Lidderdale  ordered  an 
accountant’s report on Barings to be brought to him with immediate effect. And with that, he 
departed to London Zoo with his son. 
                                                
1  Kynaston (1994) Vol. 1. p200. 
2  Bagehot (1873). 
3  Wood (1999). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The accountant’s report showed a solvent but illiquid Barings. Back from the Zoo, Lidderdale 
began to construct a financial “lifeboat” for Barings, with a contribution from the Bank but also 
from  the  commercial  banks.  This  was  the  system  acting  in  support  of  the  system.  The 
lifeboat was launched and Barings was saved, in what has become known as the “crisis that 
never became a drama”.4  
The  Bank’s  lifeboat  has  since  been  re-launched  on  more  than  one  occasion.  A  second 
financial lifeboat – different in detail, but identical in principle – was launched by the Bank of 
England in the early 1970s. Then, it was intended to save the small banks rather than the 
large. It, too, steadied some sinking ships. 
Third time, however, was not so lucky. On 24 February 1995, it was Barings Bank who were 
again  knocking  on  the  Bank  of  England’s  door  for  help.  Bank  Directors  were  again 
summoned  on  a  Saturday.  I  myself  was  caught  by  a  TV  crew  entering  the  Bank  on  that 
Saturday morning, arousing suspicion something was amiss. 
In fact, I had not been recalled to save the day. (I believe I was filmed wearing a tracksuit.) 
And I was as blissfully unaware of Barings’ problems as most of the rest of the world. (I was 
at the Bank completing a research paper on “A Structural Vector Autoregressive Model of the 
Monetary Transmission Mechanism”.) Life was easier then. 
Nick Leeson, at the time a despised and corrupt rogue-trader, today a much-admired reality-
TV  star  and  after-dinner  speaker,  had  put  a  huge  hole  in  the  Barings  boat.  Over  the 
weekend, then-Governor Eddie George tried hard to assemble a lifeboat. All visits to London 
Zoo were cancelled. But the lifeboat failed and with it Barings. That Barings was allowed to 
fail, and did so without rupturing the system, is a key lesson for today, to which I will return 
later. 
So what does this tell us about how the Bank of England’s role had evolved on entering the 
20th  century?  The  Bank  now  spoke  and  acted  as  steward  of  the  financial  system, 
marshalling its own and others’ financial resources to keep the financial system panic-free. 
The Bank was at the frontline of crisis management. 
But these episodes also contained lessons. When the first Barings crisis came, the Bank had 
been reactive and backfoot. It had been blindsided by the  risk to its own and the financial 
system’s balance sheet. The Bank was finding its feet as a crisis-container. But in attitude 
and expertise, it was a world away from being an effective crisis-preventer. 
Supporting the economy 
Fast forward  to  the  start  of  the  First World War. William  Lidderdale  had  been  replaced  as 
Bank  Governor  by  Walter  Cunliffe.  Cunliffe  was  not  what  would  these  days  be  called  an 
equal opportunities employer. The Bank’s staff rules were stifling and sexist – although were 
ahead  of  their  time  compared  to  other  City  firms.  The  Bank  went  150  years  without 
employing any women at all. When they did, it was to do the work of 15–18 year old boys, 
sorting and listing returned notes. On getting married, women at the Bank were required to 
resign their position. The Bank was “Old Lady” by name but “Young Lady” by nature. 
Cunliffe’s greatest achievement was his contribution to solving the financial panic of 1914. 
On Friday 24 July, the City woke to the threat of war as Austria made an ultimatum to Serbia. 
There was a  worldwide  scramble for the safety  of cash. Mass-selling led to stock markets 
closing in Europe, then New York, then Australia. 
London was not exempt. By 31 July, the London Stock Exchange had closed for the first time 
in its near 150-year history. Panic soon spread to the money markets, sucking liquidity and 
                                                
4  Roberts and Kynaston (1995). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
life out of the financial system. Unable to finance themselves, lending by the banks began to 
drain away, starving the economy of credit and causing it too to crater. This was truly a credit 
crunch.  
Cunliffe’s  plan,  hatched  with  the  Treasury,  was  to  lift  the  liquidity  burden  on  the  banks  by 
purchasing  the  IOUs  they  were  holding  from  overseas  borrowers  which  had  become 
understandably  illiquid  on  the  outbreak  of  war.  These  bills  were  bought  by  the  Bank  and 
stored  in  its  vaults,  in  what  became  known  as  the  “cold  storage”  scheme.5  By  freeing  the 
banks’ balance sheets in this way, the cold storage scheme was intended to stimulate credit. 
It was only a limited success, with the banks still fearful about making new loans because of 
the rising risk of default by overseas borrowers. In response, the government announced an 
extension  to  the  scheme,  with  the  government  effectively  insuring  the  banks  against  the 
credit  risk  on  these  assets  too.  It  worked.  Within  a  couple  of  months,  money  market 
conditions had stabilised and credit was once more flowing. Cunliffe’s cold storage plan had 
averted a credit crisis.  
The cold storage scheme was a piece of clever financial engineering by the Bank, designed 
to support credit and the wider economy. In the past few years, with credit growth and the 
economy weak, the Bank has been in the vanguard of creating new pieces of machinery to 
serve a similar end. 
In 2008, the Bank introduced a Special Liquidity Scheme, or SLS, to help finance UK banks’ 
legacy asset portfolio. Over £180 billion of support was provided to the banks and has since 
been repaid.6 The SLS bears more than a passing resemblance to the first phase of the cold 
storage scheme. 
In June this year, the Bank announced a second scheme, the Funding for Lending Scheme, 
or FLS. It provides liquidity support to UK banks on terms which depend on their lending to 
the  UK  economy,  thereby  acting  as  a  direct  incentive  to  stimulate  new  lending.  The  FLS 
bears some resemblance to the second phase of cold storage. 
The SLS and FLS may be less famous than JLS, the London R&B boy-band. But they are an 
important recognition of the Bank’s role in supporting credit intermediation. That role began 
in  the  early  part  of  the  20th  century  with  schemes  like  cold  storage.  The  Bank’s  role  had 
expanded  beyond  its  own  doorstep,  on  which  the  banks  stood,  to  the  doorsteps  of 
households and companies up and down the country seeking credit. 
Supporting financial infrastructure 
Yet one thing at least had stayed the same: in 1914, the Bank had only acted when jolted 
into doing so by war. Its role was still as crisis-container rather than preventer. During the 
1920s and 1930s, the Bank of England became Montagu Norman’s Bank. And Norman set 
about changing that. 
Norman was not Cunliffe’s greatest fan and the feeling was clearly mutual. “There goes that 
queer-looking  fish  with  the  ginger  beard  again”,  Cunliffe  is  said  to  have  observed  about 
Norman. “Do you know who he is? I keep seeing him creep about this place like a lost soul 
with nothing better to do.”7 Nor would Norman necessarily have ingratiated himself to today’s 
army of Bank economists. “You are not here to tell us what to do, but to explain why we have 
done it” is the way Norman rebuked the Bank’s Chief Economist of the day.8  
                                                
5  Roberts, Reading and Skene (2009). 
6  John, Roberts and Weeken (2012). 
7  Boyle (1968) p105. 
8  Ahamed (2009) p233. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Norman saw the Bank’s role in expansive terms, as provider not just of emergency help but 
as builder of infrastructure and supporter of industry. The Bank became part of the post-war 
reconstruction effort. Having spent 200 years tending to its back garden, the Bank began to 
explore pastures new. 
To  take  one  example,  in  1928  the  Lancashire  cotton  industry  was  on  its  knees.  These 
problems risked ricocheting back to the financial system, with at least two of the big five UK 
banks up to their neck in cotton.9 A plan was conceived involving consolidating the industry 
into a Lancashire Textile Corporation. This was to be financed with debt and shares issued 
and supported by – you’ve guessed it – the Bank of England. 
It was a bold and cunning plan. Unfortunately, it flopped. The share issue by the Corporation 
in 1931 was a resounding failure, leaving the underwriter with a large chunk of the shares. 
The  Bank  ended  up  having  to  support  the  market.10  It,  too,  found  itself  up  to  its  neck  in 
cotton. 
Undaunted,  the  stage  had  nonetheless  been  set  for  the  Bank’s  on-going  involvement  in 
financial infrastructure. This came not a moment too soon. In the immediate post-war period, 
the  UK  faced  pressing  financial  infrastructure  problems  –  the  so-called  “Macmillan  gaps”. 
These gaps referred the inability of small firms to finance themselves with long-term loans. If 
these gaps sound strangely familiar, then they should. 
The post-war Bank set about closing these Macmillan gaps with gusto. In 1945 it set up two 
new  financing  entities  –  the  Finance  Corporation  for  Industry  (FCI)  and  the  Industrial  and 
Commercial  Finance  Corporation  (ICFC).  These  were  financially  supported  by  banks  and 
institutional investors, providing a platform for the supply of longer term funding and venture 
capital finance to small firms. 
In 1973, the two corporations combined to form Finance for Industry (FFI). During the early 
1980s,  the  company  was  rebranded  as  Investors  in  Industry,  commonly  known  as  3i.  In 
1987,  the  entity  went  public  as  3i  Group.  This  was  not  a  flop.  Arguably,  3i  and  its 
predecessors were one of the largest feathers in the Bank’s post-war cap, helping support 
generations of new businesses and start-ups. 
And those MacMillan gaps? Regrettably, the crisis has re-opened them. Today, small firms 
are once more starved of finance, including many here in Northern Ireland. Once again, the 
quest is on for a new financial infrastructure to help close these gaps. 
Through the 1980s and 1990s, there were further examples of the Bank stepping in to close 
structural financial gaps. When the UK’s high-value payment system started creaking in the 
early  1980s,  the  Bank  designed  and  built  a  new,  bullet-proof  system.  Given  the  Bank’s 
somewhat chequered record on gender diversity up to that point, it was rather unfortunately 
named CHAPS. And indeed still is. 
In 1993, the Bank stepped-in to rescue a flagging project to upgrade the securities settlement 
process  in  the  UK.  The  Bank  designed  and  built  a  new,  safety-first,  system  which  again 
exists to this day. Fortunately, we did not call this one BLOKES, but rather the gender-neutral 
CREST. 
Most recently, in the light of the crisis, the Bank has been at the forefront of the debate about 
re-organising the structure of banking, with a ring-fence or firewall between the basic retail 
and  investment  banking  sides  of  the  business.  This  structural  approach  is  increasingly 
finding  favour  both  in  the  UK  (through  the  proposals  of  the  Vickers  Commission)  and 
internationally (for example, through the Volcker proposals in the US and the recent Liikanen 
proposals in Europe). 
                                                
9  Sayers (1976). 
10  Sayers op cit. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
For the past half-century, the Bank’s structural agenda has become a central feature. But at 
the  time  it  marked  a  radical  departure  from  the  Bank’s  past.  Designing  what  are  in  effect 
financial public goods is a front-foot activity. The Bank had grown a new limb, augmenting its 
crisis-management right arm with a crisis-prevention left arm. 
Stitching it all together 
So far, I have made no real mention of monetary policy. That is because, for much of its life 
up to the early 1970s, monetary control at the Bank of England was pretty simple. It came 
care of fixing the exchange rate – first to gold under the Gold Standard and latterly in the 
post  war  period  to  the  dollar.  With  the  demise  of  the  dollar  standard  in  the  early  1970s, 
however, the exchange rate anchor had been tossed overboard. At the Bank of England, as 
elsewhere, the search was on for a new nominal anchor. 
Into this vacuum stepped Andrew Duncan Crockett. Crockett joined the Bank in 1966 as a 
graduate entrant, just before the break-up of the Bretton Woods dollar standard. He set to 
work  on  the  biggest  problem  of  the  day,  locating  a  new  nominal  anchor.  In  so  doing,  he 
began working alongside another young(ish) new Bank entrant, Charles Goodhart. 
The result was a joint paper published in the Bank’s Quarterly Bulletin in June 1970. It was 
titled “The Importance of Money”.11 Re-reading it now, it was a prophetic piece of work. In the 
UK,  it  laid  some  of  the  analytical  foundations  for  what,  during  the  late  1970s  and  1980s, 
became monetarism. More than that, the paper placed commercial bank money and credit at 
the centre of the macro-economy. It could as well have been titled “The Importance of Credit” 
or indeed “The Importance of Banks”. 
After  a  successful  spell  at  the  IMF,  Crockett  returned  to  the  Bank  of  England  in  1989.  In 
1994,  he  then  became  General  Manager  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  the 
central banks’ central bank. In central bank circles, change was in the air. Monetary policy 
was  embarking  on  a  path  which  targeted  inflation  and  which,  unlike  monetarism  before  it, 
downplayed  money  and  credit.  And  the  regulation  of  banks,  long  the  preserve  of  central 
banks, was in many countries being hived off to separate regulatory agencies. 
What happened next was truly extra-ordinary. Whether by coincidence or causality, the world 
experienced  the  largest  banking  bubble  in  history.  Between  1990  and  2007,  global  bank 
balance  sheets  rose  by  a  factor  four.  On  the  eve  of  the  crisis  they  had  reached  around 
$75 trillion, or almost 1.5 times the annual output of the entire planet. 
At the Bank for International Settlements, Andrew Crockett saw trouble brewing. In 2000, he 
gave a speech calling for a “macro-prudential” approach to regulation.12 Crockett argued that 
central banks needed to look at, and act on, developments across the whole financial system 
if systemic risk was to be headed-off. Credit booms, the like of which was occurring for real 
at the time, sowed the seeds of that systemic risk. 
The rest is of course history, as pre-crisis credit boom turned to shuddering bust. Or rather it 
would be history were it not for the fact that this crisis, whose seeds were sown in the credit 
boom, is still with us. Output in the UK is still well below its 2007 level. The so-called Great 
Recession in the UK is already as severe as the Great Depression of the 1930s. 
In  response,  the  policy  framework  has,  once  more,  been  radically  augmented.  Macro-
prudential policy is the next big thing. It is now widely acknowledged as the missing policy 
link during the pre-crisis period, the essential bridge between monetary policy and regulation. 
As I discuss below, this bridge is now being constructed through new frameworks in the UK 
and internationally. 
                                                
11  Goodhart and Crockett (1970). 
12  Crockett (2000). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The Bank tomorrow 
So  where  does  all  of  this  leave  the  Bank  today and,  indeed, tomorrow?  In the  light  of the 
crisis, we are moving to a wholly new structure for financial policymaking in the UK. In many 
important respects, this can be seen as building on the lessons of history. To illustrate that, 
let me set out some of its main features. 
First, there is to be a radical shift in the organisation and approach to supervising individual 
financial  institutions.  The  UK  will  move  to  a  so-called  “twin-peaks”  regime.  That  means  in 
practice separating the safety and soundness aspects of the regulation (so-called prudential) 
from the consumer protection aspects (so-called conduct). The prudential part will from next 
year sit in the Bank of England in a new Prudential Regulatory Authority, or PRA. 
This is much more than deck-chair rearrangement. Accompanying this change will be a root-
and-branch change in our approach to supervision. There will be a focus on the big risks – 
the  Barings  of  yesteryear,  the  RBS  of  yesterday.  Supervision  will  be  front-foot,  testing  for 
stress before it strikes and visits to the zoo need to be cancelled. It will be also tolerant of 
bank failure  –  Barings  Mark  2  rather  than  Mark  1  –  so  that  market  discipline  can  work  its 
magic.  
Second, during the course of the crisis, there has been a radical, if underplayed, rethink of 
the Bank’s approach to supplying liquidity to the banking system.13 While not quite a change 
on  the  scale  of  the  Overend  and  Gurney  crisis,  this  allows  banks  to  access  the  Bank’s 
facilities against a much wider range of collateral. The Bank’s liquidity menu is now crystal 
clear, from which banks can now themselves choose. 
Third, an entirely-new piece of policy machinery has been introduced – new not just for the 
UK, but internationally too. In the UK, this is called the Financial Policy Committee or FPC. It 
was put on earth to do macro-prudential policy, to act as the bridge, to provide the missing 
link, to monitor the punchbowl before it is emptied and before aspirin needs administering. A 
year on, the FPC is doing just that. 
Most  recently  the  FPC  has  been  navigating  a  particularly  hazardous  course.  The  financial 
system  and  economy  are  suffering  the  hangover from  hell.  The  FPC’s  task  is  to keep  the 
system safe in the face of heightened risks of a relapse, while at the same time keeping the 
banks’  credit  arteries  open  to  support  the  economy.  Both  objectives  are  steeped  in  the 
Bank’s history – and both objectives are embodied in the FPC’s remit. 
The FPC has a remit, too, to strengthen the structural fabric of the financial system, including 
through  improved  financial  infrastructure.  That  objective  has  a  place  deep  in  the  Bank  of 
England’s heart – from Lancashire cotton mills of the 1930s, to 3i of the post-war years, to 
CHAPs of the 1980s, to Vickers of the past few years. 
Supporting  and  executing  these  new  responsibilities  will  be  a  massive  task.  First  and 
foremost, it will require the Bank to have a rich and diverse set of skills. Historically at least, 
the Bank has been skills-rich but diversity-poor. But I am pleased to say that, too, has been 
changing for the better. This year’s graduate intake has close to a 50/50 gender split. One in 
seven  of  the  intake  is  drawn  from  ethnic  minorities.  Only  a  fifth  come  from  Oxford  or 
Cambridge. 
The  PRA’s  arrival  next  year  will  broaden  further  the  diversity  of  the  Bank’s  skills  and 
experience  –  legal,  accountancy,  banking,  insurance.  The  Bank’s  policy  committees, 
meanwhile,  bring  diversity  of  experience  and  expertise  to  the  decision-making  table,  from 
academe and the private sector. 
                                                
13  Bank of England (2012). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
There  has  been  a  transformation, too,  in  the  Bank’s  approach to  external  communications 
and transparency. Think back twenty years. Then, there were no quarterly Inflation Reports, 
no six-monthly Financial Stability Reports and certainly no press conferences to accompany 
both.  Twenty  years  ago,  there  were  no  minutes  of  the  deliberations  of  the  Bank’s  policy 
committees (today, the MPC and FPC). 
Back then, press interviews were rare and scripted to within an inch of their life. In the past 
year,  Bank  officials  gave  around  65  speeches  and  over  200  press  interviews.  In  Montagu 
Norman’s day, the combined total was one. The days of “keeping the Bank out of the press 
and the press out of the Bank”14 are well and truly gone. 
Earlier  this  year,  the  Governor  gave  the  Bank’s  first  live  peacetime  radio  address  to  the 
nation for 73 years. The Bank Tweets, fortunately with rather less vigour than your average 
Premiership footballer. Soon we will have, for the first time in history, published minutes of 
the Bank’s Court of Directors. The Governor has appeared before the Treasury Committee 
on no less than 47 occasions since he took office. 
In  2011,  a  word  search  of  “Mervyn  King”  in  the  press  revealed  more  hits  than  “Kylie 
Minogue”.  To  my  knowledge,  this  is  the  first  time  a  sitting  Bank  of  England  Governor  has 
toppled the Aussie pop princess in the media opinion polls. Given its new responsibilities, the 
Bank  cannot  fail  to  remain  in  the  public’s  eye  in  the  period  ahead.  Transparency  and 
accountability will remain the watchwords – and rightly so. 
Conclusion 
When pressed by the Macmillan Committee in 1930 to explain the Bank’s actions, Montagu 
Norman replied: “Reasons, Mr Chairman? I don’t have reasons, I have instincts”.15 I suspect 
such  an  answer  would  work  less  well  with  today’s  Treasury  Committee,  to  say  nothing  of 
today’s media. 
All public policymakers have an obligation to explain. And all policymakers have an obligation 
to learn from past crises and past mistakes. That is the only way credibility can be built: not 
the avoidance of crises and mistakes, which is impossible, but the recognition by the public 
that, when they do happen, the crises are contained and the mistakes are honest ones. 
The Bank of England is embarking on the latest chapter in its 318-year history. We cannot 
avoid  a  crisis  but,  as  with  Barings  in  1890,  we  can  endeavour  to  prevent  it  becoming  a 
drama. We will certainly be doing our best to prevent it becoming a tragedy like that of the 
past few years. If nothing else, this new chapter will have learnt from, and will build on, the 
lessons of history. 
Thank you. 
References 
Ahamed, L (2009) “Lords of Finance”, William Heinemann Ltd. 
Bagehot, W (1873), “Lombard Street: A description of the Money Market”, Reprinted 1962. 
Irwin, Homewood, Illinois. 
Bank of England Archive E4/2. File on employment of women 1910–1919. 
Bank  of  England,  (2012),  The  Framework  for  the  Bank  of  England’s  operations  in  the 
Sterling  Money  Markets  available  at  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/markets/Documents/ 
money/publications/redbookjune2012.pdf 
                                                
14  Capie (2010) p50. 
15  Boyle op cit p327. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
in 
at 
New 
York” 
available 
Boston  Evening  Transcript  (1892),  “English  financier  honoured  –  Reception  to  William 
Lidderdale 
http://news.google.com/newspapers 
?nid=2249&dat=18921117&id=s5E-AAAAIBAJ&sjid=SloMAAAAIBAJ&pg=5019,4090185 
Bowman, W D (1937), “The Story of the Bank of England – From its foundations in 1694 
until the present day”, Herbert Jenkins Ltd. 
Boyle, A (1968), “Montagu Norman: A biography”, Weybright and Talley. 
Capie, F, Goodhart, G, Fischer, S, Schnadt, N (1994),  “The  Future  of  Central  Banking”, 
Cambridge University Press. 
Capie, F (2010) “The Bank of England: 1950s to 1979”, Cambridge University Press. 
Clapham,  J  (1958),  “The  Bank  of  England,  A  History  Vol.  2  1979  to  1914”,  Cambridge 
University Press. 
Crockett,  A  D  (2000),  “Marrying  the  micro-  and  macro-prudential  dimensions  of  financial 
stability”, speech at the Eleventh International Conference of Banking Supervisors available 
at http://www.bis.org/speeches/sp000921.htm 
Galati,  G  and  Moessner  R  (2011),  “Macroprudential  policy  –  a  literature  review”,  BIS 
Working Papers No 337. 
Geddes, P (1987), “Inside the Bank of England”, Boxtree Ltd. 
Goodhart, C A E and Crockett, A D (1970), “The importance of money”, Bank of England 
Quarterly Bulletin, June, pp 159–98. 
Hennessy, E (1992), “A domestic history of the Bank of England, 1930–1960”, Cambridge 
University Press. 
John,  S,  Roberts,  M  and  Weeken,  O  (2012)  “The  Bank  of  England’s  Special  Liquidity 
Scheme”, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, March, pp 57–66. . 
Kynaston, D (1994), “The City of London Vol. I – A World of Its Own, 1844–66”, London. 
Kynaston, D (1994), “The City of London Vol. II – Golden Years, 1890–1914”, London. 
Leigh-Pemberton,  R.  (1989),  Speech  given  at  the  Ernest  Sykes  Memorial,  24  May  1989 
available from Bank of England Archive, ref. 7A320/10. 
Mahate,  A  A  (1994),  “Contagion  Effects  of  Three  Late  Nineteenth  Century  British  Bank 
Failures”,  Business  and  Economic  History  available  at  http://www.thebhc.org/publications/ 
BEHprint/v023n1/p0102-p0115.pdf 
Norman,  B,  Shaw,  R  and  Speight,  G  (2001),  “The  history  of  interbank  settlement 
arrangements:  exploring  central  banks’  role  in  the  payment  system”,  Bank  of  England 
Working Paper No. 412. 
Orbell, J (1985), “Baring Brothers & Co., Limited. A History to 1939”, Butler & Tanner Ltd. 
Roberts, R and Kynaston, D (1995), “The Bank of England: Money, Power and Influence 
1694–1994”, Oxford, Clarendon Press. 
Roberts,  R,  Reading,  B  and  Skene,  L  (2009),  “Sovereign  Rescues:  How  the  forgotten 
financial  crisis  of  1914  compares  with  2008–2009”,  Lombard  Street  Research,  Special 
Report. 
Saw, R (1944), “The Bank of England, 1694–1944”, George G Harrap & Co Ltd. 
Sayers,  R  S  (1976),  “The  Bank  of  England  1891–1944  (Volumes  I–III)”,  Cambridge 
University Press. 
Wood, G (1999), “Great Crashes in History, Have they lessons for today?” Oxford Review of 
Economic Policy, 15 (3), pp 98–109.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
