Mark Carney: Monetary policy report 
Opening  statement  by  Mr  Mark  Carney,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  the  press 
conference following the release of the Monetary Policy Report, Ottawa, 24 October 2012. 
 Good  morning.  Tiff  and  I  are  pleased  to  be  here  with  you  today  to  discuss  the  October 
Monetary Policy Report, which the Bank published this morning. 
• 
The global economy has unfolded broadly as the Bank projected in its July  MPR. 
Growth  has  slowed  in  all  major  regions.  The  economic  expansion  in  the  United 
States is progressing at a gradual pace. Europe is in recession and recent indicators 
point to a continued contraction.  
In China and other major emerging economies, growth has slowed somewhat more 
than  expected.  However,  there  are  signs  of  stabilization  around  current  growth 
rates.  
Notwithstanding  the  slowdown  in  global  economic  activity,  prices  for  oil  and  other 
commodities  produced  in  Canada  have,  on  average,  increased  in  recent  months. 
Global financial conditions have improved, supported by aggressive policy actions of 
major central banks. Sentiment, though, remains fragile. 
In Canada, while global headwinds continue to restrain economic activity, domestic 
factors are supporting a moderate expansion. Following the recent period of below-
potential growth, the economy is expected to pick up and return to full capacity by 
the end of 2013.  
The Bank continues to project that the expansion will be driven mainly by growth in 
consumption  and  business  investment,  reflecting  in  part  very  stimulative  domestic 
financial conditions.  
Housing activity is expected to decline from historically high levels. The household 
debt burden is expected to rise further before stabilizing by the end of the projection 
horizon.  
There are upside and downside risks around the evolution of household imbalances. 
Residential  investment  could  regain  momentum,  thereby  reinforcing  existing 
imbalances.  Conversely,  continuing  high  household  debt  levels  could  lead  to  a 
sharper-than-expected  deceleration 
this  context, 
Canadian authorities are co-operating closely to monitor the financial situation of the 
household sector, and are responding appropriately. 
Canadian  exports  are  projected  to  pick  up  gradually,  but  remain  below  their  pre-
recession  peak  until  the  first  half  of  2014,  reflecting  weak  foreign  demand  and 
ongoing  competitiveness  challenges.  These  challenges  include  the  persistent 
strength of the Canadian dollar, which is being influenced by safe haven flows and 
spillovers from global monetary policy. 
After taking into account revisions to the National Accounts, which had the effect of 
raising measured growth for this year, the Bank now projects that the economy will 
grow by 2.2 per cent in 2012. Going forward, we expect growth of 2.3 per cent in 
2013 and 2.4 per cent in 2014. 
Core  inflation  has  been  lower  than  expected  in  recent  months.  This  reflects 
somewhat softer prices across a wide range of goods and services. Core inflation is 
expected  to  increase  gradually  over  coming  quarters,  reaching  2  per  cent  by  the 
middle of 2013 as the economy gradually absorbs the current small degree of slack, 
in  household  spending. 
In 
         BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
    the growth of labour compensation remains moderate and inflation expectations stay 
well-anchored.  
Total CPI inflation has fallen noticeably below the 2 per cent target, as expected. It 
is projected to return to target by the end of 2013, somewhat later than previously 
anticipated. 
The inflation outlook in Canada is subject to significant risks. The Bank’s projection 
assumes that authorities in Europe are able to contain the ongoing crisis, and that 
the U.S. fiscal cliff will be avoided.  
–    The three main upside risks relate to the possibility of higher global inflationary 
pressures,  stronger  Canadian  exports  and  renewed  momentum  in  Canadian 
residential investment. 
–    The three main downside risks relate to the European crisis, weaker demand 
for  Canadian  exports  and  the  possibility  that  growth  in  Canadian  household 
spending could be weaker. 
Overall,  the  Bank  judges  that  the  risks  to  Canada’s  inflation  outlook  are  roughly 
balanced over the projection period. 
Reflecting  all  of  these  factors,  the  Bank  yesterday  maintained  the  target  for  the 
overnight rate at 1 per cent. Over time, some modest withdrawal of monetary policy 
stimulus  will  likely  be  required,  consistent  with  achieving  the  2  per  cent  inflation 
target.  The  timing  and  degree  of  any  such  withdrawal  will  be  weighed  carefully 
against global and domestic developments, including the evolution of imbalances in 
the household sector. 
With that, Tiff and I would be pleased to take your questions. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
