Deepak Mohanty: The importance of inflation expectations 
Speech  by  Mr  Deepak  Mohanty,  Executive  Director  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
S P Jain Institute of Management & Research, Mumbai, 9 November 2012. 
 The assistance by Dr Praggya Das in preparation of this paper is acknowledged. 
‘‘Each possesses within himself two antagonistic and foolish counsellors, whom 
we  call  by  the  names  of  pleasure  and  pain…besides  these  two,  each  man 
possesses  opinions  about  the  future,  which  go  by  the  general  name  of 
‘expectations’; and of these, that which precedes pain bears the special name of 
‘fear’, and that which precedes pleasure the special name of ‘confidence’.”  
 Plato, 360 BC 
I thank Dr. Sesha Iyer and Dr. Pattnaik for the invitation to address this young audience. In 
monetary  analysis  and  policy,  inflation  expectations  play  a  pivotal  role.  Recently,  in  many 
advanced economies, central banks have substantially expanded their balance sheets, which 
is  apparently  inflationary.  However,  central  banks  in  these  countries  allay  the  inflation 
concerns  by  indicating  that,  despite  substantial  monetary  easing,  medium-term  inflation 
expectations  remain  well  anchored.  One  inference,  therefore,  is  that  inflation  in  future  is 
unlikely  to  go  up  if  inflation  expectations  do  not  go  up.  In  India,  we  have  the  opposite 
problem:  elevated  current  and  expected 
in 
substantially easing monetary policy. This suggests that central banks, assign a significant 
weight to inflation expectations in their monetary policy assessment. 
How does one define “expectations” which is a behavioural and psychological concept and 
apply it to economics and practical policy making? This is the theme of my talk today. I will 
sequence my presentation as follows: first, I briefly review the theory and practice of defining 
inflation expectations; second, discuss the measures of inflation expectations; third, analyse 
the measures of inflation expectations in India; and finally, conclude with some thoughts on 
enhancing our understanding of the inflation process and expectations. 
the  Reserve  Bank 
inflation  constrains 
Theory and practice 
Plato  defined  “expectations”  as  “the  beliefs  about  the  future”  more  than  2000  years  ago 
which  remains  valid  even  today.1  Such  beliefs  about  the  future  do  affect  the  current 
behaviour of economic agents. Therefore, inflation expectations can be broadly defined as 
economic agents’ belief or views or perceptions about inflation in the future. As humans, our 
minds cannot escape thinking about the future. In a market economy, almost every economic 
entity is affected by inflation in some way or other. Hence, it is reasonable to surmise that 
people form their expectations about inflation. 
The  relevant  literature  identifies  two  ways  of  forming  inflation  expectations.  The  first  is  a 
variant of adaptive behaviour wherein expectations are formed by extrapolating the past and 
current experience into the future. Apart from the past experience, people do factor in new 
generally available information. For example, in our case if the monsoon rains are deficient 
people  may  expect  higher  food  inflation  and,  hence,  higher  overall  inflation.  At  the  same 
time, economic agents learn from their past errors in projecting inflation and take that into 
account in forming their expectations. However, people may not change their expectations 
                                                
1  Curtin,  R.  (2010),  “Inflation  expectations  and  empirical  tests”,  in Inflation  Expectations, Peter  Sinclair  (eds), 
Routledge. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
continuously, but may stagger their revisions periodically. The key feature of these variants 
of inflation expectations is that it is largely backward-looking. 
The  second  way  of  forming  inflation  expectations  in  a  forward-looking  manner  is  rational 
expectations.  If  the  economic  agents  are  forming  their  expectations  after  processing  all 
available information and also factoring in the reaction function of the monetary authority, it 
could  be  considered  as  rational.  In  practice,  economists  derive  value  of  expectations from 
complex rational expectations models. 
Empirical  evidence,  however,  suggests  that  expectations  are  subject  to  significant  errors, 
both in its adaptive form and the rational expectations form. In a complex and uncertain world 
nobody  possesses  perfect  foresight.  Even  our  economy,  in  which  we  form  expectations, 
operates  with  several  imperfections.  It  is  not  possible  to  devise  an  economic  model  that 
captures all the relevant variables and at the same time gives accurate predictions about the 
future. It may thus be reasonable to assume that expectations formation is both a process of 
adaptive learning and bounded rationality. 
In  terms  of  practice,  a  steady  and  low  inflation  combined  with  well-anchored  inflation 
expectations  helps  the  monetary  authority  in  achieving  the  other  objectives  of  monetary 
policy – such as economic growth and financial stability. The state of inflation expectations 
greatly  influences  actual  inflation  and,  thus,  the  central  bank’s  ability  to  achieve  price 
stability. In a paper on inflation expectations, the current US Fed Chairman Ben S. Bernanke 
explained the term “anchored” to mean relatively insensitive to incoming data.2 That is, if the 
public experiences a spell of inflation higher than their long-run expectation, and their long-
run  expectation  of  inflation  changes  little  as  a  result,  then  inflation  expectations  can  be 
considered  as  well-anchored.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  public  reacts  to  a  short  period  of 
higher-than-expected  inflation  by  marking  up  its  long-run  expectation  considerably,  then 
expectations are poorly-anchored. 
Price rises reduce the real purchasing power of individuals. Thus, if inflation is expected to 
be persistently high, workers bargain for higher nominal wages to protect their real income. 
This creates a pressure on firms’ costs and they may in turn increase prices to maintain their 
profits. Independently, the producers’ own inflation expectations also affect inflation directly 
by influencing their pricing behaviour. If companies expect general inflation to be higher in 
the future, they  may  believe  that  they  can  increase  their  prices  without suffering  a  drop  in 
demand for their output3. 
In economic models with rational expectations, the inflation expectations, and hence inflation 
itself, is an equilibrium outcome, strongly influenced by the public’s beliefs about the policy 
rule followed by the central bank. Following this insight from the rational expectations tenet, 
central  banks  increasingly  communicate  their  policy  reaction  function  in  terms  of  possible 
paths for inflation expectations and by establishing inflation targets, attempting to anchor the 
public’s  long-run  inflation  expectations.  Since  uncertainty  about  future  inflation  affects 
households’  purchase  decision,  price  stability  is  described  as  an  environment  where 
economic  agents  need  not  take  into  account  uncertainty  about  future  inflation  in  their 
decision-making4. 
                                                
2  Bernanke, B. S. (2007); “Inflation Expectations and Inflation Forecasting”, Speech delivered at the Monetary 
Economics  Workshop  of  the  National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research  Summer  Institute,  Cambridge, 
Massachusetts, July 10, 2007. 
3  Driver,  R.  (2007).  “Public  attitudes  to  inflation  and  interest  rates”,  Quarterly  Bulletin  Q2,  Bank  of  England 
(pp 208–223). 
4  Greenspan, A. (1996), ‘Opening Remarks’, in Achieving Price Stability, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 
Kansas, pp. 1–5. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Empirical  work  from  advanced  countries  suggests  that,  “successful  maintenance  of  price 
stability  requires  keeping  long-run  inflation  expectations  at  the  desired  level,  as  economic 
shocks  and  policy  mistakes  come  and  go”.5  Underscoring  the  importance  of  inflation 
expectations,  the  Reserve  Bank’s  Second  Quarter  Review  of  Monetary  Policy  2012–13 
released on 30th October 2012 noted: “A central premise of monetary policy is that low and 
stable inflation and well-anchored inflation expectations contribute to a conducive investment 
climate and consumer confidence, which is key to sustained growth on a higher trajectory in 
the medium-term.” 
Measurement of expectations 
While  it  is  challenging  to  conceptualise  inflation  expectations,  it  is  even  more  difficult  to 
measure it as it cannot be observed in real time. In order to achieve their mandate for low 
and  stable  inflation,  central  banks  use  several  methods  to  measure  the  prevailing  level  of 
inflation expectations. For this, they seek to gain knowledge about the public’s expectations 
about  inflation  in  addition  to the financial  market  based measures. The measures  used  by 
central banks can thus be broadly classified as market-based measures and survey-based 
measures. Let me now turn to some of the measurement issues. 
First, inflation-indexed bond is a market based measure of inflation expectations. It provides 
protection against inflation. While a conventional bond pays its coupon on a fixed principal 
amount, the inflation linked bonds provide coupon on inflation-adjusted principal amount. In 
the recent years, sovereign inflation-indexed bonds have become available in a number of 
countries and have provided a new instrument for use in retirement saving. The differential 
yields between ordinary and inflation-indexed government bonds of similar maturity provide 
an indication of inflation expectations. 
Second, inflation expectations can also be derived from the yield curve of ordinary bonds of 
different  maturities.  The  expectations  theory  implies  that  the  shape  of  the  yield  curve 
depends  on  the  expected  pattern  of  short-term  interest  rates.  The  long-term  interest  rates 
exceed current short-term rates if short-term rates are expected to rise. The yield curve thus 
slopes upward. In contrast, long-term interest rates are less than current short-term rates if 
short-term interest rates are expected to fall. In this case, the yield curve slopes downward. 
The yield curves can thus be used to gauge inflation expectations. 
Third,  the survey-based  approach  is  the  other method  of measuring  inflation  expectations. 
Surveys  can  gauge  people’s  expectations  for  inflation  by  simply  asking  them  what  they 
expect.  The  survey-based  methods  of  measuring  inflation  expectations  are  important  to 
policy  makers  and  researchers  because  they  provide  data  on  an  otherwise  unobservable 
variable. The surveys cover different target groups ─ usually they pertain to households or 
professional  forecasters.  Most  of  these  surveys  present  both  short-term  and  long-term 
forecasts on inflation. 
Fourth,  many  of  the  households’  savings  and  expenditure  decisions  such  as  purchasing 
perishable and durable goods can be affected by expectations and uncertainty about future 
inflation.  Many  countries,  therefore,  conduct  consumer  surveys  to  gauge  consumer 
confidence  including  inflation  expectations.  In  such  surveys  different  sampling  techniques 
such as pure panels and repeat panels are used. 
Fifth, the Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF) is another important source to gauge the 
inflation expectations from analysts. The survey is usually used for forecasting a large variety 
of  macroeconomic  variables  in  addition  to  inflation,  viz.,  gross  domestic  product  (GDP), 
interest rates and the unemployment rate. As professional forecasters process large volume 
                                                
5  Posen,  Adam  (2011),  ‘The  soft  tyranny  of  inflation  expectations’,  Oxonia  Distinguished  Lecture,  Oxford, 
February 22. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
of information and rely on econometric models, their forecast of inflation expectations can be 
considered more rational than that of pure households. 
Measures of expectations in India 
I now turn to issues pertaining to measurement of inflation expectations in India. In the recent 
years, the Reserve Bank has been assessing the state of inflation expectations in the Indian 
economy through several means. It conducts a series of surveys aimed at different economic 
agents  as  well  as  model  based  inflation  forecasts  (Table  1).  These  surveys  have  evolved 
over time with periodic refinements. Let me give you some perspective on these surveys. 
Table 1 
Survey-based Inflation Expectations 
 First,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  been  conducting  a  survey  of  inflation  expectations  of 
households  since  September  2005  to  get  a  measure  of  the  public  pulse  on  inflation.  The 
initial rounds of the survey were only qualitative in nature and from the 3rd round, questions 
about expected rate of inflation over the next three months and next one year were added. 
From  the  9th  round  in  September  2007,  a  question  on  the  respondents’  perception  of  the 
prevailing inflation rate was also added. A question on awareness of the public on the RBI’s 
role to control inflation was added in the 21st round in September 2010. 
Second, the survey presents a measure of households’ present perception of inflation as well 
as their expectations about the near future. The inflation expectations survey of households 
is conducted in twelve cities, three each from the north, south, east and west zones covering 
the major metros from each zone and eight other cities. The 4,000 respondents are chosen 
within  a  city  in  such  a  manner  that  a  good  geographical  and  occupational  coverage  is 
achieved.  The  price  expectations  are  sought  in  the  survey  for  general  prices  and  for  five 
groups: food products, non-food products, consumer durables, housing and services. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Third, the Reserve Bank’s consumer confidence survey gives an assessment of the consumer 
sentiments  on  prices,  as  it  is  an  important  variable  influencing  the  overall  consumer 
confidence.  The  overall  consumer  confidence  is  assessed  on  the  basis  of  respondents 
perceptions of the general economic conditions and their own financial situation. The consumer 
confidence surveys provide a qualitative measure of consumers’ price expectation. 
Fourth,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  been  conducting  a  survey  of  professional  forecasters  since 
2007. The survey covers forecasters that have an established research set-up and bring out 
periodic updates on economic developments. These organizations include investment banks, 
commercial  banks,  stock  exchanges,  international  brokerage  houses,  select  educational  & 
research  institutions,  credit  rating  agencies,  securities  firms  and  asset  management 
companies.  The  schedule  covers  annual  as  well  as  quarterly 
forecasts  of  major 
macroeconomic variables such as, real gross domestic product (GDP), savings and capital 
formation,  select  financial  market  variables,  fiscal  deficit,  policy  rates,  external  sector 
variables, along with the two key measures of inflation – the wholesale price index (WPI) and 
the  consumer  price  index  for  industrial  workers  (CPI-IW).  Importantly,  the  forecasters  are 
also  asked  to  provide  their  medium-term  (5-years)  and  long-term  (10-years)  forecasts  of 
GDP, WPI and CPI-IW. 
Fifth, apart from the households and the professional forecasters’ inflation expectations, the 
Reserve  Bank  captures  another  measure  of  inflation  expectations  –  those  from  the 
producers.  These  sentiments  are  captured  from  a  business  outlook  survey  which  is  being 
conducted on a quarterly basis since 1998. The survey presents an advance assessment on 
economic  and  industrial  environment  based  on  the  qualitative  data  collected  from  select 
manufacturing  companies  including  their  assessment  and  expectations  on  the  input  and 
output price behaviour. 
Finally, the results of the above surveys are used as inputs for monetary policy formulation 
and are placed on RBI website for public dissemination. Salient features of the surveys are 
also  included  in  the  quarterly  Macroeconomic  and  Monetary  Developments  issued  as  a 
companion document to our quarterly policy statements. 
Trends in expectations 
Now I turn to evidence on inflation expectations as revealed by various surveys. 
First, the inflation expectations survey of households seeks information on product-wise price 
expectations.  It  can  be  seen  that  inflation  expectations  were  dominated  by  the  food  price 
inflation: the prices of food articles drove the sentiment of overall inflation of the households 
3-month ahead. The increase in price expectations with regard to household durables was 
the lowest (Chart 1). 
Second,  similar  trend  was  also  observed  for  households’  1-year  ahead  price  expectations 
(Chart 2). These results are not surprising considering that food has substantial share in the 
measured  relevant  price 
in  new  
(base: 2010 = 100) CPI-urban and 56.6 per cent in new CPI-rural. 
Third, the inflation expectations survey of households uses quota sampling to get adequate 
representation of the gender, occupational categories and age groups. Empirical validation 
through  a  bootstrap  confidence  interval  worked  out  for  the  overall  inflation  expectations 
showed  that  the  width  of  the  confidence  interval  was  quite  narrow.  Also  the  size  of  the 
confidence  intervals  increases  with  the  time  horizon,  indicating  that  the  respondents  are 
more coherent on their perception of the current and very near term (3-months) inflation than 
their expectations of near future (1-year). 
Fourth, the inflation expectations of households, however, are their own perceptions based 
on their own consumption basket which may not directly correspond to any official measure 
of inflation. This is reflected in significant heterogeneity across households within the survey. 
However,  to  see  how  the  average  expectations  behave  compared  to  the  official  headline 
in  WPI,  35.8  per  cent 
indices:  24.3  per  cent 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
measure of inflation, these expectations have been plotted against WPI inflation. While there 
is a significant difference in the level of inflation between the headline WPI and the survey, 
notably households’ 3-month ahead inflation expectations have been, by and large, tracking 
WPI  turning  points  (ex-post)  (Charts  3).  This  suggests  that  the  households’  inflation 
expectations  are  adaptive  with  significant  learning.  While  households  do  not  revise  their 
expectations  unless  they  see  changes  on  the  ground,  they  are  willing  to  change  their 
expectations with the actual outcome. 
Fifth, while the professional forecasters give their immediate term forecast of inflation, it is also 
an important source of medium- to long-term inflation forecast. The forecast of the professional 
forecasters  can  be  considered  rational  as  they  apparently  process  all  available  information 
including  the  central  bank’s  likely  reaction  function  to  arrive  at  their  medium-  to  long-term 
inflation forecasts. As regards their short-term inflation forecast, as more information becomes 
available,  the  forecasters  revise  their  forecasts  to  incorporate  the  latest  information  and  the 
revised quarter ahead forecasts tend to converge to the actual numbers (Chart 4). 
Sixth, professional forecasters’ long-run inflation expectations have been influenced by the 
trend  in  actual  inflation.  In  the  last  quarter  of  2007–08,  the  5-year  (10-year)  WPI  inflation 
expectations at 5 per cent (4.5 per cent) was aligned to the Reserve Bank’s comfort level. 
The consumer price (CPI-IW) inflation expectation was slightly higher at 5.5 per cent (5.0 per 
cent). With the persistence of near double- digit inflation in 2010 and 2011, the medium- and 
long-term inflation expectations have risen. As per the latest survey conducted in the second 
quarter of 2012–13, the 5-year (10-year) WPI inflation expectations were higher at 6.5 per 
cent (6.0 per cent). Similar upward movement in inflation expectations with regard to CPI-IW 
was also seen. At the same time, the differential between WPI and CPI-IW has also widened 
underscoring the role of higher food prices in expectations formation (Table 2). 
6 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
the 
inflation  expectations  were,  however,  significantly 
Seventh, 
than 
corresponding  actual  rates  suggesting  that  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations 
remained stable, notwithstanding their recent upward movement (Chart 5). 
Eighth, the manufacturing companies’ assessment of changes in selling prices for the current 
quarter and expectations for the ensuing quarter obtained from the industrial outlook survey 
are well correlated with the year-on-year changes in the price level of non-food manufactured 
products  (NFMP)  component  of  WPI.6  Thus  the  survey  indicators  provide  good  lead 
information about the movements in the manufacturing price inflation (Chart 6). 
less  volatile 
Way forward 
As  I  discussed  above,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  developed  several  measures  of  inflation 
expectations  over  the  last  seven  years  which  are  providing  important  inputs  for  monetary 
policy formulation. In order to reinforce this process, I make a few suggestions. 
First, the RBI’s inflation expectations survey of households provides a measurement of the 
sentiment  of  inflation  expectations  that  is  essentially  urban.  The  survey  can  gradually  be 
extended  to  semi-urban  and  rural  areas  of  the  country  to  enhance  its  representation.  But 
considering the strict time schedule in which the survey needs to be conducted to feed into 
the  quarterly  monetary  policy  process,  it  may  be  a  difficult  task  to  have  a  true  national 
representation. Moreover, being too ambitious in the scope and coverage of the survey could 
dilute its quality. Alternatively, an inflation expectations survey of the households for the rural 
area can be considered. The sample villages can be drawn from the sampling frame of the 
new consumer price index-rural. 
Second, governments in many countries have issued inflation-indexed bonds. These bonds 
apart  from  providing  the  investors  a  hedge  against  inflation,  give  an  estimate  of  inflation 
expectations.  In  1997,  India  had  introduced  a  variant  of  inflation-  indexed  bond  where  the 
capital was indexed to inflation. There was no subsequent issue of such bonds due to lack of 
investor  response.  Now  that  we  have  been  through  a  period  of  above-trend  inflation,  the 
appetite  for  such  bonds  may  have  increased.  Further,  the  issuance  of  such  bonds  could 
signal the firm commitment for containing inflation and thereby, inflation expectations as well. 
It is, therefore, important that such products be introduced in the Indian debt market to get a 
pulse of the market based inflation expectations. 
Third,  while  there  is  substantial  research  on  inflation  expectations  for  advanced  countries, 
there  is  hardly  any  research  in  the  Indian  context.  Since  the  Reserve  Bank  puts  in  public 
domain the results of the various inflation expectations surveys, there is available data base 
for research in this area. This will not only help improving the quality of the surveys but also 
will  enhance  understanding  of  the  process  of  expectations  formulation  in  the  Indian 
economy. Alongside, financial market variables such as yields and futures prices could be 
analysed to extract market information about inflation expectations. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
First,  it  is  clear  that  peoples’  belief  about  future  inflation  is  an  important  factor  in  shaping 
inflation trends. But it is not so clear how these inflation expectations are formed: are they 
formed  purely  on  the  basis  of  past  experience  or  in  a  forward-looking  manner  after 
processing  all  information  or  a  combination  of  both?  The  Reserve  Bank’s  household 
expectations surveys suggest that expectations are formed adaptively with learning; but here 
                                                
6  For the period December 2000 to September 2012, correlation coefficients at 0.64 and 0.75 respectively for 
current and ensuing quarters, were statistically significant at 1 per cent level. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
there  is  a  dominance  of  food  inflation  in  shaping  overall  household  inflation  expectations. 
Such  behaviour  of  inflation  expectations  underscores  the  need  for  the  Reserve  Bank  to 
continue to monitor in the Indian context, an array of measures of inflation – both overall and 
disaggregated components, to assess the underlying inflationary pressures. 
Second, even professional forecasters, who are considered more rational, have moved up 
their inflation expectations. This suggests that food inflation is acquiring a structural character 
feeding  into  inflation  expectations:  rather  than  treating  higher  food  prices  as  a  temporary 
shock, households are assessing this as a permanent structural factor. This has inflationary 
implications  in  terms  of  higher  wage-price  spiral.  If  workers’  and  producers’  inflation 
expectations go up than the latter’s demand for wage increases is more likely to be acceded 
to by the former. If such wage increases are in excess of productivity increase they will be 
inflationary, making the inflation process persistent and raising the costs of disinflation. 
Third,  in  2007–08,  professional  forecaster’s  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  in 
the range of 4.– 5.5 per cent was well in line with the Reserve Bank’s comfort level and what 
can be considered growth enhancing threshold level of inflation. Subsequently, as the actual 
inflation performance has deteriorated, medium- to long-term inflation expectations have also 
risen  to  a  range  of  6.0–7.3  per  cent.  This  underscores  the  need  that  the  current  level  of 
inflation  ought to  be  brought  down  to  better  anchor  inflation  expectations  which  is  vital  for 
maintaining price stability in an enduring manner. 
 
 8 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   9 
    10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
