K C Chakrabarty: Supporting explosive growth – effective linkages 
between the banking sector and real sector 
Keynote address by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at 
the  Inaugural  Session  of  the  8th  Annual  Banking  Summit,  organised  by  the  Associated 
Chambers  of  Commerce  and 
(ASSOCHAM),  New  Delhi, 
21 November 2012. 
Industry  of 
India 
 Assistance provided by Smt. Theresa Karunakaran in preparation of this address is gratefully acknowledged. 
Introduction 
Shri  Rajkumar  Dhoot,  Hon’ble  Member  of  Parliament  and  President,  ASSOCHAM, 
Shri M. Narendra,  Chairperson,  ASSOCHAM  National  Council  for  Banking  &  Finance  and 
CMD,  Indian  Overseas  Bank,  Shri  Sunil  Kanoria,  Vice  President,  ASSOCHAM  and 
Vice Chairman, SREI Infrastructure Finance Ltd.; Mrs. Shubhada Rao, Senior President and 
Chief Economist, Yes Bank Ltd.; Mr. Subhash C Aggarwal, CMD, SMC Group; Ms. Sudha 
Ravi,  Co-Chairperson,  ASSOCHAM  National  Council  for  Banking  &  Finance  and  CEO, 
PHL Finance Ltd., Shri D. S. Rawat, Secretary General, ASSOCHAM, distinguished guests, 
ladies  and  gentlemen.  It  is  a  pleasure  and  privilege  to  be  here  at the  8th  Annual  Banking 
Summit organized by the ASSOCHAM on the theme “Poised for Explosive Growth”. 
Present scenario 
Post the wide ranging structural reforms of the 90s, the Indian economy has, until recently, 
been churning out impressive growth rates and is now firmly ensconced in the exclusive club 
of countries with GDP in excess of one trillion  US dollars. However, as the dark clouds of 
economic gloom hover above the horizon with doomsayers painting a dismal picture for the 
future of the world economy, time is ripe for taking a hard look at the economic outlook for 
India at the present juncture and examine what we need to do in order to keep the Indian 
growth juggernaut rolling. 
The  pundits  of  doom  are  having  a field  day  as the global  scenario  remains  bleak  with  the 
Eurozone slipping into recession once again and the debt crisis continuing to batter southern 
Europe and gnawing at the economic performance of export driven Germany. An ebullient 
America had seen some green shoots of recovery, but the unemployment numbers, since, 
have not been encouraging and it is now facing a fiscal cliff. On the domestic front, though it 
is not all clear skies and sunshine with the growth engine slowing down, the growth is still 
way above that of the developed countries. India has been largely protected from the global 
economic  crisis  through  a  combination  of  strong  regulation  and  supervision  and  policies 
which leaned against the wind and best suited our country, society and culture. Having said 
that, we cannot claim to have remained totally immune from global headwinds. The Indian 
economy,  which  had  accelerated  since  the  reforms,  recording  a  growth  of  more  than  9% 
before  the  crisis,  has  slumped  to  5.5%  in  the  first  quarter  of  2012–13,  with  sequential 
downward revisions in estimated growth rate, which is now expected to clock around 5.8% in 
2012–13. This, however, is a far cry from our actual potential. 
With  economic  liberalization,  we  have  moved  away  significantly  from  the  “Hindu  rate  of 
growth” which had stagnated around 3.5% during 1950–80. According to Dun & Bradstreet 
report titled “India 2020”, India is poised to become a $ 5.6 trillion economy by the year 2020. 
The report  adds  that  Maharashtra, Gujarat  and  Andhra  Pradesh  will  be  amongst the most 
developed states in the country by 2020 and would, together, contribute 32 per cent of the 
overall  GDP.  The  states  which  were,  hitherto,  lagging  behind  such  as  Madhya  Pradesh, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Bihar, Orissa, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh, are also expected to contribute significantly to 
India’s growth story during the current decade.  
The  11th  Five  Year  Plan  carried  the  objective  of  faster  and  more  inclusive  growth.  Rapid 
GDP  growth,  targeted  at  9.0  per  cent  per  annum,  was  regarded  necessary  to  generate 
income and employment opportunities for improving living standards of the masses and to 
generate the requisite resources for financing social sector programmes aimed at reducing 
poverty  and  enabling  inclusiveness.  The  economy  performed  well  on  the  growth  front, 
averaging  8.2  per  cent  in  the  first  four  years.  Growth  in  2011–12,  the  final  year  of  the 
Eleventh Plan, which was originally projected at around 9.0 per cent, continuing the strong 
rebound  from  the  crisis,  was  eventually  recorded  at  6.5  per  cent.  The  slowdown  of  the 
economy  in  2011–12  compared  to  the  previous  year  was  a  phenomenon  common  to  all 
major economies.  
Undoubtedly,  there  has been  a  decline  in  growth,  which  cannot  be  solely  attributed  to  the 
global  slowdown.  A  part  of  it  can  be  traced  to  domestic  infrastructural  and  governance 
issues. The  twin  deficits,  inflation  and  the  supply  side  bottlenecks  are some  concerns  that 
need to be quickly tackled to spur growth. The poser before India at this juncture is whether 
we can afford to relapse to the Hindu rate of growth and be content with being considered an 
emerging  nation  forever,  or  should  we  make  efforts  to  take  our  due  position  among  the 
leaders in the world arena? We cannot and must not revert to the Hindu rate of growth.  
In order to overcome these challenges, we need to focus on the key areas of productivity, 
innovation  and  reforms,  both  at  the  level  of  the  macro  economy  and  at  the  individual 
firm / enterprise  level.  These  will  help  us  overcome  the  various  bottlenecks  currently 
shackling our growth and put us firmly on the path of sustained high economic growth. It will 
ensure  that  we  are  able  to  leverage  our  strengths,  some  of  which  I  would  be  alluding  to 
subsequently,  in  order  to  create  a  conducive  growth  environment.  These  reforms  need  to 
involve  all  stakeholders  and  should,  necessarily,  leverage  on  technology,  which  has  the 
potential  to  act  as  a  force  multiplier  in  our  efforts  towards  productivity,  innovation  and 
reforms. I see that some of these topics would be the focus of the technical sessions slated 
for later in the day. I am sure these sessions will deliberate on how the various measures 
could be implemented in an effective and time bound manner. 
The role of the financial sector in any economy is to subserve the needs of the real economy. 
Consequently, if the Indian economy has to fully realize its optimum potential, the financial 
sector would have to play a pivotal part. As we all know, our financial sector is predominantly 
bank-centric and therefore, the performance of the banking sector is crucial to the fate of the 
economy.  The  Indian  banking  system  has  come  a  long  way  since  the  Financial  Sector 
Reforms,  with  the  banks  having  served  the  economy  remarkably  well  over  the  last  two 
decades. Liberalization has resulted in greater autonomy for banks in business decisions, but 
with the concomitant responsibility of conducting business in line with the highest standards 
of  corporate  governance,  customer  service  and  a  commitment  to  nation  building,  which 
encompasses financial inclusion.  
There is no doubt in my mind that if the economic growth engine has to churn out a powerful 
performance,  banks  would,  necessarily,  have  to  be  the  prime  mover.  The  domestic  credit 
provided by the banking sector in India stands at an abysmally low level compared to many 
of our emerging Asian peers, let alone the advanced economies. There is enormous scope 
for the banks to expand their business to areas/sectors hitherto lacking formal credit. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Domestic Credit of the Banking Sector to GDP (in %) 
 10. Banks have to develop the ability to maintain high growth levels over a sustained period 
of  time.  They  also  need  to  develop  strong  linkages  with  the  real  sector.  These  linkages 
should  critically  determine  all  aspects  of  banking  operations  including  the  kind  of  products 
and services offered, the pricing strategies, delivery channels adopted, sectors/ sub-sectors 
receiving  focused  attention,  technology  platforms  adopted,  etc.  This  linkage  with  the  real 
sector  will  ensure  relevance  of  banks  as  a  key  pillar  in  the  economic  system  and  enable 
them to fully meet their crucial role in nation building. Besides, by ensuring that the financial 
system grows  in  tandem  with  the real  sector, build  up  of  systemic  risk  through  creation of 
asset price bubbles can be avoided. This lack of linkage between the financial system and 
the  real  sector  was  one  of  the  critical factors  contributing  to  the global  financial  crisis  and 
hence, the importance of this linkage has been one of our important learnings from the crisis. 
What are our strengths? 
Demographic dividend 
Sometimes, like the mythological Hanuman, we need to be reminded of our strengths, first 
and foremost of which is the great demographic dividend that the country enjoys. India has a 
young population not only in comparison to advanced economies but also in relation to the 
large developing countries. According to the Approach Document to the Twelfth Five Year 
Plan, the labour force in India is expected to increase by 32 per cent over the next 20 years, 
while it will decline by 4 per cent in industrialized countries and by nearly 5 per cent in China. 
This  “demographic  dividend”  can  lead  to  sustainable  long  term  growth,  provided  two 
conditions are fulfilled. One, higher levels of health, education and skill development must be 
achieved. Two, an environment must be created in which the economy not just grows rapidly, 
but also promotes inclusion by generating good quality employment/ livelihood opportunities 
to  meet the  needs  and aspirations  of  the  youth.  The demographic  dividend  has  payoffs  in 
creating  a  skilled,  technology  savvy  work  force,  strong  customer  base  and  higher  savings 
rates, thereby  increasing the resources  available for  productive  investments. The  progress 
made  in  the  field  of  education  and  literacy  is  leading  our  transformation  from  being  the 
world’s back office to being a knowledge partner. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Potential for inclusive growth 
A recent internal study conducted by the Reserve Bank on the profile of customers of banks 
has heartening indicators. With increasing number of bank branches, the average population 
per bank branch has improved from 15,583 in 2001 to 12601 in 2012. As per latest census, 
58.7  percent  households  were  availing  of  banking  services  in  2011  as  compared  to 
35.5 percent  in  2001.  With  liberalization  of  the  branch  licensing  policy  and  drive  towards 
financial inclusion, the share of rural and semi urban branches in total new branches opened 
reached  69.8  percent  during  2011–12  from  a  mere  23.2  percent  in  2004–05.The  share  of 
hitherto  unbanked  centres  in  newly  opened  branches  has  been  around  20  percent  during 
2011–12.  Further  efforts  are  required  and  are  being  made  in  view  of  the  large  number  of 
unbanked centres in the country. The Reserve Bank has been encouraging banks to improve 
banking  penetration  through  the  Business  Correspondent  (BC)  model,  allowing  “for-profit 
organizations” to work as BCs, leveraging technology, including mobile technology, to deliver 
banking  services  as  part  of  the  drive  to  enhance financial  inclusion. While  there  has  been 
some progress, more ground needs to be covered before we achieve the goal of meaningful 
financial inclusion. The extent of financial exclusion is high when compared to some of the 
advanced as well as developing countries. In a cross country analysis of financial inclusion, 
we compare poorly at 10.64 branches and 8.90 ATMs per 0.1 million adults, say, as against 
Brazil, which has 46.15 branches and 119.63 ATMs per 0.1 million of the population. In this 
vast financially excluded populace lies our opportunity! 
Growth, merely in terms of numbers, would not carry any meaning unless it reaches every 
section  of  society  –  the  vulnerable,  underprivileged  and  the  marginalized.  Public  sector 
banks  as  well  as  RRBs  have  played  a  key  role  in  expanding  the  branch  network  to  rural 
India. However, since it has been observed that the benefits of Government schemes often 
do  not  reach  the  intended  beneficiaries,  Reserve  Bank  has  been  encouraging  banks  to 
implement Electronic Benefits Transfer (EBT). Since many such social security beneficiaries 
reside in villages with population of less than 2000, RBI has been giving thrust on expanding 
the benefits of EBT to all villages. SLBC convenor banks have, therefore, been advised to 
prepare  a  roadmap  covering  all  unbanked  villages  with  population  of  less  than  2000  and 
allocate  these  villages  to  various  banks  for  providing  banking  services  in  a  time  bound 
manner. Besides, banks also need to provide a BC touch point in each village, where brick 
and  mortar  branches  are  not  available,  for  extending  the  provision  of  EBT  services  at  the 
earliest. BCs could also provide door step services to EBT beneficiaries through regular visits 
to villages, thereby ensuring that all kinds of banking facilities are available in the long run 
through a mix of brick and mortar branches and BC networks. We have also recommended 
the  one  district-many  banks-one  leader  bank  model  in  our  “Operational  Guidelines  for 
Implementation  of  EBT  and  its  Convergence  with  Financial  Inclusion  Plan”,  which  would 
expedite  implementation  of  EBT  in  a  simple  and  scalable  manner.  Banks  need  to 
wholeheartedly  work  towards  achieving  these  goals,  not  as  a  CSR  activity,  but  rather  by 
seeing  this  as  a  viable  and  profitable  business  opportunity.  Likewise,  banks  should  also 
pursue  extending  banking  services  like  opening  of  Basic  Savings  Bank  Deposit  Accounts, 
etc. as a potential business proposition and not as a regulatory burden. It is in banks’ own 
interest to realize early that the population mass concentrated in financially excluded centers 
has the potential to drive their future growth and profitability and help place the economy in 
the fast track mode!  
Infrastructure financing – huge potential 
Stimulating  growth  puts  the  spotlight  on  developing  infrastructure  –  an  efficient  public 
transport system, roads, public utility services, housing, educational institutions, locomotive 
plants, ports, container terminals, etc. – the entire gamut, which forms the backbone of any 
developing  country.  The  increasing  infrastructure  requirements  to  support  a  growing 
economy  call  for  enormous  investment.  A  McKinsey  estimate  suggests  that  each  year  we 
may  have  to  build  about  700  –  900  million  square  meters  of  residential  and  commercial 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
space, 350–400 km of metros and subways and 19000–25000 km of roads – a massive task 
and  an  equally  massive  opportunity  for  banks.  The  Approach  Paper  to  the  12th  Plan 
estimates that infrastructure investment will need to increase from about 8.0 per cent of GDP 
in the base year (2011–12) of the Plan to about 10.0 per cent of GDP in 2016–17. The total 
investment in infrastructure would have to be over Rs. 45 lakh crore or $ 1 trillion during the 
Twelfth Plan period.  
Financing this level of investment will require larger outlays from the public sector, but this 
has to be coupled with a more than proportionate rise in private investment. Private and PPP 
investments are estimated to have accounted for a little over 30.0 per cent of total investment 
in infrastructure in the Eleventh Plan. Their share may have to rise to 50.0 per cent in the 
Twelfth Plan. Government’s proposal for modification in investment norms for pension and 
provident funds to channelize their large cash inflows into Infrastructure Debt Funds would 
also provide infrastructure projects with reliable sources of long term funding. The funding for 
infrastructure  has  not  been  a  major  constraint  thus  far  and  credit  to  infrastructure  has 
continued to account for almost one third of bank credit to industry. There have, however, 
been other conspicuous stumbling blocks, viz. delay in policy promulgations, environmental 
clearances, land acquisitions, permissions, etc. which have contributed to delays and project 
over-runs.  While  Central  and  State  Governments  would  have  to  deliver  on  easing  these 
roadblocks and facilitating investments in the infrastructure sector, banks would also need to 
hone their credit appraisal, monitoring and risk management skills, keeping in view the long 
gestation period of infrastructure projects. This would ensure that the sector’s funding needs 
are met, while keeping the position of NPAs under stringent control.  
Challenges for banks  
Need for enhancing productivity 
The performance of banks in 2011 and 2012 have been somewhat muted due to the general 
slowdown  in  the  economy  and  the  higher  interest  rate  environment.  The  balance  sheet  of 
Scheduled Commercial Banks (SCBs) reflected slower growth at 15.5 percent in 2011–12 as 
compared to 19.2 percent in 2010–11, with deceleration in credit growth. The increased cost 
of deposits impacted net profit of banks, which increased at a slower rate of 16.1 percent as 
compared  to  23.2  percent  during  the  previous  year.  Interest  expended  on  deposits,  along 
with increase in proportion of high cost term deposits, led to acceleration in the interest cost 
of banks. Net Interest Margins of banks dipped marginally compared to the previous year. An 
analysis of profitability of banks, however, reveals that profitability of foreign banks is higher 
than  that  of  other  bank  groups.  Though  their  share  of  total  assets  of  the  banking  system 
stands around 7 percent, foreign banks account for close to 12 percent of profits of SCBs. A 
Du Pont analysis showed that foreign banks registered highest Return on Assets amongst 
bank groups due to better asset utilization, although their operating expenses to assets ratio 
was higher compared to other bank groups. Their higher profitability could be attributed to 
better  fund  management  practices.  This  is  an  area  where  Indian  banks  would  need  to 
improve.  
The profitability of SCBs would be under increased strain during 2012–13 due to higher level 
of NPAs. The gross NPAs of the banking system has increased from 2.36 percent in March 
2011 to 3.25 percent in June 2012. Restructured standard accounts as a percent of gross 
advances  have  doubled  from  2.7  percent  in  2009  to  5.4  percent  as  at  June  2012  with 
substantial  increase  in  restructuring  in  certain  sectors.  Data  indicates  that  restructuring  is 
largely  resorted  to  in  case  of  industrial  sector  accounts,  particularly,  large  industries,  as 
against  smaller  borrowal  accounts  such  as  agriculture,  micro  and  small  enterprises.  The 
persistently  high  level  of  NPAs  and  increase  in  restructured  accounts  continues  to  pose  a 
significant  constraint  on  banks’  abilities  to  reduce  lending  rates,  thereby,  in  a  sense, 
penalizing  the  honest  borrowers.  Corporates  need  to  innovate  and  embrace  technology  to 
improve  their  productivity  and  efficiency  so  that  their  costs  can  come  down,  they  remain 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
competitive and continue to service their obligation as borrowers. Banks on their part must 
look to arrest the deterioration in asset quality by adopting better risk management practices 
like  better  credit  appraisal,  closer  monitoring  of  borrowal  accounts,  greater  information 
sharing  among  banks  and  by  carrying  out  elaborate  viability  studies  before  restructuring. 
While  NPAs/  restructuring  of  assets  cannot  be  wished  away,  they  need  to  be  effectively 
curtailed so as to ensure that the lendable resources of banks are maximized. On its part, 
RBI has mandated banks to put in place an effective mechanism for information sharing by 
December 2012 and to sanction ad hoc loans/renewal of loans to new or existing borrowers 
only after obtaining/ sharing the information.  
Lack of enabling environment 
According  to  the  Doing  Business  Rankings  2013,  India  ranks  way  down  at  132  out  of 
185 countries in the global index of countries in “Ease of doing business”; 41 places below 
China, 51 places below Sri Lanka and 116 places below Taiwan. Explosive growth can only 
be  achieved  if  there  is  an  enabling  economic  environment.  This  requires  Governmental 
policies  for  quicker  clearances,  which  encourage  business  and  long  term  investment. 
Recently, some steps have also been announced to stabilize the Government finances and 
contain fiscal deficits within manageable levels.  
Government has also taken steps to encourage public investment as well as public private 
partnerships in infrastructure and to tap into available technology and capital from around the 
world. I firmly believe that for achieving explosive growth, it is imperative that macroeconomic 
environment stabilizes, inflation and inflation expectations come down to comfortable levels 
and the twin deficits are contained. The steps initiated by the Government need to fructify 
into effective change. 
Opportunities galore 
Customer centricity  
Every  challenge  is  also  an  opportunity.  A  Boston  Consulting  Group  study  “Indian  Banking 
2020 – Making the Decade’s Promise Come True” estimates that the income group below 
the middle class with annual household income of Rs 90000 to Rs 2.00 lakh per annum will 
constitute  the  largest  group  of  customers,  increasing  from  an  estimated  75  million 
households  in  2010  to  120  million  in  2020,  constituting  the  “Next  Billion”.  This  customer 
segment would increasingly demand affordable, low cost banking services. The challenge for 
banks is to extend the reach of banking services through bank branches/ATMs/BC model to 
tap the potential of this customer segment. Banks need to develop customer centric products 
and services. The pricing has to be right and affordable. Greater use of technology, including 
mobile  services,  could  revolutionize  banking.  The  potential  of  mobile  banking  is  immense. 
The  BCG  study  estimates  that  even  if  25–30  percent  of  mobile  users  have  GPRS  /  3G 
activated,  there  would  be  250  million  to  300  million  customers  who  would  access  banking 
services over the mobile. The Indian banking industry would have to innovate and build an 
efficient  and 
low-cost  framework  for  transaction  banking.  Going  forward,  customer 
satisfaction  would  be  the  buzzword  for  success  and  would  set  the  winners  apart  from  the 
laggards. 
Dream big, think small 
If we are to achieve explosive growth, banks would need to increasingly focus on the SME, 
agriculture  and  retail  sectors.  It  is  a  fact  of  life  that  large  corporates  have  easy  access  to 
huge  loans  across  the  banking  sector,  but  they  also  account  for  a  major  segment  of 
NPA/restructured  accounts.  On  the  contrary,  the  small  borrowers/MSMEs  continue  to  face 
difficulties  in  accessing  bank  finance  due  to  perceived  higher  risk  and  lower  ticket  size.  It 
needs  to  be  appreciated  in  this  context  that  the  delinquencies  in  this  segment  are  largely 
attributable  to  the  inadequacy  of  finance  and  lack  of  support  from  the  banks  to  the  viable 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
units  at  an  appropriate  stage.  Banks  must  realize  that  through  adequate  appraisal,  fair 
pricing  and  by  extending  proper  handholding  support  to  the  MSMEs,  the  sector  can  be  a 
potential game changer in terms of accretions to the banks’ bottom line.  
Banks need to evolve business models and delivery channels which would bring down the 
cost of providing credit to the agriculture/ retail/ SME segments. We can achieve explosive 
growth if banks are able to customize and deliver cost effective products and services to this 
customer segment while simultaneously guiding and providing handholding support to these 
sectors.  The  fear  of  increase  in  NPAs  cannot  be  a  ground  for  depriving  these  sectors  of 
timely  and  adequate  credit.  Besides  translating  into  increased  business  opportunities  for 
banks,  these  sectors  can  significantly  contribute  to  employment  generation  and  growth  in 
savings, and would support GDP growth.  
There is also a need to encourage incubation and development of new business ideas and 
providing  funds  to  translate  these  into  reality.  Facebook  would  not  have  been  a  reality  if 
angel  investors  Reid  Garrett  Hoffman  and  Peter  Thiel  had  not  funded  Mark  Zuckerberg. 
According  to  a  BCG  India  study,  India  has  190,000  millionaires  but  only  about  500  angel 
investors. The HNIs in India prefer to invest in real estate. While Venture capital funds, to 
some  extent,  do  provide  funding  to  start  ups,  much  more  needs  to  be  done  to  develop  a 
viable ecosystem where new ideas with potential for employment and wealth generation can 
flourish. Banks could consider providing funding to such innovations. 
Attitudinal changes 
Success demands change in the way banks do business, harness the power of innovation, 
recognize the huge potential at the bottom of the pyramid and reach out to them. Banks need 
to go the extra mile in financial literacy by educating the customers and understanding the 
ecosystem in which small businesses and agricultural operations grow and thrive. They need 
to learn to work in a partnership to finance sustainable business.  
Success  is  not  about financing  seemingly  safe  large  corporates  by following  the  herd  in  a 
“me  too”  manner.  It  is  about  changing  mindsets,  looking  at  untreaded  paths,  putting  the 
customer  above  all  and  tapping  the  power  of  technology.  This  demands  a  committed 
workforce with the requisite technology, HR and risk management skills. It calls for re-skilling 
the existing workforce and hiring and retaining talent in the public sector, particularly, in view 
of the large scale retirements over the next few years. PSBs would have to increasingly look 
at  performance  management,  changing  mindsets  and  empowering  employees  for  fast  and 
effective decision making. It requires a cultural revolution in the banking sector, particularly 
for  public  sector  banks  if  they  wish  to  retain  the  competitive  advantage  of  size  over  the 
smaller but more nimble footed private sector/ foreign banks. 
Regulatory / supervisory environment  
One of the essential pre-requisites for attaining sustained growth is financial stability, which 
in  turn  requires  a  combination  of  strong  regulation  and  supervision.  The  regulators  and 
supervisors need to be abreast of the changing contours of the financial system, be aware of 
the  changes  in  the  way  banks  do  business,  new  products  and  services,  the  risks  and  the 
mitigants.  They  need  to  have  their  ears  to  the  ground,  so  to  speak,  so  that  they  are  not 
caught  unawares  by  the  undercurrents  in  the  financial  system,  which  could  turn  into  a 
financial tsunami. Given the tremendous financial and human cost of the recent sub-prime 
crisis, we cannot afford a relapse. Hence, the emphasis has to be on developing a strong 
supervisory  infrastructure  for  creating  a  robust  financial  system  and  an  environment 
conducive to growth. We at the RBI have been looking at the supervisory system and the 
way  we  supervise  banks.  Based  on  the  recommendations  of  the  High  Level  Steering 
Committee  set  up  for  the  purpose,  we  have  initiated  the  transition  from  a  CAMELS 
transaction based approach to a Risk based approach in supervision of banks. Based on the 
interactions that I had as the Chairman of the HLSC and other periodic dialogues that I have 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
with the bank management, my assessment is that most of the banks do not have a clear 
perception of their activity wise costs and profits. It is, indeed, perplexing how these banks 
have been managing their risks when they do not have an idea of which activity/business line 
has a positive risk-reward skew? 
Against  this  backdrop,  as  a  first  step,  we  have  advised  banks  to  re-assess  their  risk 
management  architecture,  culture,  practices  and  such  other  related  processes  and  to 
benchmark  them  against  certain  essential  requirements  which  have  been  identified  as 
prerequisites  to  introduction  of  risk  based  supervision.  Banks  have  also  been  advised  to 
upgrade their HR capabilities with regard to skill sets required for handling risk management 
systems,  MIS,  etc.  to  facilitate  the  switch  over  to  risk  based  supervision.  RBI  would  also 
conduct  training  programmes/  workshops  for  banks  once  the  Risk  Profile  Templates  and 
guidelines on RBS are finalized. Meanwhile, the challenges for banks would remain in terms 
of  upgrading  their  MIS  capabilities,  fine  tuning  their  transfer  pricing  policies,  measuring 
transaction/  activity  wise  costing,  evaluating  the  risk-return  trade  off,  putting  in  place  an 
effective  and  transparent  framework  for  risk  based  pricing  of  products  and  services  and 
non-discriminatory pricing of liabilities.  
Conclusion 
To sum up, let me recapitulate the key ponderables: 
   The first  and foremost  requirement  is  to  improve  the  Governance  standards  in  all 
spheres – at the centre, state, institutions, individuals, etc. Probity in public life and 
in our dealings are key ingredients that can unshackle the chains that bind us. We 
need to build public opinion/ awareness about the need for rapid growth as it would 
prove to be the main driver for the changes that we seek. Agitation is not and cannot 
be a solution.  
The banking sector has to develop strong linkages with the real sector in order to 
ensure  stable  and  sustainable  growth.  This  should  govern  all  aspects  of  banking 
operations  which  would  help  avoid  build  up  of  systemic  risk  through  asset  price 
bubbles.  
We have recounted some of our inherent strengths earlier. All we need is to refocus 
on our key strengths and to concentrate our energies on overcoming the bottlenecks 
currently shackling our growth. Collectively, we need to work hard and improve our 
productivity and efficiency. There is no reason why we cannot realize our potential of 
being  a  high  growth  economy.  As  stakeholders,  let  us  strive  towards  attaining  a 
sustainable  high  economic  growth  trajectory  and  making  India  a  vibrant  economy 
where the gains of inclusive growth disseminate wide and deep and touch all lives, 
especially those at the bottom of the pyramid. Together we can make this happen.  
I once again thank ASSOCHAM for inviting me to this Summit and giving me an opportunity 
to share my thoughts on the theme of the Summit. I note that the technical sessions to follow 
will be focusing on related sub-themes such as financial inclusion, reforms and the emerging 
regulatory framework. I am sure that the imperatives of productivity, innovation and reforms, 
along with the need for linkages between financial sector and real sector, which I alluded to 
earlier, would find resonance in the session discussions.  
I hope that today’s deliberations would generate new ideas on how to realize the potential of 
Indian  banking  and  achieve  the  explosive  growth  required  to  support  the  needs  of  the 
economy, as it seeks to regain its high growth trajectory. Thank you. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
References  
Report on Trend and Progress of Banking in India 2011–12 
India’s  Urban  Awakening:  Building Inclusive  Cities,  Sustaining  Economic  Growth-McKinsey 
Global Institute April 2010 
Doing Business 2013 – IFC & World Bank Report 
Faster, Sustainable and More Inclusive Growth – An Approach to the Twelfth Five Year Plan 
(2012–17) 
Indian Banking 2020 – Making the Decade’s Promise Come True – Boston Consulting Group 
Business Standard, August 18, 2011 – India to be $5.6 trillion economy by 2020: Dun and 
Bradstreet 
Business World issue dated Nov 19, 2012 – Where are the angels? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
