Jwala Rambarran: Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act (FATCA) – 
imperial outreach or hidden opportunity 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Jwala  Rambarran,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Trinidad  and 
Tobago, at the meeting of the Council of Securities Regulators of the Americas (COSRA), 
Port of Spain, 29 October 2012. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen,  
I thank the Trinidad and Tobago Securities and Exchange Commission (TTSEC) for inviting 
me  to  speak  at  the  Opening  Ceremony  of  the  2012  meetings  of  the  Council  of  Securities 
Regulators of America (COSRA) and the Caribbean Group of Securities Regulators (CGSR).  
As  I  look  across  at  this  august  gathering  of  securities  regulators  from  North,  Central  and 
South America, the Caribbean and even from Europe, I am reminded of the prescient words 
of former U.S. President John F. Kennedy at his address to the Canadian Parliament in May 
1961,  “Geography  has made  us  neighbours.  History  has made  us  friends.  Economics  has 
made us partners, and necessity has made us allies.”  
The  global  economic  crisis,  which  is  now  in  its  fifth  year,  has  certainly  made  us  partners. 
Countries cannot successfully regulate their financial markets in isolation. Going it alone is 
no  longer  a  viable  option.  Closer  international  partnership  between  regulators  has  never 
been so important – and yet so challenging.  
In my remarks this morning, I would like to first share my perspective on an issue that is not 
only of immediate concern to all regulators in the Americas, but also an issue that has the 
potential  to  deepen  our  model  of  engagement  from  that  of  partners  to  allies.  I  speak,  of 
course, about the Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act, otherwise known as FATCA.  
Secondly, I would briefly describe the context in which the Caribbean would have to attain 
FATCA compliance, if countries are so desirous.  
I  will  end  with  the  state  of  FATCA  preparedness  of  Trinidad  and  Tobago,  and  some  key 
messages for moving forward.  
What is FATCA?  
Ladies and Gentlemen, since FATCA was enacted in March 2010 by the U.S. government as 
part  of  the  Hiring  Incentives  to  Restore  Employment  (HIRE)  Act,  it  has  generated  much 
heated debate and has been described in rather uncomplimentary terms. FATCA has been 
hailed as:  
“A ticking time-bomb”;  
“An attempt to convert foreigners into unpaid IRS agents”;  
“A kind of U.S. backward imperialism”.  
FATCA requires foreign financial institutions to report directly to the U.S. Internal Revenue 
Service  (IRS)  all  clients  who  are  U.S.  citizens,  green  card  holders  living  in  the  U.S.  or 
abroad,  or  who  are  foreign  entities  in  which  U.S.  taxpayers  hold  a  substantial  ownership 
interest.  
To properly comply with these new reporting requirements, a foreign financial institution will 
have to enter into a special agreement with the IRS by June 30, 2013. Under this agreement, 
a participating foreign financial institution will be obligated to:  
1.  
Obtain information to determine which account holders are U.S. persons;  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
2.  
3.  
Comply with verification and due diligence procedures on such account holders as 
required by the IRS; and  
Report annually to the IRS on the name and address of each U.S. client, as well as 
the largest account balance in the year and total debit and credits of any account 
owned by a U.S. person or foreign entities with substantial U.S. ownership.  
The penalties are steep for non-compliance. A participating foreign financial institution will be 
required to deduct and withhold a 30 percent tax on ALL payments of U.S. source income 
(such  as  interest  and  dividends)  as  well  as  U.S.  source  capital  gains  made  to  recalcitrant 
account holders (those who do not willingly and promptly provide the requested information), 
and to foreign financial institutions that did not enter into an agreement with the IRS.  
In addition, FATCA requires U.S. citizens and green card holders who have financial assets 
outside of the United States exceeding US$50,000 to report these assets to the IRS. FATCA 
focuses on the high net-worth individuals, the so-called “FATCAts”.  
If a foreign financial institution refuses to comply with these requirements, a withholding tax 
of  30  percent  will  be  applied  on  all  U.S.  source  income  of  that  institution,  regardless  of 
whether  or  not  such  payment  was  made  for  the  benefit  of  the  U.S.  account  holder,  for 
another client, or for the institution itself.  
Foreign financial institutions, as currently drafted, may broadly include every member of the 
investment  community  and  encompass  banks,  credit  unions,  custodians,  asset  managers, 
investment funds and pension fund schemes, brokers and insurance companies (where their 
products have an investment element).  
Ladies and Gentlemen, it would be quite easy for some non-U.S. institutions to believe that 
they  will  not  be  affected  by  FATCA,  as  they  do  not  have  any  U.S.  investors.  But  FATCA 
paints  with  a  very  broad  brush.  The  legislation  is  structured  so  that  all  accounts  will  be 
deemed non-compliant or „recalcitrant‟ unless the institution can demonstrate it undertook a 
rigorous  due  diligence  process  to  prove  it  has  no  U.S.  account  holders.  Otherwise  the 
30 percent withholding tax will be applied. Moreover, correspondent banks everywhere may 
refuse  to  deal  with  a  financial  institution  unless  that  institution  can  show  it  is  FATCA 
compliant.  
Potential impact of FATCA  
Ladies and Gentlemen, FATCA has the potential to affect every person or entity that has any 
interest in U.S. assets – in either capital value or income arising from these assets.  
American Citizens Abroad (ACA), a Geneva-based organization representing the interests of 
six million Americans living abroad, launched a campaign to repeal FATCA. The ACA claims 
that  “FATCA  is  an  unacceptable  manifestation  of  U.S.  financial  imperialism  that  imposes 
U.S. law  on  the  rest  of  the  world;  this  can  lead  to  systematic  destabilizing  of  international 
financial markets.”  
So, should we really be concerned about this so-called “ticking time bomb”?  
Let me underscore that the aim of FATCA is to target those who evade paying U.S. taxes by 
hiding assets in undisclosed foreign bank accounts. We recognize and affirm the sovereign 
right of the U.S. government, as it is of any government, to collect taxes from its citizens. We 
also  recognize  that  tax  avoidance  and  tax  evasion  threaten  the  already  weak  revenue 
position of many governments.  
According to a November 2011 report from the Tax Justice Network, an independent group 
that promotes financial transparency, governments worldwide lose more than US$3 trillion in 
annual  revenue  because  of  tax  evasion.  This  loss  is  equivalent  to  more  than  5  percent of 
global GDP.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The  report  estimates  that  the  United  States  is  in  the  unpleasant  position  of  Number  One 
when it comes to tax evasion. The U.S. government loses some US$377 billion a year from 
tax evasion by U.S.-based firms and individuals. To put this sum in perspective, it represents 
some 7.5 percent of total U.S. government revenue. In addition, the Euro Zone countries of 
Italy, Germany, France and Spain as well as the United Kingdom are estimated to each lose 
at least US$100 billion in revenue every year to tax evasion.  
Not surprisingly, these five countries have seen an opportunity in FATCA to counter offshore 
tax evasion and improve international tax compliance. They have agreed to each enter into 
Intergovernmental  Agreements  with 
for  collecting  and  reporting 
FATCA-style  information  to  their  local  tax  authorities.  On  September  14  2012,  the  United 
States and the United Kingdom announced they had signed the first bilateral agreement to 
implement FATCA.  
the  United  States 
FATCA and the Caribbean  
So, Ladies and Gentlemen, where does this leave the Caribbean?  
As you may be aware, tax transparency and the fight against cross-border tax evasion have 
been  high  on  the  agenda  of  successive  G-20  Summits.  At  the  G-20  Summit  held  in  Los 
Cabos, Mexico in June 2012, leaders reiterated their commitment to strengthen transparency 
and  comprehensive  exchange  of  tax  information  including  through  the  Global  Forum  on 
Transparency  and  Exchange  of  Information  for  Tax  Purposes  and  through  the  Multilateral 
Convention on Mutual Administrative Assistance. This will be mainly achieved through peer 
reviews of countries‟ compliance with internationally agreed tax standards.  
It is my respectful view that adopting a robust, common set of standards may be essential to 
fostering global financial stability. But it is neither practical nor desirable to effect a dogmatic 
application  of  these  identical  standards  to  every  country  or  region.  Standards  must  be 
calibrated and adapted to local circumstances. This is particularly true in the Caribbean given 
the limitation and vulnerabilities inherent in the relatively small size of individual economies.  
For  some  time  now,  Caribbean  countries  have  had  to  grapple  with  the  exercise  of  the 
asymmetrical  global  application  of  power  and  influence  when  it  comes  to  the  increased 
regulatory  scrutiny  by  the  advanced  countries  of  the  region’s  offshore  financial  centres, 
especially  in  respect  of  tax  evasion  and  money  laundering.  To  be  fair,  some  of  these 
Caribbean  jurisdictions  did  have  loosely  defined  regulatory  and  supervisory  environments, 
but have subsequently come a long way in strengthening their capacity.  
As  an  example,  I  recall  1998,  when  the  Organization  for  Economic  Cooperation  and 
Development  (OECD)  produced  a  list  of  countries  which  it  said  would  be  “blacklisted”  for 
“harmful tax competition”. Caribbean countries, which  were on that list, mounted a spirited 
response with the assistance of the Commonwealth Secretariat, forcing the OECD to relax its 
position in 2000.  
Since then, the global financial crisis and a string of headline-grabbing fraud scandals like 
those  involving  disgraced Wall  Street  financier  Bernard  Madoff  and  Texas  billionaire  Allen 
Stanford  have  focused  new  attention  on  offshore  financial  centers  in  the  Caribbean. 
However,  no  Caribbean  country  is  currently  on  the  OECD  “gray”  or  “black”  list  of 
non-cooperative jurisdictions.  
Now,  the  Caribbean  region  has  to  cope  with  FATCA.  Quite  rightfully,  the  Caribbean 
Community  (CARICOM),  an  organization  of  15  Caribbean  nations  and  which  coordinates 
economic policy in the region, is taking the lead on FATCA. CARICOM has created a Task 
Force  led  by  Jamaica  and  has  hired  the  accounting  firm  of  PriceWaterhouseCoopers  to 
advise on the best approach for the region on the issue. The region’s strategic approach to 
FATCA will be on the agenda of the upcoming CARICOM Central Bank Governors Meeting 
to be held in Suriname in mid-November 2012.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Apart from using the joint regional machinery of the CARICOM Secretariat to advance their 
collective interests in FATCA, I would also encourage Caribbean countries to build alliances 
with other jurisdictions in the Americas that are equally affected by FATCA.  
In particular, I note that the TTSEC, which is the third representative of the Inter-American 
Regional Committee (IARC), is in a unique position to make representations on behalf of the 
Caribbean to the International Organisation of Securities Commission (IOSCO). I encourage 
the  TTSEC  to  use  this  avenue  to  highlight  FATCA  implementation  issues  that  are  of 
particular concern to the Caribbean region or to members within the region.  
As  I  indicated  before,  no  one  country  can  do  this  alone.  Now  is  the  time  for  Caribbean 
countries to put their case before influential and potential allies in the G-20 such as Brazil 
and Canada, which together represent the Caribbean region on the Executive Boards of the 
IMF and the World Bank.  
I believe that now is also time for the Caribbean to develop a different engagement model 
with  China.  China  recently  joined  the  Global  Forum  to  maintain  its  interests  in  mainland 
China, Hong Kong and Macao. As a Vice President of the Global Forum, China may prove to 
be an invaluable ally to the Caribbean on implementation of standards of transparency and 
international tax matters, instead of being viewed solely as a non-traditional provider of aid 
resources to the region.  
Trinidad and Tobago – preparedness for FATCA  
Ladies and Gentlemen, I now turn to Trinidad and Tobago’s readiness for FATCA. I wish to 
state quite categorically that Trinidad and Tobago is not a tax haven. Trinidad and Tobago is 
recognized  by  competent  institutions  such  as  the  IMF,  the  World  Bank  and  the  Financial 
Action Task Force (FATF) as a clean and transparent jurisdiction. We have taken significant 
steps to enhance the effectiveness of our jurisdiction in our fight against tax avoidance and 
tax evasion.  
Indeed, at its Plenary Meeting in Paris just a week ago, FATF agreed to move Trinidad and 
Tobago  from  its  list  of  countries  with  strategic  Anti-Money  Laundering  and  Combating  the 
Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT) deficiencies.  
Over  the  past  decade,  the  Central  Bank  of  Trinidad  and  Tobago  has  taken  measures  to 
enhance Know Your Customer (KYC) procedures for institutions falling under its purview. We 
have  issued  Guidelines  on  AML/CFT,  which  comply  with  the  standards  of  the  FATF  and 
which  eventually  formed  the  basis  for  new  legislation  in  bringing  the  country  closer  to  full 
compliance.  
In  this  respect,  the  Central  Bank  is  one  of  three  supervisory  authorities  responsible  for 
preventing  money  laundering  and  terrorist  financing,  the  other  two  authorities  being  the 
TTSEC and the Financial Intelligence Unit (FIU).  
Trinidad and Tobago is party to 17 Double Taxation Treaties in force, and there are others 
awaiting ratification or under negotiation. We signed our first Double Taxation Treaties with 
both Norway and Denmark in 1969. Our Double Taxation Treaty with the United States was 
signed in 1971. We also have a Tax Information Exchange Agreement (TIEA) with the United 
States.  
This should make it relatively easier to enter into Intergovernmental Agreements of the model 
types proposed by the United States, in which foreign financial institutions report information 
to  authorities  in  their  residence  country  and  have  those  foreign  authorities  report  the 
information to the IRS.  
We  recognize  that  several  benefits  may  arise  from  concluding  a  FATCA-style  agreement 
using  the  Intergovernmental  model.  It  eliminates  U.S.  withholding  on  payments  to  our 
financial  institutions;  it  identifies  specific  categories  of  our  financial  institutions  which  are 
deemed  compliant  or  which  present  a  low  risk  of  tax  evasion;  it  relieves  our  financial 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
institutions  from  terminating  the  account  of  a  recalcitrant  account  holder;  and  it  imposes 
passthru withholding on payments to other foreign financial institutions in the FATCA treaty 
partner or in another jurisdiction with which the U.S. has a FATCA agreement.  
Based on submissions, it appears that all of our banks are ready to respond to, and comply 
with,  FACTA  requirements.  However,  there  are  varying  levels  of  preparedness  within  the 
banking  sector. Our  three  Canadian  and  the  U.S.-owned  banks  are  at the  highest  level  of 
preparedness, having been part of their parents‟ global program of FATCA compliance. The 
two large local banks have initiated projects which would enable them to be well in train to 
comply  with  the  FATCA  requirements.  The  smaller  banks  are  in  the  process  of  amending 
their KYC procedures to identify U.S. residents and citizens.  
So, in my respectful view, there is little need for us to be unduly alarmed about FATCA. I do 
concede, however, that successful navigation of FATCA would entail a number of challenges 
for  our  financial  institutions,  including  the  immediate  need  to  mount  an  aggressive  public 
awareness campaign. And, of course, much more work needs to be done by several other 
sectors  and  entities  in  preparing  for  FATCA  including  credit  unions,  and  the  Unit  Trust 
Corporation.  
As  you  can  appreciate,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  many  of  the  issues  surrounding  FATCA  go 
well beyond the remit of the Central Bank. For example, one key issue relates to the capacity 
of  our  Board  of  Inland  Revenue,  which  would  probably  be  the  tax  authority  designated  to 
conduct these operations, to cope with the requirements imposed by the proposed FATCA 
Partnership.  
It  is  from  this  perspective  that  the  Central  Bank  proposes  the  establishment  of  a  Joint 
Working  Group  of  key  stakeholders  to  prepare  for  FATCA  implementation.  Among  the 
proposed  terms  of  reference  of  the  Working  Group  would  be  to  evaluate  the  impact  of 
FATCA on the financial sector in Trinidad and Tobago, to determine a cost-effective strategy 
for compliance, and to advise on a promotions strategy.  
The Working Group would comprise the Board of Inland Revenue, the Ministry of Finance, 
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, members of the Banking Association of Trinidad and Tobago, 
members  of  the  Association  of  Trinidad  and  Tobago  Insurance  Companies  (ATTIC), 
members of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of Trinidad and Tobago (ICATT), the FIU, 
the TTSEC and the Central Bank.  
Conclusion  
In  closing,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  we  must  recognize  that  the  FATCA  clock  is  ticking,  but 
partnership  models  for  engagement  are  emerging.  Whether  Trinidad  and  Tobago  settles 
FATCA  on  the  basis  of  bilateral  interventions,  or  through  joint  partnership  with  other 
Caribbean  countries,  we  will  be  forcefully  seeking  to  ensure  that  financial  institutions  in 
Trinidad and Tobago face no undue disadvantage from FATCA compliance.  
I thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
