Luis M Linde: The international economic environment and Spain’s 
economy 
Testimony  by  Mr  Luis  M  Linde,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Spain,  before  the  Parliamentary 
Budget  Committee  in  connection  with  the  draft  State  Budget  for  2013,  Madrid,  4  October 
2012. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
The appearance by the Governor of the Banco de España before this Committee at the start 
of the annual debate on the State Budget is a tradition I am most pleased to embrace. I shall 
try to be as clear and direct as possible on those issues I consider most important.  
The Draft State Budget Law for 2013 is being presented against a background of singular 
difficulty for the Spanish economy.  
I  intend,  first,  to  discuss  the  international  economic  context,  in  particular  in  the  euro  area; 
second, to look at recent developments in the Spanish economy, with particular reference to 
competitiveness and fiscal consolidation; and finally, to analyse the key features of the draft 
Law. 
Without  overstaying  my  welcome,  I  shall,  before  ending  my  address,  briefly  discuss  the 
clean-up and restructuring programme for our banking system which, as you know, took a 
significant step forward on 28 September with the publication of the evaluations of the whole 
of the Spanish banking system. If you wish, we can go into greater detail on this matter in the 
round of questions, given its importance for restoring confidence in our economy, in activity 
and in employment, and, in short, for the implementation of the Budget for 2013.  
The international context 
The international context is a primary factor of difficulty. The latest analyses and projections 
show  signs  of  weakness,  which  can  be  explained  to  some  extent  by  the  difficulties  the 
European economies are facing in overcoming a sovereign debt crisis that has now lasted for 
more than two years. While the growth forecast for the world economy as a whole in 2012 
stood  at  around  4%  a  year  back, this  has  now  dipped  to  around  3%. The forecast for  the 
United States has improved, but that for the euro area as a whole has fallen from growth of 
1.1% a year ago to a decline of 0.4%. And the growth forecast for the emerging economies 
has edged down from above 6% to around 5%. 
The forecasts for 2013 have also been lowered, especially for the euro area as a whole. The 
sluggishness of the international economy and, in particular, of the euro area is bearing down 
on our ability to recover.  
Euro area governance 
I  would  therefore  find  it  useful  to  start  with  a  comment  on  euro  area  governance  and  its 
problems. 
In my appearance before the Economic Affairs Committee last July, I addressed the source 
of the sovereign debt crisis in Europe and the main reasons for its depth and development. I 
believe  I  should  reiterate  that,  to  overcome  the  crisis,  a  new  version  of  Monetary  Union 
governance will be needed. 
There have so far been two different stages in the reform of European governance. In the 
first,  efforts  focused  on  remedying  the  shortcomings  detected  in  macroeconomic  and 
financial  policy  oversight  and  coordination,  and  on  the  creation  of  financial  assistance 
mechanisms. In the second stage, following the June 2012 Summit of euro area Heads of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
State  or Government,  a  banking  union, greater fiscal  integration  and  a common  economic 
policy framework were proposed. 
Here you may recall that the European Commission communicated its plans for the banking 
union to the Parliament and the Council on 12 September, with a legislative proposal to give 
form  to  the  first  of  the  three  pillars  which  would  underpin  such  a  union:  a  common 
supervisory  mechanism  for  which  ultimate  responsibility  would  be  centralised  at  the 
European  Central  Bank,  while  there  would  be  scope  for  some  degree  of  decentralisation, 
enabling the knowledge and experience of national supervisors to be harnessed. 
The  move  is  just  a  preliminary  one  and  should  be  viewed  with  caution,  since  in  order  to 
complete  the  banking  union  an  integrated  bank  crisis  management  mechanism  and  a 
common  deposit  guarantee  scheme  will  be  needed.  This  will  not  be  possible  without 
progress  towards  a  fiscal  union,  an  area  that  obviously  poses  most  significant  political 
difficulties. 
Along these same lines, I believe we should welcome the European Central Bank Governing 
Council’s decision on 2 August to set in train the so-called Outright Monetary Transactions. 
This  comprises  a  programme  to  purchase  public  debt  on  secondary  markets,  subject  to 
compliance  with  specific  conditions,  as  part  of  the  financial  support  programmes  of  the 
European Financial Stability Facility and its successor, the European Stability Mechanism. 
Since  the  start  of  this  crisis  the  ECB  has  adopted  a  series  of  conventional  (short-  and 
medium-term liquidity provision, changes in the deposit rate) and non-conventional measures 
(long-term liquidity provision, debt purchases) aimed at preserving the sound functioning of 
monetary policy, which is tantamount to saying the transmission of the policy rates the ECB 
wishes to maintain at all maturities. These measures have also been useful in buying time for 
governments  to  correct  the  macroeconomic  imbalances  and  the  shortcomings  in  the 
institutional design of the euro which are, in part, at the source of the current fragility. The 
Outright  Monetary  Transactions  are  a  further  example  of  this  type  of  non-conventional 
measure. 
The new initiative is aimed at making sovereign debt markets work normally again, as their 
yields bear indirectly, but significantly, on households’ and firms’ financing costs. The aim is 
fully compatible with the ECB’s mandate, as the President of this institution has stressed on 
various occasions. 
Evidently, the announcement of this programme has had a stabilising effect. But given the 
nature of the problems at the source and in the development of this sovereign debt crisis, the 
role that any ECB decision may play in resolving it can hardly go beyond mitigating the risks 
of serious accidents and of providing more time so that the decisions that must be taken in 
areas other than the ECB may come to fruition. 
The Spanish economy  
Let me now turn to the key features of our current economic situation.  
The Spanish economy has been greatly affected by the financial tensions in the euro area, 
which emerged with the outbreak of the international financial crisis in 2007–2008, and the 
public finances problems of several euro area members, beginning with Greece. In our case, 
the crisis reached us and, in turn, we contributed to its unfolding as a result of the doubts 
over the sustainability of our public finances, our poor growth expectations and the scale of 
our foreign debt, which essentially built up during the real estate boom. 
Economic  policy  has  striven  to  overcome  various factors  of  vulnerability  in  a  very  adverse 
macroeconomic setting. The results of the reforms undertaken are still incipient, and we must 
persevere with this strategy, which is the only realistic way of resuming sustained growth. 
As recent events in Europe show, there are feedback loops from public finances and their 
problems  to  the  banking  system  and  its  problems,  and  from  the  latter  to  activity  and 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
employment. In turn, job creation and growth are essential ingredients for progress on fiscal 
consolidation. Accordingly, economic policy-making should continue to be structured around 
two  main  goals:  promoting  competitiveness  and  growth,  and  restoring  the  sustainability  of 
public finances. I shall briefly refer to these two major issues before analysing the Budget for 
2013. 
Competitiveness and employment 
First,  let  us  look  at  developments  in  employment  and  competitiveness,  two  closely 
interconnected problems.  
In  terms  of  economy-wide  unit  labour  costs,  the  cumulative  loss  to  2008  in  respect  of  the 
1998 level stood at 18%. In industry, and measuring competitiveness always in terms of unit 
labour costs, it was almost 30%. Naturally, labour costs are not the only explanation for the 
increase in unemployment, but they have undoubtedly been a major factor. That there were 
serious  failings  in  the  regulation  of  our  labour  market  is  something  that  practically  all 
international  economic  organisations  have  been  pointing  out  for  years.  The  reform  of  our 
labour legislation was unavoidable.  
The changes made are essentially geared to increasing the flexibility of our labour market: 
the priority of firm-level agreements, limits on the so-called “ultra-activity” of agreements, new 
regulations  governing  dismissal  for  objective  reasons  and  greater  facilities  for  maintaining 
wage  restraint  at  companies  in  difficulty  are  all  elements  of  change  aimed  at  preventing 
dismissals and higher unemployment from being the only option for many companies to stay 
in business.  
The macroeconomic projections accompanying the Budget for 2013 include the stabilising of 
our unemployment rate at around 25% of the labour force, a rate double the average for the 
European Union countries. This rate of unemployment is, quite simply, dramatic. Hence the 
enormous  importance  of  economic  recovery  and  of  greater  labour  market  flexibility:  these 
two variables complement one another, and without both operating simultaneously, net job 
creation will not be possible.  
Fiscal consolidation  
I shall now move on to public finances and to the nature of the fiscal drive needed.  
In 2007 Spain posted a budget surplus of close to 2% of GDP and a public debt/GDP ratio of 
37%,  then  one  of  the  lowest  among  the  euro  area  members.  However,  this  apparently 
healthy  state  of  affairs concealed  a  precarious  situation  owing  to the  presence  of  high tax 
revenue  that  had  a  significant  temporary  component  tied  to  the  major  expansion  of  the 
construction and real estate sector, and to unsustainable spending dynamics.  
Indeed, the end of this expansion uncovered the risks latent in that situation. Almost half of 
the  deterioration  of  more  than  13  pp  of  GDP  over  only  two  years  from  2007  to  2009  –  a 
turnaround in public finances unprecedented in Spanish economic history – was due to the 
fall 
the  aforementioned 
extraordinary revenue. Meantime, public spending climbed significantly, largely as a result of 
the  increase  in  unemployment  benefits  and  in  the  interest  burden,  but  also  as  a  result  of 
spending  on  pensions  and  on  government  consumption.  A  further  expression  of  the  rapid 
deterioration  in  the  deficit  was  the  most  substantial  rise  in  public  debt  as  a  proportion  of 
GDP.  
The first conclusion that may be drawn from this analysis, and one which is very relevant for 
understanding  our  present  difficulties,  is  that  the  budget  deficit  arising  with  the  crisis  was 
eminently  structural.  That  is  to  say,  it  was  not  only  due  to  the  downward  cycle,  or  to  the 
temporary discretionary measures with no lasting effect on public finances. In any event, the 
outcome has been that the public debt/GDP ratio has not stopped growing since 2007, and 
largely  associated  with 
the  disappearance  of 
in  revenue, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
we will end the current year 2012 with a level close to 85%: i.e. an increase of almost 50 pp 
of GDP over a period of only five years, which in itself is an indicator of the seriousness of 
our crisis.  
Reducing  the  budget  deficit  from  its  2009  peak  is  proving  anything  but  easy.  Indeed,  the 
correction made in 2010 and 2011 was very scant, and was of course less than that initially 
planned and desired. The budgetary adjustment is being made in highly adverse economic 
and  financial  circumstances,  compounded  by  the  impact  in  the  short  run  of  the  austerity 
measures on economic activity. Moreover, stabilising the proportion of debt to GDP, which is 
a key figure for restoring market  confidence,  is all  the  more  difficult  against  a  backdrop of 
meagre growth or recession and of high interest rates on public debt. 
Yet  these  contractionary  forces  can  be  mitigated  if  credibility  in  the  process  of  fiscal 
consolidation  can  be  attained.  From  this  standpoint,  following  the  heavy  slippage  in  the 
deficit in 2011, the target of 6.3% of GDP for this year and the fiscal adjustment path to which 
we  have  committed  to  2014  should  be  the  means  by  which  the  doubts  of  the  European 
authorities and the markets are dispelled.  
The information currently available (on central government figures to August) indicates that 
there are risks of slippage from the target set for 2012. Given the importance of achieving the 
target,  additional  measures  under  the  Budgetary  Stability  Law  should  be  considered  that 
provide for the target to be met. I have some points to make in this connection.  
First, most of the slippage seen has originated from adverse developments in public revenue, 
partly deriving from the very nature of the adjustment under way in the Spanish economy. 
The fact that, at present, the only source of improvement in economic activity is the external 
sector (neither higher exports nor lower imports generate, per se, increases in tax revenue) 
means  that  the  prospect  of  buoyant  public  revenue  is  scant,  and  is  compounded  by  the 
intensity  of  the  real  estate  adjustment.  Against  this  background,  maintaining  a  prudent 
projection of public revenue is essential.  
Second, instruments are needed that enable early detection of potential slippage in revenue 
and  expenditure  during  the  fiscal  year.  The  new  Stability  Law  demands  significant 
improvements in the transparency of general government conduct, particularly in relation to 
the budget outturn figures for regional and local government, which should be released with 
the  same  periodicity,  degree  of  detail,  lag  and  ready  accessibility  as  central  government 
data. 
Third,  the  mechanisms  enabling  the  prompt  correction  of  any  potential  slippage  must  be 
reinforced. Once again, the Stability Law  includes new instruments, such as the automatic 
adjustment  of  regional  government  spending  in  specific  cases  of  non-compliance,  the 
possibility  of  establishing  sanctions  and  also  of  central  government  imposing  adjustment 
measures. These new provisions may be effective in ensuring discipline, a matter that is all 
the  more  important  following  the  extraordinary  measures  adopted  by  the  State  to  offer 
liquidity  support  to  regional  and  local  government,  such  funds  being  conditional  upon 
compliance with adjustment plans. 
And, fourth, the reinforcement of the credibility of the fiscal consolidation process takes on 
great importance in the current situation of the sovereign debt crisis. It may be of help here to 
establish a medium-term budgetary horizon providing sufficient details of the expected trend 
of public revenue and spending and the assumptions on which they are based, and on the 
contents  of  the  planned  measures  and  the  expected  effect  they  will  have.  That  would  all 
contribute  to  reducing  economic  agents’  uncertainty  and  would  help  identify  the  problems 
ahead in the medium term. 
In  the  fiscal  consolidation  process,  the  long-term  perspective  is  fundamental.  Over  this 
horizon,  it  is  well  known  that  the  biggest  challenge  to  public  finances  stems  from  the 
pressure that population ageing will exert on specific expenditure items, particularly pensions 
spending. Following the Social Security reform approved in July 2011, a specific definition is 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
now  needed  of  the  so-called  “sustainability  factor”,  which  should  result  in  an  automatic 
adjustment of the system’s parameters if imbalances are detected in the long run.  
The 2013 budget  
Before moving on to the Budget for 2013, I would like to specify the framework for debate of 
the draft legislation.  
Spain  is  a  very  decentralised  country  in  terms  of  public  spending,  more  so  than  certain 
countries  with  a  federal  political  structure.  Currently,  almost  half  the  consolidated  public 
spending in Spain, i.e. net of transfers between general government sectors, is by regional 
and local government.  
Based on figures for 2011, central government was responsible for only 22% of total public 
spending; regional government for 34%; local government for 12%; and the Social Security 
system for 32%. That is to say, overall central government and social security spending in 
2011  accounted  for  only  54%  of  the  total,  while  that  of  regional  and  local  government 
amounted  to  46%.  The  picture  given  by  the  State  and  Social  Security  Budget  is  thus 
necessarily incomplete in respect of overall general government spending. 
Admittedly,  prior to  the presentation  of the  State  Budget,  Parliament  and  the  Senate  have 
approved  the  budget  targets,  both  for  overall  general  government  and  for  each  of  its 
sub-sectors,  on  the  proposal  of  the  Government  and  following  a  report  by  the  Fiscal  and 
Financial Policy Council and the Local Government National Board. Yet clearly the budgets 
of each regional government and each municipality are approved separately, there being no 
document containing information on all of them, together with that on the State and Social 
Security  Budget.  Hence,  although  we  do  have  ex-post  information  that  enables  the  public 
spending outcomes and outturn for the four major spending groups – central, regional and 
local  government,  and  the  Social  Security  system  –  to  be  analysed,  we  do  not  have  an 
ex-ante  or  prior  document  that  provides  a  detailed  analysis  of  budgetary  projections  for 
overall general government and its compatibility with the objectives set.  
It should be recalled, however, that the new Budgetary Stability Law introduced substantial 
improvements  in  this  respect.  Specifically,  it  stipulates  that,  before  1  October  each  year, 
regional and local government shall submit information on the essential items contained in 
their forthcoming budgets to the Ministry of Finance and General Government. Then, before 
15  October,  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  General  Government  will  release  a  report  on  the 
alignment of this budgetary information with the stability objectives, in such a way that the 
Ministry may make recommendations should it perceive slippage. And, finally, before 1 April 
the following year, the Minister of Finance and General Government has to submit a report to 
the Government on the degree of fulfilment by all tiers of government of the objectives in the 
initial  budget.  I  consider  that  these  reports  should  in fact  offer  this  complete  picture  of  the 
budgetary projection that we are today lacking. 
I would further remind you that the Government has announced the creation in 2013 of an 
Independent Fiscal Authority to ensure compliance with budgetary regulations. This type of 
institution  has  proven  useful  in  other  developed  countries  in  enhancing  budgetary  policy 
credibility.  It  is,  however,  crucial  that  such  an  institution  should  enjoy  a  degree  of 
independence,  effective  responsibilities  and  resources  in  line  with  best  international 
practices.  
I will now discuss the essential features of the State and Social Security budget for 2013. 
Macroeconomic setting and fiscal deficit 
The  draft  State  Budget  for  2013  is  part  of  a  macroeconomic  setting  in  which  real  GDP  is 
estimated to decrease by 0.5% as a result of a negative rate of change in national demand of 
2.8%, which would be partially offset by a 2.3 pp contribution from the external sector. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
This projection of a 0.5% decline in GDP in 2013 is clearly optimistic compared with the fall 
of around 1.5% currently projected by most international organisations and analysts. 
That said, I would like to make two observations. Firstly, if indeed the fall in activity in 2013 is 
closer to 1.5% than 0.5%, the foreseeable impact on the deficit can be estimated at 0.3 pp of 
GDP.  This  deviation  is  substantial,  but  it  would  be  possible  to  correct  it  during  the  year. 
Secondly, all projections of changes in activity should be viewed with caution and with some 
distance.  The  history  of  forecasting  errors  and  corrections  to  all  manner  of  projections 
–  including  those  of  international  institutions,  large  investment  banks,  government  and,  of 
course, the Banco de España – would fill many pages. In short, while considering that the 
rate of change in GDP for 2013 contained in the Budget is certainly optimistic, I would like to 
add that I do not think it is a serious difference or that it should detract credibility from the 
fiscal consolidation exercise undertaken in 2013. 
The  Budget  proposes  an  overall  general  government  budget  deficit  target,  in  National 
Accounts  terms  of  4.5%  of  GDP,  down  from  6.3%  projected  for  2012,  excluding  from  this 
year the impact of the support measures for financial institutions. The target for 2013 is in 
line  with  our  European  commitments  and  will  require  a  reduction  in  the  primary  deficit  of 
almost 2.5 pp of GDP. 
In terms of the different agents, a deficit target, in National Accounts terms, of 3.8% of GDP 
is proposed for central government and the Social Security system, compared with a deficit 
of 4.5% of GDP projected in 2012, which would represent an improvement of 0.7 pp of GDP, 
similar to that projected for the regional governments, which should reduce their deficit from 
1.5%  in  2012  to  0.7%  in  2013.  The  adjustment  would  be  completed  with  the  projected 
reduction of 0.3 pp in local government to reach a balanced budget in 2013.  
Revenue 
On  the  revenue  side,  this  budget  tightens  the  fiscal  pressure  both  in  terms  of  direct  and 
indirect taxation, with a range of new measures. Furthermore, it should be recalled that, in 
2013,  the measures  approved  in  2012  in  relation  to  higher  personal  income  tax  rates,  the 
increase in the rate on income from fee-earning activities, changes to corporate income tax 
and the rise in VAT rates will still have a significant impact. 
Despite the background of recession, the tax take is projected to increase overall by 3.7%. 
The net effect of all the tax regulation measures with an impact in 2013 is estimated to be 
approximately €7.2 billion. Net of this impact, revenue would fall by 0.5%. 
As for the Social Security Budget, the 1 pp reduction planned last July is postponed or ruled 
out, and a 1.1% fall is projected in 2013 in total social security contributions compared with 
the initial budget for 2012. 
The projected tax revenue for 2013 is subject to downside risks because it is based on the 
assumption that the revenue targets for 2012 will be achieved. However, on the information 
currently  available,  it  cannot  be  ruled  out  that  revenue  performs  worse  than  expected  in 
2012. If this risk materialises and is not countered by appropriate action in the remainder of 
the  year, that  would  make  it  difficult to  achieve  the  targets  set for  2013,  compounding the 
possible  effects  of  a  bigger  decline  in  GDP  than  that  assumed  in  the  budgetary 
programming. 
Expenditure 
On the expenditure side, the weight of three items should first be underlined: Social Security 
system contributory pensions, unemployment benefits and the interest on government debt. 
In 2012, these three items are equivalent to 20% of GDP and will account for approximately 
36%  of  total  public  spending.  In  2013,  these  percentages  will  foreseeably  increase 
significantly. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Noteworthy among the measures considered on the expenditure side are: the freezing of civil 
servants’  and  public-sector  employees’  salaries,  although  they  will  recover  their  December 
extra payroll, which, together with not filling vacancies, will result in a very low increase in 
personnel  costs  in  relation  to  serving  employees  of  around  0.1%.  Real  investments  are 
reduced by 46%, whereas the interest burden increases by more than €12 billion. 
In  the  Social  Security  system,  spending  on  contributory  pensions,  sickness  and  other 
benefits  will  grow  by  slightly  more  than  5%,  factoring  in  the  raising  of  pensions  by  1%. 
Foreseeably,  however,  spending  on  unemployment  benefits  will  fall  by  slightly  more  than 
6% due to the projected stability in unemployment figures and to regulatory amendments to 
the benefits system. Note, however, that changes in expenditure on social security pensions 
in 2013 will be affected by the revision that should be made, taking into account the inflation 
rate  recorded  to  November  2012.  Since  an  increase  of  3.5%  is  projected  and  the 
corresponding adjustment payment could be around 2.5%, that would represent an increase 
in spending of approximately €3 billion in 2012, which would be consolidated in 2013 and in 
future years. 
I  should  mention  that,  in  the  next  budget,  one  of  the  most  important  agreements  of  the 
so-called  Toledo  Pact  will  finally  be  concluded,  in  connection  with  the  separation  of  the 
system’s  sources  of  financing:  on  one  hand,  contributory  pensions  will  be  financed 
exclusively  by  contributions;  and,  on 
top-ups  and 
non-contributory  pensions  will  be  financed  by  taxes.  This  separation,  which  began  to  be 
applied in 2002, will be completed in 2013: and this is good news for the proper functioning 
of the system as a whole and for its future. 
the  non-contributory 
the  other, 
Public debt 
As I indicated above, from the beginning of the crisis in 2007 until the end of 2012, the ratio 
of our public debt – as defined in the Excessive Deficit Protocol – to GDP has increased by 
50  pp.  Undoubtedly,  this  is  the  highest  increase  over  the  shortest  period  in  this  ratio  in 
Spain’s economic history. The increase from 2011 to 2012 will amount to 16 pp of GDP, of 
which: 7 pp are explained by the deficit (4 pp by the primary balance and 3 pp by interest); 
nearly 1 pp is due to the fall in nominal GDP nominal, and 8 pp are attributable, essentially, 
to the financing of the Plan to Pay Suppliers and €30 billion of the amount estimated by the 
FROB to be drawn down from the European Financial Facility before year-end. 
This ratio is projected to grow more moderately in 2013, from 85% to 91% of GDP, i.e. an 
increase  of  6  pp  compared  with  the  16  pp  we  will  record  in  2012,  and  will  be  almost 
exclusively  due  to  the  increase  in  the  interest  burden  on  public  debt  because,  if  the 
projections are fulfilled, the primary deficit will be 0.7% of GDP in 2013. 
Clean-up and restructuring of the banking system 
I would not like to conclude without commenting, albeit very briefly, on the programme for the 
clean-up and restructuring of our banking system. 
As you know, a further step has been taken with the publication of the estimates of capital 
needs, based on the stress tests performed by an independent appraiser, supported by audit 
firms  and  real  estate  appraisal  companies  under  the  supervision  of  the  European 
Commission,  the  European  Central  Bank,  the  International  Monetary  Fund  and  with  the 
participation of the Ministry for Economic Affairs and the Banco de España. 
I will not repeat here the figures already published and explained and which were yesterday 
commented  on  by  the  Minister  for  Economic  Affairs  and  Competitiveness  before  the 
Economic Affairs Committee. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
However, I do want to say that the exercise performed is unprecedented in terms of its depth 
and  detail,  the  severity  of  the  macroeconomic  assumptions  accepted  and  the  scrutiny  to 
which it was subject throughout by experts from the institutions I have mentioned above. 
But there is still some way to go in the clean-up and restructuring of our banking system. The 
Memorandum of Understanding signed last July sets out the steps now to be taken, which 
the  Spanish  authorities  –  and,  rest  assured,  the  Banco  de  España  –  will  comply  with  as 
precisely as possible.  
The restructuring or resolution plans for banks owned by the FROB must be approved before 
December 2012. Also, before November, we shall have at our disposal the recapitalisation 
plans  of  banks  which  cannot  meet  their  capital  shortfall  without  State  aid,  on  the 
understanding  that  banks  which  are  not  considered  viable  will  be  resolved  orderly  in 
accordance with the terms of the corresponding resolution plan. Banks that can meet their 
capital  shortfall  without  resorting  to  State  aid  will  be  required  to  implement  their 
recapitalisation plans before June 2013. 
The other key component of the Clean-up Programme is the Asset Management Company 
which  should  be  operational  at  the  beginning  of  2013.  It  is  key  because  it  will  permit  the 
clean-up of the banks requiring State aid to be completed and will provide a suitable horizon 
for the management and sale of the mass of assets to be transferred. 
Conclusions 
The Budget for 2013 involves a considerable drive in respect of fiscal adjustment. It attempts 
to  bring  about  a  correction  in  the  primary  deficit,  net  of  interest  on  public  debt  of  almost 
2.5 pp of GDP. In the depth of a recession, that is very difficult, but necessary in order to 
meet the targets to which Spain is committed within the framework of the European Union 
and the euro area. 
We have some data which, although not warranting excessive optimism, do indicate that an 
adjustment is being achieved. We are going to end 2012  with a current account almost in 
balance, and in 2013 it will probably run a surplus. The recession has a contributing factor, 
but  not  the  only  one.  We  also  have  a  clear  improvement  in  competitiveness  based  on 
changes in our labour costs and in productivity. 
The  most  pressing  problem  facing  the  Spanish  economy  is  to  restore  market  confidence. 
There  is  no  other  way  to  achieve  this  than  meeting  the  fiscal  consolidation  targets, 
completing the clean-up and restructuring of our banking system, continuing with the process 
of private and public deleveraging and moving ahead with the reforms undertaken to improve 
our competitiveness. 
If we manage to make progress on those fronts in 2013, I am confident it will be possible to 
resume economic growth and to create net employment in 2014. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
