Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Nurturing world-class finance leaders 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (the central 
bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  14th  Inter-Collegiate  Finance  Competition,  Manila, 
22 October 2012. 
 Good afternoon everyone!  
On behalf of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, I congratulate all the students and the schools 
that participated in this 14th Inter-Collegiate Finance Competition of the Financial Executives, 
Inc. and its partner JP Morgan Chase. 
I have personally witnessed a number of previous years’ final rounds and I can tell you this 
competition  is  tough  and  definitely  not  for  the  faint-hearted.  Participants  only  have  a  few 
minutes  to  solve  difficult  questions;  these  are  questions  patterned  after  the  notoriously 
challenging Chartered Financial Analyst examination for experienced finance practitioners.  
Let us therefore give a  well-deserved round of applause to all the students, their mentors, 
and supporters from about 90 schools who entered the competition. I am happy to note that 
the finalists come from 20 schools scattered in Luzon, Visayas and Mindanao, proving once 
again that academic excellence is present across the Philippines.  
Let us also thank the delegates from the Assumption University of Thailand, the University of 
Guam, and the National University of Singapore for joining this event and giving it a regional 
scope.  
FINEX President Ramon Opulencia explains that this competition aims to expose students 
and schools to world-class finance education standards, as well as to promote exchange of 
ideas, cooperation, networking and friendship among the participants. 
We at the Philippine central bank support FINEX in this program for a number of reasons. 
Ladies and gentlemen, you and I know the value of keeping our financial system healthy on 
an institutional, national, regional, and global level. For better or for worse, financial systems 
affect economies and the lives of millions even billions of people.  
It is important to ensure therefore that the people responsible for running the finances of our 
institutions in particular and our financial system in general meet the high standards required 
by their job.  
FINEX deserves our recognition therefore in engaging students and schools to raise the bar 
of excellence in financial education year after year. Let us thank the hardworking members of 
FINEX for their undiminished commitment to this program with a round of applause.  
In this connection, I am looking forward to seeing FINEX work with our schools to make sure 
that  ethical  practices  and  social  responsibility  complete  the  education  of  our  students.  It 
would be helpful to discuss the consequences of bad or good ethical and social responsibility 
practices in particular institutions, here and overseas.  
Of course, running after a healthy bottom line is a valid and natural pursuit. However, this 
should  be  done  within  the  parameters  of  ethical  and  social  responsibility  standards,  if  the 
intention is to stay in business for the long haul.  
In fact, studies have repeatedly shown that given a choice, customers, particularly the youth, 
support companies they perceive as more trustworthy and socially responsible.  
Another reason why the Bangko Sentral supports this annual event is our belief that fair and 
open  competition  elicits  the  best  possible  performance  from  market  players  which  in  turn 
benefits their customers. As such, I look forward to this competition where the final 20 teams 
will apply their holistic competence in crafting their answers.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  students  here  today  remind  us  that  with  good  mentoring  and 
support from their school, family, friends, and industry groups they will be prepared for the 
challenges they will face in the market place. 
For  us  in  the  central  bank,  we  derive  considerable  pleasure  in  the  thought  that  we  are 
nurturing  world-class  and  responsible  financial  leaders.  A  word  of  advice  to  our  young 
competitors: a wise man once said, winning is a great reward but preparing for the future is 
the greater prize.  
I wish therefore that all of you will continue to maintain the high standards of discipline that 
have  brought  you  here.  I  also  wish  that  you  will  apply  your  learnings  to  achieve  financial 
health for yourself and mentor your family, friends and your larger community to achieve the 
same. 
This  is  the  same  rationale  that  underpins  the  Bangko  Sentral’s  economic  and  financial 
education program. Our objective is to empower our people to improve their financial well-
being by making informed decisions on saving, investing and managing their resources. 
In  addition,  having  a  well-informed  population  on  basic  economic  and  financial  concepts 
contributes  to  financial  stability  as  more  Filipinos  become  participants  in  our  financial 
mainstream. 
For  your  information,  latest  available  figures  indicate  that  only  about  20%  of  Filipino 
households  have  bank  accounts.  Nevertheless,  we  are  optimistic  that  given  our  ongoing 
national campaign to broaden and deepen the reach of our financial education program, this 
indicator is bound to improve.  
Our  economic  and  financial  education  program  covers  students  starting  from  Grade  I  to 
college, to teachers and parents, to overseas Filipinos and their dependents, and the general 
public.  Of  course  we  implement  this  in  partnership  with  other  institutions  such  as  the 
Department of Education, the Department of Labor, NGOs, private sector organizations such 
as FINEX, the banking community and multilateral agencies.  
Indeed, by working with a broad network of partners to promote financial education and to 
develop  an  inclusive  financial  system,  we  can  achieve  our  national  goal  of  sustained  and 
inclusive growth for all.  
Ladies and gentlemen, these are not mere buzzwords. Be mindful that while our economy 
continues to grow and expand, at least 20% of our population still live in poverty. Sure, we 
are  making  progress  but  we  need  to  work  on  accelerating  the  process  of  improving  our 
peoples’ quality of life. As a people, we are great. Among many other positive traits, we are 
talented, creative, flexible, fun, hardworking and innovative.  
It is our hope therefore that our students here will continue their journey to become leaders in 
our economy leaders who are world-class, ethical, and socially responsible.  
My understanding is that FINEX will continue to monitor your development, whether you are 
in  the  private  sector  or  in  government  agencies  such  as  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas. 
Yes, if you have the aptitude and the desire to become world-class civil servants, we need 
you to apply with us here at the Bangko Sentral.  
Again, to all the students, the schools you represent, the mentors who have taught you well, 
the organizers- JP Morgan Chase and FINEX, our congratulations for a job well done.  
And to the winners of the 14th Inter-Collegiate Finance Competition, we salute you for being 
at your best among our country’s best. 
Mabuhay ang ating mahal na bansang Pilipinas!  
Maraming salamat sa inyong lahat.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
