Sanusi Lamido Sanusi: Nigeria’s economic development aspirations and 
the leadership question – is there a nexus? 
Speech  by  Mr  Sanusi  Lamido  Sanusi,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Nigeria,  at  the 
2nd General Dr Yakubu Gowon Distinguished Annual Lecture, Lagos, 19 October 2012. 
 Protocols 
1. 
It is indeed a great honour for me to be invited to be a part of the 2012 Yakubu Gowon 
Foundation (YGF) Distinguished Annual Lecture Series, the second in the series. I consider 
it, a unique opportunity and privilege to be asked to present this year’s Annual Lecture, which 
is  to  commemorate  the  78th  Birthday  anniversary  of  an  illustrious  and  eminent  Nigerian, 
General  Dr  Yakubu  Gowon,  GCFR,  for  his  invaluable  contributions  to  the  continued 
existence  and  development  of  our  dear  nation.  Permit  me  to  crave  the  indulgence  of  the 
distinguished  personalities  gathered  here,  to  express  my  sincere  appreciation  to  the 
Management  of  the  YGF  for  tenaciously  pursuing  the  vision  of  the  founding  father  of  the 
YGF,  of  making  the  world  and,  indeed  Nigeria,  a  better  place.  This  vision  encompasses 
amongst  others:  supporting  communities  to  have  access  to  sustainable  healthcare, 
education  and  agriculture  as  well  as  fostering  peaceful  co-existence  through  strategic 
partnerships.  This  vision  remains  a  laudable  and  important  trajectory  for  the  elevation  of 
mankind. 
2. 
I  would  like  to  start  by  placing  on  record,  the  immeasurable  and  unforgettable 
contributions  of  the  Celebrant,  to  ensuring  that  the  country  remains  an  indissoluble  and 
indivisible entity through his committed, engaging and conciliatory leadership style which he 
bestowed  on  Nigeria  during,  unarguably,  the  most  difficult  and  challenging  times  of  her 
existence.  The  task  “To  Keep  Nigeria  One”  and  his  vision  of  “a  united  and  prosperous 
Nigeria” which he led during the trying period of the nation would have remained a mirage if 
not for the commitment and doggedness demonstrated by him and other compatriots living or 
dead. In the same vein, it can be said that the economic foundation of modern Nigeria began 
with  his  administration’s  pursuit  of  infrastructural  expansion  through  the  construction  of 
numerous  road  networks,  waterworks,  airports,  educational  institutions,  dams  and  power 
infrastructure,  etc.,  across  the  length  and  breadth  of  the  country.  Others  include  the 
decimalization  of  the  Nigerian  currency,  the  establishment  of  the  National  Youth  Service 
Corps Scheme and the judicious spending of the petro-naira, which providence bequeathed 
on the nation in the early/mid-1970s, to mention a few. 
3. 
It is against this background of his achievements in leadership and the current public 
perception of a disconnect by the leadership with the developmental quests of the country, 
that  I  have,  with  the  liberty  accorded  me  by  the  organizers,  chosen  “Nigeria’s  Economic 
Development Aspirations and the Leadership Question: Is there A Nexus?” as the title 
of  my  discourse  at  this  distinguished  gathering  today.  This  choice  is  also  to  provoke  our 
thoughts on the need to accelerate the process of grooming and development of leadership 
across the various strata of our society. You will agree with me that it is appalling to observe 
that five decades after Nigeria’s independence, our nation has remained beleaguered with 
the challenges of leadership, particularly, those imbued with selfless and unflinching desire to 
steer the course of our economic development and national unity. 
Nigerian economic development aspirations 
4. 
As  you  will  recall,  in  the  quest  to  improve  the  material  well-being  and  welfare  of  the 
citizens,  various  governments  have  over  time  embarked  upon  numerous  developmental 
policies,  plans,  programmes  and  projects.  Notable  among  these  was  the  First  National 
Development  Plan  (1962–1968),  which  was  designed  to  put  the  economy  on  the  path  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
accelerated growth by prioritizing agricultural and industrial development as well as training of 
high-level and intermediate manpower. The Second National Development Plan (1970–1974), 
through  to  the  Third  National  Development  Plan  (1975–1980),  were  devoted  primarily  to 
reconstruct and rehabilitate infrastructure that were destroyed during the civil war years. This 
period witnessed massive investment of resources into the rehabilitation and construction of 
new infrastructural facilities. 
5.  Moreover, the Fourth National Development Plan (1981–1985) was designed to reduce 
the dependence of the economy on a narrow range of activities and broaden the economic 
base as well as develop the technological base. The economic downturn of the early 1980’s 
necessitated the implementation of Economic Stabilization Measures and later the Structural 
Adjustment Programme (SAP), which was aimed at creating a more market-friendly economy 
and  to  encourage  private  enterprise  through  the  removal  of  cumbersome  administrative 
mechanisms  in  economic  management.  The  economic  deregulation  and  liberalization 
policies of the late 1980’s and 1990’s had the goal of fostering effective allocation of scarce 
resources. Furthermore, Nigeria’s Vision 2010 was aimed at “transforming the country and 
focusing it firmly on the path to becoming a developed nation by the year 2010”. According to 
the document, the private sector was expected to be very active, within a market-oriented, 
highly competitive, broad-based, private sector-driven development process. In addition, the 
return of democratic governance in the country in 1999, brought along with it the introduction 
of  a  series  of  reforms,  aimed  at  redressing  the  distortions  in  the  economy  and  restoring 
economic  growth.  The  National  Economic  Empowerment  and  Development  Strategy 
(NEEDS)  of  2004  was  a  home-grown  poverty  reduction,  value-reorientation  and  socio-
economic development strategy for the country. 
6. 
Let  me  reiterate  the  fact  that  all  plans,  programmes  and  visions  enumerated  above, 
were  to  guarantee  Nigeria’s  economic  development  by  altering  the  model  of  economic 
structure  of  production  and  consumption  pattern,  reduce  dependence  on  oil,  diversify  the 
economic  base,  generate  employment,  create  a  globally  competitive  and  stable  economy. 
Looking back, it is clear that the economy has not actually performed to its fullest potential, 
particularly  in  the  face  of  its  rising  population.  The  Nigerian  economy  has  grossly 
underperformed relative to her enormous resource endowment and the achievements of her 
peers/other developing nations with similar characteristics. This is, particularly so, because 
agriculture has remained largely peasant, while the high contributions of the tertiary sector to 
output suggest that the sector is not really servicing the Nigerian economy but, indeed, other 
economies. Little wonder then that the diversification index remains below 0.4 per cent over 
the years in spite of the numerous reforms that have been put in place. 
Comparison with countries with almost equal economic standing at Nigeria’s 
independence 
7. 
Nigeria’s economic performance has been rather weak and does not reflect its level of 
resource endowments, especially when juxtaposed with the experiences of some emerging 
Asian  economies  that  faced  similar  challenges  and  choices  about  five  decades  ago.  A 
number of East Asian countries, notably, China, Indonesia, Malaysia and Singapore were far 
behind  Nigeria  in  terms  of  GDP  per  capita  in  the  1970s.  Today,  these  countries  have 
transformed  their  economies  and  are  not  only  miles  ahead  of  Nigeria,  but  are  also  major 
players  on  the  global  economic  arena.  In  1970,  while  Nigeria  had  a  GDP  per  capita  of 
US$233.35  and  was  ranked  88th  in  the  world,  China  was  ranked  114th  with  a  GDP  per 
capita of US$111.82. However, with the visionary leaderships and the collective resolve of 
the  citizens,  China  had  recorded  an  impressive  average  annual  growth  rate  of  GDP  of 
9.5 per  cent  at  the  start  of  its  market  reforms  in  1978  to  1994.  Thereafter,  China  has 
sustained this rapid growth, perhaps, the highest in the world and has been transformed to 
the second largest economy in the world behind the USA.  
8. 
Distinguished ladies and gentlemen, it is instructive to also note that the experience of 
Indonesia offers us a great deal of lessons due to the fact of being a plural society with over 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
200 languages and ethnic groups and a population of over 250 million. Indonesia with a per 
capita income of about $55 in 1965, has recorded a faster growth by year 2000 compared 
with other major emerging markets. This was made possible by the good leadership that was 
able  to  surmount  the  numerous  challenges,  and  achieved  tremendous  growth  and 
development such that it now towers over Nigeria in all material aspects of development. As 
a  matter  of  fact,  being  the  largest  economy  in  South-east  Asia,  the  government  has 
introduced wide-ranging reforms. These included the pro-poor, pro-growth, pro-employment 
economic policies coupled with the removal of artificial economic distortions, as well as the 
promotion  of  conservative  fiscal  policies,  which  resulted  in  a  fiscal  deficit  of  less  than 
2 per cent,  among  others.  By  2011, Indonesia’s per  capita  income  had  risen  to  US$2,981, 
with more than 60.0 per cent of the population having access to safe water, compared with 
39.0 per cent for Nigeria. 
9.  With a per capita GDP of US$299 in 1960, Malaysia has successfully transformed from 
a  producer  of  raw  materials  to  an  emerging  multi-sector  economy.  In  2011,  the  real  GDP 
growth rate stood at 5.2 per cent, while the population living below the poverty line is less 
than 4.0 per cent, with unemployment projected at 3.1 per cent. Electricity production was 
about  118.2  billion  kw/h  while  consumption  stood  at  93.8  billion  kw/h.  Foreign  exchange 
reserves stood at US$129.6 billion while her total debt stood at about US$78.2 billion. The 
transformation of the country’s economy from mono-primary product exporter to a dynamic 
and vibrant industrialized nation has been linked to a variety of pull factors namely, political 
stability,  prudent  and  influx  of  foreign  investors,  business-friendly  policies,  productive 
workforce, developed infrastructure that is comparable to that of any western country, and a 
host  of  other  amenities making the  country  a  good  destination  for foreign  investments.  By 
2011, Nigeria was still lagging behind with GDP per capita income of $1,500 compared with 
Malaysia’s US$2,981 and 87.0 per cent of population having access to safe water. 
10. 
In  1960,  Singapore’s  GDP  per  capita  was  $395  which  grew  to  $925  by  1970,  while 
Nigeria’s rose from US$96 to US$219. By 2011, with GDP per capita income of US$1,500 
Nigeria  was  seriously  lagging  behind  Singapore’s  US$43,865  per  capita  GDP.  The 
proportion of the population with access to safe water increased to almost 100 per cent of the 
population  of  Singaporeans.  Today  Singapore  ranked  as  the  world’s  2nd  most  open 
economy in the Asian Pacific region. The country is highly developed, and operates under a 
successful  free  market  system  and  an  environment  devoid  of  corruption.  The  government 
runs  efficient  and  competitive  tax  rates  and  low  public  sector  expenditure.  The  regulatory 
environment has been flexible and transparent with a strong tradition of openness to global 
trade  and  investment,  which  continued  to  boost  the  country’s  productivity.  As  a  fall-out  of 
best  practices,  the  private  sector  has  been  the  source  of  Singapore’s  economic  success, 
while the government continues to play a proactive role in guiding its economic development. 
The country is ranked as the 3rd wealthiest nation in the world. The Singapore miracle was 
made possible by years of successive visionary leadership that were able to transform the 
economy through consistent policies. 
11.  A  cursory  examination  of  these  three  emerging  economies  reveals  how  these 
economies have been remarkably transformed over a space of 50 years. A closer look at the 
aforementioned  indices  signaled  to  the  fact  that  Nigeria  failed  to  keep  pace  with  its 
contemporaries, despite being more resource endowed than these countries. As a matter of 
fact,  history  has  it  that  Malaysia  at  the  early  stage  of  its  development  procured  improved 
oil-palm  and  rubber  seeds  from  Nigeria  and  became  the  world’s  largest  palm-oil 
producer/exporter and a major exporter of rubber, with Nigeria having nothing to show for it, 
but instead has become a major importer of these commodities. 
12.  Perhaps,  at  this  point  we  must  ask  ourselves  why  these  countries  fared  better  than 
Nigeria.  The  obvious  answer  no  doubt  points  to  the  leadership  question.  Today,  these 
countries  have  been  able 
that 
characterized  their  economies  at  the  early  stages  of  development  having  transited  from 
poverty,  corruption  and  political  imbroglio  into  a  more  stable  and  prosperous  nations. 
to  successfully  surmount 
the  economic  quagmires 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Therefore,  the  success  stories  of  these  East  Asian  countries  attested  to  the  truism  that 
leadership plays a crucial role in the development of any society. The commitment and good 
governance  by  the  leaders  in  these  environments  translated  the  societal  aspiration  and 
vision into concrete terms as demonstrated in the amazing economic and political progress. 
Visionary leadership and good governance, no doubt, remains the hallmark of pushing the 
growth and development frontiers as well as accelerating the pace of economic progress. We 
can, without any fear of contradiction assert that these leaders were nationalists, visionaries 
and uncompromising leaders in their various rights. 
13.  At  this  juncture,  it  will  not  be  inappropriate  to  affirm  some  of  those  leaders  who 
championed the course of development in their countries. Mohamad Mahathir of Malaysia, 
Jiang  Zemin  of  Peoples’  Republic  of  China,  Lee  Kuan  Yew  of  Singapore,  Suharto  of 
Indonesia, to mention a few, were reformers and change champions in their own right. The 
former Prime Minister of Malaysia, Mahathir Mohammed was responsible for the creation of 
a  world class economy in  Malaysia, and  was able to guarantee higher standards of living, 
higher  literacy  and  higher  life  expectancy  for  his  people.  Accordingly,  he  implemented 
appropriate economic policies to encourage enterprises in Malaysia to grow and expand by 
adopting  latest  technology  and  management  practices  and  ultimately  compete  globally. 
Mention should also be made of the former President Jiang Zemin of the Peoples’ Republic 
of  China.  His  leadership  qualities  were  extolled  for  exposing  centralized  communist 
economic system to capitalist market stimuli and achieving spectacular progress for China. 
What can be gleaned from the Asian experience 
14.  Certainly, the rapid growth in Asian emerging economies has the potential to provide 
some lessons to Nigeria. The remarkable success of the economies of the Asian countries 
raises  the question  of factors that accounted for  these  success  stories. The  Asian  miracle 
was able to create resources which were managed efficiently to promote economic growth 
and  development.  The  structure  has  helped  in  freeing  the  countries  from  corruption  as 
resources are directed to areas that produce high economic returns. 
15.  An  indispensable  lesson  from  the  East  Asian  experience  is  the  pivotal  role  that  the 
political leadership played in directing their growth paths toward ensuring economic progress 
and  development.  This  also  underscores  the  importance  of  a  stable  and  enduring  political 
environment that is conducive for establishing the ideal condition for economic and industrial 
take-off,  particularly  focusing  on technology-driven  industrialization  to  support  exports. The 
political  stability  should  encompass  adequate  security  to  foster  the  requisite  environment 
under which business and commercial activities can thrive. 
16.  Another  important  lesson  from  the  Asian  Tigers  is  the  systematic  and  coordinated 
policy  intervention  by  the  government  to  steer  the  economy  to  the  right  path.  Worthy  of 
mention  is  the  areas  of  industrial  policies  directed  at  developing  strategic  sectors  of  their 
economies  as  well  as  the  cooperation  between  the  private  sector  and  the  government. 
Government policies  were primarily geared to ensuring private sector competition between 
small and large companies as well as promotion of export-led growth. 
17.  The  issue  of  research  and  development,  (R&D)  was  at  the  front  burner  of  the 
development  strategies  of  the  Asian  nations.  These  countries  were  able  to  adapt  and 
customize the products of R&D as the bedrock of their technological advancement to support 
the  export-led  growth  strategy.  The  adaptation  of  R&D  was  instrumental  to  ensuring  the 
diversification and widening of the export base. 
Challenges of Nigeria’s economic development and the leadership question 
18.  Let  me  state  emphatically  that  though  the  Nigerian  economy  has  achieved  some 
considerable progress, the accomplishment is far below her realizable potentials given her 
abundant  human  and  material  resource  endowment.  The  country  is  still  grappling  with 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
numerous challenges, which has continued to militate against the achievement of economic 
transformation.  First,  from  the  standpoint  of  leadership,  the  country  is  seriously  beset  with 
numerous shortcomings in the leadership arena, be it in the spheres of politics, corporate or 
at  the  community  level,  etc.  In  fact,  the  case  of  Nigeria  could  be  rightly  classified  as 
leadership decadence across all spectrum of human endeavour. The bane of leadership in 
our environment could conveniently be grouped into the following broad categories. 
• 
Prevalence  of  executive/legislative/judicial  lawlessness  and  corruption  within  the 
body polity as the personal interests of many leaders override collective goals. The 
frenzied  quest  for  wealth  over  and  above  all  other  considerations  has  rendered 
leadership most ineffective. 
Abuse  and  manipulation  of  ethnic  relationship  by  leaders  in  authority  by  way  of 
nepotism, tribalism, favouritism and religious bigotry. 
Lack  of  leadership  education  and  skills  to  discharge  expected  roles  and  perform 
leadership duties effectively. 
Inadequate  motivation  of  subordinates  and  followers  leading  to  disconnect  in 
leadership and followership relationship. 
   19.  Second, the economy is yet to achieve the necessary structural changes required to 
jump-start  rapid  and  sustainable  economic  growth.  The  attitudinal  and  structural  changes 
needed  for  economic  transformation  are  still  very  much  lacking.  This  is  traceable  to  the 
manifestations  of  structural  rigidities  occasioned  by  the  apparent  weak  linkages  existing 
among  the  primary,  secondary  and  the  tertiary  sectors  of  the  economy.  The  huge  foreign 
exchange  inflows  from  oil  have  also  not  been  effectively  harnessed  to  ensure  a 
comprehensive diversification of the economy. 
20.  Third, the economy is faced with widespread dilapidated and dysfunctional economic 
and social infrastructure. This has hindered the growth of the economy, and was the result of 
decades of neglects, weak technological base and poor maintenance culture over the years. 
It  is  also  a  reflection  of  the  low  research  and  development  efforts  on  the  part  of  the 
government. 
21.  Fourth, corruption has become endemic and has continued to ravage the entire strata 
of  the  society.  In  fact,  corruption  is  a  direct  result  of  the  weak  leadership,  poor  value  and 
reward  system  in  the  country.  According  to  the Transparency  International  2012,  Nigeria’s 
position in the Corruption Perception Index for 2011 was 143 out of a total of 183 countries 
with a score of 2.4/10, which clearly reveals Nigeria as one of the most corrupt countries in 
the world. 
22.  Fifth, the menace of weak governance constitutes a serious challenge to the various 
efforts and reforms meant to achieve economic growth for sustainable development. Thus, 
the  prevalence  of  weak  institutions,  poor  governance  as  well  as  poor  ethical  standards  in 
most public and private organizations, constrain the realization of economic policy objectives 
of the government. The effect of all these have permeated the country’s regulation and law 
enforcement, rendering them ineffective. 
23.  Sixth,  is  the  environmental  factor,  particularly  the  weak  investment  climate,  owing  to 
the legal and institutional challenges as well as the spate of insecurity, which has continued 
to constrain massive flow of investment in the key potential wealth-creating and employment 
generating sectors of the economy. 
24.  Finally, policy incoherence and inconsistencies and occasional policy somersault also 
pose a major constraint to economic development in Nigeria. Though, government policies, 
plans and initiatives tend to be laudable, they are most often discontinued with any change in 
regime. Thus, regime changes in the past had often truncated the implementation of good 
projects and programmes. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Addressing the leadership challenges: what type is ideal for Nigeria? 
25.  Given  the  various  challenges  confronting  economic  performance  in  the  country,  one 
pertinent question to ask is – How do we refocus our energies (political and corporate elites 
as  well  as  the  ordinary  citizens)  to  attain  the  much  desired  economic  progress  and 
development? I am sure you all know the answer – Leadership rejuvenation at all strata of 
our society. This is because leadership is the hub upon which every other thing revolves. 
26.  According  to  ATG  Educational  Series,  leadership  is  the  process  or  the  ability  to 
motivate others to unite and work towards achieving a common goal. From the standpoint of 
our current situation, Nigeria needs leadership at all the various levels of society to manage 
the wide spectrum of our socio-economic and political activities. As the leader of all leaders, 
the political leadership is very vital in achieving the total transformation of the economy as 
seen in the case of the East Asian Economies that were able to transform over a space of 
fifty years from minor to major players on the world economic stage. 
27.  For Nigeria, it is essential for the political leaders to be visionary and transformational, 
to be able to see, project and assemble a vision of a desired future for the nation. In addition, 
they should be selfless, engaging and motivational as these are the fundamental prerequisite 
for  mobilizing  followership,  particularly  in  a  multi-ethnic,  multi-religious  and  multicultural 
society like Nigeria. As a motivator, leadership vision must be clear, attractive and attainable. 
An engaging leadership would be able to build bridges across divides, and as such be able 
to  foster  necessary  harmony  for  collective  good.  Leadership  that  would  be  effective  in  a 
setting 
radical  and  progressive 
decisions/actions. Finally, such leadership must be committed, determined and persistent to 
be able to realize a vision as well as attain the desired goals and objectives. As engraved on 
the plaque on the wall of Ray Kroc an American businessman who was behind the success 
of McDonald’s Corporation: 
like  Nigeria  must  also  be  courageous 
take 
to 
“Nothing  in  this  world  can  take  the  place  of  persistence.  Talent  will  not; 
nothing is more common than unsuccessful men with great talents. Genius 
will  not;  unrewarded  genius  is  almost  a  proverb.  Education  will  not;  the 
world is full of educated derelicts. Persistence and determination alone are 
omnipotent”. 
28. 
In  the  light  of  the  foregoing  quotation,  Nigeria  would  require  committed,  determined, 
and  persistent  leaders  in  order  to  be  able  to  realize  the  collective  vision  and  to  take  our 
nation to the “promised land”. Therefore, the attainment of the Vision 20:2020 to be among 
the top 20 largest economies in the world by 2020 is contingent upon our contributions as 
leaders in our various callings. 
Concluding remarks 
29.  Ladies and Gentlemen, I will like to close my discourse with a quote that would serve 
as watchwords in the discharge of our leadership duties and responsibilities. These words 
are golden and would assist us in re-evaluating our ways and actions as leaders. According 
to  Phil  Dourado,  author,  Speaker,  Leadership  Development,  Speaker  and  Journalist,  and 
Creator of the Leadership hub: 
“People  need  to  know  who  you  are  and  what  you  stand  for;  before  they 
agree  to  be  led  by  you.  Leadership  is  an  agreement.  You  lead  with 
permission.  If  your  self-story  is  not  absolutely  consistent  and  based  on 
integrity – who you really are – people will see through it and not give you 
permission to lead them. Most often, they will hide their disagreement and 
your apparent leadership will be fake”. 
30.  Given  the  inability  of  Nigeria  to  realize  its  development  aspirations  during  the  past 
52 years of political independence, and the seemingly forlorn hope for realistic progress by 
many citizens, it is obvious that the country needs a new kind of leadership. Such leadership 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
should be inspiringly creative and resolutely courageous. It is this kind of leadership that will 
be  capable  of  taking  the  country  into  new  frontiers  of  development,  as  has  been 
demonstrated  by  the  Asian  countries  that  I  had  enumerated  earlier.  Leadership  with  a 
different kind of mind— leadership that sees beyond the obvious to spot the unusual solution 
if we are to realize the aspirations of the Vision 20:2020 document. 
31.  Eminent  Personalities,  Distinguished  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  it  is  on  this  note  that  I 
implore all of us to imbibe the right attributes of leadership in our various endeavours so as to 
able  to  reposition  our  various  organizations  on  a  higher  pedestal  towards  advancing  the 
course of our national development and ultimately improve the welfare of our people. 
32. 
I thank you all for your attention.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
