Anand Sinha: Perspectives on co-operation 
Valedictory address by Mr Anand Sinha, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at 
the International Conference on Cooperatives, organised by College for Agriculture Banking, 
Pune 16–17 November 2012. 
 Assistance  provided  by  Mr.  Negi,  Mr.  Gopal,  Mr.  Ajit  Kumar,  Ms.  Scenta  Joy  and  Mr.  Yarasi  Jayakumar  is 
gratefully acknowledged. 
Ms. Meena Hemchandra, Principal, Mr. R L Sharma, Vice-Principal, College for Agricultural 
Banking (CAB), Mr. Karuppasamy, the Executive Director, Mr. A. Vaidyanthan, a luminary in 
the field of development economics, distinguished participants from both India and abroad, 
my colleagues from Reserve Bank and the print and electronic media. 
It is both a pleasure as well as a privilege for me to address this august gathering today. The 
International Conference on Co-operatives, organized by the CAB, is a part of international 
initiatives  celebrating  the  spirit  of  co-operation  in  the  year  2012,  declared  by  the  United 
Nations as the International Year of Co-operatives. The theme of the International Year of 
Co-operatives,  “Cooperative  enterprises  build  a  better  world”,  represents,  quite  aptly,  the 
very important role played by co-operatives in poverty reduction, employment generation and 
social  integration,  eventually  leading  to  a  better  world.  The  role  of  co-operation  in  social 
development and empowerment is well acknowledged and its role is only going to be more 
vital in future. 
The  theme  “Leveraging  Co-operative  Advantage”  chosen  for  this  conference  is  very 
contextual, especially in the backdrop of a much weakened global economy. I am very happy 
to  note  that  the  distinguished  co-operators,  scholars  and  academicians  present  here  had 
very intense discussion and fruitful deliberation on different facets of co-operative movement 
during the last one and half days. 
Before  I  delve  into  the  core  of  my  address  today,  let  me  touch  upon  a  few  aspects  of 
co-operation, its evolution and, most importantly, its relevance in current turbulent times. 
to 
leverage  on 
their  collective  strengths  and  overcome 
Concept of co-operation 
Co-operation is a basic and innate quality which prompts us to work together, live together 
and help one another in times of crisis for mutual welfare and betterment. Co-operation is as 
old  as  the  human  society  and,  I  must  say,  is  the  bedrock  of  any  civilization.  Co-operation 
enables  people 
individual 
weaknesses.  I  am  reminded  of  a  quote  “If  you  want  to  be  incrementally  better,  be 
competitive; but if you want to be exponentially better, be cooperative”. While competition is 
good, excessive competition can lead to a downward spiral or a race to the bottom as seen 
in  the  unfolding  of  the  current  crisis.  Excessive  competition  leads  to  perverse  incentive 
structures  and  reckless  innovation  which  needs  to  be  managed  through  a  self-regulatory 
mechanism  with  the  regulatory  framework  providing  a  backstop.  It  is  evident  that  the  self-
regulatory  mechanism  is  actually  a  co-operation  framework.  And  it  is  to  the  benefit  of  all. 
Social and economic progress would have not been possible without co-operation amongst 
people. 
The  concept  of  co-operation  is  not  just  restricted  to  human  beings.  The  flock  formation  of 
birds  is  attributed  to  co-operative  food  hunting,  information  exchange  and  protection  from 
predators.  The  formations  adopted  by  birds  while  flying  together  are  aerodynamically  very 
efficient taking advantage of the changing wind patterns and the current created by the birds’ 
wings. Further, birds that have discovered good feeding sites are found to lead other birds by 
forming flocks. It is also observed that information exchange is quite developed in species 
such as honey bees. Thus, co-operative principles are universal and all pervasive. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Evolution of co-operative movement in India 
Co-operative movement as an economic concept is more than 100 year old in India. The co-
operative movement in India emerged as a Government policy to address the distress and 
discontent in the agricultural sector in the latter part of the nineteenth century due to famine 
conditions and the absence of institutional arrangements to provide finance to farmers. The 
Co-operative  Credit  Societies  Act,  1904  envisaged  formation  of  agricultural  co-operatives. 
The subsequent legislations provided for the formation of co-operatives in other activities and 
ensured strengthening and further development of co-operative sector. The impetus provided 
by  the  Government  was  evident  in  the  emphasis  placed  on  co-operation  in  the  five  year 
plans.  The  first  five  year  plan  underscored  the  adoption  of  the  co-operative  method  of 
organization to cover all aspects of community development. The second plan emphasised 
“building up a cooperative sector as part of a scheme of planned development” as being one 
of the central aims of National Policies and aimed at enabling co-operatives to increasingly 
become the principal basis for organization of economic activity.1  
Co-operation  is  not  necessarily  restricted  to financial  activities,  though we  bankers tend to 
think  of  co-operatives  more  as  credit  co-operatives.  Co-operation  embraces  non-economic 
activities such as production, processing, marketing distribution, transport, irrigation, labour, 
etc.,  and  what  better  example  than  the  Warana  Bazaar  story  that  was  very  beautifully 
narrated to us this morning. 
Co-operative credit structure in India 
The co-operative credit structure in India can broadly be divided into two segments viz. rural 
and  urban.  The  Urban  co-operative  structure  comprises  of  Urban  (Primary)  Co-operative 
Banks numbering 1618 with 8235 branches spread over 328 districts in the country as at the 
end  March  2012.  The  rural  co-operative  structure  in  India,  on  the  other  hand,  comprises 
about 94531 co-operatives categorized into short term and long term. The short-term rural 
co-operative  credit  structure  (STCCS)  comprises  State  Co-operative  Bank  at  the  apex 
(State)  level,  Central  Co-operative  Banks  at  the  intermediate  (district)  level  and  Primary 
Agricultural Credit Societies at the ground (village) level. The long term co-operative credit 
structure (LTCCS) comprises State Co-operative Agriculture and Rural Development Banks 
(SCARDBs)  and  Primary  Co-operative  Agriculture  and  Rural  Development  Banks 
(PCARDBs). The latter structure does not come under the regulatory jurisdiction of Reserve 
Bank as it is not covered under the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (AACS). 
Recognising  the  deep-rooted  integration  of  the  co-operative  structure  in  the  Indian  socio-
economic  system,  policy  makers  have  accorded  great  significance  to  its  development  and 
strengthening. A Task Force on Revival of Short-Term Rural Co-operative Credit Institutions 
was  constituted  by  the  Government  of  India  under  the  chairmanship  of  Professor  A. 
Vaidyanathan  in  August  2004 to formulate  a  practical  and  implementable  plan  of  action to 
rejuvenate short term rural co-operative credit structure. Based on the recommendations of 
the Task Force and in consultation with the State Governments, the Government of India has 
approved  a  package  for  revival  of  the  short-term  rural  co-operative  credit  structure.  The 
package seeks to 
• 
• 
provide financial assistance to bring the system to an acceptable level of health; 
introduce legal and institutional reforms necessary for its democratic, self-reliant and 
efficient functioning; and 
take measures to improve the quality of management. 
                                                 
1  Report of the High Powered Committee on Cooperatives (May 2009), Ministry of Agriculture, Government of 
India 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
As  regards  development  of  long  term  credit  co-operatives,  the  work  was  entrusted  to  the 
Task  Force  under  the  Chairmanship  of  Prof.  A  .Vaidyanathan  to  suggest,  inter  alia,  a 
comprehensive  strategy  for  institutional  financing  of  long  term  agriculture  and  the  role  the 
Co-operative  structure  can  play  in  implementing  that  strategy  consistent  with  prudent 
financial management. Subsequently, another Task Force (Chairman: Shri G C Chaturvedi) 
was constituted to look into various aspects of the long-term co-operative credit structure, the 
report of which is under the consideration of Government of India.  
Let  me  now  turn  to  Urban  Co-operative  banks,  the  regulation  of  which  is  my  direct 
responsibility. 
Growth of urban co-operative banks 
In  the  earlier  phase,  the  Banking  Companies  Act,  1949  had  specifically  excluded 
co-operative banks from its purview as they are not banking companies. When the Banking 
Regulation  Act  was  made  applicable  to  UCBs  in  1966,  there  were  about  1100  UCBs  with 
deposits and advances of ₹.1.67 billion and ₹.1.53 billion respectively. Since then there has 
been phenomenal growth in terms of their numbers, size and scale of operations. As at the 
end of 1996, the number of UCBs increased to 1501 and their deposits and advances rose 
significantly to ₹.241.61 billion and ₹.179.27 billion. The UCBs continued to grow at a fast 
pace  till  2003,  when  their  number  increased  to  1941  and  their  deposits  and  advances  to 
₹.1015.46  billion  and  ₹.648.80  billion  respectively.  Subsequently,  the  number  of  UCBs 
declined in 2006 to 1853 due to the consolidation efforts we have undertaken to address the 
weaknesses in the UCB sector. Resultantly the sector is in a much better shape than before. 
As on March 2012 there were 1618 UCBs with total deposits of ₹.2385 billion and advances 
of ₹.1580 billion. 
Salient features of the UCB sector – heterogeneity 
The UCB sector is unique in that there is a significant degree of heterogeneity among the 
banks  in  this  sector  in  terms  of  size,  geographical  distribution,  performance  and  financial 
strength.  There  is  also  diversity  among  the  urban  co-operative  banks  in  the  levels  of 
professionalism, standards of corporate governance and adoption of technology. 
While  on  the  one  hand,  there  are  a  number  of  small  neighbourhood  banks functioning for 
mutual  interest  of  their  members,  on  the  other,  there  are  several  large  UCBs  with  a  wide 
network  of  branches,  large  number  of  depositors  and  borrowers,  many  of  whom  are 
medium/large corporates. In the latter kind of UCBs, the co-operative structure remains only 
as  an  organizational  arrangement  and  their  business  model  and  goals  are  more  akin  to 
commercial banks. Let me quote a few aspects of heterogeneity as examples. 
Size-wise distribution 
The  UCBs  are  disparate  in  their  size  as  measured  by  the  size  of  their  deposits  and 
advances.  2.4%  of  the  UCBs  have  a  deposit  base  of  above  ₹.10  billion  and  account  for 
45.35% of the total deposits of UCB sector, while 15.9% of the UCBs have a deposit base of 
less than ₹.100 million and account for only 0.7% of deposits of the sector. Further, 1.2% of 
the  UCBs  have  advances  of  more  than  ₹.10  billion  and  account  for  36.5%  of  the  total 
advances of the sector while 28.4% of the UCBs have advance of less than ₹.100 million and 
account for only 1.8% of the aggregate advances of the sector. 
Geographical distribution 
The geographical distribution of urban co-operative banks across the country is also skewed, 
with significant concentration in southern and western regions. Out of 28 states in India 78% 
of the branches of UCBs are concentrated in only 5 states. There are eighteen states which 
have less than twenty UCBs operating.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Licensing of new UCBs: setting up of expert committee (Malegam Committee) 
An Expert Committee on licensing of new Urban Co-operative Banks (Malegam Committee) 
was  constituted  in  December  2010  by  the  Reserve  Bank  with  a  view  to  increasing  the 
coverage of banking services amongst local communities and for studying the advisability of 
granting new urban co-operative banking licenses. The terms of reference of the Committee 
also included reviewing the role and performance of UCBs over the last decade, reviewing 
the  need  for  organization  of  new  UCBs  in  the  context  of  the  existing  legal  framework  for 
UCBs,  a  thrust  on  financial  inclusion  in  the  economic  policy  and  proposed  entry  of  new 
commercial banks into the banking space. The recommendations of the Committee are being 
examined by the Reserve Bank. 
Let me now touch upon a few issues related to co-operative institutions in general and UCBs 
in particular. 
Relevance of co-operative structures in the globalised world 
Often  one  hears  the  argument  that  co-operative  structures  are  more  suited  for  small  and 
developing economies and that they may not have great relevance in the globalised world. 
But I feel co-operatives do have their role to play, and will continue to remain relevant, even 
in a globalised world. With globalization, many new avenues are created which co-operatives 
could  use  to  make  their  presence  felt.  The  Report  of  the  High  Powered  Committee  on 
Co-operatives (May 2009) has highlighted that globalization creates additional opportunities 
in newer areas which are very important for people and communities but are not regarded as 
commercially  viable.  The  report  suggested  that  traditional  areas  of  social  sector  such  as 
education,  health, transportation,  water  supply,  forest management,  electricity  are  some  of 
the  areas  where  “cooperative  solutions  could  be  superior  to  either  public  or  private 
approaches  to  utility  management”.  There  is  ample  scope  for  co-operatives  to  emerge  as 
independent and self-reliant institutions for self-help and collective good. 
Co-operatives in post-crisis world 
The world economy is yet to recover from the crisis which struck the financial sector. Barring 
certain  growth  pockets,  general  slowdown  in  economy  continues  unabated.  Earlier,  there 
was  a  very  strong  belief  that  the  emerging  and  developing  economies  (EDEs)  were 
decoupled from the developed countries and that the shocks arising from these developed 
economies will not adversely impact the EDEs. The global financial crisis has proved these 
assumptions wrong. Even while not having the features which led to the crisis, the EDEs did 
experience slow down due to the transmission of crisis through trade, finance and confidence 
channels. 
While the slowdown has hit all segments of the society hard, its effect is particularly severe 
on the weaker segments. In the ensuing recession, the global economy has lost more than 
USD 4 billion in output and almost 28 million jobs. This has sharpened the focus on inclusive 
growth and equitable development. The world is wiser with the realization that growth and 
development, bereft of equity and inclusiveness, may not fetch to the mankind sustainable 
peace and happiness, the ultimate goals of all human endeavours. This is so because in the 
absence of financial inclusion, it would be hard to maintain financial stability because, it is no 
secret that exclusion breeds unrest and social turmoil leading to instability. 
Financial institutions’ role is to serve the real economy and not to become the master of it. It 
is true that financial engineering does help in creating a vibrant financial market but unlike 
material science where innovations lead us to definite products and services, the innovations 
in financial markets, at times, give us complex products with uncertain results and benefit the 
employees rather than the shareholders and the society. Co-operative institutions built on the 
principles of self-help and mutual co-operation inasmuch as they enable inclusive growth by 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
involving even less privileged, engage in basic banking and that is where they should stay. 
They clearly have a greater role to play in the post crisis world. 
In fact, the lessons from the global financial crisis veer us towards keeping the basic banking 
separate from the investment banking or casino banking as it is more popularly being called 
of  late.  While  casino  banking  has  its  own  place,  the  criticality  of  basic  banking  and  the 
importance of keeping it separate from more risky investment banking has been emphatically 
argued in the aftermath of the crisis. The regulatory framework as suggested by Volker rule 
in the US and the Vickers’ report in the UK recommend this separation. In India, however, 
the  regulations  and  the  organisational  structure  of  banks  have  ensured  that  the  risky 
activities of investment banking segment are contained and do not impact the basic banking 
segment adversely. 
Contribution of co-operative institutions 
The  contribution  of  Co-operative  Banks  and  other  credit  co-operatives  has  generally  been 
evaluated  in  economic  terms.  These  institutions  have  often  been  lauded  and,  at  times, 
criticized in the context of their usefulness (or lack of it) in the economic upliftment of people 
of  smaller  means.  But  the  point  which  has  often  been  missed  out  is  their  very  profound 
contribution to the democratization of social behaviour in general and the democratization of 
economic behaviour in particular. In a society, where joint family system is disintegrating fast, 
co-operatives may also be looked upon as an alternative social support mechanism. 
Democracy vs efficiency 
Many  of  the  practitioners  and  thinkers  of  co-operative  structure  are  facing  the  dilemma  of 
finding a delicate balance between democracy and efficiency as the two are often considered 
mutually exclusive of each other. But in order to restore the credibility of co-operatives in the 
eyes  of  the  public,  it  is  essential  to  get  our  priorities  right.  A  co-operative  institution 
essentially is “...an association of persons who have voluntarily joined together to achieve a 
common  end  through  the  formation  of  a  democratically  controlled  organization,  making 
equitable  contributions  to  the  capital  required  and  accepting  a  fair  share  of  the  risks  and 
benefits of the undertaking in which the members actively participate.” Any attempt to infuse 
efficiency  by  sacrificing  democracy,  appears  to  me,  a  non  co-operative  solution  to  a 
co-operative problem. 
The  success  of  co-operative  institutions  depends  on  active  member  involvement  and 
economic participation. It has, however, been observed that member participation is very low 
in  the  election  process  of  credit  co-operatives.  A  recent  study  conducted  by  College  of 
Agricultural Banking, Pune on UCBs also corroborates this fact where it reveals that voting 
percentage is as low as 5 to 10% of total membership in many of the Co-operative banks. 
This puts a question mark on the true democratic character of the co-operative organization. 
One can hardly dispute that it is democracy and member control which are the hallmark of 
co-operatives  which  distinguish  Co-operative  banking  from  commercial  banking.  Self-
governing  bodies  like  NAFCUB  and  state  federations  may  involve  themselves  more  pro-
actively in ensuring higher member participation. 
Participation of depositors 
While  borrowers  are  required  to  become  members  of  the  UCB  and  have  voting  rights, 
depositors are not required to become members. Resultantly, the depositors who are major 
stakeholders of the UCBs are made to become nominal or associate members without voting 
rights,  and  are  left  out  of  the  decision  making.  As  observed  by  the  Expert  Committee  on 
Licensing  of  new  UCBs  (Malegam  Committee),  this  practice  has  led  to  limited  member 
participation in UCBs , even while having a large number of members as most of them do not 
have  voting  rights.  The  Committee  observed  that  the  control  of  UCBs  should  shift  from 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
borrowers  to  depositors  and  that  50  per  cent  in  value  of  deposits  to  be  held  by  voting 
members. 
Size and cooperativeness conundrum 
Despite the professed philosophy of co-operative banking to grow organically with a focus on 
community service, there is a dilemma between size and cooperativeness. The co-operative 
group  is  strongest  when  it  is  small,  while  the  co-operative  enterprise  also  needs  a  certain 
size  to  be  economically  viable.  But  economization  often  turns  into  commercialization  and 
resultantly  the  members  of  co-operatives  are  reduced  to  the  status  of  mere  customers  or 
mere  shareholders  without  any  opportunity  or  interest  to  participate  actively  in  the  goal 
setting and control of the organisation. 
The membership in large co-operative societies is composed of heterogeneous sub-groups, 
residing in different areas belonging to different social-economic strata and having different 
economic  profiles.  In  such  co-operatives  the  social  cohesion  of  members,  their  feeling  of 
group solidarity and their interest in active participation could be a casualty. 
Multiplicity of credit delivery channels 
Thanks  to  the  combined  efforts  of  all  stakeholders,  commercial  banks  and  regional  rural 
banks in this country have started playing an important role in financial inclusion and financial 
literacy. Their outreach has also increased through banking correspondents (BCs). In such a 
scenario,  some  may  argue  against  the  multiplicity  of  formal  credit  delivery  channels  in 
general  and  existence  of  Co-operative  banks  in  particular.  But  keeping  in  view  the  vast 
unbanked  and  heterogonous  population  of  this  country,  there  are  stronger  arguments  in 
favour  of  giving  people  a  menu  of  choices.  The  co-operative  banking  channel,  being 
essentially a community based banking model, is more suited to design customized products 
and services to cater to the specific needs of different ethnic and social groups that exist in 
this country. The existence of different forms of non-formal credit channels and chit funds, 
particularly  in  the  north  eastern  provinces,  clearly  underscores  the  need  for  customized 
banking products and services for different population groups. The commercial banks have 
had to undertake this responsibility in the absence of adequate efforts by the co-operative 
banking systems. I underscore the huge business opportunity for the co-operative banking in 
this segment. 
Accessibility and availability of financial services 
Although  the  issues  of  accessibility  and  availability  of  financial  services  in  rural  vis-a-vis 
urban areas are hugely different, unfortunately, the scenario of financial exclusion, more or 
less,  remains  the  same.  While  in  remote  areas,  banking  services  are  neither  adequately 
available nor accessible; in urban areas, however, they are available in good measure but 
are not accessible by the poor. People living in urban slums are as financially excluded as 
their counterparts living in unbanked villages. This brings into focus the demand side issues 
of financial inclusion. I believe credit co-operatives, being member driven organisations, are 
more suited to handle the demand side issues like financial literacy and skill development. In 
fact,  education, training and  information  is  one of  the  internationally  accepted  principles  of 
co-operation and addressing the demand side issues would go a long way in achieving our 
goal of financial inclusion. 
Co-operatives for people of small means 
Indian  co-operative  banks  are  characterised  by  huge  asymmetry  of  size  ranging  from 
balance sheet size of a few lakhs of rupees to thousands of crores. However, whether big or 
small, co-operative institutions are by default meant for people of small means. The market 
segments commercial banks are catering to, as part of their priority sector obligations, credit 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
co-operatives  are  supposed  to  have  them  as  their  niche  markets.  If  this  noble  cause  is 
served  by  smaller  entities  among  co-operatives,  one  may  be  tempted  to  say  “small  is 
beautiful”. 
I  have  mentioned  earlier  that  Co-operative  banks  essentially  engage  in  basic  banking  and 
they  remain  in  that  space.  However,  co-operative  banks,  particularly  the  bigger  ones,  like 
commercial  banks,  often  get  allured  to  high  value  loans  and  bulk  deposits  to  achieve 
“economies  of  scale”.  In  a  country  like  India,  where  there  is  a  large  chunk  of  unbanked 
population,  the  co-operative  banks  need  to  also  keep  serving  the  marginal  participants  as 
one of their primary objectives and should not be carried away in the race to grow big. 
Governance and regulation of co-operative banks 
I find from the programme schedule that the conference started with deliberations on “Policy, 
laws, governance & enabling environment”. Reserve Bank, as a regulator of banking sector 
is  involved  with  the  regulation  and  supervision  of  Co-operative  banks.  I  would,  therefore, 
prefer to deal with governance and regulatory issues in a greater detail. 
Corporate governance and principles of co-operation 
Corporate  Governance  relates  to  a  system  in  which  the  interests  of  the  whole  gamut  of 
stakeholders  are  recognized  and  conflicts  among  them  are  sought  to  be  reconciled.  The 
concept  of  corporate  governance  is  not  much  different  than  the  internationally  accepted 
principles  of  co-operation.  One  of  the  cardinal  principles  of  co-operation  as  accepted  by 
International  Co-operative  Alliance  (IAC)  is  “member  economic  participation”  indicating 
contributing  equitably  to,  and  controlling  democratically,  the  capital  of  co-operative  by  the 
members.  Equitable  appropriation  of  surplus  is  one  such  fine  balancing  act  of  reconciling 
conflicting  interest  of  various  stakeholders.  Unlike  commercial  entities,  profit  making  is  not 
the  goal  or  end  in  itself  for  co-operatives,  but  it  is  just  a  means  to  achieve  the  noble 
objectives of equitable economic development of the society. 
If  a  shareholder  of  a  Co-operative  Bank  is  looking  for  higher  and  higher  return  on  equity 
(RoE)  it  may  imply  that  although  he  is  a  shareholder  of  a  co-operative  institution,  his 
behaviour  is  more  of  a  shareholder  of  a  commercial  entity.  On  the  other  hand,  if  a 
shareholder of commercial entity has belief in Corporate Governance and Corporate Social 
Responsibility  (CSR)  he  may  technically  be  a  shareholder  of  a  commercial  entity;  his 
behaviour  would  be  more  akin  to  a  co-operator.  What  I  intend  to  say  is  that  the  word 
“co-operation” is, perhaps, more of a state of mind than something structural and material.  
Professionalism in governance structure 
There can hardly be a debate on the desirability of a higher degree of professionalism in the 
governance  structure  of  co-operative  institutions.  Dual  control  of  State Government  (under 
State Co-operative Societies Act) and the RBI has been identified by many as one of the ills 
of  Co-operative  Banks.  The  institutional  mechanism  of  Task  Force for  Urban  Co-operative 
Bank (TAFCUB), to resolve the dual control issues, has worked satisfactorily and helped in 
phasing out the weak players in a non-disruptive manner. The RBI has directed Co-operative 
Banks to  ensure  election/  co-option  of  at  least two  Professional  Directors  on  their  Boards. 
The Expert Committee on Licensing of New Urban Co-operative Banks has recommended 
creation of a professional Board of Management structure in between the Board of Directors 
and  the  CEO  as  a  pre-condition  for  licensing  of  new  urban  co-operative  banks.  A  final 
roadmap will be prepared after issues relating to governance arrangements are resolved with 
the Government. 
Criticality of management quality 
Robust  co-operative  laws  are  a  necessary  precondition  for  co-operative  success.  I  am, 
however, reminded of Aristotle who said “It is better for a city to be governed by a good man 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
than good laws”. In the context of co-operative management, I believe that more than good 
laws,  we  need  good  implementation  of  laws  and  a  robust  governance  systems.  Credit 
co-operatives need to build strong governance systems and actively associate the members 
in the decision making process. 
Basel II and urban co-operative banks 
Internationally,  Basel  II  norms  are  applicable  for  Co-operative  banks  in  many  of  the 
advanced countries. Reserve Bank of India has adopted a calibrated and gradual approach 
towards  application  of  Basel  standards  for  various  regulated  entities  keeping  in  view  their 
systemic importance and availability of skill sets. As of now, UCBs have been subjected to 
Basel I requirements for computation of capital. Certain elements of market risk management 
contained in the amendment to Basel I Accord and largely carried forward to Basel II, have 
been made applicable for bigger UCBs conducting forex transactions. Keeping in view the 
heterogeneity in size and sophistication of Indian UCBs, RBI would take a considered view in 
due course in regard to application of Basel II norms on the sector. At present there is no 
empirical study to suggest the likely impact of Basel II on Indian UCBs. 
However, the quantitative impact study done in certain European countries suggest that in 
view of the high incidence of retail exposures and residential mortgage loans of co-operative 
institutions,  the  new  regulations  should  bring  about  positive  effects  in  terms  of  lower 
requirement  regulatory  capital.  These  results  are  confirmed  by  a  study  of  wide  range  of 
Italian  co-operative  banks.  The  study,  however,  reveals  that  an  improvement  in  terms  of 
capital  requirements  vis-a-vis  credit  risk  might  be  eroded  by  the  introduction  of  a 
150 per cent risk weight on loans that are overdue for more than 90 days.2 Incidentally, as 
per the latest figures, the gross NPA of Indian UCBs is still pegged at a high of 7.0% of total 
advances.  Although  the exposure  of  the Indian  co-operative  banks  to  real  estate  sector  is 
limited,  the  other  exposures  are  risky  and  may  require  higher  capital.  In  the  context  of 
applying Basel II standards in India, it is worthwhile to mention that, unlike the credit unions 
elsewhere in the world, the Indian co-operative banks would find it difficult to raise capital. 
Though,  through  policy  initiatives,  co-operative  banks  have  been  permitted  to  raise  capital 
through some innovative instruments, not many banks have been successful in augmenting 
capital by using these instruments. 
A  counterview  in  regard  to the  impact  of  Basel II framework  on  co-operative  banks  is  that 
with  a  view  to  reducing  regulatory  costs,  the  standardised  approach  would  spur  credit  off 
take of co-operative banks to higher-rated enterprises. Most of the customers of co-operative 
banking system, however, fall within the category of small, unrated enterprises, for which the 
risk weight is 100 per cent. 
Regardless  of  the  approach  under  the  Pillar  I,  adoption  of  pillar  II  of  Basel  II  appears 
desirable for systemically important UCBs from risk management perspective. The Accord’s 
second  pillar  lays  stress  on  the  importance  of  bank’s  own  assessment  of  the  degree  of 
exposure to risk, the determination of capital adequacy to face risk, and in the provision of an 
effective  risk-management  and  control  system.  Although  not  mandated  by  the  regulator, 
bigger UCBs may, for better risk management and improved internal governance, voluntarily, 
consider adopting the Internal Capital Adequacy Assessment Process (ICAAP) as envisaged 
under Pillar II of Basel II which helps them in the self-evaluation of their resilience to stress. 
The  disclosure  requirements  under  Pillar  III  of  Basel  II  are  desirable  for  any  public  entity, 
more  so  in  an  organisation  which  is  member  driven  and  the  customers  in  general  are 
shareholders  as  well.  Relevant  information  could  be  disclosed  voluntarily  as  soon  as  it  is 
                                                
2  S. Cosma, S; The impact of Basel II on Co-operative Banking 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
available.  However,  in  the  case  of  small-size  banks  characterised  by  steady  risk  profiles, 
such information disclosure could be yearly. 
Adoption of technology – financial inclusion 
I  mentioned  earlier  that  the  co-operative  institutions  by  virtue  of  their  business  model  are 
better equipped to further financial inclusion initiatives. The organizational structure (member 
driven),  the  largely  local  clientele,  easy  access  and  the  reputation  as  a  friendly 
neighbourhood  bank  are  the  strengths  of  UCBs  which  enable  them  in  widening  and 
deepening financial inclusion. A number of measures have been taken to facilitate financial 
inclusion by UCBs: The measures include (i) introduction of No-frills account with nil or low 
minimum  balance,  (ii)  relaxation  of  Know  Your  Customer  (KYC)  requirements  for  small 
accounts,  (iii)  Constitution  of  an  expert  committee  for  studying  the  advisability  of  granting 
licences to new urban co-operative banks, (iv) Exempting UCBs maintaining minimum CRAR 
of  12%  on  continuous  basis  from  the  mandatory  share  linking  norms,  (v)  Revising  the 
permitted  credit  limits  for  individual  housing  loans,  (vi)  Extension  of  area  of  operations  by 
UCBs,  (vii)  Liberalising  norms for  opening  of  new  branches  by  UCBs,  (viii)  Permitting  well 
managed  banks  to  set  up  off-site  ATMs,  (ix)  permitting  use  of  Business  Correspondents 
(BCs) and Business Facilitators (BFs) by UCBs, (x) permitting lending to Self Help Groups 
(SHGs) and Joint Lending Groups (JLGs) etc. 
Technology forms a critical component of financial inclusion initiatives as use of IT reduces 
the  cost  of  financial  transactions,  improves  the  allocation  of  financial  resources  and 
increases  the  competitiveness  and  efficiency  of  the  financial  institutions.  In  India  we  have 
adopted a bank led model for financial inclusion which seeks to leverage on technology. The 
commercial banks and Regional Rural Banks were advised to adopt Core Banking Solutions 
for  all  their  branches  by  September  2011  for  the  purpose.  The  multi-channel  approach 
adopted for financial  inclusion  in  the  country  envisages financial  inclusion  through  Multiple 
channels  like  handheld  devices,  mobiles,  cards,  Micro-ATMs,  Branches,  Kiosks,  etc.  The 
front  end  devices  used  for  the  purpose  have  to  be  seamlessly  integrated  with  the  Core 
Banking  Solutions  (CBS)  of  the  banks.  UCBs  were,  therefore,  advised  to  scale  up  their 
financial inclusion efforts by utilizing appropriate technology. 
UCBs have a low level of technology adoption and only 267 UCBs had adopted CBS as on 
March 31, 2012, which is a lowly 16.5%. The low level of profits in these banks, the high cost 
of implementation of CBS, lack of IT awareness, technical as well as vendor management 
skill, have held then back from adopting CBS. 
Having stated all the constraints of UCBs in adopting CBS I have no doubt about the fact that 
CBS would play an important role in financial inclusion. Being late entrants in the areas of 
both  CBS  and  Financial  inclusion  the  UCBs  are  at  an  advantage  as  they  can  reap  the 
benefits of the latest technology for both CBS and financial inclusion. They need not face the 
problems faced by commercial banks in integrating their existing CBS platforms with the front 
end devices such as hand held devices and mobile technology offering CBS. RBI is seriously 
looking at introduction of CBS across the sector in a time bound manner. 
Conclusion 
Co-operation is an age old concept which survived the vagaries of time and has served the 
society  well.  I  am  sure co-operation  will  continue  to  remain  relevant  in  the  times to  come. 
With  changing  times,  however,  there  would  arise  a  need  for  it  to  reorient  itself  to  suit  the 
changing needs and requirements of the financial system. Conferences of this kind provide 
an  ideal  platform  for  deeper  and  focussed  deliberations  on  issues  confronting  the 
co-operative  sector  and  help  chart  out  the  road  ahead.  I  am  sure  the  deliberations  in  this 
conference  would  help  the  policy  makers  and  all  other  stakeholders  to  invigorate  the  co-
operative sector in leveraging its advantages. I wish great success to all credit and non-credit 
co-operatives in the country. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
I would end by quoting Franklin D Roosevelt “Competition has been shown to be useful up to 
a certain point and no further, but cooperation, which is the thing we must strive for today, 
begins where competition leaves off”. 
THANK YOU  
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
