Ardian Fullani: 100 years of independence – our history reflected in the 
national currency 
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the  Opening  of  the 
Exhibition “100 years of independence – our history reflected in the national currency”, Vlora, 
16 November 2012. 
 Dear Mayor, 
Dear Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure for me to be here today in Vlora on the occasion of the opening of the 
Exhibition “100 Years of Independence: Our History Reflected in the National Currency”. It is 
extraordinary  that  we  are  only  a  few  days  away  from  the  celebration  of  Albania’s 
100th anniversary of independence.  
In the capacity of the institution responsible for issuing the currency in Albania, the Bank of 
Albania  considers  that  it  is  its  duty  to  inform  the  public  at  large  about  Albania’s  monetary 
history. The exhibition we are opening today is a contribution in this respect. It presents the 
journey of currency in Albania from the declaration of independence to this day. It features a 
vast collection of artefacts of the Albanian state monetary history. It has great material and 
cultural value as many of these objects are unique and date back to prior the issue of our 
national currency by the Bank of Albania.  
By  touring  a  number  of  cities  in  Albania,  such  as  Berat,  Gjirokastra,  Korça,  Shkodra  and 
Tirana, and making a stop in the city where Albania’s independence was declared, we are 
walking along the same path as our national currency – the lek. We aim to draw the public’s 
attention  to  the  fact  that  the  state  formation  process  and  our  modern  history  are  not  only 
about political and military events, or about biographies of people and institutions, but they 
are also closely linked to the history of our national currency.  
As  soon  as  you  enter  this  exhibition,  you  can  immediately  feel  how  the  history  of  the 
Albanian currency has walked hand in hand with our nation’s history and its major historical 
figures. They are so closely linked that when you hold a coin or banknote in your hand, the 
historical period during which it has been minted, printed and used, flashes in front of you 
just like in a photo. 
The currency, along with the language, constitute an inseparable part of our national identity 
and  cultural  heritage.  By  unfolding  in  its  images  people,  events  and  the  most  important 
values  of  our  history,  the  currency  has  contributed  to  strengthening  the  feeling  of  national 
identity in the Albanian people.  
By  acting  as  a  common  medium  of  social  interaction,  the  currency  has  also  played  an 
irreplaceable role in creating a national tradition and memory, strengthening in turn the sense 
of  belonging  to  the  Albanian  nation  and  the  sharing  of  a  common  destiny.  All  these  have 
contributed to strengthening national sovereignty, particularly when the currency is managed 
in a stable way. 
William Camden, a British historian in the late 16th century, considered money as the fifth 
element after air, fire, earth and water. The universal character of money has captured the 
interest of numerous generations of philosophers and has stimulated human imagination in 
different  kinds  of  ways.  Money  is  not  only  an  economic  act  but  also  a  political  one.  It 
establishes the boundaries, contributes to consolidating a country’s identity and may lead to 
conflicts  and  wars.  But  despite  all,  having  a  good  will,  money  may  precede  peace  and 
stability  of  one  or  more  countries.  As  also  stated  by  Helmut  Kohl,  former  Chancellor  of 
Germany, “the real flag of the Federal Republic of Germany is the Deutsch Mark”.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
If you had lived in Albania in the period when its independence was declared, your money 
would have mainly consisted in French gold francs – what we still refer to as “Napoleons” to 
this  day  –  and  Austrian  silver  coronas.  Being  citizens  of  a  coastal  city,  you  would  have 
probably used Italian liras and copper coins for your small purchases. During World War I, 
the main forms of money were not only gold and silver coins, but also local banknotes – for 
instance, banknotes issued by the autonomous region of Korça.  
Nowadays, in addition to the currency issued by the Bank of Albania, we also use cheques 
and means of electronic payments. Hence, although money has taken many forms through 
different times, it has always been very important to the people and the economy. It has been 
so important that even to this day, people still continue to keep and collect coins, banknotes, 
cheques or notes of past times – which today have no economic value – as a sign of their 
trust in money. 
The  project  for  an  Albanian  national  currency  was  part  of  the  general  modernizing  policy 
implemented by Ismail Bej Vlora in the newly-established Albanian state.  
According to him, the sooner Albania strengthened its economic freedom, the better it could 
preserve  the  newly-gained  political  freedom,  hence  turning  into  a prosperous  country. The 
father of independence considered the establishment of a central bank as crucial to Albania’s 
economic development, in line  with the models provided by foreign banks, and particularly 
the  Bank  of  England,  which  at  the  time  was  the  centre  of  the  global  financial  system.  As 
Ismail Bey Vlora noted “... Let me say with admiration that the work of the Bank of Albania is, 
both economically and politically, a second victory for Albania, after that of independence”. 
Despite  being  established  as  a  privately-held  institution,  the  Bank’s  activity  would  not  be 
oriented  towards  generating  profit  or  other  commercial  interests.  It  would  rather  orient 
towards  providing  public  goods,  such  as  issuing  the  currency  and  acting  as  banker  to  the 
government, banks and other financial intermediation agents in Albania. 
Despite  the  numerous  efforts,  gaining  independence  did  not  bring  the  establishment  of  a 
national monetary system and Albania continued to be one of the few countries still having a 
gold-based coin circulation system.  
The  establishment  of  the  central  bank  was  vital  to  inspire  the  Albanian  public  trust,  by 
encouraging investment of savings in shares and bank deposits, hence turning the bank into 
an engine of the lending system in Albania. 
If we look back in the past, we can see how much the Albanian currency has evolved. From 
the declaration of independence – when gold and silver were considered to be the only real 
forms  of  money  –  we  come  to  the  present  with  the  Bank  of  Albania  projecting  to  put 
electronic money into circulation.  
Unlike precious metals, which hold their value over the centuries, a currency’s value is equal 
to  public’s  trust  in  the  stability  of  the  economy  and  in  the  central  bank  putting  it  into 
circulation. It is this public trust that guarantees the stability of the currency and enables the 
development of a modern monetary system. 
The  latter  is  the  product  of  a  long  period  of  practical  experience  and  a  large  number  of 
economic studies suggesting that the central bank, through its monetary policy, contributes 
to  improving  the  economic  perspective  and  people’s  living  standards  by  preventing 
prolonged  periods  of  inflation  and  deflation.  In  addition,  price  stability  contributes  to 
increasing economic activity and employment; hence promoting economic welfare. Firms and 
consumers  make  informed  decisions  about  consumption  and  investment;  the  market 
allocates the resources more effectively; productive potential and incentives to invest in the 
economy  increase;  while  the  redistribution  of  welfare  and  income  improves,  hence 
contributing to strengthening social cohesion.  
In order to facilitate monetary policy implementation and efficiency in the economy, the Bank 
of Albania pays great attention to encouraging economic and financial education in Albania. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
We  believe  that  broadening  the  basic  knowledge  on  economic  environment  improves 
people’s ability to process the necessary information and make right economic decisions.  
In addition to providing the public a more effective participation in the society, economic and 
financial education contributes to ensuring public support for the policies the Bank of Albania 
implements. 
In  carrying  out  this  mission,  our  compass  remains  oriented  towards  Europe  and  the 
incessant progress towards economic and legal convergence with the EU. Our activity  will 
continue to focus on strengthening the Bank of Albania’s independence as key precondition 
for safeguarding monetary and financial stability. The common European currency has itself 
turned into the basic anchor of the EU.  
The best way the Bank of Albania can fulfil its mission to the public is for the latter to know 
and  trust  the  national  currency.  A  strong  and  sound  currency  will  be  an  inseparable 
companion in our journey towards Brussels and Frankfurt. 
Dear Mayor, Ladies and Gentlemen, I hope you will enjoy the visit to the Bank of Albania’s 
exhibition we are opening today in “the city of flag”. On behalf of the Bank of Albania, it is my 
great pleasure to declare it open.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
