Andreas Dombret: New regulation on trading with OTC derivatives 
Introductory  statement  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
Deutsche  Bundesbank,  to  the  panel  discussion  “Financial  markets  –  finding  a  regulatory 
normal”, Euro Finance Week Conference, Frankfurt am Main, 20 November 2012. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Dear Ladies and Gentleman 
The regulation  of  the  OTC  derivatives  markets  is  more  or  less  on track,  but the  ambitious 
timeline  of  the  G  20  will  not  be  kept.  The  G  20  goal  to  trade  standardised  derivatives  on 
exchanges  or  electronic  trading  platforms  and  to  clear  all  standardised  OTC  derivatives 
through  a  central  counterparty  (CCP)  by  the  end  of  2012  will  not  be  reached. Whereas  in 
Europe the clearing obligation established by the European Market Infrastructure Regulation 
(EMIR)  is  mostly  in  force.  The  trading  obligation  under  the  currently  discussed  Markets  in 
Financial  Instruments  Regulation  (MiFIR)  will,  together  with  the  Markets  in  Financial 
Instruments Directive (MiFID), not enter into force before 2015. 
It  is  remarkable  that  the  United  States  has  made  more  progress  with  implementing  the 
trading and clearing obligation under Dodd Frank. However, this first mover advantage does 
not always produce the best solution for the global derivatives market. 
Multilateral approaches are more promising than bilateral solutions 
2. 
The forthcoming challenge will be the global application of the new regulatory framework. 
While the United States of America seeks a bilateral approach to assess the equivalence of 
third  country  regimes,  the  European  stance  is  to  negotiate  on  a  multilateral  basis  to  grant 
equivalence of different regulatory regimes. 
I am convinced that this approach is superior since it creates more legal certainty compared 
with a case by case equivalence assessment.  
3. 
Regulation will be without effect if there is no adequate implementation and 
supervision 
The implementation, application and introduction of the numerous rules will demand a huge 
effort:  First  of  all,  from  the  supervisors,  as  they  have  to  supervise  and  oversee  central 
infrastructures, as well as from the financial and non-financial industry. Furthermore, CCPs 
and market participants, both are affected. 
CCPs have to adjust their risk management to cope with more clearing members and with 
accelerating  volumes  of  derivatives  to  be  cleared  centrally.  CCP  clearing  is  required  of 
market  participants;  otherwise  they  have  to  accept  higher  capital  and  collateralisation 
requirements. Besides, the standardisation of OTC derivatives should make good progress, 
so that the clearing and trading obligation becomes operational as soon as possible. 
We are aware of the practical difficulties and do not underestimate the challenges that have 
to be met in order to fulfil the new requirements. But all our commitment will result in more 
transparent  and  more  stable  markets  which  will  better  serve  all  market  participants  in  the 
future. 
Transparency is the crucial cornerstone of each regulation 
4. 
Transparency  is  a  very  important  issue  within  the  entire  regulatory  process  around  OTC 
derivatives markets. Supervisors but also market participants need more reliable, transparent 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
and  accessible  data  on  the  derivatives  markets.  And  they  will  profit  a  great  deal  from  the 
reporting obligation to trade repositories established under both EMIR and Dodd-Frank. 
We expect reporting to trade repositories to work out next summer. The necessary technical 
details  will  be  confirmed  by  the  European  Commission  soon  and  the  registration  approval 
process by ESMA will also start. 
But  MiFIR,  too,  will  increase  transparency  since  it  requires  pre-trade  transparency  for 
derivatives traded on organised trading venues. 
The future findings from the data gathering will be helpful for further reviews of the regulation 
and possibly new regulatory efforts. 
Closing remarks 
5. 
European  and  national  legislators  have  made  good  progress  in  regulating  the  OTC 
derivatives markets. But further efforts have to be taken to complete the process embarked 
upon  in  the  light  of  the  G  20  commitments.  The  dialogue  between  regulators  and  market 
participants therefore must be continued and intensified. 
Thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
