G Padmanabhan: Technology in the financial sector – some issues and a 
few concerns 
Address  by  Mr  G  Padmanabhan,  Executive  Director  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  to  the 
Bankers’ Club, Thrissur, 22 October 2012. 
 Assistance provided by S/Shri. G Mahalingam, H S Mohanty and Saswat Mahapatra gratefully acknowledged. 
Mr Joseph, Mr Jayakumar, Mr Hareesh Babu, Mr John, distinguished ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure to be addressing the bankers in this beautiful city of Thrissur, often called the 
cultural  capital  of  Kerala.  From  the  bankers’  perspective  it  can  well  be  called  the  banking 
capital of Kerala, as three banks are head-quartered in Thrissur and a fourth in the adjoining 
town of Aluva. I am told that the Bankers Club, Thrissur is one of the oldest and the largest in 
Kerala. As I struggled to decide on what I should talk to an audience like this, I recalled that 
in the email, Mr Hareesh Babu, President, Bankers’ Club, had sent inviting me to this event, 
he had taken considerable pride in pointing out the fact that as united forum of bankers, you 
have coined the slogan, "Think Beyond Banking" as your objective. I was quite impressed 
with this forward looking vision and decided that to an erudite audience like this, I would flag 
the  defining  role  of  technology  in  the  financial  sector.  The  advent  of  technology  and  its 
adoption into the financial sector has enabled bankers to think beyond banking, at the same 
time, the same technology by facilitating complex financial products has indirectly contributed 
to the financial crisis that is sweeping the world. Therefore in my address, I intend to make 
certain observations about financial crisis as well. I shall at the end, raise some technology 
related issues of immediate concern to Indian banks.  
2.  
The financial sector has undergone both qualitative and quantitative transformation 
during the last four decades. As Martin Wolf has noted, over the last three decades, the debt 
of the US financial sector (can be taken as a proxy given its size) grew six times faster than 
the  GDP.  At  the  peak  of  the  pre-crisis  boom,  the  financial  sector  is  reported  to  have 
generated about 40% of total US corporate profits1. The financial sector in US accounts for 
about 8.6% of the country’s GDP, eclipsing the pre-crisis peak of 2006. Let us look at the 
markets. Turnover in the global foreign exchange market (which, as you see it today, is only 
four decades old!) has grown from USD 640 billion a day in 1989 (the earliest year for which 
comprehensive  data  is  available)  to  about  USD  4  trillion  a  day  in  2010.  From  a  hesitant 
beginning  in  1970’s,  securitized  assets  outstanding  today  are  estimated  to  exceed 
USD 15 trillion. Interest rate derivatives market, which has a shorter history, had outstanding 
contracts exceeding USD 500 trillion at end 2011. Whichever metric or statistic you look at, it 
is abundantly clear that the financial sector has grown phenomenally. That this growth has 
been propelled by the increase in global trade, commerce, investment is fairly obvious but a 
difficult question yet remains to be answered. Has the large financial sector made the world a 
riskier  place  without  commensurate  social  or  economic  benefit?  I  shall  come  back  to  this 
issue a little later. but at this juncture, the limited point that I am making in this context is to 
recognize the phenomenal growth of the financial sector, which would certainly not have not 
been possible without advancement in information technology.  
3.  
Before we discuss further some of the qualitative changes in the financial sector that 
has been made possible by advancement in computing and communication technology, let 
us  look  at  the  development  of  technology  during  the  last  four  decades.  If  we  take  the 
introduction of fourth generation computers (LSI and VLSI technology) in the late seventies, 
the computing capacity has developed manifold, in keeping with the famous Moore’s Law. To 
                                                
1   Reportedly, financial sector profits account for about 30% of total corporate profit in US. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
technology 
today  has  made 
The  computing  and  communicating 
give  an  interesting  example,  Apple  II,  perhaps  the  first  successful  personal  computer, 
released  to  public  in  1977  by  Stephen  Wozniak  and  Steven  Jobs  cost  $1,195  (without  a 
monitor),  had  16k  RAM  only,  and  no  storage  device.  A  minimal  specification  personal 
computer today has about a quarter of a billion times more RAM and comes at one-fourth 
cost,  purchasing  power  taken  in  to  account.  Riding  on  the  back  of  this  advancement,  the 
communication technology has taken quantum leap. We see an explosive transformation in 
all aspects of our lives – but perhaps nowhere it is as apparent as in the financial sector.  
4.  
financial 
transactions across space possible instantaneously and provided the wherewithal to record 
and account for innumerable transactions accurately. It is difficult to believe today that in the 
1960’s  the  New  York  Stock  Exchange  shortened  its  trading  days  because  the  volume  of 
trades was too high to process manually. Nearer home, few would remember that when the 
Rupee was devalued in June 1966, the foreign exchange market was closed for two days to 
enable  the  banks  to  rework  their  positions.  The  speed  and  reliability  of  information 
technology has supported creation of nationwide financial services, including ATMs (hailed 
by Paul Volker as the only useful innovation by the financial sector in the last three decades), 
electronic check and credit card processing, transfer of funds, and so on.  
5.  
The  development  of  the  vast  array  of  financial  products  –  from  plain  vanilla 
securities based on various kinds of receivables to complex non linear structures – critically 
depended on advancement in technology to support it. The creation, pricing, valuation and 
risk  management  of  complex  and  exotic  products  would  not  have  been  possible  without 
development in technology. I would venture so far as to say that formulation and refinement 
of the quantitative techniques and models underlying these products were brought about by 
advancement and secular availability of computing technology.  
6.  
Are there any concerns about development of technology enabled financial sector? 
First question that arises is: has the financial sector become more efficient? Apparently not. It 
is  stated  that  the  cost  of  financial  intermediation  in  the  US,  which  perhaps  has  the  most 
advanced  financial  system,  as  measured  by  the  sum  of  all  profits  and  wages  paid  to  the 
financial  intermediaries,  has  grown  from  5%  of  GDP  in  1980  to  9%  in  20102.  Similarly, 
financing cost as represented by the value added share as a proportion of the total output of 
the  financial  sector  has  increased  from  about  1.4%  to  2.3%  during  the  same  period.  The 
explosive  growth  in  the  risky  products  –  another  name  for  derivatives  and  structures 
securities – has led to similar concerns. It has been argued that the financial sector, through 
these instruments, has ended up taking excessive risk and if the value added is adjusted for 
the risk, the contribution to GDP may have to be significantly revised downwards. As regards 
the futility of excessive risk taking, as Andrew Haldane puts it, “If risk-making were a value-
adding  activity,  Russian  roulette  players  would  contribute  disproportionately  to  global 
welfare.”  
7.  
Even  post  crisis,  it  is  agreed  by  all  that  a  well  developed  financial  sector  plays  a 
critical role in economic development. An efficient financial sector enables the individuals to 
smoothen their consumption through the life cycle and deal with uncertainties. It also pools 
resources  and  directs  them  to  socially  productive  projects.  A  poorly  developed  financial 
sector on the other hand would greatly reduce welfare. But it certainly does not mean that 
social  and  economic  welfare  is  a  monotonically  increasing  function  of  the  financial  sector 
growth. The financial sector after all is supposed to serve the real sector, and when it grows 
beyond  what  is  warranted  by  the  “economic  fundamentals”,  problems  like  financial 
complexity, poorly understood financial innovation, herding behaviour, and endogenous risk-
taking, etc surface, far outweighing the benefit. The crisis has abundantly demonstrated this.  
                                                
2   Philippon, T (2011), “Has the US Finance Industry Become Less Efficient?”, mimeo NYU. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
8.  
Let us look at another aspect of a technology enabled of modern financial system. 
With the advent of electronic trading in exchanges, high frequency or algorithmic trading has 
come  to  dominate  the  Wall  Street  and  exchanges  world  over.  On  any  given  day,  this 
lightning-quick,  computer-driven  form  of  trading  accounts  for  upward  of  half  of  all  of  the 
business transacted on US stock markets. Starting in the 1980’s and apportioned part of the 
blame for the 1987 Stock market crash, high frequency trading(HFT) has acquired increasing 
sophistication over the years. On the one hand there are allegations that HFT goes against 
the interests of ordinary investors and has made the market less fair for them. On the other, it 
has  opened  the  possibility  of  nightmare  events  like  flash  crash  of  May  2010,  when  in 
5 minutes the DJIA recorded its biggest intraday fall of about 1000 points (9%), to recover 
most  of  the  losses  20  minutes  later.  In  August  2012,  runaway  trading  by  Knight  Capital 
affected  the  shares  of  148  companies  and  Knight  Capital  itself  had  to  take  a  loss  of 
USD 440 million in what has been attributed to “technology breakdown”. A few days back, a 
freak  trade  wiped  out  nearly  USD  58  billion  of  wealth  in  two  minutes  when  NIFTY  fell  by 
nearly 900 points due to a set of faulty orders by a broker.  
Frauds and deceptions have been the bane of banking and finance down the ages. 
9.  
Advent of computers have not only made novel ways of fraud possible, but also made the 
consequence  of  such  frauds  –  the  quantum  of  potential  loss  astronomical.  The  banks  are 
susceptible  to  frauds  both  from  external  as  well  as  internal  sources.  In  a  white  paper  title 
“Dissecting Operation High Roller”3 McAfee and Guardian Analytics have indicated a cyber 
fraud with objective to siphon large amounts from high balance accounts. The white paper 
states  that  the  criminals  have  attempted  at  least  €60  million  (US$78  million)  in  fraudulent 
transfers from accounts at 60 or more financial institutions (FIs). If all of the attempted fraud 
campaigns  were  successful  as  the  total  attempted  fraud  could  be  as  high  as  €2  billion. 
Similarly, internal frauds have also assumed paramount importance. An article published in 
ABA  Banking  journal4  has  indicated  various  types  of  internal  frauds  viz.  general  ledger 
frauds, identity theft, account takeover and collusion with outsiders. The article also mentions 
about  a  high-level  bank  employee  being  indicted  for  allegedly  transferring  more  than 
$4 million from general ledger accounts to her own accounts over a period of eight years and 
concealing the money in the general ledger.  
10.  
The point that I have been trying to make so far is that advancement in information 
and  communication  technology  has  opened  vistas  in  financial  sector  that  could  not  be 
imagined a few decades back. Yet, it cannot perhaps be said that all the ways in which we 
have harnessed the technology has contributed to social utility or made the financial sector 
more robust and useful.  
11.  
Now  let  us  turn to  some  of  the  beneficial  aspects  of  techno-banking  in  the  Indian 
context. There are three perspectives to this issue – that of profitability, which concerns the 
owners,  that  of  service,  which  concerns  the  customers  and  lastly,  that  of  regulatory  and 
statutory compliance, which concerns the regulators. I have discussed this issue in the Indian 
context at great length recently and I do not want to repeat the same in detail. Briefly, the 
technology adoption has surely added to the profitability for the banking sector now supports 
a  much  larger  asset  without  any  increase  in  manpower.  The  ease  of  capture,  storage, 
portability,  and  retrieval  of  information  has  enabled,  at  least  potentially,  a  much  better 
compliance regime. With expansive ATM network and wide implementation of core banking 
solution,  we  seem  to  have  but  in  place  the  basic  paradigm  of  techno-banking  for  the 
customer. However, you would agree with me that we are yet to achieve an optimal level of 
efficiency in all three aspects and there is a lot to be done in that regard.  
                                                
3   http://www.mcafee.com/us/resources/reports/rp-operation-high-roller.pdf 
4   “4 internal frauds and how to spot them” – the article was posted on the website of ABA Banking Journal on May 26, 
2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
12.  
One  issue  that  has  been  accorded  high  priority  in  our  policy  hierarchy  in  recent 
times is financial inclusion. We have always been alive to the need for extending the reach of 
the  financial  sector  to  the  under-privileged  sections  of  the  society.  The  branch  licensing 
policy of the seventies and the eighties with mandatory extension of branch network to rural 
areas was pursued with that objective. It has been estimated that a 1 percent increase in the 
number  of  rural  banked  locations,  per  capita,  resulted  in  distinct  decline  in  poverty,  and  a 
0.34  percent  increase  in  total  output.  Now,  the  technological  advancement  has  made  it 
possible for us to think of novel and innovative ways to approach the objective of financial 
inclusion.  
13.  
Before  we  discuss  application  of  technology  to  achieve  financial  inclusion,  let  us 
convince  ourselves  of  the  imperative  of  financial  inclusion.  The  financial  sector,  amongst 
others, performs two important functions. It enables inter-temporal transfer of income – you 
can  transfer  surplus  income  of  one  period  to  a  lean  period  and  you  can  borrow  in  a  lean 
period against future income. For whom is this more important than the poor, who have to 
face the vagaries of employment and income? Access to financial sector also enables the 
vast multitude of self-employed urban as well as rural poor to engage in productive activities 
and live with dignity. The plight of these people can be understood from an example cited by 
Abhijit Banerjee and Esther Dufflo in their excellent book “Poor Economics”. In Chennai, fruit 
sellers buy INR 1000 worth of fruit on credit from the wholesalers and pay it back at the end 
of  the  day  with  an  interest  of  4.69%  –  an  annual  interest  rate  exceeding  1700%.  Imagine 
what difference access to organized financial sector can make for these people. This brings 
me to another point I wish to emphasize: financial inclusion should not be driven by altruistic 
motives. It is rather to be pursued as a business model. There is vast scope of sustainable 
and profitable business here as the example clearly suggests.  
14.  
On  the  subject  of  innovative  application  of  techno-banking  in  a  broader  socio-
economic  context,  I  wish  to  talk  about  the  innovative  M-PESA  mobile  banking  system  in 
Kenya. The basic idea of M-PESA is that the 100,000 small retailers in Kenya who already 
sell mobile-phone airtime, in the form of scratch cards, can also register to be mobile-money 
agents,  taking  in  and  paying  out  cash.  More  than  17,600  retailers  have  signed  up  as 
M-PESA agents – far outnumbering Kenya’s 840 bank branches. By March 2012, within five 
years,  over  15  million  people  of  Kenya’s  had  used  it  –  this  means  rural  villagers  haggling 
over  produce,  then  using  their  Nokias  to  make  the  final  deal.  It  means  Masai  herdsmen 
bringing  their  phones  to  market  along  with  their  cattle,  ready  to  stock  up  on  essentials  to 
bring  back  to their  homes.  Such  a  system  also  requires  intermediaries,  to  get the  cash  to 
M-PESA agents, and ensure cash movement keeps up with e-float exchanges. In this way, 
the  system  has  created new  jobs,  with  some  intermediaries  and retailers  earning  $1000  a 
month in commission from M-PESA transactions. No wonder, the model has been sought to 
be replicated in other countries. However, replication of success in Kenya remained elusive 
in other countries like Tanzania and South Africa. The success of M-PESA can be attributed 
to  several  factors  viz.  the  absence  of  banking  facility,  presence  of  a  single  dominant 
operator, absence of a cost effective remittance channel and existence of national identity. 
Needless to say, there is no one-size-fit-all technology for all situations. The innovation will 
have to adapt itself to the needs and endowments of each society.  
15.  
Let me now turn to the last issue I wish to touch upon today – IT Governance. The 
business  processes  in  the  banks  and  other  financial  sector  entities  are  increasingly 
dependent on information and communication and communication technology. It is therefore 
imperative to create an appropriate governance framework not only to protect the interests of 
the bank itself, but also to address the concerns of all stakeholders including regulators and 
the  customers,  who  are  outside  the  organization  and  create  a  conducive  atmosphere  of 
confidence  in  the  system.  Briefly  an  IT  governance  framework  should  be  built  around  the 
following considerations:  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
b. 
a. 
Redundancies and business continuity  
Information security  
Audit of financial transactions in an IT enabled system. 
The  strategy  for  adoption  and  implementation  of  IT  has  to  be  aligned  with  the 
business  strategy  of  the  bank.  The  use  of  IT  resources  should  be  aimed  at 
delivering value to the stakeholders. 
There  has  to  be  a  comprehensive  framework  for  management  of  risk  emanating 
from use of IT. This is a very broad area and includes a host of issues including  
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
16.  
Though the scope for use of complex financial products is rather limited in the Indian 
context, it is to be appreciated that the pricing, valuation and hedging of such positions are 
based on computer models. In the context of the financial crisis, Richard Doling wrote in The 
New York Times5, "Somehow the genius quants – the best and brightest geeks Wall Street 
firms could buy – fed $1 trillion in subprime mortgage debt into their supercomputers, added 
some  derivatives,  massaged  the  arrangements  with  computer  algorithms  and  –  poof!  – 
created $62 trillion in imaginary wealth." Now this may be an extreme position, but there is a 
kernel  of  truth  in  it.  Do  we  have  a  framework  where  the  top  management,  the  Board, 
understands the computer models used for creating risky positions in complex products and 
their  implications?  There  has  to  be  a  policy  framework  for  continuously  assessing  and 
auditing the performance of the IT resources, including IT personnel. 
Conclusion  
17.  
questions would lead to a greater debate among stakeholders. 
Before  concluding  my  thoughts,  I  wish  to  raise  a  few  questions  hoping  that  the 
Question 1: How reliable is the BCP/DR mechanism in banks?  
18.  
The  24x7  electronic  banking  through  alternate  channels  has  put  the  spotlight  on  need  for 
continuous,  uninterrupted  and  reliable  services  which  presuppose  existence  of  a  robust 
BCP/DR  mechanism  in  banks.  BCP/DR  mechanism  typically  incorporates  impact  analysis, 
recovery and governance framework which includes communication and crisis management. 
Indian  banks  have  strengthened 
technology 
implementation.  But  where  do  we  stand  today  and  how  prepared  is  our  industry?  Can  we 
exhibit the level of preparedness the banking and financial industry displayed in Japan during 
the  tsunami?  In  recent  times,  ATMs  of  a  large  bank  were  out  of  operation  because  the 
BCP/DR mechanism put in place for moving the primary site to the secondary site did not 
kick in. BCP/DR is still looked at as an IT issue in the organization where as it is actually a 
business  issue.  Successful  BCP/DR  mechanism  involves  three  critical  aspects  of  people, 
process and technology. Are we giving adequate emphasis on people aspects? 
their  BCP/DR  mechanism 
through 
19.  
Question 2: What is the status of adapting CBS to meet the future needs 
including the banking need of billion plus population? 
The coming days will put several demands on the CBS in banks. Indian financial sector is to 
become  the  third  largest  in  the  world  in  terms  of  asset  size  by  2025  and  will  warrant 
commensurate increase in depth and breadth of financial products and instruments as well 
as  high  level  of  service  delivery.  The  initiatives  towards  inclusive  banking  would  see 
customer  base  of  banks  expanding  at  a  faster  pace.  The  continued  emphasis  on  shifting 
cash transactions to non-cash modes; and the efforts of the Government to transfer all social 
                                                
5   The Rise of Machines, Richard Doling, The New York Times, October 11, 2008. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
benefits  electronically  to  the  citizens,  the  volume  of transactions  in  the electronic  payment 
systems would grow manifold. Further, as the IDC Financial Insights, April 2012 has reported 
“banks would like to see their core banking systems help them cope with the onslaught of 
new  regulations  and  the  new  reporting  requirements  that  come  along  with  the  new  rules”. 
Besides, several initiatives listed in the "Payment Systems in India: Vision 2012–15" such as 
uniform routing code, uniform account code, electronic trade financing etc are going to affect 
the  way  the  banks  are  processing  transactions  today  and  would  require,  if  implemented, 
suitable  adjustments  by  banks.  Thus,  these  developments  are  likely  to  challenge  the 
scalability and adaptability of CBS in banks not only in terms of transaction handling but also 
in terms of adding new products, new processes and new applications. Are the banks ready 
for such future demands? 
20.  
Question 3: Converting data archives to data warehouse – have we tapped the 
potential?  
The  needs  for  use  of  business  intelligence,  analytical  and  data  warehousing  for  retaining 
competitive  advantages  in  a  highly  competitive  industry  were  never  so  urgent  for  banks. 
Analytics has the power to transform technology and data from supporting tools into strategic 
weapons  for  retaining  and  servicing  the  existing  and  potential  customers.  CBS  of  bank  is 
generating  huge  piles  of  data.  But  how  many  of  the  banks  have  really  leveraged  the  data 
goldmine they have to the hilt? Have they sufficiently built skill sets to see pattern in those 
data  bases  and  increased  their  understanding  of  customer  behavior?  Have  the  banks 
realized  the  potential  of  analytics  and  business  intelligence  in  fraud  management  and 
regulatory compliance in areas of AML/CFT, suspicious transaction reporting etc? 
21.  
Question 4: What ails alternate banking channels from achieving a critical 
mass – customer fear, ignorance or bad business pursuits by many banks? 
It  is  well  known  that  socio-cultural  factors  affect  the  customers’  adoption  of  alternate 
business channels. But are the banks doing enough to instill the sense of security, reliability 
and  trustworthiness  of  the  alternate  channels  in  customers  to  help  them  overcome  these 
barriers? Adoption of alternate banking channels would require moving the customers from 
being “assisted” initially to becoming “self-reliant” in using the channels. Though, the banks 
may  have  strategies  for  increasing  the  usages  of  alternate  channels,  successful  adoption 
would  depend  to  a  large  extent  on  the  line  managers  dealing  with  customers.  Are  they 
motivated enough to promote alternate channels? How do we incentivize the branches that 
initiate the customers to electronic banking? 
Question 5: Outsourcing or abdicating – are banks treading the thin line? 
22.  
It is but natural for banks to outsource their some of their activities especially their IT related 
activities. However outsourcing brings in its wake, several risks and thus it is imperative for 
any  bank  outsourcing  its  activities  to  ensure  effective  management  of  these  risks.  Do  the 
banks  have  adequate  controls  over  the  outsourced  activities  and  outsourcing  entities?  I 
heard of an incident where the administrative password of a critical application server of a 
bank was with the vendor not with the system administrator of the bank. Delegating is what 
we  ask  someone  to  do  on  our  behalf;  while  abdicating  is  what  we  do  as  escapism, 
camouflaging lack of skill sets. 
23.  
One related question is over-dependence on certain IT systems (including operating 
systems  and  databases)  resulting  in  concentration  of risk  in  certain  components  /  vendors 
which are spread across the banking sector. What could be done to redress this? 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
24.  
Question 6: Are banks properly leveraging technology for inclusive banking? 
The  challenge  in  financial  inclusion  is  reducing  the  gap  between  demand  and  supply  of 
financial services. Delivery of banking services is not always feasible in rural areas with cost 
effective distribution being a challenge. Can the technology help in meeting this distribution 
gap? Everybody is pinning hope of mobile technology for financial inclusion. Is it an exciting 
possibility or a meaningless dream? It is definitely an exciting possibility. The mobile banking 
in India is gradually making in-roads. However, the success of mobile banking would depend 
on how the banks and the mobile service providers co-operate and collaborate to deliver the 
financial services to the unbanked. Further, it would depend on banks how they can leverage 
the technology to improve business, whether it’s through mobility, low-cost ATM rollouts, or 
revenue sharing models and service management. 
Question 7: Time for wake up call for banks? 
25.  
The World Payments Report 20126 puts India as the 13th largest non-cash payments market 
in  the  world,  with  non-cash  volumes  have  been  growing  about  10%  a  year.  However,  the 
non-cash  payments  growth  in  India  is  behind  the  more  enthusiastic  pace  of  other  BRIC 
nations  (China  and  Russia  having  growth  rate  of  30  per  cent).The  “Payment  Systems  in 
India: Vision 2012–15” focuses on inculcating the habit of cash less payments in the citizens 
of the country for a less-cash society. The execution and achievement of the Vision would be 
purely driven by the banks and non-bank entities. The World Payment Report 2012 report 
recognizing the role of banks in non-cash payments states that banks need to innovate even 
more around customer needs to drive loyalty and retention. But are the banks in India doing 
enough? Are banks taking the easy way out by being content with the measures initiated by 
the regulator? To illustrate most of nearly 7 lakh PoS terminals in the country are deployed 
by three banks. Where most of the banks issue cards, except for a few banks, none of them 
are  in  acquiring  business.  Is  this  because  card  issuance  is  a  lot  easier  than  enrolling 
merchants and putting in place the PoS infrastructure? How should we respond? One way 
could  be  to  review  the  extant  guidelines  on  acquiring  PoS/  ATM  transactions  in  terms  of 
increased  role  of  non-bank  payment  system  operators  by  permitting  white  label  PoS.  The 
other could be to mandate the banks to deploy PoS terminals linked/proportion to the number 
of cards issued by them.  
26.  
Let me now sum up. IT and communication technology has changed banking and 
financial sector in many fundamental ways. It has created new kinds of risk with far graver 
potential  consequences  than  in  the  pre-techno-banking  era  but  at  the  same  time  it  has 
opened up new paths to make financial sector broad based and, particularly in the context of 
economies like ours, to explore innovative ways to achieve financial inclusion. In this pursuit 
there are several important issues that Indian banks will have to face up and resolve. Finally, 
exploitation of the benefits of the IT resources have to be within a comprehensive framework 
of governance that aligns the interests of all stakeholders, addresses the risks arising from 
technology-enabled business processes, and is in sync with the broader social objectives.  
                                                
6   Capgemini, RBS, EFMA. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
