Njuguna Ndung’u: Development of efficient and cost effective payment 
systems in Kenya 
Address by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the “Emerging 
Payment Systems Technical Capacity Building Workshop 2012”, Kenya School of Monetary 
Studies, Nairobi, 14 November 2012. 
 Dr. Eliawony Kisanga; Executive Secretary; ESAAMLG; 
Ms. Maria C. Stephens; Senior Technical Adviser; USAID;  
Representatives of USAID and US Treasury;  
Representatives of Central Banks present; 
Distinguished Guests and Participants; 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
Let  me  begin  by  extending  a  very  warm  welcome  to  all  the  workshop  participants.  To  the 
participants who are drawn from beyond our borders, it is my sincere hope that your stay with 
us shall be enjoyable and that you will carry with you pleasant memories of Kenya when you 
return to your respective countries. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  This  workshop  is  about  the  development  of  efficient  and  cost 
effective payment systems. The workshop will offer the pertinent issues of financial integrity 
which completes the architecture of financial inclusion. The importance of financial inclusion 
is  now  critically  clear.  Indeed,  there  has  been  mounting  evidence  that  access  to  financial 
services is a tool to fight poverty sustainably. Access to affordable and sustainable financial 
services enables the poor to save and accumulate capital  for investment. This is important 
for generating self- employment opportunities, smooth consumption, reduce vulnerability to 
economic  shocks,  raise  productivity,  obtain  higher  returns  on  investments  and  ultimately 
improve the quality of their lives. 
However, approximately 2.5 billion adults globally, representing over half of the world’s adult 
population,  have  no  access  to  formal  financial  services  to  increase  their  incomes  and 
improve  their  lives.  Among  them,  1.1  billion  live  on  less  than  one  dollar  a  day.  These 
numbers are a representation of the great demand and need for increased access to income 
generating activities and to appropriate financial services for the large un-banked populace 
across the globe. This is particularly true of developing economies in Africa, Asia and Latin 
America where nearly 90% of the world’s unbanked adults reside. The expansion of financial 
inclusion  has  thus  become  a  critical  topic  in  development  agendas  for  policy  makers  and 
regulators globally, with considerable energy and resources having been devoted towards its 
enhancement.  The  testament  to  this  is  the  G20  Global  Partnership  for  Financial  Inclusion 
(GPFI) where non-G20 members participate. The Central Bank of Kenya, and indeed Kenya 
has been represented by the Governor. At this point therefore, allow me to underscore the 
importance of emerging payment systems to promoting financial inclusion agenda. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  The  rapid  growth  of  the  mobile  phone-based  money  transfer 
service  in  Kenya  beginning  with  M-Pesa,  in  2007  has  been  seen  by  many  as  having 
produced  a  tectonic  shift  in  Kenya’s  financial  landscape  with  a  great  impact  on  financial 
inclusion.  Indeed,  the  rapid  adoption  and  use  of  mobile  money  transfer  services  by  some 
70% of the adult population has suggested that there is huge potential for the development of 
inclusive formal financial services through mobile phones. Equally complementing this was 
banks integration with it and also payments of goods functionality raising in acceptance and 
reception.  Notably,  the  development  of  innovative  and  easy-to-use  payment  systems  by 
financial  institutions  and  other  businesses  such  as  mobile  phone  operators  has  helped  to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
support  rapid  growth  in  e-  commerce,  in  many  cases  providing  consumers  with  more 
effective, convenient, and secure ways to purchase an expanding variety of products. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: We all know that in the business world, the customer is King. In this 
regard, I wish to highlight at this point key issues that policy makers may need to address to 
strengthen consumer confidence in new and emerging payment systems and which may be 
categorized  into  five  broad  areas  including:  clarity,  transparency  and  completeness  in 
information disclosure; variability in regulatory and protection regimes; fraudulent, misleading 
and deceptive commercial practices; dispute resolution and redress and security and inter-
operability. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  Any  success  in  financial  inclusion  has  to  go  hand  in  hand  with 
financial  integrity.  In  this  regard,  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya  has  continuously  sought  to 
enhance  the  regulation  and  supervision  of  the  financial  system  in  order  to  improve  its 
integrity. Indeed, as part of our efforts in ensuring appropriate and effective oversight, we first 
issued  AML  Guidelines  in  2000.  These  Guidelines  were  later  revised  in  2006  and  are 
currently in the process of being reviewed to reflect the prevailing international best practice 
and  to  align  them  with  the  Proceeds  of  Crime  and  Anti-Money  Laundering  Act,  2009 
(POCAMLA) as amended and the new Act on combating terrorism financing. 
It is true that over the last 2 years, the Central Bank has issued regular AML/CFT guidelines 
to financial institutions to further support and enhance the implementation of the Proceeds of 
Crime and Anti-Money Laundering Act (POCAMLA), 2009. The guidelines have covered the 
operationalization of the AML Act, Suspicious Transactions Reporting, and measures to be 
adopted by financial institutions to combat the financing of terrorism. The Central Bank has 
also  revised  the  Forex  Bureau  Guidelines  so  as  to  align  them  with  the  AML  Act  and  is 
currently sharing with stakeholders the Hawala guidelines. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: The creation of the Financial Reporting Centre early in the year and 
the  passing  of  the  Anti-Terrorism  Law  is  a  clear  signal  of  the  Kenya  Government’s 
commitment  in  protecting  the  integrity  of  our  country’s  financial  system.  In  fact  I  wish  to 
inform you that following the creation of the FRC, all financial institutions in Kenya including 
banks, forex bureaus and mobile phone financial service providers will be required to report 
all  suspicious  transactions  to  the  Financial  Reporting  Centre.  I  have  expounded  on  these 
issues and updates whenever I represent Kenya in FATF evaluation meetings. That is why in 
the  current  standing,  FATF  has  commended  Kenya  for  its  tremendous  effort  in  AML/CFT 
Laws enactment and how we are on implementation. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: In conclusion, it is my hope, that this workshop will help enhance 
our  technical  capacity  on  emerging  payment  systems  as  we  share  our  own  country 
experiences on these systems. Let me also once again take this opportunity to assure all of 
you  of  the  Central  Bank’s  continued  commitment,  collaboration  and  partnership  in  the 
development of robust and secure payment systems. But this is where capacity is urgently 
needed and support by  USAID and the US Treasury arising from their experience is most 
welcome. 
Finally,  it  is  a  pleasure  and  honour  to  now  declare  the  Emerging  Payment  Systems 
Technical Capacity Building Workshop officially open and wish you fruitful deliberations. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
