Jorgovanka Tabaković: Financial system and economy – responses to 
the challenges of the crisis 
Inaugural speech by Ms Jorgovanka Tabaković, Governor of the National Bank of Serbia, at 
the conference “Financial system and economy – responses to the challenges of the crisis”, 
Belgrade, 2 November 2012. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
The  on-going  sovereign  debt  crisis  in  the  euro  area,  most  acute  in  Central  and  Eastern 
Europe has shown that no country can remain an isolated island in a global environment of 
strong economic and financial ties. The adverse effects of the sovereign debt crisis in euro 
area  countries  spilled  over  to  the  region  of  Central  and  Eastern  Europe,  mainly  via 
dampened  external  demand,  the  consequent  weakening  of  economic  activity  and  smaller 
inflow  of foreign  direct  investments. This  went  hand  in  hand  with  limited  access  to foreign 
sources of funding, as country risk premiums and costs of borrowing went up.  
In an environment of shrinking foreign capital inflows and exports-generated inflow of foreign 
exchange, the first line of defence against the crisis is the maintenance and improvement of 
competitiveness. The price aspect of competitiveness can be improved via exchange rate or 
by restrictive income policy. 
The managed floating exchange rate regime significantly buffered the external shock which 
Serbia  experienced  in  the  last  quarter  of  2008,  when  the  first  wave  of  the  global  financial 
crisis spilled over to our country. In 2009, compared to other countries in Central and Eastern 
Europe, Serbia’s GDP shrunk the least (3.5%). At the same time, countries running the fixed 
exchange  rate  regime  suffered  greater  economic  turbulences.  For  example,  the  Baltic 
countries  Estonia  and  Lithuania  had  to  resort  to  adjustments  through  wage  reductions, 
ending the year with a 15% fall in GDP. 
As for Serbia, the flexible exchange rate regime also paved the way out of the crisis. On the 
one  hand,  the  adjustment  did  not  have  to  take  place  through  sudden  and  drastic  wage 
reductions and on the other, net exports gave a positive contribution to GDP growth. In this 
way, the dinar exchange rate was also the “engine” of Serbia’s subsequent recovery, which 
will  facilitate  our  shift  to  a  new,  sustainable  model  of  investment-  and  exports-driven 
economic growth. It is true that apart from numerous positive effects, the depreciation may 
also have a negative bearing on financial stability, especially in countries with a substantial 
share of external and domestic debt in foreign currency or foreign-currency indexed, and in 
highly  euroised  economies  such  as  Serbia. The second  pillar  of  defence  against the  crisis 
may be a countercyclical fiscal policy, that is, the stimulation of domestic demand during the 
time  of  recession.  However,  the  scope  for  implementing  countercyclical  fiscal  policy  is 
usually  smaller  in  developing  countries.  It  narrows  down  even  further  with  the  swelling  of 
fiscal  deficits  in  times  of  crisis,  sounding  alarms  on  public  debt  sustainability  in  many 
countries. That  is  why  experts  recommend fiscal  consolidation  instead  of fiscal  expansion. 
True, in the short run, fiscal consolidation negatively impacts GDP, but in the medium and 
long run it lays groundwork for sound and sustainable economic growth, which strengthens 
investor confidence and pushes down the country risk premium.  
When there is not much room for countercyclical fiscal policy, it is expected that monetary 
policy  should  provide  a  boost  to  economic  activity.  However,  its  countercyclical  potentials 
depend on the nature and strength of inflationary pressures. As opposed to the demand-side 
shocks, the supply-side shocks, such as the current food price shock in Serbia, are usually 
not addressed by monetary policy because these are temporary shocks with relatively short-
lived effects. However, if they trigger an increase in inflation expectations and other prices 
and jeopardise price stability despite the strong disinflationary effect of aggregate demand, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
monetary  policy  tightening  is  inevitable.  In  other  words,  such  circumstances  considerably 
narrow down the scope for boosting economic activity through monetary policy.   
The  efficiency  of  monetary  policy  in  Serbia  is  most  constrained  by  the  high  degree  of 
euroisation of the domestic economy, which makes the foreign exchange risk the key risk to 
financial stability. Note that while banks are not exposed directly to the foreign exchange risk 
since the currency structure of their assets and liabilities is matched, it is the borrowers who 
take the major brunt of this exposure. And the exposure of the government, corporates and 
households  to  sudden  and  significant  changes  in  the  exchange  rate  may  have  serious 
implications for financial stability through the conversion of foreign exchange risk into credit 
risk. 
As confirmed by the stress tests implemented by the National Bank of Serbia, the stability of 
our  financial  system  is  not  under  threat  despite  the  high  share  of  non-performing  loans 
(NPLs). In September, Serbia’s NPL ratio reached 19.9% and was the highest in the region. 
However,  it  was  in  Serbia  too  that the  NPL  ratio  recorded the  smallest  increase  since  the 
beginning of the crisis. Satisfactory stability of our banking system is also confirmed by the 
capital  adequacy  ratio  of  over  16%  and  by  the  full  coverage  of  NPLs  by  the  loan  loss 
provisions.  Moreover,  Serbia  is  one  of  the  few  countries  in  the  region  that  registered  a 
slowdown rather than a fall in lending activity. Of course, we cannot expect to see any major 
step-up in lending and a sharp reduction in the share of NPLs in the short term, but this will 
happen  once  the  economy  heals.  The  economic  recovery  is  expected  to  start  next  year, 
which should bring investments of better quality and help repair the financial position of the 
corporate sector.  
The current challenge for lending activity and foreign capital inflows across the region, Serbia 
included, is the deleveraging of EU banks and their potential withdrawal from these markets. 
Though  deleveraging  is  in  essence  a  healthy  process,  even  for  the  host  country  as  it 
contributes  to  the  reduction  of  external  debt,  current  account  deficit  and  risk  to  financial 
stability,  it  is  critical  that  the  process  is  gradual,  or  better  to  say,  in  accordance  with  the 
adjustment capacities of the economy concerned. If otherwise, the host country could face 
significant  threats  to  its  financial  stability.  To  prevent  this  from  happening,  small  countries 
need  to  be  proactive  and  involved  in  the  adoption  of  international  regulations,  while 
communication and coordination need to be improved at global level. A good example in this 
context is the so-called Vienna Initiative.  
The  deleveraging  of  EU  banks,  registered  in  nearly  all  countries  of  the  region,  has  not 
bypassed Serbia either. This comes as no surprise considering that the subsidiaries of EU 
banks account for around 74% of our banking sector assets. It should be noted, however, 
that banks in majority foreign ownership operating in the Serbian market are separate legal 
entities,  which  guarantee  for  their  liabilities  with  their  own  capital,  and  are  in  that  respect 
independent  from  their  parents.  Besides,  the  structure  of  the  sources  of  funding  in  the 
Serbian  banking  sector  is  favourable  –  domestic  deposits  being  the  dominant  source  and 
making up over 70% of all bank liabilities. Since end-2008 household savings have gained 
more than EUR 3 billion, which testifies to increasing confidence in the banking system. It is 
exactly the high loan to deposit ratio that assured growth in lending activity during the crisis – 
admittedly slower than pre-crisis, but growth nonetheless. Another guarantee that there will 
be  no  abrupt  withdrawals  from  the  market  is  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia’s  regulatory 
framework, which aims to preclude any sudden  movements which could be harmful to the 
liquidity and stability of the financial system. 
Implementation of Basel III in the EU, planned as of the next year, will most probably bring 
new challenges and further reduce the exposure of EU banking groups towards countries of 
Central  and  Eastern  Europe.  However,  encouraging  banks  to  tap  longer-term  and  more 
stable  sources  of  funding  and  resorting  to  alternative  ways  of  funding,  chiefly  in  regard  to 
domestic  saving  and  funds  of  international  financial  organisations,  may  mitigate  negative 
consequences of these processes. When it comes to Serbia, it should also be borne in mind 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
that deleveraging may help lower the degree of economy’s euroisation as a lower volume of 
foreign exchange sources of funding will encourage banks to obtain and lend funds in the 
domestic  currency  to  a  greater  extent.  In  the  current  circumstances,  it  is  obvious  that  the 
achievement of sustainable external equilibrium and credibility of fiscal policy are paramount 
for the improvement of Serbia’s credit rating and a stable inflow of foreign direct investment 
and other forms of foreign capital. As I have already underscored, depreciation helps reduce 
external disequilibrium, primarily over the short run, by ensuring price competitiveness of the 
domestic economy. However, it does not eliminate the main causes that brought about the 
deepening of this disequilibrium. The key to the lasting removal of external disequilibrium and 
ensuring sustainable economic growth are structural reforms directed at productivity growth 
and economic competitiveness. 
A better credit rating will enable more favourable borrowing in foreign markets and a more 
stable  inflow  of  foreign  capital  needed  to  finance  new  investment  and  encourage 
employment. This will ultimately contribute to the stability of the foreign exchange market and 
facilitate operation of the corporate sector. Provided the Government takes decisive steps in 
implementation of key reforms of the tax and pension systems, including corporatisation of 
the public sector, it is highly probable that Serbia’s credit rating will not only be sustained but 
upgraded as well. In contrast, further widening of the fiscal deficit would bring about a higher 
public debt and deterioration in external liquidity. 
Therefore,  in  defending  the  country  from  the  current  crisis,  economic  policy  makers  face 
numerous limitations. Some of these limitations also represent a chance to set the country’s 
economic growth on long-term stable foundations, which should be the  centrepiece of any 
responsible economic policy. On its part, the National Bank of Serbia will continue to stabilise 
inflation at a low level and maintain a sound financial system, this being the best way to help 
the  economy  in  the  current  circumstances  and  contribute  to  the  creation  of  a  favourable 
business and investment environment. Nonetheless, the following must be borne in mind – 
the more efficient fiscal consolidation and structural changes, the more feasible will it be for 
the  National  Bank  to  achieve  its  objectives  by  providing  a  stronger  monetary  stimulus  to 
economic growth! And vice versa, of course! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
