Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Islamic finance in a challenging economy – moving forward 
Opening address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 
2nd International Shari’ah Research Academy for Islamic Finance (ISRA) Colloquium 2012 
“Islamic 
forward”,  Kuala  Lumpur, 
27 November 2012. 
in  a  challenging  economy  –  moving 
finance 
 Islamic  finance  has  experienced  its  most  rapid  pace  of  development  and  growth  in  this 
decade, signifying its dynamism and resilience as a form of financial intermediation. This has 
taken  place  in  a  highly  challenging  international  financial  and  economic  environment.  It  is 
estimated that the global Islamic finance industry will remain on this growth trajectory, with 
the  continued  expansion  of  Islamic financial  institutions,  including  in  new  jurisdictions,  and 
with the growing significance of financial markets in the Islamic financial system. Increased 
liberalisation and greater foreign participation in the Islamic financial markets are reinforcing 
this  trend  and  resulting  in  increased  cross  border  financial  flows.  This  is  contributing  to 
increased international financial and economic linkages between nations, particularly among 
emerging economies. 
During the recent global financial crisis and its aftermath, the international financial system 
has experienced a series of unprecedented financial meltdowns and disruptions. During this 
period, the Islamic financial industry has generally weathered these challenging financial and 
economic  conditions.  In  relation  to  this,  Islamic  finance  highlights  the  importance  of  basic 
banking and the need to have a clear separation from higher risk-taking activities. It therefore 
has  limited  exposure  to  highly  leveraged  activities,  such  as  complex  derivatives  and 
structured  credit  instruments.  Indeed,  Islamic  finance  emphasises  a  close  link  between 
financial  transactions  and  real  economic  activity.  Islamic  finance  thus  serves  the  real 
economy.  The  recent  financial  crisis  has  therefore  led  to  a  greater  appreciation  on  the 
distinct  nature  of  Islamic  finance  in  addition  to  its  explicit  in-built  strengths  that  supports 
financial stability. 
These  foundations  have  been  reinforced  by  the  global  efforts  taken  to  strengthen  the 
international financial architecture of Islamic finance to safeguard financial stability and thus 
its  sustainability.  In  the  recent  years,  the  intermediaries  have  also  gained  scale  and  the 
financial markets have gained depth and maturity. Among the institutional arrangements in 
the  international  Islamic  financial  system,  is  the  establishment  of  the  Islamic  Financial 
Services Board in 2002 to set prudential standards while earlier in 1990, the Accounting and 
Auditing  Organisation for  Islamic  Financial  Institutions  (AAOIFI)  was  established  to  set  the 
accounting  standards  for  the  financial  industry.  Various  jurisdictions  have  now  undertaken 
legal  and  regulatory  reforms  to  pave  the  way  for  the  offering  of  Islamic  finance  in  their 
respective  countries  while  ensuring  attention  to  sustaining  financial  stability.  These 
developments  have  been  particularly  important  to  the  recent  intensification  of  the 
internationalisation of Islamic finance which in turn contributes towards building bridges and 
forging greater linkages among a wider range of economies. 
Transitioning into the next stage of growth of Islamic finance 
It  is  of  no  doubt  that  we  are  now  facing  the  most  challenging  economic  and  financial 
environment in decades. Given that the pace of the internationalisation of Islamic finance has 
accelerated  during  this  period,  it  has  heightened  the  urgency  to  chart  the  next  phase  of 
development  of  Islamic  finance  to  ensure  that  financial  stability  continues  to  be  preserved 
and that the financial system continues to serve the economy. Its resilience during the global 
financial crisis should not result in complacency. As we move forward, there are three key 
imperatives in addition to the efforts to ensure financial stability for the industry and to the 
continued development of the financial system. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
than  26 
total  of  more 
reaching  a  projected 
First is the need to highlight with greater clarity the value proposition of Islamic finance so as 
to ensure that it remains a form of financial intermediation that serves the real economy and 
that  it  will  continue  to  be  a  benefit  to  society.  This  requires  the  development  of  financial 
products and services that manifests the value propositions of Islamic finance, and that such 
products are marketed with simplicity so as to facilitate a greater understanding of the main 
benefits of the products. In relation to this, Islamic finance presents significant appeal to the 
growing Socially Responsible Investment (SRI), sustainable investments and ethical finance. 
This is particularly relevant in the context of the recent global financial crisis. It has brought to 
the forefront the need for the financial system to be linked to the economy and for the need 
for greater and improved levels of transparency, fairness, ethics and social responsibility in 
modern finance. 
Beyond financial returns, SRI also accords primary consideration to the impact on economic 
activity  and  on  the  broader  society,  thereby  incorporating  the  important  dimensions  of 
environmental  sustainability,  social  responsibility  and  governance.  This  is  in  close  parallel 
with  the  inherent  principles  of  Islamic  finance,  in  which  financial  transactions  must  be 
underpinned by real economic activities, and its operations are guided by the principle that 
money should also be used to create social good. 
The SRI market is also fast growing. It is expected to become a mainstream asset class by 
2015, 
trillion  US  dollars  of 
asset-under-management, accounting for 15 to 20 percent of the global market. This recent 
growth  has  largely  been  driven  by  the  demand  from  institutional  investors  which  are 
increasingly  prioritising  the  consideration  of  sustainability  and  social  responsibility  in  their 
business conduct and institutional value system. Indeed, the ongoing economic challenges in 
the  major  advanced  economies  have  resulted  in  the  re-emphasising  of  the  importance  of 
growth that is sustainable and responsible. In the emerging economies, this is also important, 
given  that  rapid  economic  development  also  needs  to  ensure  that  the  progress  will  be 
sustainable. 
The  recent  growth  of  Islamic  finance  has  also  been  fuelled  by  a  sustained  phase  of 
innovation. This  has  resulted  in  the  development  of  a  wide  range  of  Shariah-compliant 
financial  solutions  to  meet  the  differentiated  needs  of  consumers  and  businesses  in  the 
global economy. To sustain this trend, further in-depth applied research is needed to develop 
more financial products that create closer links between Islamic finance and real economic 
activity, in terms of its operating models, risk management and supporting infrastructure. This 
includes more innovative risk sharing products and to evolve from the common structures of 
Islamic financial products to the more unique structures with greater growth opportunities. 
This trend is already apparent in the sukuk market. There has been the issuance of several 
new  and  innovative  structures  in  this  segment,  with  unique  underlying  features  that  has 
drawn  significant  global  attention.  This  includes  the  recent  issuance  of  the  first  Renminbi 
(RMB) 1 billion sukuk with airtime vouchers as its underlying assets and the debut issuance 
of a “green” sukuk by France. Another high-potential segment is the Islamic fund industry. Its 
recent growth momentum has spanned more than 36 countries, including markets that are 
relatively new to Islamic finance, such as Australia and Ireland. 
The  second  imperative  is  for  the  outreach  of  Islamic  finance  to  be  inclusive  and  to  be 
accessible to all, particularly the  lower income groups and small businesses. An important 
agenda in the global economy is to achieve a more balanced growth with reduced income 
disparities.  Financial  services  has  a  tremendous  role  in  contributing  towards  a  more 
equitable economic growth and a more sustainable development. In relation to this, Islamic 
financial  institutions  need  to  strive  to  enhance  the  access  of  their  financial  services  to  all 
segments of society. This imperative translates into the need and demand for more Islamic 
microfinancial  products.  In  emerging  as  a  new  market  niche,  Islamic  microfinance  would 
meet  the  differentiated  demands  of  low  income  communities  and  provide  support  to 
entrepreneurial activities. Its strong value proposition reinforced by financial inclusion would 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
result  in  significant  potential  to  uplift  the  economic  performance  and  development. 
Furthermore, Islamic microfinance, if supported by microtakaful, has the potential to provide 
a more comprehensive, sustainable and accessible financing and protection solution for the 
lower income groups and small businesses. 
Access to financial products and services enhances the potential to thrive and to generate 
growth  and  employment.  Investment  in  talent  development  and  research  activities  for  this 
purpose can thus contribute towards evolving a more inclusive Islamic financial system. This 
is also within the paradigms of development and welfare in the Islamic context, as the Islamic 
finance model is also designed to be relevant to social welfare and economic development of 
not only the under-privileged communities, but also of contributing towards intensifying the 
progress of low income countries in the world. 
Thirdly, is for the effective dissemination of information to facilitate the standardisation and 
harmonisation process in Islamic finance. Several developments in this recent decade have 
facilitated standardisation and harmonisation in Islamic finance. The extensive engagement 
related  to  setting  the  prudential  standards  for  Islamic  finance  by  the  Islamic  Financial 
Services  Board  (IFSB)  has 
implementation  of  regulatory  and 
supervisory standards. There has also been greater international dialogues between global 
Shariah scholars through several platforms and structured forums. This greater engagement 
facilitates convergence in interpretation and the greater leverage on technology for the active 
dissemination  of  information  at  real  time  further  facilitates  the  harmonisation  process.  The 
next  stage  however  is  the  need  for  more  efficient  information  dissemination  that  would 
promote greater market transparency, price discovery and industry insights. 
The development of the Islamic Financial Knowledge Repository Portal by ISRA that will be 
launched today will be an important effort that can contribute to meeting this objective. As a 
knowledge database it centralises Shariah rulings and its justifications, legal and regulatory 
requirements. This is enriched by the latest collection of research and development in Islamic 
finance.  This  database  will  become  an  important  source  of  reference  and  guidance  for 
Shariah  and  industry  practitioners,  policy  makers,  researchers  and  academicians.  This 
initiative  by  ISRA  will  not  only  promote  greater  understanding  but  mutual  respect  and 
recognition of Islamic finance. 
facilitated  consistent 
Concluding remarks 
The global Islamic finance industry is transitioning to its next stage of development and will 
stand  to  benefit  from  an  enhanced  universal  appeal  with  a  wider  consumer  and  business 
segment,  greater  financial  inclusion  and  harmonisation  through  increased  research  and 
development  and  more  effective  dissemination  of  information.  A  strong  culture  of  applied 
research and development in Islamic finance that promotes innovative financial engineering, 
through practical and useful applied research findings is an integral part of industry-building 
efforts to support the industry’s growth. 
Greater  collaboration  will  be  important  to  create  greater  synergy  of  expertise  in  applied 
research  and  development 
industry  associations 
collaborating with local and international research institutes and academia to seek for new 
global research findings and breakthroughs will enhance the potential for increased product 
development activities. 
This Colloquium that is organised by ISRA following the success of the inaugural Colloquium 
last  year,  to  discuss  the  new  research  findings  for  the  various  segments  of  the  Islamic 
financial industry with the expectation that it will contribute to opening new horizons for the 
future development of Islamic finance. 
On this note, let me wish you a productive and successful Colloquium. I would also like to 
congratulate ISRA on the launching of its new Islamic Financial Knowledge Repository. 
Initiatives  by 
finance. 
Islamic 
in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
