Mugur Isărescu: The future of the international banking system 
Presentation  by  Mr  Mugur  Isărescu,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Romania  and 
President of the Romanian Association for the Club of Rome, at the Annual Conference of 
the Club of Rome “The Power of the Mind”, organized by the Club of Rome, the Romanian 
Association for the Club of Rome (ARCoR) and the National Bank of Romania, Bucharest, 
2 October 2012. 
 Introduction 
I.  
I was asked to address this Conference about the future of the international banking system. 
It is not an easy task at all, at least for two reasons. 
The first reason is that I am addressing a Conference of the Club of Rome, a forum for open 
debates  and  for  launching  mainly  revolutionary  ideas.  I  am  afraid  that  my  position,  as  the 
Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Romania,  does  not  allow  me  to  have  more  than  an 
evolutionary vision on the banking system. I know that from time to time, and mostly during 
crisis periods, banks and financial markets are considered the root of all evil. I have to accept 
that  markets  in  general,  especially  financial  markets,  do  not  function  perfectly,  but  I  will 
paraphrase Winston Churchill and say that the market mechanism could be bad, but better 
than any other economic and financial mechanisms that humanity has known until now. You 
have  in  front  of  you  a  person  who  lived  forty  years  in  a  centrally  planned  economy. 
Consequently,  I  am  afraid  that  my  paper  about  improvements  of  the  mechanisms  of  the 
financial and banking markets might turn out rather boring and conservative as I will only talk 
about some improvements, not about radical changes. But as we, bankers, have to put up 
with the stress test, I ask of you to be resilient during my presentation. 
The  second reason  is  because  peering  into  the future  is  based  on  our capacity  to  assess 
risks. We do this by using our inbred capacity to weigh probabilities, which is, in our modern 
times,  supported  by  mathematical  models.  Nevertheless,  our  capacity  to  assess  what  lies 
ahead  is  impaired  when  facing  uncertainty,  as  it  was  the  case  since  the  outbreak  of  the 
current crisis. 
However,  we  are  fortunate.  As  Alan  Greenspan  noted,  “there  is  a  degree  of  historical 
continuity in the way democratic societies and market economies function.” This means that 
there is a “persistent stability” that can be used for inferring what the future might look like. All 
we have to do is learning the lessons of the past. 
Historical overview 
II.  
Looking  carefully  at  the  economic  history,  we  see  two  sorts  of  changes.  Some  legal  and 
economic institutions change slowly enough to allow us to anticipate future outcomes fairly 
accurately. But from time to time, there are some very rapid or significant legal or institutional 
changes. Such events usually emerge in the aftermath of a deep crisis. This seems to be the 
case these days. New legal provisions and new institutions are needed to build the banking 
union or the fiscal union. 
For more than two decades I have been one of those who promoted democracy and market 
economy in Romania. Therefore I have to believe that Western civilization will continue to be 
democratic, applying the rule of law in market economies. With these institutions in place, we 
can look backwards to draw some lessons on the future of the banking sector. I will do this 
through the eyes of a central banker. A central banker is always interested in the way the 
banking  system  works.  If  the  banking  system  moves  away  from  being  sound  and 
shock-resilient,  monetary  policy  becomes  inefficient.  When  many  changes  are  to  be 
implemented, the risk of making mistakes cannot be ruled out. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
One  way  to  look  at  the  banking  system  is  to  see  its  history  as  a  succession  of  financial 
crises. In a nutshell, from the Great Depression to this day, the banking system faced two 
major financial crises: the one in the `30s and the current one. In between, there were some 
more  or  less  mild  financial  crises.  From  this  perspective,  as  a  central  banker,  I  see  two 
trends. First, some financial crises, whether major or not, have led to in-depth reassessments 
of the regulation paradigm over time. Second, a cross-border approach to regulation policies 
has been developed gradually. However, it has recently accelerated as a prerequisite for the 
envisaged banking union. 
The experience until the ‘60s 
II.1.  
One  of  the  main  conclusions  reached  in  the  aftermath  of  the  Great  Depression  was  that 
competition  in  the  banking  sector  could  jeopardise  financial  stability.  By  putting  downward 
pressures on profit margins, competition stimulates banks to take on new risks, thus reducing 
capital buffers. 
Consequently, for the following four decades, until the late ‘60s, many measures were aimed 
at controlling competition. Particularly, limits were imposed on lending and deposit rates, on 
loans to the private sector, on main monetary variables (which are nowadays set by credit 
institutions). Likewise, worldwide restrictions were in place on cross-border capital flows and 
foreign exchange markets. 
Note  also  that  back  in  those  days  commercial  banking  was  separated  from  investment 
banking (Glass-Steagall Act) and there was no financial innovation. In addition, policy rates 
were  set  by  governments.  Commercial  bankers  were  paid  well  (but  not  remarkably  well 
compared to other professionals) and the 3:6:3 rule accurately described their daily routine: 
borrow at 3%, lend at 6% and be on the golf course at 3 p.m. 
In such a “risk-free” environment, capital requirements began to be eased, reaching 5% of 
bank assets. Extended liability was replaced by limited liability. During 1945–1971 no major 
banking crisis occurred (Eichengreen and Bordo, 2003), but this came at the cost of lower 
profitability of banks, whose capacity to innovate and support the economy went down. 
But, as Andrew Crockett (2011) put it, facilitating informed risk-taking, the financial system is 
a key element in achieving optimal levels of productivity growth and rising living standards. 
Confronted  with  against-efficiency  regulations,  financial  markets  started  to  seek  ways  out. 
This is a lesson we should keep in mind. 
The ‘70s and beyond 
II.2.  
These ways out primarily took the form of the emergence of competitors to the US dollar as a 
settlement  currency,  the  collapse  of  the  Bretton  Woods  system  and  the  establishment  of 
international  syndicate  banks  which  began  in  1964.  Under  the  pressure  of  market  forces, 
starting  in the  `80s, financial  sector  deregulation  gained ground  by  loosening  up  legal  and 
administrative  restrictions.  Almost  all  restrictions  imposed  up  to  the  ‘60s  were  removed.  A 
new era dawned, with markets enjoying more freedom. 
One  important  result  worth  mentioning  is  that  lending  was  no  longer  constrained  by  the 
volume of deposits or holdings of liquid assets. Banks could borrow on the interbank market 
at any time. Under the new circumstances, capital became the only factor containing the size 
of banks’ books (Goodhart, 2010). 
Setting  appropriate  requirements  for  bank  capital  was  challenging  to  regulators  and  it 
remained so. On the one hand, a strong capital base is associated with the soundness of a 
bank.  On  the  other  hand,  that  comes  at  a  price  in  terms  of  profitability.  Capital  adequacy 
requirements were unified under the Basel I Accord, which set them at 8% and established 
risk coefficients. But they were quickly watered down by the Basel II Accord, which allowed 
banks to assess their own risks, through sophisticated models. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Starting  with  the  ‘80s,  credit  expansion  was  relatively  rapid.  Independent  central  banks 
appeared to have tamed inflation once and for all. New sophisticated financial instruments 
seemingly succeeded in reducing risks to low levels for ever. A new generation of investors 
emerged and took on risks that they could not afford. Cross-border transactions increased 
rapidly at unprecedented levels. After a period of several good years, euphoria emerged at 
the beginning of the 21st century. 
The  focus  on  return  on  equity  (short-term)  rather  than  on  return  on  assets  (long-term) 
provided wrong incentives for the owners and the managers of banks. Whereas in 1998 the 
detaining period for shares in a bank was three years on average in the US and in the UK, it 
decreased  to  3  months  in  2008,  signalling  the  so-called  “casino  capitalism”.  At  the  same 
time, while in 1989 the executive directors of the top seven US banks gained 100 times the 
average income of a median household, by 2007, they earned 500 times that income. 
This  disregard  for  risk  sparked  worries  among  the  national  and  international  authorities 
concerning  potential  threats  to  macroeconomic  and  financial  stability.  The  interest  in 
macroprudential  policies,  which  nowadays  are  seen  as  vital,  became  manifest  early  in  the 
`80s. However, policy implementation remained feeble and the unthinkable happened. 
Now the most important mission is to correctly identify what went wrong and what principles 
we should use when making enhancements to our financial system. Before moving on to the 
next section which addresses these issues, let me draw two lessons. 
First, overregulation is not good. As proved by the experience gathered from the `30s to the 
`60s,  it  can  provide  financial  stability  at  the  expense  of  future  productivity  and  living 
standards.  To  quote  Andrew  Crockett  again,  “We  should  be  careful  that  greater  safety  in 
banking is not purchased at the cost of reduced efficiency or additional risks elsewhere in the 
system”. 
Second,  proper  functioning  of  markets  requires  adequate  rules.  To  me,  it  seems  that 
something  was  wrong  not  only  with  markets  themselves,  but  with  the  way  they  were 
regulated.  Regulation  did  not  pay  enough  attention  to  problems  that  may  appear  when 
markets operate. Andrew Crocket explained that the “market mechanism failed because of 
perverse  incentive,  asymmetric  information  and  conflict  of  interests”.  This  means  that,  as 
Tommaso  Padoa-Schioppa  described  it  a few  years  ago,  this  crisis  is  not  only  a failure of 
markets, but also a failure of governments and regulators. 
In  my  view,  free  markets  work  properly  given  a  set  of  good  rules.  It  is  natural  for  human 
beings to make free choices. It is the regulators` duty to design rules that always preserve 
this freedom  while  preventing, for  as  long  as  possible,  the accumulation  of  problems from 
asymmetric information, perverse incentive and conflict of interests. The two approaches of 
regulation – the one up to the `60s and the one before the outbreak of the current crisis – are 
a proper basis for understanding what good rules might mean. 
The financial system in the aftermath of the crisis 
III.  
The financial industry is supposed to be the lubricant of the economic engine and ensure its 
smooth and efficient functioning. To grasp the sheer scale of its task, just imagine the billions 
of savers and investors whose interests have to be matched by the financial system, each of 
them  having  a  particular  behaviour,  often  driven  by  emotions.  In  doing  so,  financial 
institutions  use  specialized  resources  to  assess  and  manage  risks,  including  complicated 
mathematical  models.  Just  think  of  the  many  Nobel  prizes  that  were  awarded  for 
achievements in this field. 
The complexity of financial intermediation explains some of the seemingly peculiar features 
of the financial system as, for instance, the fact that the volume of transactions on the forex 
market  is  many  times  larger  than  what  would  be  required  by  the  actual  exchange  of 
merchandise. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
The major positive contribution of the financial system is its ability to deal with asymmetric 
information  problems.  Adverse  selection  and  moral  hazard  are  issues  emerging  from 
asymmetric  information.  They  are  a  cost  to  society,  as  they  hamper  lending.  Financial 
system  expansion  has  been  the  natural  solution  of  the  society  in  order  to  overcome 
asymmetric  information  problems.  Financial  institutions  put  their  capital  at  risk  and  derive 
income from the spread between lending and deposit rates. In doing so, they use specialized 
resources to assess credit risk and discipline the borrower. 
The fact that it has failed, triggering heavy costs to the society, leads to deep public anger 
and resentment. 
“While  anger  and  resentment  may  be  useful  spurs  to  action”  –  to  quote  Andrew  Crockett 
(2011) yet again – “they are much less helpful in shaping a balanced response to the crisis 
that both safeguards society against financial fragility and preserves the contribution that the 
financial sector makes to high quality sustainable growth”. Indeed, the crisis response so far 
has perhaps focused too much on preventing future financial crises and neglected the fact 
that robust economic growth is simply not possible  without the contribution of the financial 
system. 
lead  however 
III.1.   Why did the markets not deliver? 
Nowadays  the  financial  sector  tends  to  be  associated  with  its  negative  externalities,  while 
ignoring the essential function it performs in the economy. These negative externalities refer 
to both the direct cost of bailing out financial institutions and the indirect cost of the ensuing 
economic  recession.  Overemphasizing  negative  externalities  may 
to 
regulations that excessively limit risk-taking, which is unavoidable if the financial sector is to 
stimulate  private  saving,  enhance  allocative  efficiency  and  help  smooth  out  economic 
fluctuations due to non-financial causes. 
In theory, in the banking sector, stakeholders’ interest should ensure that credit standards, 
risk  management  and  controls,  and  capital  cushion  remain  adequate,  as  fund  providers 
would  penalize  managers  who  run  excessive  risks.  In  securities  markets,  long-term 
reputational  concerns  should  have  overcome  incentives  to  exploit  short-term  information 
asymmetries. 
Obviously,  in  practice,  proper market functioning  was  distorted  by  perverse  incentives  and 
information asymmetry. A special role was played by implicit guarantees that regulators gave 
to  market  participants.  These  guarantees  combined  with  the  risk  discounting  usually 
associated with a prolonged bonanza and resulted in excessive risk-taking and leverage. In 
my view, the lesson is as follows: any good fix of the financial system should deal with the 
sources of market failure and not only try to prevent inconvenient outcomes. 
In  doing  so,  I  think  it  is  better  to  avoid  over-complex  regulation,  which  may  indeed  be 
self-defeating in the long run. There has been a tendency to over-regulate in the aftermath of 
the crisis: as Haldane and Madouros (2012) observed, whereas the first Basel accord had 
only 30 pages, attempts to make it more flexible and fashionable turned it into a 347 pages 
document in its second iteration, on which the ink had barely dried when the financial crisis 
hit, and attempts to plug the gaping holes it revealed pushed the page count to no less than 
616  pages  in  the  case  of  the  Basel  III  agreement.  In  the  US,  whereas  the  original 
Glass-Steagall act, perhaps the most influential piece of legislation of the 20th century, had a 
mere 37 pages, the new Dodd-Frank Act of 2010 has 848 pages, and that’s only the primary 
legislation – counting in the 400 pieces of detailed rule-making from various US regulatory 
agencies that are required for its implementation, the document risks topping 30,000 pages. 
The  situation  is  similar  in  substance  in  Europe,  where  new  regulatory  directives  and 
regulations  account  so  far  for  2,000  pages  of  primary  legislation,  and  where  detailed 
rule-making occur on a similar scale as in the US, we would end up with 60,000 pages for a 
now literal regulatory blanket. Today’s financial markets are very complex and are becoming 
even  more  so.  Haldane  and  Madouros  are  right: “as  you  do  not fight fire  with  fire,  so  you 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
don’t fight complexity with complexity”. An efficient regulatory response should be grounded 
in simplicity. The “keep it simple” principle has never sounded truer. 
Fixing the financial system 
III.2.  
Attempts to fix the financial system seek to alter its structure by dealing with the scope, the 
size  and  the  cross-border  dimension  of  the  financial  activity.  As  concerns  the  scope,  the 
basic  idea  is  that  financial  institutions  should  be  prohibited  from  undertaking  certain 
potentially risky activities. Some proposals recommend reintroducing the separation between 
commercial and investment banking (as in the original Glass-Steagall Act). Others, such as 
the  so-called  “Volcker  rule”,  distinguish  between  client-service  trading  and  proprietary 
trading,  basically  banning  the  latter.  Criticism  of  these  proposals  is  three-fold:  (i)  the 
separation between commercial and investment banking is much more suitable to remove a 
conflict of interests rather than reduce credit risk; (ii) the major risk for commercial banking is, 
after all, credit risk; and (iii) in practice, it is difficult to delineate between proprietary trading 
and trading to hedge risk. 
Regarding the size of financial institutions, let me go directly to the “too big to fail” institutions. 
Their contribution to systemic risk is more than proportional to their size. It is not possible for 
such institutions to be sold, merged or closed down without jeopardizing the economy as a 
whole. Standard bankruptcy legislation, providing protection from creditors, simply does not 
work. Given the systemic importance of such institutions, access to creditors is essential. A 
special resolution framework should be designed in such a way that market participants be 
confident that it can be activated without generating unacceptable risks for the economy. 
Finally, the cross-border aspect of financial activity poses some particular challenges arising 
from  the  fact  that  legislation  and  bankruptcy  regimes  differ  across  countries.  Moreover, 
national regulators have, above all, the responsibility to ensure financial stability in their own 
country. The correct answer here lies with oversight mechanisms being adapted in order to 
be  able  to  deal  with  the  challenges  of  globalization,  rather  than  attempting  to  restrict  the 
functioning  of  the  financial  system  in  order  to  reflect  the  limitations  in  international 
cooperation. 
IV.  
The foreseeable future of the European banking systems: the banking union 
Let me quote Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa once more. He wrote that the old way of thinking 
along  the  Westphalian  concept  of  nation-states  is  no  longer  suited  for  policy  action  when 
dealing  with  problems  that  are  transnational,  such  as  the  financial  crisis.  For  instance, 
Europe  as  a  whole  does  not  have  large  external  deficits,  or  a  high  indebtedness  of  the 
household sector. Yet, it is being penalized by markets because its politicians try to solve the 
problems along the lines of nation-states. 
The need for a banking union 
IV.1. 
From this perspective,  the EMU  is visibly  incomplete.  On the one hand, in the absence  of 
a fiscal union, sovereign  spreads  vary according  to market perception.  On the other hand, 
in the absence of a banking union, banks are perceived as contingent liabilities of individual 
sovereigns. 
The EU is presently dealing with the negative feedback loop between banks and sovereigns. 
The  imperative  need  to  break  this  vicious  circle  gave  birth  to  a  wide  consensus  that  the 
banking  union  is  a  less  controversial  and  more  feasible  solution  than  a  fiscal  union.  It  is 
viewed as a way to place the banking sector on a more sound footing and restore confidence 
in the euro. It is also viewed as a step towards a fiscal union. 
A  banking  union 
the  so-called 
“impossible trinity”,  which  points  out that financial  stability  and financial  integration  are not 
compatible with preserving supervision at national level (Schoenmaker, 2011). 
is  also  a  good  answer 
the  perspective  of 
from 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
IV.2.   The project 
Now  let  us  turn  to  what  the  projected  banking  union  would  imply.  The  current  design 
envisages the banking union as functional for the euro area with an opt-in clause applicable 
to non-euro area Member States. At this stage, the proposal consists of four complementary 
pillars. 
First, there should be a single rulebook. This means that the members of the banking union 
should  establish  and  implement  a  harmonized  framework  for  banking  regulation  and 
supervision. 
Second, there should be a single supra-national supervisory authority in charge across the 
union (the main supervisory tasks will be transferred from the national to the European level). 
Third,  there  should  be  a  single  bank  resolution  mechanism  to  address  potential  banking 
crises. 
Fourth and finally, there should be a single deposit guarantee scheme in order to harmonise 
and centralise deposit insurance. 
IV.3.   Assessing the project 
Obviously, each pillar has its own pros and cons. Let me mention the most important ones. 
As  concerns  the  single  rulebook,  the  financial  crisis  highlighted  the  danger  of  divergent 
national  rules.  The  current  context  justifies  the  adoption  of  a  common  legal  framework  for 
banking  regulation.  The  European  Banking  Authority  would  play  the  central  role  in 
elaborating the rulebook. The result will be (i) less regulatory arbitrage; (ii) a reinforcement of 
the competitive neutrality principle: same business, same risk, same rules; and (iii) a higher 
level of transparency, contributing to a robust and uniform regulatory framework in the Single 
Market. 
On  the  other  hand, there  are  some  risks:  (i)  implementing  the  same  rulebook  across  over 
8,000  banks  in  17  or  more  countries  may  not  prove  flexible  enough;  (ii)  the  tougher 
regulations currently in place at national level might be undermined in those non-euro area 
Member States which decide not to join the banking union. Local subsidiaries may choose to 
bypass the more prohibitive banking legislation by turning into branches. 
The  single  supervisory  mechanism  could  be  created  through  the  transfer  of  prudential 
supervision attributes from national authorities to the ECB. In this context, a number of tasks 
such  as  consumer  protection,  fight  against  money  laundering  and  supervision  of  banks 
based in non-EU countries remain at the national level. 
Meanwhile, the ECB takes the actual responsibility for supervising the banking system, being 
in  charge  of  licensing  credit  institutions,  ensuring  compliance  with  capital,  leverage  and 
liquidity requirements and also supervising financial conglomerates on a consolidated basis. 
A gradual timetable was designed to smooth the transition to the new mechanism. Starting 
from  1  January  2013,  the  ECB  may  choose  to  take  over  the  supervision  of  any  credit 
institution in the banking union. A particular focus will be on the entities which have received 
or requested public funding. 
By  1  January  2014,  all  other  banks  should  be  under  central  supervision,  with  an  earlier 
cut-off date (1 July 2013) for banks of major systemic importance. 
The  successful  implementation  of  the  mechanism  would  hold  considerable  weight  in 
restoring confidence and increasing transparency in banking supervision. However, a couple 
of  downsides  are  worth  mentioning:  (i)  voluntary  participation  of  non-euro  states  in  the 
banking union may result in the fragmentation of the EU single market into participating and 
non-participating  countries,  and  (ii)  there  is  still  uncertainty  regarding  the  role  of  these 
countries within the single supervisory institution. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The  question  arises  whether  the  decision  to  entrust  the  ECB  with  a  banking  supervision 
mandate  was  the  appropriate  choice.  In  my  opinion,  it  seems  that  is  the  case,  although  a 
number  of  opinions  highlighting  potential  problems  should  not  be  ignored.  In favour  of  the 
ECB  are  its  strong  expertise  in  the  financial  sector,  as  well  as  the  synergy  that  exists 
between  banking  supervision,  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  lender-of-last-resort  function  and 
payment system oversight, on the other hand. 
As the third pillar of the banking union, the single bank resolution mechanism is deemed to 
ensure  a  centralised  management  of  banking  crises  that  provides  options  for  dealing  with 
bank failures in an orderly way, with minimal disruptions to the economy. The principles of 
the resolution should be set out in a single rulebook and they should address the issues of 
the cost of bank recovery, the fiscal backstop, and the moral hazard problem that may occur. 
The  cost  of  banks’  recovery  or  resolution  should  be  borne  by  shareholders  and  creditors. 
Nevertheless, in the case of systemic crises, an explicit fiscal backstop may be required, on 
the design of which a political consensus will be difficult to achieve. 
Another  challenge  to  establishing  this  mechanism  relates  to  the  heterogeneous  resolution 
framework  at  the  national  level,  which  calls  for  significant  changes  in  national  insolvency, 
labour  and  tax  laws.  Additionally,  if  the  European  Stability  Mechanism  were  enabled  to 
recapitalise  banks  directly,  negative  consequences  could  occur  in  terms  of  moral  hazard 
within  the  single  market,  as  well  as  unfair  competition  between  participating  and 
non-participating banks in the banking union. 
However, one should not overlook the fact that the single bank resolution mechanism has the 
advantage  of  increasing  the  speed  and  credibility  in  addressing  banking  crises  (especially 
cross-border failures). 
As regards the single deposit guarantee scheme, the underlying idea is that a larger pool of 
resources  reinforces  confidence  in  the  banking  system.  A  caveat  is  worth  mentioning, 
however: in times of extreme financial stress, the size of potential liabilities may undermine 
the credibility of the mechanism. 
Even  if  this  pillar  is  less  urgent  than  the  others,  steps  in  this  direction  have  already  been 
taken.  Specifically,  the  coverage  of  the  national  deposit  guarantee  schemes  has  been 
harmonised  at  the  level  of  EUR  100,000/depositor/institution  and  measures  to  simplify 
protected deposit repayments have been adopted in terms of faster payouts and improved 
financing. 
This single protection scheme is designed to ensure an equal treatment of depositors across 
EU countries, in complementarity with the Single Supervisory Mechanism. 
From 
there  are  some  potential  negative 
consequences stemming from the establishment of the banking union in the euro area, which 
need to be assessed. 
First  of  all,  the  failure  to  join  the  banking  union  could  lead  to  possible  changes  in  the 
domestic  banking  structure.  Parent  banks  may  decide  to  turn  their  subsidiaries  into 
branches. This would be reflected by (i) additional fragmentation of financial sectors across 
the region, (ii) low availability of information to host-country regulators and supervisors, and 
(iii)  lower  capacity  at  institution  and  group  levels  to  respond  to  domestic  and  regional 
developments.  Secondly,  incentives  for  deleveraging  may  emerge  in  a  non-euro  country 
remaining  outside  the  banking  union,  also  for  circumstantial  reasons  of  the  home-country 
banking groups. 
All in all, the advantages of joining a banking union outweigh, in my opinion, the drawbacks. 
As  a  matter  of  fact,  given  the  current  stage  of  financial  globalization,  a  similar  approach 
would  also  be  advisable  worldwide.  Of  course,  I  am  not  suggesting  establishing  a  global 
banking  union.  I  only  suggest  increasing  cross-border supervisory  cooperation. This  would 
the  perspective  of  non-euro  countries, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
mean  new  mechanisms,  new  techniques  for  sharing  information,  as  well  as  harmonised 
approaches when dealing with banks in distress. 
By way of conclusion 
V.  
By way of conclusion, I would say that we should adjust our ways of thinking and acting to 
the shifting economic and financial reality, rather than force the financial system to embrace 
a  more  or  less  fashionable  theoretical  approach.  Not  only  the  current  crisis,  but  also  the 
troubled history of the banking system reveals that the viable solution is to find a balanced 
approach  between  the  roles  markets  and  governments  have  to  play  in  order  to  put  the 
economy  on  a  smooth  growth  path.  In  this  context,  the  financial  system  reform  measures 
should aim not only at avoiding the outbreak of a new crisis in the future, but also at ensuring 
that  the  new  architecture  of  the  financial  system  enhances  its  ability  to  support  sound 
economic growth. 
Thank  you  very  much  for  your  attention  and,  last  but  not  least,  for  your  patience.  I  also 
appreciate that you accepted that I slipped from the shoes of the President of the Romanian 
Association  of  the  Club  of  Rome  into  the  ones  of  the  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of 
Romania. 
Selected bibliography 
Crockett,  Andrew:  “What  financial  system  for  the  21st  century?”,  Per  Jacobsson  lecture, 
Basel, June 2011 
Eichengreen, Barry and Bordo, Michael: “Crisis Now and Then: What Lessons from the Last 
Era  of  Financial  Globalisation”,  in  P.  Mizen  (ed.),  Monetary  History,  Exchange  Rates  and 
Financial Markets: Essays in honour of Charles Goodhart, Vol. 2, Cheltenham, UK: Edward 
Elgar, Ch. 3, pp. 52–91, 2003 
Goodhart,  Charles:  “The  Changing  Role  of  Central  Banks”,  BIS  Working  Papers  No.  326, 
2010 
Greenspan,  Alan:  “The  Age  of  Turbulence:  Adventures  in  a  New  World”,  Penguin  Press, 
pp. 462–464, 2007 
Haldane, Andrew: “Control Rights (and Wrongs)”, Economic Affairs, Vol. 32, 2012 
Haldane,  Andrew  and  Vasileios,  Madouras:  “The  Dog  and  the  Frisbee”,  Fed  Reserve  of 
Kansas 36th Policy Symposium, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, 2012 
Haldane,  Andrew  and  Vasileios,  Madouras:  “What  is  the  Contribution  of  the  Financial 
Sector?”, Voxeu.org, 2012 
Padoa-Schioppa,  Tommaso:  “Markets  and  Government  Before,  During  and  After  the 
2007–20xx Crisis”, Per Jacobsson lecture, Basel, June 2010 
Financial  Services  Authority:  “The  Turner  Review:  A  Regulatory  Response  to  the  Global 
Banking Crisis”, 2009 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
