Ardian Fullani: Overview of Albania’s latest economic and financial 
developments 
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  on  the  Monetary  Policy 
Decision-Making of the Bank of Albania’s Supervisory Council, Tirana, 31 October 2012 
 Today,  on  31  October  2012,  the  Bank  of  Albania’s  Supervisory  Council  reviewed  and 
approved  the  quarterly  Monetary  Policy  Report.  Based  on  the  analysis  of  Albania’s  latest 
economic  and  monetary  developments,  and  following  discussions  on  their  performance 
outlook,  the  Bank  of  Albania’s  Supervisory  Council  decided  to  keep  the  key  interest  rate 
unchanged, at 4.0%. The Supervisory Council deems that the current monetary conditions 
are adequate to meet Bank of Albania’s inflation target in the medium term. Keeping the key 
interest  rate  at  its  minimum  historical  level  ensures  the  necessary  monetary  incentive  to 
promote Albania’s domestic demand and economic growth.  
Let me now proceed with an overview of the economic and monetary developments and key 
issues discussed at today’s meeting.  
 the 
the  negative 
impact  on  economic  growth  rate, 
The Albanian economy was faces with a challenging global environment over the first three 
quarters of 2012 due to difficult situation of the world economy, and particularly of the euro 
area. Domestically and externally generated supply shocks determined the economic growth 
profile and continued to test Albania’s macroeconomic and financial foundations. Over this 
period,  the  Albanian  economy  was  faced  with  slow  foreign  demand  growth,  increased 
financial risk premia and tendencies of several financial market agents to reduce exposure to 
Albanian  economy.  These  developments  were  also  reflected  in  low  consumption  and 
investment  levels.  Along  with  the  reduced  fiscal  stimulus  in  2012,  they  resulted  in  a  weak 
aggregate demand and low economic growth during the first three quarters of the year.  
Despite 
financial  and 
macroeconomic  stability  resulted  stable.  In  spite  of  demand  volatility  and  supply 
concerns, inflation resulted low and in check, reflecting, inter alia, good anchoring of public 
expectations around the 3% target. Fiscal balance sustainability, Albania’s improved external 
position,  and  sound  real-sector  and  financial-sector  balances  in  the  economy  further 
strengthened Albania’s economic and financial stability over this period.  
Average annual consumer price inflation resulted 2.7% in the third quarter of the year, 
increasing gradually along the year.  
Added  contribution  of  prices  for  unprocessed  food  and  non-food  consumer  goods  mostly 
created this quarter’s annual inflation rate. On the other hand, prices of other basket items 
were stable and slightly volatile. The economic and monetary analyses confirm the presence 
of  weak  demand-induced  inflationary  pressures.  Developments  in  the  real  sector  of  the 
economy conditioned the controlled price rise of domestic products. These tendencies have 
been  reflected  in  the  downward  trend  of  core  inflation  and  low  non-traded  inflation  of  the 
consumer price index basket.  
Consumer  price  performance  continued  to  reflect  the  low  pressures  from  other  cost 
elements. In particular, import prices were low and given the relative exchange-rate stability, 
they transmitted low pressures from imported inflation.  
Following the economic contraction in the first quarter, Albanian economy fell by 2.0% y-o-y, 
in  the  second  quarter.  Economic  activity  growth  was  generated  by  agriculture,  industry 
sectors and some branches of the services sector, while the construction sector fell sharply.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
From the viewpoint of aggregate demand, the second quarter’s economic growth was mostly 
supported by the foreign demand, while the domestic demand remained sluggish. Consumer 
spending,  though  higher  than  in  the  first  quarter,  did  not  return  to  past  year’s  rates  of 
increase.  This  component  of  the  domestic  demand  remained  influenced  by  the  perceived 
uncertainty,  lacked  dynamisms  in  the  labour  market  and  slowed  available  income. 
Confronted  with  a  low  ultimate  demand  for  their  products  and  in  the  presence  of  spare 
capacities  and  relatively  tight  lending  terms,  private  investments  also  remained  low.  In 
particular,  during  the  first  half  of  the  year,  the  low  private  investment  level  reflected 
households’ low demand for housing.  
Public spending and fiscal stimulus were also weak, reflecting the consolidating fiscal policy 
and  observing  the  fiscal  restrictions  required  by  law.  Fiscal  consolidation,  which  is  based 
mostly  on  reduced  expenditure,  is  illustrated through  the  downward  trend  of  budget  deficit 
over  the  period.  The  budget  deficit  resulted  about  ALL  25.7  billion  during  the  first  three 
quarters of the year, down by about 19%, y-o-y. Until September, the realised expenditures 
were about 0.2% lower than a year earlier, while the budget income increased 2.3%.  
The data on developments in the external sector of the economy show Albania’s significantly 
improved external position. The value of exports increased 6.7%, y-o-y, in the first quarter, 
reflecting  the  moderation  in  the  foreign  demand  and  performance  of  global  market  prices. 
Over the period, imports contracted by 0.9%, y-o-y. These developments led to an annual 
contraction of trade deficit by 5.4% until August, positively influencing the aggregate demand 
growth. Also, the sharply decreased current account deficit in the second quarter is a positive 
signal for the long-term stability of this indicator and assists in stabilizing the demand for and 
supply of foreign currency in the domestic market.  
Developments  in  the  monetary  sector  attest  to  low  inflationary  pressures  in  the  economy. 
Monetary  assets  expansion  slowed  over  the  third  quarter,  reflecting  the  decline  in  the 
domestic demand for money.  
The  public  sector’s  prudential  behaviour  has  led  to  a  low  demand  for  monetary  assets, 
particularly  from  the  banking  sector.  On  the  other  hand,  the  slow  economic  activity  and 
available  spare  capacities  appear  to  have  restricted  the  private  sector’s  demand  for 
monetary  assets.  Private  sector  credit  increased  by  5%,  y-o-y,  in  August,  following  the 
slowing trajectory having started since the second half of 2011. Developments over the past 
months show that banks are more active in national currency intermediation, while they have 
decreased  their  foreign  currency  intermediation.  This  development  is  driven  by  banks’ 
readiness to invest lek funds and economic agents’ increased awareness of foreign currency 
credit risk.  
Regarding  lending  concerns,  we  would  emphasise  that the  weak  credit performance  owes 
mostly  to  economic  agents’  low  demand  for  monetary  assets.  However,  the  bank  credit 
supply appears somewhat tightened.  
The  banking  system  remains  prudential  in  selecting  the  projects  it  finances,  as  a 
consequence  of  deteriorated  loan  portfolio  quality  and  uncertainties  surrounding  the  future 
outlook. Banks continued to maintain tight lending standards, appearing rather selective in 
assessing the business plans and meeting the demand for loan. Overall, the Bank of Albania 
assesses that creating a positive climate assists in recovering lending and the demand for 
loan. The Albanian banking system remains well-capitalised, liquid and capable of meeting 
the  economy’s  needs  for  credit.  However,  within  the  parameters  of  financial  prudence,  it 
should be forward-looking about its decisions and more flexible in providing financial support 
to Albanian business.  
Financial  markets  were  characterised  by  a  downward  interest  rate  trend  over  the  third 
quarter, associated with low liquidity pressures and reflecting the Bank of Albania’s easing 
monetary policy.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Increased  interbank  market  activity  suggests  the  increased  efficiency  in  using  this  market 
and  is  a  good  premise  for  developing  the  overall  monetary  market  in  Albania.  Over  the 
period,  the  easing  monetary  policy  signals  in  terms  of  lowering  the  government  security 
yields  were  better  transmitted.  This  transmission  was  favoured  by  completion  of  structural 
movements  in  the  banking  system  and  reduced  government  demand  for  funding.  Deposit 
interest rates continued to fall as  well, but as already reflected by the high deposit growth 
over  this  quarter,  they  did  not  restrain  the  increase  in  financial  savings  at  the  banking 
system.  The  easing  of  financial  costs  was  not  fully  transmitted  to  the  private  sector  credit 
segment during July-August. In particular, additional costs required by banks to anchor the 
new  credit  remain  tight,  in  response  to  the  perceived  uncertainty  and  their  reacting 
mechanism for credit risk reduction.  
Against  the  backdrop  of  slow  current  and  expected  economic  developments,  aggregate 
demand  and  inflation,  the  monetary  policy  deepened  its  stimulating  nature  in  the  third 
quarter.  As  at  end-July,  the  key  rate  was  lowered  by  0.25  percentage  points,  down  to  its 
historical  minimum  of  4.0%.  This  was  the  fifth  key  rate  lowering  since  September  2011. 
Parallel to that, the Bank of Albania continued to supply the banking system with the required 
liquidity through its variable liquidity-providing operations.  
 Future outlook suggests that inflationary pressures remain low. Our analyses and projections 
conclude  that  the  economic  activity  will  remain  below  potential,  exerting  pressures  on  the 
downside inflation. At the same time, the supply generated pressures appear contained.  
Based on current performance of inflation-determining factors and their future outlook, after 
12 months inflation is expected to fluctuate around 1.2% – 3.4%, with a probability of 90%. 
The expected inflation and economic outlook imply the maintaining of a stimulating monetary 
policy for the period ahead. The Bank of Albania remains heedful to future developments and 
new information, and stands ready to intervene timely and duly to meet its legal mission. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
