William C Dudley: The recovery and monetary policy 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York and Chairman of the Committee on the Global Financial System 
(CGFS), at the National Association for Business Economics Annual Meeting, New York City, 
15 October 2012. 
 Good  morning. It  is  a  pleasure  to  have  the  opportunity  to  speak  at  this  NABE  (National 
Association for Business Economics) conference today. Having spent more than 20 years as 
a business economist working in the private sector before joining the Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York in 2007, I feel right at home here today. 
My remarks will focus on the economic outlook. I do this with some trepidation, of course. In 
the  private  sector  there  are  two  adages  about  forecasting  that  underscore  the  need  to  be 
humble in this endeavor: First, forecast often. Second, specify a level or a time horizon, but 
never specify both, together. 
But  more  seriously,  despite  the  difficulties  in  making  accurate  forecasts,  we  still  need  to 
understand as best we can why the economy is performing the way it is, what that implies 
about  the  economic  outlook,  and,  how  policymakers  can  respond  to  generate  better 
outcomes. We live in a highly complex and uncertain world, but we need to make as much 
sense  out  of  it  as  possible.  As  always,  what  I  have  to  say  reflects  my  own  views  and  not 
necessarily those of the FOMC (Federal Open Market Committee) or the Federal Reserve 
System. 
My attention today will be on three important questions: 
• 
Why  has  the  U.S.  recovery  been  so  sluggish  and  consistently  weaker  than 
expected?  
What should we, as monetary policymakers, do it about it?  
What other policy actions are needed to help ensure a timely transition to strong and 
sustainable growth?  
 The disappointing recovery 
Turning to the first question, U.S. economic growth has been quite sluggish in recent years. 
For example, annualized real GDP (gross domestic product) growth has averaged only about 
2.2 percent since the end of the recession in 2009. As a consequence, we have seen only 
modest improvement in the U.S. labor market. 
Not  only  has  growth  been  slow,  it  has  also  been  disappointing  relative  to  the  forecasters’ 
expectations. For example, the Blue Chip Consensus have been persistently too optimistic in 
recent  years.  This  is  illustrated  in  Exhibit  1  which  shows  how  private  sector  forecasts  for 
2008 through 2013 have evolved over time. 
Two aspects of this exhibit are noteworthy. First, forecasters have consistently expected the 
U.S. economy to gather momentum over time. Second, with only one exception, the growth 
forecasts  for  each  year  have  been  revised  downward  over  time,  as  the  expected 
strengthening did not materialize.  
In contrast, as shown in Exhibit 2, there has been no notable pattern of forecast misses for 
inflation. Sometimes, inflation has been a bit higher than expected, other times a bit lower. 
On balance, inflation has been very close to our 2 percent longer-run objective. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Although  I  have  focused  on  the  private  forecasting  record  here,  the  FOMC  participants’ 
forecasts  show  a  similar  pattern.  It  is  on  the  growth  side  where  there  have  been  chronic, 
systematic misses. 
In  my  view,  the  primary  reason  for  the  poor  performance  of  the  U.S.  economy  over  this 
period  has  been  inadequate  aggregate  demand.  There  are  several  explanations  for  this. 
Although  some  were  well-known  earlier,  others  have  only  become  more  obvious  as  the 
recovery has unfolded. 
One reason is the nature of economic recoveries following financial crises. On that basis, the 
poor performance of the U.S. economy is not unusual – historical experience shows clearly 
that recoveries following financial crises typically are very slow and difficult.1 
During  the  credit  boom,  finance  is  available  on  easy  terms  and  the  economy  builds  up 
excesses in terms of leverage and risk-taking. When the bust arrives, credit availability drops 
sharply  and  financial  deleveraging  occurs.  Wealth  falls  sharply,  precautionary  liquidity 
demands  increase,  desired  leverage  drops  further.  In  the  U.S.  case,  there  were  some 
idiosyncratic elements, such as subprime lending and collateralized debt obligations. But, in 
the  end,  the  U.S.  experience  included  the  major  elements  of  most  booms:  Too  much 
leverage,  too  little  understanding  of  risk,  too  easy  credit  terms,  and  then  a  very  sharp 
reversal. 
When  the  bust  arrives,  over-indebted  households  and  businesses  want  to  increase  their 
saving and liquidity buffers, and financial intermediaries want to raise credit standards. Both 
responses  restrain  demand  and  make  a  cyclical  rebound  more  difficult.  In  the  U.S.  case, 
because the bust was concentrated in housing, the scope for a strong cyclical recovery was 
particularly  constrained  because  the  interest-rate  sensitive  sector  that  would  typically  lead 
such a rebound could not recover until the overhang of unsold homes and the impairment of 
housing finances was corrected. 
The U.S. recovery has also been subpar because it has been taking place in the context of a 
weak  global  economy.  Historically,  after  a  country  experienced  a  financial  crisis,  growing 
foreign  demand  and  currency  depreciation  have  often  led  to  a  sharp  improvement  in  the 
trade  account  that  has  put  a  floor  under  economic  activity.  In  such  circumstances,  rising 
exports substitute for domestic consumption in supporting aggregate demand. This demand, 
in turn, encourages businesses to hire and invest. In contrast, this time the shock generated 
by  the  U.S.  housing  bust  had  global  consequences,  exposing  economic  vulnerabilities 
outside of the United States, especially in Europe. Under these circumstances, the scope for 
trade as a support for U.S. growth, while positive, has been very limited. 
These  two  factors  –  the  dynamics  following  financial  crises  and  the  weakness  of  foreign 
demand  –  help  explain  why  U.S.  growth  has  been  weak,  but  I  don’t  think  these  factors 
explain why it has been consistently weaker than expected. 
After all, on the other side of the ledger, the policy response following the crisis has been 
much more aggressive than is typical. On the monetary policy side, the Federal Reserve cut 
short-term interest rates close to zero, communicated that short-term rates were likely to stay 
exceptionally low far into the future, and undertook a series of large-scale asset purchases in 
order to ease financial conditions further. 
On  the  fiscal  side,  in  2009  the  Congress  and  Administration  enacted  the  largest  fiscal 
stimulus program in history and some of these fiscal actions were renewed (e.g., extended 
unemployment compensation benefits) and new initiatives undertaken (e.g., the payroll tax 
holiday)  once  it  became  clear  that  the  recovery  was  faltering.  Also,  there  were  significant 
                                                 
1   These lessons are evident in surveys of past financial crises and are examined in detail by Carmen Reinhart 
and Ken Rogoff in their superlative book, This Time is Different: Eight Centuries of Financial Folly. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
policy actions taken to strengthen the banking system, including forcing banks to recapitalize 
so that they would have the capacity to sustain their lending. 
So why has the recovery disappointed? 
One possibility is that the negative dynamics of a post-bubble environment are even more 
potent than had been appreciated. Feedback loops may be more powerful and frictions may 
be larger. In the U.S. case, this is particularly germane with respect to housing and mortgage 
finance. For example, we have found significant shortcomings in those institutional structures 
available to support the workout of the overhang of mortgage debt in an efficient and timely 
manner.  
A  second  reason  may  be  the  series  of  additional  negative  shocks  experienced  since  the 
initial phase of the financial crisis. The largest of these relate to the crisis in the eurozone. 
But  one  could  also  add  the  periodic  commodity  price  shocks,  the  disruptive  impact  of  the 
tragic Japanese earthquake and tsunami on global trade and production, and the effect of 
the uncertainties around the impending fiscal cliff on hiring and investing. 
That  said,  the  shocks  since  the  acute  phase  of  the  crisis  in  the  United  States  were  not 
uniformly  negative.  Take,  for  example,  the  sharp  increase  in  U.S.  oil  and  natural  gas 
production stemming, in part, from the innovations in drilling and extraction technologies. Not 
only does this rising production directly boost real GDP, but also the large drop in natural gas 
prices has significantly improved the industrial competitiveness of U.S.-based businesses. 
A  third  reason  for  the  weaker  than  expected  recovery  likely  lies  in  the  interplay  between 
secular and cyclical factors. In particular, I believe that demographic factors have played a 
role in restraining the recovery. The developed world’s populations are aging rapidly. In the 
United States, for example, the baby boom generation, which is a particularly large cohort, is 
now  beginning  to  retire.  As  the  population  ages,  this  has  two  consequences.  First,  the 
spending  decisions  of  the  older  age  cohorts  are  less  likely  to  be  easily  stimulated  by 
monetary policy. That is because such age groups tend to spend less of their incomes on 
consumer durables and housing. Second, as the population ages and the number of retirees 
climbs,  the  costs  associated  with  Social  Security,  government  pensions,  and  healthcare 
retirement  benefits  increase.  This  creates  budgetary  pressure  and  leads  to  a  choice  of 
raising revenue to fund these costs, cutting other government programs, or cutting benefits. 
Now if this all had been fully anticipated by retirees and near-retirees, then this would already 
be factored into their spending and saving decisions. But, I doubt that this has been the case. 
I suspect that many have been surprised by the swift change in economic circumstances as 
the housing boom went bust. I doubt that many fully anticipated the budget crunch and the 
prospect that their future retiree and healthcare benefits would likely be curbed or their taxes 
would have to rise in the future. When households begin to anticipate this, they reduce their 
assessment of their sustainable living standards. This downward reassessment then feeds 
back to current spending and saving decisions. 
A  fourth  reason  why  the  recovery  has  been  slower  than  expected  may  be  that  we 
overestimated the capacity for fiscal policy to continue to provide support to growth until a 
vigorous recovery was achieved. On the fiscal side, the authorities can cut taxes or increase 
spending  to  support  income  and  demand  during  the  deleveraging  phase  that  follows  the 
financial  crisis.  But  the  ability  of  such  stimulus  to  continue  to  support  economic  activity 
ultimately  encounters  budgetary  limits.  For  example,  the  need  to  keep  the  long-term  fiscal 
trajectory  on  a  sustainable  path  limits  the  size  and  duration  of  federal  fiscal  stimulus 
measures. For state and local governments, the statutory requirements for balanced budgets 
meant that fiscal policies turned restrictive relatively quickly once budget surpluses and rainy 
day funds were exhausted, and this was only temporarily mitigated by federal transfers to the 
states as part of the initial fiscal stimulus program. Fiscal policy is now a drag rather than a 
support to growth in the United States, and this will likely continue.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
to  zero, 
two  complementary 
the  Fed  has  aggressively  employed 
Monetary policy  
I  would  give  each  of  these  four  explanations  some  weight  for  why  the  recovery  has  been 
consistently  weaker  than  expected.  But  I  would  add  a  fifth,  monetary  policy,  while  highly 
accommodative  by  historic  standards,  may  still  not  have  been  sufficiently  accommodative 
given the economic circumstances. 
Now  let  me  be  clear.  I  believe  the  evidence  overwhelmingly  indicates  that  our  monetary 
policy  has  been  effective  in  easing  financial  conditions  and  supporting  economic  activity. 
After  reducing  the  traditional  policy  tool,  the  target  for  the  overnight  federal  funds  rate,  to 
close 
types  of 
non-traditional tools – asset purchases and forward guidance on the policy rate – to provide 
additional stimulus through their effects on long term rates and various risk premia. 
Effective  forward  guidance  on  interest  rates  causes  market  participants  to  lower  their 
expectations and uncertainty about future path of interest rates and to anticipate that easier 
financial conditions will persist well in to the future. This pushes down the yield curve and 
leads to easier financial conditions. 
Federal Reserve asset purchases also make financial conditions more accommodative. Such 
purchases, by taking duration out of private hands, push down term premia and lead to lower 
long-term rates than would otherwise be the case for any given economic outlook. Agency 
MBS (mortgage-backed securities) purchases absorb prepayment risk and reduce secondary 
and  primary  mortgage  rates,  stimulating  demand  for  housing  and  increasing  purchasing 
power through refinancing. Lower long-term rates support the prices of equities and housing, 
boosting  wealth  and  easing  balance  sheet  constraints,  while  an  accommodative  monetary 
policy  stance  reduces  downside  risks  for  the  economy  and  this  leads  to  lower  default  risk 
premia on corporate debt. 
Our two tools work in a complementary manner. Asset purchases strengthen the credibility of 
the  forward  guidance  on  interest  rates,  while  forward  guidance  provides  information  about 
how long the FOMC is likely to hold on to the assets it purchases. 
My conclusion is that the easing of financial conditions resulting from non-traditional policy 
actions  has  had  a  material  effect  on  both  nominal  and  real  growth  and  has  demonstrably 
reduced the risk of particularly adverse outcomes.  Nevertheless, I also conclude that, with 
the benefit of hindsight, monetary policy needed to be still more aggressive. Consequently, it 
was appropriate to recalibrate our policy stance, which is what happened at the last FOMC 
meeting. 
As I argued in a recent speech, simple policy rules, including the most popular versions of 
the Taylor Rule, understate the degree of monetary support that may be required to achieve 
a given set of economic objectives in a post-financial crisis world. That is because such rules 
typically do not adjust for factors such as a time-varying neutral real interest rate, elevated 
risk  spreads,  or  impaired  transmission  channels  that  can  undercut  the  power  of  monetary 
policy.2 
One reason that monetary policy may have been less powerful than normal is that one of the 
primary  channels  through  which  monetary  policy  influences  the  real  economy  –  housing 
finance – has been partially impaired. This has both quantity and price dimensions. Credit 
availability to households with lower-rated credit scores remains limited and households with 
homes that have fallen sharply in value have lost most or all of their home equity and this 
makes it very difficult for them to refinance these mortgages. 
                                                 
2  Dudley, William C. (2012). “Conducting Monetary Policy: Rules, Learning and Risk Management”. Remarks at 
the  C.  Peter  McColough  Series  on  International  Economics,  Council  on  Foreign  Relations,  New  York  City, 
May 24. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Federal  Reserve  MBS  purchases  have  succeeded  in  driving  down  mortgage  rates  to 
historically low levels. But these purchases would have had still more effect on the economy 
if pass-through rates from the secondary market to the primary market had been higher. As 
can be seen in Exhibit 3, the Federal Reserve’s purchases significantly narrowed the spread 
between  agency  MBS  and  Treasury  yields,  with  the  latest  round  of  purchases  notably 
effective  in  this  regard.  But,  as  shown  in  Exhibit 4  the  spread  between  primary  mortgage 
rates and agency MBS yields3 has widened and this has limited the drop in primary mortgage 
rates. 
The incomplete pass-through from agency MBS yields into primary mortgage rates is due to 
several  factors  –  including  a  concentration  of  mortgage  origination  volumes  at  a  few  key 
financial institutions and mortgage rep and warranty requirements that discourage lending for 
home purchases and make financial institutions reluctant to refinance mortgages that have 
been originated elsewhere. On a related note, higher guarantee fees charges by Fannie Mae 
and  Freddie  Mac  have  increased  the  fixed  cost  of  originating  loans  and  this  has  also 
increased  the  spread  between  primary  and  secondary  mortgage  rates.  Factors  limiting 
pass-through warrant ongoing attention from policymakers. 
Another reason why monetary policy has become less effective in stimulating the economy is 
because  the  impetus  from  a  given  level  of  monetary  accommodation  likely  has  become 
attenuated  –  that  is,  less  powerful  –  over  time.  Historically,  attenuation  has  not  been 
important  because  monetary  policy  typically  has  not  stayed  exceptionally  easy  for  long 
periods of time. But this time is different and that difference may be important. 
So  how  might  the  monetary  policy  impulse  on  economic  activity  have  become  attenuated 
over time? I would suggest two potential channels. 
The first channel is that monetary policy works, in part, by changing the timing of purchase 
decisions. If interest rates decline, the drop in financing costs may induce some households 
to buy a motor vehicle or purchase a home now rather than in the future. Of course, if the car 
or home is purchased today, this will borrow at least a portion of those sales from the future. 
There is a limit to how many cars and homes most people will want to buy, given their budget 
constraints.  In  this  case,  as  the  stimulus  from  the  policy  stays  in  place,  the  impulse  on 
economic growth will gradually “wear off” as there are fewer and fewer households who can 
be induced to pull their future planned purchases forward to the present. The same argument 
applies  to  mortgage  refinancing  activity.  The  stimulus  comes  from  the  refinancing  activity, 
which increases the amount of income that borrowers have available for other expenditures. 
The impetus to growth wears off unless mortgage rates keep dropping, stimulating additional 
rounds of refinancing activity. 
The  second  channel  is  that  low  interest  rates  will  gradually  reduce  the  interest  income  of 
savers  and  this  could  eventually  affect  their  consumption.  Household  interest  income  has 
fallen considerably over the past few years. 
This effect is likely to work quite slowly. The fact that interest rates are low for six months or 
a year probably does not have much impact on households’ expectations of their long-term 
interest income and thus, does not have much of an impact on consumer spending. But, as 
low  interest  rates  are  sustained,  this  could  eventually  lead  to  a  downward  adjustment  in 
households’ assessments of their interest income over time and influence their spending. 
One  way  to  look  at  this  is  through  the  prism  of  forward  real  interest  rates.  If  interest  rate 
expectations many years forward have fallen, then expectations about the permanent level of 
interest  income  should  have  declined  as  well.  As  shown  in  Exhibit  5,  forward  real  rates 
five years ahead have declined notably over the past few years. This could be a reasonable 
                                                 
3  Primary  mortgage  rates  are  the  rates  paid  by  conforming  borrowers,  MBS  yields  are  the  rates  received  by 
investors. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
proxy for savers’ expectations. Note that the decline in Exhibit 5 has not been precipitous, it 
has occurred very gradually over time. 
However, policymaking is about making choices between available alternatives. In the long 
run,  even  savers  would  be  better  off  in  a  world  in  which  aggressive  monetary  policy 
generates  a  strengthening  recovery  that  eventually  permits  the  normalization  of  interest 
rates, than they would be compared to a circumstance in which the United States allowed 
itself to fall into a Japan-style trap of low growth and low rates for decades. So I do not view 
the effect of low rates on savers as a reason to be less accommodative. 
Rather, in my view, the potential for the monetary policy impulse to be attenuated over time, 
is an additional reason to be aggressive in terms of the policy response. A more front-loaded 
program  would  avoid  greater  attenuation  compared  with a  policy  that  started  out  less 
aggressive but added stimulus gradually over time. This has two benefits. First, it would likely 
be more successful in generating the desired recovery more quickly. Second, relative to a 
more back-loaded program, less would ultimately need to be done to achieve the desired set 
of outcomes.  
The fact that there are asymmetric payoffs from an economy that is weaker than expected 
versus  one  that  is  stronger  than  expected,  given  that  we  are  at  the  zero  lower  bound 
reinforces  this  conclusion.  In  particular,  if  the  economy  were  to  continue  to  underperform, 
and experienced a severe shock, there would be some risk of getting stuck in a deflationary 
situation in which monetary policy would be even less effective. 
At the present time there is no conflict between our employment objective and our inflation 
objective, as I expect inflation to be at or below our 2 percent longer-run objective over the 
coming years. But shouldn’t we also consider the costs associated with a more aggressive 
monetary policy of the kind adopted at the last FOMC meeting, especially when we are using 
non-traditional monetary policy tools? 
Absolutely.  We  have  carefully  evaluated  three  potential  sets  of  costs  and  will  continue  to 
review them. 
The first set of costs stems from the risk that the current monetary policy regime could distort 
asset allocations and lead to renewed financial asset bubbles. We look at this issue on an 
ongoing  basis.  To  date,  there  is  little  evidence  of  problems  or  excesses,  but  this  could 
change  as  the  recovery  proceeds.  If  these  costs  were  to  rise,  we  would  need  to  examine 
what  steps  could  be  taken  on  the  macro-prudential  front  in  response.  Also,  such 
developments  would  need  to  be  incorporated  into  the  monetary  policy  decision-making 
process. 
The second set of costs stems from the risk that exit from this regime could prove difficult. In 
particular, some observers worry that the expansion of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet 
could  ultimately  prove  inflationary.  If  that  were  the  case,  then  I  would  regard  the  costs  as 
exceptionally high. 
Fortunately, I am confident that such fears are misplaced. That is because we now have the 
ability to pay interest on excess reserves (IOER). This means we can keep inflation in check 
regardless the size of our balance sheet. If the recovery got underway in earnest and credit 
demand surged, we could slow down the rate of credit creation by raising the interest rate we 
pay on excess reserves. Banks wouldn’t lend out funds at lower rates than what they can 
earn from holding reserves with us. As a result, a hike in the IOER would raise the level of 
interest rates throughout the economy and this would dampen any expansion of credit. Our 
ability to pay interest on excess reserves is an essential tool that we can use to avoid future 
inflation problems.4 
                                                 
4 
In technical terms, we will be operating a floor-based system for implementing monetary policy rather than the 
traditional corridor-based system for a period. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
We are mindful of the fact that there could still be confusion about how exit will take place. 
This could increase financial market volatility. To reduce this risk, the FOMC has published a 
set of exit principles. These principles lay out a roadmap about how exit is likely to occur: 
First,  the  end  of  reinvestment  of  maturing  securities;  second,  an  increase  in  short-term 
interest  rates,  and,  third,  the  gradual  sale  of  mortgage  backed  securities  to  shrink  the 
magnitude  of  excess  reserves  in  the  system  and  ultimately  to  restore  the  Fed’s  balance 
sheet to a predominately all-Treasury portfolio. 
A  degree  of  humility  is  appropriate  given  the  lack  of  experience  as  to  how  markets  will 
respond when economic conditions eventually cause investors to anticipate exit. When asset 
purchases are anticipated to end or when asset sales begin to be anticipated, this will affect 
term premia in ways that cannot be precisely predicted in advance. That said, I do expect the 
repricing  will  prove  manageable.  We  will  seek  to  communicate  so  as  to  avoid  generating 
sharp shifts in term premia and in long-term interest rates. Also, we will play close attention 
to ensure that financial institutions are managing their interest rate risks appropriately. 
The  third  set  of  costs  is  the  impact  of  higher  short-term  rates  on  the  Federal  Reserve’s 
earnings and balance sheet when exit occurs. When we ultimately raise short-term interest 
rates,  this  will  squeeze  the  Fed’s  net  interest  margin.  Also,  when  the  Fed  sells  long-term 
assets, there is some prospect for losses on these sales depending on the level of long-term 
interest rates at the time when such sales occur. This means that the Fed’s earning could fall 
sharply  or  even  turn  negative  in  a  given  year.  We  look  at  this  issue  very  closely  to 
understand the risks here. The good news is that a very large proportion of our liabilities – 
those associated with currency outstanding – has no interest cost. This mitigates the risk of a 
sharp net interest margin squeeze. Moreover, our analysis shows that the cumulative income 
generated over the period in which the balance sheet has been unusually large is likely to 
exceed normal levels under a wide range of scenarios. 
In my view, while the costs are real and need to be carefully evaluated, they pale relative to 
the costs of not achieving a sustainable economic recovery. A failure in that regard would 
lead  to  widespread  chronic  unemployment.  Not  only  would  that  be  tragic  for  millions  of 
people, but it also would generate chronic shortfalls in the nation’s potential output and fiscal 
capacity. Relative to the costs outlined above, the benefits from avoiding such an outcome 
seem overwhelming. 
Cyclical and structural policy  
Although I favor an aggressive monetary policy in the current situation, I also recognize that 
monetary policy is not a panacea. We all know that in the long run money is neutral – that is, 
that while monetary policy can help the economy return to full employment following a shock, 
the full employment level of output, employment and real income depends on factors outside 
of monetary policy. Also, we must recognize that the strength of the current cyclical recovery 
will depend importantly on non-monetary policy choices. 
Other  steps  are  needed  to  secure  the  best  available  economic  outcome.  In  particular, 
attention  should  be  paid  to  what  could  be  done  to  capitalize  on  the  recent  stabilization  in 
house  prices  to  improve  access  to  mortgage  credit  and  to  foster  competition  in  mortgage 
origination  to  ensure  a  more  complete  pass-through  of  low  secondary  mortgage  rates  to 
households.  Indeed,  if  balance  sheet  dynamics  are  more  important  and  frictions  around 
housing  more  powerful  than  we  initially  understood,  then  there  should  be  strong  payoff  to 
policies that ease them. 
At  the  same  time,  Congress  and  the  White  House  should  take  steps  that  reduce  the 
short-term  and 
fiscal  policy.  Currently,  households  and 
businesses face elevated short-term uncertainty as to what will happen to tax and spending 
policies  in  2013  and  how  this  will  affect  the  economic  outlook.  I  believe  this  is  restraining 
hiring and investment today. 
long-term  uncertainty  over 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
But families and businesses also face long-term uncertainty about how the country’s fiscal 
challenges will be addressed. Providing greater clarity about the scope and terms of Social 
Security and Medicare must be helpful, especially in correcting those expectations that are 
unduly pessimistic. On this score, Social Security is particularly noteworthy. According to a 
2011 Pew Research Center poll, more than 40 percent of people aged 18 – 30 believe they 
will receive no retirement income from Social Security, even though Social Security receipts 
are estimated to equal about 75 percent of benefits on a sustainable basis under the current 
regime.5 
Congress and the White House should enact a fiscal program that starts with mild restraint, 
but credibly builds that restraint over time so as to put the nation’s debt burden on a clearly 
sustainable  course.  Ideally,  the  program  would  have  broad  bipartisan  support  and  provide 
clarity not just on the near-term outlook, but also about how the major entitlement programs 
would be adjusted. 
Also,  steps  could  be  taken  to  increase  the  productive  capacity  of  the  economy  over  time. 
Such actions are desirable because a more productive economy will generate higher living 
standards and have greater fiscal capacity. 
Let me briefly mention a few steps that could be taken to increase the economy’s potential 
over time – immigration policies that attract workers with scarce skills to the United States; 
education  policies  and  job  retraining  programs  that  build  and  replenish  human  capital; 
spending on infrastructure to remove bottlenecks; tax simplification and the elimination of tax 
policies that distort investment and saving decisions; regulatory policies that are attentive to 
costs and benefits and that emphasize getting the incentives right. 
Counter-cyclical  policies  and  structural  policies  are  not  substitutes,  they  are  complements. 
We need both. The strength of demand today is importantly influenced by expectations about 
future living standards. The lower the expected path of national income, the less favorable 
the distribution of that income is expected to be, and the greater the uncertainty over the mix 
of tax rates and benefits a person or business expects to pay and receive, the less they will 
spend  or  invest  today.  Thus,  policies  that  improve  the  long-run  outlook  make  a  cyclical 
recovery easier to achieve today. 
Conversely,  a  monetary  policy  that  promotes  a  cyclical  recovery  supports  the  economy’s 
long-run  prospects.  Left  for  too  long,  long  term  unemployment  will  eventually  lead  to 
permanent atrophying of skills that will restrain the economy’s growth potential. This is also 
true for the cohort of young workers who are stuck in jobs for which they are overqualified 
and  who  are  having  trouble  securing  the  professional  experience  that  would  make  them 
increasingly productive over time. 
Although the outlook for the U.S. economy remains somewhat cloudy as we look into 2013, I 
remain a long-run optimist about where we are headed. The long term prospects of the US 
economy are excellent. The United States leads the world in higher education, technology 
and innovation and has recently acquired new comparative advantages in energy. We have 
an exceptionally dynamic labor market, high rates of entrepreneurialism, competitive product 
markets, and a well-capitalized financial system that relentlessly reallocates capital from one 
sector to the next in search of higher returns. 
Even over the next few years, while there are significant downside risks relating to the fiscal 
cliff and the eurozone, it is possible that the recovery could turn out stronger than expected. 
The  underlying  process  of  balance  sheet  repair  is  considerably  advanced,  housing  is 
recovering and, as that occurs, our newly recalibrated monetary policy could gain additional 
traction. Thus, if uncertainties about the U.S. fiscal path and the future of the eurozone were 
resolved in a constructive manner, growth could pick up more vigorously than anticipated. 
                                                 
5  http://www.people-press.org/2011/11/03/section-6-generations-and-entitlements/ 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
This would be a wonderful outcome. The September FOMC statement noted: the Committee 
expects “that a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy will remain appropriate for a 
considerable  time  after  the  recovery  strengthens”.  Consistent  with  this,  if  we  were  to  see 
some good news on growth I would not expect us to respond in a hasty manner. Only as we 
became confident that the recovery was securely established, would I expect our monetary 
policy  stance  to  evolve  to  ensure  that  it  remained  appropriate  to  achievement  of  our 
objective: maximum sustainable employment in the context of price stability. 
Thank you for your kind attention. I would welcome a few questions. 
 
 9 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
References  
Ahearne, Alan, Joseph Gagnon, Jane Haltmaier, and Steve Kamin [and Christopher Erceg, 
Jon  Faust,  Luca  Guerrieri,  Carter  Hemphill,  Linda  Kole,  Jennifer  Roush,  John  Rogers, 
Nathan Sheets, and Jonathan Wright] (2002). “Preventing Deflation: Lessons from Japan’s 
Experience in the 1990s”. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, International 
Finance Discussion Paper Number 729, June. 
Dudley,  William  C.  (2012).  “Conducting  Monetary  Policy:  Rules,  Learning  and  Risk 
Management”.  Remarks  at  the  C.  Peter  McColough  Series  on  International  Economics, 
Council on Foreign Relations, New York City, May 24. 
Gagnon,  Joseph;  Matthew  Raskin,  Julie  Remache,  and  Brian  Sack  (2010).  “Large-Scale 
Asset Purchases by the Federal Reserve: Did They Work?” Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York Staff Report Number 441, March. 
Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen (2011). “The Effects of Quantitative 
Easing  on  Interest  Rates:  Channels  and  Implications  for  Policy”.  Brookings  Papers  on 
Economic Activity, 2011:2, pp. 215–65. 
Kuttner,  Kenneth  N.,  and  Adam  S.  Posen  (2001).  “The  Great  Recession:  Lessons  for 
Macroeconomic  Policy  from  Japan”.  Brookings  Papers  on  Economic  Activity,  2001:2, 
pp. 93–185. 
Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff (2009). “This Time is Different: Eight Centuries 
of Financial Folly”. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
Åžahin, AyÅŸegül; Joseph Song; Giorgio Topa; and Giovanni L. Violante (2012). “Mismatch 
Unemployment”. Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report Number 566, August. 
Woodford,  Michael  (2012).  “Methods  of  Policy  Accommodation  at  the  Interest-Rate  Lower 
Bound”.  Paper  presented  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City  Economic  Policy 
Symposium, Jackson Hole, WY. August. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
