Manuel Sánchez: Mexico – how to tap progress 
Remarks  by  Mr  Manuel  Sánchez,  Deputy  Governor  of the  Bank  of  Mexico,  at  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Dallas, Houston, Texas, 1 November 2012. 
 I feel privileged to be with you to speak on the topic of “Mexico: How to tap Progress,” on the 
eve of this timely conference organized by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas. I would like 
to thank this institution for its kind invitation and the opportunity to share a few thoughts with 
you.  
This  conference  deals  with  one  of  Mexico’s  most  pressing  problems,  which  is  the 
unsatisfactory performance of its economy, as reflected in a relatively low rate of long-term 
GDP  growth.  The  subject  is  fundamental  for  economists  as  it  ultimately  leads  back  to  the 
question of why some economies grow faster than others for prolonged periods of time, and 
more specifically, why many countries do not converge to the living standards of rich nations 
in  spite  of  the  fact  that  the  knowledge  and  technologies  of  the  former  are,  in  principle, 
transferable to the latter.  
Ample  research  in  the  theories  of  economic  growth  should  help  us  find  some  clues  to 
understanding Mexico’s  experience. But the fact that the Mexican economy is not growing 
faster is of crucial importance to policy makers. Because the ultimate goal of economic policy 
is  to  promote  greater  social  wellbeing,  understanding  the  obstacles  to  a  more  dynamic 
economy 
is  an  essential  prerequisite  for  the  design  of  appropriate  measures  for 
improvement. 
We  are  fortunate  that  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Dallas  has  organized  this  conference, 
which is in the tradition of Mexican studies carried out by this and other organizations in the 
United States and especially, in the state of Texas over the years. I congratulate the Dallas 
Fed  on  this  initiative  and  I  am  confident  that  your  discussions  will  contribute  to  more 
accurately identify Mexico’s possibilities for prosperity. 
As always, my comments are entirely my own responsibility and do not necessarily reflect 
the views of the Bank of Mexico or its Governing Board. 
Mexico’s long-term economic underperformance 
Like many  countries,  during  most  of the  last  and  the  present  century, Mexico  experienced 
significant  progress  on  the  basis  of  several  indicators  of  human  development.  In  the  last 
hundred  years,  the  country  transformed  itself  primarily  from  an  agrarian  to  an  urban, 
service-oriented economy, while undergoing an extensive industrialization process.  
During this period, access to better health and education conditions broadened substantially. 
For  example,  from  1950  to  2010,  life  expectancy  at  birth  rose  from  34  to  75  years;  infant 
mortality declined from 96 to 13 per thousand live births; the illiteracy rate fell from 43 to 8 
percent;  and  average  schooling  increased  from  2  to  9  years.  A  similar  message  could  be 
distilled from other indicators, such as access to tap water, power and sanitation. 
Also, without ignoring that ample segments of the population still live in poverty, today most 
people  enjoy  the  basic  benefits  of  modern  life, such  as  televisions,  refrigerators  and  other 
electronic  appliances,  which  in  the  past  were  either  nonexistent  or  of  lower  quality  and 
relatively more expensive and thus reserved for only the wealthiest. And according to some 
human development measures, notably those regarding health, Mexico has reached levels 
close to those of rich societies. 
In  contrast  to  this  advancement,  the  long-term  expansion  of  income  per  capita,  which 
summarizes  the  population’s  capacity  to  satisfy  its  desires,  has  been  less  impressive. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Specifically,  during  the same  six  decades  –  1950  to  2010  – the  average  annual growth  in 
per-capita GDP was 2 percent, a rate which is disappointing, at least, for two reasons.  
First, it is similar to that registered during the same period by some mature economies, such 
as the United States. Since Mexico is a developing country, presumably exhibiting a wider 
set  of  basic  unexploited  investment  opportunities,  output growth  should  have  been  higher, 
narrowing the development gap with the most industrialized nations. 
Furthermore,  Mexico’s  economic  evolution  compares  unfavorably  with  leading  emerging 
economies  which  five  decades  ago  were  either  below  or  at  its  own  level  of  income.  For 
instance,  while  in  1960  Mexico  had  roughly  the  same  per-capita  GDP  as  Singapore  and 
more than double that of South Korea, now, some fifty years later, this indicator for Mexico is 
only  one-fifth  that  of  Singapore  and  less  than  one-half  that  of  South  Korea.  Even  the 
so-called  stabilizing  development  era  of  1958–1970,  which  posted  the  most  impressive 
record  in  Mexico’s  modern  history,  looks  inferior  when  contrasted  with  these  economies, 
which have converged to developed-nation standards. 
Second, the referred overall growth rate covers a significant slowdown in the last thirty years, 
when per-capita GDP grew, on average, only 0.6 percent per year. This anemic pace, which 
would take about 116 years for doubling income, occurred in spite of the implementation of 
market-oriented  reforms,  including  the  opening  up  of  the  economy  to  foreign  trade  and 
investment, the privatization of state-owned enterprises, and the wide deregulation process. 
The record of this recent period does not improve if one excludes the unstable decades of 
the 1980s and 1990s, characterized by high and volatile inflation, balance of payment crises, 
and negative shocks to Mexico’s terms of trade. A conclusion one might draw at this point is 
that,  in  spite  of  the  more  robust  growth  of  earlier  years,  the  long-term  expansion  of  the 
Mexican economy is lackluster. The obvious question, then, is: What are the factors behind 
this disappointing performance? 
Exploring the possible causes of low growth  
Various studies suggest that the most significant problem underlying Mexico’s slow economic 
growth  is  one  of  productivity.  Taking  either  an  identity  approach  to  disentangle  labor 
productivity or a more functional method to estimate total factor productivity, the data suggest 
that  Mexico’s  main  disadvantage  relative  to  more  successful  countries  is  a  path  of  low 
productivity growth.1 
An implication of this observation is that, although labor and capital are essential factors of 
production, and a spurt in any of them could contribute to higher growth for some time, the 
long-term  drag  for  the  Mexican  economy  lies  primarily  in  the  low  efficiency  with  which  it 
allocates its productive resources across households, firms, and sectors. 
This observation is useful in that it may cast some doubts on the potential effectiveness of 
reforms that seek mainly to enlarge resources for capital investment. But the usefulness of 
this finding probably ends here. In the search for obstacles to economic growth, we need to 
substitute  the  original  question  with  a  new  one  referring  to  the  possible  roots  of  stagnant 
productivity. 
Many studies underline, as possible explanations of depressed productivity in Mexico, poor 
institutions,  deficient  infrastructure,  burdensome  regulation,  and  lack  of  competition  in  key 
areas,  among  other  factors.  In  order  to  explore  the  likely  plausibility  of  these  and  other 
                                                
1   See,  for  example,  OECD  Productivity  Statistics  (Database)  for  the  first  approach,  and  Kehoe,  T.  J.  and  F. 
Meza (2011), “Catch-up Growth Followed by Stagnation: Mexico, 1950–2010,” NBER Working Paper Series, 
December,  for  the  second  approach,  and  García-Verdú,  R.  (2007),  “Demographics,  Human  Capital  and 
Economic Growth in Mexico: 1950–2005”, Poverty Reduction and Economic Management unit Latin American 
and the Caribbean region, The World Bank, June, for both approaches. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
factors, I find it useful to examine the behavior of labor productivity, defined as output per 
worker, and the ratio of workers to total population, and calculate the former for each of the 
four  comprehensive  sectors  of  the  economy:  agriculture,  manufacturing,  nonmanufacturing 
industry (mining, utilities and construction), and services. In the most recent worst-performing 
period, with available data for 1980–2005, three basic observations are noteworthy.  
First, meager per-capita GDP growth during these years was the net result of an increase in 
the ratio of workers to population, whose effect slightly surpassed that of a fall in aggregate 
labor productivity. 
Second,  aggregate  labor  productivity  fell  because,  relative  to  total  labor  in  the  economy, 
production dropped in agriculture and nonmanufacturing more than it grew in manufacturing 
and  services.  In  other  words,  the  increasing  role  of  manufacturing  and  services  in  the 
Mexican economy did not sufficiently compensate for the diminishing influence of the other 
two, smaller sectors. Table 1 
Third,  sectoral  labor  productivity  increased  only  in  the  least  and  in  the  most  productive 
sectors: agriculture, mainly because of labor emigration, and manufacturing. In the other two 
sectors labor productivity declined at roughly the same pace. Table 2 
It  seems  that  if  some  aspects  are  highlighted  as  obstacles  to  economic  expansion,  they 
should  be  proven  to  have  a  significant  influence  on  those  sectors  identified  as  negative 
contributors to  productivity  growth.  Specifically,  the fall  of  labor  productivity  in  the  services 
sector should be given more importance than that observed in nonmanufacturing, when the 
relative sizes of these two sectors in the economy are considered.  
At a conjectural level, one might identify a possible common characteristic between the two, 
given  that  the  fall  in  nonmanufacturing  labor  productivity  has  been  concentrated  in 
construction  and  that  in  services  has  been  generalized,  with  the  only  exception  being 
transport,  storage,  and  communications.  A  large  part  of  both  construction  and  services 
exhibits a high degree of informality. It is well known that informality is linked to small-scale 
production,  low  investment  in  new  technologies,  and  poor  incentives  for  human  capital 
accumulation.  
Additionally, a prominent feature of large service segments, such as education and health, is 
a lack of or limited competition among providers, lowering incentives to seek efficiency.  
On  the  other  hand,  one  must  find  possible  reasons  as  to  why  manufacturing  has  not 
registered more robust labor productivity growth. It might be the case that the opening up to 
foreign  competition  has  taken  many  years  and  until  recently  allowed  a  certain  degree  of 
protection, especially from competition with countries not covered by free trade agreements.2 
The role of deep structural reforms 
The previous conjectures provide examples of possible factors that might have some bearing 
on  Mexico’s  aggregate  labor  productivity  deterioration.  Of  course,  not  even  at  this 
speculative  level  does  the  questioning  end.  One  must  uncover  the  root  causes  of  the 
aforementioned factors.  
A  key  example  is  the  prevailing  informality  in  the  previously  mentioned  sectors  with 
weakening  labor  productivity.  In  any  country,  the  origin  of  such  a  phenomenon  is  typically 
associated  with  excessive  regulation  and 
it  optimal  for  relatively 
unproductive  firms  to  enter  the  informal  sector,  which,  in  turn,  could  be  a  cause  of  lower 
taxation,  making 
                                                
2   For  example,  as  late  as  2004,  Mexico’s  average  import  tariff  was  14 percent.  For  the  role  that  competition 
might  have  on  manufacturing  firms’  adoption  of  new  technologies,  see  Salgado,  H.  and  L.  Bernal  (2011), 
“Multifactor Productivity and its Determinants: An Empirical Analysis for Mexican Manufacturing”, Journal of 
Productivity Analysis Vol. 36(3), December. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
investment in human capital, inducing dynamic inefficiency.3 Another example is low credit 
penetration,  which  is  frequently  connected  to  poor  contract  enforcement,  and  the  size  of 
informality itself. 
There  is  wide  consensus  that  Mexico  needs  structural  reforms  to  enhance  productivity 
growth.  In  order  for  any  initiative  to  be  promising  in  terms  of  its  envisioned  results,  it  is 
essential to better understand the structural impediments to the expansion of productivity. 
In  my  opinion,  the  first  challenge  lies  in  measurement.  Many  good  studies  on  Mexico’s 
discouraging  long-term economic  performance fail  to  subject  their  hypotheses  to  statistical 
verification. In some cases, arguments for one-off effects on productivity are confused with 
those  more  suitable  for  explaining  dynamic  consequences.  To  explain  low  productivity 
growth,  one  needs  to  identify  factors  that  not  only  affect  levels  but  also  rates,  through 
channels such as the accumulation of human capital and the adoption of new technologies. 
Also, because of relatively richer data in terms of detail, time, reliability and industry-specific 
price indices, among others, much research has been devoted to scrutinizing manufacturing, 
while  the  rest  of  the  economy  has  faced  less  examination  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  major 
productivity problems lie outside manufacturing.  
In addition to measuring the possible barriers to productivity, it is necessary to quantify the 
intended benefits of specific structural reforms to the extent this is possible. Empirical studies 
on Mexico’s previous structural reforms are surprisingly scant. Yet, estimating the expected 
effects is indispensable to an objective assessment of future concrete reforms. 
Concluding remarks 
The unsatisfactory long-term performance of the Mexican economy is of significant interest to 
both economists and policy makers. Low per-capita GDP growth does not reflect mainly a 
problem  of  employment and  investment,  but  one  of  productivity.  In  order  to  envision  more 
rapid  improvement  in  social  wellbeing,  we  need  to  identify  the  structural  obstacles  to 
productivity expansion, notably in services and nonmanufacturing industries.  
Structural reforms should, then, be focused on removing the root causes of impediments. A 
major task is one of measurement, as shown by the fact that statistical studies quantifying 
the  effects  of  previous  structural  changes  are  relatively  scarce.  I  am  confident  that  your 
discussions will contribute greatly to an understanding of what Mexico needs to do to attain 
much higher levels of prosperity. 
                                                
3   For an excellent exposition of static and dynamic inefficiency arguments applied to informality, see Heckman, 
J.  J.  et  al.  (2010),  “Policies  to  Promote  Growth  and  Economic  Efficiency  in  Mexico,”  NBER  Working  Paper 
Series, November. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  5 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 