Peter Praet: Deleveraging and monetary policy 
Speech by Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at the 
Hyman P Minsky Conference, organised by the Levy Economics Institute and ECLA of Bard 
with support from the Ford Foundation, The German Marshall Fund of the United States, and 
Deutsche Bank AG, Berlin, 26 November 2012. 
 I would like to thank Philippine Cour-Thimann, Federic Holm-Hadulla and Roberto Motto for their contributions to 
the preparation of this speech. 
It is a great pleasure to join you on the occasion of the Levy Economics Institute’s Hyman P. 
Minsky Conference. The financial crisis erupted five years ago when the leverage cycle that 
had accompanied the “great moderation” abruptly reversed. Since then, the euro area and 
large  parts  of the global  economy  have  been  swept  by  several  waves  of financial  shocks. 
And  each  wave  has  unleashed  strong  deleveraging  forces  throughout  the  affected 
economies.  
Deleveraging  often  reflects  a  necessary  adjustment  process.  And  it  does  not  necessarily 
warrant  policy  intervention.  At  the  same  time,  it  bears  the  risk  of  becoming  abrupt  and 
disorderly,  thus  threatening  price  stability  by  dislodging  the  provision  of  credit  and  the 
transmission of monetary policy signals to the real economy. In the worst case, it may lead to 
a  full-blown  financial  meltdown  via  self-sustained  adverse  feedback  loops  of  the  kind 
envisioned by Hyman P. Minsky.  
Central banks have a role in ensuring that the economy does not move towards divergent 
dynamics that would be inconsistent with price  stability. To this end, they have a range of 
policy tools at their command which may be used to control deleveraging pressures. 
But,  of  course,  strong  accommodative  central  bank  intervention  may  create  moral  hazard, 
thus discouraging needed adjustment efforts and possibly leading to the accumulation of new 
imbalances.  
In my remarks today, I will discuss how the ECB navigated through the crisis in view of the 
complex “balancing act” between disruptive deleveraging processes and moral hazard. I will 
argue  that  forceful  action  was  needed  to  fend  off  acute  downward  pressures  on  price 
stability.  In  illustrating  this  point,  I  will  often  come  back  to  the  concept  of the  transmission 
mechanism, which is fundamental to a central bank’s ability to maintain price stability.  
I will also focus on the specificity of the approach adopted by the ECB during the crisis in 
order  to  maintain  price  stability.  And  I  will  relate  it  to  the  challenges  faced  by  a  single 
monetary policy in the multi-country context of the euro area. This may have implications for 
the process of deleveraging in the economy. 
To contain moral hazard concerns, the ECB has consistently conveyed to market participants 
and the general public that it responds symmetrically to upside and downside pressures on 
price stability. Moreover, it adopted additional safeguards against moral hazard, such as the 
explicit conditionality attached to our recently announced Outright Monetary Transactions.  
At  the  same  time,  we  have  used  and  will  continue  to  use  our  influence to  ensure  that the 
overall institutional architecture of Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) becomes incentive-
compatible, also beyond monetary policy.  
Monetary policy during the global financial crisis 
Let me elaborate on the ECB’s response in the different phases of the crisis, starting with the 
global phase before the crisis became combined with a sovereign debt crisis in some euro 
area countries. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The first phase of the financial crisis – with Lehman Brothers’ failure being the watershed – 
can be described as a bank run on a global scale. In contrast to a classic run, it centred on 
wholesale deposits rather than retail deposits. But the dynamics were the same in that they 
essentially reflected an evaporation of confidence in banks.  
The  spark  that  ignited  this  crisis  was  a  bout  of  general  uncertainty  about  the  health  of 
financial-intermediary balance sheets in the context of huge losses made by some obviously 
systemic banks. As financial intermediaries no longer trusted each other, they shortened the 
maturity of their exposures, charged higher premia or withdrew from the market altogether.  
The fuel which fed the flames of the crisis, in a context in which previously much vaunted 
hedges had become meaningless, was a large maturity mismatch and high leverage in the 
financial sector. This translated perceived vulnerability into actual vulnerability.  
Finally, the wind which fanned the flames came from the feedback loop associated with fire 
sales. 
Despite its dramatic effects, devising a response to this first phase of the crisis might, at first, 
seem like a case study in a standard monetary economics curriculum. Bagehot’s analysis of 
the UK banking panic of 1866 delivered the insight that the central bank has to lend freely 
against good collateral at a high rate. Also, Friedman and Schwartz’s analysis of the Great 
Depression suggested that the central bank has to accommodate liquidity preference shocks.  
However,  although  these  insights  may  provide  inspiration,  they  do  not  provide  an  off-the-
shelf recipe. Bagehot did not have in mind a monetary regime of fiat money and had a clear 
view of which banks were sound and which were not. Friedman and Schwartz argued that 
the Federal Reserve should have stabilised M2, which collapsed in the early 1930s. But only 
stated this as a general rule without a detailed prescription. As a result, it remained unclear 
how to implement it, starting from a situation in which the soundness of banks was uncertain 
and  the  usual  monetary  instruments  were  different.1  There  was  also  no  consensus  in  the 
economic  literature  on  how  to  think  about  the  monetary  policy  stance  when  markets  are 
suddenly unable to perform in the manner which most theorists prefer to assume: would it be 
just  the  overnight  market  rate  –  normally  controlled  by  the  central  bank  –  or  a  broader 
concept  encompassing  the  whole  “risk-free”  yield  curve,  or  perhaps  even  including  other 
rates and asset prices?  
The ECB’s response to the crisis was to deepen the policy it adopted in “good” times in order 
to also address “bad” times. In simple terms, this policy required us to continue to decide the 
appropriate  level  for  the  short-term  interest  rate,  while  ensuring  that  the  transmission 
mechanism works as effectively as possible. The transmission mechanism is the long chain 
of reactions that lead from a policy-rate change to its final impact on the real economy and 
inflation via the effects on the whole array of interest rates, asset prices and monetary and 
financial indicators more generally.  
In normal times, the ECB decides on the appropriate level of the short-term interest rate and 
provides  the  necessary  liquidity  to  make  such  a  rate  prevail  in  the  overnight  market.  A 
forecast of the necessary amount of liquidity is based on the need for liquidity by banks at the 
aggregate  level.  And  the  money  market  fulfils  the  task  of  distributing  the  liquidity  across 
individual banks in an efficient manner as the banks themselves provide intermediation.  
In normal times, the change in the overnight rate is then transmitted to the whole array of 
interest  rates  via  arbitrage  and  somewhat  predictable  relationships,  both  along  the  inter-
temporal  dimension  and  the  intra-temporal  dimension.  Trust  in  the  stability  of  such 
relationships led most of the academic literature prior to the crisis to focus on the policy rate 
(or  equivalently  on  the  overnight  market  rate)  as  a  summary  indicator  of  financial  and 
                                                
1  For  a  discussion,  see  Christiano,  L.,  Motto,  R.  and  Rostagno,  M.  (2003),  “The  Great  Depression  and  the 
Friedman-Schwartz hypothesis”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 35, No 6, pp. 1119–1197. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
monetary  conditions  –  although  this  trust  often  was  not  shared  outside  the  academic 
literature.  
Incidentally,  I  note  that  the  idea  that  what  matters  for  the  transmission  mechanism  is  the 
whole array of interest rates and asset prices as well as balance sheets, and not just any 
specific  short-term  interest  rate  has  been  a  crucial  theme  in  monetarist  thinking.  And 
monetarists  argued  that  monetary  aggregates  provide  a  handy  summary  indicator  of  the 
changes in the various yields and asset prices.2 
From the beginning of the financial crisis, the first element of the transmission mechanism  
–  the  money  market  –  ceased  to  function  properly.  Liquidity  premia  soared  and  arbitrage 
transactions became thin.  
With the collapse of Lehman Brothers, financial tensions affected almost all asset classes, 
leading to a pronounced liquidity preference shock. As a result of the ensuing self-sustained 
deleveraging process, interest rates and asset prices can lose contact with or change their 
relationship to the central bank policy instruments.  
In  such  circumstances,  a  central  bank  needs  to  regain  control  of  the  transmission 
mechanism,  meaning  that  it  must  steer  financial  and  monetary  conditions  in  a  way  that  is 
consistent with its price stability mandate.  
The  ECB  responded  to  these  challenges  by  cutting  its  policy  rate  –  the  main  refinancing 
operation (MRO) rate – and by switching to a fixed-rate full allotment regime. Under such a 
regime,  the  central  bank  stands  ready  to  satisfy  fully  the  demand  for  liquidity  –  against 
collateral – at the prevailing policy rate. In the absence of a functioning interbank market, that 
demand for liquidity is in excess of the banks’ liquidity needs under normal conditions.  
Note that this regime can be maintained at any policy rate level, due to the presence of a 
corridor in the ECB’s operational framework. It simply implies that excess liquidity pushes the 
overnight  rate  down  towards  the  rate  paid  on  the  deposit  facility.  It  also  implies  that  the 
corridor can provide for a way to detach the decision to provide liquidity from the decision to 
set the interest rate. 
Let me illustrate this point with an example. If market interest rates and bank lending rates 
move in a manner inconsistent with a change in the policy rate, the central bank’s ability to 
influence the real economy and inflation may be impaired. The central bank can try to correct 
this. Traditional wisdom is based on making an even larger change in the policy rate so that 
the impact on financial and monetary conditions is of the originally-desired size. But another 
solution is to anchor other rates directly to the central bank policy intentions by the provision 
of liquidity.  
The fixed-rate full allotment regime can achieve this outcome because, in effect, it squeezes 
out the premium at short maturity via the intermediation role taken up by the central bank. 
This  assumes,  however,  that  the  counterparties  of  the  central  bank  are  still  fundamentally 
sound. 
A similar logic can also be applied to longer maturities. The central bank can provide liquidity 
at longer maturity at the average policy rate that will prevail in the future over this maturity. 
This can be done at any level of policy rate. The existence of the deposit facility provides a 
floor to the overnight rate. And the central bank can extend its influence over term credit by 
lengthening the maturity of its lending operations.  
                                                
2  See, Friedman, M. and Schwartz, A.J. (1982), Monetary Trends in the United States and the United Kingdom: 
their Relation to Income, Prices, and Interest Rates, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, pp. 1867–1975, 
and Meltzer, A.H. (1999), “Commentary: monetary policy at zero inflation”, in New Challenges for Monetary 
Policy:  a  Symposium  Sponsored  by  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
Kansas City. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
One  notable  application  of  this  logic  was  the  12-month  refinancing  operation  enacted  in 
December  2009.  In  this  operation,  the  ECB  stood  ready  to  satisfy  fully  the  demand  for 
liquidity  at  one-year  maturity.  The  interest  rate  charged  on  this  liquidity  was  the  average 
MRO rate that would prevail over the life of the operation.  
This type of measure is distinct from attempts to flatten the “risk-free” yield curve via forward 
guidance  which  is  often  discussed  in  the  literature.  The  reason  is  that  it  is  aimed  at 
squeezing out the premium faced by banks over and above the current and expected policy 
rate. 
Let me recall that, in the euro area, about three-quarters of corporate finance comes from 
banks. Hence, anchoring banks’ funding conditions to the desired level can help ensure that 
lending rates faced by households and firms continue to reflect policy intentions. This was 
indeed  the  case  during the first  phase  of the  crisis,  with  lending  rates  declining  in  tandem 
with policy rates according to standard regularities.3  
Central banks’ willingness to accommodate the increased demand for liquidity may, however, 
be  ineffective  in  preventing  a  destructive  deleveraging  process,  unless  two  additional 
elements are addressed.  
First, there is a need to remove the stigma associated with accessing central bank liquidity. 
The ECB did so by providing liquidity at an attractive price via monetary policy operations in 
which a broad number of counterparties have access.  
Second, deleveraging forces and fire sales have a direct impact on the value of collateral. To 
address this situation, the ECB broadened its collateral rules, thereby also enabling banks to 
take  full  advantage  of  central  bank  liquidity.  At  the  same  time,  the  ECB  tightened  its  own 
risk-control measures to mitigate the risk it absorbed.  
Monetary policy in the period of the sovereign debt crisis 
As we all know, the crisis did not remain restricted to the banking sector. In fact, from 2010 
onwards, several euro area countries have experienced a severe sovereign debt crisis. 
The driving forces of this evolution varied across countries. Some countries had already built 
up  weak  fiscal  positions  before  the  crisis,  which  emerged  as  a  major  vulnerability  in  the 
downturn.  Others  were  overburdened  by  the  fiscal  costs  of  domestic  banking  crises.  But 
irrespective  of  its  origins,  in  all  cases  an  adverse  feedback  loop  between  bank  and 
government balance sheets emerged, which then spilled over national borders.  
This adverse sovereign-bank nexus was nurtured by the large holdings of sovereign debt on 
bank balance sheets. When market scrutiny of public finances and investors’ risk aversion 
suddenly increased, sovereign yields started rising. The implied, actual or potential, losses 
for overly exposed banks raised the spectre of additional public support. As a consequence, 
the credit standings of sovereigns and banks have moved in tandem and both have found it 
increasingly difficult to maintain market access.  
In  several  jurisdictions,  the  access  of  the  banking  sector  to  funding  markets  was  heavily 
impaired. There was a real threat of a second wave of disruptive deleveraging. And as banks 
had  already  shed  parts  of  their  external  and  other  non-core  assets  in  the  first  wave,  less 
room was left for banks to protect domestic credit.  
The propensity for banks to pass on the ECB’s monetary policy signals to the real economy 
fell markedly. In other words, there were renewed risks that the monetary policy transmission 
channel could become severely impaired. But this time the ECB faced a new challenge: the 
                                                
3  Giannone,  D.,  Lenza,  M.,  Pill,  H.  and  Reichlin,  L.,  “Non-standard  monetary  policy  measures  and  monetary 
developments”, Working Paper Series, No 1290, ECB, January 2011. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
dislocation  had  taken  on  a  distinctly  national  dimension.  Financial  market  fragmentation 
along national borders had become the new reality. 
The  ECB’s  response  to  this  second  phase  of  the  crisis  has  been  guided  by  the  same 
principle as in the first phase: decide on the appropriate level of the policy rate to maintain 
price  stability  and  preserve,  to  the  extent  possible,  the  proper  working  of  the  transmission 
mechanism. Moreover, the experience we accumulated during the first phase helped us in 
designing measures aimed at providing abundant liquidity, while avoiding stigma effects. 
The  ECB  conducted  two  three-year  lending  operations  indexed  to  the  MRO  (in  December 
2011  and  February  2012).  The  operations  were  aimed  at  alleviating  adverse  funding 
conditions  for  banks  by  allowing  them  to  satisfy  their  additional  liquidity  needs.  The  net 
liquidity injection amounted to around €520 billion – taking into account the shifting of liquidity 
out  of  other  operations.  One  key  result  was  that  the  longer-term  refinancing  operations 
(LTROs) provided banks with a more certain medium-term funding situation, in line with the 
longer maturity of the operations. 
The  months  following  these  operations  saw  a  broad  stabilisation  of  financial  conditions. 
Money and credit figures indicated that an abrupt and disorderly adjustment in the balance 
sheets  of  credit  institutions  had  been  avoided.  Funding  conditions  for  banks  generally 
improved,  and  increased  issuance  activity  and  a  re-opening  of  some  segments  of  funding 
markets could be observed.  
However,  the  root-problems  of  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  were  only  partly  addressed  by 
Members States. Hence, tensions in sovereign debt markets did not take long to resurface.  
These  tensions took  a form that  was  specific  to  the  institutional features  of the  euro  area: 
markets  started  questioning  the  irreversibility  of  the  common  currency,  thus  pricing  in 
redenomination risk in sovereign bond yields of vulnerable countries. The ensuing disruptive 
dynamics risked undermining one of the key motivations for introducing the euro, namely to 
provide a lasting safeguard against currency crises, such as the one experienced in Europe 
in the years 1992–93.  
The main symptom of these problems was a pronounced movement towards financial market 
fragmentation.  For  example,  the  cuts  we  made  in  the  MRO  rate  over  the  period  had  very 
heterogeneous effects on funding conditions in different countries. In some countries, retail 
lending  rates  declined,  but  in  others  they  hardly  moved  or  even  increased.  As  a 
consequence, the singleness of monetary policy in the euro area was no longer guaranteed. 
And  the  countries  in  greatest  need  of  a  further  expansionary  impulse  were  the  ones  that 
were impacted least by cuts in the policy rates. This drags down their domestic economies 
and further weakens their fiscal positions. 
To mitigate  the  dynamics  of  such  self-sustaining fragmentation,  the  ECB  decided  to  adopt 
Outright Monetary Transactions (OMTs). OMTs provide for interventions in government bond 
markets, with no ex ante limits, for countries that are subject to effective conditionality of a 
programme under the European Stability Mechanism (ESM). 
The aim of OMTs is to directly address excessive risk premia in government bond markets 
that reflect in particular unwarranted perceptions of redenomination risk and are a key source 
of impairment in monetary policy transmission.  
By imposing conditionality, OMTs aim to strike a balance between counteracting adverse tail 
risk and preserving incentives. Specifically, OMT conditionality ensures that countries commit 
themselves  to  a  path  of  ambitious  fiscal  consolidation  and  structural  reform,  thereby 
preserving fiscal sustainability. This has two functions: first, it mitigates the balance sheet risk 
associated  with  outright  purchases;  second,  it  preserves  the  monetary  policy  rationale  for 
OMTs. If countries were to reduce their adjustment efforts in response to ECB intervention, 
the beneficial effects of OMTs on the monetary policy transmission would be undermined by 
weaker  fiscal  and  macroeconomic  fundamentals.  Therefore,  conditionality  is  an  inherent 
feature of OMTs. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Specific challenges facing the single monetary policy for the euro area 
The twin banking and sovereign debt crises, with heterogeneous manifestations across the 
single currency area, has put a premium on deleveraging – or at least a curb on leveraging – 
both in the banking sector and government sector. This contrasts with the greater emphasis 
on household sector deleveraging as driver of the US “balance sheet recession” in the wake 
of the financial crisis, to take the words of Koo.4 It also contrasts with the greater emphasis 
on corporate sector deleveraging in the Japanese case over the past two decades.  
In part reflecting these circumstances, the ECB’s approach during the crisis has also been 
different  to  that  of  other  major  central  banks.  The  ECB’s  main  focus  has  been  on 
collateralised  lending,  whereas  the  focus  of  other  major  central  banks  has  been  on  large-
scale  asset  purchases.  This  has  had,  in  turn,  implications  for  the  pace  and  size  of 
deleveraging in the euro area economy.5  
In this respect, the ECB’s approach can be seen as more indirect than the approach based 
on  large-scale  asset  purchases.  Both  approaches,  by  supporting  the  capacity  of  the 
monetary  and  financial  sector  at  large  to  acquire  assets,  can  support  asset  prices  and 
lending, which is conducive to a smooth deleveraging process in the economy. 
Asset purchases directly create scarcity in the instrument being purchased. This exerts an 
upward  pressure  on  prices,  and,  through  portfolio  rebalancing  effects,  may  also  affect  the 
prices  of  other  assets.  However,  direct  asset  purchases  involve  a  difficult  choice  for  the 
central  bank:  it  must  take  a  decision  on  which  assets  to  buy,  necessarily  interfering  with 
relative asset prices and income distribution. 
Collateralised lending involves such decision only at the level of the definition of the collateral 
and  its  eligibility  conditions. This  can  also  influence  the  prices  of  collateral,  but the  role of 
selecting which assets to buy or sell is essentially “outsourced” to the banking system, that 
is, to many private agents. Hence, collateralised lending leaves the price discovery process 
and the allocation of savings to market mechanisms.  
The  specificity  of  the  ECB’s  approach  must  be  seen  against  the  background  of  the 
bank-based  financing  structure  of  the  euro  area  economy  which  I  mentioned  earlier  –  in 
contrast to the more market-based financing in the United States for instance. It must also be 
seen against the specific institutional environment in which the ECB operates – characterised 
by a multi-country context.  
Some commentators suggest that governments should always take on leverage when there 
is excessive deleveraging in the private sector. But this option rapidly reaches its limits in the 
presence of debt sustainability concerns. And it has done so more quickly in the euro area 
than in other economies where the institutional framework is different.  
In  a  context  of  macroeconomic  imbalances  across  the  euro  area  countries  and  financial 
market  fragmentation,  the  Eurosystem  balance  sheet  has  expanded  in  size,  with  an 
increased concentration of liquidity provision to banking systems in countries under strain.  
The asymmetric distribution of the ECB’s action across the euro area has attracted attention, 
also  from  a  political  viewpoint.  What  is  insufficiently  reflected  in  this  debate  is  that  this 
asymmetry is endogenous and is a result of the single monetary policy.  
This asymmetric action across the euro area is also reflected in increased Target2 balances 
on  the  balance  sheets  of  Eurosystem  central  banks.  Such  an  endogenous  shift  in 
                                                
4  Koo, R., “The world in balance sheet recession: causes, cure, and politics”, Real-World Economics Review, 
No 58, December 2011, pp. 19–37. 
5  See Cour-Thimann. P. and Winkler, B. (2012), “The ECB’s non-standard monetary policy measures: the role 
of institutional factors and financial structure”, Oxford Review of Economic Policy, forthcoming in December. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
flows 
flowing  across  euro  area  countries, 
composition has acted as an internal adjustment mechanism, whereby the fallout of funding 
pressures in the banking system has been directed into the Eurosystem and away from the 
real  economy.6  This  has  buffered  the  adjustment  of  the  real  economy  and  kept  trade  and 
financial 
thereby  preventing  disorderly 
deleveraging.  It  has  provided  time  for governments  individually  and  collectively  to  address 
the adjustment needs and undertake the appropriate reforms. But this time needs to be used 
effectively. 
The ECB’s non-standard measures have been ensuring that solvent banks are not liquidity-
constrained  so  that  they  continue  lending  to  the  real  economy  without  a  disorderly 
deleveraging  process.  However,  there  are  limits  to  what  monetary  policy  can  and  should 
credibly do: monetary authorities cannot be expected to solve problems which lie well outside 
their current official remit. 
The delicate balancing act 
More generally, a central bank should be aware that it is constantly required to exercise a 
delicate balancing act. On one hand, it may need to provide backstops to remove tail risks 
that  could  otherwise  result  in  severe  downward  pressure  on  price  stability.  On  the  other 
hand,  by  mitigating  a  crisis  which  largely  reflects  shortcomings  in  other  policy  areas  and 
excesses in the financial sector, the central bank may alter incentives for different actors to 
correct imbalances.  
If domestic policy-makers and other economic actors delay necessary reforms because they 
can  count  on  the  central  bank  to  provide  support  whenever  market  conditions  deteriorate, 
monetary  policy  may  become  insufficiently  effective,  as  well  as  biased  towards  the  short 
term.  In  the  words  of  Hervé  Hannoun,  the  Deputy  General  Manager  of  the  Bank  for 
International Settlements, a central bank has to constantly guard not only against the risk of 
“fiscal dominance” but also “financial dominance”.  
I  would  like  to  give  one  example.  A  central  bank  can  commit  itself  to  engaging  in 
extraordinary  monetary  policy  interventions  and  to  swiftly  reversing  them  as  conditions 
improve.  But  would  this  commitment  be  sufficient  to  align  the  incentives  of  all  the  actors 
involved? In the economic jargon, is this promise “time consistent”? Or will other economic 
agents expect the policy-maker to deviate from its stated intention and adjust their actions 
accordingly?  
Economic literature stresses two elements that add credibility to such commitments: strong 
institutional frameworks setting out clearly defined objectives; and the adoption of “rule-type 
behaviour”  that  consistently  and  predictably  determines  the  response  of  policy-makers  to 
specific  circumstances.  These  elements  allow  a  policy-maker  to  steer  the  expectations  of 
other  actors  in  line  with  its  long-term  intentions,  thereby  mitigating  the  time  inconsistency 
problem.  
As  regards  monetary  policy,  the  institutional  framework  set  up  for  EMU  –  central  bank 
independence and price stability objective being the key elements – has proved to be strong 
and effective.  
The  crisis  has  shown,  in  my  view,  that  the  “rule-type  behaviour”  has  to  be  provided  by  a 
symmetric  reaction  of  central  banks  to  financial  forces.  In  particular,  a  strong  reaction  to 
financial  distress  in  the  downturn  has  to  be  matched  by  a  strong  reaction  to  financial 
imbalances during the building-up phase.  
What is the best way to do this? I believe that a more symmetric reaction to financial forces 
can  be  best  ensured  by  according  a  prominent  role  to  the  analysis  of  money  and  credit 
                                                
6  See, for instance, Cour-Thimann, P. (2012), “Target balances and the crisis in the euro area”, forthcoming. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
developments in monetary policy decisions, especially if this is complemented by appropriate 
macro-prudential measures.  
But  it  should  be  recognised  that  monetary  policy  is  only  one  element  of  the  overall 
institutional framework.  
The current sovereign crisis is largely the outcome of severe shortcomings in the institutional 
architecture  of  EMU,  which  was  not  capable  of  fostering  prudent  fiscal,  structural  and 
financial  policies.  But  policy-makers  have  reacted  to  these  shortcomings  and  have  set  in 
motion ambitious reforms to strengthen economic governance in Europe.  
Earlier today, my colleague Vítor Constâncio discussed the rationale of this reform agenda in 
great detail. I will therefore not elaborate on this. But I would like to echo his assessment. 
The repair of the institutional architecture of EMU will contribute to addressing the underlying 
causes of the crisis, thereby also supporting the smooth functioning of EMU in the future.  
Conclusions 
Let me conclude.  
The  crisis  brought  about  several  waves  of  financial  turmoil  that  threatened  to  spiral  out  of 
control. In line with its price stability mandate, the ECB intervened in each of these episodes 
so as to tackle the specific threats to the monetary policy transmission that arose with each 
incarnation of the crisis. 
The  policy  actions  of  the  ECB,  and  of  all  other  major  central  banks,  have  been  able  to 
repeatedly ward off self-sustaining feedback loops characterised by disorderly deleveraging. 
The challenge ahead for central banks consists, in my view, of combining such a backstop 
role during a crisis with a credible commitment to adopting symmetric behaviour in the run-up 
phase of financial imbalances.  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
