H R Khan: Managing currency and interest rate risks – new challenges 
for banks & corporates 
Session keynote address by Shri H R Khan, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, 
at the 2nd FT-Yes Bank International Banking Summit, Mumbai, 16 October 2012. 
 The speaker acknowledges the contributions of Ms. Dimple Bhandia, Shri. Rakesh Tripathy and Shri. Surajit Bose 
of the Reserve Bank of India. 
It is a pleasure to be here at the 2nd FT-Yes Bank International Banking Summit amidst a 
very  distinguished  set  of  panellists  and  audience.  I  must  compliment  the  organisers  for 
selecting a very wide range of subjects – subjects which are as varied as they are topical in 
the  world  as  we  live  in  today  –  for  discussions.  The  subject  for  this  session  “Managing 
currency and interest rate risks – new challenges for banks and corporations” is very relevant 
in  the  post  crisis  world  of  elevated  financial  market  volatility.  Managing  market  risk  has 
always  been  at  the  core  of  the  risk  management  function  of  banks  and,  increasingly,  of 
corporates. As the subject of the discussion appropriately suggests, the recent global crisis 
has,  indeed,  posed  “new”  challenges  for  banks  and  end-users  in  managing  currency  and 
interest  rate  risks.  Such  new  challenges  have  emerged  due  to  excessive  volatility  both  in 
terms of dimension and direction witnessed in almost all classes of financial assets. Since 
banks and corporates are often required to take decisions that can impact them much later, 
such a state of excessive volatility makes it difficult for concerned economic agents to make 
optimal and informed decisions.  
Institutions, both financial and non-financial, have endured extreme levels of market volatility 
in  recent  years.  Long  standing  correlations  across  and  within  asset  classes  broke  down, 
traditionally  held  beliefs  about  the  valuation  of  securities  were  turned  on  their  heads, 
currencies  and  interest  rates  moved  into  ranges  hitherto  not  witnessed,  and  definitely  not 
anticipated.  And  all  of  this  happened  within  an  environment  of  significant  economic  and 
geopolitical uncertainty amidst slowing growth, posing considerable challenges for banks and 
corporates  alike.  Scenarios  which  had  been  consigned  to  the  “tail”  of  normal  distributions 
even  in  traditional  stress  testing  exercises  suddenly  became  actual  scenarios,  leaving 
institutions scrambling for new techniques and paradigms to manage currency and interest 
rate risks. This has been, as we know, eloquently captured by Nassim Nicholas Taleb in his 
black  swan  theory  which  describes  occurrence  of  highly  unexpected  events  causing  high 
impact. 
Prolonged period of systemic risks and heightened volatility 
The  onset  of  the  global  financial  crisis  in  2007  set  the  stage  for  a  prolonged  period  of 
systemic risks, anxiety and unprecedented levels of volatility in financial markets. It left policy 
makers grappling for measures – both conventional and unconventional – as they scrambled 
to  deal  with  bankrupt  financial  institutions,  frozen  inter-bank  markets,  increasingly  volatile 
financial markets, persistently high levels of unemployment and a stagnating real economy. 
The  increased  volatility  injected  an  additional  element  of  uncertainty  into  financial  markets 
and  created  significant  feed-through  effects  into  the  real  economy.  Financial  and  non-
financial  companies,  faced  with  the  challenges  of  anticipating  costs  and  pricing  their 
products, adopted a more cautious approach to business planning and their hiring and firing 
policies.  
Going  forward  the  heightened  volatility  in  financial  markets  is  unlikely  to  moderate  soon. 
Global economic conditions remain fragile. The green-shoots of recovery which had emerged 
during 2010 have given way to uncertainty about the prospects of global growth in developed 
and  emerging markets alike.  Unemployment  remains  at  unsustainably  high  levels  in many 
advanced economies. Unconventional monetary policy measures have become the norm in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
fiscal 
the advanced world as one central bank follows another in announcing novel measures to 
kick start their respective economies. New phrases have entered the dictionary of the central 
bankers  –  “Operation  Twist”,  “Outright  Monetary  Transactions”,  “Funding  for  Lending” 
scheme, to name just a few. All of these have resulted in considerable uncertainty about the 
impact  of  such  measures,  the  longevity  and  extent  of  the  measures  and  the  timing  and 
impact  of  scaling  back  such  measures,  as  and  when  they  are  finally  unwound.  These 
uncertainties have inevitably found expression in increased volatility in financial markets. 
There  is  yet  to  emerge  any  credible  and  sustainable  solution  to  the  sovereign  debt  crisis 
plaguing  the  Eurozone.  There  remains  continuing  uncertainties  about  the  future  of  the 
European  Monetary  Union.  Several  measures  have  been  taken  recently  towards  resolving 
the  issues  facing  the  Eurozone.  These  include  policy  announcements  about  European 
banking  and 
integration,  announcements  of  new  rounds  of  asset  purchase 
programmes,  statements  from  senior  policy  makers  in  support  of  the  single  currency,  etc. 
These have stabilized markets by reducing probability of tail risks and have bought critical 
time and elbow room for policy makers.  
Nevertheless, critical risks and vulnerabilities remain. A definite strategy to  the resolve the 
Eurozone  sovereign  crisis  remains  elusive  and  policy  execution  risks  are  high  given  the 
widespread  popular  discontent  about  the  proposed  austerity  and  other  fiscal  measures. 
There  are  increasing  signs  of  fragmentation  along  national  lines  in  the  euro  zone  while 
banks’  balance  sheet  adjustments  and  funding  difficulties  are  only  adding  to  the  credit 
constraints being posed by trends in deleveraging as banks strive to attain higher levels of 
capitalization.  Downside  risks  to  global  growth  are  non-trivial  and  further  uncertainties  are 
being posed by political developments in the US including the looming “fiscal cliff”. All or any 
of these issues have the potential to trigger considerable market instability. 
The  uncertainties  in  the  advanced  economies  are  finding  their  way  to  developing  nations 
through trade, finance, commodity price and confidence channels. Critically, the uncertainties 
are  reflected  in  the  volatility  of  capital  flows  to  emerging  market  –  a  volatility  which  is 
reverberating  in  domestic  financial  markets.  In  cases  of  countries  such  as  ours  the 
uncertainties  posed  by  global  headwinds  are  accentuating  domestic  macro-economic 
challenges. Due to increased channel of inter-linkages between the domestic markets and 
the rest of the world, the domestic markets have not been able to remain isolated from the 
global developments. Just to drive home the point, let us look at the ratio of its external trade 
to GDP. In the case of India, the ratio has increased four-fold – from 8 per cent of GDP in 
1972 to nearly 40 per cent now. Taking cognisance of the growth of non-trade cross border 
flows,  a  more  meaningful  measure  of  a  country’s  global  integration  can  be  the  ratio  of 
two-way flow of goods and finance in and out of a country to its GDP. In the Indian context, 
this ratio has increased eight fold over last four decades, from 14 per cent in 1972 to well 
over  100  per  cent  now.  These  statistics  clearly  reflect  the  country’s  growing  trade  and 
financial  integration  with  the  rest  of  the  world.  While  increased  integration  gives  better 
business  opportunities  in  normal  times,  during  such  volatile  times,  it  would  also  pose 
challenges for banks and corporates as they seek to manage their risks while continuing to 
find  viable  funding  sources  for  their  activities  both  in  Indian  and  abroad  and  conduct  their 
business  in  general.  Apart  from  linkages  with  the  global  developments,  there  are  several 
domestic  factors  which  are  also  important  in  the  context  of  increasing  trend  of  volatility  in 
domestic  financial  markets  such  as  widening  current  account  deficit,  growth  slowdown, 
growing  fiscal  deficit,  sticky  inflation,  governance  related  issues,  downward  revision  in 
sovereign rating outlook and the threat of a downgrade of the country’s sovereign rating to 
below  investment  grade,  to  name just  a few.  Government  of India  has, of  course,  taken  a 
series of measures to address many of the challenges in the recent weeks. 
Given very limited role that we can play in influencing the global environment characterized 
by  frequent  bouts  of  risk-on/risk-off  sentiments,  I  would  like  to  touch  upon  the  changing 
scenario in domestic financial markets and its implications for currency and interest rate risk 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
management.  Thereafter,  I  would  briefly  touch  upon  the  challenges  these  developments 
pose for banks and corporates and what lessons can be learnt. 
Currency and interest rate risk in the Indian context 
After  remaining  stable  for  nearly  two  years,  the  Indian  Rupee  started  depreciating  very 
sharply last year immediately after the credit rating of the US was downgraded by the S&P. 
As  compared  to  an  appreciation  of  1.1  per  cent  during  2010–11,  the  Indian  Rupee  fell  by 
more  than  12  per  cent  during  2011–12  (Chart  1).  The  downward  pressure  on  the  Indian 
Rupee was also marked by heightened volatility. A sharp depreciation within a short period of 
time had a destabilizing impact on the general market sentiment. As may be seen (Chart 2), 
the Indian Rupee was relatively less volatile till July 2011 but the level of volatility increased 
significantly  thereafter.  There  was  some  moderation  in  volatility  after  a  series  of  policy 
measures  were  announced  by  Government  of India  and  the  Reserve Bank  of  India  during 
last quarter of 2011. These measures were aimed at augmenting capital flows and imposing 
certain restrictions on banks and corporates in order to curb speculative uni-directional bets 
on the Indian Rupee by such entities. Apart from taking policy measures, the Reserve Bank 
did  also  intervene  to  maintain  orderliness  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  by  curbing 
excessive volatility and in the process stabilizing the market sentiments. 
During  the  current  financial  year  2012–13,  after  depreciating  by  more  than  10  per  cent  till 
June  2012,  the  Indian  Rupee  started  recovering  gradually  in  response  to  major  central 
banks’  decision  to  go  for  further  policy  easing  and  the  announcements  of  next  round  of 
reform  measures  by  the  Government.  The  appreciation  is,  however,  also  associated  with 
some degree of volatility. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   3 
At the same time, it can be said that the Indian Rupee is not the only currency that has been 
experiencing  increased  volatility.  There  are  other  BRIC  currencies,  emerging  market 
currencies and even Euro that have seen such sharp movements. In fact, the movement of 
the Indian rupee seems to be broadly tracking the fortunes of the Euro against the US dollar – 
a  testimony  perhaps  to  the  degree  to  which  global  markets  are  influencing  conditions  in 
domestic financial markets (Chart 3). 
Before I move to the issue of managing the currency risk, let me briefly touch upon another 
equally  critical  macro-economic  variable-interest  rate  that  also  poses  risk  to  banks  and 
corporates alike and needs to be managed. In contrast to the Indian Rupee movement, the 
movement in domestic interest rates (as represented by the generic 10-year yield of bonds 
issued  by  Government  of  India)  has  been  range  bound  (Chart  4)  with  reduced  volatility  in 
recent months as compared to the past (Chart 5). 
    4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The trends in interest rate movements have been influenced by a host of factors, such as, 
policy actions on the rate front and open market operations conducted by the Reserve Bank, 
upward  revision  in  FII  investment  limits  in  Government  securities,  broadening  of  investor 
base for investment in Government securities, persistence of inflationary pressure, etc. 
Measures taken by the Reserve Bank 
As stated earlier, in the face of increasing volatility in the financial markets and a significant 
depreciation of the domestic currency, a host of measures have been taken by the Reserve 
Bank and the Government of India since the beginning of last quarter of 2011. These include, 
inter alia, the following: 
I 
Limits  on  investment  in  debt  securities  comprising  government  securities  and 
corporate bonds by foreign institutional investors were enhanced; 
Interest rates on rupee denominated non-resident deposits were deregulated while 
rates foreign currency denominated deposits increased;  
The all-in-cost ceiling for External Commercial Borrowings (ECBs) was rationalized;  
Following administrative measures aimed at discouraging speculative activities were 
initiated: 
a.  Reduction in limits for booking forward contracts under past performance route 
and only on fully deliverable basis; 
b.  Forward contracts once cancelled cannot be rebooked; 
c.  Net  Overnight  Open  Position  Limits  (NOOPL)  of  the  Authorized  Dealer  (AD) 
banks were reduced across the board; and 
d.  AD  banks  were  advised  that their intra-day  open  position/daylight  limit should 
not exceed the existing NOOPL approved by the Reserve Bank; 
Interest rate on export credit in foreign currency was deregulated; 
Foreign  exchange  earners  were  asked  to  convert  50  per  cent  balances  in  their 
Exchange  Earners  Foreign  Currency  (EEFC)  accounts  with  AD  banks  into  rupee 
balances and credited to the rupee accounts. Subsequently, the erstwhile stipulation 
of allowing credit of 100 per cent foreign exchange earnings was restored subject to 
certain conditions, such as, the total of the accruals in the account during a calendar 
month  should  be  converted  into  Indian  Rupees  on  or  before  the  last  day  of  the 
succeeding  calendar  month  after  adjusting  for  utilization  of  the  balances  for 
approved purposes or forward commitments;  
Positions taken by banks in currency futures/options cannot be offset by undertaking 
positions in OTC market, and the NOOPL of the banks as applicable to the positions 
involving the Indian Rupee as one of the currencies will not include positions taken 
by banks on the exchanges. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
Much has been said and discussed about the impact of the policy measures. There has been 
some criticism within the financial and commercial circles that the policy initiatives have been 
a step backwards and that they have introduced rigidities in the domestic foreign exchange 
market  and  constrained  the  ability  of  banks  and  corporates  to  hedge  their  risks.  I  do  not 
intend to go into the details of the raison d’être for each of these measures but would rather 
confine  myself  to  a  few  general  remarks  in  this  regard.  The  Reserve  Bank  undertook  the 
administrative measures to curb the speculative trends. These measures arose from a set of 
practices  and  behavioural  traits  which  had  emerged  in  domestic  financial  markets  and 
aggravated  the  pressures  on  domestic  financial  markets.  To  name  just  a  few:  corporates 
often leave their foreign exchange exposures unhedged to benefit from the movement of the 
currency in their favour and save the cost of hedging rather than concentrating on their core 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
business  to  generate  profits.  Derivatives  are  often  used  as  instruments  for  generation  of 
profit  rather  than  as  instruments  for  risk  mitigation.  Import  exposures  were  typically  left 
unhedged  or  the  hedge  ratio  was  very  small.  The  past  performance  facility  was  made 
available to corporates to enable them to plan their foreign currency exposures. Without a 
delivery mandate, the facility was instead used to speculate on currency movements. 
It needs to be appreciated that none of the measures which have been taken in the recent 
months have in any way restricted or constrained the abilities of corporates to manage their 
genuine foreign exchange exposures. All that has been done is curbing the scope available 
for  taking  speculative  bets  on  the  Rupee  that  resulted  in  enhanced  volatility.  Within  the 
overarching  prerequisite  of  facilitating  genuine  hedging  needs  of  the  customers,  Reserve 
Bank  would  consider  further  relaxations  in  a  calibrated  manner.  Infact  Reserve  Bank  has 
already  relaxed  some  of  the  measures  in  July  2012  so  that  the  genuine  hedging 
requirements of the real sector are not affected. Exporters have now been allowed to cancel 
and  rebook  forward  contracts  to  the  extent  of  25  percent  of  the  contracts  booked  in  a 
financial year for hedging their contracted export exposures. Similarly, AD Category I banks 
have  been  permitted  to  exclude  their  Net  Options  Position  and  the  positions  taken  by  the 
overseas branches from their NOOPL, for positions involving the Indian Rupee as one of the 
currencies. 
Managing currency and interest rate risks 
The events during the crises have compelled banks and corporates to start taking a broader, 
more  sophisticated  approach  to  analyzing  their  risk  exposures.  These  events  have  forced 
banks  and  corporates  to  go  back  to  the  first  principles  of  risk  management  and  that  is  of 
identifying risks, measuring them and managing them. Prior to the crisis, a prolonged period 
of  stable  financial  markets,  incentivized  banks  and  corporates  alike  to  take  on  more  and 
more risks on their balance sheets. A one way trend in currency rates prompted corporates 
to  leave  their  foreign  exchange  exposures  to  generate  profits  if  the  currency  moved 
favourably. Low and stable interest rates acted as incentives for increasing leverage. When 
financial markets turned volatile, the currency started depreciating and the funding markets 
started  drying  abroad,  many  of  these  corporates  were  left  vulnerable.  Not  surprisingly  a 
recent analysis reveals that the major reasons for cases being referred to the CDR cell in the 
last few years were high leverage or huge open foreign exchange positions of companies. 
The  experiences  during  the  crises,  therefore,  entail  many  important  lessons  for  managing 
currency and interest rate risks. First, the experiences have reemphasized the importance of 
corporates  focussing  on  their  core  businesses  and  not  looking  at  currency  mismatches  to 
generate  extra  profit.  Second,  the  recent  experiences  have  also  highlighted  the  risks 
associated with un-hedged exposures. The third set of lessons relate to the careful selection 
of  hedging  instruments.  Many  corporates,  large  and  small,  burnt  their  fingers  dabbling  in 
complex derivative products. Many leant, the hard way, that there are no free lunches and 
that  “zero  cost  structures”  and  “unlimited  payoffs”  are  but  figments  of  fertile  imagination. 
Fourth,  is  the  importance  of  stress  testing  or,  at  least,  of  anticipating  and  preparing  for 
potential worst case scenarios. For many corporates, the last few years of slower growth and 
trade,  would  arguably  have  been  easier  to  handle,  had  they  focussed  on  proper 
management  of  currency  and  interest  rate  risks.  Fifth,  the  risks  associated  with  excessive 
leverage have very clearly been brought out by the crisis. The recent experiences have, thus, 
under-scored the age old lesson of the downside of excessive “greed”. 
On its part, the Reserve Bank has continuously been making efforts in sensitising the banks 
and the end-users for judicious use of available derivative products in India in managing both 
currency as well as interest rate risk. While there is a comprehensive regulatory frame work 
put in place for OTC derivatives products to hedge currency risk, such as forwards, swaps, 
options, etc. exchange traded currency futures and options have also been permitted in order 
to provide the benefit of transparent pricing and better risk management. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Long-term forex derivatives 
The forward market in India is pretty liquid up to one year. The liquidity in forward market for 
tenor  beyond  one  year,  however,  is  unsatisfactory  and  poses  difficulties  for  market 
participants  who  want  to  hedge  a  long  term  forex  exposure.  Mostly  they  deal  with  the 
problem  by  booking  contracts  up  to  one  year  and  then  roll  it  over  till  the  maturity  of  the 
exposure. This strategy partially addresses their long term risk, reducing exchange rate risk 
to the risk of a less volatile forward premium. While there has been no regulatory restriction 
put  on  bookings  of  longterm  forwards  as  such,  there  is  asymmetry  in  this  segment  in  the 
sense that it is dominated by demand on the buy side. Further, the illiquidity also owes to the 
absence  of  a  Rupee  (term)  interest  rate  swap  market,  and  this  makes  it  difficult  for  the 
market makers to price a long term forward contract. 
MTM of the forex derivatives 
Another  related  issue  in  this  context  that  I  would  briefly  like  to  touch  upon  is  marked  to 
market (MTM) on outstanding forex derivative contracts and the reluctance on part of some 
of the corporates on entering into such contracts for fear of MTM losses, should the price of 
the underlying variable move in other direction. It needs to be emphasized that the MTM is a 
dynamic concept representing the fair value of the contracts taking into account the market 
movements  and  essentially  represents  the  replacement  cost  of  the  derivative  contracts. 
These accounting losses should, therefore, be looked at in totality along with the economic 
rationale of the hedges undertaken. While we have had a series of informal dialogues with 
industry representatives, banks, auditors and even some corporates on the issue for a better 
understanding,  there  seems  to  be  no  unanimity  as  far  as  the  applicability  of  the  existing 
accounting guidelines are there. Generally speaking, a corporate entering into a derivative 
contract as a perfect hedge should be indifferent to the price movements during the period of 
the  contract  as  any  MTM loss  in  the  derivative contract should  be  near  equal  to  the  MTM 
gains  in  the  underlying.  If,  however,  different  accounting  norms  are  followed  for  both  the 
hedged  item  as  well  as  the  hedging  instrument,  there  could  be  a  possibility  of  timing 
mismatch in the profit and loss statement resulting into undue volatility in the bottom line of 
the corporates. I understand that companies that prepare financial statements under Indian 
Generally  Accepted  Accounting  Principles  (GAAP)  or  International  Financial  Reporting 
Standards  (IFRS)  have  the  option  to  apply  “hedge  accounting”  principles  to  these 
transactions in order to minimize volatility in the profit or loss statement and reflect the risk 
management  objective  of  these  arrangements.  It  is  necessary  that  industry  representative 
bodies, such as, Foreign Exchange Dealers’ Association of India (FEDAI) and the Institute of 
Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI) discuss the issues involved and come out with some 
clarity on the issue for the larger benefit of all the stakeholders. 
Limited appetite for risk mitigation products 
For  mitigating  foreign  exchange  exposure  risks  of  Indian  corporates/importers,  facilities  of 
onshore hedging of the Indian Rupee exposure of the non-resident buyers/sellers have been 
introduced.  There  has  been  hardly  any  interest  to  promote  this  facility  among  the 
non-resident business associates. As far as managing interest risk is concerned, interest rate 
swaps (IRS), forward rate agreements (FRAs) are permitted derivative products in the OTC 
market. The IRS market has evolved over the past decade and is fairly liquid though activity 
is  concentrated  at  few  tenor  points  (mostly  up  to  five  years)  and  among  few  participants 
(foreign banks and a few private sector and foreign banks account for more than 80 per cent 
of trading activity). One of the issues with the IRS market in India is that trades are mostly 
concentrated on overnight MIBOR as benchmark in absence of a liquid term money market. 
In order to offer alternative hedging tool to the market participants, exchange traded interest 
rate  futures  (IRF)  on  10  year  notional  GoI  coupon  bond  and  91-day  T-bills  were  also 
introduced.  After  witnessing  good  amount  of  trading  activity  during  initial  few  months 
immediately  after  the  launch,  the  trading  activity  has  reduced  considerably.  Reserve  Bank 
has also permitted introduction of IRF contracts on two and five year Government Securities 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
on cash settlement basis to provide the products at the shorter end which would offer flexible 
hedging  options  to  the  market  participants.  These  products,  however,  are  yet  to  be 
introduced  by  the  exchanges.  There  have  been  various  reasons  put  forward  by  market 
participants for IRF not being used by them. Recently, the Reserve Bank constituted Working 
Group  on  “Enhancing  Liquidity  in  Government  Securities  and  Interest  Rate  Derivatives 
markets”  (Chairman:  Shri  R.  Gandhi).  The  Group  has  made  several  recommendations  for 
improving liquidity in both the IRS and IRF market, such as, electronic trading platform for the 
IRS market, central counter party (CCP) mechanism for providing guaranteed settlement of 
trades  executed  through  the  electronic  platform,  standardisation  of  the  IRS  contracts, 
permitting  insurance  companies,  pension  funds  and  other  financially  sound  entities  to 
participate in IRS market, IRF based on overnight call borrowing rate; permitting cash-settled 
10 year IRF, etc. Reserve Bank has also permitted single-name credit default swaps (CDS) 
in India for hedging credit risk separately. Since the launch of the product, however, only few 
trades  have  been  executed.  Various  reasons  have  been  attributed  for  the  lack  of  trading 
interest in CDS in India. One of them is that banks are yet to put in place internal policies for 
trading  in  CDS.  Though  International  Swap  and  Derivatives  Association  (ISDA)  master 
agreements  have  been  finalised  by  the  Fixed  Income  Money  Market  and  Derivatives 
Association of India (FIMMDA), participants have to enter into bilateral ISDA agreements for 
transacting  in  CDS.  When  insurance  companies  and  mutual  funds,  which  are  likely  to  be 
permitted  by  their  respective  regulators  soon,  start  participating  in  the  CDS  market,  one 
hopes the volumes will pick-up. 
Risk of long-term floating rate loans to individuals 
It has been observed that a major chunk of the loan portfolio of banks these days comprises 
floating  rate  products,  especially  in  the  retail  segment,  with  loans  for  housing  sector 
extending up to 20 years or so. On the other hand the interest rate paid by them on deposits 
is  predominantly  fixed  and  these  deposits  generally  are  of  upto  a  maximum  of  five  year 
maturity. This obviously can result in serious asset liability mismatch in their balance sheets 
apart from subjecting the unsophisticated borrower to interest rate risk over a longer horizon. 
While there are options available to banks to manage this mismatch through raising of long 
term  resources  via  bonds,  securitization  of  assets,  hedging  of  interest  rate  risk  using 
derivative  products,  etc.  the  retail  borrowers  are  not  well-equipped  to  use  any  hedging 
instrument  to  hedge  the  interest  rate  risk.  There  have  been  some  suggestions,  such  as, 
allowing banks to issue more long-term bonds, treating banks’ exposure to fix-rate long-term 
housing  loans  eligible  for  priority  sector,  and  encouraging  large  institutional  investors  like 
pension funds, provident funds, insurance companies, etc. to invest in bonds floated by bank 
so that long-term fixed rate loans can be extended to the retail borrowers. In order to assess 
the feasibility of introducing more long-term fixed interest rate loan products, particularly for 
the retail customers by banks, the Reserve Bank has set up a Committee (Chairman: K. K. 
Vohra) that is expected to submit its report shortly. 
Management of interest rate and currency risks by banks 
Let me now turn to the challenges for banks for management of currency and interest rate 
risks. Banks are essentially in the business of managing risks. In particular, they are required 
to  handle  interest  rate  mismatches  as  well  as  currency  mismatches  in  their  capacity  as 
authorized  dealers  and  market-makers  in  the  currency  market.  The  events  of  the  last  few 
years have proved that banks, even in their own interest, have to take on at least some of the 
onus of risk management of their clients. The Reserve Bank has also assigned responsibility 
on banks for ensuring suitability and appropriateness while transacting derivative instruments 
with the corporates and also ensuring that the corporates have appropriate risk management 
framework. More specifically, before offering any derivative product to clients, banks should 
obtain Board resolution from the corporates which should explicitly mention, inter alia, (i) the 
limit assigned by the corporate to the bank, (ii) the names and designation of the officials of 
the  company  authorised  to  undertake  particular  derivative  transactions  on  behalf  of  the 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
company  (iii) specific  products  that  can  be  transacted  by  such  designated  officials,  etc. 
Keeping in view the implications of excessive risks taking by the corporates and impact of 
consequential risks on their balance sheets and the financial system, banks have also been 
advised  to  evaluate  the  risks  arising  out  of  unhedged  foreign  currency  exposure  of  the 
corporates and price them in the credit risk premium while extending fund based and non-
fund based credit facilities to them. Banks have also been advised to consider stipulating a 
limit on unhedged position of corporates on the basis of policy approved by the Board of the 
banks. Absence of proper oversight over corporate’s business particularly their currency and 
interest rate risks has come to the fore now when we have witnessed a number of cases of 
corporates seeking restructuring/CDR, many of whom have got into difficulties due to foreign 
exchange  related  losses  and  excessive  leverage,  restructuring/defaults  of  overseas 
ECB/Foreign Currency Convertible Bonds (FCCB) obligations, loss to the overseas branches 
of Indian banks who have subscribed Credit Linked Notes (CLNs) under the FCCB issues. 
This  does  not,  in  any  way,  take  away  the  primary  responsibility  of  the  corporates  towards 
their own risk management system but the joint effort can go a long way towards preventing 
the kind of legal disputes which arose in the recent past. 
Banks enter into derivative contracts for the purpose of hedging their own risks. They also 
play an important role as market makers in the derivatives markets to enable their customers 
to hedge their risks. Client trades are typically covered on a back-to-back basis by banks in 
the inter-bank market, implying that the banks are hedged as far as market risks on client 
related  transactions  are  concerned  but  they  continue  to  hold  on  to  the  credit  risks  arising 
from the exposure to their clients. Banks also typically maintain “open” positions as part of 
their trading book of their derivative portfolio and these positions engender market risks for 
the  banks.  The  management  of  both  risks  is  critical  for  banks,  especially  in  the  current 
environment of increased uncertainties and market volatility. 
Banks also carry a significant amount of interest rate risk in their investment portfolio due to 
holding of the Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) bonds and non-SLR securities. Managing risks 
in  the  investment  portfolio,  thus,  acquires  additional  significance  in  an  environment  of 
increased volatility of interest rates notwithstanding the HTM dispensation available to banks 
up to certain limits. Typically, banks have been using a combination of duration targets and 
duration gap analysis for managing risks arising out of movements in interest rates. A series 
of  stress  tests  are  being  conducted  periodically  by  the  Reserve  Bank  on  the  impact  of 
interest  rate  shocks  on  the  banking  and  trading  books  of  banks.  The  results  have  been 
presented in the Financial Stability Reports (FSR) published by the Reserve Bank of India. 
They suggest that while banks are largely resilient to the shocks involving both parallel and 
non-parallel shifts in the yield curve, there are a few banks which are significantly impacted. 
Hence, there remains a need for banks to be vigilant in managing risks on this front. 
As reported in our FSR, the empirical analysis of the portfolio of select banks conducted in 
the  Reserve  Bank  a  few  months  back  revealed  that  banks  were  carrying  a  significant 
quantum of risks in their portfolios on a gross basis though on a net basis the positions were 
relatively  matched  (Chart  6).  The  chart  shows  that  gross  positive  MTM  position  of  the 
derivative  portfolio  of  some  banks  is  significant  in  relation  to  their  capital  funds.  In  some 
cases,  the  gross  positive  MTM  is  several  multiples  of  their  capital  funds.  This  clearly 
suggests  that  banks  remained  exposed  to  and,  would  need  to  manage  the  risks  of 
counterparty failures. A series of scenario and sensitivity stress tests were also conducted on 
the  derivative  portfolios  of  banks  as  part  of  the  above  exercise.  The  sensitivity  analysis 
involved  the  application  of  a  series  of  interest  rate  and  exchange  rate  shocks  to  the 
derivatives  portfolio  of  banks.  The  scenario  analysis  was  based  on  a  set  of  historical 
scenarios of heightened volatility. The stress test results showed that, for some banks, the 
impact  of  the  stress scenarios  are  very  significant  even though for most  banks  the  impact 
was manageable. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
 In summing up, I would like to mention that from all indications, the uncertainty and volatility 
associated with the financial markets are here to stay, at least for the foreseeable future, as 
the “new normal” when the world grapples the lingering impact of the global financial crises 
and  the  sovereign  debt  crisis,  a  prolonged  period  of  low  or  zero  interest  rates  leading  to 
potential  mispricing  of  risks  and  high  volatility  in  oil  and  commodity  prices,  tail-risk  of 
geopolitical  events  besides  domestic  macro-economic  developments.  Managing  currency 
and interest rate risks is, therefore, going to be a major challenge for the corporates and the 
banks,  particularly  in  an  emerging  and  developing  economy  like  India  where  future 
development of the market is critically linked to avoiding systemic risks and shocks as we 
move forward. Before I conclude, I would like to flag some of the related issues for the panel 
and other distinguished participants to discuss. 
a. 
Are there any models/methods available to mitigate the impact of global headwinds 
without sacrificing the gains of globalization? 
Given the breakdown of traditional correlations among asset classes, assumptions 
about  valuations,  enhanced  uncertainty  and  heightened  volatility,  are  the  risk 
management  systems  of  the  corporates  and  the  banks  evolving  in  sync  with  the 
emerging challenges? 
Specifically for banks in India, have they really internalized the need and necessity 
of monitoring and reviewing the risk management strategies of their clients? Have 
the banks put in place the required systems and processes to Know the Business of 
their Customers (KBC), risks they carry on their balance sheet? 
Are  the  corporates  really  constrained  for  hedging  due  to  accounting  issues?  Can 
industry associations, banks and accountants develop a common understanding on 
this? 
Are their staff, management and Board sufficiently sensitive to the risk management 
related issues? What is constraining the market-makers in using the risk mitigation 
products e.g. IRF, CDS, etc., which were introduced with a lot consultation with the 
market-participants? 
Given the preponderance of investment portfolio in the balance sheet of banks, are 
they sufficiently sensitive to interest rate risks? Are banks cognizant of the need to 
actively manage the interest rate risks in their derivative portfolio? With a portfolio 
hedged  against  market  risks 
there  adequate  recognition  of  embedded 
counterparty risk? 
is 
b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 
f. 
Thank you.  
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
