Matthew Elderfield: Micro-macro schizophrenia – Banking Union and the 
European capital dilemma 
Address  by  Mr  Matthew  Elderfield,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland  and 
Alternate  Chairman  of 
to  Bloomberg,  Dublin, 
26 November 2012. 
the  European  Banking  Authority, 
 if 
European regulators face a dilemma – a bad case of policy schizophrenia – in deciding the 
pace of the next steps of bank recapitalisation. With the fiscal policy break full on, and the 
monetary  policy  throttle  full  back,  what  is  the  right  calibration  for  prudential  capital  policy? 
From  the  micro-prudential  perspective,  the  answer  is  more  and  faster.  From  the  macro 
prudential perspective, fear of pro-cyclicality and debt sustainability might suggest: take care. 
This has been a central dilemma for policymakers in the Eurozone in many countries. As I 
would like to discuss today, this will be a key policy choice for the European Central Bank 
under a banking union.  
The European summit conclusions of 29 June gave official birth to the concept of a banking 
union and the single supervisory mechanism. These steps arose out of the pressing need to 
break  the  debilitating  link  between  weak  banking  systems  and  constrained  sovereign 
finances. While there is a continuing debate on the details, this is to be done by facilitating 
the direct recapitalisation of banks, from pooled European resources following the successful 
introduction of a common European banking supervisor, for Eurozone countries.  
Banking  union  also  holds  out  the  prospect  of  strengthening  the  framework  for  European 
banking  supervision, 
implemented  successfully.  Creating  some  distance  between 
supervisors and the banks they regulate (and, indeed, from the political systems of the banks 
they  regulate)  can  help  improve  the  capacity  for  challenge  and  ensure  a  broader,  more 
detached,  perspective  on  problems.  Bringing  in  a  foreigner  to  do  your  supervision  is  not, 
alas,  the  magic  solution  to  all  the  woes  of  a  banking  system.  But  the  single  supervisory 
mechanism  holds  open  the  prospect  of  an  institutional  framework,  a  broader  skill  set  and 
more  diversity  of  experience  that  should  help  insulate  supervisors  from  the  pressures  – 
subtle and direct, cultural and political – that come from long-time and close proximity to their 
regulatory charges and their champions.  
In  addition to  strengthening  banking  supervision  and  breaking the  link  between  banks  and 
sovereigns, the banking union also may allow the development of a deeper single market, 
although  here  there  are  considerable  uncertainties  and  potential  risks  due  to  the  fact  that 
only  a  subset  of  the  European  Union  will  be  taking  the  steps  towards  banking  union.  The 
proposed  way  to  square  the  circle  between  the  single  market  and  the  banking  union  is  to 
provide  for  a  bifurcation  between  regulation  and  supervision.  Banking  supervision  for  the 
Eurozone  (and  opt-in  countries)  will  be  undertaken  by  the  single  supervisory  mechanism 
operated by the ECB. But regulation, that is to say the process of agreeing policy on rules, 
will remain with the EBA. 
However,  matters  are  not  quite  so  straightforward  and  concerns  have  been  raised  in  a 
number of quarters. For example, the distinction between supervisory standards or practices 
on the one hand and regulations on the other is easier in the abstract and becomes blurred 
in  some  areas.  In  the  space  left  for  national  discretion  under  current  EU  directives  and 
regulations, should the EBA seek to develop a common single market rulebook – or should 
the ECB do its own thing? I would think that where issues arise from divergent interpretations 
of  existing  EU  law  or  of  differences  in  definitions  and  standards,  the  EBA  and  all 
27 supervisors  should  have  an  opportunity  to  discuss  and  consider  efforts  at  further 
convergence before the ECB sets off on its own. However, in areas of supervisory practices 
(such  as  SREP,  risk  assessment,  inspection  methodologies  and  the  like)  I  would  think  it 
makes sense to preserve some flexibility for national discretion at the level of the 27, but that 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
it will be essential for the ECB to move forward with plans to develop a common supervisory 
model.  
What would, however, be more worrying is if the different principal supervisors in the single 
market,  now  including  the  ECB,  were  to  take  measures  that  sought  to  ring  fence  or 
discourage  cross-border  banking  structures  or  activities  that  spanned  their  respective 
domains. In this respect, my personal view is that the ECB’s stance towards Euro clearing by 
LCH is an unfortunate precedent and it is important that this philosophy does not spill over 
into  banking  supervision.  But  equally,  it  is  important  that  the  FSA’s  approach  to  incoming 
branches and to liquidity and capital support from banking groups based elsewhere in the EU 
does not undermine the single market.  
This issue underlines another important role that the EBA plays, beyond that of policy and 
rule maker: its mediation mandate to resolve disputes between supervisors and ensure the 
application of EU law. This is a crucial role which has yet to be tested in earnest. And it could 
be  of  increasing  importance  as  a  tool  to  tackle  supervisory  actions  which  undermine  the 
operation of the single market for banks.  
Both the policy-making and mediation roles of the EBA raise what has become a key issue in 
the  political  negotiations  on  the  banking  union,  namely  the  voting  arrangements  that  will 
apply in the future. It is clear that the concerns of the UK and other “out” countries will need 
to be addressed. I think it would be unfortunate if the “ins caucus” sought to agree a common 
position on matters before engaging in debate around the EBA table, so as to benefit from 
the views of other countries – and indeed I would not see the caucus leading to a block vote, 
as individual supervisors will still retain their responsibility for policy-making. But, as I said, 
the governance and voting arrangements for the EBA clearly need to change.  
Another key point of discussion relates to the scope of the ECB’s responsibilities in terms of 
the  number  of  banks  it  is  responsible  for,  and  the  speed  with  which  its  new  mandate  is 
implemented. It is clear that at the outset, a core group of systemically important banks will 
be  subject  to  direct  ECB  supervision,  albeit  with  some  supervisory  tasks  delegated  to 
national supervisory authorities. However, an open question subject of considerable debate 
relates  to  the  timing  of  any  subsequent  assumption  of  responsibility  for  banks  from 
programme countries and/or smaller banks. Broadly casting the ECB’s mandate to cover all 
banks will avoid any disruptive capital flows between institutions subject to the two different 
regimes, and will also acknowledge the fact that severe problems have arisen from clusters 
of  banks  that  sit  below  any  obvious  systemic  threshold,  but  which  nevertheless  have 
imperilled the finances of governments. Ireland and Spain are, of course, examples of this. 
This  approach  was  considered  at  the  October  EU  summit.  There  is,  however,  a  practical 
question  regarding  the  speed  with  which  the  ECB  can  reasonably  assume  responsibility  – 
and potential reputational risk – for such a large universe of credit institutions, even with a 
model involving significant delegation of tasks to national authorities. This points to the need 
to articulate some transitional arrangements. One approach might be a transitional phase of 
supplemental, but not direct ECB supervision, for the wider set of small banks. In this interim 
period,  the  ECB  would  issue  its  supervisory  manual  for  use  by  national  supervisory 
authorities for  the  smaller  banks  too.  And,  crucially,  the  ECB  could  be  given  the  power  to 
step in to inspect the financial soundness of any particular bank or subset of banks outside of 
the systemic group but which are flashing red on its radar. A small supervisory SWAT team 
could  be  sent  in  to  kick  the  tires  alongside  the  national  supervisor  that  retains  direct 
supervisory responsibility. And, if necessary, the ECB could elect to bring particular banks 
under its direct supervisory power. This would allow it to gradually expand its remit during the 
transitional period and have the absolute right to troubleshoot problems beyond the systemic 
group, which is surely what recent experience has proved necessary. 
Another key challenge will be to develop the operating model of the ECB’s new supervisory 
responsibilities. I have two thoughts here. First, while the high-level governance framework of 
the  ECB’s  supervisory  responsibilities  (as  distinct  from  its  monetary  policy  ones),  remains 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
that 
there 
the  capacity 
is  clear  accountability  and 
under negotiation, it seems likely that there will be some sort of high-level supervisory board 
put  in  place.  At  the  other  end  of  the  spectrum,  will  be  the  national  supervisory  authorities 
conducting  decentralised  tasks.  The  exact  design  of  the  arrangements  for  escalation  and 
decision making between the two are of crucial importance. While there will necessarily be a 
framework of committees and panels for certain types of decisions and policy-making, it is 
vital 
for  decisive  executive 
decision-making,  particularly  in  times  of  crisis.  In  moments  of  crisis  or  market  disruption, 
supervisors are required to take dozens of decisions in short periods of time. It is important 
that  the  organisational  design  of  the  single  supervisory  mechanism  recognises  this  reality. 
Indeed, this is the negative flipside that distance between supervisor and bank can bring. So, 
one reasonable design principle – both for the regulated bank in search of a speedy answer 
and for the depositor in need of decisive supervisory action – one such principle must be that 
of  efficiency  and  effectiveness  in  the  escalation  and  decision  making  process  of  the  new 
supervisor. 
My  second  thought  on  the  ECB’s  new  operating  model  relates  to  supervisory  culture.  A 
clearly articulated supervisory culture and philosophy will be important for guiding front-line 
supervisors  and  for  ensuring  consistency  in  practice.  It  is  important  that  supervisors  who 
engage day-to-day with banks understand the risk appetite of senior management and their 
willingness  to  tackle  problems.  Tone  and  culture,  as  well  as  the  underlying  supervisory 
model, will be key in setting expectations.  
Seventeen  national  supervisors  (at  least)  will  be  converging  into  a  new  pan-European 
structure, uniting diverse cultures rooted in different market structures, as well as reflecting a 
range  of  different  supervisory  practices.  Should  the  focus  be  on  rule  breaches  or  risks? 
Business  models  or  audit  reports?  Should  supervisors  talk  more  to  the  CEO  or  to  the 
compliance  officer?  How  central  a  role  should  enforcement  play  for  prudential  breaches? 
And how should senior management distil down the essence of the new supervisory model 
and  approach,  so  that  it  can  be  communicated  and  understood  easily  by  both  firms  and 
front-line staff? For example, in Ireland, our new approach is one of “assertive, risk based 
supervision underpinned by a credible threat of enforcement.” That is designed to put a few 
concepts front and centre: that we operate a risk-based approach, differentiating based on 
impact and probability; that there are consequences and accountability for non-compliance; 
and that our supervisors are empowered to insist upon actions to mitigate risk where we are 
not satisfied by the explanation from a firm’s management. 
The  best  driver  for  creating  this  common  supervisory  culture  and  model  is  through  the 
development – jointly by the supervisors that will use it – of a risk assessment framework. 
This  will  provide  a  common  vocabulary  across  the  banking  union  for  the  description  and 
identification  of  risk,  and  set  out  clear  rules  of  the  game  for  supervisors  regarding  risk 
appetite and how problems are to be mitigated. It will therefore be an early, important task, 
for  the  ECB  to  develop  a  common  risk  assessment  framework  and  a  protocol  for  on  and 
off-site inspections. 
Stepping back from this long to-do list, it must be pretty obvious what the central challenge is 
for  the  new  single  supervisory  mechanism.  The  key  first  call  to  be  made  is  around  the 
“European capital question”: is there enough capital in the European banks, in light of asset 
quality problems and the requirements of CRD IV, and, if not, how quickly should you remedy 
the deficit? 
This raises the policymaking dilemma, which one might call Micro–Macro Schizophrenia: the 
tension between the micro-prudential imperative to require more capital, more quickly, and 
macro-prudential  concerns  over  the  implications  for  pro-cyclicality  and  sovereign  debt 
sustainability. It’s most obvious form may be found in peripheral Eurozone countries but the 
condition is, of course, widely observed! 
The  micro-prudential  supervisor’s  concern  for  more  capital,  faster,  is  rooted  in  scepticism 
over  the  asset  quality  of  the  European  banks’  balance  sheets,  due  to  practices  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
forbearance and failure to recognise embedded losses. It is compounded by the concern that 
the use of bank internal models, creating risk weights from historical losses, is masking or 
understating problems. And it is heightened by the imminent challenge facing the European 
banks  as  they  start  on  the  foothills  of  CRD  IV/Basel  3  implementation,  with  the  five-year 
transition  to  higher  capital  requirements  just  beginning  and  the  banks  collectively  facing  a 
staggering capital gap of €349.3billion.1  
The micro-prudential supervisor who argues for tougher, faster bank capital standards might 
also pray in aid of a macro-prudential argument: that a lengthy transition incentivises banks 
to  hoard  capital  and  avoid  lending,  so  get  it  over  with!  However,  there  are  two  other 
competing  macro-prudential  concerns.  One  is  pro-cyclicality.  The  Basel  3  framework 
addressed the pro-cyclicality problem, but perhaps like a general fighting the last war it sets 
out the case for a countercyclical buffer to be built up to provide a drag on frothy, imprudent 
lending  in  good  times.  But  times  are  now  certainly  not  good,  so  is  there  a  case  for  the 
release  of  capital  –  or  the  deferral  of  new  requirements?  The  argument  here  is  that 
increasing  capital  requirements  inhibit  lending  and  encouraged  deleveraging,  therefore 
harming  growth.  In  a  speech  prior  to  his  exposition  on  the  Dog  and  Frisbee,  the  Bank  of 
England’s  Andy  Haldane  hinted  that  there  might  be  a  case  to  be  made  for  some  such 
adjustment.2 Adair Turner shortly after tackled the question of the design of countercyclical 
buffers, but dismissed the case for any relaxation in Basel 3 implantation on the grounds that 
the  Basel  Committee’s  analysis  showed  that  the  long-term  benefits  of  sticking  to  the  plan 
outweighed the costs. However, he acknowledged risks to SME lending.3 And perhaps the 
Basel  analysis  might  have  a  different  colour  if  it  was  conducted  now  in  the  depths  of  the 
sovereign debt crisis?  
The  other  macro-prudential  concern  is  around  debt  sustainability  and  the  linkage  between 
weak banking systems and stressed sovereign finances. The problem here, of course, is that 
if  countries  with  sovereign  debt  concerns  need to  borrow  more  to recapitalise  their  banks, 
then this harms their debt sustainability requires more austerity, which in turn impacts on the 
real economy and feeds back into the banks. This is a highly damaging feedback loop that 
needs to be broken. The former US Treasury Secretary Hank Paulson famously spoke about 
the  need  for  a  bazooka  to  sort  out  the  crisis,  by  which  he  meant  using  a  vast  amount  of 
money to convince the markets that the problem has been solved. But for countries with debt 
problems, they need to borrow more to afford the ammunition for the bazooka, so their debt 
sustainability  gets  worse.  The  room  for  manoeuver  for  ever  tougher  capital  requirements 
brought  forward  faster  and  faster  is  therefore  severely  constrained.  In  this  respect,  the 
feedback loop will only be broken by investment, rather than borrowing, from outside of the 
loop. This, of course, is where the banking union is supposed to come in, but back to that in 
a minute. 
This micro-macro dilemma has more than faint echoes of the debate on fiscal policy. Is more 
austerity needed or is there a case for stimulus? Do you stick to Plan A or move to Plan B. 
The recent IMF analysis on the fiscal multiplier – whereby it contended that fiscal corrections 
in  certain  countries  have  a  larger  than  previously  considered  drag  on  growth  –  casts  new 
light, indirectly, on the dynamic of the bank-sovereign debt negative feedback loop.4 If you 
want to embrace the micro-prudential instinct for ever more capital but need to cut spending 
                                                
1  
In  order  to  achieve  a  tier  1  ratio  of  8.5%  based  on  year  end  2011  data:  http://eba.europa.eu/cebs/media/ 
Publications/Other%20Publications/QIS/EBA-BS-2012-xxx--Public-ISG-Report-Basel-III-Monitoring-.pdf; 
http://www.bis.org/press/p120920.htm. 
2   “Risk Off,” Andrew G Haldane, 18 August 2011 (see page 9). 
3   “Credit Creation and Social Optimality” Adair turner 29 September 2011. 
4  
IMF Report: World Economic Outlook October 2012: Coping with High Debt and sluggish Growth. Article by 
Olivier Blanchard and Daniel Leigh entitled High fiscal multipliers undermine austerity programmes. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
to  get  there,  be  wary  of  the  multiplier  impact  back  into  the  economy  and  on  the  business 
prospects of the banks you are trying to strengthen in the first place. 
So,  is  there  a  cure  for  the  Micro-Macro  Schizophrenia  condition?  Well,  there  are  perhaps 
three competing schools of thought regarding treatment: what we might call the St Augustine, 
Schwarzenegger and Dell cures. 
The St Augustine approach proposes: “make me very, very capital virtuous, but not yet.” The 
policymaker  is  advised  to  adopt  even  tougher  capital  rules  in  the  future,  but  to  push  back 
their  start  date  and  in  the  meantime  use  relaxation  and/or  deferral  of  prudential  capital 
standards  as  a  countercyclical  stimulus  to  the  economy,  perhaps  like  the  Roosevelt 
administration apparently did in the New Deal.  
The St Augustine solution seems to suffer a number of defects, however. It creates an even 
bigger eventual capital ascent for the banks. Doesn’t the yet bigger capital mountain ahead 
cast a long shadow and still encourages hoarding? Indeed, it seems that one lesson from the 
Basel implementation process is that transition periods have only  limited value as markets 
anticipate their end point and put pressure on banks to be early adopters: to be fair to the 
industry, this was a point they made at the time. But most fundamentally, the St Augustine 
approach suffers from the fact that the compelling logic of Basel 3 has not really changed 
and that there is every possibility the banks need more capital to get through their current 
travails, not just some future ones. 
The  contrasting  treatment  is  the  Schwarzenegger  cure,  to  be  specific  the  approach  which 
involves a muscular saviour arriving from the future to protect the present day. The answer 
here is to fast forward Basel 3 implementation and immediately bring forward the full future 
requirements of 2018 to the present day of 2013. The argument here5 is to get it all over with 
quickly and avoid a half-decade of anaemic growth caused by constrained lending as banks 
slowly meet Basel 3, hoarding capital and deleveraging along the way. 
This  prudent,  conservative  approach  has  a  lot  going  for  it  and  is  appealing  to  a 
micro-prudential  regulator.  In  Ireland  we  have  sought  to  put  the  loan  losses  in  the  banks 
behind  them  by  rigorously  capitalising  for  future  projected  losses.  Our  tool  has  been  the 
stress test, in its capital shortfall variant: you project forward losses over a three year period 
under a severe stress scenario, calculate the shortfall that arises against a prescribed hurdle 
rate and, crucially, require that to be filled now.  
In  Ireland  we  went  a  step  further  and  used  an  outside  party,  to  come  up  with  a  wholly 
independent calculation of projected loan losses. This lead to a capital requirement that was 
€8 billion higher than that projected by the banks themselves. That is the equivalent to 4.9% 
of Irish GDP. In UK GDP terms, the amount would have been £76 billion. This is clearly a 
significant  number  no matter  which  way  you  look  at  it.  And  then  as  a further  measure  we 
required an additional buffer of capital for projected losses beyond the stress test period, to a 
value of €5.3bn. 
Should  Ireland  or  other  EU  member  states  adopt  the  Schwarzenegger  school  and  fast 
forward all the way to Basel 3 as soon as possible? As I say, that has strong attractions for a 
micro-prudential  supervisor.  But  there  are  two  absolutely  necessary  conditions  for  this  to 
make sense. First, it would have to be absolutely clear that the tougher capital requirement 
cannot  be  met  by  deleveraging,  as  that  would  defeat  the  purpose  and  exacerbate  the 
macro-prudential problem.6 Second, we have the sovereign debt negative feedback loop to 
worry  about.  Accelerated  Basel  implementation  shouldn’t  come  at  the  cost  of  worse  debt 
                                                
5   Philip Hildebrand and Lee Sachs Financial Times OpEd 24 September2012. 
6   The EBA’s recapitalisation exercise did a good job of managing this by the way. http://www.eba.europa.eu/ 
capitalexercise2012/finalreportrecapitalisationexercise.pdf. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
sustainability.  So,  this  approach  also  only  makes  sense  if  there  is  European  direct  capital 
support to make this happen. 
In  the  absence  of  these  essential  conditions,  we  then  have  the  third  approach,  the  Dell 
school.  This  is,  of  course,  named  after  Michael  Dell,  one  of  the  innovators  of  just-in-time 
manufacturing.  This  involves  making  sure  that  banks  stay  above  their  current  minimum 
capital  requirements,7  and  living  with  that just  up  until  the  point  of  need of  recapitalisation 
and  public  support,  to  meet  Basel  3  or  stress  losses.  Call  this  a  just-in-time  approach  to 
backstops,  if  you  like.  Banks  therefore  make  their  slow  progress  towards  full  Basel  3 
compliance step-by-step. This may involve a protracted period of uncertainty, but you are not 
adding  fuel  to  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  fire  by  trying  to  accelerate  the  implementation 
process through more sovereign borrowing.  
Which school of thought would I adopt to resolve the micro-macro dilemma?8 In a nod to the 
St  Augustine  school,  it  certainly  makes  sense  to  take  off  the  table  any  thought  about 
attempting to impose an additional counter-cyclical buffer for the foreseeable future. With the 
end point of CRDIV clear, supervisors should require European banks to set out their capital 
plans  for  achieving  their  trajectory  to  full  compliance  with  CRD  IV.  Banks  should  start 
reporting on a full end point CRDIV basis to their supervisors, so the size of the task is very 
transparent to us. And they should build on the EBA recapitalisation process, maintaining the 
quantum  of  capital  that  meets  the  EBA  requirements  as  a  platform  for  further  progress  to 
CRDIV.  
It  will  be  informative  to  see  the  banks’  projections  regarding  loan  losses  and  future 
profitability  in  assessing  the  realism  of  their  plans.  And  it  will  be  necessary  to  stress  test 
them, which should be done in a coordinated way at an EU level orchestrated by the EBA. 
This  will  allow  supervisors  to  assess  the  realism  and  resilience  of  the  plans.  I  think  some 
fine-tuning  of  the  stress  test  approach  makes  sense.  Trying  to  satisfy  insatiable  market 
expectations  of  conservatism  in  a  stress  test  risks  being  very  pro-cyclical.  Rather  than 
calculating a capital shortfall for immediate remedy, the recent US stress tests have moved 
to using the stress test as a tool for restricting dividends and share repurchases. This would 
seem  to  be  a  useful  refinement  that  Europe  could  follow  too.  Stress  tests  were  originally 
conceived  as  diagnostic  tools,  considering  a  range  of  scenarios  and  providing  a  basis  for 
management  and  supervisory  judgement,  rather  than  as  automatic  capital  formulae. 
However, if the stress tests show a bank’s plans to be hopelessly implausible, then it may 
indeed be better to bite the bullet and look to an early capital injection or explicit backstop. 
There is, however, also a need for a rigorous examination of asset quality. Apparently higher 
capital  ratios  provide  illusory  comfort  if  they  are  based  on  avoidance  of  embedded  loan 
losses. Ireland has taken a very stringent approach to asset quality reviews. We have used 
third  parties  to  assess  the  quality  of  legal  security  and  loan  file  data  integrity,  as  well  as 
conducting detailed loan file reviews and independently modelling loan losses. We have also 
pressed  the  Irish  banks  to  re-underwrite  their  mortgage  and  SME  portfolios  that  are  in 
arrears to establish a more granular view of embedded losses. And we have required more 
rigorous provisioning practices and disclosure of impairment.9  
                                                
7   After taking prudent impairments for future loans. 
8   The FSA's recent fine tuning of its capital approach for the new small business lending facility and its reported 
focus on preserving the stock of capital rather than maintaining a tougher ratio at all costs is an innovative 
approach to address the dilemma at a UK level. 
9   The  Financial  Measures  Programme  Report,  March  2011:  http://www.centralbank.ie/regulation/industry-
sectors/credit-institutions/Documents/The%20Financial%20Measures%20Programme%20Report.pdf. 
Impairment  Provisioning  and  Disclosure  Guidelines,  December  2011:  http://www.centralbank.ie/press-
area/press-releases/Documents/Impairment%20Provisioning%20Guidelines-%20Central%20Bank%20of 
%20Ireland%20-%20Decemeber%202011.pdf 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
However, it is clear that Ireland is not the only jurisdiction where significant questions have 
been raised over the asset quality underlying banks’ actual balance sheet strength. It makes 
sense to undertake a pan-European asset quality review exercise of some sort.  
Capital  plans,  diagnostic  stress  tests  and  rigorous  asset  quality  reviews  would  seem  a 
reasonable course of action to underpin and strengthen a Dell-style just-in-time approach to 
the capital problem. But there is another crucial element that needs to be in place, in case 
the  need  for  capital  injections  does  in  fact  arise.  This  raises  the  last  subject  I  want  to 
mention: the appropriate sequencing of the introduction of the single supervisory mechanism 
with a new European resolution mechanism. And related to this is the question of the role of 
the ESM concerning direct bank recapitalisation. 
The  sequencing  debate  goes  something  like  this:  if  the  single  supervisory  mechanism  is 
implemented in the course of 2013 - and a pan-European Deposit Guarantee Scheme is a 
distant  prospect  –  when  should  you  introduce  new  resolution  powers,  ESM  direct 
recapitalisation and/or a pan European resolution Authority and Fund?  
There is an Irish-orientated debate on retrospective ESM recapitalisation, but I want to put 
that to one side and argue that for the banking union to be a success for Europe as a whole it 
is important that the sequencing debate is concluded sensibly. You do not want the ECB to 
start  its  new  mandate  without  the  full  toolkit  of  European  resolution  and  recapitalisation 
arrangements operational and at hand. To do otherwise places the new single supervisory 
mechanism in a precarious position at the moment of its inception.  
What, for example, of the question of accountability for triggering the use of taxpayer funds? 
One of the mantras behind banking union from creditor countries is that liability means the 
need  for  responsibility.  In  other  words,  mutualisation  of  risk  through  direct  recapitalisation 
requires joint supervisory control and responsibility. But I would suggest the reverse applies 
too  and  creates  an  awkward  scenario  for  the  ECB.  The  ECB  may  wish  to  exercise  its 
supervisory  discretion  and  require  more  capital  even  when  minimum  pillar  1  requirements 
are  met,  such  as  through  Pillar  2  charges,  stress  test  results  or  maybe  even  accelerated 
CRDIV  implementation.  But  these  actions  could  trigger  the  use  of  national  taxpayer  funds 
and therefore a vicious cycle of further sovereign debt, more austerity for particular taxpayers 
(to which it has no accountability) and a negative feedback into the bank it is trying to sort 
out.  If  a  European  institution  is  taking  on  the  responsibility  of  such  an  important  call  then 
surely some European arrangements need to be in place to deal with the consequences? 
This is an invidious position to impose on the new supervisor right at its birth. To switch from 
analogies bazooka-like, it is a distinctly unpleasant situation to be asked to put out a fire, but 
to find your fire extinguisher is half full – and that the only way to get a re-load is to increase 
debt and austerity. 
So,  this  then,  is  my  overriding  and  final  conclusion.  To  be  a  success,  the  new  single 
supervisory mechanism of the banking union needs to have a  well-considered relationship 
with the EBA and a strong commitment to the single market. It needs to have a best practice 
supervisory  toolkit,  effective  and  efficient  decision-making  procedures,  a  top-notch  risk 
assessment framework and a robust, jointly shared, supervisory culture. But above all, the 
European  political  process  needs  to  ensure  that  the  new  resolution  rules  and  ESM  direct 
recapitalisation tools are fully operational for the new supervisor when it takes on its onerous 
responsibilities.  If  not,  the  ECB  itself  is  at  risk  of  succumbing  to  a  very  nasty  case  of 
micro-macro schizophrenia. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
