Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Finance and the real economy – fostering sustainability 
Speech  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia,  at  the  Islamic 
Development  Bank  (IDB)  Regional  Lecture  Series  on  Islamic  economics,  finance  and 
banking:  “Finance  and  the  real  economy  –  fostering  sustainability”,  Jakarta,  19  December 
2012. 
 I am most honoured to be invited to deliver this inaugural lecture of the Islamic Development 
Bank Regional Lecture Series. I am also most delighted to be back here in Jakarta. I would 
like to thank the Islamic Development Bank for the invitation, and Bank Indonesia for kindly 
hosting this event. 
For more than three decades now, the Islamic Development Bank has had an important role 
in  promoting  economic  growth  and  development  in  so  many  parts  of  the  world,  and 
associated with this, has been its role in fostering the development of Islamic finance. It has 
supported the building of key international financial infrastructure that has been important for 
the orderly global development of Islamic finance and for safeguarding financial stability. The 
Islamic Development Bank has also supported research and education efforts in this area, 
while  its  strategic  interests  in  financial  institutions  in  different  jurisdictions  have  been  an 
important  catalyst  for  their  establishment  and  expansion.  In  the  current  more  uncertain 
environment,  in  the  aftermath  of  the  recent  global  financial  crisis,  the  role  of  the  Islamic 
Development Bank will  continue to be important, given that the goal of sustainable growth 
and development in the world economy has now become even more challenging. 
As  the  conventional  financial  system  currently  confronts  what  is  perhaps  its  most  defining 
period,  several  important  lessons  can  be  drawn  for  our  collective  efforts  to  build  more 
resilient financial systems. Important considerations need to be accorded to the issues that 
have emerged, and on the policy directions affecting growth and stability. My address today 
will discuss several of these issues, and discuss how Islamic finance, given its nature and 
inherent features, can contribute to the process of enhancing the discipline that contributes to 
ensuring growth and financial stability. 
At  the  core,  the  financial  system  needs  to  serve  the  real  economy.  The  purpose  of  the 
financial system is intermediation – that is, to match savings and investments for the purpose 
of generating economic growth. Yet, in recent decades, a number of factors have contributed 
to  the  weakening  of  the  link  between  financial  intermediation  and  productive  economic 
activity.  Deregulation  opened  up  new  opportunities  for  financial  institutions  to  enhance 
performance  and  expand  the  scope  of  their  activities.  Greater  competition,  reinforced  by 
significant  advances  in  technology,  intensified  the  pace  of  innovation.  And,  the  extended 
period  of  low  inflation  and  low  interest  rates  incentivised  greater  risk-taking.  Cumulatively, 
these developments contributed to a dangerous build-up of financial imbalances. 
This has prompted a rethinking of the issues related to the financial business and its models, 
and wide-ranging regulatory reforms by the international community. Related to these issues 
is the question on the “appropriate” size of the financial sector. As economies develop, the 
size  of  financial  sector  assets  and,  correspondingly,  the  value-added  contribution  of  the 
financial sector, is expected to increase. However, while there is a fundamental relationship 
between the growth of the financial sector and the real economy, the relationship is not well-
understood or captured in current macroeconomic models. This creates a potential challenge 
for  policymakers  to  determine  the  point  at  which  growth  of  the  financial  sector  may  be 
outstripping the demands and the potential of the real economy. This issue has become even 
more pronounced with greater regional and global financial integration, and in countries that 
are  also  international  financial  centres.  To  the  extent  that  corporate  and  personal  income 
growth  is  driven  by  financial  transactions  rather  than  by  an  increase  in  production  or 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
employment growth, economies become potentially more vulnerable to the consequences of 
financial system stress. 
The recent global financial crisis provides a distinct example of how excessive leverage and 
exponential growth in financial activities that are detached from the growth trajectory of the 
real economy can become a source of instability. Leverage increased sharply in the years 
leading  to  the  crisis,  buoyed  by  years  of  strong  economic  growth.  In  the  advanced 
economies,  bank  balance  sheets  exploded,  growing  to  multiples  of  annual  GDP.  For 
example,  in  the  case  of  Iceland,  the  three  largest  banks  that  were  nationalised  in  early 
October 2008 had seen their total assets expand from 100 percent of GDP in 2004, to more 
than  900  percent  of  GDP  as  at  end-2007.  Similarly  in  Ireland,  assets  in  their  financial 
institutions  with  substantial  domestic  businesses  were  more  than  400  percent  of  GDP  by 
2008, while in the United Kingdom, bank assets were more than 500 percent of GDP prior to 
the  global  financial  crisis.  The  sheer  size,  complexity  and  leverage  in  the  banking  system 
increased  the  fragility  of  financial  institutions  and  limited  their  ability  to  absorb  even  small 
losses, thereby resulting in widespread and deep economic dislocations. 
This  expansion  of  financial  activities  was  also  in  part  due  to  the  activities  in  the  shadow 
banking  system,  which  in  the  United  States,  grew  to  be  even  larger  than  the  traditional 
banking  sector  in  gross  terms.  At  the  height  of  the  crisis,  the  size  of  gross  amounts 
outstanding of over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives globally was estimated at over 614 trillion 
US dollars1, more than ten times global GDP. Despite its size, the over-the-counter market 
was opaque and inadequately regulated, making it more difficult to quantify the risk that had 
been assumed by the financial institutions. 
A further issue relates to financial innovation and for policy interventions not to stifle those 
innovations that are beneficial to society, while reining in those that are harmful. The current 
debate  on  the  international  financial  reforms  continues  to  reveal  that  this  is  a  challenging 
task. While there is wide support for a return to basic banking, it is also acknowledged that 
financial innovations have been instrumental in improving financial access levels, by enabling 
financial  institutions  to  manage  risks  in  ways  that  have  allowed  for  higher-risk  economic 
activities  to  be  undertaken.  Contrary  evidence,  however,  also  exists.  In  the  run-up  to  the 
crisis, derivatives were extensively used to arbitrage regulatory requirements and to extract 
excessive profits through opaque and complex transactions that resulted in the fundamental 
mispricing of risk. Current reform efforts are therefore confronted with the need to strike a 
balance between constraining harmful practices, without restricting innovation that is key to a 
progressive financial system. 
Another issue relates to the prospect for aligning the expectations of capital providers with 
the imperatives of sustainable banking. In the years preceding the crisis, the growth of the 
financial  system  substantially  exceeded  that  of  the  overall  economy.  Published  data2 
indicates  that  the  balance  sheet  of  the  world’s  largest  1000  banks  increased  by  about 
150 percent  between  2001  and  2009.  At  its  peak,  the  scale  of  the  assets  of  the  financial 
sector far exceeded those in other sectors, with record profits reported from year to year. In 
the current environment, banks continue to remain under considerable pressure to support 
activities that generate the kind of rates of return that capital providers have come to expect 
from  the  industry.  This  runs  counter  to  expectations  for  banking  to  be  returned  to  its 
fundamental role of supporting real economic activity. The extent to which these conflicting 
imperatives can be reconciled in a sustainable manner remains unclear. 
A  focal  point  of  the  reforms  has  been  to  protect  retail  banking  from  the  vagaries  of 
investment banking that often has involved higher risk-taking activities. In the United States, 
                                                
1  As at December 2009. BIS Quarterly Review Statistical Annex, June 2010, Table 19. 
2  The Banker publication. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
the  Volcker  Rule  prohibits  banks  from  carrying  out  certain  types  of  investment  banking 
activities if they wished to continue to rely on deposit funding. In a similar vein, in the United 
Kingdom, the adoption of the recommendations by the Independent Commission on Banking 
mandates banking groups to establish a separate subsidiary for their retail activities, and it 
prohibits  the  subsidiary  from  undertaking  other  businesses  and  risks.  Solutions  to  these 
challenges  are  far  from  straightforward.  While  these  and  other  reforms  by  the  Basel 
Committee and the Financial Stability Board are expected to have far reaching implications 
for  the  landscape  of  the  financial  system  as  we  know  it  today,  they  have  yet  to  provide 
answers to many of the key questions that policymakers and the financial industry need to 
address in the pursuit of effective functioning and sound financial systems as we progress 
forward into the future. 
Since  the  global  financial  crisis,  significant  attention  has  been  directed  at  evolving  an 
effective  macro-prudential  policy  framework,  which  can  serve  to  rein  in  excesses  and 
strengthen  the  nexus  between  finance  and  the  real  economy.  The  concept  of  macro-
prudential  policies  is  hardly  new  and  can  be  traced  back  to  as  early  as  the  late  1970s,  in 
reference  to  the  macroeconomic  and  financial  stability  implications  from  the  rapid  pace  of 
lending to developing economies3. Some emerging markets, including Asia, have, since the 
1990s, deployed macro-prudential policy instruments to manage imbalances in the financial 
system and capital flows. 
Following the recent global financial crisis, greater attention is now being focused on the role, 
scope,  instruments  and  governance  arrangements  for  macro-prudential  policy  to  preserve 
financial  stability.  New  or  strengthened  mandates  for  macro-prudential  policies  are  being 
established in a growing number of jurisdictions, supported by wide-ranging changes to the 
legislative framework and institutional structures. Used effectively in combination with other 
policy  tools,  including  micro-prudential  measures  and  monetary  and  fiscal  policy  tools, 
macro-prudential policies have been demonstrated to significantly improve financial stability 
outcomes. 
Effectively  operationalising  macro-prudential  policy  frameworks,  however,  remains  a  key 
challenge.  By  design,  macro-prudential  policies  are  intended  to  reduce  the  probability  and 
severity  of  a  future crisis. While further  research  will  deepen  our  understanding  of  leading 
indicators and transmission channels, judgments will continue to have a key role. History has 
shown that political economic considerations have, at times, had an effect on the willingness 
of  policymakers  to  act.  Despite  the  high  costs  of  crisis  on  the  financial  system  on  the 
economy and on the society, there is still an inherent bias towards inaction. This underscores 
the need for a stronger focus on creating an environment in which policymakers will have the 
confidence  to  act.  This  requires  a  strong  mandate,  sufficient  policy  instruments,  and  clear 
accountability structures. 
While macro-prudential policy has a clear and important role in contributing towards financial 
stability moving forward, it does not however diminish the important role of micro-prudential 
supervision.  Indeed,  the  notion  that  more  developed  macro-prudential  policy  frameworks 
can, over time, provide  a credible alternative to the close supervision of systemic financial 
institutions – for example, through the development of better predictive macro indicators, or 
through  reliance  on  recovery  and  resolution  plans  alone  –  is  misplaced.  There  can  be  no 
substitute  for  the  effective  ongoing  supervision  of  financial  institutions,  which  relies  on 
supervisory  assessments  and  judgments,  and  enhances  the  understanding  of  firm 
behaviours in a manner that models and plans, no matter how sophisticated, will never be 
able to fully achieve. Efforts should therefore also be accorded towards further strengthening 
                                                
3  Based on the article entitled “The term ‘macro-prudential’: origins and evolution” published in the BIS Quarterly 
Review March 2010, which contains excerpt of the unpublished minutes of a meeting of the Cooke Committee 
(the precursor of the present Basel Committee on Banking Supervision) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
the  conduct  of  micro-prudential  supervision  and  promoting  the  complementarities  between 
micro- and macro-prudential policies. 
Let  me  now  turn  my  remarks  to  the  growing  role  and  relevance  of  Islamic  finance  in 
contributing to the global agenda of fostering sustainable growth that is firmly anchored to the 
real economy. 
The core proposition of Islamic finance draws from its inherent features and the values that it 
brings to the economy, and the tremendous potential that it offers in supporting sustainable 
economic growth and in safeguarding financial stability. These core propositions are derived 
from  the  Shariah,  which  dictates  that  Islamic  financial  transactions  must  be  supported  by 
underlying  productive  activities.  This  Shariah  ruling  ensures  a  close  link  between  financial 
transactions and the real economy. Innovation and intermediation in Islamic finance are thus 
aligned  to  generating  productive  economic  activities.  There  is  also  strong  discouragement 
against  excessive  risk  undertakings  and  a  prohibition  against  speculative  elements. These 
rulings also serve to insulate the Islamic financial system from excessive leverage, which in 
turn contributes towards promoting financial stability and its long-term sustainability. These 
fundamental  elements  resonate  with  the  call  for  banking  to  focus  on  its  core  function  of 
providing financial services that add value to the real economy. 
This  recent  decade  has  also  witnessed  a  dramatic  transformation  of  the  Islamic  financial 
landscape.  It  has  been  marked  by  sustained  rapid  growth  and  the  widening  of  its 
geographical reach, resulting in more diverse Islamic financial institutions and the generation 
of  a  wide  spectrum  of  innovative  products,  particularly  in  the  high-growth  segment  of  the 
sukuk market. In this decade, Islamic finance has also evolved from being domestic-centric 
to  become  increasingly  internationalised.  In  this  dynamic  environment,  the  scope  of  the 
Islamic  finance  business  has  expanded  from  simple  retail  and  trade  financing  to  include 
private  equity,  project finance,  sukuk  origination  and  issuance,  as  well  as fund  and  wealth 
management  products.  Today,  the  total  global  size  of  the  Islamic  financial  assets  has 
surpassed  more  than  1  trillion  US  dollars.  There  are  now  more  than  600  Islamic  financial 
institutions operating in 75 countries. 
The vision for the Islamic financial system in Malaysia was articulated in our first Financial 
Sector  Masterplan that was  launched  in  the  year  2001,  in  which  the  plans for  building the 
foundations for the Islamic financial system were outlined. This included strengthening and 
diversifying the financial intermediaries in the financial system, building and developing the 
financial markets, and enhancing the regulatory supervisory, Shariah and legal framework. 
Ten years later, in 2011, a new Financial Sector Blueprint was launched, charting the path 
for Islamic finance to transition to become increasingly internationalised, and thus to become 
more integrated into the mainstream of the global financial system. 
Whilst  Islamic  finance  has  all  the  ingredients  and  the  potential  to  meet  the  needs  of  the 
global economy, the channelling of funds to productive activities in Islamic finance today is 
still largely being carried out through non-participatory contracts, that includes the mark-up 
sale (Murabahah) and the lease-based (ijarah) structures, which continue to remain essential 
to cater for financing trade and the purchase of assets. Such contracts are similar to lending 
instruments  which  expose  the  Islamic  financial  institutions  mostly  to  credit  risk  elements. 
Whilst  non-risk-sharing  contracts  will  continue  to  contribute  to  the  future  growth  of  Islamic 
finance,  the  wider  use  of  risk-sharing  transactions  and  undertakings  under  participatory 
finance  models  have  significant  scope  in  evolving  a  broader  representation  of  Islamic 
financial  products  that  will  spur  the  next  phase  of  industry  growth  and  development.  This 
includes  participatory  or  equity-based  contracts  such  as  Mudarabah  and  Musharakah  that 
support  ventures  involving  entrepreneurship  endeavours.  Greater  use  of  equity-based 
models in Islamic financial solutions has been observed in the more recent period. This has 
been  most  evident 
from 
predominantly  ijarah  and  murabahah  structures  to  musharakah  partnerships  as  well  as 
convertible and exchangeable trusts. 
the  sukuk  segment,  with  Shariah  structures  evolving 
in 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The further development of participatory Islamic finance contracts on a broader scale offers 
particular  potential  in  efforts  to  reinforce  links  between  finance  and  the  real  economy. 
Several  elements  of  risk-  and  profit-sharing  participatory  contracts  support  this.  As  profit-
sharing  and  loss-bearing  are  clearly  identified  and  agreed  based  on  the  contractual 
agreements between the financier and the entrepreneur, strong emphasis is placed on the 
value creation and economic viability of productive efforts that create new wealth. In equity-
based  contracts,  the  financial  intermediation  is  thus  also  directed  towards  promoting 
entrepreneurship,  in  that  the  clearly  defined  risk-  and  profit-sharing  characteristics  of  the 
Islamic financial  transaction  provides  strong  incentives  for  both  parties  to  contribute  to the 
success  of  the  investment.  This  also  provides  the  foundation  for  a  long-term  trust-based 
relationship, and a clear interest for the financial institutions to undertake the appropriate due 
diligence  to  ensure  that  the  returns  are  commensurate  with  the  risks  being  assumed. 
Aspects  of  governance  and  risk  management  thus  strongly  underpin  these  contracts.  In 
particular,  such  contracts  demand  higher  standards  of  disclosure  and  transparency  to  be 
observed, which in turn act to strengthen market discipline. 
The legal, regulatory and supervisory framework will need to be adjusted to accord greater 
clarity  to  the  appropriate  legal  and  regulatory  treatment  in  order  to  foster  the  sound  and 
orderly growth of risk-sharing structures and activities, both in terms of the funding and the 
assets-side  of  Islamic  banks.  In  Malaysia,  steps  are  currently  being  taken  to  provide  a 
conducive enabling environment for this next phase of development that will spur more risk-
sharing transactions though the formulation of new legislation for Islamic banking and takaful. 
This legislation is now at the final stages of the process of its enactment. This new law for the 
industry  is  aimed  at  promoting  certainty  to  the  legal  and  regulatory  treatment  of  Islamic 
financial  transactions  by  providing  legal  recognition  to  the  contractual  requirements  in 
accordance with the Shariah. This provides a comprehensive legal environment under which 
effective risk and profit sharing activities can take place, encompassing all aspects of Islamic 
financial  transactions,  from  its  prudential  and  business  conduct  requirements  to  the  legal 
treatment  of  Islamic  banking  assets  upon  its  resolution,  to  be  fully  consistent  with  the 
distinctive elements of the respective Shariah contracts employed in these transactions. 
This legal framework will also further enhance the capacity of the regulatory and supervisory 
framework for the Malaysian Islamic finance industry to evolve in greater alignment with the 
international  regulatory  and  the  supervisory  standards  and  best  practices  issued  by  the 
Islamic  Financial  Services  Board  (IFSB)  to  govern  the  specificities  of  Islamic  financial 
transactions. To complement the efforts to strengthen the regulatory law for Islamic finance, 
Malaysia  has  also  established  the  Law  Harmonisation  Committee  in  2010  to  undertake 
objective reviews on other relevant laws and recommend legislative changes to ensure that 
the laws in the country would allow for Islamic financial transactions to take place effectively 
and efficiently. 
Another important dimension in fostering the further development of risk and profit sharing 
instruments  is  the  need  to  ensure  the  institutional  soundness  of  the  Islamic  financial 
institutions and their enhanced ability to assess risks in the real sector. This underscores the 
imperative of robust risk management capabilities to manage new risks peculiar to risk and 
profit sharing contracts and the adoption of strong governance, transparency and disclosure 
practices within the Islamic financial institutions to meet the due diligence requirements for 
determining the viability of business and investment proposals. 
Business risks of equity positions and ownership risks of underlying assets are, for example, 
embedded  in  these  arrangements  arising  from  the  contractual  relationships  between  the 
investors and entrepreneurs as well as the Islamic banking institutions as the intermediary of 
funds. Further in-depth applied research is also needed to develop more innovative financial 
products using risk and profit sharing structures with the corresponding development of risk 
management techniques. This also needs to be reinforced by enhanced consumer protection 
and education initiatives to deepen the understanding and awareness of consumers on the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
associated risks and rewards in the Islamic financial contracts, in particular for equity-based 
instruments. 
Equally important in ensuring the institutional soundness of Islamic financial institutions is the 
need  for  robust  liquidity  management.  Today,  Islamic  financial  institutions  operating  in  the 
different  jurisdictions  are  still  confronted  with  the  challenge  of  managing  their  liquidity 
positions  effectively,  given  the  limited  supply  of  high  quality  Shariah-compliant  liquid 
instruments  being  the  reason  most  commonly  cited.  The  lack  of  high  quality  liquidity 
instruments for Islamic finance is not only constraining effective liquidity management, but it 
is also affecting the efficient cross-border diversification of financial flows. It is therefore our 
hope that through the mandate of the International Islamic Liquidity Management Corporation 
(IILM) in issuing high-quality liquid sukuks, it will contribute to promoting more efficient cross-
border liquidity management by Islamic financial institutions whilst facilitating Islamic financial 
institutions in meeting the international requirements on liquidity. 
Let  me  conclude  my  remarks.  Whilst  the  evolution  of  the  global  financial  landscape  is 
currently being shaped by the need to return finance to its basic functions of serving the real 
economy,  several  critical  questions  remain,  the answers  to  which  will  continue  to  have  an 
important  bearing  on  the  global  agenda  to  build  sound  and  resilient  financial  systems  that 
promote  sustainable  growth.  In  particular,  determining  the  appropriate  size  of  a  financial 
sector  relative  to  its  economy  before  it  becomes  a  risk  to  overall  financial  system  and 
economic stability; promoting conditions that ensure that financial innovation is beneficial to 
the  economy;  and  enhancing  prospects  for  aligning  expectations  of  capital  providers  with 
more sustainable banking strategies present significant policy challenges that will continue to 
occupy the attention of policymakers going forward. 
The global community has made some important strides, but more work remains to achieve 
an  appropriate  balance  between  preserving  safety  and  soundness  of  the  financial  system 
and allowing financial institutions and markets to perform their intended functions. We are not 
without policy options. The role of macro-prudential policy and the developments in Islamic 
finance  have  gained  greater  prominence  in  terms  of  their  potential  to  improve  financial 
stability  outcomes,  and  most  notably  by  the  vital  contribution  that  they  make  towards 
restoring  the  foundations  for  finance  that  supports  sustainable  economic  growth,  and 
bringing with it immense benefits to the real economy and to the well-being of society. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
