Anand Sinha: Gauging the potential of emerging markets – can growth 
be achieved with durable financial stability 
Opening remarks by Mr Anand Sinha, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
2nd FT-YES Bank International Banking Summit, Mumbai, 15 October 2012. 
 Inputs provided by Ajay Prakash and Yarasi Jayakumar are gratefully acknowledged. 
1. 
Ms.  Henny  Sender,  Chief  Correspondent,  International  Finance,  Financial  Times 
and moderator for the panel discussion, my co-panelists, Mr. Bunt Ghosh, Head of Emerging 
Market Strategy for Asset Management, Credit Suisse; Mr. Sunil Godhwani, CMD, Religare 
Enterprises;  Mr.  Sizwe  Nxasana,  CEO,  First  Rand  Group;  Dr.  Rana  Kapoor,  Founder, 
Managing Director and CEO, Yes Bank; other delegates and members of print and electronic 
media. A very good afternoon to you all. 
2. 
While it is unequivocally agreed that financial stability is an objective that we must all 
pursue, especially in the light of the lessons learnt from the global financial crisis, the debate 
continues  on  how  to  balance  growth  and  stability,  given  the  fact  that  pursuit  of  financial 
stability may have costs in the nature of foregone growth. In the light of this heightened policy 
debate, the current panel discussion on “Gauging the potential of emerging markets – Can 
growth be achieved with durable financial stability” as part of the FT-Yes Banking Summit is 
very timely and apt. 
3. 
issues. 
Before  the  panel  commences  their  discussions,  let  me  briefly  touch  upon  a  few 
Growth vs stability – Is there a trade off? 
I. 
4. 
The  lessons  of  the  global  financial  crisis  have,  very  clearly,  emphasised  the 
significance of financial stability. If policies to ensure financial stability are not pursued, then 
the growth that comes with credit cycle in the upturn will be more than dissipated when the 
bust phase comes, with grave consequences for the financial system and macroeconomy in 
the  form  of  large  output  losses,  lack  of  growth,  rising  unemployment,  impaired  financial 
markets, weakened banks and financial system, impaired monetary policy transmission and 
a sense of pessimism. In such conditions, banks become extremely risk averse and do not 
have the required prudential strength to continue to lend. Moreover, with markets not having 
confidence  in  financial  intermediaries,  the  funding  costs  become  high.  The  result  is 
deleveraging  or  a  substantially  reduced  lending  with  higher  lending  rates. Thus,  there  is  a 
significantly  reduced  credit  supply  while  the  economy  desperately  needs  more  credit.  As 
noted  by  Governor,  Dr. Subbarao1,  the  damage financial  instability  can  cause  in  poor  and 
developing  economies  can  be  particularly  severe.  The  striking  fact  about  recessions  with 
financial crises is that credit demand also gets substantially muted and growth takes much 
longer  to  pickup  compared  to  other  recessions,  due  to  the  overhang  of  debt  and  high 
leverage built up by households, corporates, banks and other entities in the financial system 
during the boom phase of the economy. 
5.  
The pre-crisis period was marked by inadequate understanding of systemic risk and 
lack  of  framework  to  address  it.  It  was  also  strongly  believed  that  price  stability  achieved 
through inflation targeting would provide macroeconomic stability and was a necessary and 
sufficient  condition  for  achieving  financial  stability.  The  regulators  and  supervisors  had  to 
ensure  individually  strong  banks  through  microprudential  regulation,  and  it  was  presumed 
                                                
1 
“Financial Stability: Issues and Challenges”, (Sep 2009) – speech by Dr. Duvvuri Subbarao. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
that  the  highly  sophisticated  and  efficient  financial  markets  would  distribute  risks  among 
economic  agents  who  will  have  the  wherewithal  to  handle  risks.  In  alignment  with  the 
exclusive focus of monetary policy on price stability, the ruling doctrine (Greenspan put) was 
that,  for  a  variety  of  reasons,  monetary  policy  was  not  capable  of,  and  did  not  have  to, 
respond to asset bubbles. Instead, the debris from an asset bubble burst could be handled 
by  aggressively  easing  monetary  policy  which  would  put  the  economy  back  on  rails.  The 
reason  why  this  doctrine  had  survived  till  recently  was  because  it  had  worked  well  in  the 
previous  episodes  including  the  stock  market  crash  of  1987  and  the more  recent  dot  com 
bubble. This doctrine now stands completely discredited in the light of the current crisis. The 
failure  of  the  doctrine  can  possibly  be  explained  by  the  much  higher  level  of  debt  and 
leverage in the current crisis. 
It is clear that there was inadequate understanding of systemic risks in the pre-crisis 
6.  
period and there was no framework to address them. In my view, the most notable and novel 
feature  of  Basel  III  framework  is  creating  a  framework  for  dealing  with  systemic  risks  and 
consequently with financial stability issues. 
7. 
Let  me  now  briefly  discuss  how  the  pursuit  of  financial  stability  i.e.  dealing  with 
systemic risks, necessarily has a cost in terms of growth. To deal with procyclicality issues 
(time dimension of systemic risk), capital and/or provisioning buffers are required to be built 
up  during  the  upturn  of  the  cycle  for  increasing  the  resilience  of  the  banking  system  and 
leaning against the credit cycle with a view to moderating it. 
8. 
To deal with the negative externalities arising out of the failure/impairment of highly 
interconnected banks (cross sectional dimension of systemic risk), i.e. systemically important 
banks (SIBs), measures are required to reduce their probability of failure and impact on the 
financial system if they failed. In other words, the measures for financial stability would aim at 
incentivising the SIBs to reduce their systemiticity. Here the trade off is with the advantages 
of the economies of scale and scope. 
9. 
Thus, the pursuit of financial stability has cost in terms of growth. The other concern 
which is often voiced is that the capital buffers on the back of much higher level of equity 
required in the capital structure as per Basel III would leave banks with substantially lower 
Return  on  Equity  (ROE)  and  it  would  become  difficult  to  retain  investor  interest,  rendering 
capital  raising  difficult.  While  these  aspects  understandably  have  caused  concerns,  these 
concerns have become particularly heightened due to the state of the global financial system 
and  macroeconomy.  The  banking  system  particularly  in  the  advanced  economies  has  to 
build  up  its  capital  and  liquidity  levels  and  Basel  III  is  to  be  implemented,  even  when  the 
macroeconomy  is  in  an  uncertain  and  depressed  state.  Ideally,  these  measures  could  be 
implemented when the macroeconomy and financial system were in good shape. Therefore, 
many  find  giving  up  growth  for  pursuing  financial  stability  in  these  circumstances  not 
convincing.  However,  there  is  no  option  to  recapitalising  banks  particularly  in  advanced 
economies  because  without  this  measure,  the  macroeconomy  cannot  recover.  The 
alternative  would  be  deleveraging  on  large  scale  to  gain  market’s  confidence  and  meet 
prudential  standards,  which  will  be  highly  detrimental  to  macroeconomy.  Thus,  there  is  a 
clear  dilemma  in  the  short  term  which  will  have  to  be  addressed  from  a  long  term 
perspective. However, there is some comfort from the fact that studies show that Basel III 
implementation  may  not  result  in  large  cost  for  growth.  The  Basel  Committee  on  Banking 
Supervision (BCBS) has carried out detailed impact studies which show that if the Basel III is 
fully phased in 35 quarters, the GDP growth will dip by 0.22 per cent from the trend path (i.e. 
0.03 per cent p.a.) and converge to it after this period. For every percentage point increase in 
capital, the GDP growth will dip by 0.17 per cent during the transition phase. This is a very 
affordable cost for gaining from durable financial stability. That is why the Basel committee 
has kept the implementation period of 6 years to minimise the impact on growth and make it 
affordable.  However,  it  should  be  noted  that  the  actual  impact  on  growth  would  obviously 
depend upon the capital levels at which banks would choose to operate. These levels are 
likely to be higher than the minimum prescribed by Basel III. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
10. 
As regards the possible decline in investor interest due to lower ROE, it is argued 
that with lower leverage, banks would be much safer and hence investors would demand a 
lower  return.  Studies  show  that  the  average  ROE  in  various  segments  (both  financial  and 
non-financial firms) over a longer period are not significantly different. Lower leverage would 
make the returns on banking stocks much less volatile which should suit the investors. 
11. 
It is thus expected that the trade off from the pursuit of financial stability in the Basel 
framework  would  be  a  manageable  cost  in  terms  of  growth  and  that  investor  interest  in 
banking stocks would remain retained. 
Gauging the potential of emerging markets 
II. 
12. 
Now  let  me  draw  your  attention  to  the  other  sub-topic  of  discussion  “Gauging  the 
potential of emerging markets”. Many emerging market and developing economies (EDEs) 
have done well over the past decade and through the global financial crisis (Table). Growth 
in  these  economies  accelerated  during  2003–07,  even  as  growth  in  advanced  economies 
was considerably lower, triggering a vigorous debate on whether EDEs had decoupled from 
the advanced economies. 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  3 
 13. 
EDEs proved more resilient against the Great Recession than advanced economies. 
Successful reforms from the 1990s have made the EDEs more responsive to market forces. 
The  latest  World  Economic  Outlook  (IMF  –  Oct  2012)  has  indicated  that  the  marked 
improvement  in  the  resilience  of  EDEs  –  measured  by  their  ability  to  sustain  economic 
expansions  and  recover  quickly  form  downturns  –  is  attributed  to  better  policy  making 
(countercyclical policy, inflation targeting, and flexible exchange rate regimes) and improved 
policy  space  (characterized  by  low  inflation  and  favorable  fiscal  and  external  positions) 
coupled  with  reduced  incidence  of  shocks,  more  specifically  the  homegrown  shocks.  The 
EDEs  are  spending  more  time  in  expansions  and  are  having  smaller  downturns  than 
advanced economies. Consequent to the increased resilience, the EDEs have  virtually led 
the post crisis recovery and account for almost all global growth. 
14. 
While the share of EDEs in global output is still small at about 30%, the contribution 
of EDEs to global growth has been increasing at about 70%. One remarkable development 
over  the  last  decade  has  been  the  narrowing,  and  now  almost  total  elimination,  of  the 
“investment  gap”  between  advanced  economies  and  EDEs.  Investment  in  advanced 
economies  has  decelerated  and  even  declined,  reflecting  their  lower  growth  rate,  aging 
populations  and  much  higher  capital  base.  In  absolute  terms,  not  too  long  ago  (2005), 
investment in EDEs was a quarter of that in advanced economies. Today, EDEs invest about 
the same as advanced economies in US$ terms – around US$ 5.5 trillion.  
15. 
The recent growth in some emerging market and developing economies has been 
supported by capital inflows, strong credit growth, and for those that export commodities, by 
the  continued  strength  of  commodity  prices,  which  are  prone  to  reversals  given  the 
increasing  financial  interconnectedness,  through  trade,  finance  and  confidence  channels. 
This  suggests  that  these  economies’  prospects  might  not  be  that  robust  (Frankel,  2012)2. 
Though  the  EDEs  displayed  relative  resilience  to  external  shocks  and  put  up  a  stronger 
economic growth performance during the crisis period, the notion of a complete decoupling 
of  developing  and  developed  countries  appears  impossibility.  While  the  Global  Financial 
Crisis  dented  the  decoupling  hypothesis  to  a  large  extent,  the  Eurozone  crisis  which  has 
escalated  since  May  2012  through  fiscal  slippages,  banking  downgrades  and  political 
uncertainty, seems to have completely demolished it. Moreover, some of the policy space the 
EDEs built over the past decade was used up during the global crisis and has not yet been 
                                                
2  Frankel, Jeffrey, 2012, “Will Emerging Markets Fall in 2012?” Business & Management Journal, Vol. 2, No. 2, 
pp. 119–20. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
fully rebuilt, increasing the vulnerability of these economies to shocks, both external as well 
as internal. 
16. 
It is not unexpected therefore, that lately, the EDEs’ growth has been slowing down. 
Apart  from  the  negative  spillovers  from  the  macroeconomic  conditions  in  advanced 
economies,  deleveraging  and  financial  uncertainties  have  led  to  volatile  capital  flows. 
Additionally, diverse factors specific to the domestic economies of the EMEs have also been 
responsible for their slowdown. Chinese economy slowed sharply, owing to a tightening in 
credit  conditions  (in  response  to  threats  of  a  real  estate  bubble),  a  return  to  a  more 
sustainable pace of public investment, and weaker external demand in advanced economies 
due to their slowdown. China’s surplus, for instance, fell to 2.8% of GDP in 2011 from more 
than 5% in 2010. China’s growth in Q2 of 2012 fell to a three-year low of 7.6 per cent, down 
from  8.1  per  cent  in  Q1.  China’s  economy  continues  to  weaken,  with  the  industrial  sector 
growing by just over 9 per cent in July, the lowest in three years. India’s activity suffered from 
waning  business  confidence  amid  slow  approvals  for  new  projects  and  sluggish  structural 
reforms  and  policy  environment  designed  to  rein  in  inflation.  Brazil’s  economy,  in  the  first 
quarter  of  2012,  grew  at  its  slowest  pace  (at  0.2  per  cent  q-o-q)  in  more  than  two  years. 
Brazil has been hit by falling commodity prices and capital outflows, and central and Eastern 
Europe, by weak demand in the EU and retrenchment by euro area banks.  
17. 
Many of the larger and faster growing EDEs are close to, or above, potential, which 
suggests that they will not be able to drive global growth as before. A perceptible shift in the 
growth strategy of some EDEs in favour of increase in domestic consumption and demand, 
entailed significant rise in wage levels which is adding to inflationary tendencies. The scope 
for  policy  maneuverability  in  the  EDEs  at  present  seems  to  be  limited  as  compared  to  
2008–09. While during the time of Global Financial Crisis, the domestic factors in EDEs were 
supportive which encouraged them to put in place monetary and fiscal stimulus measures, 
the domestic environment in most of the EDEs during the Eurozone crisis is not conducive 
either  because  of  rising  inflation  or  fiscal  tightness  or  widening  current  account  deficits  or 
combination  of  all,  broadly  reflecting  the  legacy  of  Global  Financial  Crisis.  Coming  to  the 
specifics,  the  EDEs’  capacity  to  provide  monetary  stimulus  is  constrained  by  rising 
inflationary  expectations,  and  their  ability  to  announce  any  aggressive  fiscal  stimulus  is 
limited  by  the  mounting  gross  public  debt.For  example,  in  the  depths  of  the  2008  credit 
crunch,  China  made  4  trillion  Yuan  (US$  586  billion)  fiscal  injection  over  two  years;  and 
surge in bank credit by 17.6 trillion Yuan helped prop up the global economy. China would 
now find it difficult to set in motion a big fiscal stimulus as its official government debt, though 
only  27  per  cent  of  GDP,  crosses  60  per  cent  if  bank  lending  to  local  governments  are 
included. In the circumstances, it is perhaps appropriate to focus on group of countries where 
there is some elbowroom for stimulus measures. While China, Indonesia and Russia have 
relatively higher capacity to use monetary and fiscal policies to support growth, Egypt, India, 
Brazil and Poland have the less room for a stimulus3. 
18. 
There  is  another  line  of  thinking  which  suggests  that  in  the  event  of  weak 
consumption  and  investment  demand,  EDEs  would  need  to  discover  innovative  ways  of 
boosting  aggregate  demand  in  a  non-inflationary  manner.  In  a  few  EDEs  with  poor 
infrastructure facilities, scaling up infrastructure investment provides one such avenue, just 
as reconstruction in Japan and Thailand is expected to ignite reacceleration of output. 
19. 
Questions, nevertheless, remain about how smooth and durable the transition from 
export-oriented  growth  to  domestic  demand  will  be,  especially  in  economies  where 
household  debt  is  relatively  high.  It  is  also  not  clear  what  the  shift  in  the  composition  of 
                                                
3  The  Economist  ranking  of  27  emerging  economies  according  to  their  monetary  and  fiscal  wiggle-room, 
January 26, 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
growth  would  mean  for policies,  in  particular,  if economies  in  the region  were  to  intervene 
less in the foreign exchange markets. 
20. 
To conclude, EDEs have certain positives on their side in the longer term perspective. 
Late demographic transition suggests that these countries would continue to enjoy the bonus 
of productive workforce in the coming years, and the life cycle hypothesis suggests that EDEs 
may account for a significant portion of global savings. With these advantages on their side, 
stronger autonomous growth by EDEs, driven by domestic demand, combined with structural 
reforms  in  both  advanced  economies  and  EDEs,  would  clearly  help  maximize  positive 
feedbacks that benefit all. However, despite some decoupling, EDE growth remains bound to 
recovery in advanced economies. Rebalancing growth towards domestic consumption in EDEs 
is  under  way,  but  it  will  be  many  years  before  they  can  become  self-propelling  engines  of 
growth. In the given scenario to expect that the EDEs, by themselves, will be able to lift global 
growth to the pre-crisis levels appears to be unrealistic.  
III. 
Indian growth and outlook 
India’s growth performance 
21. 
After a sharp recovery from the global financial crisis and two successive years of 
robust growth of 8.4 per cent, GDP growth decelerated sharply to a nine-year low of 6.5 per 
cent during 2011–12. There has been a decline in the average savings rate from 35.0 per 
cent during 2005–08 to 32.7 per cent during 2008–11, led by a sharp decline in public sector 
saving rate that has not been offset by private savings. The reduction in the average public 
sector savings rate in the post-global crisis period largely reflects the impact of fiscal stimulus 
measures as well as the decline in the contribution of non-departmental enterprises. Average 
investment rate has also declined in the post-crisis period. 
22. 
Notwithstanding  the  slowdown  in  recent  years,  India’s  real  GDP  growth  rate  has 
remained  among  the  highest  in  the  world.  As  observed  by  the  Prime  Minister  in  his 
intervention at the meeting of the full Planning Commission on September 15, 2012, “Indian 
economy ended the Eleventh Plan with some notable achievements. The economy grew at 
an  average  annual  rate of  7.9  per  cent.  This  is commendable  for  a  period  which  saw two 
global crises – one in 2008 and another in 2011.” 
Growth outlook 
In  the  “First  Quarter  Review  of  Monetary  Policy  Statement  for  2012–13”  (FQR) 
23. 
issued  by  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  on  July  31,  2012,  the  Reserve  Bank  had  revised 
downwards the projected GDP growth from 7.3 per cent to 6.5 per cent for 2012–13 in the 
backdrop of deficient monsoon and weak industrial activity. The mid-quarter review (MQR) of 
monetary  policy  issued  on  September  17,  2012  stated,  “Economic  activity  picked  up 
modestly in Q1 of 2012–13 in relation to the preceding quarter; but the sluggish momentum 
of  value  added  in  Q1  was  evident  across  all  sectors  of  the  economy,  and  particularly  in 
industry.  Lead  indicators  point  to  slack  activity  in  Q2  as  well.  …”.  Furthermore,  the  MQR 
stated  that  “….Domestically,  growth  continues  to  be  weak  amidst  a  negative  investment 
climate; however, the recent reform measures undertaken by the Government have started 
to reverse sentiments. The Government undertook long anticipated measures towards fiscal 
consolidation  by  reducing  fuel  subsidies  and  selling  stakes  in  public  enterprises.  Further, 
steps  taken  to  increase  foreign  direct  investment  (FDI)  should  contribute  to  both  greater 
capital  inflows  and,  over  the  long  run,  higher  productivity,  particularly  in  the  food  supply 
chain.” 
Stimulating growth – The way forward 
IV. 
24. 
It  would  be  important  to  recreate  the  favourable  macroeconomic  environment  in 
India that prevailed prior to the global crisis which ensured a growth rate of over 9 per cent 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
for  3  consecutive  years  (2005–06  to  2007–08)  –  namely  moderate  inflation,  fiscal 
consolidation and a low order of current account deficit. This may not be entirely feasible in 
the short-term, the external environment being what it is and given its interlinkages with the 
domestic economy. However, it is imperative that a concerted policy effort is adopted to bring 
back the economy on rails. 
25. 
Measures are also needed to improve the flow of resources to infrastructure sector 
on  a  commercial  basis.  While  this  has  several  dimensions,  the  setting  up  of  Infrastructure 
debt funds is a positive move in this direction. Some of other issues include rationalization of 
stamp duties across states and re-look at tax treatment of Pass-Through-Certificates (PTC). 
Alternative  means  of  risk  mitigation  through  CDS  or  bond  insurance  are  being  explored. 
More players are also needed to help corporate bond market acquire depth and vibrancy. 
26. 
The envisaged resumption of the fiscal consolidation process in the Union Budget 
2012–13  and  the  recent  hike  in  the  prices  of  retail  prices  of  petroleum  products  (towards 
capping of budgetary subsidies) are also important steps in this regard. While increase in the 
retail prices of petroleum products could lead to short-term price pressures, these are likely 
to have a long-term beneficial impact on the macroeconomic environment. Sustained fiscal 
consolidation  would also help to turnaround public sector savings which  along with private 
sector savings would be important for financing investment requirements. In this context, the 
need  to  reverse  the  migration  of  household  savings  from  financial  assets  into  gold,  would 
also be important. This would also help to mitigate the pressure on the balance of payments, 
to some extent. Ensuring adequate supply side response will be vital. 
27. 
As stated in the Mid-Quarter Review, monetary policy also has an important role in 
supporting  the  growth  revival.  “..  several  challenges  remain,  one  of  which  is  persistent 
inflation. But, as policy actions to stimulate growth materialize, monetary policy will reinforce 
the  positive  impact  of  these  actions  while  maintaining  its  focus  on  inflation  management. 
Only  this  will  ensure  that  the  economy  derives  the  maximum  benefit  from  the  recent,  and 
anticipated, fiscal and supply-side policy measures.” 
28. 
I would conclude by drawing on one of the most important lessons of the crisis that 
there  is  a  need  to  deal  with  the  procyclicality  by  building  up  the  resilience  of  the  banking 
system and moderating the credit cycle in the upturn phase of the economy to prevent large 
financial imbalances building up in the economy which could prove to be disastrous when the 
economy  enters  the  downturn  phase.  There  would,  thus,  certainly  be  a  tradeoff  between 
growth and stability in the short term. In the long term, growth and stability are not mutually 
exclusive  but  are  interdependent  with  one  feeding  on  the  other.  Stability  without  growth  is 
regressive and growth without stability is disastrous. The policies that are being put in place 
to build resilience and stability into the system, while they may appear impacting the growth 
in the short term, are certainly going to have a positive effect on the growth prospects in the 
medium to long term. As regards the emerging market growth story, while these economies 
have, with adequate policy space created out of better policy making, supported the global 
growth so far, it would be too much to expect them to continue to shoulder the burden on a 
long  term  basis.  These  economies  are  already  feeling  the  brunt  of  global  slowdown, 
uncertainty  in  financial  markets  and  very  accommodative  monetary  conditions  in  the 
advanced economies. At the same time, they do not have adequate monetary or fiscal space 
due  to  legacy  of  crisis.  Finally,  coming  to  Indian  scenario,  there  is  a  slowdown  in  Indian 
growth story. We need to reflect on the shortcomings in the system, make amends and get 
our act together to spur growth. Bringing the fiscal and current account deficits under control 
and addressing the supply side issues would be the key. However until the global conditions 
improve it would be difficult to achieve the pre-crisis growth rates. Conferences of this kind 
contribute significantly in pursuit of optimal solutions to challenges we face today. 
Now, let me join the panel in discussing these issues further..... 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
