Inia Naiyaga: Fiji’s economy, outlook and performance of its insurance 
industry 
Keynote address by Mr Inia Naiyaga, Acting Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji, at 
the launch of LICI’s new “Double Bula Life Plan”, Suva, 4 October 2012. 
 His Excellency, the High Commissioner of India – Mr Vinod Kumar 
Mr Sanjeev Kumar Jain, Acting General Manager (LICI Fiji) 
Management and Staff of LICI 
Distinguished Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Introductory Comments 
Bula vinaka, Namaste, and a very good evening to you all 
Your Excellency, thank you for gracing us this evening with your presence. 
I  wish  to  thank  Mr  Jain  for  the  invitation  to  be  here  this  evening,  and  may  I  at  the  outset 
congratulate LICI for reaching its 56th year of operations in Fiji tomorrow, 5 October 2012. 
October  is  always  a  month  of  reflection  for  us  here  in  Fiji,  as  the  celebration  of  our 
independence falls on this month, and together with it comes a sense of pride for what we 
have achieved as a nation, the resilience we show as a people when faced with challenging 
circumstances, and the renewed spirit of working together for the betterment of our future. 
I believe these are the same things we are celebrating for LICI Fiji today, in this month of 
October.  A  sense  of  pride  to  have  been  involved  with  Fiji  for  56  years,  the  resilience  to 
remain an improved market player over the years of which some were very challenging, and 
the renewed spirit to serve the people of Fiji with products and services that give us options, 
and suit our requirements. 
You are launching your new plan at a crucial phase of our economy’s business cycle.  
Let me therefore make some comments on our economy: 
Fiji economy & outlook 
Our latest growth forecast of 2.7 percent for 2012 is currently being reviewed as we finalise 
preparations for the 2013 National Budget announcement. However, we at the Reserve Bank 
are  assured  that  all  indicators  are  generally  moving  in  line  with  expectations.  Real  sector 
growth has been broad based with some sectors exhibiting lower growth than forecasted and 
some others exceeding forecasts. Investment is picking up and consumption is strong. 
In terms of the Reserve Bank’s twin statutory objectives, inflation is trending downwards; the 
year-end  inflation  forecast  remains  unchanged  at  3.5  percent,  and  foreign  reserves  are 
comfortable at just under $1.6 billion or the equivalent of 5 months of retained imports. Given 
this scenario, our monetary policy stance remains accommodative. 
I am glad to say that the financial system continues to be sound. Developments in this all 
important  sector  have  been  clearly  evident  in  the  growth  in  total  assets  of  our  financial 
institutions. 
The  key  prudential  indicators  of  our  banking  system  remain  favorable.  The  satisfactory 
performance of the banking system has been characterised by: 
• 
Strong levels of capital; 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 Adequate liquidity; indeed liquidity levels have been at all time highs in recent years; 
Higher profitability; and 
Revived  lending  trends  which  in  the  recent  past  were  assessed  to  be  on  slow 
growth. 
There is also in my view a rapid development of innovation in the domestic financial sector. 
We are seeing a faster transfer of technology from abroad to Fiji in the areas of microfinance, 
mobile banking, microinsurance, and bancassurance. LICI Fiji provides a classic example on 
bancassurance  through  its  joint  initiative  taken  with  ANZ  to  roll  out  its  insurance  services 
using the bank’s network. 
Performance of the insurance industry 
We all understand the critical role played by the insurance sector in ensuring our risks are 
covered. To any economy, insurance provides the safety net against possible risks that could 
cost  the  country  millions  of  dollars.  Insurance,  therefore,  assists  in  the  building  block  of  a 
country by providing financial security in the event of a financial loss. On a more personal 
basis, it provides comfort and relief to businesses, individuals and families from hardship. 
Our  local  insurance  companies  have  generally  performed  well  in  terms  of  asset  growth, 
profitability, adequacy of capital and solvency. Let me mention a few statistics from our latest 
quarterly assessment: 
• 
Total  assets  of  the  life  insurance  industry  recorded  a  growth  of  around  8  percent 
over the year, to reach $780 million; 
Net profit grew over the second quarter of this year to reach $25 million; 
Net premium income grew by 25 percent over the year to June 2012; and 
There has been a remarkable increase in the aggregate solvency surplus of assets 
over  the  required  solvency  margin  for  the  insurance  industry  with  the  two  life 
companies making up 50 percent of the overall solvency surplus. 
 LICI Fiji 
LICI Fiji is one of the two companies licensed to conduct life insurance business in Fiji. We 
have  witnessed  the  continued  expansion  of  LICI’s  operations  in  Fiji,  over  the  years, 
especially  in  the  last  five  years  with  increased  capital  and  solvency  surplus,  expanded 
market share in terms of premiums and improved products and levels of customer service. 
Life insurance is competitive and demands innovation. Quality service and products are very 
important  in  meeting  the  needs  and  varied  choices  of  people  and  to  help  enhance  their 
quality of life. Product design becomes very specialized and requires a lot of innovation. 
Indeed,  the  launch  of  this  new  “Double  Bula  Life”  plan  is  a  testimony  of  the  company’s 
continued effort to research and develop insurance plans that meet the needs of our local 
population. 
The new “Double Bula Life” plan 
The Reserve Bank of Fiji had formally endorsed the offering of this plan by LICI back in May 
of  this  year,  after  a  detailed  submission  by  the  company.  Our  assessment  considered  the 
plan to be an investment alternative that our people, from those who have just started work, 
to  those  who  have  just  received  lump  sum  pension  payments,  can  take  up  and  reap  the 
benefits of an assured return in the future. 
I will not mention again the features nor the benefits of this new plan, as we have all been 
provided with details of these during the Feature Presentation earlier this evening. I can only 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
congratulate  LICI  on  yet  another  excellent  product  development  initiative  and  thank  the 
company  for  its  continued  commitment  to  our  country  through  exceptional  service  and 
innovation. 
Concluding remarks 
In closing, I would like to commend the management of LICI for your innovation and foresight 
in developing and contributing to the insurance industry in Fiji. I have no doubt that you will 
continue to play such a role as we move our country forward.  
Thank you very much again for the invitation to be here this evening. 
Vinaka Vakalevu and Dhanyavaad. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
