Darmin Nasution: Towards sustainable and inclusive growth – 
challenges amidst the global turbulence 
Speech  by  Dr  Darmin  Nasution,  Governor  of  Bank  Indonesia,  at  the  Bankers’  Dinner, 
Jakarta, 23 November 2012. 
 Respectable Leaders and Members of Parliament,  
Honorable Ministers and Heads of Institutions,  
Prominent Bankers,  
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Assalamu’alaikum Wr. Wb,  
Good evening and may God bless us all,  
Commencing our respectable gathering this evening, I would like to invite all of you to join 
me in extending praise and gratitude to God Almighty who has blessed us once again with 
the opportunity to meet here for the Bankers’ Dinner 2012.  
In  this  very  appropriate  time,  please  allow  me  on  behalf  of  Bank  Indonesia’s  Board  of 
Governors to express our deepest gratitude and appreciation to the banking community as 
well  as  the  government,  the  parliament,  businesspeople,  academics,  experts,  press  and 
other stakeholders for supporting Bank Indonesia in performing its mandates.  
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen,  
1.  
During last year’s Bankers’ Dinner on December 9, 2011, at this very same room, I 
caught the glimpse of optimism surrounding all of us. We were optimistic that 2012 
would be the year of hopes and opportunities for all of us to continue safeguarding 
the economy with a strong and sustainable growth.  
It was indeed not an overly sanguine expectation considering that 2011 had seen a 
steady  domestic  expansion  accompanied  by 
impressive  macro  stability. 
Furthermore, since early 2011 the US economy had shown signs of bottoming out 
from its severe crisis in 2008.  
However, by mid 2012 we came to realize that the global crisis has not subsided. 
The multi dimensional crisis that depressed the European economy has brought a 
global impact of great magnitude during 2012.  
Up to this moment, the European region has been confronted by unavoidable debt 
trap,  tightened  fiscal  space,  squeezed  monetary  room,  mounting  unemployment 
level, fragile financial sector, and decaying market confidence. All of these combined 
has  manifested  into  a  vicious  circle  that  is  weakening  Europe’s  ability  to  escape 
from the prolonged crisis.  
As  the  global  inter-linkages  strengthened,  the  dynamics  of  emerging  economies 
cannot be entirely decoupled from what happens in the advanced economies. Since 
mid-2012, we have seen some big developing countries, particularly China, began 
to lose its endurance.  
2.  
3.  
4.  
5.  
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen,  
6.  
The depth and scope of crisis originated from US sub-prime bubble burst coupled 
with  European  debt  problem  have  shifted  backward  the  structural  capacity  of 
advanced  economies.  In  the  following  years,  advanced  economies  will  have  to 
accept a low-growth new equilibrium.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
7.  
Economists  have  called  this  equilibrium  “the  new  normal.”  It  represents  an  era 
resulted  from  significant  post-bubble  correction  following  “the  great  moderation” 
spanning from 2000 to 2007. During this tranquil episode, global economy grew high 
in  a  relatively  long  period  of time,  supported  by  rapid  technological  advancement, 
low  level  of  interest  rate  and  inflation,  but  accompanied  by  the  accumulation  of 
leverage in the household sector as well as excessive risk taking and engineering in 
the financial sector. The bubble has finally burst at the end of 2008, culminated with 
the episode of “Lehman Collapse.”  
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen,  
8.  
While  the  advanced  countries  started  the  opening  decade  of  this  new  millennium 
with  the  golden  era  of  “great  moderation”  and  closed  it  with  the  gloomy  “new 
normal”,  the  exact  opposite  happened  in  Indonesia.  We  started  in  thorny  path 
resulted from the aftershock of economic stabilization program post the 1997/1998 
crisis, and landed successfully inside a transition period of an economy categorized 
as middle income country.  
Indonesia’s  per  capita  income  by  the  end  of  2011  has  reached  approximately 
USD 3,000, six-fold increase from the figure in the Asian crisis of 1997/1998. If our 
economy continues to grow while the macroeconomic and financial stability can be 
maintained, it is only a matter of time before Indonesia move into the upper middle 
income countries category with per capita income reaching USD 4,000.  
We also manage to close the early decade of the new millennium with phenomena 
of  an  increasing  group  of  society  experiencing  higher  standard  of  living,  the 
so-called  middle  class.  At  present  and  in  the  future,  this  group  will  become  an 
important  transitional  strength  to  influence  our  entire  aspects  of  life,  be  it  politics, 
economy, social as well as culture.  
We have optimism that with the rapid increase in the productive-age population as a 
demographic  bonus  within  the  population  pyramid,  the  growing  middle  class  will 
continue to expand until at least the next 20 years.  
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen,  
12.  
In  the  midst  of  prolonged  sluggishness  within  the  advanced  economies,  the 
expanding  middle-class  population  has  strengthened  and  enriched  the diversity  of 
base  demand  of  goods  and  services  in  the  domestic  market,  thereby  steadfastly 
supporting  the  economic  expansion.  In  the  last  eight  years,  we  manage  to 
successfully maintain a continuous economic growth of around 6.1–6.2% per year 
(figure 5), one of the highest in the world.  
In addition to the expanding middle class population, the resilience of the domestic 
economy  is  also  sustained  by  the  stable  and  conducive  macro  and  financial 
environment, therefore providing space for a broad-based economic expansion. In 
my view, this achievement is inseparable from the solid and well-coordinated fiscal, 
monetary, and banking policies that are built based on prudence and discipline.  
The Economist, in its November 10, 2012 issue, presented an interesting analysis 
describing  the  new  era  of  Great  Moderation  in  Asia.  The  magazine  applauded 
Indonesia for having the most stable economic growth within the last twenty quarters 
in world economy.  
The magazine also acknowledged Indonesia as a pioneer in implementing monetary 
and  macro  prudential  policy  mix.  Through  an  effective  policy  mix,  Indonesia  is 
deemed  capable  of  mitigating  credit  risks  and  preventing  capital  outflows  without 
having to raise interest rate.  
9.  
10.  
11.  
13.  
14.  
15.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
16.  
17.  
The  central  bank’s  policy  of  preemptive  easing,  according  to  the  magazine,  has 
significantly contributed to maintain economic growth stability. Since October 2011, 
Bank Indonesia has become the first central bank in Asia to lower its policy rate.  
In my view, this magazine’s review has revealed a fresh reference on the fact that 
macro management relying solely on prudence and discipline is insufficient. At the 
end of the day, it remains true that the policy is more of an art rather than a science.  
Distinguished ladies and gentlemen,  
18.  
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen,  
22.  
While growth can be maintained at a high level, the inflation rate in recent years has 
in  fact  shown  a  downward  trend  towards  the  medium-term  target  of  4.0  percent. 
Likewise, the rupiah in the past three years have also been moving in line with the 
fundamental condition.  
On the one hand, the achievement of a low inflation and stable exchange rate has 
created  conducive  climate  for  the  resilience  of  the  banking  industry.  On  the  other 
hand, the well-proven resilience of our banking industry is able to become a shock 
absorber for the economy. This is supported by adequate capital strength to absorb 
various risks, as well as effective regulation and supervision.  
With  improved  resiliency,  the  banking  intermediation  is  on  the  right  track.  This  is 
reflected  in  the  relatively  strong  growth  of  productive  loan,  while  keeping  the 
non-performing at a low level. The increase in credit expansion is also inseparable 
from BI’s policy a few years ago which linked the Minimum Reserve Requirement to 
Loan-to-Deposit Ratio.  
With 
the 
saving-investment  dynamic  grow  more  robust  and  contributive  to  strengthen  the 
structural foundation  of  the  economy.  Investors begin  to feel  confident developing 
their  production  capacity.  This  is  reflected  in  an  increased  ratio  of  investment  to 
GDP, even surpassing the pre-crisis level of 1997/1998.  
the  declining  macro 
financial  stability, 
the  proven 
risks  and 
Based on some notes I have underlined earlier, it is not an overstatement to say that 
in  the  midst  of  the  turbulent  global  economy  and  financial  markets,  we  have 
recorded  numerous  successes  in  2012.  Nevertheless,  a  series  of  concerns  which 
has bearing on economic and financial performance still needs to be addressed.  
In my view, the biggest challenge today is on how best we can manage economic 
resources and allocate them in the most efficient way possible and right on target. It 
is also essentially important how we manage to improve the innovation capacity and 
technology readiness.  
At  this  point,  I  believe  the  speed  in  addressing  the  two  challenges  will  affect  our 
ability to maintain the sustainability of our economic growth in a balanced manner. I 
would define these equilibriums as internal balance, i.e. the balance of growth and 
inflation, and external balance which include the balance of payment.  
We  can  illustrate  internal  balance  and  external  balance  as  two  interconnected 
containers. Imbalances of both or even one of the two could cause the economy to 
quickly exhaust its power.  
We  experienced  external  imbalance  in  2005  and  2008  because  the  domestic 
demand was not supported by efficient and well-targeted allocation of resources. I 
would  like  to  relate  this  to  the  importance  of  re-composing  fiscal  expenditure  to 
make it better targeted, especially to address the infrastructure gap.  
It is true that the structure of fiscal expenditure which prioritizes subsidy and routine 
spending  contributes  to  the  resilience  of  domestic  demand,  such  that  economic 
growth can remain equally stable across the whole regional territories. Nonetheless, 
19.  
20.  
21.  
23.  
24.  
25.  
26.  
27.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
28. 
29.  
30.  
31.  
32.  
the  resulting  price  distortion  has  encouraged  excessive  fuel  price  consumption, 
leading to pressure on the balance of payment.  
A valuable lesson learned has certainly been obtained from the mini crisis of 2005. 
The sluggish response to the accumulated problem in the form of delays in adjusting 
fuel prices had resulted in excessive policy implementation. This led to a steep rise 
in inflation up to 17% and a sharp decline in purchasing power.  
Therefore,  in  2012  Bank  Indonesia  continues  to  endeavor  for  the  balance  of 
payment  to  be  well  managed.  Notwithstanding,  maintaining  proper  balance  of 
payment is not a matter of interest rate, exchange rate, or macro prudential policy 
per se.  
Fundamentally,  the  balance  of  payment  dynamic  correlates  more  to  how  our 
industries own competitive ability and become independent in developing innovative 
capacity  and  technological  readiness,  as  well  as  how  economic  resources  are 
allocated in an efficient and well-targeted manner.  
In the middle of the currently expanding economy, the diverse challenges at the end 
require  our  ability  to  direct  the  economy  toward  more  productive  activities  and  to 
provide  larger  and  more  sustainable  supporting capacity  for the  economy.  Among 
the  needed  abilities  is  to  avoid  the  potential  vulnerability  in  the  economy  such  as 
asset price bubble.  
Our observation shows that since September 2011, mortgage and auto loan grew 
faster than the average growth of aggregate credit. At that time, the mortgage loan 
expanded  up  to  43%  with  motorcycle  credit  reaching  62%,  while  credit  growth  in 
aggregate term only arrived at 24%. This potential risk of asset price bubble could 
trigger financial instability if not mitigated immediately.  
Distinguished ladies and gentlemen,  
33.  
In addition to the above macro challenges, another significant test relates to how the 
financial sector contributes to economic development through effective and efficient 
financing. The Banking Act No.7 Year 1992 as amended by Act No.10 Year 1998 
clearly stipulates the banking industry to play intermediary role for the economy in 
an effective and efficient manner.  
Since last year we have initiated a number of preliminary steps to improve banking 
efficiency.  We  launched  a  policy  requiring  banks  to  publish  their  Prime  Lending 
Rate.  
The result has been reflected in the gradually declining lending rate, although this 
can be improved further. Some SMEs still have to deal with micro credit interest rate 
of around 30%.  
In  my  point  of  view,  to  improve  banking  efficiency,  efforts  needs  to  be  conducted 
comprehensively taking into account various constraints involved. As an illustration, 
around 91% of our banking financing source relies heavily on third party funds which 
concentrated in short term deposits.  
From those third party funds, 44% is in the form of term deposits of which 50% is 
beyond  the  deposit  guarantee  scheme.  The  sizable  amount  of  third  party  funds 
outside the guarantee scheme resulting from the unhealthy structure of the funding 
market  as  price  (interest  rate)  is  greatly  influenced  by  the  oligopolistic  power  of 
some big depositors.  
This micro constraint has given rise to the rigidity of deposit rate within the banking 
sector in responding to the downward central bank’s policy rate.  
In  terms of fund  management,  only  4%  of  banks’  asset  is  placed  in  the  interbank 
money market. With the number of banks currently reaching 120, segmentation of 
34.  
35.  
36.  
37.  
38.  
39.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
the  banking  industry  structure  is  evident  as  reflected  in  the  small  amount  of 
placement in the interbank money market.  
Excess  liquidity  is  heavily  concentrated  only  in  a  few  banks  whereas  other  banks 
must compete to obtain third party fund, leading to high deposit rate.  
40.  
Distinguished ladies and gentlemen, 
41.  
Segmentation  in  the  area  of  banking  capacity  is  also  found.  A  great  number  of 
banks  are  operating  in  contrast  to  their  capacity,  and  even  below  their  level  of 
economies of scale, hence creating inefficiency.  
According to Bank Indonesia study, a bank must at least have Rp1 trillion of core 
capital in order to start operate efficiently. Core capital requirement must increase to 
at least Rp5 trillion to enable banks to operate at a level of optimal efficiency.  
This  explains  why  in  general  the  level  of  our  banking  efficiency  has  not  been 
satisfactory.  However,  I  welcome  achievements  in  efficiency  improvement  as 
reflected in the lowering of the operation expense to operation income ratio of the 
industry,  reaching  74%  in  September  2012.  However,  several  banks  are  still 
reporting efficiency ratio of above 90% and even some above 100%.  
Distinguished ladies and gentlemen,  
44.  
Various problems and challenges in the economy which I have just elaborated have 
initiated Bank Indonesia to take a number of policy measures during 2012.  
The formulation of monetary policy was made by strengthening the calibration of a 
mix  of  monetary,  exchange  rate,  and  macroprudential  policy  with  good  dose 
flexibility.  Such  blend  is  required  as  we  must  simultaneously  respond  to  two 
challenges.  First,  we  must  prevent  the  effect  of  global  slowdown  to  the  economy 
through  counter-cyclical  policy  measures.  Second,  we  must  preserve 
macroeconomic  and  financial  stability  through  carefully  calibrated  combination  of 
instruments.  
Entering  the  year  of  2012,  our  monetary  policy  was  confronted  with  deteriorating 
global economic outlook due to the escalation of the European crisis. On February 
9, 2012, we decided to lower the BI rate by 25 basis points to 5.75%.  
However, the continuity of the counter-cyclical policy response was faced with the 
challenge of stronger inflation expectation in the midst of the uncertainty of the fuel 
price adjustment.  
On that background, since March 2012, the BI rate was maintained at the level of 
5.75%.  As  policy  maneuver,  we  have  made  a  number  of  adjustments  to  the 
overnight interest rate corridor. Strengthening the monetary operation framework for 
liquidity  management  was 
the 
reverse-repo-government securities transactions.  
implemented 
optimalizing 
also 
by 
Distinguished ladies and gentlemen,  
49.  
The  increasing  challenge  in  formulating  monetary  policy  in  2012  arises  from  the 
increasing pressure on the Rupiah. In the vulnerable global financial markets as of 
today, we perceive exchange rate stability as the first line of defense in maintaining 
macroeconomic  and  financial  stability  as  a  whole.  For  that  reason,  it  is  critically 
important to maintain the exchange rate stability.  
In  keeping  exchange  rate  volatility  in  check,  we  continue  to  thrive  for  balance 
between  supply  and  demand  in  the  foreign  exchange  market.  To  strengthen  the 
supply structure, since June 2012, Bank Indonesia regularly conducts the USD term 
deposit auction.  
42.  
43.  
45.  
46.  
47.  
48.  
50.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
51.  
52.  
The  opening  of  the  USD  term  deposit  auction  is  expected  to  address  scarcity  of 
instrument  in  the  domestic  interbank  money  market,  and  to  optimize  foreign 
exchange received from export proceeds.  
To  strengthen  the  supply  structure  for  reserves  emanating  from  Export  Proceed 
Reserves, including oil EPRs, Bank Indonesia will release trustee regulation shortly. 
This  regulation  is  intended  to  provide  solid  legal  grounds  for  trustee  activities  for 
banks managing reserves and assets under custody.  
Distinguished ladies and gentlemen,  
53.  
As  we  retain  the  policy  rate  to  maintain  its  consistency  with  inflation  target  and 
mitigate the adverse impact of weakening global economy, we optimize the use of 
macro  prudential  instruments,  in  particular  a  maximum  loan  to  value  ratio  and  a 
minimum loan down payment effective March 2012.  
In  general,  we  observe  that  calibration  of  our  macro  prudential  and  monetary 
policies  have  started  to  produce  positive  outcome  in  our  economy.  Our  economy 
growth, despite slightly slowing down due to global factor, stays strong sustained by 
solid domestic growth. At the same time, inflation stays controllable at low level.  
Distinguished ladies and gentlemen,  
55.  
resiliency  and  competitiveness  of  banks,  and 
Driven by various problematic issues surrounding financial and banking systems as I 
have  previously  explained,  in  2012  Bank  Indonesia  formulates  conventional  and 
Islamic-based  banking  policy  frameworks  within  3  complimentary  corridors.  These 
corridors  are  (i)  safeguarding  macro  economy  and  financial  system  stability, 
(ii) bolstering 
(3)  bolstering 
intermediation.  
Our policy responses in the first corridor, safeguarding macro and financial stability, 
are manifested by macro prudential regulation. As I have explained earlier, as part 
of our policy mix, we have made effective Housing Loan to Value Auto Loan Down 
Payment regulations applied for conventional banks.  
The  LTV  is  intended  to  mitigate  financial  system  instability  emanating  from  rapid 
credit  growth  in  consumptive  sectors,  particularly  in  housing  and  automotive.  To 
mitigate regulatory arbitrage, in near future we will release LTV and DP applied for 
Islamic banks and Islamic unit of conventional banks.  
To  anticipate  the  impact  of  the  global  economic  issues  that  could  destabilize  the 
financial system and the banking sector, Bank Indonesia will soon revise regulation 
on  Minimum  Capital  Adequacy  Requirements  of  Commercial  Banks,  offering  an 
approach to a more comprehensive risks-based capital calculation.  
In essence, banks will be required to provide the minimum capital in compliance with 
their risk profile ranging from 8% to 14%. This amount can be set higher if based on 
Bank Indonesia existing minimum capital requirement, the amount is not adequate 
to anticipate risks.  
The  statute  applies  similarly  for  foreign  bank  branches  operating  in  Indonesia. 
Within  the  framework  of  the  financial  system  stability,  foreign  bank  branches 
operating  in  Indonesia  are  required  to  maintain  Capital  Equivalency  Maintained 
Assets (CEMA). CEMA serves as compulsory capital allocation fund in the form of 
business  capital  deposited  in  certain  amount  of  financial  assets  that  should  also 
meet  certain  requirements.  CEMA  will  help  foreign  bank  branches  bank  to 
immediately  anticipate  and  mitigate  the  risks.  Therefore,  risks  on  financial  system 
can be properly maintained.  
To  safeguard 
the  crisis 
management protocol related to exchange rates and banking, including integration 
Indonesia  has  enhanced 
financial  stability,  Bank 
54.  
56.  
57.  
58.  
59.  
60.  
61.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Distinguished ladies and gentlemen,  
62.  
with the national crisis management protocol and improvement of short-term funding 
facilities.  To  make  crisis  management  effective  for  systemic  crisis  prevention,  this 
MoU  needs  to  be  sheltered  under  the  protection  of  upcoming  Financial  Sector 
Safety Net Act.  
In the second corridor, strengthening resiliency and competitiveness of banks, Bank 
Indonesia  implements  policies  to  structure  bank  ownership  and  regulate  activities 
and  bank  network  expansion  on  the  basis  of  capital  (the  so-called  multi-licensing 
regime).  
Structuring bank ownership, of which regulation was issued under Bank Indonesia 
regulation  number  14/8/PBI/2012,  has  spirit  and  philosophy  to  enhance  good 
governance  and  bank  soundness  ratings.  Therefore,  banks  whose  soundness 
ratings  and  governance  are  deemed  to  be  strong  will  be  exempted  from  this 
regulation as long as they successfully maintain strong governance and ratings.  
In the meantime, regulations on bank operational activities and network expansion 
are  very  important  in  endeavours  to  foster  competitiveness  of  banks.  Therefore, 
Bank  Indonesia  will  soon  release  regulation  concerning  “Banking  Activities  and 
Network Expansion based on Capital.”  
On  the  basis  of  this  regulation,  commercial  banks  will  be  categorized  into  four 
buckets depending upon their Tier 1 size. In other words, the bigger the Tier 1, the 
wider the scope of the activities and network outreach of the banks. Each bucket will 
have  clear  definition  of  scope  of  activities  as  well  as  network  outreach.  Lower 
buckets will permit banks to have basic banking services, whereas higher buckets 
will permit banks to have wider scope and more complex activities.  
Banks will be stimulated to foster inclusive finance to support economy development 
in the region currently underserved. Therefore, regulation on bank activities will be 
linked to regulation on the mechanism for opening bank office networks.  
This regulation provides incentive and disincentive mechanisms for banks to expand 
their activities and branch office networks depending upon their allocation of Tier 1, 
regionalization,  and  level  of  efficiency.  Incentives  and  disincentives  are  provided 
through  allocation  of  core  capital  (Tier  1)  required  differently  for  different  types  of 
branch networks to be opened by banks (full branch, sub branch, and cash payment 
points) depending upon the zone considering efficiency level of the bank. Under this 
regime,  core  capital  required  for  banks  opening  office  networks  in  zone  with  high 
bank density will be higher than those with lower density.  
Enhanced regulatory regime for banking activities and distribution expansion will be 
launched in the same package with amendment of Single Presence Policy (SPP).  
The  amendment  will  be  undertaken  by  reopening  the  option  to  establish  holding 
company.  With  this  option,  strategic  investors  currently  holding  positions  as 
controlling shareholders in a particular bank will be permitted to become controlling 
shareholders 
to  exercise  merger  and 
consolidation of banks under their controls.  
In the third corridor, we will strive to ensure that bank intermediation is on the right 
track. Therefore, each bank will be mandated to meet target of productive lending 
determined  for  each  operational  bucket.  To  stimulate  inclusive  economy  growth, 
inclusive  in  the  productive  lending  target  is  micro,  small,  and  medium  enterprises 
lending at minimum of 20%. The regulation on this productive lending target will be 
made public shortly.  
in  other  banks  without  obligations 
63.  
64.  
65.  
66.  
67.  
68.  
69.  
70.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
Distinguished ladies and gentlemen,  
71.  
Safe,  robust,  and  efficient  payment  systems  are  vital  conduits  supporting 
sustainable  economy  expansion  and  efficient  transactions  in  the  banking  sector. 
During the course of 2012, Bank Indonesia has collaborated with banking industry to 
develop the payment system.  
Key steps completed in 2012 include standardizing chips for ATM and debit cards, 
fostering  synergies  amongst  ATM  networks,  and  developing  electronic  credit 
transfer  system  for  rural  bank  customers  embedded  in  the  National  Clearing 
System.  
Besides, to mitigate default risk in the credit card segment, in the beginning of 2012 
Bank  Indonesia  released  regulation  concerning  limitation  of  the  number  of  credit 
card issuer that is commensurate to financial capacity of customer.  
Distinguished ladies and gentlemen,  
74.  
Before we focus on the policy outlook that Bank Indonesia will pursue, allow me to 
shed some lights on the forthcoming challenges in wider perspective.  
In 2013, global economy will step into the new normal. In this stance, we need to 
remain  vigilant  over  two  substantial  risks,  which  unless  well-mitigated, will  amplify 
complexities in managing our macroeconomic policies.  
First,  risk  from  the  continued  uncertainty  surrounding  the  European  crisis,  and 
second, risk from the US fiscal cliff, inevitable tax increase and the automatic budget 
cut in the US, in early 2013.  
In  its  October  2012  publication,  the  IMF  warned  that  failure  to  address  the  dual 
global risk combination will drag developed economies into a whirlwind of recession 
and the global economy will only grow by 2.0%, far from the baseline scenario of 
3.6%.  
With such bleak portrait, we can obviously see the daunting challenge we face in the 
future.  On  that  note,  backed  by  supportive  demographic  structure  as  our  capital 
base, we are challenged to immediately take a number of structural adjustments.  
We  have  been  called  upon  to  immediately  make  efficient  every  aspect  of  the 
economy in order to be more competitive. The development of a more efficient and 
reliable  domestic  connectivity,  improvement  in  the  ease  of  doing  business, 
harmonization of regulation and reforms of bureaucracy are important aspects which 
we must address.  
I feel troubled if we continue to dally while we still have time; we will remain trapped 
in  the  current  natural  resources-based  economic  model.  By  the  year  2020,  our 
demographic bonuses we now enjoy will start to diminish.  
However,  if  we  succeed,  I  believe  we  would  be  able  to  bring  changes  in  our 
economic models, from resource-driven growth to efficiency-based growth.  
In spite of this, we cannot simply rely on efficiency alone. In the future, the Asian 
region is expected to enter a new era as pioneer of global growth. Asia will grow as 
basis for consumption, production, and technological progress.  
Asia’s  position  as  technology-intensive  production  base  is  increasingly  taken  into 
account. For example, the mobile gadget iPhone, labelled as “Made in USA,” in fact 
has its major components supplied by Asian countries.  
The reduction of various impediments to every policy aspects will move us from a 
resource-driven growth economy to an efficiency-based growth economy. However, 
relying  solely  on  efficiency  is  not  enough  since  going  forward  the  Asian  region  is 
72.  
73.  
75.  
76.  
77.  
78.  
79.  
80.  
81.  
82.  
83.  
84.  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
85.  
86.  
87.  
projected  to  become  the  new  growth  frontier  as  the  basis  of  production, 
consumption, and technological advancement.  
The  establishment  of  these  three  bases  are  supported  by  growing  intra-regional 
trade.  In  this  regard,  we  are  faced  with  both  challenges  as  well  as  opportunities: 
“Will Indonesia reap the enormous potential benefit from Asia by becoming a part of 
the  regional  production  chain,  or  will  Indonesia  stand  still  and  continue  as  a 
resource-based economy and only become the market of other countries?”  
To become an acknowledged player in the Asian production chain, we must become 
an  innovation-driven  economy.  For  that  matter,  the  strengthening  of  scientific  and 
technological  infrastructure  as  well  as  human  capital  to  support  technological 
readiness  and  increase  private  innovation  capacity  are  considered  as  strategical 
aspects which must simultaneously be the focus of our attention.  
If we are able to bring our economy to become more efficient and innovative, based 
on  technology  and  human  capital,  it  is  without  a  doubt  that  Indonesia  in  time  will 
become  an  excellent  production  hub  in  Asia.  That  is  where  we  must  be  heading, 
with the spirit, commitment, and courage for self-reform. Measures of reforms which 
we  must  take  to  reach  this  destination  will  equip  our  economy  with  extra  energy, 
independence, and flexibility to face the challenges of globalization.  
Distinguished ladies and gentlemen,  
88.  
In our effort to develop an efficient and innovative economy with sustainable growth, 
we must not neglect the need for equal access of opportunities for every layer of the 
society (inclusiveness). Based on such economic and objective rationale, inclusive 
growth is more sustainable and optimal for the economy.  
However,  the  transition  of  our  society  into  a  middle  class  category  has  some 
transitional impact to economic gap. Looking deeper into the problem, the transition 
will result in human capital productivity gap in our domestic economy.  
The two pillars of productivity will make total economic productivity less optimal and 
the  economy  will  lose  its  economic  thrust.  Ceteris  paribus,  such  economy  will  be 
more prone to external as well as internal shocks, and this condition will negatively 
affect our ability to preserve macroeconomic and financial stability. This will in turn 
put our effort to eradicate poverty and reach better income distribution at risk.  
For that matter, an inclusive growth is not just merely an empty term. In reality, more 
than  half  Indonesian  population  still  do  not  have  access  to  the  formal  financial 
channel (2010 World Bank Survey).  
This  fact  also  shows  that  the  market  is  still  largely  open  to  banking  industry. 
Furthermore, data shows that the ratio of credit to GDP is still around 31%. It is with 
respect  to  this  inclusive  growth  that  Bank  Indonesia  views  the  significance  of 
“inclusive financial program.”  
Distinguished ladies and gentlemen,  
93.  
Based  on  this  line  of  thinking,  it  is  in  my  view  that  the  future  economic  policy 
direction  is  to  answer  to  the  challenge  of  achieving  a  sustainable  and  inclusive 
growth of the Indonesian economy.  
If  we  are  able  to  address  the  number  of  structural  impediments  which  have  been 
previously identified, we can hope that the economy will be able to grow on a higher 
path, and at the same time benefits can be inclusively reaped by every layer of the 
society.  
Taking into consideration that macroeconomic management going forward will still 
be exposed to global risk and the wide complexity of the domestic problems, Bank 
89.  
90.  
91.  
92.  
94.  
95.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
96.  
97.  
Indonesia will continue to calibrate a policy mix composed of interest rate, exchange 
rate, and macroprudential aspects.  
To  support  exchange  rate,  market  interest  rate,  and  overall  financial  stability,  the 
monetary policy implementation will continue to be enhanced with a more integrated 
operational  framework,  with  the  emphasis  in  using  government  securities  in 
monetary operation. In my view, however, this form of stability should not encourage 
moral hazard behaviour of economic players and the market in general which may 
expect  the  authority  to  constantly  intervene  to  maintain  stability  at  all  costs.  Such 
form  of  stability  should  in  fact  give  room  for  the  process  of  financial  market 
deepening.  
A  deep  financial  sector  will  extremely  help  in  making  effective  monetary  policy 
transmission,  providing  a  more  variety  of  instruments  for  risk  mitigation  (hedging) 
and facilitating effective and efficient economic financing, including those provided 
by our banking industry.  
Distinguished ladies and gentlemen,  
98.  
99.  
100.  
In  my  view,  our  banking  industry  must  continue  to  be  encouraged  to  improve 
resilience, efficiency and its role in intermediation. Broadening of the public’s access 
to an affordable banking service through the financial inclusive program is included 
as part of strengthening intermediation function.  
Going  forward,  the  financial  inclusion  program  must  be  implemented  through  the 
supply  and  the  demand  sides.  From  the  supply  side,  broadening  of  an  affordable 
banking services access, and making available banking products meeting the need 
of the lower income society must be carried out.  
In this regard, going forward, we plan to broaden banking service access by way of 
a  non-conventional  measure 
technology, 
telecommunication,  and  agent  cooperation  or  familiarly  known  as  branchless 
banking or mobile payment. Through this strategy, banking services will reach every 
layer of the society without having to physically present the bank office.  
the  use  of 
information 
through 
Distinguished ladies and gentlemen,  
101.  
In  this  regard,  branchless  banking  must  be  implemented  in  phase  with  due 
consideration on potential risks that may occur, including its impact to the financial 
stability. On that account, in early 2013 Bank Indonesia will issue guidelines on the 
implementation of branchless banking which  will be followed by the issuance of a 
number of supporting regulations.  
102.   Recognizing the increasing strength of the Indonesian middle class, Bank Indonesia 
also  views  the  need  to  optimize  such  new  strengths  through  the  acceleration  of 
generating  new  business  ventures.  For  that,  Bank  Indonesia  will  continue  its 
cooperation with universities and the private sector by preparing a business training 
program for college students and former Indonesian workers abroad.  
104.  
103.   Currently  being  prepared  is  a  start-up  loan  for  business  start-ups.  This  skim  will 
involve technical agencies and other agents in  coaching, consulting, guaranteeing 
and providing eligible credit collateral, such as land certification.  
The major obstacles of the community’s lower economic level in accessing credits 
for productive purposes are not only the lack of eligible credit collateral availability 
but also the high levels of lending rate for the micro segment. As such, I view that 
the fruits of national banking efficiency improvements should be felt by those in the 
lower economic level. Having said that, we will promote healthy competition in the 
micro  segment  through,  among  others,  the  publication  of  Micro  Credit  Lending 
Rates.  
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Distinguished ladies and gentlemen,  
105.  
106.  
Aside  supporting  the  development  of  inclusive  finance,  the  policy  direction  for  the 
payment system of the future will focus on several very specific dimensions.  
First, to increase the community’s trust in using payment system instruments, we will 
continue to improve the security of features in using non-cash payment instruments 
and support ways to make non-cash transactions more affordable and the services 
safe, prompt, and widely accepted.  
107. Second, to increase the efficiency and convenience of payment system users, we will 
promote  interoperability  between  payment  systems.  This  will  be  achieved  through 
the implementation of standards for the payment instrument or infrastructure.  
Third, we will strengthen the legal framework, both for the providers and the users of 
payment  system.  The  rapid  development  of  payment  system  supported  by 
technological development needs to be supported by more stringent laws in the form 
of a payment system act.  
108.  
Distinguished ladies and gentlemen,  
109.  
To  conclude  my  speech  tonight,  please  allow  me  to  present  economic  outlook  of 
2013. As we view the prospects ahead, we will not be able to release ourselves from 
the reality that the Indonesian economy is situated within a very challenging global 
environment.  
110.   However, the width and depth of such global atmosphere does not mean that our 
economy’s  outlook  is  devoid  of  any  optimism. We  should  remain  optimistic  as  we 
have a stable economy, proven and acknowledged, a domestic demand based on 
growing middle class, and adequate policy spaces to absorb global risks.  
Such  three  basis  of  economic  strength  will  continue  to  support  the  growth  of 
confidence and as such can serve as a driving force in the continuation of physical 
and  human  capital  accumulation  process.  Several  latest  indicators  show  the 
continuous accumulation of capital for the development of production capacity from 
both domestic and abroad.  
111.  
112.   With  such  prognosis  and  also  the  support  of  increasing  government  capital 
expenditure, we see the 2012 growth of investment around 10.7%, and we expect 
that it will continue to increase to 11.6%–12% in 2013.  
113.   With  increasing  investment,  in  due  time,  purchasing  power  will  be  sustained,  thus 
household consumption growth in 2013 can be maintained at 5.0%–5.4%.  
The  economic  expansion  also  gains  impetus  from  export  performance  which  is 
estimated to improve in line with improved commodity price. For 2013, total exports 
are estimated to grow by 5.4%–5.8%.  
114.  
116.  
115.   With solid growth centres, we believe that the national economy’s momentum can 
still  be  maintained  and  even  be  enhanced.  As  such,  we  are  optimistic  that  the 
national economy in 2013 will grow by 6.3%–6.7%.  
I firmly believe that growth will reach the upper end of the range if structural issues 
mentioned earlier can be addressed.  
Even  though  growth  will  continue  to  be  on  the  upside,  the  2013  inflation  is 
forecasted 
target  range  of 
4.5 ± 1 percent.  
to  remain  under  control  within 
the  expected 
117.  
Distinguished ladies and gentlemen,  
118.  
This is, in effect, what I have to share with you tonight. Looking at the challenges we 
are  facing,  I  think  we  agree  that  the  years  to  come  will  be  no  easier  than  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
episodes that have passed. However, we should embrace an optimistic attitude. The 
potential and opportunities within our nation remains strong and vast, and it is our 
duties to unlock them.  
119.   We trust that God Almighty will always be with us and give His blessings and ease 
our steps towards a better future. Thank you.  
Wassalamu’alaikum Wr. Wb. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
