Eddie Yue: Evolution of financial consumer protection and education in 
Asia 
Speech by Mr Eddie Yue, Deputy Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at 
the HKMA-SFC-OECD Asian Seminar, Hong Kong, 13 December 2012. 
 André (Laboul),1 Ashley (Alder),2 distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, 
Good morning. It’s my pleasure to be among such distinguished company, and for such an 
important topic. On behalf of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority (HKMA), thank you all for 
joining us and I look forward to the discussion here today. 
In discussing consumer education and protection, the focus must of course be on benefiting 
the consumer. That said, there is more than an element of enlightened self-interest for the 
rest of us. For the pathway to profit does not divert around the consumer interest. It runs right 
through it. Indeed, the best companies – those with long-term sustainable models of growth – 
operate on the basis of a natural synergy between what is good for customers and good for 
business. 
This is an old lesson – but it’s one we are relearning in the aftermath of the global financial 
crisis.  One  of  the  gripping  aftershocks  from  the  crisis  has  been  the  mis-selling  complaints 
against  some  financial  institutions.  Such  cases  are,  of  course,  deeply  damaging  to  those 
individual  institutions.  Yet  they  also  impact  on  us  all.  When  the  dust  settles  after  each 
successive  scandal,  the  lasting  impression  threatens  the  reputation  not  just  of  individual 
firms,  but  of  whole  sectors.  In  the  case  of  Hong  Kong,  where  the  financial  industry  is  so 
critical to the economy, this obviously carries even more importance. 
Now, as a survey has found, we are fortunate in Hong Kong to have one of the highest levels 
of consumer trust in banks and financial services compared to other places.3 But we’ve seen 
in the financial crisis how fragile trust can be. So we need to guard against complacency, and 
work towards ensuring that Hong Kong remains a beacon to the rest of the global financial 
services industry. Whether one is a financial institution, a financial regulator or a consumer, 
this is in all our interests. 
So,  how  do  we  get  there?  In  short,  my  argument  this  morning  is  that  we  will  do  so  by 
recognising the  interdependence  of these three groups.  Each  has  a role  to  play,  but  each 
also needs the help of the others. And, I would argue, at the heart of this interdependence 
lies effective consumer protection and education. I would like to discuss briefly each group in 
turn – first, the role of financial institutions.  
“The role of financial institutions” 
As I alluded to just now, financial-services institutions have a direct interest in upholding the 
reputation  of  the  industry  as  a  whole.  I  believe  success  in this regard  rests  on  two  pillars. 
First, nurturing a culture of honesty among practitioners. Second, an absolute commitment to 
                                                
1  Mr André Laboul, Head of the Financial Affairs Division, OECD and Chairman of the International Network on 
Financial Education. 
2  Mr Ashley Alder, Chief Executive Officer, Securities and Futures Commission. 
3  See  Edelman  Trust  Barometer  2012,  Hong  Kong  (HK  trust  in  banks  74%  and  financial  services  62% 
respectively.  See  slides  13  and  15). 
to  a  global  average  of  47%  and  45%, 
compared 
(http://www.slideshare.net/DavidRBrain/2012-edelman-trust-barometer-hong-kong-deck-
1232012checkedfinal#btnNext) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
prioritise above all the customer, not profit maximisation. Or, combining both pillars, we could 
summarise all that into a single, rather old-fashioned word: integrity. 
In theory, that’s a standard to which we are all happy to sign on to. And yet, the temptation to 
put  product  before  service,  profit  before  client,  is  very  real.  I  am  sure  we  have  all  seen 
sufficient examples in different places.  
I  believe  there  are  a  number  of  actions financial  institutions  can  and  should  take to guard 
against  such  dangerous  practices.  I  will  mention  just  three  very  briefly.  First,  greater 
transparency and disclosure of the benefits and risks of investment products. Second, more 
responsibility  placed  on  financial  institutions  with  respect  to  assessing  the  suitability  of  a 
product for a customer given his/her risk appetite. Third, simpler procedures and freer access 
for consumer to complaint and redress mechanisms. These are all things that many financial 
institutions have embedded into their corporate culture and I encourage all others to do the 
same. 
“The role of financial regulators (the HKMA)” 
This  brings  me  to  the  second  group,  financial  regulators.  Given  my  role,  I  will  focus 
specifically on the example of the HKMA. In response to the changing landscape following 
the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers,  the  HKMA  expanded  its  efforts  to  protect  and  educate 
consumers, and this change resulted in the creation in April 2010 of our Banking Conduct 
Department. I will focus first on our work to strengthen consumer protection before going on 
to saying something about our work on consumer education. 
HKMA & consumer protection 
In terms of consumer protection, first, the HKMA has introduced new requirements on banks 
and  issued  guidelines  on  the  selling  of  investment  products.  These  include  (a)  requiring 
audio-recording  the  customer  risk  profile  assessment  and  sales  process  to  provide  audit 
trails for reviews by banks and the regulators; (b) implementing a pre-investment cooling-off 
period in the sale of unlisted structured products to less sophisticated customers (such as the 
elderly or first-time buyer); and (c) requiring banks to carry out continuous reviews of product 
risk and inform investors of any upward changes to the risk ratings of the products they have 
purchased.  These  requirements  were  in  addition  to  existing  measures  introduced  by  the 
Hong  Kong  Securities  and  Futures  Commission  (SFC)  on  the  supervision  of  securities 
companies’ selling activities. 
Second, the HKMA is active in monitoring banks’ compliance with these and other regulatory 
requirements  through  thematic  on-site  examinations.  Banks  are  expected  to  have  control 
processes  and  procedures  in  place  to  ensure  adherence  to  the  conduct  regulations.  In 
addition,  to  monitor  compliance  levels  among  banking  staff,  the  HKMA  conducts  mystery 
shopping trips.  
Third,  the  HKMA  has  strengthened  consumer  protection  by  working  with  partners.  One 
example  is  our  work  with  the  Hong  Kong  Association  of  Banks  in  carrying  out  a 
comprehensive review of credit card practices in Hong Kong, drawing on reforms undertaken 
in  the  UK  and  US.  As  a  result,  we  have  been  rolling  out  in stages  31 measures  aimed  at 
promoting fair and responsible business practices by credit card issuers, and all these will 
become effective by 2013. A second example is our partnership with the Financial Services 
and  the  Treasury  Bureau  and  the  Securities  and  Futures  Commission  to  establish  the 
Financial  Dispute  Resolution  Centre.  The  objective  is  to  help  consumers  settle  monetary 
disputes quickly by means of mediation and arbitration. The Centre came into operation in 
June this year.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The HKMA & consumer education 
On consumer education the HKMA has also been very active. From time to time, we publish 
articles,  called  “insight  articles”,  to  increase  consumers’  awareness  of  their  rights  and 
obligations in relation to particular consumer products like accumulators, Octopus cards and 
instalment  payment  plans.  We  also  highlight  key  features  and  risks  of  certain  investment 
products, and remind consumers not to invest if they do not understand a product. We have 
launched earlier this week a “Consumer Corner” on the HKMA website to provide important 
information on local banking consumer issues, including a set of “frequently asked questions” 
based on public enquiries and topical issues. 
As with protection, so with education, we are also working with our partners. Among these 
initiatives,  we  are  joining  with  the  Consumer  Council  in  their  consumer  awareness 
campaigns.  Another  very  important  initiative  I’d  like  to  highlight,  is  our  work  with  the 
Securities  and  Futures  Commission  to  establish  an  Investor  Education  Centre  (IEC).  The 
HKMA  will  supplement  this  with  additional  consumer  education  independent  of  the  IEC, 
focusing  on  areas  such  as  banking  products  and  services,  as  well  as  other  investment 
products that may not be covered by the IEC. 
 “The role of the consumer” 
So, as well as good practice among financial institutions, financial authorities also have an 
important role to play in enhancing consumer protection and education. But focusing on just 
those  two  groups  leaves  out  possibly  the  most  important  group  of  all  –  the  consumers 
themselves, to whom I will devote my remaining remarks. 
One of the things on which the global financial crisis cast a cold light was the implicit cost to 
households – and indeed to society and financial markets – of low levels of financial literacy. 
Financial  literacy  is  increasingly  recognised  as  an  important  individual  life  skill  that  people 
need to thrive in a modern economy like Hong Kong. Without it, consumers can be at risk of 
mis-buying and bank employees are themselves at a higher risk of mis-selling. 
For example, one of the hallmarks of our financial sector in this city is the universal banking 
regime that allows banks to offer basic services as well as a wide range of financial products. 
This is a great strength for the industry and highly beneficial to both banks and consumers. 
However,  we  should  also  acknowledge  that  it  can  expose  some  customers to  higher risks 
arising from investment in complex financial products. I have in mind especially consumers 
who may be less sophisticated but who may nonetheless have a high level of trust in banks. 
In  that  sense,  it  was  not  surprising  that  following  the  financial  crisis,  there  was  greater 
demand  by  consumers  and  consumer  groups  to  better  understand  the  risks  of  investment 
products  offered  by  banks. This  demand  has  been  amplified  by  a  number  of  other  trends, 
namely:  the  greater  complexity  of  financial  products;  the  rapid  pace  of  change  in  financial 
standards  and  regulations;  the  rising  number  of  high  net  worth  individuals  in  Asia-Pacific 
actively  looking  for  investment  opportunities;  and  the  recognition  that  regulation  alone  is 
insufficient to protect consumers.  
Financial  education  has  thus  become  an  important  complement  to  market  conduct  and 
prudential  regulation.  Raising  the  financial  competencies  of  individuals  has  become  a 
long-term  policy  priority  for  the  financial  industry.  This  is  particularly  crucial  in  Hong  Kong 
where,  as  you  know,  we  have  a  regulatory  framework  based  on  disclosure  and 
complementary customer suitability assessments. 
In that context, it is especially important that consumers understand a product’s features and 
risks thoroughly when considering their investments. They have to decide whether or not an 
investment suits their objectives, and whether they have the ability to assume the associated 
risks. Thus, a key component of any efforts to enhancing financial education and protection 
must be improving individuals’ ability to ask the right questions and increase their awareness 
that ultimately they are responsible for their investment decisions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
“Conclusion” 
So,  we’ve  discussed  how  important  consumer  protection  and  education  are.  And  we’ve 
covered  the  roles  of  each  of  the  three  groups  in  bringing  about  better  protection  and 
education. Let me now try to bring these strands all together. 
Something  that  became  very  clear  in  the  wake  of  the  financial  crisis  was  that  apparently 
low-probability  risks  at  the  margin  of  an  industry  can  have  profound  impacts  –  and  that  a 
rules-based system alone is inadequate in guarding against them. After the crisis, there has 
been increasing recognition that each of us in fact operates in a financial eco-system – in 
some respects, a fragile system – in which the well-being of the whole rests on the health 
and actions of each part. 
Through suasion and regulation, financial regulators like the HKMA can do a lot to support 
consumers. But we will always be one step remote from the point of transaction. That’s why 
we  look  to  banks  and  other  financial  institutions  not  just  to  follow  our  rules,  but  to  show 
leadership by really engaging in this area. Institutions can do a lot, individually and together, 
to  self-  and  peer-regulate  and,  above  all,  ensure  integrity  throughout  their  organisations, 
particularly at the consumer-facing levels. 
In the end, though, in this financial eco-system as with any other, so much depends on its 
beating heart – the consumer. That’s why I believe one of the best things we in this room can 
do is to bend our efforts towards greater financial literacy. Through initiatives to better inform 
and empower consumers, they can be the judge of their own best interests. That way, the 
benefits accrue not only to individual consumers, but to the sector and society more widely. 
Education requires long term commitment and effort from us all, but the prize is also great. 
Ladies and gentlemen, over the next day or so, we have the opportunity to make a real and 
substantial contribution to this agenda. For that reason, I am most grateful to you for joining 
us, and I very much look forward to our discussion and exchange of views. Together, I am 
sure we can learn and develop further many good measures. Measures that will not only help 
consumers,  but  will  also  improve  the  health  and  strength  of  the  financial  sector  and  our 
economies more widely. 
Thank you.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
