Andreas Dombret: As goes Ireland, so goes Europe? 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the Institute of International and European Affairs, Dublin, 25 October 2012. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Many thanks for inviting me to speak to you. I am delighted to have the opportunity to be with 
you here in Dublin today. 
One  of  the  issues  which  the  Institute  of  International  and  European  Affairs  features  on  its 
website is “The Future of Europe”. And, indeed, the future of Europe is at the centre of the 
current public debate. 
After  nearly  ten  very  successful  years,  the  European  Monetary  Union  has  encountered  a 
serious crisis. Over the past few months, we have seen some progress in this regard: a fiscal 
compact has been agreed, the ESM has come to life, there is preliminary agreement on a 
European Single Supervisory Mechanism, and – most importantly – more member states of 
the euro area have embarked on broader economic reforms. But the crisis is still not over, 
and progress is still too often painfully slow. 
When talking about the euro, the successes, the setbacks and the way forward, Ireland plays 
an important role. As an open and flexible economy with a highly skilled work force, Ireland 
has  seized  the  opportunities  presented  by  global  and  especially  by  European  economic 
integration. 
When Ireland joined the EU in 1973, it was one of the poorer member states. Since then, 
your real per capita income has increased more than twofold and is today among the highest 
in the euro area. Ireland has benefited from several factors: low barriers in terms of language 
and culture vis à vis the US and the UK have certainly helped, but Ireland also has done a lot 
to  raise  its  growth  potential  by  improving  the  skills  of  its  labour  force,  lowering  corporate 
taxes and maintaining flexible labour and product markets. As a result, you attracted a lot of 
Foreign Direct Investment and became a remarkably open economy. 
As we all know, this remarkable success story has suffered a number of setbacks. In the light 
of the crisis, some economic developments have proved unsustainable. The Irish real estate 
boom – as so many others – provided a temporary boost at the time, but raised private debt 
to worrying levels – to 215 % of GDP in 2007 – and diverted capital away from potentially 
more productive uses. Exploding unit labour costs have eroded the competitiveness of the 
Irish economy, undermining the very core of its growth model so far. 
But even though the last few years have been challenging, many signs point to a silver lining. 
There has been significant progress in reforms with the results to show for it: on-track deficit 
reduction, falling unit labour costs, a positive current account and last but not least a return to 
positive growth. To sum it up: I am very much confident with regard to the Irish case. 
And I am more and more convinced that we are witnessing a resurgence that is instructive 
for  the  euro  area  as  a  whole.  The  problems  experienced  by  Ireland  are  by  no  means 
confined to the “Green Island”, but are typical of what went wrong in the run-up to the crisis. 
Thus, the reforms undertaken in Ireland hold valuable lessons for the wider monetary union. 
But what exactly did go wrong at the onset of EMU? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The origins of the crisis 
2. 
For  many  euro-area  member  states,  the  introduction  of  the  euro  ushered  in  a  new  era  of 
abundant capital. In the case of Ireland, for instance, capital inflows amounted to about two 
trillion  euro  between  1999  and  2008.  In  principle,  this  is  exactly  what  standard  economic 
reasoning  predicts:  capital  was  flowing  from  capital-rich  to  capital-poor  economies,  where 
returns should be higher. Such flows complemented limited domestic saving in capital-poor 
countries and reduced their cost of capital, boosting investment and growth. 
As we all know, it did not always work that way. Overblown financial sectors channeled the 
capital flows into unproductive investments. Ireland is certainly a case in point as light-touch 
regulation and tax incentives encouraged the financial sector to balloon. Overinvestment in 
real  estate  as  well  as  in  public  and  private  consumption  failed  to  boost  productivity.  Unit 
labour costs soared, competitiveness declined, and rigid labour and product markets meant 
that this process gained additional momentum. 
When the financial crisis broke out in 2007, the vulnerabilities became apparent in Ireland. 
Growth imploded, deficits – which were often already too high before the crisis – exploded, 
and  cracks  in  the  Irish  banking  system  started  to  show.  As  an  aside,  you  may  recall  that 
these  cracks  extended  right  into  Germany,  where  Irish  subsidiaries  or  special  investment 
vehicles got their German parent companies into trouble. Not surprisingly, investor sentiment 
began  to  shift,  and  also  interest  rates  in  your  country  started  to  rise  sharply,  triggering  a 
major crisis that is still far from being resolved. 
How  could  it  all  go  so  wrong?  Key  to  understanding  the  crisis  is  the  euro  area’s  unique 
institutional  set-up,  a  set-up  that  easily  leads  to  simple,  but  faulty  analogies  with  other 
economies. 
As you are well aware the euro area pairs a common monetary policy with 17 national fiscal 
policies. Firstly, this combination gives rise to a deficit bias, as it allows costs to be shifted 
partially on to others. If a worsening fiscal position in one country has repercussions for our 
monetary union as a whole, others may step in and bail out. And, secondly, central banks’ 
balance sheets can serve as a conduit for shifting risks among national taxpayers, even if 
there are no explicit fiscal transfers. 
The founding fathers of the euro foresaw this risk. Precautions were taken in the form of the 
prohibition  of  monetary  financing  of  government  deficits,  price  stability  as  the  primary 
objective, the no-bail-out clause and the Stability and Growth Pact that was to give teeth to 
the  rules  on  sound  public finances  enshrined  in the  Maastricht Treaty.  However,  the fiscal 
rules  were  breached  numerous  times,  not  least  by  Germany  and  France.  In  addition, 
investors  made  hardly  any  distinction  between  the  bonds  of  individual  member  states  –  I 
leave it to you to decide whether this was because they neglected the growing differences in 
the economic fundamentals or because they never really believed that the no-bail-out clause 
would hold once the going got tough. 
While  the  provisions  against  unstable  fiscal  positions  proved  to  be  insufficient,  the 
institutional  framework  took  no  account  of  other  macroeconomic  imbalances.  Risks 
stemming  from  divergences  in  competitiveness  or  exaggerations  in  national  real  estate 
sectors  were  not  considered  in  the  design  of  the  European  Monetary  Union.  Hence,  even 
countries  that  had  impressive  fiscal  data  before  the  crisis  ran  into  deep  trouble  once  the 
enormous implicit liabilities in their banking sectors became apparent. 
Ireland, unfortunately, was one of those countries. Assessing the Irish economy in 2007 the 
IMF – which I quote for convenience, not to blame it – wrote: “Fiscal policy has been prudent, 
with a medium-term fiscal objective of close to balance or surplus, in line with Fund advice. In 
the  past  couple  [of]  years,  windfall  property-related  revenues  were  saved  and  the  fiscal 
stance was not procyclical, in line with Fund advice”. However, once the risks in the financial 
sector materialised and the government had to step in, Irelands fiscal position deteriorated 
very quickly. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The way forward 
3. 
To  overcome  the  current  crisis,  and  to  prevent  future  crises,  we  have  to  address  these 
problems I have just described. And this has to happen both nationally and at the European 
level. 
So far, a number of steps have been taken. At the beginning of my speech I mentioned the 
ESM, to which I might add the fiscal compact and the new excessive imbalance procedure 
that has been established to prevent macroeconomic developments from diverging too much 
in the future. Nevertheless, the painful task of correcting past mistakes lies mainly with the 
member states. In this context I wish to point to Ireland as a good example of what has to be 
done  and  what  can  be  achieved.  In  this  regard  I  view  Ireland  as  a  “role  model  of  the 
periphery”. 
I have already mentioned the decline in competitiveness that occurred prior to the crisis. In 
this respect Ireland certainly had a steep mountain to climb. In 2008, Irish unit labour costs, 
as an indicator of competitiveness, were more than 40% higher than at the launch of EMU. 
Still, not least thanks to flexible labour markets, the necessary adjustment has been swifter in 
Ireland than in other member states. 
There was a similar experience with the bubble in the Irish real estate market. Your problems 
became apparent earlier than in other member states, with property prices starting to fall in 
the  last  quarter  of  2007.  Hence,  Ireland  responded  earlier  than  other  countries,  and  in  a 
determined  manner,  to  a  shock  which,  as  of  today,  has  cut  property  prices  in  half.  As  a 
result, the restructuring of the banking sector is more advanced and costs for bank loans to 
firms are now lower than in countries such as Italy or Spain. This highlights the fact that it is 
sometimes better to take a big bath rather than just a shower. And it is better to take it as 
soon as possible because the water typically gets colder as time passes by. 
But the situation in your country also highlights something else: the dangerous link between 
banks  and  sovereigns.  Looking  to  the  future,  this  link  has  to  be  broken,  or  at  least  to  be 
weakened considerably, to prevent history from repeating itself. 
Let me first step back and take a look at why the close link between banks and sovereigns 
has  proven  to  be  so  problematic  and  so  dangerous  in  this  crisis.  If  many  banks  run  into 
trouble  at  the  same  time,  possibly  on  account  of  a  large  asset  bubble  bursting,  financial 
stability as a whole is threatened. The government then often has no option but to step in if it 
wants  to  prevent  a  meltdown  of  the  real  economy.  But  such  a  rescue  can  place  a  huge 
burden  on  government  finances  –  and  no  country  knows  that  better  than  Ireland,  where 
support for  the financial  sector  was  a  major factor  why  the  debt  ratio  soared from  25% of 
GDP in 2007 to 108% in 2011. Conversely, weak government finances can destabilise banks 
–  directly  through  their  exposure  to  sovereign  bonds,  and,  indirectly,  through  worsening 
macroeconomic conditions. That is what we are also witnessing at this very moment. 
Thus, breaking the link between banks and sovereigns is vital for making the euro area more 
stable. A banking union can very well be a major step in that direction – but by harnessing 
the  disciplinary  forces  of  the  market,  not  by  doing  away  with  them.  Core  elements  of  a 
banking  union  therefore  have  to  be:  First,  a  comprehensive  bail-in  of  bank  creditors,  and 
second, an appropriate risk-weighting of sovereign bonds. 
In order to minimise the risk that bank rescues pose to government finances, creditors have 
to be the first in line when it comes to bearing banks’ losses. Implicit guarantees have to be 
removed  as  taxpayers’  money  can  only  be  the  last  resort.  By  the  same  token,  sovereign 
bonds  need  to  be  risk-weighted  appropriately  when  it  comes  to  the  adequacy  of  capital 
buffers. Riskier bonds have to become more expensive in terms of the amount of equity that 
they tie down, as is already the case for non-sovereign bonds. This serves two purposes: On 
the one hand, surcharges of this kind should translate into lower demand and, hence, into 
larger  spreads,  which  gives  a  disciplining  signal  to  the  respective  sovereign.  And,  on  the 
other hand, banks would become more resilient in the event of market turmoil. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Adequate risk-weighting of sovereign bonds helps to prevent fiscal difficulties from translating 
directly  into  financial  instability.  If  fiscal  autonomy  remains  with  national  member  states, 
which is still the status quo in the EU Treaties, this is crucial. Banks have to internalise the 
fiscal  position  of  sovereigns  in  a  similar  manner  as  they  take  into  account  the  risk  of 
corporate bonds or loans. Otherwise, the envisaged recapitalisation of banks via European 
funds could turn out to be a backdoor for mutualising sovereign solvency risks. 
I therefore believe that these two regulatory reforms – a comprehensive bail-in of creditors as 
well as an adequate risk-weighting of sovereign bonds – need to complement the envisaged 
European  supervisory  mechanism.  In  principle,  this  single  European  supervisor  can  help 
prevent future crises by enforcing the same high standards irrespective of the banks’ country 
of origin and by taking transnational interdependencies into account. 
At  the  moment,  it  looks  as  though  this  task  shall  be  carried  out  by  the  European  Central 
Bank. This is, first of all, an expression of confidence in the competence of central banks in 
general  and  in  the  ECB  in  particular.  But  conducting  monetary  policy  and  financial 
supervision  does  not  come  without  risks.  If  the  institution  responsible  for  ensuring  the 
financial  soundness  of  banks  simultaneously  influences  banks’  financing  conditions  via  its 
monetary  policy,  conflicts  of  interest  may  arise.  Besides,  the  resolution  of  banks  implies 
intervening in property rights, which requires democratic accountability. If the ECB is to be 
tasked with supervising European banks, there will have to be a strict separation of monetary 
policy  and  supervision.  Such  a  separation  will  be  difficult  from  both  a  legal  and  an 
organisational point of view. In this respect, there still are questions that need to be resolved. 
A banking union will contribute to financial stability, if its design preserves sound incentives 
for all actors involved. This holds true not only for future risks, but also for risks that have 
already  materialised.  Economically  speaking,  a  banking  union  is  basically  an  insurance 
mechanism. And, as with any insurance, only future losses or damages that are unknown ex 
ante can be covered. No doubt, the banking union is an important building block for a more 
stable monetary union. But, as such, it is meant to mitigate future risks and not to cover past 
sins. 
In this context, I fully understand that Ireland is closely following the conditions under which 
euro-area member states will provide financial assistance to Spain for the recapitalisation of 
its financial institutions. One specific point is the degree of bondholders’ participation in the 
Spanish restructuring process. The Eurogroup stated in July with respect to Ireland: “Similar 
cases will be treated equally, taking into account changed circumstances.” However, as this 
issue is currently under discussion I prefer abstaining from public comments. Instead I like to 
share my view with you on the issue of legacy assets in general. 
Legacy assets are those risks which evolved under the responsibility of national supervisors. 
From  what  I  have  already  said,  it  follows  that  these  assets  have  to  be  dealt  with  by  the 
respective  member  states.  Anything  else  would  amount  to  a fiscal  transfer.  It  may  be  that 
such  fiscal  transfers  are  desired  or  even  deemed  necessary.  But  then,  they  should  be 
conducted via national budgets and subject to approval of national parliaments, rather than 
under the guise of a banking union, which would then have to start under a heavy burden. 
And, in the event of such transfers the proper sequencing of events is the key. We should not 
end  up  in  a  world  where  risks  from  bank  balance  sheets  are  rapidly  mutualised,  while  an 
effective single supervisory mechanism would be slow in coming. 
A banking union will therefore not be a quick fix. But it can be an important milestone towards 
a more stable and prosper monetary union and hence instrumental in regaining confidence in 
the euro area. 
Ireland has already come a long way in this regard, as your successful return to the capital 
markets in July has shown. Trust has been regained because Ireland has walked the talk. 
And I am sure you agree: Any deviation from this climb when the mountaintop is already in 
sight would be both short-sighted and costly. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
More  precisely,  when  listening  to  the  discussion  on  more  leniency  for  Greece,  I  can 
understand that demanding similar adjustments to the Irish programme seem tempting at first 
glance. But as we have learned the hard way over the last years, trust is as easily lost as it is 
hard to regain. 
Ireland  has  made  enormous  progress  in  the  process  of  regaining  trust  and  confidence. 
Important financial market indicators are an expression of this fact. CDS premia for the Irish 
sovereign  have  fallen  continuously  in  2012.  In  the  meantime  Irish  CDS  premia  are  below 
those of Spain and even Italy. The same development can be observed for the spread over 
German  bunds.  All  of  these  developments  are  the  result  of  “leading  by  example”  with 
structural reforms. Hence, I see no reason for Irish CDS changing the course, and I doubt 
that this would truly be in Ireland’s best interest. I suggest not to jeopardise what has been 
achieved so far. 
Conclusion 
4. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
When we talk about Europe, Ireland is such an interesting example for a number of reasons. 
First, it highlights the benefits of a unified Europe which still leaves its member states enough 
room to establish their own model of success – Ireland has certainly seized that opportunity. 
But the Irish experience at the same time also illustrates some of the things that have gone 
wrong in Europe over the past decade, and I have mentioned many of them in my speech. 
Nevertheless,  and  even  more  importantly,  the  Irish  experience  holds  valuable  lessons  on 
how  to  overcome  the  current  crisis.  Of  course,  Ireland  has  not  yet  overcome  all  of  its 
problems  –  every  country  is  different  and  challenges  are  never  exactly  the  same.  But  I 
believe  we  all  can  learn  a  great  deal  from  the  Irish  way  of  handling  the  crisis:  As  goes 
Ireland,  so  goes  Europe.  Let  me  conclude  my  speech  with  the  single  most  important  and 
most encouraging lesson we can draw from the Irish experience: “Yes, it can be done”. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
