Glenn Stevens: Reserve Bank of Australia reviews Note Printing 
Australia and Securency 
Opening statement by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the 
House of Representatives Standing Committee on Economics, Canberra, 8 October 2012. 
 Madam Chair 
Members of the Committee  
Thank you for the opportunity to meet with you today. This is an occasion on which we can 
convey a good deal of information and answer questions.  
In line with the commitment I made to the Committee in August, we have provided a folder of 
documents  which  shows  the  process  that  the  Board  of  Note  Printing  Australia  and  the 
Reserve  Bank  conducted  in  2007  when  concerns  were  raised  inside  NPA  regarding  that 
company’s use of sales agents in some foreign jurisdictions.  
As  the  Committee  knows,  criminal  prosecutions  have  been  launched  about  these  matters 
and the legal processes have some time to run. It is very important that the Reserve Bank 
does  not  say  or  do  anything  which  would  improperly  impinge  on  any  legal  process,  most 
particularly not in a public forum. There are accordingly documents which, I am advised, we 
should not table at this time. Others have had to be redacted. A number of the individuals 
accused have expressed concerns regarding the possibility of publication of this material and 
the  Bank  has  decided  we  should  not  publish  it.  But  there  is  a  list  of  documents  that  are 
relevant. If at some stage the constraints are able to be lessened, then the Committee will 
know what documents may be of interest.  
We  have  also  provided  a  covering  memorandum  which  does  several  things.  First,  it 
provides some background to two companies:  
• 
• 
This  history  dates  back  to  their  respective  establishments  in  the  1990s.  For  Committee 
members  or  members  of  the  public  who  want  some  general  understanding  of  who  these 
companies are and what they do, this may be helpful.  
Second, the memorandum goes through in detail the sequence of events that began with the 
Reserve Bank Board asking about the use of foreign sales agents by both the companies in 
April 2006.  
Thirdly, it gives an account of the way Securency, NPA and the Reserve Bank behaved after 
the allegations, initially only about Securency, were aired in the media in May 2009.  
The memorandum shows how the various documents we have identified, many of which we 
have provided, fit into the chronology. I would like to go through that now.  
Note Printing Australia (NPA), which prints banknotes; and  
Securency, which produces polymer substrate.  
Request to see policies on the use of agents in 2006  
The Reserve Bank Board discussed the issue of the use of agents by the two companies at 
its meeting in April 2006. As a result of that discussion, the two companies were asked to 
provide  the  Reserve  Bank  Board  with  their  policies  on  agents.  Mr  Thompson,  at  that  time 
Chairman of the Boards of both NPA and Securency, responded to this request in July 2006, 
and  provided 
for  both  companies.  This 
correspondence  noted  that  the  companies  had  recently  reviewed  and  strengthened  their 
the  policies  and  associated  documents 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 policies.  While  each  company  had  its  own  policies  and  procedures,  both  articulated  the 
following key elements:  
• 
the  respective  boards  reaffirmed  the  companies’  policies  against  any  direct  or 
indirect  involvement  in  corrupt,  unethical  or  otherwise  questionable  practices,  and 
asked management to ensure that all agents formally acknowledge and commit to 
this policy. The agency agreements provided for termination when this commitment 
was breached;  
a process was established to inform the respective boards about the appointment of 
agents, the applicable commission rates and payments made; and  
a process of annual review of these policies was established.  
• 
The  NPA  Board  sought  updates  on  implementation  of  its  revised  policies  at  the 
February 2007 NPA Board meeting. On hearing management’s responses, the NPA Board 
requested that faster progress be made and that an Information Paper on the state of play 
with  agents  be  prepared  for  the  May 2007  meeting.  The  RBA,  through  the  Assistant 
Governor (Corporate Services) and director of NPA, Mr Campbell, also sought or received 
updates on the implementation of the policies from the NPA Manager of Corporate Service. 
in November 2006 and March 2007. No probity concerns were raised in response to these 
requests for updates.  
implementing 
the  course  of 
the  revised  agent  policies  at  NPA, 
The May 2007 NPA Board Paper, the audit at NPA and the memo from the NPA 
manager  
During 
in  about 
mid April 2007,  the  NPA  Manager  raised  concerns  with  Mr  Campbell  (Assistant  Governor 
(Corporate Services) of the Reserve Bank, and director of NPA) about comments that had 
apparently  been  made  by  two  of  NPA’s  agents  and  about  the  conduct  of  certain 
NPA management.  Mr  Campbell  encouraged  the  NPA  Manager  to  seek  answers  to  the 
queries he raised and to include his concerns in the May 2007 NPA Board paper on agents 
which had been requested by the NPA Board.  
The  paper,  authored  by  the  NPA  Manager  (as  Company  Secretary)  and  the  CEO,  was 
presented at the 16 May 2007 NPA Board meeting. It noted that two of three agents had yet 
to sign on to the new arrangements. The paper raised issues as to whether the management 
of NPA’s agents was occurring in accordance with the strengthened policies put in place in 
2006. It expressed the concerns about the two agents, partly based on things that they had 
apparently  said  to  the  NPA  Manager.  In  one  case  the  agent  had  replied  to  questions  in 
writing  denying  any  improper  conduct.  In  the  other  case  a  verbal  explanation  had  been 
offered but no written response. There were some other irregularities noted.  
The paper’s recommendation was simply that “Directors note this paper”. The NPA Board in 
fact expressed deep concern as to the management of NPA’s agency agreements. The NPA 
Board at that May 2007 decided, among other things, to:  
• 
• 
After the NPA Board meeting Mr Campbell advised the Governor and the Deputy Governor 
of  the  NPA  Board’s  decisions.  After  discussion they  formed  the  view  that  NPA’s  response 
could be strengthened if, rather than simply a review by NPA management being conducted, 
the  Reserve  Bank’s  Audit  Department  were  asked  to  carry  out  an  audit  of  NPA’s  use  of 
agents. This was conveyed to Mr Thompson, who agreed and made a request to the Head of 
the  Audit  Department.  The  Reserve  Bank  Board  was  advised  at  its  5 June  meeting  about 
this.  
terminate the contracts of two agents; and  
ask that a review of all agent files be undertaken by management.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The draft audit report of NPA agents was received by the Chairman of NPA, Mr Thompson, 
on 5 June 2007. It was also received by Mr Battellino in his capacity as Chair of the Reserve 
Bank  Audit  Committee,  which  served  as  the  Audit  Committee  of  NPA.  The  draft  report 
contained  findings  of  poor  business  practice  and  controls  and  noted  that  the  behaviour  of 
some agents should have raised suspicions by NPA staff and management. Based on these 
findings, the draft report made a number of recommendations. Two key ones were that:  
• 
• 
the use of agents should be limited to the extent possible; and  
NPA  staff  should  be  counselled  on  the  risks  associated  with  the  use  of  agents  in 
some countries.  
that 
the  Head  of  Audit  Department  and  suggested 
The  draft  report  also  contained  a  number  of  recommendations  for  tightening  controls  in 
relation to agents.  
Mr  Battellino  as  chair  of  the  Audit  Committee  of  NPA  discussed  the  draft  audit  report’s 
recommendations  with 
the 
recommendations should be strengthened to say that NPA should cease all use of agents, 
and that the NPA Board should conduct an urgent investigation on the role of management 
and staff in dealing with agents, to ensure that there had been compliance with Australian 
laws. These suggestions and some other proposed drafting changes were accepted.  
Mr Battellino also asked that the NPA Manager, who had played a key role in preparing the 
May 2007  NPA  Board  paper,  had  assisted  the  audit,  and  who  had  voiced  concerns  to 
Mr Campbell in April, be requested to come to the Reserve Bank’s Head Office in Sydney 
and  to  put  any  concerns  he  had  directly  to  the  Bank,  and  to  do  so  in  writing.  The 
NPA Manager  agreed  to  do  so,  but  only  on  the  condition  that  his  visit  be  kept  strictly 
confidential and having been assured that his statement would be read only by a very small 
number of people – the Deputy Governor and perhaps the Governor. (It was not provided to 
the Governor.)  
The meeting between the NPA Manager and the Deputy Governor took place on 5 June, the 
same day as the draft audit report became available. At the request of the Deputy Governor, 
on 8 June the NPA manager supplied a written statement through his lawyer to the Reserve 
Bank’s legal counsel on strict terms of confidentiality required by him. The Deputy Governor 
read  it.  The  same  document  with  some  very  minor  changes  was,  at  the  Bank’s  request, 
subsequently provided by the NPA Manager’s lawyer directly to the Freehills team who were 
engaged by the NPA Board sub-committee, also on terms of strict confidentiality and on the 
basis that it would be returned to the NPA Manager’s lawyer which it was.  
On 7 June 2007 the Reserve Bank senior management discussed the draft audit report with 
Mr Thompson. It was agreed that the draft audit report contained serious findings and that 
the NPA Board needed to meet and put in place a detailed response to the matters raised. It 
was agreed that, in line with the audit recommendations, the NPA Board should establish a 
sub-committee to investigate NPA management and staff in their dealings with agents. It was 
also  agreed  that  a  similar  audit  of  the  use  of  agents  by  Securency  should  be  requested, 
pending which payments to Securency’s agents would be suspended.  
The  final  NPA  audit  report,  which  contained  the  strengthened  recommendations,  was 
provided to the NPA Board on 8 June 2007. On that day, Mr Battellino sent to the Reserve 
Bank  Audit  Committee  a  copy  of  the  audit  report,  as  well  as  a  copy  of  a  file  note  of  the 
meeting with the NPA Chairman the prior day.  
The response to the audit  
The NPA Board met on 12 June 2007. In response to the audit, it decided to cease the use 
of  agents.  It  also  decided  to  establish  an  NPA  Board  sub-committee  to  investigate  the 
conduct of NPA management in the use of agents, to implement the recommendation in the 
audit  report.  The  sub-committee  was  to  be  chaired  by  Mr George Bennett,  former  KPMG 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
managing partner and independent member of the Reserve Bank’s Audit Committee. Other 
members  were  Mr  Warburton,  a  non-executive  director  of  NPA  and  former  Reserve  Bank 
Board  member,  and  Mr Campbell.  Since  NPA  had  no  legal  counsel,  the  Reserve  Bank’s 
General Counsel was appointed legal counsel for the NPA Board for the investigation. The 
Reserve  Bank  Board  secretary,  who  also  acted  as  secretary  of  the  Reserve  Bank  Audit 
Committee, was secretary of the sub-committee.  
A special meeting of the Reserve Bank’s Audit Committee (which, as noted above, served as 
the Audit Committee of NPA) was convened on 13 June 2007 to consider the audit report. 
The Audit Committee endorsed the decisions taken by the NPA Board. It also took the view 
that  the  terms  of  reference  of  the  sub-committee  should  be  widened  to  include  an 
assessment  of  compliance  with  appropriate  business  standards  and  conduct,  as  well  as 
Australian  law,  and  that  independent  legal  advice  should  be  sought.  Minutes  of  the  Audit 
Committee  were,  as  per  normal  practice,  provided  to  the  Reserve  Bank  Board  at  its  next 
meeting,  which  was  in  early  July.  The  Reserve  Bank  Board  was  informed  at  that  July 
meeting of the results of the audit and the steps that were being taken in response. It asked 
that the investigation be carried out quickly and that, if necessary, serious disciplinary action 
be taken. The Reserve Bank Board was also informed that a similar audit at Securency had 
been commissioned.  
The  NPA  Board  sub-committee  decided  to  engage  Freehills  to  carry  out  an  independent 
investigation into the question of whether Australian law had been breached and into NPA’s 
business  standards.  The  sub-committee  had  an  initial  meeting  with  the  Freehills  team  on 
18 June  2007  and  subsequent  meetings  on  16 July,  25 July  and  10 August 2007.  The 
Freehills team had access to documents, including the audit report and the NPA  Manager 
memo, and a substantial volume of emails held at NPA, including materials that the auditors 
had  not  reviewed.  It  also  interviewed  several  NPA  managers  including  the  NPA  Manager 
who had been invited to prepare the memo, the CEO and others.  
Mr Bennett provided an update on progress of the NPA Board sub-committee’s work to the 
Reserve Bank Audit Committee at its 30 July meeting.  
The  Freehills  team  provided  their  final  report  to  the  NPA  Board  sub-committee  on 
10 August 2007. The sub-committee considered the report. On 13 August the sub-committee 
Chair,  Mr  Bennett,  provided  the  final  report  to  the  Chairman  of  the  NPA  Board, 
Mr Thompson, together with a cover note. Mr Bennett noted that the inquiry had not found 
evidence of a breach of Australian law, but had found deficiencies of varying seriousness in 
relation  to  business  practices.  By  this  time  the  NPA  Board  had,  as  noted  above,  already 
taken the decision to cease using agents. A copy of the sub-committee’s report including the 
Freehills  report  was  also  reviewed  by  the  Deputy  Governor.  At  its  7 August 2007  meeting, 
the Reserve Bank Board was briefed about the draft findings of the Freehills report. It was 
also informed about the results of the audit at Securency, which are discussed in more detail 
below.  
Mr Bennett attended the NPA Board meeting on 16 August to brief the NPA Board on the 
sub-committee’s  findings.  On  29 August 2007,  the  NPA  Board  met  again  to  discuss  the 
report of the NPA Board sub-committee in more detail. It concluded that after an extensive 
investigation  with  assistance  from  external  lawyers,  the  sub-committee  had  identified 
instances  of  weakness  in  controls  and  documentation,  and  in  contract management,  but  it 
had found no evidence of illegality or impropriety by NPA managers and staff.  
The NPA Board resolved that proper process meant that the NPA employees who had been 
interviewed as part of the sub-committee’s investigation should be given the opportunity to 
read relevant parts of the Freehills report, and to provide comments to the NPA Board if they 
wished. Subsequently, extracts of the Freehills report were shown to those NPA employees.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The NPA Board met again on 13 September 2007 to consider the comments received from 
the employees.1  
A follow up review of NPA agent arrangements was conducted by the Reserve Bank Audit 
Department  in  late  2008.  That  report  concluded  that  NPA  had  implemented  all  the 
recommendations of the May 2007 NPA audit report.  
The 2007 audit of Securency  
Given  the  results  of  the  audit  of  NPA,  and  given  that  Securency  also  used  agents,  it  was 
considered necessary to have a similar audit at Securency. Although Securency had its own 
external  auditors,  the  senior  management  of  the  Reserve  Bank  agreed with  Mr Thompson 
that,  in  his  capacity  as  Chairman  of  Securency’s  Board,  he  would  ask  the  Reserve  Bank 
Audit  Department  to  conduct  the  audit,  due  to  their  experience  with  the  NPA  audit. 
Mr Thompson subsequently emailed the Head of Audit, asking for the audit to be undertaken, 
with the scope of the audit to be similar to that carried out at NPA. The Securency Board 
meeting  on  3–4 July  noted  this  had  occurred.  It  also  endorsed  a  decision  that  had  been 
taken by the Securency management to terminate the Malaysian agent.  
The  same  audit  team  that  had  conducted  the  audit  at  NPA  conducted  this  audit  at 
Securency. The audit began on 18 June. At the same time, Securency also suspended its 
payments to agents, pending the result of the audit.  
The  Securency  audit  report  was  issued  on  1 August  2007.  The  conclusion  was  that 
Securency  had  a  “good  and  robust  process”  in  relation  to  the  use  of  agents,  and  that 
Securency’s practices were consistent with the company’s policy. The audit made a number 
of  recommendations.  The  audit  team  supported  Securency’s  termination  of  the  Malaysian 
agency agreement, which took effect from 15 July 2007. The Securency board was informed 
at 
the  audit  recommendations  had  been 
implemented.  
The findings provided no basis to insist on the termination of Securency’s other agents. The 
suspension of payments to agents was therefore lifted.  
A copy of the Securency audit report was forwarded by Mr Battellino to the Reserve Bank 
Audit Committee and the results of the audit were also noted at the August 2007 meeting of 
the Reserve Bank Board. The following year – in December 2008 – a further audit of agent 
activity at Securency was undertaken. It reached similar conclusions as the 2007 Securency 
audit.  
its  11–12 September 2007  meeting 
that 
Post-termination payments to agents by NPA  
The NPA Board considered what payments were due to agents who had been terminated. It 
sought legal advice on the question of payments to one agent in particular. After a lengthy 
process of legal advice which concluded that the agent would likely succeed in a legal action 
claiming  an  entitlement  to  commission,  NPA  management  proposed  at  the  26  September 
2007 NPA Board meeting that a commercial settlement be sought. On the basis of the legal 
advice received, the NPA Board approved the recommendation and further discussions took 
place through the respective lawyers of NPA and the agent. A settlement was finally agreed 
between the agent and the CEO of NPA, and advised to the NPA Board in May 2008.  
                                                
1  Following the September 2007 NPA Board meeting, Mr Thompson resigned as Chairman. The Reserve Bank 
then appointed Mr Campbell as interim Chairman. A new CEO of NPA was appointed in early 2008. In April 
2008, Mr Campbell was succeeded by Dr Bob Rankin. Dr Rankin also took on the chairmanship of Securency 
after Mr Thompson resigned from that role in March 2008. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Post-termination payments to agents by Securency  
Securency sought legal advice from its external legal advisers on its obligations to the agent 
that 
its 
11–12 September 2007 meeting decided that the agent should be paid for work done prior to 
termination in terms of the contract.  
the  Securency  Board  at 
terminated.  On 
the  basis  of 
this  advice, 
it 
The 2009 allegations about Securency  
On  or  about  20  May  2009,  The  Age  sent  Securency  a  number  of  questions  regarding 
Securency’s  use  of  agents,  which  Securency  responded  to  on  22  May  2009.  On 
21 May 2009, 
the  Chairman  of  Securency,  Dr  Bob  Rankin  (who  had  succeeded 
Mr Thompson as Chair of the Board of Securency) contacted KPMG to discuss conducting a 
review of Securency’s agent policies and procedures. The Age subsequently indicated, on 
22 May 2009, that it was going to run a story on the matter.  
On  22  May  2009,  Dr  Rankin  contacted  the  Australian  Federal  Police  regarding  the  matter 
and proposed that an investigation be conducted.  
On  23  May  2009,  The  Age  published  articles  regarding  Securency’s  use  of  agents. 
Subsequent stories noted that NPA had discontinued the use of agents in 2007.  
That  same  day,  Dr  Rankin  formally  requested  that  the  AFP  conduct  an  investigation  in 
connection  with  the  allegations  made  in  the  media.  Dr  Rankin  consulted  with  the  Reserve 
Bank prior to making this request.  
At his first meeting with the AFP on 26 May 2009, Dr Rankin referred to the audit conducted 
at  NPA  in  2007  and  the  Freehills  report  and  made  them  aware  of  the documents  and  the 
AFP indicated that it would request those documents if and when they were required and that 
they  had  a  certain  process  to  follow.  Those  documents  were  subsequently  requested  in 
approximately January 2010 and provided on 1 February 2010.  
At  the  meeting  on  26  May  2009,  Dr  Rankin  also  raised  with  the  AFP  the  prospect  of 
Securency obtaining an independent review of Securency’s agent policies and procedures by 
KPMG. At the request of the AFP, Securency did not immediately retain KPMG, so as not to 
hinder the AFP’s initial access to documents.  
In early June 2009, the Reserve Bank Board was provided with an update on Securency’s 
referral to the AFP for investigation. The Reserve Bank Board was informed that the AFP’s 
investigation was in an assessment phase, during which the AFP would determine whether a 
further  investigation  was  necessary.  The  AFP  informed  Securency  around  the  end  of 
June 2009 that the AFP would proceed with a full-scale investigation and that it did not object 
to Securency engaging KPMG.  
Securency  offered  full  cooperation  to  the  AFP,  as  did  NPA  when  the  AFP  inquiry  was 
subsequently widened to include possible wrongdoing at NPA.  
In  July  2009,  with  the  AFP’s  agreement,  the  Board  of  Securency  approached  KPMG  and 
asked them to conduct an independent investigation of Securency’s policies and procedures 
regarding  agents.  The  Reserve  Bank  Board  was  subsequently  informed  at  its  July  2009 
meeting  that  Securency  had  engaged  KPMG  to  conduct  an  independent  review  of 
Securency’s agent policies and procedures.  
In  October  2009,  KPMG  informed  Dr  Rankin  that  KPMG  had  discovered  documents 
indicating  that  a  former  employee  of  Securency  had  raised  concerns  over  the  use  of 
overseas agents in early 2007. A progress report was provided by KPMG to the Securency 
Board in November 2009 which confirmed that their forensic work had discovered material 
which indicated concerns about possible corrupt payments had been raised by a Securency 
employee  with  Securency  senior  management  in  early  2007.  These  concerns  had  never 
been made known to the Securency Board or the Audit Department when it conducted either 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
the 2007 or 2008 audits. At the time the CEO and CFO of Securency were stood down and 
the  use  of  agents  suspended  pending further  inquiry. The  preliminary findings  reported  by 
KPMG also indicated that there had been failures to fully implement the procedures specified 
in Securency’s agent policies and procedures.  
KPMG’s  final  report  was  released  publicly  by  Securency  in  March  2010.  It  contained  a 
number of recommendations, which have been implemented.  
The charges 
Charges were laid against a number of individuals who were former employees of NPA and 
Securency  from  July  2011.  The  companies  were  also  charged.  Further  charges  were  laid 
against  Securency  in  August  2011,  and  NPA  in  September  2011.  The  charges  alleged 
conspiracy to offer to pay, or pay, a benefit to a foreign official not legitimately due, in a total 
of  four  foreign  jurisdictions.  Malaysia  (October  2001  –  December  2003,  both  NPA  and 
Securency),  Indonesia  (December  1999  –  February  2001,  both  NPA  and  Securency), 
Vietnam  (January  2001  –  September  2004,  Securency  only)  and  Nepal  (February  2000 
– May 2002, NPA only, with no individuals as yet charged over Nepal).  
At the time of writing, matters remain before the Courts.  
What has been done at the companies? 
While this is perhaps not really a question for today, it is worth recounting what steps have 
been taken to strengthen arrangements at both companies. I outlined in July 2011 a number 
of these.  
Of course the persons charged with wrongdoing are no longer with either company.  
The use of foreign sales agents at NPA ceased in 2007 as a result of the NPA audit at that 
time. NPA these days operates under a tighter charter to keep its focus more closely aligned 
with the Bank’s core objectives and risk tolerance. The Bank has changed the composition of 
the Board. NPA’s principal focus over the years ahead will include the production, later this 
decade, of a series of upgraded banknotes for Australia.  
In  the  case  of  Securency,  the  use  of  sales  agents  was  also  discontinued  after  the  KPMG 
report. Policies were overhauled as recommended in that report. We have also, as you know, 
announced our intention to exit our shareholding in Securency.  
Both companies are of course continuing to cooperate with the authorities in resolving the 
issues.  
The Bank has continued to give a good deal of thought to its overall governance of the two 
companies. The Reserve Bank Board has had discussion on these issues over the past year 
or so, and has benefited from advice from external experts on corporate governance. I am of 
course  happy  to  provide  any  further  information  that  the  Committee  may  wish  on  these 
matters.  
That concludes my opening remarks.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
