Stanley Fischer: Recent developments in the Israeli economy – interview 
with Richard Quest 
Interview  with  Professor  Stanley  Fischer,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Israel,  and  Mr  Richard 
Quest, at the Globes Israel Business Conference, Tel Aviv, 10 December 2012. 
 Q: On the Israeli economy – we know there is a slowdown, we know it won’t 
necessarily be as bad as some people have forecast. But you are optimistic. 
A: The economy is doing well in most respects, and we’re predicting growth for next year of 
about 3 percent, which until the European economies started declining we thought we might 
do better than that, we’re not sure about that now. The things that are going well, the inflation 
rate  is  in  the  middle  of  the  target  range,  the  exchange  rate  is  at  a  reasonable  level,  the 
balance of payments is in pretty good shape. 
Q: What’s not going well? 
A: Well, the next government is going to have a very large budgetary problem. The Treasury 
announced  last  week  that  the  deficit  this  year  will  be  4.2  percent  of  GDP.  We’re  at  full 
employment now, and that’s a large deficit to have in this situation. And it’s known that they 
have to cut about NIS 15 billion out of planned expenditure, and they possibly will also have 
to raise taxes a bit more than they have so far…that’s a huge budgetary problem. One of the 
reasons for the Prime Minister choosing to go to elections was that he couldn’t get a budget 
through the coalition – well, its going to have to be done with a new coalition. 
Q: As far as the growth rate of the Israeli economy – growth rate of 3 percent – are you 
satisfied with that level of growth, bearing in mind that it seems to be non-inflationary 
and therefore gives you room for further monetary activity? What will you do in the 
future? 
A: Well,  the  markets  think  that  the  interest  rate  is  going  to  decline  once  more  in  the  next 
twelve months. Clearly there is room if necessary to cut interest rates, we hope we won’t get 
there. We keep a watchful eye on the price of homes, whenever that starts showing signs of 
going  up  we  have  to  consider  what  further  cuts  in  the  interest  rate  will  do,  or  find  other 
macroprudential measures. 
Q: Is the weakness in the Israeli economy that you are seeing primarily because of 
external reasons, or is there something going on within Israel? 
A: A large part of the weakness undoubtedly comes from the global economy and from the 
fact  that  exports  are  not  growing  as  rapidly  as  they  have  in  previous  years.  Within  the 
economy, investment demand grew very, very rapidly in 2011 and in some part of 2012. That 
has slowed down significantly – that presumably means that people looking ahead are less 
impressed by 3 percent growth than by 5 percent growth which is what we had until 2011, for 
some time. So I think that’s a potential source of difficulty, and for the rest, I think there is a 
great  deal  of  uncertainty  –  geopolitical  uncertainty,  and  there  is  also  governmental 
uncertainty, about what the next government will do- 
Q: Let’s talk about that. What are you most worried about what the next government 
might or might not do? 
A: Well, that’s a major worry – its not going to be easy to deal with this budgetary problem, in 
light of the fact they were not able to pass a budget a few months ago. The major challenge 
is whether the next government will be able to do what was done in 2003, which was to put 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
the economy on a very successful course of growth, based on the plan which got the budget 
into  shape  and  which  started  liberalizing  the  economy.  That  seems  to  be  the  major 
challenge.  What’s  the  concern?  That  instead  of  that,  because  of  the  political  situation  or 
whatever, there will be a budget which just scrapes by. That means that next year, in 2014, 
we’ll find ourselves again scrambling to get close to a budget target that is not as ambitious 
as it should be. 
The deficit for this year, which is supposed to be 2 percent, will be around 4.2 percent. One 
guesses that next year they’ll be aiming at 3 percent; when they said that 3 percent was the 
target for this year, we were arguing for something a little bit less. It’s difficult to be ambitious 
at the beginning; it’s much more difficult to be ambitious later, down the road, when you’ve 
already not done it once or twice. So that’s really a major concern. 
The second issue is one which is much more difficult to deal with, which is the issue of the 
business climate, as seen both from outside and from within. The World Bank issues a report 
each year called “Doing Business” which ranks countries in terms of how easy it is, or how 
difficult it is, to do business. In the last two years, we declined from being number 32 on that 
list,  which  is  not  great,  to  being  38  on  the  list,  which  is  much  less  great.  That  reflects  a 
general feeling that the business climate has deteriorated. It relates to bureaucracy, it relates 
to places where we stand out as having problems, in the construction process, in a variety of 
other bureaucratic processes, of registering property, in all of those things we are not doing 
well. We went far behind on paying taxes…these are things we have to deal with, if we want 
to get the economy growing again. 
Q: You are basically saying, the budget is not in great shape and could get worse, the 
economic situation is slowing down and could get worse, and the business climate 
which is the engine of growth is not performing as it should and could get worse. Is 
that what you’re saying? 
A:  Well,  it’s  always  good  to  have  someone  translate  what  I’m  saying  into  English  and  I 
greatly appreciate that. But I can say all those things, but I can also say  we’re growing at 
3 percent, we don’t have a balance of payments problem, we don’t have an inflation problem, 
and we’re growing faster than almost any economy in the West. 
Q: If the next government misses its budgetary forecast, and the deficit continues to 
be above target, that means you, or your successor, will have to take action to 
rebalance, to maintain the equilibrium. 
A: Well it depends on the reasons for missing the budgetary targets. If the reason for missing 
the  budgetary  target  is  that  the  economy  has  slowed  down,  and  tax  revenues  have  gone 
down,  and  the  government  has  stood  by  its  expenditure  plans,  it’s  not  obvious  that  they 
should  try to reduce the  deficit  at  that  point. If  the  deficit  has risen  because  spending  has 
gone up, or something like that, then you’re looking at a different situation. So we have to 
wait and see. One of the many things that the governments of Israel have fought in the last 
6–7 years is to have moved from having one of the highest debt ratios in the Western world 
to having one of the lowest. Now  we moved from 100 percent to 75 percent debt to GDP 
ratio.  The  others  moved  from  below  75  to  100.  So  we  have  more  room  to  run  an 
expansionary fiscal policy if we absolutely have to do it, in a situation of unemployment and 
low growth. We don’t need to do that now. 
Q: Where do you stand in terms of tax rising or spending cuts to help balance the 
budget – or does it not make much difference to you and the central bank? 
A: Most research shows that changing expenditures – cutting spending – is more effective 
than raising taxes as a way of dealing with the budget deficit. But we’ve cut taxes a lot in the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
past years, and the Bank of Israel has argued that the cuts were a little too fast, and they 
have in fact been rescinded to some extent.  
You can’t do these things independent of asking what you are spending on. If we have to 
increase our defense budget, if we have to increase our education budget, then we’ll have to 
finance these things. 
Q: Do you believe there should be an increase on social spending, on education? 
A: Increasing the efficiency of spending in these areas would be very useful. We have a very 
big educational problem in this economy, and at some point we are going to have to deal 
with it. We have been dealing with it, we probably need to do more. 
Q: Whichever government takes office, there won’t be much time and there won’t be 
much wiggle room to get this right…If you don’t get a budget deficit under control, it 
can get out of control very fast. 
A: If you don’t get it under control in the first year, that is 2013, which will be about half a 
year, or a little over half a year, it will be much harder to do in the future. Putting off these 
problems very rarely works. 
Q: When you go to those meetings, at the IMF and other international forums, and you 
meet your European colleagues, you’re enormously respected, you’re very well 
known, your views count – do you ever not want to just say to the European ministers, 
get your act together – you’re causing mayhem and mischief? 
A:What  are  the  Europeans  trying  to  do?  They’re  trying  to  build  a  federation  at  a  time  of 
enormous  difficulty  –  enormous  economic  difficulties  and  political  difficulties.  So  they’re 
taking more than a year or two to do it. That’s very frustrating. On the other hand, if they get 
it done, they will have created a different Europe for the long term, and that’s what we need 
them to do. 
Q: You know as well as I do that they built that house badly to start with, and they 
knew they were building it badly- 
A: Richard, I must say that I don’t put a lot of weight on what people tell me they knew, when 
something  happened  some  time  ago  and  they  forgot  to  mention  it  to  me  –  everyone  now 
knows that they had to get to fiscal union right away. Well, I didn’t hear that in 1994, I didn’t 
hear it in 1997. I think that we’re all much wiser after the fact. So I’m a little less tough on 
these  guys  who  didn’t  see  things.  Just  as  when  an  economic  crisis  shows  up  there  are 
always at least 5 people who saw it coming, and then you say, why didn’t I pay attention to 
them;  and  there  are  another  50  who  saw  something  else  coming  and  you  way  thank 
goodness I didn’t pay attention to them. So I have to blame myself. I didn’t see it – I don’t 
think many people saw it. 
Q: What do you tell those people in the US who say – lets go over the “fiscal cliff”, 
because it is the only way that long term structural change will take place – when we 
see the pain? 
A: The short term argument is that all the tax reductions of the past decade, and those of this 
crisis, will expire on December 31 of this year. That means tax rates will have gone up, and 
then Obama will be in a position, when he wants to cut tax rates, and Republicans want to 
cut tax rates, and its argued that he will then be in a better position to reach an agreement…I 
don’t have a lot of faith in this “we’ll cause a lot of pain to the politicians so they’ll do the right 
thing”. We’ve  heard  that  story  all  the  time,  I  haven’t  seen  anything  happen  yet.  I  think  we 
better rely on them trying to reach a deal right now. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Q: Central bankers are often in the headlines these days. Has there been a time during 
recent crises when you – the major central bankers in the world – met and said, we’re 
doing this, we just don’t know if this is going to work? 
A: First, “we” does not include “me” – we are not yet members of the G7, the G10, or of the 
G20…there were meetings where we said something like, “this is what we have to do, we are 
not certain how it will work out, but this is the very best thing we can do”. 
Q: What happens to politicians when they get their hands on a budget? 
A: There’s a natural tendency to want to spend more money, because everybody asks you to 
spend more money, and the pressure is always people coming along and wanting money for 
this and for that. That’s why in some countries you need to have a very powerful Treasury, as 
we have in Israel. There is this spending tendency, governments prefer to run deficits. It’s 
very interesting that in two cases that culture changed dramatically – Canada in the 1990s 
and Australia in the 1980s – were chronic-deficit countries In Australia now it’s bad for the 
government to run a deficit, and in Canada they worry about the deficits much more. Why? 
Because they cut the deficits and they grew much faster in both cases, they saw the results 
of running a decent economic policy. Can you rely on that? Not really, it depends on each 
country. 
Q: What do you see as your responsibility when house prices, or property prices, get 
out of kilter? 
A: We have to do what we can to prevent that happening. The main problem for a central 
bank  is  that  it  operates  on  the  financing  side,  which  is  to  say  on  the  demand  side  of  the 
housing  market.  We  can  raise  the  interest  rate,  impose  regulations  on  the  banks,  which 
we’ve  done,  that  will  moderate  the  impact  of  low  interest  rates  on  demand  for  housing. 
But…reducing the price of housing on the demand side does not cause more houses to be 
built, it causes less houses to be built. The real place that you can get action that will solve 
the housing problem is on the supply side…if you increase the supply of land in this country 
more rapidly, you will be able to get housing prices down. If you can speed up the pace at 
which it’s possible to get planning permission, which is the place we’re  worst in the Doing 
Business study – If we can deal with those prices, we’ll get the supply of houses to go up, 
which will increase production and reduce prices. We have to do what we can because we 
operate on the demand side, but we don’t have  the control over supply that would enable 
Israel to solve its housing problems. One of the reasons we’ve been growing reasonably is 
that housing activity has been very strong. 
Q: You are term-limited to 2015. If I could sign a law giving you a third term – would 
you want it? Would you take it? 
A: I believe very strongly in term limits. I have hardly seen anybody get better after ten years 
on  a  job.  I  believe  very  strongly  in  this  ten  year  term  limit  for  governors.  I  thought  that  I 
should stop teaching when I stopped being sick to my stomach when I went in and lectured. I 
lost  my  fear  of  the  students,  I  really  don’t  want  to  lose  my  fear  of  these  people  and  the 
journalists among them, by being on the job too long. It is still extremely challenging, and it’s 
a great privilege to have that job. 
Q: Will you stay in Israel after your term is up? 
A: I very much want to stay strongly connected with Israel, we have family in the States and 
we’ll have to decide what we do. But I’m not going to disappear from the local scene, that’s 
for sure. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Q: I’m choosing my words carefully here…Do you have a desire to play a public role in 
Israel after you have been Governor of the Bank of Israel? 
A: There are a few jobs that I would prefer over this one and I don’t think any of them are 
available, or likely to be available. 
Q: What brought you to Israel? 
A: My wife and I, and my family, have been involved with Israel since we were young. We 
visited pretty regularly…spent Sabbaticals here, we knew Israel reasonably well. In 1983–85 
I  had  the  privilege  of  working  with  George  Shultz  when  the  United  States  and  the  Israeli 
government  cooperated to  stabilize  the  Israeli  economy We’d  always  been  close  to Israel, 
somebody gave me the opportunity to try to contribute something to Israel, and I said well, I’d 
always wanted to do that, and I’ll never get another opportunity like this The current Prime 
Minister was very influential and persuasive, he was the finance minister at the time. We are 
extremely happy we did it; it’s been a wonderful experience. 
Q: Is it fair to say that after 2015 we will not have heard the last from you? 
A: I hope my voice will still be heard. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
