Paul Tucker: The role of deposit insurance in building a safer financial 
system 
Speech by Mr Paul Tucker, Deputy Governor for Financial Stability at the Bank of England, 
at the International Association of Deposit Insurers Annual Conference, London, 25 October 
2012. 
 It  is  a  great  honour  to  be  the  closing  speaker  at  your  conference  today.  I  shall  use  the 
opportunity  to  update  you  on  progress  with  the  Financial  Stability  Board’s  work  on  the 
resolution of distressed financial institutions.1  
Deposit insurance, stability and competition 
Although it has rarely been centre stage in recent debates, deposit insurance in fact plays a 
key  role  in the  international  efforts  to  build  solid foundations for global finance.  Eighty-odd 
years  ago  the  US  introduced  deposit  insurance  to  underpin  confidence  in  a  commercial 
banking system that was threatening to unravel. In recent years, the UK has not been alone 
in  learning  the  hard  way  that  it  is  not  enough  simply  to  have  a  deposit  insurance  system. 
Retail depositors will run from a troubled bank if they are not confident that they will have 
access to their transactions balances quickly.  
The general public need to know about the deposit insurance system, understand it, and be 
able to rely on rapid payout by the Deposit Insurer in the event of a bank’s failure. With the 
encouragement of the Bank of England, the UK’s bank supervisors – today at the FSA, from 
next year at a new Prudential Regulation Authority within the Bank – are requiring deposit 
takers  to  advertise  prominently  the  availability  and  terms  of  deposit  insurance,  in  every 
branch, on every ATM, on every key webpage.  
Further, crucially, the UK’s Financial Services Compensation Scheme will ensure they can 
deliver  rapid  payout,  ideally  within  7  days.  This  requires  banks  to  hold  more  information 
about  their  depositors  than  it  seems  they  would  choose  on  their  own.  It  is  perfectly 
reasonable for society to demand this. 
Once  those  conditions  are  met,2  the  deposit  insurance  regime  has  the  potential  to 
revolutionalise retail banking. By assuring retail depositors of safety, new banks should find it 
easier, other things being equal, to establish a deposit base, lowering barriers to entry into 
banking. Later I shall come to who pays for this: it isn’t government and the taxpayer but the 
industry itself.  
Deposit insurance and resolution 
But  we  know  from  experience  that  liquidation  and  payout  to  insured  depositors  can  be  a 
seriously  inferior  way  of  handling  the  failure  of  some  deposit-takers.  That  is  because 
liquidation can entail a destruction of value, disruption to the provision of services, and other 
spillovers to the rest of financial system. Some of that can be avoided if, instead, we are able 
to  transfer  the  insured  deposit  book  and  some  good  assets  to  another  bank  (or  other 
                                                
1   Paul  Tucker is  chairman  of  the  FSB’s  Resolution  Steering Group.  For  an  earlier  update see  Tucker  (2012) 
‘Resolution:  a  progress  report’,  a  speech  delivered  to  the  Institute  for  Law  and  Finance  Conference  in 
Frankfurt. The Financial Stability Board will provide an official Progress Report to the forthcoming meeting of 
G20 Finance Ministers and Governors in Mexico.  
in 
the  FSB  Peer  Review  on  Deposit 
themes  were  emphasised 
2  The  same 
Insurance. 
http://www.financialstabilityboard.org/publications/r_120208.pdf 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
purchasers).  In  resolution  circles,  this  is  known  as  “purchase  and  assumption”  or  P&A. 
Bridge  banks  are  often discussed  in  this  context  but  they  are  not  really  another  resolution 
strategy.  Rather,  they  are  a  holding  mechanism while  a  search  for  a  buyer  for  part  of  the 
business is undertaken. So, under established practices in the USA and elsewhere, the basic 
non-liquidation resolution strategy has been to break up a bank into a good and bad bit; and 
effect a sale of the good and economically critical parts. In many major jurisdictions, including 
the UK, this is typically aided by an injection of resources by the Deposit Insurer, up to but 
not beyond what it would have expected to pay out to insured depositors in a liquidation. The 
most  critical  services  –  basically  transactions  deposits  and  payments  –  are  thereby 
maintained.  
Whether under “liquidation and payout” or “purchase and assumption”, uninsured depositors 
and  other  creditors,  including  bondholders,  take  losses  after  equity  is  exhausted.  That 
includes  the  Deposit  Insurer,  which  becomes  a  claimant  creditor  in  the  liquidation  or 
administration  of  the  rump  of  the  business.  It  therefore  stands  to  lose  money  if  there  is  a 
realised loss that is not absorbed by more junior creditors. Any such loss is later recouped by 
the Deposit Insurer via a levy on the surviving insured banks.  
It is important to underline that for banks funded by insured deposits, some of the costs of 
failure will fall on their peers. Over time, I suspect that that will increase pressure for a funded 
deposit-guarantee  scheme  with  risk-based  levies.  That  avoids  defaulting  banks  getting  off 
scott free, and has banks contributing to the deposit insurance system when times are good 
rather than only when under pressure.  
I  realise  that  I  am  telling  this  conference  of  deposit  insurance  agency  experts  things  you 
already know! I am doing so because they are highly relevant to where I am going on the 
development  of  resolution  strategies  for  coping  with  the  failure  of  the  world’s  largest  and 
most complex banks, and how Deposit Insurance might fit into that endeavour. 
Resolution regimes for systemically important firms 
The objective is, of course, to get to a position where public money is never used to provide 
solvency support for a failing bank, however large or complex.  
To be clear, this is emphatically not just about preserving payments and transactions-deposit 
services. If we did only that, we will all be sitting around at some point in the future saying 
how appalling it was that a big dealer had failed and that they had had to be rescued in order 
to avoid a seizure in the capital markets. 
So where are we on resolution regimes? It is worth saying upfront that we recognise that it is 
not  easy  for  banks  to  assist  the  authorities  in  drawing  up  resolution  plans  when  the  full 
resolution legislation is not yet in place; it will matter enormously exactly what the legislation 
says.  A  year  ago,  the  G20  Leaders  endorsed  an  international  standard  –  the  FSB’s  Key 
Attributes  –  that  lays  down  what  resolution  regimes  need  to  look  like  in  the  different 
jurisdictions around the world. It’s now a matter of countries putting those regimes into place. 
The US has largely done so through Dodd Frank. Europe is on the verge of doing so. It has a 
draft directive on recovery and resolution which seeks to implement the FSB standard very 
faithfully. This will be an enormous step forward. I think Asia will then follow that pattern, to 
the extent that it hasn’t done so already. The FSB’s Standards’ Implementation Committee 
currently has an exercise underway, led by Martin Gruenberg, Acting Chairman of the FDIC, 
and of course chair of the IADI, to review progress on legislating the Key Attributes. Their 
report is due to be published in the first quarter of 2013. 
A broadly common statutory framework will help home and host authorities work together on 
resolution  planning. To  that  end,  Crisis  Management  Groups (CMGs)  are  now  in  place for 
nearly all global systemically important firms (or G-SIFIs as they are now commonly called), 
with  the  goal  of  reviewing  firms’  proposed  recovery  plans  and  developing  resolution 
strategies for them. Firm-specific cross-border cooperation agreements (or CoAgs) are also 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
being  developed,  setting  out  roles  and  responsibilities  of  the  home  and  host  authorities, 
clarifying  how  they  will  share  information,  and  how  they  will  cooperate  to  implement  their 
preferred  resolution  strategy.  If  home  and  host  authorities  are  not  going  to  cooperate,  we 
need to flush that out ahead of time, rather than stumble into it in the moment of desperation. 
There’s  a  good  deal  of  cultural  change  entailed  here.  In  the  past,  supervisors  have 
sometimes seemed during peacetime to be more committed to cooperating than they have 
been prepared to live up to when it most mattered.  
A forthcoming FSB consultation paper on developing resolution strategies 
But we – the FSB – realise that more guidance is needed. 
Although not of central interest to this audience, resolution isn’t just about banks, and so we 
are  planning  to  elaborate  on  how  the  Key  Attributes  should  be  applied  to,  for  example, 
central counterparties, insurers, and the client assets held by prime brokers, custodians and 
others.  
More relevant to today’s conference, following the FSB’s recent Plenary meeting in Tokyo we 
announced  that  in  the  next  few  weeks  we  will  issue  a  consultative  paper  on  resolution 
planning and, in particular, on resolution strategies.  
The paper, drawn up by a subcommittee led by Christine Cumming of the New York Federal 
Reserve Bank, will cover three areas. The first is Recovery Triggers and Stress Scenarios 
used in recovery planning. Firms need to ensure that triggers are not linked mechanically to 
metrics that lag behind their true financial condition – a problem with some previous early-
intervention  frameworks.  Recovery  actions  must  start  sufficiently  early.  But  care  must  be 
taken to avoid markets overacting to the fact of such actions being taken. That is not easy.  
Second,  the  consultative  paper  will  outline  a  possible  framework for  national  authorities  to 
use  when  identifying  the  critical  functions  and  support  services  of  firms  that  need  to  be 
sustained in distressed conditions. What matters here is focusing on those services that are 
vital to the economy.  
The third, and most important, area of consultation is about the development of Resolution 
Strategies and Operational Resolution Plans. This guidance aims to capture the main issues 
that authorities should address. It draws on two stylised approaches to resolution: a so-called 
“single  point  of  entry”  approach,  under  which  resolution  of  a  whole  group  is  executed, 
primarily  by  the  home  authority  and  mainly  at  the  level  of  the  parent  or  holding  company; 
and, secondly, a “multiple point of entry” approach whereby co-ordinated actions are taken 
by  a  number  authorities  along  national,  regional  or  functional  lines.  There  is,  of  course,  a 
spectrum between those two poles.  
Identifying the resolution strategy that is most likely best suited to each specific firm is very 
important.  The  strategy  must  be  relatively  easy  to  understand  –  a  strategy  that  cannot  be 
explained concisely to top officials in central banks and regulators is not a strategy at all. But 
although authorities should try to identify a preferred strategy and should be as transparent 
as  possible,  I  should  caution  that  what  turns  out  to  be  the  best  approach  in  the  event  of 
distress  will  depend  on  the  circumstances. The suggestion  of  a  “Presumptive  Path”,  being 
aired by some in the market, is somewhat unrealistic, at least in its strongest form. Public 
authorities with statutory obligations to maintain stability cannot bind themselves to detailed 
strategies that in the event might not work as well as an alternative. 
At  the  planning  stage,  whether  a  single-  or  a  multiple-point-of-entry  strategy  looks  more 
feasible  will  depend  upon  a  group’s  organisational  and  financial  structure.  It  is  likely  that 
some groups will need to adapt themselves in order to remove impediments to resolution.  
Much of that will be case by case. But some general policies are also emerging. Here in the 
UK, the government is requiring the domestic retail banking business of the largest banking 
groups to be ring-fenced. And for the EU, Erkki Liikanen has produced an important report on 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
the structure of banks which would involve essentially ring-fencing the trading business. Both 
of these approaches, which are similar in many respects, work with the grain of the FSB’s 
approach to resolution.  
Single-point of entry resolution: bail-in of the debt of the top company  
The central principle running through this whole endeavour is that after equity is exhausted, 
losses should fall next on uninsured debt holders, in the order they would take losses in a 
standard bankruptcy or liquidation process. Although all resolution strategies have that effect, 
it is the particular focus of what has come to be called “bail-in”. I should perhaps say that 
bail-in isn’t about identifying a special type of bond that can be written down or converted. 
“Bail-in” is a verb not a noun. It’s about giving the authorities the tools, the powers, to effect a 
restructuring of the capital and liabilities of a bank that isn’t toxic all the way through; as such 
it  will  be  recognisable  to  specialists  as  broadly  akin  to  the  US  Chapter 11  system  for 
business reconstructions, but speeded up for the exigencies of banking.  
Bail-in  is  not  unique  in  putting  losses  on  bondholders.  All  resolution  tools  do  that.  The 
distinguishing  characteristic  of  bail-in,  as  a  resolution  tool,  is  that  it  applies  losses  upfront 
based  upon  a  valuation  rather  than  at  the  end  of  a  liquidation  of  assets.  As  such,  it 
prospectively avoids an unnecessary destruction of value. 
For those groups that issue debt from the holding company and downstream the proceeds to 
operating  subsidiaries,  it  should  be  possible  to  bail  in  debt  at  the  holding  company  and 
recapitalise  distressed  parts  of  the  group. Where  necessary,  those  distressed  subsidiaries 
could  be  recapitalised  by  bailing-in  –  ie  writing  down  and/or  converting  into  equity  – 
intergroup  debt  owed  to  the  parent.  The  host  authorities  of  those  operating  companies 
should in principle be prepared to go along with that kind of operation provided that the home 
country  engenders the necessary  trust  and takes  account  of  the  need to  maintain  stability 
around the world not just in its immediate neighbourhood.  
Deposit insurance schemes and bail-in: multiple point of entry resolution 
We should not, however, assume a monolithic approach to resolution. It is not a case of one 
size fits all. What I have described could work for banking groups that issue plenty of debt 
out  of  a  top  company.  It  would  not  work  so  easily  for groups  operating commercial  banks 
around  the  world  that  are  funded  to  a  very  large  extent  from  insured  deposits.  In  a 
hypothetical  extreme  case,  if  they  haven’t  issued  bonds,  then  there  would  be  no  bond 
holders to bail in.  
It has become fairly common to say that such groups should be resolved on a regional basis, 
ie broken up. Maybe. But even if that is correct, “break it up” hardly amounts to resolution 
plan. What happens to the broken-up parts? Under a “breakup” strategy, a plan is needed for 
all of the parts, both distressed and undistressed. That can’t be a free for all. Indeed, it is 
worth  underlining  that,  under  the  FSB  Standard,3  it  is  the  responsibility  of  the  home 
authorities  of  the  group  to  ensure  that  a  group-wide  resolution  plan  exists.  There  is  no 
ducking  that.  It  removes  an  ambiguity  that  has  quietly  haunted  banking  authorities  for 
decades, including in the UK. 
Imagine an international commercial banking group whose operations in various jurisdictions 
are both big and complex. Good subsidiaries might be sold or floated off. But that won’t be 
possible  for  the  bankrupt  parts  of  the  group.  The  realisation  of  the  assets  via  a  standard 
liquidation of those subsidiaries  would be  liable to destroy a lot of value, creating disorder 
that could spill over to other jurisdictions and possibly globally. Such subsidiaries need to be 
                                                
3   FSB Standard Key Attribute 11.8. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
resolved. That could be via bail-in of their bondholders and other creditors. But what happens 
if  there  are  not  enough  bonds  in  issue  to  absorb  all  of  the  losses  and  recapitalise  the 
operation? A way of cutting through that would be for each Deposit Insurer to be bailed in. 
Rather  than  a  Deposit  Insurer  having  to  wait  to  discover  its  losses  until  the  end  of  the 
process  of  a  potentially  destructive  realisation  of  the  bank’s  assets,  it  would  hear  up  front 
how much it had lost. Its losses should be smaller that way. And it might gain a stake in a 
surviving business, which it could sell once conditions had calmed. This approach could, if 
necessary, be applied in different regions to different distressed subsidiaries of the group. 
I must stress that in no way does any of this dilute the protection to insured deposits. 
It  puts  losses to  bondholders  and  also transfers  them  to  the  surviving  parts  of the  various 
local banking systems standing behind each local Deposit Insurer. But, as I have outlined, so 
do other resolution techniques that draw up on the Deposit Insurers’ resources. “Liquidation 
and  payout”  would  entail  much  bigger  losses  for  the  Deposit  Insurers  and  thus  for  other 
banks. 
Work  is  underway  on  how  to  operationalise  this  strategy.  It  requires  active  cooperation 
amongst home and host authorities.  
Recovery & resolution planning: making it happen  
Indeed, a lot of work is underway, some of it publicly, some of it with firms, some of it quietly 
in the background. This is top level stuff. It isn’t about writing 3,000 or 30,000 page essays. It 
is at its heart about a few regulators getting together with the top management of the firms 
and saying this is what we would plan to do to you if the only alternative was liquidation, and 
working out how to operationalise that strategy. That is something the key countries, the key 
governments, have every reason in the world to co-operate on. In the FSB, we are putting in 
place a process where the most senior officials will talk to each other to reassure themselves 
on  the  resolvability  of  globally  significant  firms.  From  that  will  follow  detailed  operational 
planning, and requirements to remove impediments to executing resolution strategies. 
And flipping from my global hat to my domestic hat, at the Bank of England we have been 
working  closely  with  the  FDIC  on  how  we  would  operationalise  resolution  strategies  in  a 
cross-border setting.  
You  shouldn’t  doubt  that  this  will  happen.  Don’t  listen  to  siren  voices  who  question  our 
capability or will. 
Financial protectionism and the FSB agenda 
Which  brings  me,  in  conclusion,  to  a  broader  point.  The  international  authorities  are 
committed  to  maintaining  global  finance  –  global  capital  markets,  the  free  flow  of  capital 
across  borders.  We  are  not  trying  to  create  a  new  order  that  incorporates  financial 
protectionism.  On  the  contrary:  the  balkanisation  of  finance  would  cut  against  the 
extraordinary historical changes towards a much more globalised real economy.  
But allowing a fragile financial system to persist would also be a threat to globalisation. In 
fact, it has to be recognised that around the world domestic authorities have been putting in 
place defensive measures, mostly below the radar of commentators, over the past few years. 
This comes back to the use of public money. A world in which public money is used to bail 
out banks or dealers, is a world in which balkanisation is likely because the authorities that 
deploy  public  money  are  accountable  to  domestic  tax  payers  –  people  with  votes  in  their 
jurisdiction – and to nobody else. But by delivering the FSB’s global agenda – not only on 
resolution, but more widely – we will significantly reduce, if not remove, the need for some of 
those balkanising tendencies. By making finance safe and orderly failure possible, I think we 
can take off the stage the most basic force towards balkanisation. The stakes are high.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
