Rundheersing Bheenick: A central bank in search of “anti-fragility” 
Address  by  Mr  Rundheersing  Bheenick,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius,  at  the  Gala 
Dinner  on  the  occasion  of  the  Second  Meeting  of  the  Official  Monetary  and  Financial 
Institutions  Forum  (OMFIF)  in  Africa,  hosted  by  the  Bank  of  Mauritius,  Port-Louis, 
5 November 2012 
 Of all the memorable events that the Bank of Mauritius has staged in this Dining Room – and 
there have been quite a few – tonight’s event is surely one of a kind. This is the very first time 
that we are welcoming at the Bank His Excellency Rajkeswur Purryag, G.O.S.K., G.C.S.K., 
since  he  acceded  to  the  exalted  position  of  President  of  the  Republic  of  Mauritius  four 
months ago. Mr President, we are deeply honoured by your presence amongst us tonight. 
This is also the first time that we are hosting a meeting of the Official Monetary and Financial 
Institutions Forum. We are conscious of the honour OMFIF is doing us, a small Central Bank 
of a small island-state, by giving us the privilege of hosting this event. Let me extend a very 
warm welcome to our many distinguished visitors from abroad. And express our thanks to 
our distinguished guests from home for joining us tonight.  
This  is  only  the  second time  that OMFIF  is  holding  a meeting  in  Africa. Now  bankers  and 
central bankers are supposed to have a head for numbers – cynics have their doubts. We 
are struck by a strange coincidence. When the South African Reserve Bank hosted the first 
meeting in Africa, it happened to be celebrating its 90th Anniversary. As we host this second 
meeting, we are celebrating the 45th Anniversary of our Bank. I am sure numerologists and 
others of their ilk may discern some hidden esoteric meaning in those numbers. And this is 
what we intend to discover during the next two days.  
Let me say a few words on OMFIF for our guests who may not be very familiar with its work. 
Founded in 2010, OMFIF regroups diverse players from the public and private sector, central 
banks,  sovereign  wealth  funds,  and  academia  who  get  together  to  exchange  views  and 
share experience with the objective of improving performance and achieving prosperity. This 
second meeting provides a remarkable networking opportunity. It brings together a total of 
19 institutions, of nearly 100 delegates from 21 countries, 25 delegates from central banks, 
64 delegates from the private sector, 4 delegates from multinational organizations and others 
from  governmental  and  academic  institutions.  We  can  therefore  reasonably  expect  very 
enriching debates and exchanges at the various sessions. 
The inaugural meeting in South Africa last year already set the tone. Participants highlighted 
the  signs  of  Africa’s  stunning  potential:  5%  average  GDP  growth  in  the  recent  past, 
fast-rising 
the  crucial 
requirements  for  the  future  of  the  African  continent.  Foremost  among  them  were  the 
following:  first,  strengthening  trade  integration  with  other  faster  growing  areas;  second, 
fighting  corruption;  and  third,  harnessing  domestic  and  foreign  savings  for  investment  and 
development.  The  theme  of  this  year’s  symposium  “Trade  flows  and  global  growth”  rightly 
follows up on the conclusions of the meeting in South Africa.  
Tonight I will share with you our own experience at the Bank of Mauritius and touch upon our 
role in the regional integration agenda. I also comment en passant on some issues that have 
a bearing on the prosperity of the African continent.  
We are all aware that we are meeting against the backdrop of a continuing global financial 
and economic crisis. At different levels and in different fora, we have talked enough about it. 
As  Christine  Lagarde,  the  Managing  Director  of  the  IMF,  put  it  in  Tokyo,  it  is  now  time  to 
A-C-T,  spelling  the  word  for  added  emphasis.  Lagarde  didn’t  say  it  but  she  would  surely 
agree that Africa must be part of the solution to the global crisis.  
incomes,  and  abundant  resources.  The  meeting  articulated 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
While mature markets, in particular the UK and the euro area, continue to face sharp risks of 
prolonged  sub-par  growth,  Asia  and  Africa,  have  emerged  as  the  two  fastest-growing 
continents in the world. Asia, resilient in the face of prolonged softening in external demand, 
is being hailed as the new axis of development. What a refreshing change from the bugbear 
of the Yellow Peril and the Clash of Civilizations that Western strategists used to fantasize 
about  not  so  long  ago!  Typical  of  this  school  of  thought  was  a  book  penned  by  Alain 
Pereyfitte, confidant of Charles de Gaulle, which he entitled: “Quand la Chine s’éveillera…le 
monde  tremblera”  −  literally  translated,  “When  China  awakes……  there’ll  be  a  global 
earthquake.” As Lord Desai has pointed out, the African awakening is a totally different story. 
There is no fear of an earthquake, with Africa as its epicenter. But there is no denying that 
African  policymakers  have  been  rapidly  getting  their  act  together,  bringing  greater  political 
and macroeconomic stability and microeconomic reforms.  
Africa  has  been  very  successful  at  attracting  investors  by  the  abundance  of  its  resources 
endowment. India and China have increased trade and capital flows to Africa; and China has 
become  an  important  partner  for  Africa  in  infrastructure  development.  Integration  within 
Africa has however been fairly disappointing. The International Trade Statistics 2012 of the 
World Trade Organisation confirms the relatively low level of intra-Africa trade: at only 10%, 
intra-Africa trade trails far behind the 30% level of ASEAN, the 40% level of North America, 
and the 60% of Europe. Red tape, poor infrastructure and trade barriers are costing Africa 
billions of dollars and depriving the region of new sources of economic growth.  
It  is  clear  that  we  must  step  up  our  efforts  to  stimulate  intra-regional  trade  and  develop 
further  financing  links  within  the  continent.  Trade  integration  could  unlock  the  growth  and 
employment potential in the region and help to mitigate the impact of external shocks on our 
economies. Five years ago, the Bank of Mauritius threw its hat in the ring and joined the fight 
to promote intra-regional trade by lobbying successfully to become the settlement bank for 
COMESA’s  regional  payments  system  initiative,  REPSS,  the  Regional  Payment  and 
Settlement System. REPSS went live last month. The system allows for an easy transfer of 
funds among member countries – importers are able to pay for goods and services in their 
local currencies, and exporters can invoice their products in their domestic currencies. There 
is  no  reason  why  this  platform  cannot  also  serve  the  needs  of  other  countries  beyond 
COMESA member-states, and thus give a much-needed fillip to cross-border regional trade.  
Macroeconomic convergence and financial integration figure high on our regional integration 
agenda. The Bank has been playing an increasingly active role in other African integration 
initiatives such as COMESA, SADC and AACB, i.e. the Association of African Central Banks. 
Countries in the region recognize that stability is a necessary condition for prosperity. Along 
with  several  of  our  peers,  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  joined  the  Sub-Saharan  Africa  Regional 
Consultative  Group  of  the  Financial  Stability  Board.  This  will  help  to  identify  the  region’s 
challenges and, hopefully, adjust global policy-making to make it more relevant for peripheral 
countries.  Such  a  forum  ensures  that  the  African  continent  has  a  voice  in  the  process  of 
policy reforms.  
There is another remarkable phenomenon happening in our part of the world which I would 
like to flag for your attention. While major banks in developed countries are mired in scandal, 
scrambling for capital, shrinking their operations, and losing their CEO’s, many of our banks 
are posting healthy profits and extending their footprint to other parts of the continent. This 
underlines the need for African regulators to collaborate more and exchange information to 
mitigate risks of contagion. The two African giants, Nigeria and South Africa, which account 
for half of sub-Saharan Africa’s GDP, must be more sensitive to the spillover effects of their 
actions on the rest of the continent. We must be ready to take prompt policy actions in the 
event  of  a  home-grown  crisis.  It  is  not  surprising,  therefore,  that  we  are  joining  hands  to 
establish supervisory colleges to foster closer supervisory cooperation and address the issue 
of banking crisis resolution in the African region.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Africa has an abundance of resources and is seen as the world’s most promising place for 
new  production.  However, this  wealth,  when  tapped,  does  not  trickle  down  to  Africans.  By 
contrast, a small island economy like Mauritius, with its 1,860 square kilometres of land, a 
coastline of 177 kilometres, its limited resources and its independent economic history of less 
than five decades, has prospered and continues to score high marks on a number of counts. 
We have a sound and dynamic financial sector, an evolving monetary policy framework, a 
modern  financial  market  infrastructure,  and  a  banking  sector  that  has  showed  remarkable 
resilience during the turbulent years. This financial and monetary stability has undoubtedly 
been a major contributor to the robust growth that Mauritius has experienced throughout the 
crisis. In 2011, the Mauritian economy was one-third bigger than it was in 2007, GDP having 
risen from Rs244 billion to Rs323 billion over the period. One might be tempted to say: “if this 
is a crisis, let’s have more of it!” But we must not tempt the devil…  
Mauritius  is,  of  course,  far  from  being  what  Nassim  Taleb  calls  a  “black-swan-robust” 
economy,  that  is,  an  economy  that  can  resist  difficult-to-predict  events. But  we  have  most 
certainly taken steps to “robustify” our economy, and we have made it less vulnerable and 
less fragile. In his Stamp Memorial Lecture at the London School of Economics in October 
this year, Sir Mervyn King, Governor of the Bank of England, put it thus:  
“[Taleb]  argues  that the  opposite  of  fragility  is  not  resilience  or  robustness,  but 
“anti-fragility”,  that  is  a  state  in  which  people  or  institutions  thrive  on  volatility, 
shocks to the system, and risk. We go to the gym to stress our muscles in order 
to  strengthen  them;  occasional  seismic  activity  may  prevent  a  more  damaging 
earthquake…[Anti-fragility] offers a warning of the dangers of believing that the 
role of monetary policy is to offset all shocks. Rather than pretend that we can 
forecast  the  future,  a  more  intelligent  response  is  to  reinforce  the  resilience  of 
those parts of the financial system that we cannot permit to fail and encourage 
entry and exit in a free market in other parts.”  
Since I joined the Bank – about the time when the sub-prime crisis broke – I introduced an 
annual  Letter  to  Stakeholders  as  part  of  my  new  communication  strategy  in  an  attempt  to 
de-mystify central banking. In my Letter of 2011, I may unwittingly have put my finger on one 
of  the  mechanisms  to  build  “anti-fragility”.  I  wrote  there  that  I  have  come  to  consider  the 
smallness of our economy as  
“an asset rather than a liability because small size gives us an added adaptive 
advantage:  a  quick response  capacity  and  the flexibility  to  continually  adjust  to 
the volatile external environment”.  
That  prompt  response  and  flexibility  have  very  much  become  our  mantra  at  the  Bank  of 
Mauritius during the crisis. Which means that, unknown to ourselves, we have actually been 
promoting  “anti-fragility”.  We  are  as  amazed  as  Molière’s  eponymous  Bourgeois 
Gentilhomme was when he discovered that he had been speaking prose all his life!  
How,  then,  did  we  “robustify”  the  banking  and finance  sector?  How  did  we  respond  to the 
increasing volatility, the external shocks, and the heightened risk? It will take us too long to 
go  through  all  the  things  we  did,  both  government  and  Central  Bank,  to  cope  with  the 
succession  of  shocks  that  hit  us  in  the  financial  and  real  sectors  over  the  last  five  years, 
some of them anticipated and quite unrelated to the crisis. Let me just highlight some of the 
actions of the Central Bank. Inevitably, these sparked some misgivings about the evolving 
role of the Central Bank.  
Central banks in systemic countries have moved center-stage. The US Federal Reserve, the 
European  Central  Bank,  the  Bank  of  England,  and  the  Bank  of  Japan  have  moved  well 
beyond the traditional ‘lender of last resort’ function and financial orthodoxy. They have had 
to step in swiftly to stabilize economic activity and restore trust in the financial system. These 
central banks are in uncharted territory. Some fear that, like some of the mammoth universal 
banks at the heart of the crisis these central banks may also have become too big to fail. 
Others raise the spectre of a “currency war” and revive memories of a former US Treasury 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Secretary, John Connally, who told a group of European finance ministers worried about the 
export of American inflation that the dollar is “ our currency, but your problem.”  
Small  central  banks,  like  ours,  do  suffer  from  this  quantitative  easing  and  consequent 
currency weakening in our reserves portfolio even while we recognize that we benefit from 
the favourable impact on the demand for our exports. We have been constantly re-jigging our 
reserves composition, more for prudential reasons than in a search for yield.  
We have struggled to maintain a high level of monetary and financial stability in spite of our 
exposure arising from the openness of the economy. We made full use of all the elbow room 
we could build around us by taking a less restrictive approach to the Bank of Mauritius Act; 
we revisited little-known provisions of the Act and viewed the Bank’s mandate in a broader 
perspective – at the cost, I must say, of much friction with other interested parties and to the 
evident delight of the local press. We did not limit ourselves to the conduct of monetary policy 
via interest rate decisions only. The Bank fully assumed its socio-developmental role in the 
economy. 
We  have  been  particularly  attentive  to  a  better  integration  of  banking  and  financial  sector 
policies  with  national  economic  policies.  To  facilitate  this,  we  stepped  up  our  coordination 
with  the  Treasury  while  safeguarding  the  central  bank’s  independence  against  fiscal 
dominance and other encroachments on its domain, in, for example, the area of exchange 
and reserve management. Let me mention briefly some of the main policy measures that can 
be credited with instilling “anti-fragility” in the system:  
First, trade finance. For a country which depends so critically on trade exchanges with the 
rest of the World – external trade constitutes 69% of GDP – it was perhaps inevitable that the 
financing  of trade flows would  be  the  area  where financial  stress  would  first  surface  when 
international  money-centre  banks  did  not  roll  over  long-established  trade  credit  lines  to 
domestic banks.  
The  Bank  responded  promptly  by  extending  a  Special  Foreign  Currency  Line  of  Credit  of 
US$125  million,  i.e.  nearly  7%  of  Bank  reserves  to  ensure  the  continued  financing  of  the 
country’s trade. This measure, taken in December 2008, extended the Bank’s toolkit and it 
was vital to keep the economy functioning smoothly in the unusual conditions prevailing at 
the time. The Special Foreign Currency Line of Credit remained available for three years and 
we only withdrew it last year when it was no longer required. Those who follow developments 
in this area will recall that it was only in October 2011 that the BIS brought two changes in 
the treatment of trade finance under the Basel Capital framework to improve access to, and 
lower the cost of, trade finance instruments for low-income countries.  
Second,  Swaps  Transactions.  The  lack  of  liquidity  in  the  spot  foreign  exchange  market 
towards  the  end  of  2009  started  to  impact  on  the  orderly  functioning  of  this  market. 
Consequently,  the  Bank  offered  to  undertake  swap  transactions  with  a  view  to  injecting 
liquidity in the market and thus, prevent the build-up of uncertainties that would have been 
having financial stability implications. Spot-to-one month forward swap transactions in USD, 
EUR and GBP were carried out for an amount equivalent to USD94 million.  
Third, Excess Liquidity. As the global economy nosedived, it dragged down private sector 
credit  demand.  By  an  unfortunate  coincidence,  this  happened  simultaneously  with  the 
Government  drawdown  of  prudential  credit  types  negotiated  with  international  financial 
institutions  to  ward  off  the  possible  negative  repercussions  of  any  sudden  stop  in  foreign 
direct  investment  inflows.  These  flows  diminished  somewhat,  but  no  sudden  stop 
materialized.  The  net  redemption  of  public  debt  that  followed  fuelled  an  explosion  of 
domestic excess liquidity. As its peak, this stood at Rs8.3 billion, or nearly three times higher 
than the Bank’s comfort level of Rs3 billion. As yields on reduced issues of Government debt 
were  aggressively  pushed  further  and  further  below  savings  deposit  rates,  it  became 
increasingly  obvious  that  this  excess  liquidity  situation  would  hamper  the  monetary 
transmission mechanism and impede normal financial intermediation.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The  Bank  was  in  a  fix.  Its  own  resources  were  severely  stretched  as  interest  rates  on  its 
reserve holdings, its main source of income, neared the zero level. Although profitability was 
not a major motivation, it could not easily envisage incurring a loss. It could not persuade the 
Treasury to issue more paper, with a senior finance official bluntly saying: “Excess liquidity is 
your problem!” to the Bank officer mandated to explore this issue with the Treasury. Unlike 
some central banks, we did not have the option of automatically issuing treasury paper for 
monetary policy purposes for the Government’s account.  
Tentatively, we started issuing 28-day Bank of Mauritius paper. We had already abandoned 
the overnight placement facility with the Central Bank as it didn’t serve any useful purpose 
given  the  high  costs  incurred.  Persistent  excess  liquidity  led  to  frequent  rollovers  of  our 
28-day  paper. The  Bank  lengthened  the  maturity  of  its  own  paper  and, before  long, found 
itself  issuing  bills  of  91-day,  182-day  and  364-day  maturities  as  well  as  notes  of  2-year, 
3-year and 4-year duration. At peak time, the Bank had a total of Rs11.5 billion outstanding, 
compared to Rs31.5 billion of Treasury bills at the time. Let me fast forward to the present 
when we are facing sporadic liquidity shortages in the domestic banking system. Since early 
December, we have gone into reverse mode. We have been offering to buy back our own 
paper but no bank has taken us up on our offer yet.  
Fourth, the  Bank’s  accounting framework. This  required  the  Bank  to  liquidate  periodically, 
part of its portfolio to distribute unrealized gains, and did not allow dynamic provisioning. I 
shall spare you the details of how we managed to effect changes in the Bank’s accounting 
framework  in  the  face  of  concerted  opposition  from  the  Bank’s  external  auditors,  the 
Treasury, the State Law Office, and some of our own accounting staff – or how we got the 
IMF to defend our corner. In November 2011, we also doubled the Bank’s capital from Rs1 
billion  to  Rs2  billion  to  quell  any  fears  about  the  Bank’s  capital  adequacy.  Both  are 
fascinating stories, but we shall have them for another time.  
Fifth, credit to small cane-growers. When the sugar sector was hit by continued decline in 
export prices and small planters were abandoning cane cultivation, the Bank made available 
a cheap line of credit in rupees amounting to Rs1.5 billion in each of the two years 2010 and 
2011  and  of  Rs1.3  billion  2012  to  the  Mauritius  Sugar  Syndicate  to  finance  the  crop  at 
preferential  rates.  We  negotiated  paper-thin  margins  with  the  commercial  banks  to  make 
sure that it provided maximum benefit to the targeted beneficiaries.  
Sixth,  we  worked  closely  with  the  Treasury  to  develop  new  bank  lending  facilities  for  the 
Small and Medium Enterprises sector. This was announced in the November 2011 Budget. 
The Bank supported the initiative by providing the framework through which finance could be 
extended on favourable terms and conditions through commercial banks. The Bank has been 
closely monitoring the scheme since it was launched.  
Seventh, public debt management. The Bank was entrusted with the management of central 
Government’s debt since December 2008. Since then, the Bank has innovated with a host of 
measures  to  render  the  Government  securities  market  deep  and  liquid.  Single  maturity 
auctions that determine the Government’s debt profile are conducted since 2010 and this has 
enabled the issuer to decide on its debt profile rather than leave it to the market to mark its 
preference.  We  scored  some  success  in  lengthening  the  domestic  debt  profile  of  central 
Government.  A  new  instrument  –  273-day  Treasury  Bills  –  was  introduced  to  widen  the 
maturity  spectrum  of  available  instrument  and  we  succeeded  to  garner  a  smooth 
upward-sloping  yield  curve,  which  among  other  things,  is  expected  to  benefit  the 
development  of  a  corporate  bond  market  by  enabling  market  participants  to  price  their 
financial products.  
We have noted that banks, in general, have a tendency to lean on a buy-and-hold strategy 
when they purchase Government Treasury Bills. The marked preference of banks for official 
paper, even at the cost of driving down yields in the preferred part of the spectrum, and a 
growing risk aversion, have impeded the growth of credit and have prompted us to introduce 
a new tool in the form of a cap on banks’ holdings of Treasury Bills in their banking books in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
to  our  action  on 
April  2011.  This  cap  was  initially  set  at  20  per  cent  of  daily  average  rupee  deposits  and 
tightened further to 18 per cent as from July 2011. There is no limit on banks’ holdings of 
Treasury  Bills  in  their  trading  book.  You  will  note  that  while  most  central  banks  impose  a 
minimum holding of liquid assets, we were bold enough to prescribe a maximum imposable 
limit  on  the  premise  to  encourage  banks  to  direct  loanable  funds  towards  extending  more 
credit and also, to promote the long-awaited development of the secondary market.  
My  eighth  point  relates 
the  foreign  exchange  market.  For  an 
import-dependent economy which does not grow its own food and which imports its fuel, the 
exchange-rate pass-through plays a critical role in domestic inflation with imports accounting 
for  nearly  53%  of  the  Consumer  Price  basket.  Armed  with  our  mandate  to  target  price 
stability and the power to formulate appropriate intervention policies on the foreign exchange 
market, we moved decisively to reduce volatility on the foreign exchange market arising from 
suspected  currency  manipulation  in  an  oligopolistic  market  with  information  asymmetries 
where  the  State  Trading  Corporation  (STC)  played  the  role  of  the  fat  goose  to  be  avidly 
plucked by the well-informed and well-supplied currency trading desks. Our statutory powers 
allowed  the  Bank  to  provide  directly  the  currency  requirements  of  the  STC,  the  agency 
responsible for our fuel and part of our food imports. This measure not only reduced volatility 
but it also enabled the STC to have less frequent price adjustments, thereby contributing to 
the price stability objective of the Bank.  
The ninth measure we introduced relates to an action we took in June this year to shore up 
the export sector. Ever since the crisis hit, we have been closely monitoring the indebtedness 
of  the  corporate  sector.  We  have  a  high  level  of  interconnectedness  and  related  party 
transactions  in  our  banking  system,  which  makes  it  very  vulnerable  to  contagion.  Our 
exporters had long been used to a slow and steady depreciation of the domestic currency. 
Over the years, they built up large rupee debts which they serviced from unhedged foreign 
currency earnings, mostly in euros. The prolonged weakness of the euro prompted calls to 
peg the rupee to the euro and, more generally, to depreciate the rupee. Instead of yielding to 
these pressures, which  would have  imposed a heavy burden on the rest of the population 
and risked social instability, the Bank introduced a Special Facility in Foreign Currency for an 
amount of Euros 600 million, or 27% of gross reserves, to refinance the outstanding stock of 
rupee  debt  of  the  export  sectors  which  were  hit  by  the  declining  external  demand  in  key 
markets and the weakness of the export currencies. The Bank was charting new territory as 
we  had  never  undertaken  such  a  refinancing  operation.  Economic  operators  with 
highly-leveraged  balance  sheets  –  and  severely  affected  by  the  mismatch  between  their 
earnings  in  foreign  currency  and  their  debt  in  rupees  –  posed  grave  risks  to  the  balance 
sheets of banks and to overall financial stability in the country.  
The tenth measure was introduced in parallel with the previous one. It concerns the same 
issue  of  currency  valuation  but  approaches  it  from  the  perspective  of  foreign  exchange 
reserves.  There  is  no  doubt  that  the  rupee  has  strengthened  since  the  crisis  –  the  rupee 
exchange rate index moved from 100 in 2007 to 91.6 in December 2011, standing at 94.2 in 
September 2012. Over the same period, year-on-year inflation has fallen from 11.9% in 2006 
to  3.9%  in  September  2012  after  having  dipped  to  a record  low  of  0.1%  in  October  2009. 
Given  the  openness  of  the  economy  and  the  exchange  rate  pass-through  which  I  have 
referred  to  earlier,  we  could  not  have  achieved  the  inflation  outcome  without  the  currency 
strategy which underpinned it.  
There  has  been  increasing  concern  about the  “overvaluation”  of  the  rupee  from  exporters’ 
lobbies.  The  matter  has  been  addressed  by  the  IMF  in  the  last  two  annual  Article  IV 
consultations,  and  also  in  a  recent  special  report:  “Mauritius:  External  Balances  from  a 
Long-Term  Perspective.”  Please  bear  with  me  as  I  quote  selective  excerpts  from  these 
documents to drive home the point that we may possibly be misreading the IMF’s analysis 
when we argue for an accelerated depreciation:  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Excerpt 1:  
“The flexible exchange rate continues to play a useful role as a potential shock 
absorber;  exchange  rate  interventions  should  be  used  primarily  to  limit  excess 
volatility. Net international reserves appear fully adequate, but not excessive.”  
(Staff report for the 2012 Article IV Consultation, February 2012)  
Excerpt 2:  
“Using cross-country panel methodologies as well as single country time series 
techniques,  we  estimate  that  the  Mauritian  Rupee  is  mildly  overvalued  with 
respect to fundamentals. Nevertheless, there is significant uncertainty about the 
size  of  the  overvaluation.  Mauritian  competitiveness  in  general  (beyond  real 
exchange  rate  issues)  appears  to  have  declined  with  respect  to  exports,  labor 
productivity,  growth  in  unit  labor  costs,  and  other  structural  competitiveness 
indicators”  
(IMF: Mauritius External Balances from a Long-Term Perspective – May 2012)  
Excerpt 3:  
“The  balance  of  evidence  suggests the  need  for  measures to  address  external 
imbalances  and  declining  competitiveness…….the  real  exchange  rate  in  2012 
might  be  considered  overvalued……although 
fully 
conclusive….the  exchange  rate  is  one  of  the  tools  to  address  analyzed 
imbalances; likely partially effective in the short run, but also probably the most 
ineffective tool for the long run.”  
(IMF: Mauritius External Balances from a Long-Term Perspective – May 2012)  
the  evidence 
is  not 
Excerpt 4:  
“The recent strengthening of the Rupee owes to the depreciation of the Euro and 
the deteriorating conditions in the Euro area.”  
(IMF: Mauritius External Balances from a Long-Term Perspective – May 2012)  
Excerpt 5:  
“Empirical  results  indicate  that  the  BOM’s  FX  intervention  has  generally  been 
effective in affecting the volatility of the rupee exchange rates.”  
(IMF: Mauritius External Balances from a Long-Term Perspective – May 2012)  
Well, that should put paid to the argument that the Central Bank has been misguided in its 
forex intervention policies as much as to the contention that the salvation of the export sector 
depends on a currency fix that the Bank should provide.  
Earlier, we had been advised by the Fund that the mild overvaluation did not warrant active 
foreign exchange intervention. In the light of evidence suggesting growing misalignment and 
our reserve cover being qualified as “adequate, but not excessive”, we launched an initiative 
to  increase  our  reserve  cover  to  six  months’  of  imports.  Since  its  launch  in  June  2012, 
Operation Reserves Reconstitution has added reserves of nearly one month of import cover 
and we are well on the way to achieve our target. We managed to contain rupee appreciation 
and  corrected  the  growing  misalignment  without  creating  disorderly  conditions  on  the 
domestic foreign exchange market. Whether this will suffice to combat further appreciation 
depends very much on what happens to our trading partner currencies.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
I hope I have not bored you with all these details. These measures, and many other smaller 
ones relating amongst others to macro-prudential provisions, that I have no time to mention 
tonight,  contributed  to  build  “anti-fragility”  not  just  in  the  Mauritian  economy  but,  more 
broadly, in  Mauritian society as  well. We did not chart new territory; we  were really raking 
over old ground but we did it with a fresh insight and renewed determination. Lady luck was 
also  on  our  side  as  we  seem  to  have  got  the  sequencing  right.  Which  reminds  me  of  a 
remark of US President Herbert Hoover:  
“Wisdom consists not so much in knowing what to do in the ultimate as knowing 
what to do next”  
It  is  possible  that  we  have  also  been  helped  by  the  nature  of  our  banking  and  finance 
system.  Let  me  explain.  Two  years  ago  (June  2010),  I  was  privileged  to  be  among  the 
Governors who were being hosted to a dinner at All Souls College in Oxford by John Vickers, 
who was then chairing the International Banking Commission. He had arranged for a rather 
unusual after-dinner speaker, unusual for bankers’ meetings. This was the Oxford Professor 
of …….Zoology, Lord May, who treated us to a talk on “The Ecology of Finance”. The gist of 
his  argument  was  that  simple  ecosystems,  not  complex  ones,  were  better  at  resisting 
stressful  environments.  He  cautioned  against  extrapolating  from  ecosystems  to  financial 
systems but suggested that there were lessons to be learnt. Avoid complexity, and keep it 
simple. The Mauritian banking structure is a fairly simple one, with banks mobilizing deposits 
in traditional ways and the lender knowing the borrower. The simple structure and traditional 
banking  values,  allied  with  normally  non-intrusive  regulation,  have  also  contributed  to  the 
resilience of our banking system.  
Let  me  come  to  my  final  point  –  the  Gold  Bar  project  that  H.E.  The  President,  will  be 
launching later tonight. We have witnessed the domestic savings rate halving from 29% in 
1992 to 14% currently. This is partly in response to continued negative real interest rates on 
saving deposits. The outlook for normalising rates in the near future is not encouraging. In 
the absence of attractive financial saving instruments, it is the domestic property market that 
draws speculative investment with the risk of a real estate bubble. More generally, there is 
demand for a “safe haven”, away from paper currencies as we are living under the threat of 
the  depreciation  of  paper  money  and,  particularly  of  reserve  currencies,  from  quantitative 
easing. This is the rationale for the Bank to introduce physical gold as a new asset class. The 
Bank, which already sells industrial gold to jewelers and gold coins to the general public, has 
partnered with Rand Refinery of South Africa for this Gold Bar project.  
There are two features to this new savings instrument that enhance its attractiveness. We 
are  offering  a  buy-back  option  to  make  the  investment  as  liquid  as  possible;  and  we  are 
proposing  custodial  services  in  our  vault  to  mitigate  the  risk  of  loss  through  theft. We  are 
initially proposing gold bars in three denominations, 10g, 50g and 100g, and they will be put 
on sale at competitive prices, set as close as possible to those prevailing on the international 
bullion market. We now wait with bated breath to see how the market reacts to it!  
Before concluding, let me recognize – De La Rue with whom we have partnered to organize 
this event. As some of you may be aware, the relationship between Mauritius and De La Rue 
goes  as  far  back  as  1860!  Indeed  it  was  152  years  ago  that  Thomas  De  La  Rue,  as  the 
nascent company was then known, bagged its very first banknote printing contract, to supply 
Mauritius with three denominations of banknotes.  
The  first  note  to  be  printed  was  the  5-pound  note,  which  also  gave  its  fixed  exchange 
equivalent value of 25 dollars. Now,  would  it not be just great if we could issue our rupee 
notes  giving  their  exchange  value  in  Euros?  Alas,  the  world  of  fixed  parity  has  long  been 
gone. Let me also add a word of thanks to Standard Chartered Bank which chipped in as a 
silver sponsor.  
Our  thanks  also  go  to  the  Mauritius  Post  Office  which  kindly  agreed  to  issue  a  Special 
Commemorative Cover to mark this OMFIF meeting in Mauritius.  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
May I invite you to rise and propose a combined toast to the President of the Republic, to all 
our guests, this evening, and to the success of this OMFIF meeting. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
