Glenn Stevens: Remarks to Parliamentary Joint Committee on the 
Australian Commission for Law Enforcement Integrity 
Remarks  by  Mr  Glenn  Stevens,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  the 
Parliamentary Joint Committee on the Australian Commission for Law Enforcement Integrity, 
Canberra, 30 November 2012. 
 Madam Chair 
Members of the Committee  
Thank  you  for  the  opportunity  to  attend  today  and  for  the  opportunity  to  make  a  few 
introductory remarks.  
The Committee posed a number of questions to the Reserve Bank, some in relation to the 
lessons from the corruption allegations against Note Printing Australia (NPA) and Securency, 
and the majority in relation to the Bank’s offshore operations. The Bank responded to these 
questions in late May.  
In regard to the corruption allegations, the companies have extended their full cooperation to 
the  legal  authorities.  They  have  also  done  a  great  deal  of  work  to  reform  policies  and 
compliance over the past several years. Of course, these matters remain before the Courts.  
A key learning point for the Reserve Bank from these events is the extent of possible risks 
that  can  come  from  operating  commercial  ventures  which  export  to  a  range  of  foreign 
jurisdictions.  This  has  caused  the  Reserve  Bank  to  re-evaluate  its  risk  appetite  insofar  as 
such entities are concerned.  
As for the offshore operations of the Reserve Bank itself, there are three of them: in London, 
New York and, recently, Beijing. Of those three, the operations in London and New York are 
the  largest  and carry  the  greatest  risks for the Bank. Those  risks  are  overwhelmingly  of  a 
financial and operational nature, since a major part of those offices’ function is to manage the 
bulk  of the  Bank’s foreign  currency  assets. The  key  people  in  those  offices  are  Australian 
staff well trained in the Bank’s policies and controls for such activities.  
The Beijing office is, at this stage, small, purely representational, and is operated out of the 
Australian Embassy there, with the various protocols and controls associated with that. The 
staff there, who are bound by the Bank’s Code of Conduct, also received appropriate training 
from the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade.  
The Bank’s control environment for the London and New York offices has been configured 
appropriately for the risks these offices take, with detailed policies, procedures and controls. 
As a general observation, given the nature of the operations and the jurisdictions in which 
they are operating, the risks of corruption in the London and New York offices are considered 
generally to be inherently no more, and no less, than associated with like activities in Head 
Office. That said, risks of any operation can increase with remoteness and, for this reason, 
there is, on a daily basis, close monitoring from Head Office of all transactions undertaken in 
London and New York. Extensive, on-the-ground auditing of these operations occurs every 
year.  
As to the integrity framework generally, the Bank has a Code of Conduct, which governs all 
the staff. Staff receive training in the requirements of the Code and additionally are required 
periodically to re-familiarise themselves with it. As it happens, a new version of this Code has 
recently been rolled out, following an extensive review. There is also a comprehensive Fraud 
Control  Framework,  which  includes  a  Fraud  Policy  and  a  Reporting  Fraud  and  Unethical 
Behaviour  Policy.  The  Bank  has  drawn  upon  the  relevant  Australian  standards  and  best 
practice  guidelines,  including  the  Commonwealth  Fraud  Control  Guidelines  and  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Commonwealth Procurement Rules, in preparing and implementing its policies and its fraud 
risk management framework.  
Those policies place an obligation on staff to report any concerns they may have regarding 
compliance or unethical or illegal behaviour. There is an automatic process of escalation of 
such concerns, once expressed, to the Deputy Governor, and there are externally operated 
phone  numbers  staff  can  call  if  they  wish  to  remain  anonymous.  The  Bank  undertakes  to 
protect those who raise such concerns in good faith. Staff operating in the overseas offices, 
including locally recruited staff, are bound by these policies and the Code of Conduct. Staff in 
overseas offices are also, of course, bound by the laws of the country in which they reside. 
There  is  more  detail  in  our  responses  to  the  Committee’s questions  on  notice,  supplied  in 
late May.  
The  Committee  also  asked  about  corruption  risks  associated  with  the  Reserve  Bank’s 
participation in global and regional forums, in which participation has increased considerably 
over  recent  years.  These  are  forums  such  as  the  G-20,  the  Financial  Stability  Board,  the 
Asian central bank group known as EMEAP, and international institutions such as the Bank 
for International Settlements, the IMF and so on. We believe the risks of corruption in such 
activities are inherently low, and made lower by appropriate controls on the way participation 
is conducted.  
I would be pleased to respond to any questions members of the Joint Committee might have.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
