Nils Bernstein: Challenges ahead for the Danish economy 
Speech  by  Mr  Nils  Bernstein,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Denmark,  at  the  annual 
meeting of the Danish Bankers Association, Copenhagen, 3 December 2012. 
 The sovereign debt crisis is still leaving its mark on the world economy, especially in the euro 
area. While the US economy seems to be in a moderate upswing, the euro area economy is 
shrinking.  GDP  growth  has  been  negative in  the  last  two  quarters  and  the  outlook for  the 
4th quarter  is  not  bright.  Even  the  German  economy,  which  until  recently  had  been  less 
severely  affected  by  the  problems  in  Southern  Europe,  seems  to  be  slowing  down.  The 
Swedish  economy is  holding its  ground,  but  is  also seeing lower growth.  The international 
organisations  all  predict  that  the  world  economy  will  pick  up  only  gradually  in  2013,  and 
growth estimates have generally been adjusted downwards, particularly for the euro area. 
Although the USA seems to be faring a little better, its unsustainable budget deficit presents 
serious challenges. So far, political disagreement between the President and Congress has 
stood in the way of finding an effective solution to the problem. The risk is that the financial 
markets at some point begin to respond, as seen in other highly indebted countries. The USA 
is unique in a number of respects, such  as the size of the economy, but all the same, the 
economic fundamentals still apply. The development in the USA will have a knock-on effect 
on the rest of the world. 
In  the summer of  2011,  when  the US  debt ceiling was  raised, a compromise was  reached 
between  the  Democrats  and  Republicans,  meaning  that  a  number  of  summary  budget 
reductions will be introduced at the turn of the year, and at the same time a number of tax 
cuts will expire. 
The  potential tightening accounts for  4  per  cent  of  GDP  and,  if  effected, it  will  plunge the 
US economy into a recession. 
Negotiations to avoid this “fiscal cliff” are underway. It is scarcely possible to find a solution 
without  addressing  the  long-term  problems  linked  mainly  to  demographic  change.  The 
financial markets constantly reflect the changing prospects of reaching a compromise. 
In some of the most heavily indebted countries, unemployment has reached alarming levels. 
Public opinion often ascribes this to the consolidation of public finances. But actually, there is 
no real alternative to consolidation. Sustainable public finances are a condition for reducing 
the rate of interest on government debt to an acceptable level. Sovereign default is not an 
attractive  alternative.  And  it  will  certainly  not  lower  unemployment  –  on  the  contrary.  The 
solution is  the “long  haul”,  to  coin  a  phrase. The  problems  were  caused by  the  imprudent 
economic policies  pursued  by  these  countries  in  the  10–15  years  leading  up  to  the  crisis. 
They cannot be  solved overnight.  Ireland is  an example of  how  resolute action to  address 
budget and competitiveness problems can shorten the path back to tolerable conditions. 
The  ECB  continues  its  efforts  to  contain  the  crisis.  The  Outright  Monetary  Transactions 
programme announced in September entails that the ECB may buy short-term government 
bonds from debt-ridden EU member states in the secondary market under certain conditions – 
for  example  that  the  EU  member  state  accepts  a  programme  to  seriously  address  its 
structural problems. Following the announcement, 2-year yields immediately fell in e.g. Spain 
and Italy, while they rose in Germany. Activation of the programme requires an official request 
from the member state in question. Spain has been mentioned as a candidate. 
Turning  to  Greece,  we  hope  that  last  week’s  agreement  between  the  euro  area  finance 
ministers can restore calm for a while. But the Greek debt will be a recurring theme for many 
years to come.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The Danish  economy is  well-balanced, but  growth  is  on  a  slow  track. The  current-account 
surplus is large, and we hold considerable external assets. Inflation is moderate, and so is 
unemployment. In fact, if we disregard the most recent period of overheating, culminating in 
2008, we have to go back to the first half of the 1970s, when things also went wrong, to find a 
lower number of unemployed people than today. Experience from the period of overheating 
has to some extent distorted our concept of normality. But the level of unemployment in that 
period was not normal, so it cannot be used as a yardstick. If we do that, things will go wrong 
again. 
 The private sector is consolidating in the wake of the financial crisis. That is understandable, 
but obviously it is curbing consumption and investment. This trend will cease when savings 
have reached the desired level – time will show when – and the economy will begin to pick 
up. The shift could come suddenly – but that is not a promise – especially if the signals from 
the rest of Europe become more positive. 
The most recent national accounts figures for Denmark point to negative growth this year. We 
estimate that the economy will grow by 1–1½ per cent next year compared with this year. 
Exports have buoyed up growth in Denmark. The reason is that some of our largest export 
markets, such  as  Germany and  Sweden,  have  not  been so  severely affected by  the  crisis 
until now. In the short term this somewhat cushions the impact of a deterioration of around 
20 per cent  in  Denmark’s  competitiveness over  the  last  decade,  measured  by  relative  unit 
labour costs. We have lost and are still losing manufacturing jobs in the competitive sectors. If 
we want to boost employment in these areas, we must improve competitiveness – there are 
no other options. 
 There are – tentative – signs that the housing market is recovering. Price falls have slowed 
down and the curve has flattened somewhat during the year, both for owner-occupied flats 
and  for  single-family  houses.  In  the  Copenhagen  area,  which  typically  feels  the  winds  of 
change first, both turnover and prices have risen. 
The low level of interest rates is supporting the market. Moreover, the number of homes for 
sale  has  dropped  sharply  over  the  last  year,  which  helps  to  stabilise  prices.  As  regards 
mortgages,  we  are  seeing  a  shift  from  very  short-term  variable-rate loans  to  variable-rate 
loans with longer rate fixation periods, as well as a shift from lending by banks to lending by 
mortgage banks. 
 The  agreed  Finance  Bill  2013  is  in  keeping  with  the  2020  plan  for  public  finances,  which 
allows public spending to grow by 0.8 per cent of GDP. But this year consumption growth will 
be considerably lower, presumably below 1/4 per cent. However, it is essential not only to set 
narrow limits on growth in public spending, but also to observe these limits. In that respect we 
have seen a change in recent years – unlike previously, local and regional governments are 
not overspending. When the new Budget Act with a tougher sanction regime comes into force, 
starting with the budgets for 2014 to 2017, there is a greater chance that this will also be the 
case  in  future.  Prudent  management  of  public  finances  is  a  precondition  if  the  Danish 
government is to maintain its high credit rating and be able to borrow at low interest rates. 
This year the government deficit is expected to be just over 4 per cent of GDP. This is to a 
large extent attributable to the extraordinary disbursements of early retirement contributions; 
many people said yes when this option was offered. Disbursements total some kr. 25 billion, 
corresponding to 1½ per cent of GDP. 
The estimate of  next  year’s  deficit is  subject to  much  uncertainty due  to  the  new  rules  on 
taxation of capital pensions. The option to pay pension taxes in advance at a reduced rate will 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
provide considerable one-off revenue for  the  government. How  large this  revenue will  be  I 
cannot say. But it should be used to reduce government debt. 
The  government  has  not  yet  introduced  all  the  reforms  –  envisaged  in  the  2020  plan  – 
required  to  ensure  the  sustainability  of  public  finances.  So  keeping  to  the  path  of  reform 
should be a main priority in the near term. 
 Bank lending rates and the banks’ willingness to grant loans have been relatively high on the 
public agenda since the financial crisis. Since 2008, Danmarks Nationalbank has reduced its 
interest  rates  on  a  number  of  occasions.  But  individual  bank  customers  have,  perhaps, 
experienced a different reality. The banks have not reduced their lending rates by nearly as 
much as Danmarks Nationalbank has, and within the last six months many have announced 
higher interest rates, while the monetary-policy rates have continued to fall. There are several 
reasons for this. 
The unusually low  level of  interest rates has  made it  difficult –  not to  say  impossible –  for 
banks  to  reduce  deposit rates further. To  avoid  undermining their  earnings, the  banks  are 
compelled to keep their lending rates unchanged. 
At the same time, the banks have been met with tougher earnings requirements. While higher 
earnings must compensate for higher credit risk under less favourable business conditions, 
new  and  more  stringent  capital-adequacy  rules  mean  increased  capital  requirements. 
Irrespective of whether a bank chooses to build up capital buffers by retaining profits or by 
raising  capital from investors, this requires sound  earnings. Many  banks  have taken  major 
steps to reduce costs, sometimes at the expense of employees. 
Credit policies have generally been tightened since 2008. This is reflected in lending rates, 
but also in the perception of the access to borrow. Overall, firms are saving up, and when 
asked they generally say that they do not see finances as an impediment to production. 
With  a  view  to  increasing  funding  options  for  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises,  the 
opportunities to expand the use of corporate bonds are currently being explored. Danmarks 
Nationalbank welcomes this initiative, provided that it takes place on market terms. 
 It  has  attracted  considerable  international  attention,  most  recently  from  the  European 
Commission,  that  Danish  households  have  far  more  gross  debt  relative  to  income  than 
households in other countries. The low rate of interest on variable-rate mortgage loans has 
often been  identified as  the  reason why  the  finances of  the  households are,  nevertheless, 
generally  sound.  This  raises  the  question  of  how  robust  household  finances  are  to  rising 
interest rates, and whether an increase could jeopardise financial stability. Today we are able 
to provide a fairly detailed answer to these questions. The main conclusion of an extensive 
study of household finances is that the threat to financial stability from household debt and its 
composition is limited. The assessment is based on the share of the debt held by families with 
particularly tight budgets. 
Most  families  have  robust  finances  and  are  resilient  to  negative  events  such  as  a  strong 
increase in interest rates or a protracted period of unemployment if they reduce consumption 
or savings, although this may entail considerable lifestyle changes. And this assessment does 
not even take into account that a continuous rise in interest rates is very likely to go hand in 
hand with an economic recovery and hence better employment opportunities. 
Obviously this assessment of the risk to financial stability does not rule out the possibility that 
higher  interest  rates  could  have  rather  unpleasant  implications  for  families  with  very  tight 
finances. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Before I step down, it might be appropriate to reflect on some of the experience I have gained 
during my  seven years as  Governor  of  Danmarks  Nationalbank. Naturally, it  will only be  a 
brief summary. 
Without doubt, the financial crisis is the single event that has had the strongest impact on the 
financial sector during my tenure. 
How prepared were we? How did we tackle the crisis itself? Which follow-up steps should we 
take? These are important questions. 
Regardless of our actions, Denmark is a small, open economy and we would have been hit by 
the international financial crisis which from the autumn of 2008 caused international trade to 
contract by 20 per cent and later led to a European debt crisis that has descended like a fog 
of uncertainty on the European economies. 
The key question is whether we  in Denmark had made ourselves vulnerable to the severe 
shock that hit us from abroad. The answer is an unqualified “yes”. Even without a financial 
crisis, the Danish economy would have been under pressure. 
In  this country, the preceding international boom with ample liquidity and low  interest rates 
was  allowed  to  develop  into  an  unusual  overheating  of  the  economy,  which  was  already 
slowing down when the shock hit us. The tax freeze, tax cuts, growth in public spending and 
new mortgage types were the domestic factors behind the overheating. The banks’ lending 
growth,  skyrocketing  property  prices  and  unsustainably 
low  unemployment  were 
manifestations of the overheating. Cause and effect worked both ways. 
It has been discussed whether Danmarks Nationalbank issued sufficient warnings against this 
overheating. The truth is that the Danish government in the autumn of 2006 ignored a clear 
encouragement to tighten fiscal policy  by  kr.  8  billion; in fact, it  even eased fiscal policy in 
2007. And the opposition wanted to spend even more. 
Admittedly, such  tightening measures should preferably have been  introduced at an earlier 
stage, but even in the autumn of 2006 Danmarks Nationalbank could not find support for its 
view.  
This goes to show how difficult it is to conduct countercyclical economic policy. Often there is 
lack  of  ability  and  willingness  to  acknowledge  problems  in  time  and  take  action.  So 
stabilisation policy should first and foremost be achieved by introducing automatic stabilisers 
in  the  economy,  observing  sustainable  medium-term  spending  targets  and  aiming  for 
structurally balanced government budgets. Labour market structures should be designed to 
promote growth and employment. 
When  the  crisis  really  hit  the  financial  sector  in  September  2008,  a  large  majority  in  the 
Danish  parliament  –  the  Folketing  –  implemented  the  first  of  a  series  of  bank  rescue 
packages which  have  softened the worst  blows  against  the financial sector. It  has  been a 
great strength that these initiatives have received broad political support. 
The  bank  rescue  packages  were  introduced  as  crisis  measures.  An  actual  revision  of  the 
rules  on  banking  activities,  based  on  the  lessons  learned  from  the  financial  crisis,  is  now 
underway and is to a large extent taking place at the international level. For Denmark, this will 
initially result in EU regulation, subsequently in Danish rules to fill in the EU framework. 
A large financial legislation package is currently being submitted to the Folketing. I have the 
draft with me here. It weighs 1.37 kg. (Although I should add that the weight can be halved by 
printing on both sides of the paper.) And we will see much more in the coming years. 
It  is  understandable that  the  rules  are  being  tightened  after  the  excesses  of  the  financial 
crisis,  and  Denmark  has  very  little  scope  for  independent action.  All  the  same,  it  is  worth 
considering whether the growing volume of legislation and the increasing complexity of the 
rules will provide better assurance against future crises. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Professor  and  Doctor  of  Law  Linda  Nielsen,  who  works  with  banking  law  and  investment, 
recently made a noteworthy contribution to the debate in the daily Politiken. Everyone working 
with  these  issues  should  read  it.  Her  main  point  is  that  the  number  of  rules  aimed  at 
regulating the financial sector’s activities is overwhelming – and more are to come – and often 
the contents are so detailed and complex to read that even a person with a doctorate in law 
finds  them very difficult to  understand. There is  a  multitude  of  different rules  with  different 
structures, exemptions and levels of detail. It is completely overwhelming. 
What  does  this  mean  to  banks,  their  boards  and  their  customers,  and  how  about  the 
legislators? Are we constructing a vehicle where the person in the driver’s seat with a firm grip 
on the steering wheel believes to be steering it, while the car is in fact following its own path 
with considerable backlash? There is no simple answer to this question, which is not unique 
to  financial  regulation.  As  I  have  already  said,  individual  countries  have  little  room  for 
manoeuvre as these activities take place at the international level. However, it is important to 
make the rules as clear and simple as possible. That will make them easier to observe and 
control. Keep it simple. 
Let  me  try  to  illustrate  this.  Since  2004,  Danmarks  Nationalbank  has  prepared  so-called 
outlier  memos,  i.e.  identified  outlier  banks.  On  the  basis  of  –  mainly  –  published  financial 
statements for a large group of banks, we have been able to point out those that achieved the 
lowest scores for selected key ratios, such as excess capital adequacy, high lending growth, 
large  exposures  and  earnings  capacity.  Using  this  simple  method,  we  sought  to  identify 
potentially vulnerable banks. Subsequently, we have concluded that virtually all of the banks 
within this group that have actually become distressed had been identified beforehand using 
this relatively simple method. The Danish Financial Supervisory Authority was aware of this 
and  included  it  in  its  supervisory  activities.  With  the  “Supervisory  Diamond”,  the  Danish 
Financial Supervisory Authority has taken a step in the right direction, with focus on observing 
a few key ratios – and now with sanctions for non-observance. And others can also monitor 
these key ratios. 
Another  interesting  observation  is  that  among  the  10 banks  identified  before  the  crisis  as 
having  the  highest  exposures  to  the  property  sector,  8–9  have  subsequently  become 
distressed. 
So the conclusion is that relatively simple key ratios can be used to identify the banks that 
could be at risk. 
Aggressive  lending growth  combined with  property speculation is  the single  factor with the 
greatest impact on the banks that have folded. 
 Seen in a broader perspective, Denmark has navigated the financial crisis fairly well so far. 
The  weeding  out  of  unsound  banks  has  almost  been  completed,  and  after  all  less  than 
6 per cent of the banks became distressed – measured by balance-sheet total. Despite the 
large house price falls, the number of enforced sales is limited – especially when compared 
with  the  housing  crisis  in  the  early  1990s.  If  we  disregard  periods  of  unsustainable 
overheating  and  subsequent  adjustment,  unemployment  has  not  been  lower  for  the  last 
40 years. Denmark has sound economic ratios and internationally it is among the countries 
with the highest credit ratings. The reason why we have not been more severely hit is that we 
had  the  necessary  buffers.  All  in  all,  this  is  no  bad  point  of  departure  for  meeting  the 
challenges of the coming years. 
 In  my  seven years as  Governor  of  Danmarks Nationalbank, 1/3 of  Denmark’s banks  have 
disappeared  –  in  numeric  terms.  The  decline  has  been  steady  over  this  period  and  is  in 
keeping with a trend that goes far back – crisis or no crisis. Danmarks Nationalbank will gladly 
assist you in calculating when you will be able to hold your annual meeting at a decent-sized 
dining table – if this trend continues. As I see it, the most significant factor is the increasing 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
complexity of banking. So if I may offer a piece of sound advice to a Director of the Danish 
Bankers Association (chief lobbyist) who wishes to continue to have a large number of paying 
members,  I  suggest  that  you  give  priority  to  clear  and  simple  rules  –  especially  for  small 
banks. Regardless of the path you take, I would like to thank the Danish Bankers Association, 
its members, its employees and its Director for our good and constructive cooperation through 
seven years.  
Thank you for your attention.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
