Mario Draghi: Hearing at the Committee on Economic and Monetary 
Affairs of the European Parliament 
Introductory statement by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, before 
the  Hearing  at  the  Committee  on  Economic  and  Monetary  Affairs  of  the  European 
Parliament, Brussels, 17 December 2012. 
 Madam Chair, 
Honourable members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, 
It  is  a  pleasure  to  be  back  here  in  Parliament  and  in  front  of  your  Committee  for  our  last 
exchange of views in 2012. 
This year has not been an easy one. It has been a year when the ties that bind the Member 
States of the euro area have been tested. But it has also been a year in which a longer-term 
vision  for  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  (EMU)  has  been  formulated.  And  it  is  a  year  in 
which  that  vision  has  begun  to  be  translated  into  actions,  including  on  vital  reforms  of 
European governance. 
We end the year on a positive note with the re-launching of that longer-term vision, with the 
proactive  steps  taken  by  governments  and  European  institutions  towards  a  genuine  EMU 
and,  most  recently,  with  the  unanimous  agreement  by  the  ECOFIN  to  establish  a  Single 
Supervisory Mechanism (SSM). 
Let me congratulate your Committee for the swift adoption of its position on the SSM and its 
ambitious  European  approach.  This  a  clear  demonstration  that  European  institutions  are 
determined  to  act  in  a  timely  and  decisive  way  to  complete  EMU.  And  it  is  a  clear 
demonstration that euro area Member States are ready to agree to a substantial sharing of 
sovereignty when circumstances require. 
Recent agreements mark a major qualitative step towards a stable EMU. The establishment 
of  the  SSM  can  be  expected  to  be  a  key  turning  point  in  the  resolution  of  our  current 
challenges. 
The SSM will contribute to restoring confidence in the banking sector across the euro area. It 
will help to revive inter-bank lending and cross-border credit flows, with tangible effects for 
the  real  economy.  And  combined  with  possible  direct  recapitalisation  of  banks  by  the 
European Stability Mechanism and an envisaged single resolution mechanism, the SSM will 
go a long way towards breaking the vicious feedback loops between sovereigns and banks. 
I hope that the legislative process can now be concluded swiftly. After the adoption of the 
relevant legal acts, the European Central Bank (ECB) will launch the preparations so that the 
SSM can be established within the timeline foreseen by the legislators. 
In my introductory remarks today, I will first briefly summarise the economic and monetary 
situation.  I  will  then  address  the  relationship  between  monetary  policy  and  financial 
supervision. And I will close by outlining my views on the priorities for 2013 in implementing 
the shared longer-term vision for EMU. 
Economic and monetary developments 
1. 
Since  our  last  meeting,  the  ECB  has  left  its  key  interest  rates  unchanged:  the  main 
refinancing rate stands at 0.75%; the rate on the deposit facility at 0%; and the rate on the 
marginal lending facility at 1.50%. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
On non-standard monetary policy measures, the Governing Council decided in December to 
continue  conducting  all  refinancing  operations  as  fixed  rate  tender  procedures  with  full 
allotment, at least until July 2013. 
The  medium-term  outlook  for  economic  activity  remains  challenging.  Economic  activity 
contracted for a second consecutive quarter in the third quarter of 2012, and indicators for 
the  fourth  quarter  signal  further  weakness,  although  some  recent  survey  indicators  have 
stabilised  at  low  levels  and  financial  market  sentiment  has  improved  further.  Domestic 
demand  is  dampened  by  still  weak  consumer  and  investor  sentiment  and  the  ongoing 
balance sheet adjustments in the banking and business sectors, which continue to weigh on 
investment decisions. 
We expect economic weakness to extend into next year with a very gradual recovery in the 
second half of the year. The recovery is expected to be supported by strengthening global 
demand,  a  highly  accommodative  monetary  policy  stance  and  significantly  improved 
confidence in financial markets, all of which should work their way through to spending and 
investment decisions. 
Annual inflation in the euro area has continued to moderate, falling from 2.5% in October to 
2.2%  in  November.  Looking  ahead,  inflation  is  expected  to  decline  further.  This  should 
support real disposable incomes. 
Risks to the outlook for price developments are broadly balanced. Inflation expectations for 
the euro area remain firmly in line  with the Governing Council’s aim of maintaining annual 
inflation rates below, but close to, 2%. 
Our  monetary  analysis  paints  a  picture  consistent  with  price  stability.  Looking  at 
developments  over  several  months,  the  underlying  pace  of  monetary  expansion,  when 
accounting  for  special  factors,  remains  subdued.  Loan  dynamics  are  also  subdued  and  in 
many parts of the euro area, credit has been contracting. This is the result of balance sheet 
adjustments by banks and businesses as well as the current economic weakness. 
Monetary policy and financial supervision 
2. 
Let me now turn to the first topic chosen for our exchange of views, namely the relationship 
between monetary policy and financial supervision. 
The discussions leading to the recent decision to establish the SSM have raised questions 
about  how  monetary  policy  responsibilities  and  supervisory  responsibilities  should  be 
appropriately separated. 
In  recent  years,  many  central  banks  have,  for  good  reasons,  assumed  supervisory  roles. 
Fourteen of the 17 national central banks in the euro area have a role in supervision and so 
too do several major central banks elsewhere in the world. 
Indeed, the global financial crisis has generally led to closer ties between central banks and 
financial  supervision.  The  Bank  of  England,  for  example,  will  soon  assume  supervisory 
responsibilities previously assigned to the Financial Services Authority. In the US, the role of 
the Fed in financial supervision has been strengthened. 
This all suggests that the relationship between monetary policy and financial supervision is 
particularly  important  in  times  of  crisis.  It  is  not  by  chance  that  historically  the  first  central 
banks were supervisors of commercial banks. 
The  ECB  will  establish  clear  guiding  principles  and  internal  operating  practices  to  ensure 
effective separation of monetary policy and financial supervision. Let me briefly elaborate. 
First,  the  ECB’s  involvement  in  financial  supervision  has  no  bearing  whatsoever  on  our 
primary objective of price stability. It bears neither on the objective itself, which is statutory, 
nor on its quantified expression of inflation rates below, but close to, 2%. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Second,  a  supervisory  board  will  form  the  centre  of  gravity  for  the  conduct  of  financial 
supervision. It may encompass a geographical entity that is somewhat wider than the euro 
area if, as we hope, several countries that are not currently euro area Member States decide 
to join the SSM. 
Third, separation between monetary policy and financial supervision will in particular take the 
form of independent analysis and prescription for the use of policy tools for each of the two 
functions. This will rely on strong governance. 
We  will  establish  appropriate  internal  procedures  that  ensure  clear  functional  separation. 
Here we will follow international best practice. 
While  separation  of  the  two  functions  is  essential,  it  is  an  established  fact  that  stronger 
supervision facilitates the conduct of monetary policy. Let me give you just two examples. 
First, in the absence of financial stability, standard monetary policy tools – namely, changes 
in  the  short-term  interest  rate  –  lose  some  of  their  potency.  Effective  supervision  that 
contributes to a stable financial system can only benefit the smooth transmission of monetary 
policy. 
Second,  effective  financial  supervision  can  counteract  excessive  leverage  and  exuberant 
credit  expansions,  which  can generate  inflationary  pressure  over the  longer  term. Thus,  in 
mitigating  the  build-up  of  macroeconomic  imbalances,  effective  supervision  can  foster  a 
stable macroeconomic environment with stable prices. 
Monetary policy will stay credibly oriented towards price stability. In so doing, it secures the 
trust of markets and the public in the stable purchasing power of a currency. This stabilises 
market  expectations,  lowers  volatility  and  creates  an  environment  for  stable  financial 
markets. 
We  have  begun  internal  reflections  on  all  these  issues,  together  with  the  national  central 
banks, and we stand ready to launch the formal preparations as soon as the legal framework 
has been adopted. 
A genuine economic and monetary union 
3. 
Let me now turn to the second topic chosen for our exchange of views, namely a genuine 
economic and monetary union. 
In the spring of this year, after three years of severe economic and financial challenges, it 
became clear that what the euro area needs is a coherent longer-term vision for EMU. At our 
April  hearing,  we  discussed  such  a  vision,  following  earlier  discussions  in  this  Committee 
about the Fiscal Compact and Growth Compact. The vision was then laid out in greater detail 
for the Heads of State or Government. 
Since that time, remarkable progress has been made. The June European Council was an 
important  milestone.  Institutional  changes  that  were  not  conceivable  less  than  a  year  ago 
have been put on the EU political agenda or are about to be finalised. The SSM is a prime 
example of such political momentum. 
Last week, the European Council set out further steps towards the completion of EMU. The 
in-depth discussions of structural reforms and the challenges of competitiveness have been 
particularly important – and they are reflected in the Council’s conclusions. 
From an ECB perspective, I see two main priorities for 2013. First, we should improve the 
functioning of economic union. Excessive imbalances within the euro area have destabilised 
EMU. This must not be allowed to happen again. 
It is encouraging that adjustment is now visibly underway. For example, exports of goods and 
services have increased by 27% in volume in Spain since 2009 – and by 14% for Ireland, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
22%  for  Portugal  and  21%  for  Italy.  These  four  countries  are  also  experiencing  gains  in 
relative unit labour costs. 
Economic reforms bear fruit, even if, in the short term, the costs to individual citizens can be 
considerable. But the reforms are the right path. Governments should persevere. 
What can be done at the European level to provide even more support for this process? The 
proposed  “reform  contracts”  between  euro  area  Member  States  and  EU  institutions  are  a 
promising avenue. Combined with a carefully designed framework of targeted and temporary 
financial  support,  they  should  contribute  to  fostering  structural  reforms  and  thereby 
strengthening competitiveness. 
Ideally,  the  reform  contracts  should  focus  on  countries  with  the  largest  competitiveness 
challenges. They should identify the structural bottlenecks to improving competitiveness and 
target the reforms in a way that will remove those bottlenecks. This would establish a clear 
link  between  reforms  and  restoring  competitiveness,  which  is  essential  for  growth  and  job 
creation. 
Smooth  functioning  of  product  and  labour  markets  is  a  prerequisite  for  growth  and  job 
creation  in  EMU.  I  therefore  welcome  the  announcement  that  next  year  the  European 
Commission will undertake a systematic review of product and labour markets. For euro area 
countries the review should allow to assess whether these markets are fully compatible with 
participation  in  EMU.  Here,  product  and  labour  markets  must  provide  for  enhanced 
adjustment  capacity  to  adapt  to  a  changing  global  economic  environment  and  ensure 
sustained high levels of employment. 
The second priority for 2013 from the ECB’s perspective is the completion of financial union 
with the establishment of a single resolution mechanism. The aim of resolution is to deal with 
non-viable banks through measures that include their orderly winding down and closure while 
preserving financial stability. Such a mechanism will make it possible for banks to fail in an 
orderly manner. 
Improving economic union by restoring competitiveness and the functioning of product and 
labour markets on the one hand, and setting up a single resolution framework on the other 
hand are key priorities for 2013. 
This Committee has always pushed for ambitious European solutions in the field of financial 
and  economic  governance.  I  am  confident  that  you  will  again  play  an  instrumental  role  in 
moving  the  agenda forward  and  adopting  the  relevant  legislative  proposals. Thank  you for 
your attention. I am now at your disposal for questions.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
