Mohammed Iqbal Belath: Africa and the Indo-Pacific – the new economic 
mainspring 
Welcome address by Mr Mohammed Iqbal Belath, Second Deputy Governor of the Bank of 
Mauritius,  at  the  Second  Meeting  of the Official  Monetary  and  Financial  Institutions  Forum 
(OMFIF) in Africa, hosted by the Bank of Mauritius, Port Louis, 5 November 2012. 
 Governors  
Deputy Governors  
Members of the Management Board of OMFIF 
Members of the Advisory Board of OMFIF  
Distinguished Guests  
Ladies and Gentlemen  
A very good morning and warm welcome to you all!  
I  feel  privileged  to  deliver  this  Welcome  Address  on  the  occasion  of  the  2nd  Meeting  of 
OMFIF in Africa, which demonstrates the growing importance of the Dark Continent on the 
global  map.  The  continent  has  come  a  long  way  from  its  ruthless,  poverty-stricken  and 
unstable  political  environment.  Today,  Africa  is  looked  upon  as  the  continent  full  of 
opportunities, the place where we may say the “next big things to unfold”. The hosting of this 
Meeting in Mauritius is a premiere for the Bank and I will like to salute the vision of Governor 
Bheenick to put our Bank on the radar of Official Monetary and Financial Institutions Forum.  
The 1st Meeting in Africa, the inaugural one, was held a year ago in Pretoria at the South 
African  Reserve  Bank,  when  the  SARB  was  celebrating  its  90th  Anniversary.  The 
2nd Meeting is being held at the Bank of Mauritius, which is celebrating its 45th Anniversary 
this year. Perfect Symmetry? Sheer Coincidence? I’d rather not venture to know the venue 
for the 3rd Meeting in Africa!!! Leaving aside the perfect symmetry of these anniversaries, I 
believe that it is the ideal time to be in Africa and to deliberate of the topic of the Meeting: 
Africa and the Indo-Pacific: The New Economic Mainspring.  
The  US  Secretary  of  State,  Hillary  Clinton,  first  coined  the  term  “Indo-Pacific”  officially  in 
October  2010,  in  Honolulu,  in  a  geopolitical  sense,  to  elucidate  developments  in  the  Asia 
Pacific region. Her husband, former President Bill Clinton, on one of his innumerable trips to 
Africa, declared and I quote “We are living in the most interdependent time in history. The 
evidence is all around us. Wealth and talent now cross borders that are more like nets than 
walls but so do less positive forces. The financial crisis that started in the United States and 
swept the globe proved just how deeply our social and economic fates are intertwined — we 
can’t escape each other anymore. The good news is that we have more power than ever to 
build a world of shared values and shared opportunities – and nowhere is this clearer than in 
Africa.”  
The Indo-Pacific region covers a huge geo-strategic and geo-economic territory, covering the 
western  Pacific  Ocean  to  the  western  Indian  Ocean  along  the  eastern  coast  of  Africa.  As 
global economic power shifts from West to East, this region is rapidly gaining importance as 
the centre of trade, investment and cooperation. The Indo-Pacific contains close to half the 
world’s population and  draws Australia together with the rising powers of China and India, 
the  dynamic  sub-regions  of  Northeast  Asia  and  Southeast  Asia  and  the  resource  rich  and 
sometimes  volatile  Middle  East  and  Africa.  Moreover  the  region  provides  several  of  the 
world’s most important choke-points for global commerce. So, there could not have been a 
better theme for seminar.  
This Meeting will dwell  on a number of issues and I don’t intend to elaborate thereon. But 
allow me to throw some thrusts on some of the topical issues. When we look at Asia, the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
growth  of  its  intra-regional  trade  in  the  last  decade  has  been  quite  inspirational  and  has 
helped  in  building  new  channels  of  growth.  These  have  indeed  helped  Asia  to  sustain  its 
growth momentum in these challenging times and contain the spillover effects of lacklustre 
economic performance in traditional markets. Africa, too, is gearing up its regional market, 
which has an immense potential. But Africa has a big infrastructural disadvantage – countries 
throughout the continent are not well-connected. Steady advances in regional integration and 
services  will  surely  enable  the  move  from  overseas  trade  to  trade  between  countries  and 
across regions.  
Increasingly,  Africa  is  making  use  of  available  technology  to  make  progress  on  inclusive 
growth.  The  use  of  mobile-banking,  this  single  most  innovative  instrument,  has  created 
ripples  by  increasing  outreach  to  many  of  the  unbanked  that  were  excluded  due  to  high 
operation costs in establishing branch network around the continent. This broad example will 
set the path for inclusive growth but it raises concerns for policymakers for financial stability 
issues arising therefrom.  
Africa has, in the past, been victim of what is referred to as the “natural resource curse”. But 
today  we  are  witnessing  a  new  phenomenon  with  the  surge  in  commodity  prices. 
Commodity-exporting  countries  have  experienced  appreciation  of  their  currencies  owing  to 
increasing  capital  flowing  in  those  countries  to  take  advantage  of  the  rising  commodity 
prices.  Also,  they  have  been  following  the  trend  in  setting  up  Sovereign  Wealth  Funds. 
Unfortunately, these capital flows had made those countries vulnerable to the occurrence of 
Dutch disease, excessive capital and exchange rate volatility.  
Today  we  are  meeting  for  the  5th  Meeting  of  the  World  E-Money  Council.  E-money  is 
gradually becoming an important element of the infrastructure of a modern economy. There 
exists different synonyms and definitions of e-money, but anything where value is exchanged 
electronically  and  by  contrast,  not  using  physical  form  of  money,  is  generally  accepted  as 
E-money.  
All  of  us  do  very  much  appreciate  the  convenience  of  the  ability  to  pay  by  plastic.  Card 
payments as well as E-money transactions have systematically grown to account for a big 
slice  of  spending  in  the  retail  economy.  The  ability  to  make  and  receive  payments  with 
confidence  is  the  centre  stage  of  any  commercial  activity.  The  smooth  functioning  of  the 
market  infrastructure  for  enabling  payment  and  settlement  systems  is  essential  for  market 
and financial stability as well as for economic efficiency. The public policy objectives common 
to all stakeholders are to enhance public confidence, safety, integrity, access to finance and 
efficiency  of  payments  systems.  Consequently,  to  facilitate  cross-border  trade  and 
investment 
instruments,  clearing  mechanisms  and 
settlements systems must be in place.  
Allow me here to talk of our own involvement in regional initiatives. The Bank of Mauritius is 
the  settlement  bank  in  the  REPSS  set-up,  which  enables  for  the  cross-border  payment 
settlement needs of COMESA countries. The Bank is actively pursuing discussions to extend 
this  platform  beyond  COMESA.  Another  initiative  of  the  Bank,  which  came  into  effect  last 
September related to the Cheque Truncation System (CTS), which refers to the clearing of 
cheques based on digital images of cheques. This initiative ultimately attempts to eliminate 
potential fraud and forgery risks while ensuring faster clearing of cheques.  
However,  the  advent  of  E-Money  raises  a  number  of  challenges  for  central  banks:  Will 
e-money  always  be  variants  of  the  national  currency  of  a  country?  Can  central  banks 
account for e-money in circulation? Will they still have the monopoly of money issuance and 
therefore dictate monetary policies? And what about the impact on regulation and anti-money 
laundering?  
Ladies and Gentlemen, allow me to quote Elbert Hubbard, the philosopher (1856–1915), who 
said that “The world is moving so fast these days that the man who says it can’t be done is 
generally interrupted by someone doing it.” I will no further stand before the beginning of your 
the  appropriate  payment 
flows, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
sessions  and,  without  much  ado,  I  wish  you  all  successful  deliberations  and  a  fruitful 
Meeting.  
Thank you for your kind attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
