Fritz Zurbrügg: Fiscal and monetary policy – interdependence and 
possible sources of tension 
Speech by Mr Fritz Zurbrügg, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at 
the University of Lucerne, Lucerne, 21 November 2012. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure for me to be giving this presentation at the University of Lucerne this 
evening. Tonight’s topic is one that has interested me for some time. During my ten years at 
the  International  Monetary  Fund,  I  repeatedly  dealt  with  questions  of  fiscal  and  monetary 
policy and the interplay between them – albeit in a general and rather abstract way. Over the 
past six years at the Federal Finance Administration, my work was focused on fiscal policy, 
and in particular its implementation. This summer, I transferred to the Governing Board of the 
Swiss National Bank (SNB), and now have the unique opportunity, and the privilege, to focus 
on  monetary  policy.  Although  it  is  probably  a  little  early  for  me  to  be  making  definitive 
speeches on both of these economic policy areas, I would like to share a few initial thoughts 
with you. 
Introduction 
In some countries, the scope for fiscal policy action has recently come up against its limits. 
Governments today find themselves in the position of being virtually unable to finance their 
normal range of activities, meaning that there is also no scope left for discretionary economic 
stimulus  measures.  This  has  raised  expectations  on  monetary  policy  to  do  something  to 
stabilise the economy and the financial markets. And indeed, central banks across the world 
have introduced unconventional measures, in order to fulfil their mandates even under these 
unusual circumstances. Some of these measures have come in for criticism, because they 
encroach on the territory of fiscal policy. 
Thus, there is currently tension between monetary and fiscal policy in a number of countries. 
How does this tension come about? Which factors might exacerbate or mitigate it? And what 
is the current situation in Switzerland? 
To address these questions, I will first review the goals and the division of responsibilities in 
these two areas of economic policy. In a second step, using the recent crisis as an example, 
I will highlight the importance of rules and a culture of stability for an economic policy that is 
both  sustainable  and  tension-free.  I  will  finish  by  describing  the  current  situation  in 
Switzerland. 
Fiscal and monetary policy goals and complementarity 
Must there necessarily be tension between monetary and fiscal policy? This might be true if 
these two areas of economic policy were pursuing conflicting goals. However, if we look at 
the  objectives  of  monetary  and  fiscal  policy,  we  can  see  that  they  are  very  similar 
(cf. chart 1). 
Today, in most advanced economies, monetary policy is conducted by independent central 
banks, with the primary objective being to ensure price stability while taking due account of 
economic  developments.  If,  for  example,  a  central  bank  raises  interest  rates  because 
inflation is edging upwards, it can expect this to have a dampening effect on the economy. At 
the  same time, monetary  policy  authorities must  always  bear  in  mind that monetary  policy 
can only create favourable conditions for growth temporarily; in the long term, expansionary 
monetary policy cannot achieve a lasting stimulation of aggregate demand. If it nevertheless 
attempts  this,  it  will  have  an  inflationary  impact  in  the  long  term,  and  destabilise  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
economy. To avoid this, the central bank must focus on a goal which is achievable with the 
resources at its disposal, namely ensuring price stability. Price stability is not an end in itself. 
By ensuring price stability, monetary policy creates conditions favourable for companies and 
households, and thereby makes an important contribution to stable economic development. 
Fiscal policy is aimed at ensuring that expenditure and receipts are balanced over the long 
term. At the same time, budgetary policy has to take account of the state of the economy. 
This  is  how  the  Confederation’s  primary  fiscal  policy  goal  is  set  out  in  the  Federal 
Constitution.1 These clear principles ensure that fiscal policy can fulfil its important function of 
stabilising the economy without the soundness of public finances being called into question. 
If fiscal  policy focuses  exclusively  on  encouraging growth  and  pays  no  attention  to  budget 
soundness, it runs the risk of losing its room for manoeuvre. This is essential in enabling it to 
react to new challenges, and to smooth the economy in the event of a crisis. Thus, budget 
soundness is not an end in itself, because it fosters employment and prosperity. 
Fiscal  policy  thus  pursues  a  similar  goal  to  monetary  policy.  By  creating  favourable 
conditions for lasting and balanced economic growth, they both foster a prosperous society. 
The  economic  policy  goals  of monetary  and  fiscal  policy  are  closely  intertwined  –  or  even 
overlapping. 
In both of these economic policy areas, sustainability is key: Fiscal policy can only ensure the 
lasting  achievement  of  its  goals  if  public  finances  remain  healthy  over  the  long  term. 
Monetary  policy,  for  its  part,  should  focus  on  the  medium  to  long  term,  because  any 
economic stimulus motivated by short-term considerations carries the risk of raising inflation 
expectations. 
To recap: The goals of fiscal and monetary policy overlap to a large extent, which means that 
in normal times there should be no tension between the two policies. Nevertheless, there is a 
strong  complementarity  between  fiscal  and  monetary  policy,  as  their  operations  have  a 
reciprocal impact as regards both the financial markets and the real economy. 
Let’s  look  at  the  financial  markets  first  (cf.  chart  2).  Monetary  policy  steers  a  reference 
interest rate on the money market, which is used as a basis for the valuation and trading of 
securities such as government bonds on the financial market. If monetary policy is credible 
and succeeds in ensuring price stability, inflation expectations are low and well anchored. In 
this case, small changes in the reference rate cause relatively large adjustments to long-term 
rates – the monetary policy transmission mechanism is working. The inflation risk premium 
and  capital  market  rates  are  low.  Lower  interest  rates  mean  lower  funding  costs  for  the 
government. However, if the government seeks capital market funding, another factor comes 
into  play  in  addition  to  inflation  expectations  and  the  inflation  risk  premium:  the  credit  risk 
premium. The more sustainable the public finances, the greater investor confidence will be. 
This leads to a lower credit risk premium. This makes public finances more affordable, which 
in  turn  reduces  credit  risk.  Monetary  policy  also  benefits,  because  the  transmission  of 
monetary policy stimuli is not impeded. In this way, sustainable monetary and fiscal policy 
together achieve greater stability, less uncertainty and lower rates. 
Let’s now turn to the real economy (cf. chart 3). On the one hand, lower interest rates mean 
lower  funding  costs  for  companies  and  private  households.  This  provides  favourable 
conditions  for  economic  growth  but  does  not  create  it  per  se.  Growth  itself  is  founded  on 
productivity  gains,  population  growth  and  capital  formation.  A  stability-oriented  monetary 
policy  allows  households  and  companies  to  make  their  economic  decisions  (work, 
consumption,  saving  and  investment)  in  a  less  uncertain  environment.  In  this  way,  the 
                                                
1   Swiss Federal Constitution, Art. 126 (budget): “The Confederation shall keep its expenditure and receipts in 
balance in the long term”; art. 100 (economic policy): “In their budgetary policy, the Confederation, Cantons 
and Municipalities shall take into account the economic development”. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
allocation of resources and capital is improved. Fiscal policy can benefit from this, because a 
steady economic cycle means more stable receipts and expenditure. 
Fiscal  policy  also  facilitates  the  planning  of  economic  decisions,  when  it  is  focused  on 
stability. A balanced budget allows relatively constant taxation. But if a government is heavily 
in debt, there is a danger that households will save rather than consume, despite a low level 
of  taxation,  because  they  are  expecting  future  tax  increases  (Ricardian  equivalence). 
Economic policy stability reduces uncertainty and thereby creates favourable conditions for 
economic growth. In such an environment, the central bank is able to focus entirely on its 
mandate of maintaining price stability. 
So  successful  monetary  policy  is  predicated  on  healthy  fiscal  policy,  and  vice  versa.  To 
achieve stability and prosperity in the long term, fiscal and monetary policy must both focus 
on sustainability. When that happens, tension can be avoided. 
Good rules limit discretionary freedom 
To  achieve  as  tension-free  an  economic  policy  as  possible,  fiscal  and  monetary  policy 
implementation thus has to focus on stability. But how can this be guaranteed? The freedom 
of action of a central bank, in particular, is considerable, given that it has the note-issuing 
privilege  and  implements  monetary  policy  independently  of  political  considerations.  But  in 
fiscal policy, too, the government and parliament enjoy a relatively large amount of discretion 
in the performance of their mandate. They can set the level of both taxes and expenditure, 
although there are, a priori, no clear guidelines on the optimal levels. 
In order to ensure that fiscal and monetary policy authorities do not exploit their discretionary 
freedom,  but  instead  use  their  instruments  in  a  targeted  way  with  the  aim  of  achieving 
sustainable economic policy, there need to be clear and binding rules. 
In the monetary policy domain, the “rules versus discretion” debate started early. Its origins 
can  be  traced  back  to  the  beginning  of  the  19th  century.  At  that  time,  disciples  of  the 
so-called currency school were demanding that the issuance of paper money be closely tied 
to the central bank’s gold reserves, whereas advocates of the banking school took the view 
that a stability-fostering expansion in the money supply would also come about without such 
a rule. 
The first arguments in favour of rules appeared early on in the literature on monetary policy.2 
Today,  there  is  a  consensus  that  a  rules-based  monetary  policy  is  more  successful  in 
ensuring price stability. The lack of clarity in past rules had led to monetary policy being more 
exposed to political pressure. As a result, monetary policy authorities were tempted to focus 
more on short-term growth stimulus than on the long-term repercussions of such stimulus on 
price  stability.  This  is  why  monetary  policy  needs  to  be  conducted  by  a  rules-based, 
independent  central  bank,  with  the  main  focus  on  the  assessment  of  the  future  path  of 
inflation.3  Thus,  the  actual  goal  of  monetary  policy  –  price  stability  –  can  be  achieved 
(cf. chart 4). 
In  the  fiscal  policy  domain,  the  “rules  versus  discretion”  debate  is  of  much  newer  vintage. 
Whereas,  in  1990,  there  were  only  five  countries  with  fiscal  rules  (Germany,  Indonesia, 
Japan,  Luxembourg  and  the  US), today  there  are  81.4  The  current financial  crisis  and  the 
associated debt crisis have highlighted the importance of fiscal rules. In principle, fiscal policy 
can be implemented by means of automatic stabilisers and discretionary measures. To be 
effective,  discretionary  measures  have  to  fulfil  a  number  of  conditions.  These  can  be 
                                                
2   Cf. Friedman (1948). 
3   Cf. Kydland and Prescott (1977), and Barro and Gordon (1983). 
4   Cf. Budina et al (2012). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
summed  up  as  the  three  T-criteria:  timely,  targeted  and  temporary.5  In  other  words, 
discretionary measures have to take effect in good time, to avoid them having a procyclical 
effect. This risk arises, in particular, from the fact that discretionary measures require political 
decisions. So their implementation can take a lot of time. Second, such measures need to be 
targeted, so that support can be given to the sectors and industries affected. Third, they must 
be temporary, so as not to permanently weigh on public finances. 
Experience has shown that, in the upswing, budget deficits are not offset by surpluses, and 
that  discretionary  measures  therefore  often  result  in  government  finances  being  burdened 
even  beyond  the  downswing.6  To  achieve  a  balanced  budget,  it  is  necessary  to  limit  the 
room for manoeuvre in the political domain. To this end, politicians use fiscal rules as a form 
of  self-imposed  restraint  (cf.  chart  5).  As  a  result,  automatic  stabilisers  now  play  an 
increasingly important role compared to discretionary measures. 
The automatic stabilisers are designed to fulfil the three T-criteria. Unemployment insurance 
is an important automatic stabiliser. It triggers automatic government expenditure or receipts, 
depending on the economic situation, and thus has an immediate, or timely effect. Second, it 
provides  targeted  support  to  those  affected  by  the  economic  downswing.  Third,  it  is 
temporary. 
But  rules  alone  are  no  guarantee  of  stability,  for  there  is  often  considerable  room  for 
interpretation  when  implementing  them.  There  is  always  a  way  to  circumvent  them.  Fiscal 
rules existed in a number of countries even before the onset of the sovereign debt crisis. A 
good example is the Maastricht criteria in the EU, which various countries repeatedly failed to 
meet,  without  effective  sanctions  being  brought  to  bear.  The  history  of  monetary  policy  is 
also  rich  with  examples,  from  all  over  the  world,  which  show  how  a  departure  from  the 
objective  of  price  stability  can  have  drastic  consequences  for  the  economy.  If  the  central 
bank is unable to ensure price stability, it calls its credibility into question, and thereby runs 
the risk of reducing the effectiveness of future measures. 
What factors help to ensure that rules are complied with? 
First, we need good rules. In the fiscal policy domain, the elements of a good rule are: It is 
clear  and  easy  to  understand;  it  is  binding,  i.e.  has  a  basis  in  law  –  ideally  at  the 
constitutional level; and it is equipped with a specific sanctioning mechanism. Finally, it must 
make provision for exceptions, and these should be clearly defined. 
In the monetary policy domain, too, there are certain requirements regarding what makes a 
good rule. First, it must set out how the central bank should use its policy tools to achieve the 
goal  of  price  stability.  It  defines  criteria  according  to  which  monetary  policy  measures  are 
taken. For many central banks, inflation forecasts play an important role. On the one hand, 
they  serve  as  the  main  indicator  for  the  interest  rate  decision.  On  the  other,  they  are  an 
important communication tool. A good rule creates a certain degree of transparency vis-à-vis 
the public, and makes monetary policy more predictable. It provides an anchor for inflation 
expectations and helps to improve the credibility of monetary policy. 
Second, we need a culture of stability which is well anchored in the minds of both politicians 
and the general public – part of the national mentality (cf. chart 6). Economic literature has 
repeatedly demonstrated that certain political structures and a culture of stability are mutually 
reinforcing.7  For  fiscal  policy,  these  structures  can  be,  for  example,  fiscal  federalism  (tax 
competition),  the  subsidiarity  principle,  direct  democracy  structures  and  political  continuity 
(e.g. the concordance principle). In the area of monetary policy, central bank independence 
                                                
5   Cf. Summers (2007). 
6   Cf. IMF (2008). 
7   Cf. Feld and Kirchgässner (2008) and Poterba (1994). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
plays  an  important  role.  It  has  been  empirically  demonstrated  that  a  higher  degree  of 
independence goes hand in hand with lower inflation rates.8 To retain its independence, the 
central bank must show good performance, and acquire credibility and respect. This is the 
only way to make politicians and the public acknowledge the value of independence. 
Tension during a crisis 
The financial and economic crisis provided an impressive demonstration of how important it 
is for fiscal and monetary policy to remain focused on their mandate and on sustainability. 
If  public  finances  are  already  running  a  high  level  of  indebtedness  in  good  times,  fiscal 
policy’s room for manoeuvre will be severely curtailed (or very quickly used up) in a crisis. In 
this situation, the central bank faces growing pressure from both politicians and the public to 
stimulate the economy with monetary policy measures.9 If the central bank gives in to this 
pressure,  it  endangers  its  own  independence  and  thereby  its  credibility.  With  an 
unsustainable fiscal policy, a stable monetary policy is no longer possible over the long term, 
even if the central bank is independent and not under pressure to stabilise the economy. A 
glance at economic history shows that high inflation rates have very often been accompanied 
by high levels of public debt.10 
Monetary policy can only act in a crisis if its credibility is intact. Some central banks, including 
the SNB, have reached the zero lower bound for interest rates as a result of the recent crisis. 
Even  after  hitting  the  lower  bound,  these  central  banks  are  still  able  to  pursue  their 
objectives.  In  order  to  retain  their  freedom  of  action,  they  are  resorting  to  unconventional 
measures. Some of these measures, such as purchasing securities of private sector issuers, 
are described as quasi-fiscal, meaning that they are part of monetary policy but, like fiscal 
policy, they have distribution effects. For this reason, they attract public and political attention 
and can therefore threaten the central bank’s independence. 
There is also a danger that politicians, economic agents and the public will expect monetary 
policy to have a solution for every problem. Numerous problems in the real economy, such 
as the lack of competitiveness and the current account imbalances, are structural in origin. In 
this  area,  it  is  the  responsibility  of  governments  to  introduce  reforms.  Resolving  such 
problems is outside the scope of monetary policy. 
The management of the recent financial and economic crisis has resulted in a much greater 
overlap  between  fiscal  and  monetary  policy  activities  than  before  the  crisis.  In  some 
countries, this has given rise to tension between fiscal and economic policy. The lack of a 
sustainable fiscal  policy  can  lead  to  excessive  demands  being  placed  on  monetary  policy, 
which could result in the latter also straying from the path of stability. 
Switzerland is an exception 
In  Switzerland,  despite  the  difficult  economic  environment,  there  is  currently  no  tension 
between monetary and fiscal policy. There are two reasons for this. First, public finances are 
very healthy. Second, monetary policy has always been focused on stability. 
The  healthy  state  of  public  finances  is  mainly  due  to fiscal  rules  at  cantonal  level  and  the 
debt brake at federal level (cf. chart 7). The debt brake was introduced in 2003 to halt the 
growth in Swiss public debt that had taken place in the 1990s.11 The core element of the debt 
                                                
8   Cf. Alesina and Summers (1993) and Klomp and de Haan (2010). 
9   Cf. Jordan (2011, 2012a). 
10   Cf. Bernholz (2003). 
11   Sovereign debt grew from CHF 39 billion in 1990 to over CHF 120 billion in 2002, peaking at CHF 130.3 billion 
in 2005. In 2011, it stood at CHF 110.5 billion. Cf. FDF (2012). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
brake is a simple expenditure rule: Expenditure must not exceed receipts over the course of 
one economic cycle. The advantage of this is that no specific debt level needs to be defined 
or  aimed  for.  I  would  like  to  point  out  that,  rather  than  limiting  fiscal  policy’s  room  for 
manoeuvre, the debt brake increases it. It combats excessive debt, leaving fiscal policy in a 
better position from which to act, should it need to. 
The debt brake provided a specific and workable expenditure rule, which takes account of 
the  economic  cycle,  allows  clearly  defined  exceptions  and  contains  a  predefined  set  of 
sanctions. The debt brake is enshrined in the Federal Constitution, and the exceptions and 
the sanctioning mechanism are defined in the Federal Act on the Federal Financial Budget. 
Under  the  sanctioning  mechanism,  if  a  stipulated  limited  is  exceeded,  the  excess  amount 
must be recouped within the next three years. 
Thus,  the  debt  brake  provides  Switzerland  with  a  rule  at  federal  level  which  fulfils  the 
requirements for a good fiscal rule. Stability is reflected in the level of sovereign debt, which 
is  moderate  by  international  standards.  Should  a  need  for  fiscal  policy  action  arise,  fiscal 
policy’s room for manoeuvre would be unimpaired. 
In  the  most  recent  financial  and  economic  crisis,  fiscal  policy  in  Switzerland  has  primarily 
relied on the effects of automatic stabilisers, and has been sparing in its use of discretionary 
stabilisation measures. Nevertheless, in view of the severity of the crisis, the Federal Council 
initiated targeted discretionary measures, in line with the debt brake requirements. However, 
as mentioned, the debt brake also allows for exceptions in certain unusual circumstances. 
This exceptions rule made it possible to provide UBS with temporary support in 2008, without 
jeopardising the Confederation’s ability to fulfil its normal mandate.12 
There  is  another  reason  for  restraint  in  discretionary  fiscal  policy.  The  impact  of  a 
government economic stimulus programme in a small open economy such as Switzerland is 
slight.  The  high  proportion  of  imports  means  that  much  of  the  government  spending 
dissipates  abroad.  It  has  been  empirically  demonstrated  that  the  fiscal  multiplier  in  small 
open economies is zero or even negative.13 The impact is further reduced if the shock does 
not originate in the domestic economy, but from outside – as was the case in the most recent 
crisis.  The  crisis  has  confirmed  the  limits  of  discretionary  fiscal  policy  stabilisation.  For 
example,  the  measures  adopted  by  the  Confederation  in  2009  and  2010  could  not  be 
implemented fully and in a targeted way.14 
Swiss  monetary  policy  has  also  made  an  important  contribution  to  economic  stability.  It  is 
also  subject  to  binding  rules.  For  example,  the  requirement  to  ensure  price  stability  is 
enshrined  in  the  National  Bank  Act  and  is  defined  in  the  SNB’s  monetary  policy  strategy, 
which has been in force since 2000 (cf. chart 8).15 The SNB equates price stability with a rise 
in  the  national  consumer  price  index  of  less  than  2%  a  year.  Moreover,  the  SNB’s 
independence  is  enshrined  in  the  Federal  Constitution.  This  requires  it  to  operate  without 
political  pressure.  As  a  counterweight  to  this  independence,  the  SNB  has  a  duty  of 
accountability; it must report regularly to the government and the general public on monetary 
policy matters. Thus, monetary policy is also equipped with good rules, and this is reflected 
in  a  high  degree  of  stability.  By  international  standards,  Switzerland  has  very  low  inflation 
rates and low interest rates. 
During the most recent crisis, the monetary policy authorities cut interest rates sharply and 
rapidly, and expanded the supply of liquidity. In response to the strong and rapid appreciation 
                                                
12   Cf. FDF (2012). The Confederation acquired a CHF 6 billion stake in UBS in the form of convertible bonds. 
13   Cf. Ilzetzki et al (2010). 
14   Cf. SECO (2012). 
15   Cf. art. 99 Federal Constitution, art. 5 para 1 National Bank Act and SNB, 92nd Annual Report, 1999. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
of  the  Swiss  franc  facing  the  Swiss  economy  in  summer  2011,  the  SNB  introduced  a 
minimum  exchange  rate  of  CHF  1.20  against  the  euro,  thereby  helping  to  stabilise  the 
economy. The excessive appreciation of the Swiss franc is a monetary problem, because it 
carries  the risk  of  deflation.  So  it  is  a  problem that  has  to  be  dealt  with  through monetary 
policy. The minimum exchange rate has met with the support of the general public and the 
political domain. However, it should be regarded as an extreme measure. It is not a panacea 
for all the problems facing the Swiss economy, and carries considerable risks.16 
We  have  seen  that  both  monetary  and  fiscal  policy  in  Switzerland  are  focused  heavily  on 
stability. Swiss economic policy stands out for having good rules and a stability culture that 
work through the political structures in a mutually reinforcing way. Thanks to this culture of 
stability,  Switzerland  was  able  to  combat  the  financial  and  economic  crisis  with  sound 
finances and a credible and effective monetary policy. The automatic stabilisers were able to 
take  full  effect.  Moreover,  targeted  measures  could  be  financed  without  generating  a 
destabilising increase in debt. Monetary policy authorities were able to deploy the full range 
of tools at their disposal, thereby helping to stabilise the economy and the financial markets. 
The  high  level  of  credibility  enjoyed  by  monetary  policy  was  also  a  major  factor  in  the 
successful implementation of the unconventional measures. The tension between monetary 
and  fiscal  policy  that  is  now  observable  in  other  countries  does  not  currently  exist  in 
Switzerland. 
Conclusions 
We have seen that, in normal times, there is no tension between monetary and fiscal policy, 
but that instead fiscal and monetary policy are pursuing higher, closely related goals, namely 
ensuring macroeconomic stability, exploiting economic growth potential to the fullest extent, 
and thereby creating prosperity. 
A prerequisite for macroeconomic stability – especially in times of crisis – is the sustainability 
of both economic policy areas, i.e. price stability and a balance between public receipts and 
expenditure. For this to happen, there need to be good rules on the one hand, and a culture 
of stability on the other. 
In crisis situations – as the recent financial and economic crisis has amply demonstrated – 
tension can arise between monetary and fiscal policy. If fiscal policy is no longer able to act, 
there is a danger that politicians, economic agents and the public will expect monetary policy 
to come up with a solution for every problem. 
In Switzerland, where good rules and a strong culture of stability exist, there is currently no 
tension. But even if our country is in a relatively good position, this is no reason to rest upon 
our laurels. Stability-oriented fiscal and monetary policies must be constantly maintained, to 
ensure that they are sufficiently robust when the next challenge presents itself. 
One of the greatest challenges for fiscal policy is demographic changes, which will place a 
heavy burden on public finances in the future. Calculations show clearly that, if policy is not 
changed, age-related costs will rise sharply. It will not be possible to solve these problems 
using only fiscal rules such as the debt brake. Profound structural reforms to social security 
arrangements are needed. 
Central  banks,  too,  face  major  challenges.  In  the  last  few  years,  central  banks  across  the 
world have broken new ground. They have cut interest rates practically to zero, supplied the 
financial system with generous amounts of liquidity and introduced unconventional monetary 
policy  measures.  These  measures  carry  a  number  of  risks,  of  which  inflation  is  the  most 
frequently  cited.  Allow  me  to  conclude  my  presentation  with  a  few  words  on  that  subject. 
                                                
16   Cf. Jordan (2012b). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
There  is  no  sign  of  inflation  for  the  short  or  medium  term.  Globally,  stable  inflation 
expectations  and  the  underutilisation  of  capacity  suggest  that  there  is  no  inflationary 
pressure. According to the SNB’s inflation forecast, price stability in Switzerland is not under 
threat  for  the  next  few  years.  As  the  crisis  recedes,  however,  central  banks  will  face  the 
challenge of returning monetary policy to normal in a timely manner and reabsorbing liquidity. 
The  SNB’s  mandate  is  to  ensure  price  stability  while  taking  due  account  of  economic 
developments. We will continue to take all action necessary to fulfil this mandate. 
 8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  9 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  11 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
References 
Alesina,  Alberto  and  Lawrence  H.  Summers,  1993.  Central  Bank  Independence  and 
Macroeconomic  Performance:  Some  Comparative  Evidence.  Journal  of  Money,  Credit  and 
Banking 25(2): 151–62. 
Barro, Robert J. and David B. Gordon, 1983. Rules, discretion and reputation in a model of 
monetary policy. Journal of Monetary Economics 12(1): 101–121. 
Bernholz,  Peter,  2003. Monetary  Regimes  and  Inflation  –  History,  Economics  and  Political 
Relationships. Edward Cheltenham: Elgar Publishing. 
Budina, Nina, Tidiane Kinda, Andrea Schaechter and Anke Weber, 2012. Fiscal Rules at a 
Glance: Country Details from a New Dataset. IMF Working Paper 12/273. 
FDF,  2012.  Die  Schuldenbremse  –  eine  Erfolgsgeschichte.  www.efd.admin.ch/ 
dokumentation/00737/00782/02006/index.html?lang=de (20 November 2012). 
Feld, Lars P. and Kirchgässner, Gebhard, 2008. On the Effectiveness of Debt Brakes: The 
Swiss  Experience.  In:  Sturm,  J.  E.  and  R.  Neck  (eds.):  Sustainability  of  Public  Debt. 
Cambridge, USA: MIT Press. 
Friedman,  M.,  1948.  A  Monetary  and  Fiscal  Framework  for  Economic  Stability.  American 
Economic Review, 38(3): 245–264. 
Ilzetzki, Ethan, Enrique G. Mendoza and Carlos A. Végh, 2010. How Big (Small?) are Fiscal 
Multipliers? 
NBER Working Papers 16479. 
IMF, 2008. World Economic Outlook. Financial Stress, Downturns, and Recoveries, October 
2012. 
Jordan, Thomas J., 2011. Auswirkungen der Staatsverschuldung auf die Unabhängigkeit der 
Geldpolitik. 21. Internationales Europa Forum Luzern. Luzern, 8 November 2011. 
Jordan, Thomas  J.,  2012(a).  Kein  Ende  der  Schuldenwirtschaft  ohne  Stabilitätskultur.  NZZ 
Podium, Zurich, 28 February 2012. 
Jordan, Thomas  J.,  2012(b).  Speech given  to  the  General  Meeting  of  Shareholders  of  the 
Swiss National Bank. Berne, 27 April 2012. 
Klomp,  Jeroen  and  Jakob  de  Haan,  2010.  Inflation  and  Central  Bank  Independence:  A 
Meta-Regression Analysis. Journal of Economic Surveys 24: 593–621. 
Kydland,  Finn  E.  and  Edward  C.  Prescott,  1977.  Rules  Rather  Than  Discretion:  The 
Inconsistency of Optimal Plans. Journal of Political Economy 85(3): 473–91. 
Poterba,  James  M.,  1994.  State  Responses  to  Fiscal  Crises:  The  Effects  of  Budgetary 
Institutions and Politics. Journal of Political Economy 102(4): 799–821. 
SECO,  2012.  Evaluation  der  Stabilisierungsmassnahmen  2008–2010.  Die  Volkswirtschaft 
5-2012. 
Summers,  Lawrence  H.,  2007.  The  State  of  the  US  Economy.  Presentation  at  Brookings 
Institution Forum, 19 December 2007. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
