Andrew Bailey: The challenges in assessing capital requirements for 
banks 
Speech  by  Mr  Andrew  Bailey,  Executive  Director  of  the  Bank  of  England,  at  the  Bank  of 
America Merrill Lynch conference, London, 6 November 2012. 
 Thank  you  for  inviting  me  to  speak  today.  I  want  to  talk  about  the  challenges  bank 
supervisors  face  in  determining  the  appropriate  approach  to  assessing  the  capital 
requirements for banks.  Scarcely a new subject I know, but nonetheless one that is at the 
top of the agenda of regulators, both macro and microprudential.  My starting point today is 
not  whether  banks  are,  or  are  not,  adequately  capitalised  –  I  will  come  to  that  –  but  the 
framework by which supervisors assess capital needs, a subject that is attracting a great deal 
of attention. 
I will put my cards on the table at the start. I am not a believer that supervisors should rely on 
any single data point when assessing a given firm’s stability. We need to assess measures of 
capital,  liquidity  and  leverage.  The  art  of  supervision  is  to  look  at  a situation from  several 
angles and seek thereby to identify weaknesses.  Good supervision is about judgement.  The 
psychologist  and  behavioural  economist  Daniel  Kahneman  has  described  good  judgement 
as, “the product of a solid grasp of intuition coupled with empirical validation where possible”. 
There was too much box-ticking in the past, but I do not intend there to be in the future.  I 
was dismayed to hear recently a commentator saying that, “supervisors will never be more 
than box-tickers”.  Wrong.  If you don’t agree, meet my colleagues.  I was also interested to 
read  recently  a  claim  that  today  supervisors  are  unable  to  stand  up  to  the  banking  lobby. 
Wrong.  We  accept  that  in  a  judgement-based  approach  to  supervision,  there  will  be 
disagreement. We don’t seek disagreement for the love of it, but it is part of what we do. 
In terms of how supervision is done, my preference is to start with a risk-based approach to 
assessing  capital  needs  and  then  back  that  up  with  other  risk-based  approaches  and  a 
simple non-risk based approach, like a leverage ratio.  The general approach is also the one 
that we are developing for insurers by designing early warning indicators to act as a check on 
the modelled risk-based approach. 
Why do I start with a risk-based approach?  Because there is a logic to the approach of the 
supervisor mirroring how the firm manages risk for itself.  I would be horrified if a firm said to 
us, “you know, we don’t bother to assess the risk we are taking”.  Some history is relevant 
here.  Modern  risk-based  capital  requirements  began  with  the  Basel  I  Accord  in  the  late 
1980s.  I  was  in  Banking  Supervision  at  the  Bank  of  England  then  as  we  implemented 
Basel I. 
It had simple, crude, risk weights, but it was better than anything that had come before.  In 
the Basel I era, I remember that conversations with banks often began with them saying: “we 
are happy to discuss risk-based capital requirements as you the supervisors measure them, 
but that is not how we manage risk”.  This statement would not have been bad had the Basel 
I  approach  acted  as  a  restraint  on  how  firms  took  risk,  whether  or  not  it  was  how  they 
measured risk.  Unfortunately, that was at best only partially true. 
Basel II is much criticised, and there is much to criticise, but one thing we should not forget is 
that it had barely been implemented when the financial crisis began, indeed Basel II was not 
implemented in the US at all.  The excessive leverage and risk-taking had grown up in the 
Basel I world. 
Interestingly,  in the  US, unlike  in  Europe, banks  were  effectively  constrained from  balance 
sheet expansion by a regulatory leverage ratio.  But their response to this constraint appears 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
to have been to seek a higher return on equity through holding riskier assets drawn from, for 
instance, sub-prime and leveraged loans. 
When we look at the causes and types of bank failures in the crisis, the point is often made in 
this  country  that  the  problems  appear  to  have  been  located  in  mortgage  and  commercial 
property lending as much as investment banking. 
That  is  true.  Basel  I  was  flawed  in  that  it  failed  adequately  to  cover  investment  banking 
activities that grew after the late 1980s, arguably because of the regulatory arbitrage.  Basel 
II  failed  to  fill  these  gaps  adequately.  But  Basel  I,  through  its  simple  risk  weights,  also 
encouraged  the  property-lending  boom.  One  part  of  the  story  goes  something  like  this: 
demutalised  building  societies  came  under  pressure  to  generate  higher  returns  for 
shareholders and thus devised business models that pushed them towards greater leverage 
and larger risks for a given amount of lending – in other words, higher LTV lending.  And they 
also  exploited  another  flaw  in  Basel  I,  the  ability  to  securitise  loans  without  properly 
assessing the impact on the viability of the business models.  Thus, Northern Rock grew its 
high  LTV,  low-margin  lending  and  developed  a  securitisation  operation  that  was  ultimately 
too big for the bank to sustain. 
Now to be clear, this is not a defence of Basel II. Far from it.  Basel II introduced a model-
based approach alongside the so-called standardised approach.  It created complexity, and it 
encouraged  the  use  of  models  generally,  including  for  assets  that  are  not,  in  my  view, 
susceptible to robust modelling.  Basel II was also implemented in what looks like too much 
haste – it may not have seemed that way at the time I accept.  But bad models were allowed 
through the gate.  Commercial property was a bad case in point.  One has to ask whether 
commercial property loans are too lumpy to be modelled.  But, modelled they were. 
And,  we  are  now  undoing that  with  the  so-called  slotting  approach,  which  involves  putting 
loans into risk buckets according to key characteristics. 
Supervisors have taken, broadly, four actions to correct the failings of Basel I and II.  First, to 
raise sharply the capital requirements for trading book and investment banking activities.  In 
doing so, we are changing the terms of trade for investment banking of this sort, and we are, 
of course, seeing the consequences.  No apologies there I’m afraid. 
Second, we are, as I have just said, taking some assets out of the models regime because 
they should not have been there in the first place. 
Third, where assets are in the models regime, we are moving to create floors to prevent low 
modelled risk weights driving overall capital requirements down to imprudent levels.  There is 
no doubt that an industry has grown up to arbitrage models and we will not in future let that 
lead  to  irresponsible  practices.  Let  me  take  the  case  of mortgage  risk weights,  which  has 
attracted  recent  attention.  Prime  mortgages  are  the  sorts  of  assets  that  should  be 
susceptible to modelling – there are a lot of them and they have been around for a long time. 
We  still  require  the  models  calibration  to  take  account  of  the  early  1990s  recession. 
Specifically, we don’t want models to use the relatively benign loan losses of recent years to 
reduce capital held.  Why? 
The recent recession has been accompanied by very low interest rates, which have kept loan 
losses down, but this may or may not be the picture in the future.  It would be unwise to bet 
on it happening, and particularly when we know that loan forbearance is quite widespread. 
The fourth thing that supervisors have done is to apply judgement in overlaying the Pillar 1 
modelled  capital  requirements  with  Pillar  2  capital  buffers.  Since  2008,  required  Pillar  1 
capital in the major UK banks has increased from £151bn to £186bn.  Pillar 2 capital buffers 
set  by  the  FSA,  in  all,  have  increased  during  the  same  period  from  just  under  £20bn  to 
£150bn.  Put simply, in the regime up to 2008, there was no judgemental overlay of capital 
buffers, now there is such a buffer.  This is a product of good judgemental supervision. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
What is the role of a leverage ratio?  For me, it is not the frontline tool, but rather the very 
useful back-up check.  Why is it not in the frontline?  Because it would not on its own prevent 
the  two  main  causes  of  the  crisis.  First,  savvy  investment  bankers  would  take  assets  off 
balance sheet into places where a leverage ratio may not be the best measure.  And second, 
on its own it does not stop the arbitrage whereby the riskiness of each unit of assets rises as 
a  means  to  circumvent  the  discipline  of  the  leverage  ratio.  But,  it  is  a  very  useful  tool, 
because  on  their  own,  risk-based  measures  can  be  arbitraged  too  by  claiming  that  the 
measured risk has fallen when the real risk has not. 
The leverage ratio helps to put a floor into the system which stops that type of activity beyond 
a certain point. 
Does  this  approach  of  using  several  tools  leave  the  whole  system  of  regulation  too 
complicated?  It certainly puts an emphasis on having good people in regulation, but I come 
back to the quote of the late 1980s, namely that good regulation has to understand how firms 
take risks.  That does not, however, mean that a supervisor should allow a free-for-all and 
then (usually vainly) hope to understand it.  We are doing a number of important things to 
counter complexity.  First, the proposal on ringfencing from the Independent Commission has 
a  strong  element  of  separating  more  straightforward  activities  from  the  more  complex.  It 
should not be a matter of rules and good behaviour inside the ringfence and the Wild West 
outside, because the outside could damage the financial system, but we will be able to use 
different  approaches  on  each.  Second,  the  Prudential  Regulation  Authority  will  be  very 
focused in its judgements on the things that matter for our objectives.  For me, this is where 
simplicity is key  – keep it very focused, but to do that we must have good people who can 
see the wood for the trees.  That is what we are developing for the PRA.  And third, as part of 
this,  we  are  very focused  on  understanding  business  models, how  firms make money,  the 
risks they take.  This, too, is a feature common to our supervision of banks and insurers. 
To give you an example, the high return on equity and low cost of equity business model is 
dead. 
through  a 
misunderstanding of risks.  Moreover, banks can alter their cost of equity through the choices 
they make on risk. 
Sometimes I hear the cost of equity explained as if it is exogenous, but it is not. 
Let me turn now to the current situation.  I am not going to tell you the answer to whether the 
UK banks need extra capital, if so, how much of what type, and how rapidly should it be put 
in.  The  answer  will  of  course  differ  for  each  bank.  Let  me  though  set  out  some  of  the 
considerations that shape the answers, and in doing so remember that we have to take into 
consideration  the  sizeable  increase  in  capital  in  the  system  since  2008.  And  let  me  also 
emphasise that the FPC does need to reach a conclusion on these issues soon, and in doing 
so reduce one contribution to uncertainty over the future. 
The first consideration to note is that we face a situation where there is uncertainty around 
our judgements  on  the quality of  a  number of asset  classes  and their  valuation.  This  is  a 
reflection of the unusual and difficult economic conjuncture that we have been going through, 
combined  with  the  challenge  of  determining  the  scale  and  nature  of,  for  instance,  loan 
forbearance. 
This is particularly evident in areas like commercial property lending where there is a hump of 
loan refinancing to come and a quite sharp tiering of performance among assets. 
Second, the euro area, and the possible impact of disorderly break-up, should that happen 
(and in saying this, I offer no view on whether it will happen), could have a sizeable impact on 
many banks.  But here the FPC faces another very difficult judgement, namely what scale of 
so-called tail risk – the losses from low probability but high impact events – do we wish to see 
covered  in  the  capital  held  now  by  banks?  In  other  words,  how  much  insurance  should 
come from capital providers?  The broad answer is a lot, but that does not tell us how much, 
It  should  never  had  been  alive,  because 
it  could  only  exist 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
and in the limit there are utterly catastrophic risks for which it is not sensible to hold capital as 
the answer. 
Third, when we look at the low market value of some banks relative to their book value, how 
much of this should we attribute to lending margins being considerably lower than they were 
expected  to  be?  Net  interest  margins  are  squeezed  in  the  current  environment.  This  is 
important because, to the extent this argument holds true, the action taken to deal with it, if 
any, could be different. 
Another  relevant  consideration  is  to  what  extent  it  reflects  different  market  valuations  of 
banks’ tangible assets or of their intangible assets, such as goodwill, that are to some extent 
already and will to a greater extent under Basel III be accorded no value for regulatory capital 
purposes. 
Fourth, to what extent are low market values caused by uncertainty among investors about 
the  future  regulatory  and  operating  environment  for  banks?  This  could  be  caused  by  a 
number of factors, including ringfencing and capital policy as supervisors adjust risk weights. 
Fifth, by how much further should we adjust risk weights to reflect past inadequacies. 
And, finally, how rapidly should we make any adjustments, and how should such adjustments 
fit with both the Basel III implementation timetable and the changes that firms themselves are 
making? 
In  conclusion,  and  pulling  all  of  this  together,  there  is  a  lot  of  talk  about  the  need  for 
simplicity.  I agree.  The proliferation of rules is unhelpful and particularly when it extends into 
making rules on how to supervise, a feature that we see in the EU processes.  To return to 
Kahneman’s point, solid intuition is a part of supervision. But simplicity is not about one-club 
golf, and it is not about abandoning risk-based regulation.  A simple timeline would suggest 
that Basel I did more to cause the crisis than Basel II. 
But the latter would surely have made it even worse had it be in place for longer.  Looking 
forwards,  we  do  need  strong  judgemental  supervision,  and  we  do  need  the  powers  to 
separate  trading  activities  into  separate  legal  entities  as  the  ICB  has  proposed.  As  Paul 
Volcker  recently  pointed  out,  customer  banking  involves  a  fiduciary  duty,  whereas  trading 
with counterparties does not. My only caveat here, and it is a very important one, is that the 
fiduciary duty of customer banking was sadly lost in the wave of mis-selling. 
Judgemental  supervision  has  already  been  applied  to  correct  the  excesses  of  pre-crisis 
activities. Investment banks have been forced to lower leverage and raise capital, and we are 
seeing  the  consequences.  The  monoline  mortgage  bank  model  –  in  the  commercial  not 
mutual-sector  has  been  restructured  heavily  already.  No  demutualised  building  society 
survives as an independent entity today.  The high return on equity with low cost of equity 
business  model  is  dead.  Of  course,  there  is  more  to  be  done,  and  I  have  set  out  the 
framework  within  which  I  think  about  the  capital  needs  of  the  banking  system.  Above  all, 
simplicity is about clear focus and a firm resolve. 
Thank you 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
