Andreas Dombret: Can regulation contribute towards greater stability of 
the financial system? 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the general conference to mark the 60th anniversary of the Österreichische 
Bankwissenschaftliche Gesellschaft, Vienna, 1 October 2012. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
 “Can  regulation  contribute  towards greater  stability  of the financial  system?”  My  answer  to 
this question is, “Yes, but….” Or to be more precise: “Yes, but only if we pay more attention 
to certain things in future.” 
What do I mean by that? 
I would like to begin by emphasising the great achievements that we have reached so far. 
The international financial system is considerably more resistant today than it was just a few 
years ago. Many important regulatory measures were tackled under the G20 financial sector 
reform agenda. Many initiatives have been converted into legislation or have already entered 
into force; others will follow in the months ahead. 
 Pay greater attention to the consistency of regulation 
Now I come to the “but” I just mentioned. In order to make the financial system truly safer, I 
believe we must pay more attention to the following two aspects in the future than we did up 
to now. First, we must have a closer look at the consistency of the many different regulatory 
projects. Second, we need to intensify international cooperation. Let me speak briefly about 
these two aspects 
1) 
We are currently working on a number of topics to make the international financial system 
more stable. Of course, the progress made so far varies from one area to the next. At this 
point I would like to mention just three examples that keep us busy at the moment: 
• 
The transposition of capital requirements laid down in  Basel III into European law 
(CRD IV/CRR), 
The new solvency regime for the European insurance sector (Solvency II) and 
The EU European Market Infrastructure Regulation (EMIR). 
• 
• 
This  small  selection  is  enough  to  demonstrate  the  wide  range  of  reforms  that  have  been 
launched – from banks to insurers to individual financial instruments. This is both right and 
necessary. However there is a danger that we may lose overview of the financial system as a 
whole  by  pushing  ahead  with  sector-specific  regulations  largely  independently  of  one 
another. 
We need to be aware of this risk and focus our attention more on the systemic aspects of 
regulation.  It  is  important  to  adopt  such  an  approach  in  order,  for  example,  to  effectively 
combat regulatory arbitrage. This is true with regard to the relocation of business activities 
from one jurisdiction to another as well as to evasive actions in the form of switching from 
one sector of the financial system to another. For example there is the danger that activities 
may  be  relocated  from  the  banking  sector  to  the  less  strictly  regulated  shadow  banking 
system  because  banking  regulations  due  to  Basel  III  and  the  regulations  governing 
systemically important financial institutions have been intensified.  
Besides potential regulatory arbitrage, we must also pay more heed to the interplay between 
individual regulatory initiatives. Where there is a lack of consistency there is a danger that 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Intensify international cooperation 
different  measures  may  create  conflicting  incentives  or  cause  countervailing  effects.  One 
such example is the interplay between the CRD IV/CRR and Solvency II regimes. The former 
seeks,  among  other  things,  to  place  bank  funding  on  a  more  stable,  long-term  basis. 
However,  under  Solvency  II  and  certain  circumstances  the  effect  can  be  to  benefit 
short-dated bonds. Since insurers are among the leading investors in bank bonds, this can 
have a direct impact on the refunding costs for banks. 
2) 
Besides  gearing regulation  more  closely  to  systemic  aspects,  we  have  to  push for greater 
cross-border cooperation. This is a precondition for preventing competitive distortions as a 
result  of  international  regulatory  arbitrage  or  gaps  in  regulation.  Solo  attempts  for  single 
nations  are  non-viable  options.  I  therefore  strongly  welcome  the  fact  that  the  G20  has 
become established as the central forum for international cooperation, and that the Financial 
Stability Board (FSB) has assumed a pivotal role in the international debate on regulation.  
But  at  the  same  time  we  must  maintain  a  certain  degree  of  national  flexibility.  National 
financial systems continue to differ, in some cases substantially. This being so, it would not 
be  appropriate to  strive  for  across-the-board  uniformity for  all  regulatory  requirements. We 
should not stop competing for optimal regulation. By that I don’t mean countries undercutting 
each other with more and more lax provisions. The last few years have shown, where such a 
“race to the bottom” can lead us. What is important is that we exchange experiences, learn 
from  the  past  and,  if  necessary,  subscribe  to  the  regulatory  approaches  and  measures 
implemented by other countries.  
To sum up, let me say this: 
We  are  on  the  right  track.  The  international  financial  system  is  already  considerably  more 
stable.  But  only  by  focusing  on  the  system  as  a  whole  and  by  continuing  to  work  closely 
together will we have lasting success.  
Thank you! 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
