Ravi Menon: Corporate governance – going beyond the rules 
Opening  address  by  Mr  Ravi  Menon,  Managing  Director  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of 
Singapore,  at  the  Securities  Investors  Association  (Singapore)  4th  Asian  Investors’ 
Corporate Governance Conference, Singapore, 1 October 2012. 
Mr David Gerald, President & CEO, SIAS  
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, good morning.  
 Evolution of corporate governance  
1. 
The  corporation,  as  we  know  it  today,  began  in  England  as  early  as  the 
17th century.  Ownership  of  companies  typically  vested  in  a  few  individuals  who  were  also 
managers of the companies. There were no organised markets for the transfer of shares in 
the company. Shares were transferred only to friends or relatives.  
2. 
Industrialisation  in  the  19th  century  led  to  large  capital  demands  by  companies. 
Markets for the transfer of shares began to sprout in New York and some European cities. 
During the 20th century, as corporations continued to grow, the descendants of the founding 
families  gradually  reduced 
their  ownership  shares.  Control  of  corporations  shifted 
increasingly  into  the  hands  of  managers.  A  separation  emerged  between  ownership  and 
control.  
3. 
The separation of ownership and control made economic sense. Businesses could 
tap the market for capital and executive talent separately and more efficiently. However, the 
separation of ownership from control presented an agency problem. Thus emerged modern 
corporate governance – a system to ensure accountability by those who run companies to 
those who invest in these companies.  
4. 
But corporate governance rose to prominence only in the last two decades, starting 
with the UK’s Cadbury Report in 1992. Since then, there has been a continuous stream of 
reforms  in  the  UK  to  strengthen  corporate  governance,  culminating  in  the  UK  Corporate 
Governance Code, which operates on a “comply or explain” principle. Corporate governance 
reforms  in  the  US  took  a  slightly  different  trajectory,  leading  to  the  Sarbanes-Oxley  Act. 
Unlike  the  UK  Code,  Sarbanes-Oxley  is  enshrined  in  legislation  and  compliance  is 
mandatory.  
5. 
In Singapore, our corporate governance journey began in 2001, with the introduction 
of the Code of Corporate Governance. Since then, the Code has undergone two reviews to 
take into account changes in our corporate landscape as well as international developments. 
The  most  recent  review  was  conducted  by  the  private  sector  led  Corporate  Governance 
Council  in  2010.  MAS  accepted  all  of  the  recommendations  of  the  Council,  with  minor 
modifications,  and  issued  a  revised  Code  of  Corporate  Governance  earlier  this  year.  Key 
independence,  enhancing 
changes 
remuneration  practices  and  disclosures,  clarifying  the  Board’s  responsibility 
in  risk 
governance, and providing further guidance on companies’ engagement with shareholders.  
focused  on  strengthening  Board 
the  Code 
to 
Going beyond the rules 
6. 
Rules on corporate governance – mandatory or otherwise – have been considerably 
enhanced in most major jurisdictions. Yet, rules alone cannot assure us of high standards of 
practice. The recent financial crisis has exposed significant shortcomings in the governance 
of  companies.  We  have  seen  monumental  failures  in  risk  management,  a  spate  of 
accounting  scandals  and  outright  fraud.  Closer  to  home,  SGX-listed  companies  have  had 
their fair share of failures in corporate governance.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
7. 
The  answer  does  not  lie  in  even  more  rules.  We  must  now  focus  on  changing 
behaviour and building capabilities, to make the recent reforms meaningful. Let me highlight 
three areas:  
• 
• 
• 
one, strengthening market discipline  
two, building Board competencies  
three, instilling the right values 
Strengthening market discipline  
8. 
Let  me  begin  with  market  discipline  –  the  process  by  which  stakeholders  apply 
effective scrutiny on a company. The key enabler for market discipline is disclosure. We have 
put  in  place,  in  the  SGX  listing  rules,  the  necessary  requirements  for  disclosure  to  be 
ongoing,  timely,  and  accessible.  But  for  disclosure  to  enable  effective  market  discipline,  it 
must also be meaningful.  
9. 
Meaningful disclosure is especially important given that our Code is non-mandatory. 
We have adopted a “comply or explain” approach so that we can pitch the expectations at 
the  level  of  best  practice  while  allowing  companies  the  flexibility  to  deviate  from  these 
expectations if their particular circumstances warrant it. But companies must explain publicly 
the reasons for any such deviations so that the market can judge.  
10. 
Unfortunately, disclosures being made by companies deviating from the Code  are 
often  uninformative.  Let  me  give  an  example.  A  company  that  did  not  have  independent 
directors making  up  at  least  one-third  of  the  Board  offered  the following  explanation:  “The 
Board  believes  that  there  is  an  independent  element  on  the  Board  and  that  it  is  able  to 
exercise  independent  judgment  on  corporate  affairs”.  The  statement  does  not  provide  any 
evidence or information to shareholders on how the independent element is achieved in spite 
of the smaller number of independent directors.  
11. 
Companies  should  provide  meaningful  explanations  of  their  reasons  for  deviation, 
and  not  opt  for  “template”  disclosures  that  shed  no  light  on  these  reasons,  or  worse, 
obfuscate  the  issue.  There  is  scope  for  standardising  the  format  in  which  disclosures  of 
compliance with key principles in the Code are made, to facilitate comparability across listed 
companies. MAS and SGX will be exploring this in the coming months.  
12. 
In strengthening market discipline, disclosure is one side of the coin; the other side 
is the considered exercise of shareholder rights. Shareholders can play an important role in 
enhancing  corporate  governance  by  studying  corporate  statements,  attending  general 
meetings, and voting on key issues.  
13. 
But  the  reality  seems  to  be  that  companies  have  limited  engagements  with 
shareholders  on  governance  issues,  and  most  institutional  investors  do  not  vote  or  attend 
AGMs. The situation may be improving though, at least in Singapore. According to the CLSA 
Corporate  Governance  Watch  2010,  institutional  investors  are  becoming  more  active  in 
voting their shares and engaging with companies in Singapore.  
14. 
Shareholders  are  not  the  only  people  who  can  exercise  market  discipline.  Third 
parties  like  the media  and  research  analysts  also  have  a  role  to  play.  They  can  shine  the 
spotlight  on  exemplary  companies  as  well  as  highlight  questionable  practices.  Let  me  cite 
two commendable initiatives.  
• 
The National University of Singapore and the Business Times have developed and 
publish regularly a Governance and Transparency Index, which assesses and ranks 
companies based on their corporate governance practices and the transparency of 
their financial results.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 The  Securities  Investors  Association  (Singapore)  will  introduce  a  new  corporate 
governance page on its website to provide investors with more information on the 
corporate governance practices of the top 100 companies selected through the use 
of a corporate governance scorecard.  
15. 
It  is  also  encouraging  to  see  an  increase  in  local  media  coverage  of  corporate 
governance  issues.  But there  is  one  area  where  I  believe  the media  can  do  better.  Media 
reports  following  a  company’s  AGM  tend  to  focus  excessively  on  the  remuneration  of  the 
CEO  and  the  directors,  with  precious  little  commentary  on  the  company’s  performance, 
business strategies, or risk management. I am not suggesting that remuneration issues are 
not  appropriate  areas  for  scrutiny  –  they  very  much  are  –  but  we  need  a  more  holistic 
assessment  of  our  companies,  and  the  media  plays  an  important  educational  role  in  this 
regard, especially for retail investors.  
Building board competencies  
A second area where we need to go beyond the rules is in raising the competency 
16. 
levels  of  our  Boards.  Corporate  governance  reforms  the  world  over  have  focused  on 
addressing  the  principal-agent  problem  chiefly  through  strengthening  the  independence  of 
Boards. This is necessary but not sufficient. A good director must not only be independent in 
form,  but  must  be  competent  so  that  he  can  also  be  independent  in  substance.  Directors 
must be able and willing to devote time to their roles and have the relevant experience to 
question management and form independent views on strategy, risk, and performance.  
17. 
This  is  particularly  relevant  in  the  area  of  risk  management.  Boards  have  an 
important  role  to  play  in  determining  the  company’s  risk  tolerance  and  risk  policies.  They 
must  oversee  management  in  designing,  implementing,  and  monitoring  the  company’s 
systems for managing risk.  
But  risk  is  fundamentally  about  uncertainty  and  is  therefore  inherently  subjective. 
18. 
This is why a diverse Board – with both executive and  independent directors as well as a 
variety of backgrounds and expertise – is key. Given the complexity of the environment we 
operate in, only through robust debate and rigorous consideration of the range of possibilities 
can Boards make sound decisions on risk and strategy.  
19. 
Putting  together  diverse  Boards  with  competent  directors,  and  at  the  same  time 
meeting  the  tighter  requirements  for  independence,  is  a  real  challenge  –  especially  for  a 
small country like Singapore with a limited talent pool. The solution does not lie in lowering 
our  standards  for  either  independence  or  competence.  Companies  must  take  a  more 
proactive  approach  in  identifying  and  making  available  training  to  their  directors.  One 
possible way to increase the pool of directors would be for more Singapore companies to be 
open to having their senior staff sit on the Boards of other companies, as a way to further 
develop their promising executives.  
20. 
There are some promising initiatives underway. The Singapore Institute of Directors 
(SID) and the Stewardship and Corporate Governance Centre (SCGC) have been working to 
help increase the pool of directors through a variety of training programmes. For example:  
• 
The  SID-SMU  Directorship  Programme  provides  basic,  broad-based  knowledge 
essential for performing as Board directors.  
SCGC,  set  up  by  Temasek,  is  developing  a  training  programme  designed 
specifically for potential and newly appointed directors.  
21. 
But more work needs to be done in the area of competency building. Let me offer 
one  possibility.  There  may  be  scope  to  build  a  cadre  of  full-time  professional  directors  in 
Singapore. The concept of a professional director – as a person “who spends all his time in 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
the discharge of his responsibilities as a director of various publicly held corporations”1 – is 
not  new.  In  some  jurisdictions,  professional  associations  have  introduced  accreditation 
frameworks for directors, such as the “chartered director” in UK and the “accredited director” 
in New Zealand. This could be worth considering.  
Instilling the right values  
22. 
Finally, corporate governance must be about instilling a culture that places values 
above  profits.  Publicly  listed  companies  are  increasingly  at  risk  of  becoming  slaves  to  the 
pressures  of  quarterly  earnings.  In  a  brutally  competitive  environment,  this  short-termism 
promotes not only excessive risk-taking but a variety of sharp practices, exploitative sales, 
and  even  fraudulent  transactions.  Little  wonder  that  public  trust  in  corporations  has 
diminished in many jurisdictions.  
23. 
Boards and senior management have a critical role in promoting a culture rooted in 
strong  ethical  frameworks.  They  must  make  clear  that  serving  the  customer’s  interest, 
dealing fairly with suppliers and counterparties, following the laws of the land, and not placing 
the larger society at risk are essential for maximising long-term shareholder value.  
24. 
Directors  and  senior managers  set  the tone for what  is  acceptable  behaviour  and 
what is not. The questions they ask – as well as the questions they do not – send strong 
signals throughout the corporation. Let us ask ourselves:  
If a particular division in a company is making huge profits, what does the Board and senior 
management do? Congratulate them and raise the targets? Or ask probing questions about 
how  much  risk  is  being  taken,  whether  there  has  been  fair  dealing,  and  whether  all 
stakeholders have been served?  
25. 
Restoring ethical conduct is particularly relevant for the financial industry. Following 
the crisis, the industry has fallen into disrepute, especially in the West. Recent revelations 
arising from the Libor scandal – and this is not unique to London – suggest that the lessons 
have not been learnt. If we allow this culture of cynical greed to take root, it will undermine 
the public trust that is so critical to not just the growth but the viability of financial institutions. 
The  leadership  of  financial  institutions  –  Boards  and  senior  management  –  owe  a  special 
duty  of  care  to  ensure  that  finance  is  trustworthy,  socially  redeeming,  and  economically 
purposeful. They must send a clear, unadulterated message, down to the last person in their 
organisation: “If it is not right, don’t do it. If it is not true, don’t say it.”  
26. 
financial institutions on.  
This is an area that MAS intends to engage the Boards and senior management of 
Conclusion  
27. 
We  are  making  good  progress  in  our  corporate  governance  journey. We  are  now 
entering a new phase, and must go beyond rule reforms to create the conditions for good 
governance to flourish – developing a conducive ecosystem for market discipline, building up 
the  competencies  of  our  Board  directors,  and  instilling  a  culture  of  ethical  conduct  and 
values.  
28. 
journey.  
I  wish  you  all  success  in  this  important  new  phase  of  our  corporate  governance 
                                                
1  Joseph  Barr,  “From  the  Boardroom:  The  Role  of  the  Professional  Director”,  Harvard  Business  Review, 
May-June 1976. 5. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
