Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Uganda’s potential as an economy for 
the next five years 
Presentation by Mr Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile, Governor of the Bank of Uganda, at the 
Mineral Wealth Conference, Kampala, 1 October 2012. 
 Introduction 
1. 
The  next  five  years  are  likely  to  be  a  period  of  transition  for  the  Ugandan  economy;  a 
transition  which  will  encompass  three  dimensions.  First,  there  will  be  a  transition  to  an 
economy  in  which  non  renewable  natural  resources  –  oil  and  minerals  –  could  make  a 
substantial contribution to export earnings and Government budget revenues. Secondly, the 
Ugandan  economy  will  become  progressively  more  integrated  into  the  regional  economy, 
with  the  implementation  of  the  common  market  and  customs  union  in  the  East  African 
Community (EAC). The third dimension of the transition will be a transition from an economy 
which  is  predominantly  factor  driven,  based  on  its  endowments  of  natural  resources  and 
unskilled labour, to one in which economic growth is driven more by improvements in factor 
efficiency;  i.e.  by  growth  in  productivity.  These  three  prospective  economic  transitions  are 
related in important ways, which I shall elaborate on later.  
Whether  Uganda  can  gain  maximum  benefit  from  these  opportunities  depends  to  a  large 
extent  on  the  economic  policies  which  we  pursue  over  the  medium  to  long  term  and  the 
quality  of  our  economic management  and governance. It  is  not  axiomatic  that  Uganda  will 
benefit  from  our  oil  and  mineral  resources  that  Uganda  will  be  able  to  exploit  the 
opportunities presented by East African economic integration and that Uganda will generate 
sustained  and  dynamic  productivity  growth.  These  benefits  will  only  occur  if  the  policy 
choices  we  make  are  the  right  ones.  This  is  the  main  message  of  my  presentation  this 
morning.  
Opportunities for an economic transition in Uganda 
2. 
For  the  last  two  decades  Uganda  has  recorded  robust  economic  growth,  averaging  about 
7 percent per annum in real terms. As a result, the size of our economy, again in real terms, 
has quadrupled since the early 1990s, although real per capita incomes have only doubled in 
this  period  because  population  growth  rates  have  exceeded  three  percent  per  annum. 
Sustaining  rapid  economic  growth  consistently  over  two  decades  is  an  impressive 
achievement, not matched by most other developing countries. However, this growth has not 
yet  brought  about  a  major  structural  transformation  of  the  economy.  The  majority  of  the 
workforce, around 70 percent, is still employed in smallholder agriculture where productivity 
per worker is very low; average value added per worker in agriculture is only $200 per year. 
In  large  parts  of  the  economy,  which  are  still  dominated  by  traditional,  informal  activities, 
productivity is stagnant.  
The  Global  Competitiveness  Index,  which  is  produced  by  the World  Economic  Forum,  the 
African  Development  Bank  and  the  World  Bank,  distinguishes  three  stages  of  economic 
development  which  are  related  to  competitiveness.  In  the  first  stage,  which  characterises 
most low income countries, economies compete on the basis of their endowments; unskilled 
labour and natural resources. The second stage is an efficiency driven stage of development, 
in  which  economies  compete  by  continuously  raising  their  productivity.  Improvements  in 
factor  productivity  are  the  main  driver  of  economic  growth  in  this  second  stage  of 
development.  
It is on the threshold of the second stage of development that the Ugandan economy now 
stands.  In  industries  such  as  food  processing,  construction  materials,  telecommunications 
and  financial  services,  modern,  high  productivity  industries  have  been  set  up  and  are 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
expanding, although they still employ only a relatively small share of the workforce. If we can 
make the transition to an efficiency driven economy successfully, Uganda can accelerate the 
structural transformation of its economy and move towards middle income status.  
The commercial  exploitation  of hydrocarbon  and  mineral  deposits  offers both  opportunities 
and challenges for Uganda. The opportunities arise because oil and minerals will generate 
substantial increments to public revenue and to foreign exchange earnings; resources which 
could  be  used  to  invest  in  the  physical  and  human  capital  needed  to  strengthen 
competitiveness  and  thus  help  to  create  the  foundation  for  productivity  driven  economic 
growth.  The  World  Bank’s  Doing  Business  Indicators  report  that  an  inadequate  supply  of 
infrastructure  is  cited  by  firms  as  the  third  most  problematic  factor  for  doing  business  in 
Uganda (the most problematic factor is corruption and the second most is access to finance). 
Strengthening the transport and power infrastructure could reduce significantly the costs of 
doing business in Uganda and thereby help to promote private investment in modern, high 
productivity,  industries.  Better  infrastructure  is  also  necessary  to  enable  Uganda  to  export 
minerals or to process them in the country. Productivity growth also requires investment in 
human  capital.  Uganda  has  made  great  progress  in  making  access  to  primary  education 
virtually universal across the country, but we now need to build on this and expand access to 
secondary  education  and  to  provide  the  workforce  with  the  vocational  skills  needed  for 
modern industries.  
Unfortunately,  oil  and  minerals  can  also  impede  development,  as  demonstrated  by  the 
experience  of  many  developing  countries  which  are  rich  in  resources.  Natural  resource 
revenues  are  often  very  volatile  because  of  the  inherent  volatility  of  global  prices  and 
sometimes  because  production  volumes  may  also  be  erratic,  and  this  volatility  can  be 
transmitted to the macroeconomy, creating a cycle of resource led booms and slumps. The 
export of natural resources and the spending of the revenues thus generated in the domestic 
economy  can  also  cause 
the 
competitiveness  of  the  non  resource  traded  goods  sectors  of  the  economy,  such  as 
agriculture  and  manufacturing;  this  is  a  phenomenon  called  “Dutch  disease”.  Avoiding  the 
pitfalls  of  natural  resource  dependency  –  the  so  called  “resource  curse”  –  is  only  possible 
with  sound  economic  policies  and  good  economic  governance,  a  subject  I  will  return  to 
shortly.  
The EAC is now implementing the second stage of its regional economic integration project; 
the common market which will allow for trade in services within the EAC, including the right 
of establishment of firms in the service sectors, and the free movement of capital and labour. 
The EAC customs union has already yielded major benefits for Uganda. Uganda’s exports to 
our  EAC  partner  states  have  risen  from  only  $68  million  in  2001/02  to  $676  million  in 
2011/12. Intra-EAC exports now comprise 25 percent of Uganda’s total exports, compared to 
14 percent 10 years ago.  
Regional  economic  integration  can  help  to  accelerate  Uganda’s  transition  to  an  efficiency 
driven  economy  in  several  ways.  First,  it  will  expand  the  size  of  the  market  for  domestic 
firms,  allowing  them to realise  economies  of  scale  and  become more  efficient.  In terms of 
value, the combined GDP of the EAC partner states is the equivalent of nearly $90 billion, 
which  is  four  times  the  size  of  the  Ugandan  economy  alone.  Secondly,  it  will  strengthen 
competitive  pressures  in  the  national  market,  by  exposing  domestic  firms  to  greater 
competition  from  firms  from  other  EAC  partner  states.  Competition  provides  the  best 
incentive for firms to increase their productivity.  
Thirdly,  regional  integration  will  provide  a  stepping  stone  for  industries  which  are  not  yet 
competitive globally to begin exporting, and thus stimulate the improvements in productivity 
which  will  eventually  enable  them  to  compete  on  global  markets.  This  is  likely  to  be 
especially important for the domestic food sector, which could produce substantial surpluses 
for  export.  In  turn,  the  opportunity  to  sell  on  regional  export  markets  will  give  farmers  in 
Uganda  incentives  to  focus  on  production  for  the  market  and  to  produce  higher  value 
rate  appreciation,  which  damages 
real  exchange 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
products. Finally, cooperation at the regional level is necessary to develop the infrastructure 
to support growth in the region’s economies; for example road and rail links from landlocked 
countries to the coast. This will be particularly important for the development of the mining 
industry.  
What policies are essential to bring about the economic transitions? 
Macroeconomic policy 
The  foundation  of  Uganda’s  economic  growth  over  the  past  two  decades  has  been  the 
priority accorded to macroeconomic stability, and in particular the control of inflation. This will 
be equally important in the future, to support the transitions which I have discussed above, 
not least because the transition to an efficiency driven economy depends on attracting higher 
rates of private investment in modern industries. A stable macroeconomy is a prerequisite for 
private investment on a large scale.  
The  two  key  components  of  sound  macroeconomic  management  are  a  monetary  policy 
which has as its primary policy objective the maintenance of low inflation, implemented by a 
central  bank  which  has  the  operational  independence  to  set  interest  rates  to  achieve  this 
objective. The  BOU  has  modernised  its  monetary  policy,  introducing  an Inflation Targeting 
Lite monetary policy framework, which employs a policy interest rate – the Central Bank Rate 
(CBR) – to influence demand in the economy. The new framework has already proved to be 
effective in bringing inflation down. Inflation was driven up sharply last year by supply price 
shocks, but the BOU’s strategy of raising the CBR has brought about rapid disinflation. The 
latest inflation data, released last week, show that core inflation has fallen to 4.8 percent. The 
BOU intends to hold core inflation as close as possible to its policy target of 5 percent over 
the medium term, using the policy interest rate to counter any shocks which threaten to drive 
inflation above the target in a persistent manner.  
Fiscal  policy  will  become  even  more  important  as  a  tool  for  maintaining  macroeconomic 
stability once production of oil and minerals begins on a commercial scale. A large part of the 
rents  accruing  from  natural  resources  take  the  form  of  Government  budget  revenues  and 
hence  flow  into  the  domestic  economy  through  the  Government  budget.  How  the 
Government spends these revenues  will have a crucial impact on macroeconomic stability 
and on the extent to which Dutch disease affects the economy. A sound fiscal policy must be 
formulated  in  a  forward  looking  medium  to  long  term  framework.  It  must  ensure  that 
revenues derived from natural resources are not spent in an unsustainable manner, leading 
to a short lived consumption and construction boom, followed by a bust once the resources 
run  out.  It  must  ensure  that  any  expansion  of  domestic  demand  arising  from  the  use  of 
natural  resource  revenues  is  carefully  matched  to  the  available  supply  capacities,  for 
example  in  the  construction  industry,  to  avoid  driving  up  prices.  Fiscal  policy  must  also 
ensure  that  public  spending  is  delinked  from  the  volatility  in  resource  revenues,  to  avoid 
imparting  cyclical  volatility  to  the  economy.  This  requires  formulating  fiscal  policy  using  a 
medium term fiscal anchor, such as a non oil fiscal balance target.  
Public financial management 
Uganda’s  ability  to  benefit  from  the  public  revenues  generated  by  oil  and  minerals  will 
depend on the quality of public financial management. It is imperative that public revenues 
are spent in an efficient manner, which requires both very careful selection of public projects 
and effective project implementation. Uganda must be especially vigilant to avoid allocating 
public funds to white elephant projects, which cannot generate positive social rates of return. 
Ensuring that only high quality projects are selected for the Government budget will only be 
possible if the technical skills of public officials involved in project appraisal are improved and 
if the project selection process is very thorough, transparent and open to public scrutiny. The 
current capacities in the public sector for implementing public investment projects are weak; 
the backlog of projects for which funding has already been secured but implementation has 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
been delayed  is evidence of serious absorption capacity constraints. Consequently, before 
Uganda attempts to scale up public spending on public infrastructure, it is essential that the 
capacities  in  the  public  sector  for  managing  all  aspects  of  public  investment  projects  are 
strengthened.  
Improve the climate for private investment 
Raising the rate of private investment in modern, labour intensive industries is a prerequisite 
for a transition to an efficiency driven economy. In some respects, Uganda has a conducive 
business  environment for  the  private  sector. We  have  a  record  of macroeconomic  stability 
and  provide  liberalised  factor  and  product  markets.  In  the  Global  Competitiveness  Index, 
Uganda scores relatively well on the indicators for the macroeconomic environment, labour 
market efficiency and financial market development.  
Nevertheless, Uganda’s private investment rate, which stood at an average of 18 percent of 
GDP  over  the  last  five  years,  does  not  compare  favourably  with  the  fastest  growing 
developing  economies,  such  as  those  in  Asia,  where  private  investment  rates  of  over 
30 percent of GDP are the norm. The World Bank’s Doing Business Indictors reveal some of 
the reasons why Uganda does not attract higher rates of private investment. I have already 
mentioned  that  firms  cited  the  inadequate  supply  of  infrastructure  as  one  of  the  most 
problematic factors affecting their business, and the policy implications of this. However, the 
problem most frequently cited by firms in the Doing Business Indicator Surveys is corruption. 
Corruption raises the costs and the risks of doing business. Curbing corruption is, therefore, 
essential  to  improve  the  business  climate  in  Uganda  and  attract  higher  levels  of  private 
investment.  
Accelerating the demographic transition 
Uganda has one of the highest total fertility rates in the world, at 6.7 births per women, and is 
yet to undergo a demographic transition. As a consequence, Uganda also has a very high 
dependency  ratio,  with  110  dependents  for  every  person  of  working  age.  The  high 
dependency ratio is a major obstacle to improving productivity, because it impedes domestic 
savings  and  reduces  the  real  resources  per  head  which  are  available  for  human  capital 
formation, such as per pupil education expenditures. The developing countries which have 
been most successful in sustaining rapid economic growth and structural transformation of 
their economies have achieved this in the context of a demographic transition to low fertility 
rates and dependency ratios which has enabled very high rates of investment to be financed 
and  the  quality  of  human  capital  formation  to  be  improved  substantially.  To  replicate  this 
success,  Uganda  must  implement  policies  to  bring  down  the  total  fertility  rate,  by 
strengthening  female  education,  improving  maternal  and  child  health  care,  providing  wider 
access to contraceptives and through public campaigns to promote smaller families.  
Conclusions 
Uganda faces exciting challenges in the years ahead. The economy has delivered, over the 
last 20 years, consistent and robust real economic growth which has led to a doubling of per 
capita  incomes.  We  now  have  the  opportunity  to  build  on  this  platform  and  accelerate 
structural transformation. The focus of our efforts should be to strengthen the incentives for 
raising  productivity,  so  that  continuous  increases  in  efficiency  become  the  driving  force  of 
growth  and  development.  Competitive  markets  and  a  stable  macroeconomy  provide  the 
foundations  for  such  a  transition.  The  resources  earned  from  the  production  of  oil  and 
minerals can make a vital contribution to enhancing productivity in the economy, but only if 
they  are  managed  and  invested  in  a  very  sound  manner.  The  exploitation  of  natural 
resources raises the premium on economic management and economic governance.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
