Thomas Jordan: The Swiss franc – a success story 
Address  by  Mr  Thomas  Jordan,  Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss  National 
Bank, at the launch of the book Der Schweizer Franken – eine Erfolgsgeschichte (The Swiss 
franc – a success story), Zurich, 3 October 2012. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, allow me to begin by welcoming you all to the launch of the book Der 
Schweizer Franken – eine Erfolgsgeschichte. 
Since  this  book  was  commissioned  by  the  Swiss  National  Bank,  I  would  like  to  take  this 
opportunity to say a few words as to how it came about. 
After  I  have  finished,  first  Hans-Peter  Thür,  publishing  director  of  NZZ  Libro,  and  then 
Professor Baltensperger, the book’s author, will speak to you. 
After their comments, and before we close this event with a standing lunch, you will have the 
opportunity to ask questions. 
The German theologist, Hans von Keler,1 is said to have commented “History is more than 
what has already happened; it is the layers of the past beneath our feet, the ground on which 
we lay our foundations”, and it seems to me to be particularly fitting for today’s book launch. 
Institutions do not just fall from the sky – they are created by people. Switzerland’s present 
monetary and currency institutions have come into being as the result of a gradual process. 
Professor  Baltensperger’s  book  is  an  impressive  account  of  the  efforts  to  establish  sound 
institutions over a period of more than 150 years. 
Many approaches were tried, some proved their worth, while others were abandoned. The 
establishment  of  these  monetary  institutions  was  not  a  constant  reinvention  of  the  wheel; 
rather, progress was evident. The sound institutions that have grown in this way represent 
valuable  capital  for  our  country  and  have  made  a  significant  contribution  to  Switzerland’s 
prosperity. 
I feel  that  it  behoves  us  to  become familiar  with  the  history  of  our  monetary  and  currency 
institutions. This is true not just for the employees of the SNB, but in particular for them. In 
fact,  this  was  the  original  idea  behind  Professor  Baltensperger’s  book,  namely  to  improve 
employees’ knowledge of Switzerland’s economic history. Or, expressed in a different way: 
To encourage them to “become familiar with the ground on which we lay our foundations”. 
On the initiative of the former Chairman of the Board, Jean-Pierre Roth, an internal seminar 
on  the  history  of  the  Swiss  currency  in  the  19th  and  20th  centuries  was  organised  in  the 
autumn of 2008 and in the spring of 2009. It became clear that no work yet existed which 
covered the entire period of the history of the Swiss franc. It was this realisation that laid the 
foundation  for  this  book.  The  book  was  ultimately  written  by  expanding  on  the  material 
derived from the internal seminar. 
As you will be able to conclude for yourself after reading the work, the result can certainly be 
considered  a  resounding  success.  The  book  by  Professor  Baltensperger  is  a  beautifully 
illustrated work with fascinating contents. It is not only an attractive book, but is also a very 
valuable working tool. 
A special feature of this history of the Swiss currency is that it was not written by a historian, 
but  from  the  perspective  of  a  monetary  theorist.  Nevertheless,  the  author  is  not  only  an 
outstanding monetary theorist and academic teacher, he also has rich practical experience 
                                                
1   Hans von Keler, *1925, German theologist. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
as  an  economic  policy  advisor.  The  SNB’s  Governing  Board  would  like  to  thank  Ernst 
Baltensperger  for  having  made  such  a  significant  contribution  to  the  understanding  of  the 
Swiss  franc.  We  would  also  like  to  thank  the  publishing  house,  NZZ  Libro,  and  all  the 
individuals participating in this project for their careful handling and publishing of this book. 
It is now my pleasure to give the floor to Hans-Peter Thür. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
