Duvvuri Subbarao: Quantitative easing – unconventional policy response 
to the financial crisis 
Remarks by Dr Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, while welcoming 
Mr Ben Bernanke, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, 
at the Reserve Bank of India, Mumbai, 10 October 2012. 
 I am delighted to welcome Chairman Ben Bernanke to the Reserve Bank and to this meeting 
with the Top Management Group of RBI. 
like 
It  would  be  presumptuous  on  my  part 
Ben Bernanke, especially to a gathering of central bank staff. I will do so nevertheless, if only 
to pay homage to a tradition. 
legendary  personality 
introduce  a 
to 
Crisis – an intellectual challenge 
As we all know, the crisis was an intellectual challenge as it called into question many of our 
beliefs  and  theories,  and  reopened  issues  that  we  thought  had  been  settled.  Clearly,  it 
demanded a policy response that went beyond conventional economics. As central bankers 
started battling the crisis, ferociously easing monetary policy, leading the intellectual charge 
from the front was Chairman Bernanke.  
Unconventional policies 
Through  his  resort  to  unconventional  policies,  Ben  Bernanke  demonstrated  the  enormous 
range, depth and power of the central bank policy arsenal. In doing so, he drew not only from 
his  impressive  scholarship  of  the  Great  Depression,  but  also  from  the  lessons  of  several 
post-war crises, including the long slow down in Japan. This is a rare instance of academic 
economics being tested in real time.  
As  an  academic  and  as  a  policy  maker,  Chairman  Bernanke  was  ahead  of  others  in 
recognizing  the  limits  of  conventional  monetary  policy.  As  someone  quipped,  he  believed 
strongly  that  it  is  better  to  succeed  through  unconventional  policies  than  to  fail  through 
conventional  policies!  In  a  scenario  where  the  policy  interest  rate  was  already  at  the  zero 
lower  bound,  he  had  advocated  a  money-financed  tax  cut,  essentially  equivalent  to  a 
“helicopter  drop”  of  money  (earning  him  the  sobriquet  “Helicopter  Ben”).  Unlike  a  bond-
financed tax-cut, which  leads to tax increases down the  line, a tax cut financed by money 
creation  should,  in  theory,  not  emasculate  fiscal  expansion  through  the  Ricardian 
Equivalence. 
Quantitative Easing (QE) 
The  Federal  Reserve  under  Bernanke  was  not,  of  course,  the  first  central  bank  to  deploy 
quantitative  easing  (QE). The  Bank  of  Japan (BoJ)  is  considered to  be the  pioneer  in  this 
regard.  However,  where  Chairman  Bernanke  stood  out  was  that  he  used  QE  far  more 
aggressively than the BoJ ever did, introducing innovations as he went along. QE became 
“credit  easing”  when  private  assets  were  bought  to  stabilize  financial  markets, followed  by 
another unconventional move – “operation twist” – to intervene directly at the long end of the 
yield curve with offsetting interventions at the short-end. The latest version of QE, as we all 
know, is an open ended commitment to purchase mortgage backed securities at the rate of 
$40 billion per month for as long as the “labour market does not improve substantially”. 
QE, in all its variations, was able to halt the downward deflationary spiral by making up for 
the  declining  velocity  of  money  caused  by  deleveraging.  It  kept  sovereign  borrowing  rates 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
low in the face of a market revolt. It helped clean up the balance sheets of stressed financial 
institutions through cheap funding.  
The recovery from the Great Recession was relatively quick; at least that was how it seemed 
through the “green shoots” of 2010. Now, of course, we are no longer so sure. The limitations 
of  macroeconomic  techniques  honed  through  deconstructing  the  Great  Depression,  the 
inflationary  seventies  and 
to  see.  Quite 
understandably,  therefore,  QE  has  its  critics.  It  may  be  relevant  to  recall  some  of  the 
criticism. 
the  Great  Moderation  are 
for  all 
there 
Criticism of QE 
The main criticism has been that QE is being continued beyond its usefulness. What the US 
economy  requires  now  is  a  fiscal  stimulus,  and  further  QE  is  no  substitute  for  a  fiscal 
stimulus. It would only stoke inflationary pressures down the line.  
A second criticism, in fact a corollary to the first one, has been the argument that stretching 
monetary  policy  to  unconventional  levels  has  obliterated  the  firewall  between  fiscal  and 
monetary policies, with monetary policy increasingly becoming an extension of fiscal policy, 
thereby renewing concerns about the fiscal dominance of monetary policy. 
Third, whereas fiscal stimulus leads to higher taxes down the line, the combination of zero-
bound  interest  rates  and  QE  is  an  immediate  tax  on  savers,  who  in  effect  finance  the 
stimulus. This tax on savings should induce people to consume and invest more, and save 
less.  But  with  impaired  balance  sheets,  they  are  possibly  saving  even  more.  Given  this 
outcome, some have questioned the circumstances under which and the extent to which QE 
can trigger a virtuous cycle of demand for and supply of credit to the real economy. 
Fourth,  there  has  been  criticism  from  some  emerging  markets  alleging  that  the  excess 
liquidity  unleashed  by  QE  is  fuelling  volatile  capital  flows,  asset  bubbles  and  inflation  and 
also spiking up commodity prices.  
Finally, the Fed is being challenged on the risks in the process of unwinding QE, in particular 
of how this could be managed consistent with price stability and financial stability. 
Chairman Bernanke has responded to the above criticism on several occasions from various 
platforms. He has also found an innovative answer for each new problem thrown at him so 
far. This is all the more remarkable given that there is no recent real life experience to draw 
from.  
Central banks and the new trilemma 
As  a  central  bank,  we  empathize  with  the  Fed’s  concerns.  The  crisis  has  pushed  central 
bank  policy  making  into  uncharted  territory. We  will  not  know  for  many  years  whether  the 
policy mix we have followed to manage the crisis is right. Even so, in real time, all of us have 
to  struggle  with  the  challenge  of  managing  the  new  trilemma  –  of  balancing  fiscal 
sustainability, price stability and financial stability.  
Communication policies 
Chairman Bernanke’s unconventional policies have extended beyond the content of policy to 
its communication. Hard as it might be to imagine from today’s perspective, prior to 1994, the 
Federal  Reserve  was  not  actually  announcing  the  target  Fed  Funds  Rate;  the  market  was 
expected  to  infer  the  rate  from  the  timing,  sequencing  and  magnitude  of  its  open  market 
operations. In sharp contrast, today the Fed not only explicitly announces the rate but also 
gives a clear indication of the future policy trajectory. Like Chairman Bernanke has carried 
his  policies  to  an  unconventional  level,  he  has  carried  their  communication  also  to  an 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
unconventional  level  by  shaping  and  managing  expectations  through  post-policy  press 
conferences and town hall meetings.  
Bernanke’s legacy 
All  in  all,  because  of  what  he  did,  what  he  said,  and  above  all  because  he  stuck  to  his 
convictions honed through deep scholarship, Chairman Bernanke will have a profound and 
lasting  influence  on  the  theory  and  practice  of  central  banking.  In  the  world  of  policy,  he 
might be remembered for fashioning the monetary policy of the 21st century. In the world of 
academia,  he  will  probably  earn  the  ultimate  honour  an  academic  craves  if  his  real  world 
practice of economics becomes the stuff of text books. 
Once again, I have great pleasure in welcoming Chairman Bernanke to the Reserve Bank. 
Ben, we are truly delighted to have you with us and look forward to hearing you.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
