Christian Noyer: Remaining challenges facing the euro area  
Speech with Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France and Chairman of the Board 
of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, at the Foreign Correspondents Club of 
Japan, Tokyo, 10 October 2012. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
I would like to start by thanking the Foreign Correspondents Club of Japan for this invitation. I 
am delighted to be here with you today to discuss, here in Tokyo before an audience from 
different backgrounds, the situation in the euro area. 
For the past few years the euro area has been going through a major crisis. This crisis has 
multiple causes that call into question the institutional foundations of monetary union. 
I  strongly believe that  the  different roots  of  this  crisis  have  now  been  thoroughly analysed 
and are being effectively addressed. The main challenge facing the euro area is to pursue 
the efforts underway to return to balanced budgets, regain competitiveness and growth and 
strengthen Economic and Monetary Union. 
What is the situation in the euro area? 
1. 
In  early  2012  the  outlook  seemed  encouraging.  Confidence  appeared  to  be  steadily 
returning, the decisions taken, in particular the very long-term refinancing operations – had 
calmed  the  markets.  Nevertheless,  pressures  quickly  mounted  again,  reflecting  especially 
the difficulties experienced by Greece and Spain. It became clear that the situation was still 
precarious, and that the solutions hitherto adopted in the euro area had to be enhanced in 
order to be truly lasting. 
Today  there  are  a  number  of  positive  signs:  bond  market  activity  is  reasonably  buoyant, 
yields  of  peripheral  countries  have  declined  slightly  and  stock  markets  have  picked  up. 
However, two major weaknesses persist: 
– 
Financial  markets  are  highly  fragmented  within  the  euro  area  and  sovereign 
yield spreads remain substantial; 
Growth is  weak and,  here  too, there are  major disparities within the euro area. In 
the second  quarter,  growth  stood  at  -0.2%  for  the  area,  after  stagnating  in  the 
first  quarter.  Germany  posted  the  highest  growth,  at  0.3%,  and  Portugal  the 
weakest, at –1.2%. We are still expecting growth to recover very gradually next year. 
 Before discussing how to address these problems, we have to correctly analyse the causes. 
In my opinion, three mutually reinforcing causes gave rise to the euro area crisis. 
1.  
The main origin of the crisis lies in the lack of fiscal discipline on the part of most 
Member States. While these countries had had to make considerable consolidation 
efforts to fulfil the convergence criteria and to be allowed to join the euro, almost all 
of  them  became  more  lax  as  soon  as  they  entered.  In  the  first  ten  years  of 
EMU,  they  ran  up  deficits  and  debts, including during times of growth. As a result 
in 2008, when the crisis started, these countries had no more fiscal room and their 
public finances deteriorated substantially. 
Member  States’  individual  discipline  has  therefore  been  too  weak,  and  collective 
discipline, which  was  nonetheless  provided  for  in  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact, 
was  not  applied  in  practice.  I  would  like  to  recall  the  spirit  of  this  Pact.  It  was 
designed to be the fiscal pillar of monetary  union.  It  was  based  on  a  peer-review 
mechanism.  But,  on  the  one  hand,  it  was  deliberately  misinterpreted:  whereas 
countries  were  required  to  maintain  a  fiscal  balance  over  the  cycle,  without 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
2. 
  3. 
there  was  a 
this  discipline,  year  after  year, 
breaching  the  3%  of  GDP  reference  value  for  the  annual  public  deficit,  they 
interpreted  this  to  mean:  “we  can  constantly  run  a  3%  deficit”.  And,  on  the  other 
hand, the Pact was not respected, as sanctions were not imposed on Member States 
that breached these rules (including France and Germany around 2002). 
The second cause of this crisis lies in the competitiveness gaps that had widened 
for  a long  time  before  the  crisis.  The  economic  rationale  is  easy  to  understand: 
when  joining  a  currency  area  whose  goal  is  to  achieve  an  inflation  rate  of  just 
below  2%,  changes  in  unit  production  costs  must  be  in  line  with  this  central 
bank  objective,  modulo  the  productivity gains. In all countries that did not abide by 
this  calculation  and 
loss  of 
competitiveness that ultimately proved very significant. 
As  regards  these  budgetary  slippages  and  competitiveness  losses,  I  hasten  to 
add  that  markets  did  not  play  their  role.  As  soon  as  the  euro  was  adopted,  they 
ceased to  differentiate between  countries  and  sovereign  yield  spreads  narrowed, 
even aligning themselves at the lowest levels, i.e. those of Germany and France. 
For  the  first  decade  of  EMU,  the  single  currency  appeared  to  play  a  buffer 
role  that  in addition to protecting countries against monetary instability – which the 
euro  successfully did  and  was  its  raison  d’être  –  also  protected them  against  the 
economic reality. Member States were labouring under the illusion that  they  could, 
without  ever  suffering  the  consequences, allow  themselves  to  flout  the  rules  for 
budgetary  discipline  or  make  no  efforts  to  remain competitive. The crisis came as 
a very severe wake-up call. 
The third cause of this crisis, interlinked with the other two, is institutional: monetary 
union was  not  built  on  sufficiently  robust  economic,  fiscal,  financial  and  political 
institutions.  The  fiscal  discipline  mechanisms  were  insufficient,  there  was  no 
mechanism  for  the  surveillance of  macroeconomic  imbalances,  nor  was  there  a 
crisis  management  mechanism;  financial  union  worked  when  times  were  good: 
banks held the bonds of other Member States, but it very rapidly fragmented when 
the crisis erupted, due to the lack of institutional soundness. 
The causes of the crisis are being addressed 
2. 
I will now explain how the euro area is dealing with the three fundamental causes of the crisis 
it is facing. 
First, the efforts already made on the fiscal front by euro area countries are already bearing 
fruit: the primary position of the euro area should be close to balance by the end of 2012, 
which is a remarkable achievement compared to the other major economic areas (Japan, the 
United  States  and  the  United  Kingdom  will  all  run  deficits  of around  9%,  6%  and  5% 
respectively).  At  the  current  juncture,  this  is  clearly  an  asset  for  us  and  an  element  of 
confidence both for the markets and economic agents, and needs to be further enhanced. 
In addition to these efforts at the national level, a stronger framework for common discipline 
has  been  put  in  place,  which  represents  a  major  step  forward  towards  a  more  integrated 
economic union. 
The 
last 
December considerably reinforces the Stability and Growth  Pact: the surveillance powers of 
the European  Commission  regarding  national  budgets  have  been  enhanced,  sanctions 
have become  quasi-automatic  and  the  public  debt  and  public  spending  criteria  are  being 
more closely  monitored.  In  addition,  the  Treaty  on  Stability,  Coordination and  Governance 
puts  in place  a  new  “fiscal  compact”,  notably  including  the  requirement  that  the  annual 
structural government deficit does not exceed 0.5% of GDP. 
“six-pack”)  which  came 
legislative  package 
(known  as 
force 
into 
the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
At  current  debt  levels,  economic  agents  would  respond  to  loose  fiscal  policy  by  delaying 
their own  private  spending.  The  financial  markets  would  continue  to  impose  very  punitive 
interest rates  on  our  countries  to compensate  for  the  uncertainty  surrounding  the  fiscal 
outlook. Overall, the confidence generated and  the financial benefits  of fiscal  consolidation 
far outweigh the negative effects on effective demand in the short run. It is crucial that all of 
the efforts in this area are pursued with determination. 
Now  turning  to  competitiveness,  here  too  the  progress  already  made  in  terms  of 
structural reforms  and  the  adjustment  of  unit  production  costs  in  many  countries  is  very 
encouraging. Never  in  the  recent  past  have  the  European  economies  been  reformed  so 
much  in  such  a short space of time. I could cite many examples: the reform of the labour 
market  in  Spain  and  Italy,  or  the  pension  reforms  in  Italy  and  France.  These  reforms 
constitute  the  necessary  foundation  for  dynamic  and  sustainable  growth  in  the  future 
and  they  must  be  vigorously  pursued.  Furthermore,  the  new  Stability  Pact  includes  a 
surveillance mechanism  for macroeconomic imbalances, which has been missing up till now. 
Lastly,  the 
the  process  of  being 
strengthened extremely rapidly as a result of the crisis. 
– 
institutions  that  underpin  the  euro  area  are 
in 
I have  already  mentioned  the  substantially  reinforced  fiscal  and macroeconomic 
discipline  framework:  it  needs  to  be  recognised  that  this  is  a  very important  step 
given  the  transfers  of  sovereignty  that  it  represents  –  we  are moving  towards  a 
stronger economic union; 
The  European Stability  Mechanism, whose  implementation has  been  bolstered  by 
the go-ahead  given  by  Germany’s  constitutional  court  and  which  held  its  first 
Board  meeting,  has  a  firepower  of  EUR  500  billion  of  new  money  to  directly  buy 
government bonds,  provide  collateral  or  lend  funds.  It  will  also  be  able  to  directly 
lend money to banks in difficulty without increasing the debt of their home countries 
as  soon  as  the  single  supervisory  mechanism  will  be  in  place.  It  is  a  powerful 
crisis  resolution  tool  that  Europe  has  equipped  itself  with;  added  to  already 
disbursed bilateral and EFSF loans and to the existing EU facility, the total firepower 
will near 1000 billion of USD. 
The work on the establishment of the banking union is moving forward rapidly too. 
The  Commission’s  report  that  was  submitted  a  few  weeks  ago  sets  out  a 
clear framework: all banks in the euro area will quickly become subject to a single 
supervisory  mechanism  under  the  authority  of  the  ECB.  Day-to-day  supervision 
will  be  performed  by  the  national  supervisors,  in  accordance  with  the  principle  of 
decentralisation that  has  already  proved  its  effectiveness in  the  implementation of 
the single  monetary  policy  within  the  Eurosystem.  The  principle  underlying  this 
single supervisory mechanism is that the severity of the crisis in the euro area has 
largely been due to the vicious circle that developed between banking and sovereign 
risk. To break  this link, we need to have a genuine  institutionalised  banking  union 
that  ensures  not  only  the  same  supervision  throughout  the  euro  area,  but  also 
identical  rules,  an  integrated  bank  crisis  resolution  mechanism  and  a  common 
deposit guarantee scheme. We are moving towards the banking and financial union 
that was missing from monetary union. 
  3.   
The  Eurosystem  is  providing  valuable  support  during  this  period  of 
necessary reforms 
level  –  implementing 
It  is  clear  that  the  ultimate  responsibility  for  exiting  the  crisis  lies  with  governments,  at 
national 
reforms,  consolidating  public  finances  and  restoring 
competitiveness  –  and  at  the  collective  level  –  agreeing  on  and  implementing  a  more 
coherent and comprehensive institutional framework around monetary union. These reforms 
are obviously – and fortunately – the fruit of a democratic process and can only be that. But 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
the corollary to this is that these necessary reforms cannot be immediate: they take time, first 
to be implemented and then to yield their effects. And the time of the markets is not that of 
democracy,  as  you  know.  Doubts  and  delays  create  nervousness,  volatility  and  worry  in 
financial markets, which often leads to sharp rises in interest rates for countries deemed to 
be vulnerable. 
The Eurosystem has decided to take firm action when it considers that these interest rates 
do  not  reflect  a  genuine  credit  risk  differential,  but  rather  unfounded  fears  about  the 
reversibility of the euro. Because at that point, the effectiveness of the single monetary policy 
is clearly jeopardised: the key interest rates that we set no longer feed through to the real 
economy in the same way in all countries via the bank lending channel – which is a crucial 
channel in the euro area given the predominance of intermediated financing. In order to fulfil 
our  mandate  of  maintaining  price  stability,  our  monetary  policy  impulses  need  to  be 
transmitted homogeneously across the whole area. This is why we decided to create a new 
instrument:  Outright  Monetary  Transactions.  The  idea  is  to  have  a  credible  backstop  to 
counter  unjustified  increases  in  sovereign  yields.  This  backstop  must  naturally  be 
accompanied by strict conditionality to guarantee that the country concerned makes effective 
progress towards a more robust economic situation. 
By means of this new tool, as with all of the other tools that we have deployed since the start 
of the  crisis  –  in  particular  the  measures  to  support  bank  liquidity  –  the  Eurosystem  is 
endeavouring to  relieve the pressure from the markets which may  undermine the ability of 
countries to implement the reforms embarked on, and which may eventually jeopardise price 
stability.  We  shall  continue  to  take  all  of  the  necessary  action  to  fulfil  our  mandate  and 
contribute,  within  this  framework,  to the  success  of this  tricky  but  necessary  period  of 
transition towards a more coherent, stable and dynamic economic and monetary union. 
Thank you for your attention. I shall be pleased to answer your questions. 
 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
