Haruhiko Kuroda: Overcoming deflation and quantitative and qualitative 
monetary easing 
Speech by Mr Haruhiko Kuroda, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Kisaragi-kai Meeting, 
Tokyo, 20 September 2013. 
 Introduction 
Thank you for giving me the opportunity to address you today. 
I assumed the position of Bank of Japan Governor just six months ago, on March 20. At the 
time, as the Governor of the Bank, which has a mission to ensure price stability, I resolved to 
pull Japan’s economy out of the deflation that has lasted for some 15 years. This is because, 
due to prolonged deflation, “deflationary expectations” (the recognition that prices will decline 
or  not  increase)  were  entrenched  among  people  and  firms,  and  this  situation  had  been 
depriving  Japan’s  economy  of  vitality.  Reflecting  my  determination,  the  new  policy  of 
quantitative and qualitative monetary easing (QQE) was introduced in April. The policy has 
already  started  to  exert  effects.  Positive  developments  in  the  real  economy  and  financial 
markets have been spreading, and people’s expectations in terms of economic activity and 
prices have been improving. 
Today, I will first briefly discuss developments in economic activity and prices at home and 
abroad. Then I will turn to a description of the deflation that has continued in Japan for some 
15 years and delve somewhat into the background and what should be done to overcome it. 
Recent developments in economic activity and prices 
I. 
Let me start with recent developments in economic activity and prices. To summarize, with 
the QQE making steady progress, Japan’s economy has been proceeding smoothly along a 
path toward achieving the “price stability goal” of 2 percent, as the Bank has presented in its 
outlooks. 
Economic activity and prices 
Japan’s economy is recovering moderately, as a virtuous cycle from income to spending is 
gradually starting to operate in both the corporate and household sectors. In the corporate 
sector,  corporate  profits  and  business  sentiment  have  improved  significantly.  A  focus  of 
attention  had  been  whether  this  improvement  would  genuinely  lead  to  an  increase  in 
spending, namely, business fixed investment, and recent data have confirmed that business 
fixed investment is starting to pick up mainly in the nonmanufacturing sector (Chart 1). For 
example,  in  the  GDP  statistics,  business  fixed  investment  in  real  terms  for  the  April-June 
quarter increased on a quarter-on-quarter basis for the first time in six quarters. Machinery 
orders – a leading indicator for business fixed investment – also turned to an increase on a 
quarter-on-quarter basis in the April-June quarter, for the first time in five quarters, and have 
been expanding since then. As for the household sector, the pick-up in housing investment 
has  become  evident.  Private  consumption  has  also  been  resilient,  registering  three 
consecutive  quarters  of  increase  in  real  terms  in  the  GDP  statistics  (Chart  2).  Sales  at 
department  stores  have  remained  firm,  notably  in  imports  and  high-end  products,  and 
consumption  of  services  such  as  outlays  for  travel  and  sales  in  the  food  service  industry 
have  held  steady.  Such  resilience  in  private  consumption  had  been  supported  by  wealth 
effects from the rise in stock prices and an improvement in consumer confidence in the first 
half  of  2013,  and  recently  it  has  begun  to  be  backed  also  by  improvement  in  the  income 
situation, such as employment and wages. Specifically, the ratio of job offers to applicants 
and the unemployment rate have both improved to a level observed for the first time in five 
years,  with  the  former  rising  to  0.94  and  the  latter  declining  to  3.8  percent  in  July.  As  for 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
wages, total cash earnings per employee was around the year-ago level in July, after having 
turned to an increase on a year-on-year basis in the April-June quarter mainly due to the fact 
that summer bonus payments rose (Chart 3). In addition to these positive developments in 
both the corporate and household sectors, as public investment has increased and exports 
have generally been picking up, production is increasing moderately. Looking ahead, Japan’s 
economy is expected to continue a moderate recovery as a virtuous cycle operates among 
production, income, and spending. 
In a situation where the economy is recovering, for prices the year-on-year rate of change in 
the consumer price index (CPI, excluding fresh food) accelerated to 0.7 percent in July, after 
having turned positive to 0.4 percent in June (Chart 4). Although the rise in energy-related 
goods  such  as  petroleum  goods  has  indeed  pushed  up  prices,  an  improvement  has  been 
observed  in  a  wide  range  of  goods  and  services  against  the  backdrop  of  resilient  private 
consumption.  In  addition,  looking  at  surveys  conducted  on  households,  economists,  and 
market participants, inflation expectations are judged to be rising on the whole. The year-on-
year rate of increase in the CPI is likely to rise gradually. 
Features of the current economic recovery 
Let me touch on the main features of the current economic recovery. This recovery has been 
following a pattern that differs from typical ones in the past. In many cases, the pattern of 
postwar economic recovery in Japan was that it started with improvement of corporate profits 
due to an increase in exports and production, which in turn led to an increase in business 
fixed  investment.  The  longest  postwar  economic  recovery  –  from  2002  to  2008  –  also 
followed  this  pattern,  on  the  back  of  an  unprecedented  expansion  in  the  global  economy, 
with  the rise  of  emerging  economies  and  housing bubbles  in  advanced  economies. In this 
type of pattern, large enterprises in the manufacturing sector – which have an advantage in 
exports – are the first to recover and, as the employment and income situation improves on 
the  whole,  a  recovery  spreads  gradually  to  the  nonmanufacturing  sector  and  small 
enterprises. 
However, this time the major feature of the recovery is that the nonmanufacturing sector has 
been  leading  it  on  the  back  of  firm  domestic  demand,  such  as  private  consumption  and 
public investment. Therefore, business fixed investment is weak in the manufacturing sector 
but  strong  in  the  nonmanufacturing  sector.  The  Indices  of  Tertiary  Industry  Activity,  which 
show developments in the nonmanufacturing sector, have recovered close to a level prior to 
the  Lehman  shock,  while  the  Indices  of  Industrial  Production  have  remained  at  about 
80 percent of their peak prior to the Lehman shock (Chart 5). 
Taking into account the difference in recovery pattern, how should we view the sustainability 
of economic recovery in the future? What is important is, first, for the firmness in domestic 
demand to continue and, second, for exports, production, and business fixed investment in 
the  manufacturing  sector  –  which  are  lagging  –  to  improve.  In  regard  to  the  first  point,  as 
mentioned earlier, a virtuous cycle from income to spending has started to steadily operate, 
and thus firm domestic demand is likely to be sustained. Let me next touch on the second 
point. The key here is, above all, developments in overseas economies. 
Current state of and outlook for overseas economies 
Overseas  economies  as  a  whole  are  gradually  heading  toward  a  pick-up,  although  a 
somewhat weak performance is partly seen. The economies are expected to gradually pick 
up  mainly  as  the  U.S.  economy  moderately  accelerates  its  pace  of  recovery  and  the 
European economy slowly bottoms out. 
By region, the U.S. economy has been on a moderate recovery trend against the background 
of  steady  private  demand.  Five  years  have  passed  since  the  Lehman  shock,  and  U.S. 
households have finally begun to heal after the major damage caused by the subprime loan 
problem. Private consumption has been increasing moderately in the face of a termination of 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
tax cuts at the beginning of the year. The housing market has entered a recovery process, 
albeit still at a low level, and housing investment has been improving despite the effect of an 
increase  in  mortgage  rates.  Such  firmness  in  the  household  sector  has  gradually  been 
spreading  to  the  corporate  sector,  and  business  sentiment  has  started  to  improve.  As 
accommodative financial conditions are likely to continue and downward pressure from the 
fiscal  side  is  expected  to  diminish  gradually,  the  pace  of  recovery  in  the  United  States  is 
likely to accelerate modestly. 
In  Europe,  April-June  real  GDP  registered  the  first  positive  quarter-on-quarter  growth  in 
seven  quarters,  and  the  economy  seems  to  have  bottomed  out.  Severe  fiscal  austerity 
measures  were  revised,  and  downward  pressure  from  the  fiscal  side  has  weakened 
somewhat. Financial markets, which were under pressure on a number of occasions during 
the past several years, have generally been stable. Firms and consumers have gained some 
breathing  space,  and  their  sentiment  has  been  improving.  Production  has  stopped 
decreasing as exports have bottomed out. Of course, although the European debt problem 
has  yet  to  be  fully  resolved  and  the  consequences  continue  to  warrant  attention,  the 
European economy is likely to pick up gradually as recent developments continue. 
The  Chinese  economy  has  continued  to  see  stable  growth,  albeit  at  a  lower  level  than 
before,  as  the  government  has  engaged  in  a  variety  of  structural  reforms.  Private 
consumption has been firm on the back of the favorable employment and income situation, 
although  effects  of  the  government’s  frugality  campaign  are  still  observed.  The  pace  of 
increase  in  fixed  asset  investment  has  been  solid,  mainly  due  to  rises  in  investment  in 
infrastructure and real estate. While the government has been placing weight on the quality 
of growth, at the same time it has given due consideration to economic activity. As for the 
outlook, there is a high degree of uncertainty associated with the effects of structural reforms, 
such as the response to the shadow banking problem, and the content and effects of policy 
measures  to  underpin  the  economy.  However,  supported  by  firm  domestic  demand,  the 
Chinese economy is likely to register stable growth at the current pace. 
Some  emerging  economies  have  suffered  instability  in  their  financial  markets,  such  as  a 
plunge in stock prices and depreciation of currencies. A number of factors have been cited 
as  the  background.  Examples  include  global  investors’  renewed  focus  on  the  vulnerable 
economic structure of these countries as seen in current account deficits amid waning strong 
growth expectations, speculation on monetary policy conduct in advanced economies, and 
intensified  risk  aversion.  Such  movements  in  financial  markets  entail  risks  that  the  real 
economies of these countries will be affected by tightened financial conditions and worsened 
business and household sentiment. Although resilience has strengthened in terms of external 
debt  and  events  are  unlikely  to  lead  to  a  severe  situation,  future  developments  warrant 
continued vigilance. 
As mentioned, each country and region has its own respective risk, but the baseline scenario 
is that the global economy will pick up gradually as the U.S. and the European economies 
improve. This will underpin an increase in exports and production, leading to a pick-up in the 
manufacturing sector’s business fixed investment in Japan. 
Deflation lasting for some 15 years, and the countermeasures 
II. 
Now  let  me  move  on  to  the  main  topic  of  my  speech,  the  deflation  that  has  continued  for 
some 15 years in Japan. Here, I would like to make two points. The first is how the problem 
in Japan differs from that in other economies. Second, by looking at the past 15 years, I will 
show how Japan’s economic activity and prices have developed. By reviewing the problem of 
Japan’s deflation based on a comparison with overseas and historical perspectives, I hope to 
make the measures against deflation – namely, the Bank’s QQE – better understood. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Challenges facing overseas economies and Japan’s economy 
A. 
Let me start by viewing the problem of Japan’s deflation through a comparison with overseas 
economies. 
As  mentioned,  overseas  economies  as  a  whole  are  gradually  heading  toward  a  pick-up, 
although the pace is quite modest. Therefore, in the United States and Europe a negative 
output  gap  remains  –  excess  labor  force  and  excess  facilities  –  and  unemployment  rates 
remain  elevated  (Chart  6).  Unemployment  rates  in  the  major  advanced  economies  are  at 
levels substantially higher than those prior to the Lehman shock. In the euro area, the rate 
surged after the Lehman shock and has increased further due mainly to the European debt 
problem. In the United Kingdom, the rate has remained at a high level. In the United States, 
while the rate has been declining moderately, its level remains somewhat high. In contrast, 
Japan’s unemployment rate has declined to 3.8 percent, almost the same level as the low of 
3.6 percent prior to the Lehman shock. 
On  the price front,  even  though many  economies  have  registered  somewhat  lower  growth 
compared with their potential, the year-on-year rate of change in consumer prices has been 
hovering  around  2  percent,  the  rate  targeted  by  central  banks.  The  year-on-year  rate  of 
increase  in  the  CPI  in  the  United  States,  the  euro  area,  and  the  United  Kingdom  has 
centered  around  2  percent  from  a  long-term  perspective,  albeit  with  some  fluctuations 
(Chart 7).  Firms’  and  households’  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  have  also 
been  stable  generally  around  2  percent.  In  this  situation,  we  can  say  that  inflation 
expectations are anchored. This means that even when the observed inflation rate is affected 
by economic conditions, inflation expectations do not deviate substantially from, and are thus 
anchored to, the central bank’s target inflation rate. 
Taking into account the economic and price developments across countries, at present – in 
the  United  States  and  Europe  –  the  top  priority  is  to  continue  to  provide  or  to  further 
strengthen the stimulus to the real economy. While this sounds like an orthodox challenge, 
from the standpoint of central banks, it presents difficulties in terms of steering their policy. 
As a result of fiscal actions taken in response to the economic plunge following the Lehman 
shock, the room is limited for providing further stimulus to the economy from the fiscal side, 
and  there  are  strong  expectations  for  policy  responses  from  the  monetary  policy  side. 
However, if the inflation rate continues to exceed the inflation target due to monetary easing, 
there is a risk that people’s confidence in the price stability target will be lost. It can be said 
that central banks in the United States and Europe have been addressing the challenge of 
how to stimulate the real economy from the monetary policy side while avoiding the risk of 
de-anchoring inflation expectations and inducing future inflation. In the United States and the 
United  Kingdom,  the  central  banks  have  declared  that  they  will  continue  with  monetary 
easing  until  unemployment  rates  decline  to  some  extent,  with  the  condition  that  inflation 
forecasts do not deviate significantly from the price stability target. These actions reflect an 
attempt to strike a balance in the trade-off between inflation and unemployment. 
In  contrast,  Japan  faces  a  different  type  of  challenge.  In  the  United  States  and  Europe, 
people’s  inflation  expectations  have  been  anchored  around  the  central  banks’  targeted 
inflation  rates.  In  Japan,  amid  some  15  years  of  deflation,  deflationary  expectations  have 
become  entrenched  among  people  –  in  other  words,  people’s  inflation  expectations  have 
been anchored at a substantially low level of around 0 percent. We need to de-anchor such 
expectations,  increase  them  to  the  price  stability  target  of  2  percent,  and  anchor  the 
expectations  again  at  this  level.  How  can  this  be  achieved?  I  will  discuss  this  next  while 
looking  back  at  the  changes  in  economic  activity  and  prices  since  the  second  half  of  the 
1990s. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
B. 
Changes since the second half of the 1990s 
Economic and price developments, and their effects since the second half of the 
1990s 
In  retrospect,  since  the  second  half  of  the  1990s  a  series  of  events  –  such  as  banks’ 
nonperforming-loan problems, the Asian currency crisis, the Lehman shock, and the Great 
East  Japan  Earthquake  –  weighed  strongly  on  Japan’s  economy.  In  addition,  a  variety  of 
factors  put  direct  downward  pressure  on  prices.  These  included  low-priced  imports  from 
emerging economies, firms’ low-price strategies to counter intensifying competition stemming 
from deregulation, and a reduction in the wage level due to firms’ increased reliance on non-
regular employment. 
In response, the Bank implemented a series of monetary easing policies such as the zero 
interest  rate  policy,  the  quantitative  easing  policy,  and  the  comprehensive  easing  policy. 
Thanks to these policies that stimulated the real economy, from time to time  the economy 
began to head toward recovery. However, except for a period reflecting the effects of a surge 
in  oil  prices,  these  policies  failed  to  put  an  end  to  the  trend  of  a  price  decline.  On  the 
contrary,  as  deflation  became  protracted,  deflationary  expectations  became  entrenched, 
which made overcoming of deflation even more difficult, producing a vicious circle. Once the 
tendency  to  act  based  on  such  expectations  becomes  entrenched  among  households  and 
firms, change is not an easy task. In this way, by becoming prolonged, deflation became a 
challenge that was even more difficult to overcome. 
Changes in the Phillips curve 
Let me explain the changes I have just mentioned by using the concept of the Phillips curve 
(Chart 8). The Phillips curve illustrates the relation between the output gap and the inflation 
rate. Put simply, it shows that when the economy is strengthening with the labor market as 
well  as  the  goods  and  services  markets  being  tightened,  prices  tend  to  increase.  In  the 
Phillips curve, the vertical axis depicts the inflation rate and the horizontal axis depicts the 
output  gap.  It  is  assumed  that  the  relation  of  the  two  is  an  upward-sloping  curve,  that  is, 
when the economy recovers and the output gap moves to the right, the inflation rate moves 
upward accordingly. 
Let us look at the change in the Phillips curve for Japan over the past 15 years. The blue line 
is  the  Phillips  curve  based  on  data  through  the  first  half  of  the  1990s.  The  red  line  is  the 
Phillips curve based on data since the second half of the 1990s. As you can see, the entire 
curve has shifted downward. This means that, even with the same economic conditions, the 
inflation rate is now lower than in the past. When the output gap is zero – that is, when the 
economy  is  at  an  average  level  –  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  consumer  prices  is 
1.1 percent  on  the  blue  Phillips  curve,  while  it  is  0.3  percent  on  the  red  Philips  curve, 
showing a substantial decline. 
As a result of this downward shift, based on the current shape of the Phillips curve for Japan, 
a substantially positive output gap of 6 percent would be necessary to achieve the 2 percent 
price  stability  target.  This  gap  matches  the  peak  of  the  bubble  period  from  the  end  of  the 
1980s to the early 1990s. Of course, the Bank does not aim to reproduce such a large output 
gap. Even if 2 percent inflation is achieved when the economy is booming, the inflation rate 
will  decline  again  during  the  economic  cycle.  To  achieve  2  percent  inflation  in  a  stable 
manner, therefore, it is necessary to create a relation between prices and economic activity 
such that inflation becomes 2 percent when the economy is in an ordinary state. If we think of 
it in this way, it becomes clear that the 2 percent price stability target cannot be achieved in a 
sustainable manner by simply following the past approach of increasing the inflation rate by 
stimulating the economy. A policy that aims at shifting the Phillips curve upward is required. 
To put it differently, a policy that is designed to change people’s deflationary expectations is 
necessary. To use the metaphor of the anchor, it is a policy to raise the anchor and set it at 
the new level of 2 percent. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Overcoming challenges 
C. 
As  I  have  explained,  in  Japan,  due  to  prolonged  deflation  of  some  15  years,  the  Phillips 
curve  has  shifted  downward.  In  other  words,  there  is  an  entrenched  expectation  that  it  is 
difficult for prices to increase. I will next explain how to escape from this situation. 
Of  course,  the  traditional  path  of  stimulating  the  economy  through  monetary  easing  and 
thereby narrowing the negative output gap continues to be important. At present, a negative 
output gap remains in Japan’s economy, and this needs to turn positive. In the process, the 
experience  of  an  actual  increase  in  the  inflation  rate  will  help  increase  people’s  inflation 
expectations. 
However, given that deflation expectations are entrenched in Japan – that is, that the shape 
of the Phillips curve has changed – turning the output gap positive by itself will not suffice to 
overcome deflation. Therefore, the Bank considered it necessary to take a step significantly 
different  from  the  previous  policies  by  working  directly  on  people’s  expectations  to  dispel 
deflationary expectations – to shift the Phillips curve upward. Given that the continuation of 
deflation  in  itself  makes  overcoming  of  deflation  even  more  difficult,  the  Bank  judged  it 
necessary to implement its new initiatives as soon as possible. This led to the introduction of 
the QQE (Chart 9). 
A strong and clear commitment as well as a new phase of monetary easing both in 
terms of quantity and quality 
The QQE comprises two features aimed at drastically changing people’s expectations at the 
earliest possible time. 
First,  to  eliminate  deflationary  expectations  that  were  entrenched  among  firms  and 
households, the Bank showed its determination that it would definitively overcome deflation 
through a strong and clear commitment. The Bank clearly stated that it  would achieve the 
price stability target of 2 percent in terms of the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI at the 
earliest  possible  time,  with  a  time  horizon  of  about  two  years,  thus  clearly  specifying  the 
period in which it would achieve the target. 
Second,  considering  that  deflation  had  continued  for  some  15  years,  even  with  a  strong 
commitment,  it  was  difficult  for  the  Bank’s  strong  determination  to  be  seen  as  convincing 
without  underpinning  measures  in  place.  In  particular,  from  the  viewpoint  of  achieving  the 
target  “at  the  earliest  possible  time,”  it  was  important  for  the  Bank  to  take  measures  bold 
enough  to  be  considered  different  from  the  measures  in  the  past.  The  Bank  therefore 
decided  to  change  the  main  operating  target  for  money  market  operations  from  the 
uncollateralized overnight call rate (i.e., interest rates) to the monetary base (i.e., quantity), to 
be doubled in two years. In addition, to achieve this target the Bank also decided to double 
its  holdings  of  Japanese  government  bonds  (JGBs)  and  exchange-traded  funds  (ETFs)  in 
two  years.  Furthermore,  the  Bank  decided  to  extend  the  average  remaining  maturity  of  its 
JGB purchases so that it would more than double. In this way, the Bank decided to introduce 
a new phase of monetary easing both in terms of quantity and quality. 
Continuation of monetary easing 
In  addition,  with  regard  to  the  future  policy  stance,  the  Bank  clearly  stated  that  it  would 
continue with the QQE as long as it is necessary for maintaining the target of 2 percent in a 
stable manner. While the Bank’s commitment is to achieve a 2 percent inflation rate at the 
earliest  possible  time,  this  does  not  mean  that  a  temporary  achievement  of  this  rate  is 
sufficient. It is important to maintain the 2 percent target in a stable manner. To this end, it is 
necessary  for  not  only  the  observed  inflation  rate  but  also  medium-  to  long-term  inflation 
expectations to be about 2 percent. If the observed inflation rate hovers around 2 percent on 
average and firms and households act on the assumption that prices will increase by about 
2 percent, this will lead to price stability in the medium to long term. To use the metaphor of 
the  anchor,  the  aim  is  to  set  the  2  percent  anchor  deeply  in  people’s  understanding  and 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
make the observed inflation rate hover around the anchor. In terms of the Phillips curve, this 
means that when the economy is in an average state – when the output gap is zero – the 
2 percent inflation rate will be achieved. This is what the Bank means when it says “maintain 
2 percent  in  a  stable  manner.”  The  Bank  will  continue  with  the  QQE  as  long  as  it  is 
necessary to achieve such a state while assessing the trend developments in inflation. 
If I may hasten to add one point, to this end it becomes more necessary than ever to gauge 
inflation  expectations  as  accurately  as  possible.  However,  inflation  expectations  are 
intrinsically difficult to measure. They are not directly observable, and there are a variety of 
inflation expectations depending on who is forecasting what type of prices. With this in mind, 
the Bank has been carefully analyzing a number of indicators of inflation expectations, such 
as  the  break-even  inflation  rate  using  inflation-linked  bonds  as  well  as  various  surveys 
conducted  on  households,  economists,  and  market  participants,  and  doing  its  utmost  to 
gauge accurately the changes in people’s inflation expectations. The Bank will continue to 
improve  the  accuracy  of  its  judgment  by  thoroughly  examining  a  wide  range  of  data, 
including firms’ inflation expectations, which are scheduled to be added to the Tankan (Short-
Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan) survey in the first half of 2014. 
Concluding remarks 
A little less than six months have passed since the introduction of the QQE. The Bank has 
been  steadily  pursuing  the  policy  as  initially  scheduled  (Chart  10).  The  monetary  base 
expanded to 177 trillion yen as of end-August from 146 trillion yen as of end-March, steadily 
accumulating  toward  the  targeted  200  trillion  yen  as  of  the  end  of  2013.  The  Bank’s 
JGB holdings increased to 123 trillion yen as of end-August from 91 trillion yen as of end-
March, smoothly increasing toward the targeted 140 trillion yen as of the end of 2013. The 
average remaining maturity of the Bank’s JGB purchases has been extended to about seven 
years. 
The  QQE  is  truly  an  unprecedented  policy  in  the  sense  that  it  aims  to  increase  inflation 
expectations in a situation where there is no room to further reduce the short-term interest 
rate, which is the main policy tool for a central bank. While the task is by no means easy, 
developments thus far have been encouraging. Improvements are observed in a number of 
areas  such  as  economic  activity,  financial  markets,  and  people’s  sentiment,  and  Japan’s 
economy has been moving smoothly along the path to achieving the 2 percent “price stability 
target.”  To  overcome  deflation,  which  has  been  weighing  on  Japan’s  economy  for  a 
protracted period, as soon as possible, the Bank will continue to pursue the proper monetary 
policy. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  9 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  11 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
