H R Khan: Indian financial markets – fuelling the growth of the Indian 
economy 
Address by Mr H R Khan, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the inaugural 
session  of  the  conference  on  “Indian  financial  markets  –  fuelling  the  growth  of  the  Indian 
economy”, organized by the Confederation of Indian Industry at the ADB Annual Conference, 
Greater NOIDA, Delhi NCR, 4 May 2013. 
 The speaker acknowledges the contributions of Shri. Himansu Mohanty & Shri. Surajit Bose of the Reserve Bank 
of India in preparation of the address.  
Dr.  Arvind  Mayaram,  Secretary,  Department  of  Economic  Affairs,  Ministry  of  Finance, 
Mr. S. Gopalakrishnan, President, Confederation of Indian Industry (CII), Mr. Jignesh Shah, 
Chairman,  CII  National Committee  on  Financial  Markets,  Mr.  Chandrajit  Banerjee,  Director 
General, CII, distinguished delegates. Let me start by complimenting CII for selecting Indian 
Financial Markets: Fuelling the Growth of the Indian Economy as the theme of the session. It 
is now well known that a well-developed financial sector plays an important role in economic 
growth. As John Hicks observed, the technology that made industrial revolution in England 
possible was in existence for a long time before it was commercially exploited; it had to wait 
till the financial sector developed well enough to make the necessary resources available1. 
But it has to be recognized that while absence of a robust financial sector can retard growth, 
financial development on its own cannot secure growth. Finance thus is a necessary but not 
a sufficient condition for economic growth. 
In  India,  we  have  traversed  a  long  way  since  the  economic  reforms  started  in  the  early 
1990’s.  The  reforms  of  the  early  90’s  were  focused  on  three  pillars  –  Liberalization, 
Privatization  and  Globalization  (LPG).  The  financial  sector  has  also  undergone  significant 
changes during the period to not only to support the rapid growth but also to do so without 
disruptive episodes. Let me briefly mention some of these changes, if only to stress that our 
confidence to meet future challenges is based on the bedrock of past achievements. I am 
deliberately not touching upon the issues relating to capital markets as they are not my areas 
of competence.  
Bank-based financial sector of India 
Indian  financial  sector  has  traditionally  been  bank  based.  The  banking  sector  has  so  far 
played  a  seminal  role  in  supporting  economic  growth  in  India.  The  assets  of  the  banking 
sector have expanded nearly 11 times from   7.5 trillion at end-March 1998 to   83 trillion at 
end-March 2012. The non-food credit has expanded by more than 14 times from   3.1 trillion 
1998 to   45.30 trillion during the same period. The credit to GDP ratio which stood at about 
five  per  cent  in  1950–51  improved  to  about  25  per  cent  in  2000–01  and  further  to  about 
52 per cent at the end of 2011–12 (Chart 1).  
The  pre-emption  by  way  of  Statutory  Liquidity  Ratio  (SLR)  has  declined  considerably  from 
38.5 per cent in 1991 to 23.0 per cent of the Net Demand & Time Liabilities (NDTL) in 2013 
(Chart 2). All the while, the banking sector has been robust, meeting all prudential standards 
as per best international practice. During the recent global financial crisis and slowdown in 
the  global  and  domestic  economy,  the  Indian  banking  sector  has  proved  to  be  resilient. 
There are, however, issues relating to liquidity, asset quality, capital adequacy in the context 
of  Basel  III  and  earnings  which  have  surfaced  in  the  recent  past  mainly  due  to  economic 
                                                
1   Hicks, John, A theory of economic history (1969). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
slowdown and have to be tackled expeditiously for continued resilience of the Indian banking 
system.  
The Indian financial markets  
The Indian financial markets have also grown considerably. The market capitalization of the 
equity  market  (National  Stock  Exchange)  has  grown  from  approximately 
  6.5  trillion  in  
2000–01 to approximately 
 60 trillion in 2009–10 and further to approximately   61 trillion in 
2011–12. The total corporate debt outstanding which stood at   7.9 trillion in June 2010, has 
grown to   12.9 trillion in March 2013. The outstanding CP has grown from   575 million in 
2003 to   11 billion in 2013. Similarly, outstanding CD has grown from   91 million in March 
2003 to   39 billion as on March 22, 2013. Notwithstanding the impressive growth of the debt 
markets, there is a great deal still to be done. I shall shortly return to this.  
  1.0  trillion  to 
  4.3  trillion  in  2000–01  to 
Debt markets  
Government bond market  
With  a  large  section  of  population  underprivileged,  the  welfare  commitments  of  the  Indian 
state  have  to  be  supported  by  a  large  government  borrowing  program.  The  outstanding 
marketable  government  debt  has  grown  from 
  29.9  trillion  in  
2012–13.  The  size  of  the  annual  borrowing  of  the  central  government  through  dated 
securities  has  grown  from 
  5.6  trillion  during  this  period.  It  is  no  mean 
achievement to manage such large issuances in a non-disruptive manner in the post Fiscal 
Responsibility & Budget Management (FRBM) regime and declining SLR. A large number of 
initiatives  have  been  taken  over  the  years,  such  as,  the  Primary  Dealer  (PD)  system, 
Delivery Vs Payment (DVP), centralised clearing, anonymous dealing system based on order 
matching, floating rate bonds, STRIPS, Inflation Index Bonds (IIBs), etc. The liquidity in the 
secondary  market  has  also  increased  significantly  from  a  daily  average  trading  volume  of 
 9 billion in February 2002 to   344 billion in March, 2013. The development of the debt and 
the derivatives market in India needs to be seen from the perspective of a central bank and a 
financial sector regulator which has a mandate to facilitate development of debt markets of 
the country.  
Corporate bond market  
The need for development of the debt market has assumed some urgency in recent times for 
several reasons. A vibrant debt market plays an important role in enabling the newcomers to 
bring  their  ideas  and  enterprise  to  fruition.  The  impending  large  scale  expenditure  for 
improving our infrastructure critically depends on the debt market. It is difficult for the public 
sector  to  finance  development  of  a  world-class  infrastructure  of  the  magnitude  envisaged 
because  of  its  other commitments  and the  limitations  imposed  by fiscal  prudence. Though 
the  banking  sector  has  been  playing  an  active  role  in  infrastructure  finance,  there  are 
limitations  imposed  by  Asset  Liability  Mismatch  (ALM)  mismatch,  exposure  norms,  and  
de-risking the financial system to provide stability to the financial system.  
Developing a vibrant bond market  
A  vibrant  corporate  bond  market  provides  an  alternative  to  conventional  bank  finances, 
thereby  providing  the  corporates  an  additional  avenue  for  raising  resources  and  reducing 
reliance on bank finance. A robust corporate bond market also ensures lower dependency 
and  therefore  vulnerability  of  foreign  currency  sources  of  funds.  A  vibrant  market  will  also 
help in matching the investment needs of savers with the borrowing needs of the corporates. 
A well-developed debt market enables efficient pricing of risk, promotes product innovations 
and  leads  to  greater  financial  stability.  Further,  mobilization  of  long-term  funding  for  the 
infrastructure sector critically depends on a deep and liquid debt market with a large set of 
diverse  and  sophisticated  investors  and  a  wide  array  of  instruments  not  only  to  provide 
vehicles  of  investment  but  also  to  manage  the  risk  entailed.  In  a  developed  bond  market, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
banks, who would require long-term funds in the context of Basel III requirements, would also 
be able to raise resources easily.  
Development  of  government  and  corporate  debt  market  may  be  approached  within  a 
framework of seven key components, viz., Issuers, Investors, Intermediaries, Infrastructure, 
Innovation,  Incentives  and  Instruments  –  what  I  have  called  a  7i  framework.  Sovereign 
securities  dominate  the  fixed  income  markets  almost  everywhere.  In  India  too,  the  central 
and  state  governments  remain  the  main  issuers.  The  large  supply  of  securities,  due  to 
enhanced  borrowings,  has  enabled  creation  of  benchmark  securities  with  sufficient 
outstanding stock and issuances across the yield curve. The issuances across the risk-free 
yield curve in turn, have provided benchmarks for valuation of other bonds/financial assets 
and benefitted the corporate bond market. Fiscal consolidation efforts of the Government of 
India and the State Governments enhance the quality of the issuers. In the field of corporate 
bonds  besides  financial  sector  entities,  large  well  rated  non-finance  companies  have  also 
been  issuers.  The  traditional  investor  base  for  G-Sec  in  India  comprised  banks,  provident 
funds and insurance companies with a dominance of domestic investors and limited foreign 
participation.  In  the  corporate  debt  market,  investor  base  is  mostly  confined  to  banks, 
insurance  companies,  provident  funds,  PDs  and  pension  funds.  An  approach  of  gradual 
opening  of  the  domestic  bond  market  to  the  foreign  investors  has  been  adopted  in  India 
keeping in view the macro-economic risks involved in providing unfettered access to them. 
Intermediaries  play  an  important  role  in  development  of  the  market  by  facilitating  the 
transactions,  providing  value-added  services  and  increasing  efficacy  of  the  processes.  In 
India, the major intermediaries are the PDs, industry associations like Fixed Income Money 
Market  &  Derivatives  Association/Primary  Dealers  Association  of  India,  Gilt  Mutual  Funds 
and  the  Infrastructure  Development  Funds  (IDFs).  Infrastructure  plays  an  important role  in 
development of markets and want of an efficient, transparent and robust infrastructure can 
keep market participants away on one extreme or cause market crisis on the other. India can 
boast of being one of the few emerging countries with such a state of the art financial market 
infrastructure  for  the  G-Sec  market.  A  state-of-the-art  primary  issuance  process  with 
electronic  bidding  and  fast  processing  capabilities,  dematerialized  depository  system,  DvP 
mode  of  settlement,  electronic  trading  platforms  (Negotiated  Dealing  Systems  and 
Negotiated Dealing Systems-Order Matching) and a separate Central Counter Party in the 
Clearing Corporation of India Ltd. (CCIL) for guaranteed settlement are among the steps that 
have been taken by the Reserve Bank over the years towards this end. Financial innovation 
is an essential feature in the history of development of financial markets. Innovations that are 
motivated by the need to match the needs of the investor and the issuer or made possible by 
advancement  in  technology  or  knowledge  are  essential  for  evolution  of  financial  markets. 
Incentives play a significant role in shaping the development, stability and functioning of the 
financial  markets.  Reserve  Bank  has  been  trying  to  align  incentives  by  regulation  and 
supervision though regulation itself may have created unintended incentives/disincentives as 
in the case of requirement regarding Held To Maturity (HTM) dispensation. In the process of 
development of new instruments, Reserve Bank’s endeavour has been to ensure calibrated 
and  orderly  development  of  the  markets  with  emphasis  on  prudent  risk  management  and 
promotion of financial stability.  
Within the limited scope of its engagement with the corporate debt segment as the Securities 
and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) being the main regulator of this segment, Reserve Bank 
has  taken  steps,  such  as,  introducing  Credit  Default  Swaps  (CDS)  to  manage  credit  risk, 
repo  in  corporate  bonds  to  enable  funding  of  positions,  limited  market  making  role  for  the 
Primary  Dealers,  providing  a  pooling  account  facilities  to  the  clearing  corporations  of  the 
exchanges  to  settle  the  trades  in  the  books  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  etc.  There  has 
been a demand for increased direct or indirect support from the banking sector for expanding 
the corporate debt market. Reserve Bank views such proposals with caution because of the 
prudential concern for the health of the banking sector as well as the fact that the intention is 
to generate incremental resources and not redistribute the existing ones. As we know banks 
are  already  substantially  exposed  to  the  infrastructure  sector.  Hence,  demand  for  credit 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
enhancement by banks has to be seen in the context of the fact that it would only increase 
their exposure. Further, credit enhancement by banks will not lead to development of a real 
“corporate” bond market. Credit enhancements by way of partial guarantees by multilateral 
institutions,  such  as,  the  Asian  Development  Bank  is  likely  to  attract  investments  from 
insurance  and  pension  funds  in  the  infrastructure  sector  and  lower  the  cost  of  funds  for 
companies.  Such  credit  enhancement  measures  outside  the  banking  system  could  be  the 
way out.  
Foreign exchange market  
Current account deficit & capital flows  
In the context of foreign exchange market, one of the most talked about issue is the rising 
current  account  deficit  (CAD).  In  recent  times,  CAD  has  been  increasing  and  reached  a 
historic high of 6.7 per cent during the quarter October-December, 2012. It is of course not 
sustainable  in  the  long  run.  Therefore,  a  structural  shift  in  the  composition  of  our  trade 
account  –  increasing  exports  and  curtailing  non-productive  imports,  such  as,  gold  –  is 
imperative. What needs to be emphasized is that the current account deficit has so far been 
successfully  financed  without  any  drawdown  on  our  foreign  exchange  reserves.  This  has 
been possible with sustained capital inflows, which though not as buoyant as in the pre-crisis 
days, has still been impressive. Nevertheless capital inflows cannot be taken for granted and 
there  is  a  need  to  create  the  enabling  conditions  to  attract  and  retain  long-term  foreign 
capital. The urgency now comes from two sources: the need to bridge the current account 
deficit  and  the  need  to  provide  resources  –  particularly  of  the  long  term  type  –  for 
infrastructure and other investment needs.  
Capital account management  
In  the  Indian  context,  management  of  capital  account  has  been  challenging.  So  far,  the 
approach of Reserve Bank of India has been that of cautious gradualism, informed by the 
experience  of  other  developing  countries  in  Latin  America  and  East  Asia  who  perhaps 
liberalized their capital account too soon and too fast. Yet, it should be recognized that as far 
as  the  real  sector  is  concerned,  the  capital  account  is  substantially  open  with  regard  to 
sourcing debt and equity from abroad as well as exploiting investment opportunity abroad. 
The restrictions in capital account are pronounced as far as the financial sector is concerned. 
The policy caution is motivated by apprehensions of sudden cessation or reversal of flows, 
which some influential commentators believe to  be unfounded. Even  within  the constraints 
imposed by a gradualist approach, Reserve Bank and the Government of India have taken 
several steps that include progressive increase in investment limits for Foreign Institutional 
Investors (FIIs) in government and corporate debt, introduction of Qualified Foreign Investor 
(QFIs) as a separate investor class, etc.  
Exchange rate volatility  
Talking  about  the  external  sector,  I  would  like  to  briefly  touch  upon  the  issue  of  Rupee 
volatility,  because  next  perhaps  only  to  the  stock  indices,  sharp  movements  in  the  Rupee 
usually agitate market participants, including those who have no direct exposure (Chart 3).  
In  this  context  it  must  be  recognized  that  in  the  post-Bretton Woods  era,  most  currencies 
have  had  their  own  episodes  of  volatility  and  particularly  in  the  past few  years  during  and 
after the crisis, exchange rate volatility has become a way of life. Stance of Reserve Bank of 
India has been not to target any band or level for the exchange rate, thereby enabling Indian 
Rupee  to  move  as  per  the  market  fundamentals  but  being  ready  to  intervene  to  curb 
excessive volatility. Second, Reserve Bank of India, over the years, has introduced a wide 
array of hedging instruments which can be used by the real sector to deal with volatility in the 
exchange  rate.  If  on  the  other  hand,  businesses  are  unwilling  to  pay  the  cost  of  hedging 
(which  is  directly  proportional  to  the  degree  of  volatility)  and  intend  to  take  a  view  on  the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
exchange  rate  rather  than  concentrating  on  their  own  line  of  business,  they  must  be  fully 
aware of the consequences.  
Issues in liquidity management  
At  this  particular  point  in  time,  Reserve  Bank  of  India  does  not  see  paucity  of  resources 
constraining  economic growth,  particularly  in  view  of the fact  that  banks  are  holding  about 
 3.5 trillion of government debt in excess of the mandated limit. During the first half of the 
year 2012–13, average net liquidity injection under the daily liquidity adjustment facility (LAF) 
stood at   730 billion which increased to more than   one trillion during the second half. To 
alleviate  liquidity  pressures  during  the  year,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  lowered  the  Cash 
Reserve Ratio (CRR) by 75 bps and the SLR by 100 bps besides additional liquidity injection 
of  more  than 
  1.5  trillion  through  the  open  market  operations  (OMOs).  Reserve  Bank 
remains alive to the requirements in time to come and will appropriately manage liquidity to 
ensure adequate credit flow to the productive sectors of the economy. 
Financial inclusion  
Let me  now  turn  to  an area  of  weakness  of  the  Indian financial  system  –  lack  of  depth of 
financial  inclusion  –  that  needs  to  be  addressed  with  alacrity.  Taking  cognizance  of  the 
extent  of  the  problem  and  recognizing  importance  of  financial  inclusion  based  on  the 
principle of equity and inclusive growth with stability, Reserve Bank of India has initiated a 
number  of  policies.  In  its  recent  Annual  Monetary  Policy  2013–14,  Reserve  Bank  has 
extended the Lead Bank Scheme to the metropolitan districts of the country. Extension of the 
scheme to these areas is expected to provide an institutional mechanism for co-ordination 
between  government  authorities  and  banks  for  reaching  doorstep  banking  to  the  financial 
excluded population. To further improve the banking penetration through alternate channels, 
Reserve Bank of India has permitted non-bank entities to set-up White Label ATMs (WLAs), 
to operate as Business Correspondents and to facilitate large scale use of electronic banking 
and  alternate  delivery  channels.  Under  the  new  bank  license  policy  of  the  Reserve  Bank, 
new entities are expected to enhance the banking penetration in India. These measures are 
also  expected  to  provide  platforms  for  launching  innovative  processes,  partnerships  and 
products  for  ensuring  a  deeper  financial  sector  with  a  focus  on  sustainable  financial 
inclusion.  Enriched  access  to  the  financial  sector  is  expected  to  enable  the  marginal 
population to deal better with uncertainties, enhance their productivity and bring them to the 
mainstream of the growth process.  
Concluding thoughts  
In conclusion, I would like to mention that the role of financial markets in the process of a 
country’s economic development needs no emphasis. At the same time, as the recent crisis 
has shown, financial markets can be the epicenter of crises that derail the growth process 
itself and unleash great misery. Thus, in countries like India, where financial markets are yet 
to  achieve  the  size  and  sophistication  as  those  of  the  more  developed  countries,  perhaps 
there is merit in adopting a cautious approach to financial development.  
That said, I wish to emphasize that Reserve Bank remains committed to ensure availability of 
funding for all productive endeavour across the spectrum of economic activities. Though the 
banking sector has done a great job so far in this regard, financial markets have to play an 
increasingly important role in generating incremental funding, particularly for expansion of the 
infrastructure  sector.  This  explains  the  regulatory  push  towards  the  development  of  the 
corporate  bond  market  as  an  adjunct  to  the  bank-dominated  financial  system  of  India. 
Importance  of  the  banking  sector  in  the  Indian  financial  system,  however,  remains  critical. 
The  agenda  to  make  the  financial  sector  responsive  yet  resilient  has  to  include  improving 
liquidity in the G-Sec market across the tenor, create a liquid yield curve to provide a basis 
for pricing private debt, further development of the corporate bond market, expanding the set 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
of products and participants in the derivative market to provide adequate hedging options for 
credit, interest rate and forex risks, particularly at the long end and gradual capital account 
liberalization within the framework of financial and macro-economic stability.  
It may be noted that the role of the financial sector as well as its regulators is only enabling. 
Ultimately,  the  enterprise  and  entrepreneurship in  the  real  sector  should  be  unshackled  to 
exploit  and  implement  opportunities  and  ideas.  As  Joan  Robinson  remarked,  economic 
growth  creates  demand  for  financial  instruments,  and,  where  enterprise  leads,  finance 
follows2.  
Thank you for your attention.  
 
 
                                                
2   Robinson,  Joan,  “The  Generalization  of  the  General  Theory,”  in  The  Rate  of  Interest,  and  Other  Essays. 
(1952). These remarks were made to deemphasize the role of the financial sector, but there is a great deal of 
truth in the remarks in so far as the nexus between the real and the financial sectors is concerned. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    7 
