Amando M Tetangco, Jr: The Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas and the 
banking community – forging a strong partnership that benefits the 
country 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (the central 
bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  a  dinner  with  bankers,  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas,  Manila,  
19 July 2013. 
 Sec  Cesar  Purisima,  ADB  President  Takehiko  Nakao,  SEC  Chair  Teresita  Herbosa,  the 
leaders of the Philippine banking community, former Members of the Monetary Board, Heads 
of  international  agencies  in  the  Philippines,  fellow  public  servants,  members  of  the  media, 
distinguished guests, friends, ladies and gentlemen.  
On behalf of the Members of the Monetary Board, we thank you for accepting our invitation 
to recognize the banking community one of the most important channels for the transmission 
of  the  BSP’s  monetary  policy  and  one  of  the  reasons  why  our  country  finally  earned 
investment grade this year. 
While our partnership is not perfect, our partnership is a success as it generates incalculable 
benefits for our people and our country.  
If this were a wedding anniversary, porcelain would be our theme. The story of porcelain as 
works  of  art  started  over  2,000  years  ago. What  is  amazing  is that  some  of these  ancient 
pieces still exist; they have endured.  
Like the porcelain of old, the Bangko Sentral is rich in history. While we are distinct from the 
Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines,  we  value  its  legacy  and  traditions  that  connect  us  to  the 
history of central banking in the Philippines.  
And in tandem with its partners in government and the private sector including the banking 
community, the Bangko Sentral continues to make history, enduring the heat of national and 
global challenges and coming out better and stronger from it.  
Two decades of moving forward 
Indeed, we have the metrics to show the progress we have made in pursuing our mandate of 
providing  stability  to  prices  and  the  banking  sector  through  our  monetary  and  banking 
policies and programs. 
Republic Act 7653, the law that created the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas in 1993 was passed 
by  Congress  during  the  term  of  then  Governor  Jose  Cuisia  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the 
Philippines and signed into law by President Fidel Ramos.  
That was 20 years ago. Since then, price movements as measured by inflation have been 
limited to single-digit levels: it hit a high of 9.3% in 1998 during the Asian financial crisis and 
has dipped to 2.8% in June this year.  
And  together,  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  and  the  banking  sector  have  successfully 
evolved to meet the growing and changing needs of our country and our people.  
Total resources of the banking system for instance increased from more than P1 trillion in 
1993  to  over  P8  trillion  in  2012,  deposits from  P649  billion  to  P5.8  trillion,  and  loans  from 
P553 billion to P4.1 trillion.  
Over  the  same  period,  our  gross  international  reserves  soared  from  $5.3  billion  to 
$81.6 billion as of June this year, giving us the ability to provide the foreign exchange needs 
of our growing economy and to minimize the possible impact of external shocks. Our healthy 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
GIR levels also allowed us to prepay our debts to the IMF and end more than forty years of 
our country’s dependence on IMF loans in 2006.  
Thus, when the 2008 global economic crisis came around, we were able to ride it out. In fact, 
while  credit  freeze  became  the  norm  in  developed  countries,  Philippine  banks  remained 
liquid and able to sustain double-digit growth in lending.  
And  non-performing  loans  of  commercial  and  universal  banks  dropped  from  double-digit 
levels to 1.87% in May 2013, even better than the pre-Asian financial crisis figures. Looking 
back, I think it is because we have a good balance of prudential regulations from the Bangko 
Sentral on one hand and on the other adherence to sound banking practices by our banks.  
In  other  words,  the  sound  and  stable  Philippine  banking  system  that  we  see  today  is  the 
dividend  from  our  continuing  reform  agenda  to  clean  up  bank  balance  sheets,  strengthen 
bank capitalization, improve governance structures, enhance risk management systems, and 
align with international standards.  
Many take comfort that we have been in a position of strength as we traversed recent and 
ongoing  global  turbulence  in  financial  markets.  That  may  be  so  but  we  cannot  be 
complacent: new challenges are before us and we need to address these now. 
Indeed, there will be no shortage of issues to confront. Financial markets are never static and 
we  must  be  able  to  respond  accordingly.  From  our  perspective  as  industry  regulator,  two 
challenges deserve particular mention. 
Financial stability as the prudential cornerstone 
With the global economic turmoil in the last five years far from over, the first challenge must 
be  to  maintain  financial  stability,  which  ladies  and  gentlemen,  goes  beyond  the  Basel  3 
agenda. New standards will be introduced for leverage, liquidity, the handling of market risks 
that  lead  to  credit  risks,  the  treatment  of  securitization  and  inter-financial  exposures,  and 
mitigating counterparty risks, among others.  
Beyond the Basel Accord, the distinction between OTC and exchange-traded derivatives is 
effectively being removed to ensure price transparency and improved governance. Payment 
systems are now governed by new principles set for providers of so-called Financial Market 
Infrastructures (FMIs)  while  the  use  or  non-use of  these  FMIs  by  market  players  will  have 
consequences.  
There are many other reform initiatives that could be cited. At the end of the day though, all 
of  these  are  geared  to  the  common  purpose  of  achieving  financial  stability.  We  will  have 
every opportunity to discuss how high to set the prudential bar but the principles behind the 
change in the global standards are difficult to ignore. 
Capital market development: moving beyond the usual rhetoric 
Apart  from  the  global  initiatives,  we  do  have  our  own  set  of  concerns.  Capital  market 
development has been in and out of vogue through the years. However, many unresolved 
issues remain and this is our second major challenge. 
The Capital Market Blueprint prepared under the auspices of the Securities and Exchange 
Commission headed by Chairperson Herbosa is the take-off point. I urge the stakeholders to 
look carefully at the Blueprint and commit to the deliverables within their purview. 
From the perspective of the BSP, a few specific issues are most critical.  
Who  will  disagree  with  the  proposition  that  benchmarks  are  central  to  our  market  and  its 
operations? Whether  it  is  to  price  a  new  issue  or  value/re-value  an  existing  exposure,  the 
role  of  benchmark  rates  simply  cannot  be  over-stated.  Despite  many  initiatives  and 
formulations,  we  remain  well-short  of  a  viable  yield  curve  that  properly  reflects  credit  and 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
liquidity  risks. We  have  all  heard  of  OIS,  implied  zero  rates  and  single  price  as  the  latest 
round  of  initiatives  towards  an  acceptable  yield  curve.  We  look  forward  to  having  these 
initiatives come to fruition, hopefully by end-year. 
The role of clearing entities and similar dis-interested 3rd parties will also be critical. A part of 
this  goes  back  to  the  issue  of  valuation.  At  this  juncture,  we  do  need  to  think  about  the 
broader policy framework for our market infrastructure.  
To  execute  our  capital  market  agenda,  these  are  the  areas  that  need  to  move  beyond 
rhetoric. 
Taking the challenges forward 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  past  20  years  has  been  all  about  transformation.  As  we  mold 
ourselves and the financial markets through the last two decades, we have always had the 
banking community as a partner. 
From  the  term  of  Gov.  Gabriel  Singson  to  Gov.  Rafael  Buenaventura,  and  up  to  now,  we 
have  always  nurtured  a  consultative  process.  I  assure  you  that  while  we  may  not  always 
agree on every policy detail, we will continue to find ways to address these issues together.  
Moving forward, we expect to continue relying on the consultative process. We cannot afford 
a  unilateral  approach.  We  ask  the  banking  community  therefore  to  take  an  active  role  in 
addressing the issues that lie before us. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen.  With  your  support  and  cooperation,  the  Bangko Sentral  has  had  a 
good track record in its first 20 years. And while our record of accomplishments is far from 
perfect, we are reassured by the recognition the Bangko Sentral continues to receive here 
and overseas.  
We are also heartened by our progress in developing a more inclusive financial system, the 
implementation of our nationwide economic and financial learning program, and enhancing 
protection for finance consumers.  
We  need  to  think  out  of  the  box  in  mobilizing  savings  in  the  region,  providing  extended 
financial  access  through  both  mainstream  and  non-mainstream  channels  and  creating 
alternative sources of financing for borrowers and entrepreneurs.  
Toward  this  end,  the  Bangko  Sentral  looks  forward  to  more  partnerships  with  the  banking 
community in ensuring sustained and inclusive growth for all. 
Once again, we at the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas thank the banking community and other 
sectors represented here tonight for your continuing support and cooperation.  
Mabuhay po tayong lahat! Mabuhay ang ating mahal na bansang Pilipinas! 
Maraming salamat. And let’s enjoy the rest of the evening. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
