Jens Weidmann: Striving for a stable framework for monetary union – an 
old debate revisited 
Speech by Dr Jens Weidmann, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, to the Ambassadors 
Conference, Berlin, 26 August 2013. 
  Introduction 
1 
Your Excellency Dr Guido Westerwelle 
Minister of State Ms Cornelia Pieper 
Minister of State Mr Michael Link 
State Secretary Ms Emily Haber 
State Secretary Mr Harald Braun 
Heads of Germany’s missions abroad 
Your Excellencies the Ambassadors 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Thank you very much for inviting me to this conference. I'm delighted to have the opportunity 
to speak to you here today. 
Inviting the President of the Bundesbank of all people to an ambassadors conference might 
appear somewhat unusual at first glance. After all, central bankers are hardly renowned for 
having  the most  thrilling  of  professions. “Boring is  best”  is  how  the former governor  of the 
Bank of England Mervyn King once aptly put it. 
But whether we like or not, my profession has been attracting ever greater attention. Rarely 
was monetary policy such a topic of intense public debate in the international arena as it is 
today. And incidentally, there are many channels which connect the Federal Foreign Office 
and the Bundesbank. 
These  notably  include  the  secondment  of  Bundesbank  employees  to  embassies  and 
consulates in the major financial centres. As representatives at Germany’s missions abroad, 
they  provide  information  to  interested  local  parties  on  European  monetary  policy,  on  the 
Bundesbank’s role in the Eurosystem and on the German banking system. But information 
naturally  flows  in  the  opposite  direction,  too. These  representatives  regularly  report  on the 
latest  economic  and  monetary  developments  in  their  host  countries.  This  benefits  the 
Bundesbank’s analyses and, I would hope, those of the Foreign Office as well. 
And the extent to which an additional perspective can broaden our perception of economic 
relationships was illustrated not least by the financial crisis. The outbreak of the crisis was 
not just a painful wake-up call reminding us that our theoretical models sometimes paint only 
a  very  incomplete  picture  of  reality.  Work  is  therefore  quite  rightly  under  way  –  at  the 
Bundesbank and elsewhere – to develop a superior analytical toolkit that can be deployed in 
day-to-day work. This crisis has also been a stark reminder for us economists that looking 
back can offer valuable pointers for the future. 
“History  does  not  repeat  itself,  but  it  does  rhyme.”  This  saying  by  Mark  Twain  quite  aptly 
describes economic developments as well. And it applies to the European debt crisis in equal 
measure.  Twenty-five  years  ago,  the  European  Council  tasked  a  group  of  central  bank 
governors  chaired  by  Jacques  Delors,  then  President  of  the  European  Commission,  with 
identifying  ways  in  which  a  European  monetary  union  could  be  structured.  The  Delors 
Committee’s insights can teach us a number of key lessons to this very day. For many of the 
problems weighing down on monetary union today had already been flagged and discussed 
by the Delors Committee all of 25 years ago. That makes it worthwhile taking a look back in 
time. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
My talk today will therefore be made up of three sections. In the first section, I would like to 
look at the Delors Committee’s key insights. In the second part, I would like to examine why 
monetary union began to flounder, and I will then use these conclusions in the third section 
to develop proposals for strengthening the existing framework. 
New problems, old questions 
2  
A  single  currency  fosters  economic  relationships  between  different  countries.  Yet  at  the 
same time, it also increases the dependencies between them. This insight was a recurring 
theme throughout discussions within the Delors Committee. Their line of thinking was based 
on  the  economic  policy  experiences  of  the  1970s  and  1980s.  That  era  of  oil  price  shocks 
posed  a  major  challenge  to  monetary  policymakers.  It  became  evident  that  countries  with 
independent central banks had significantly lower inflation rates than those in which central 
banks followed politicians’ instructions – while simultaneously achieving equal or even higher 
levels of growth. What we learned back then was that price stability does not run counter to 
economic prosperity, but complements and steadies it. 
But  we  learned  something  else,  too.  That  an  independent  central  bank  is  necessary  for 
stable prices; but more than that is needed. A country suffering excessive public debt and a 
lack of competitiveness can cause upheaval within a currency area, and this can also impact 
on monetary policymakers’ ability to fulfil their primary objective of ensuring price stability. In 
a  currency  union,  monetary  policy  can  only  serve  its  purpose  if  each  member  state’s 
economic policy is consistent with the requirements of a single currency. 
The members  of  the  Delors  Committee  discussed  two  possibilities  of  ensuring sustainable 
economic and fiscal policies. The first option was to transfer these decisions to the European 
level.  This  line  of  thinking  was  supported,  among  others,  by  Alexandre  Lamfalussy,  then 
managing director of the Bank for International Settlements (BIS). 
The  other  option  was  the  principle  of  individual  responsibility,  under  which  member  states 
would  remain  largely  independent  in  their  choice  of  policies,  but  would  be  liable  for  the 
decisions they made. This liability principle promised to have a disciplinary effect. Member 
states  running  unsound  fiscal  policies  or  dubious  economic  policies  would  only  be  able  to 
borrow at worse terms, since investors would demand compensation for the risk they were 
taking. 
To make provisions in case the capital markets’ disciplinary effect was insufficient, the fiscal 
scope  was  to  be  narrowed  further  still  by  way  of  a  common  set  of  rules.  Jacques  de 
Larosière, then governor of the Banque de France, was a notable proponent of a strict fiscal 
regime. 
Both options were coherent on paper. Political considerations were the main reason why the 
principle of individual responsibility ultimately prevailed. The bulk of member states were not 
prepared  to  relinquish  any  sovereignty  in  economic  matters.  It  was  widely  feared  that 
referendums held to change member states’ constitutions would not produce a majority that 
favoured a large-scale transfer of sovereign powers. 
And this was how the architecture of monetary union made up of sovereign nation-states that 
we  are  familiar  with  today,  came  about.  As  before,  national  parliaments  bear  full 
responsibility for such vital areas as tax policy, budget policy or labour market regulation. 
Vulnerabilities in the original framework 
3  
Ladies and gentlemen, what the Delors Committee tried to achieve back then was to find an 
architectural  model  capable  of  accommodating  this  inherent  tension.  They  sought  to 
construct  a  stable  European  house,  knowing  full  well  that  tremors  in  individual  member 
states might shake the structural soundness of the entire building. Why was the draft made 
back then unable to prevent the crisis we are experiencing today? 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
First, it should be noted that although one key point – the risk of macroeconomic imbalances 
– was indeed recognised by the Delors Committee, consideration was not made for it to be 
incorporated into the final Maastricht framework. The Maastricht framework instead focused 
on the one central supporting pillar: the fiscal rules designed to curb government deficit and 
debt levels. These rules were complemented by the no bail-out clause – that is, the principle 
of  individual  responsibility.  But  this  pillar  proved  unable  to  provide  sufficient  support.  The 
rules  designed  to  curb  government  deficits  didn’t  have  sufficient  binding  force.  Repeated 
breaches  knocked  more  and  more  stones  out  of  the  “fiscal  rules”  pillar,  with  Germany 
bearing much of the responsibility for this. 
In  the  end,  other  pillars  supporting  the  structure  likewise  proved  to  be  brittle.  Banking 
supervision  remained  a  national  responsibility,  which  meant  that  there  was  no  institution 
which set the same high standards for banks, irrespective of their home country, and took 
account  of  cross-border  interactions  which  were  outside  the  field  of  vision  of  national 
supervisors.  While  it  is  true  that  a  few  members  of  the  Delors  Committee,  like  Wim 
Duisenberg, later President of the ECB, spoke out in favour of common banking supervision, 
their proposals fell on deaf ears. 
The  capital  markets’  disciplinary  effect  on  governments  likewise  proved  to  be  inadequate. 
Why that didn’t work is quite easy to explain. Back then, a different committee, which like the 
Delors Committee also met in Basel – the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision – made 
what  turned  out  to  be  a  momentous  decision  for  the  euro  area.  The  new  common  set  of 
international  capital  rules  stipulated  that  government  bonds  be  valued  as  risk-free  assets, 
which meant that banks did not have to back them with capital. 
This decision affected monetary union in two ways. First, it cast doubt over whether the no 
bail-out clause could ever be enforced, given the huge differences in economic power and 
indebtedness  between  the  member  states.  Second,  sovereign  insolvency  became  less 
credible  for  reasons  of  financial  stability.  But  if  banks  do  not  set  aside  any  capital  for 
government  bonds,  a  sovereign  default  can  hit  the  banking  sector  head  on,  potentially 
triggering a financial crisis. 
A new home for monetary union 
4  
As we can see, the home shared by the member states of the euro area needs renovating in 
more ways than one. Of course, numerous methods are conceivable for constructing a stable 
dwelling. That’s just as true today as it was then. As an alternative to the “Delors house”, one 
could  also  imagine  building  a  dwelling  that  does  without  the  supporting  pillars  known  as 
“fiscal rules” and “individual responsibility” and is instead held up by the “fiscal union” ring 
beam. 
However, a properly functioning fiscal union would depend on the member states transferring 
a substantial degree of national sovereignty to the community level by giving the community 
the necessary right to at least intervene in the event of unsound public finances. Transferring 
sovereignty  on  this  scale  would  be  a  radical  change  that  would  require  wide-ranging 
legislative changes nationally and at the European level. And above all, such a step towards 
greater integration would require not just political support but public backing as well. On this 
point, however, we should remain realistic. The will to do so is barely discernible at present – 
in the midst of the crisis – not here nor in any of our partner countries. Seen from this angle, 
the situation has hardly changed since monetary union was launched. 
All that remains, then, is to stabilise the building we have, focusing our renovation efforts on 
the current supporting structures. This means, first, strengthening the common set of rules. 
And, second, it means lending renewed force and making enhancements to the principle of 
individual responsibility, which has been further eroded by a number of the crisis measures. 
Construction activity is already largely complete on the fiscal rules. But only actual practice 
will show whether the new Stability and Growth Pact and the Fiscal Compact will really make 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
lasting  improvements  to  the  structural  soundness  of  the  building  –  that  is,  whether  the 
patched-up pillars can bear the weight. 
After all, it is not enough to merely have a “new” set of tighter rules; these rules actually have 
to be applied and filled with life. This is a matter in which the European Commission has a 
particular responsibility because it has considerable discretionary powers in interpreting the 
new  rules.  I  would  not  consider  it  appropriate  to  stretch  the  flexibility  of  the  rules  to  the 
absolute limit from day one. 
In its August Monthly Report, the Bundesbank examined the recent decisions by the Ecofin 
Council  regarding  the  excessive  deficit  procedures  for  euro-area  countries  from  a  critical 
perspective.  Spain,  France,  Slovenia  and  Cyprus  were  each  granted  longer  deadlines  to 
make  adjustments  than  were  actually  envisaged  in  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact. 
Derogations  of  this  kind  should,  however,  be  reserved  for  well-justified  exceptional  cases. 
For  this  ultimately  results  in  a  weakening  of  the  structural  consolidation  requirements  and 
corrective action being pushed into the future. Granting exceptions to a number of countries 
simultaneously undermines the disciplinary effect of the fiscal rules. 
And the new Macroeconomic Imbalance Procedure should likewise be applied as rigorously 
as  possible.  While  the  construction  of  the  extended  set  of  economic  and  fiscal  rules  is 
already at an advanced stage, work on Europe's largest building project is still in full swing. 
And by that, I am referring to the banking union. If implemented properly, it can perform two 
tasks.  First,  it  can  rectify  competitive  deficiencies  in  the  banking  sector;  second,  it  can 
enhance the capital markets’ disciplinary effect on governments. Both problems are closely 
intertwined; neither can be resolved in isolation. 
After  all,  both  sets  of  players  –  banks  and  sovereigns  –  have  one  thing  in  common. They 
were only subject to the key market economy principle of liability to a very limited degree in 
the past. Both were considered to be systemically important. It was feared that if they got into 
problems, this might jeopardise the stability of the financial system. In the end, it wasn’t the 
decision  makers  who  were  liable.  But  this  is  something  that  undermines  the  incentives for 
responsible behaviour. 
In the midst of the crisis, the weakness of one set of players then became that of the other. 
Banks  that  had  run  into  difficulties  on  account  of  distressed  property  loans  in  their  books, 
say,  had  to  be  propped  up  by  the  taxpayer.  The  rescue  sums  required  in  countries  like 
Ireland, Cyprus and Spain were so huge that sovereign solvency, too, began to be called into 
question by investors. This drove refinancing costs higher. 
But the negative feedback loop also works in the opposite direction. Ailing states can bring 
down banks that have substantial holdings of sovereign bonds in their books. It is this strong 
link between sovereigns and banks that needs to be severed. 
Separating  the  two  is  all  the  more  important  because  the  nexus  between  banks  and 
sovereigns actually even increased at times during the crisis. Studies1 [1]suggest that it was 
notably the poorly capitalised banks in the crisis-hit states which took advantage of central 
bank refinancing to invest increasingly in high-yield domestic government bonds during the 
crisis. 
For when the insolvency of the home country is highly likely to bring down the institution in 
question as well, it can actually be quite rational to ramp up risk levels further still. After all, 
this barely increases the bank’s risk of insolvency but distinctly boosts the prospective profits 
if the outcome turns out to be favourable. 
                                                
1   V  Acharya  and  S  Steffen  (2013),  The  “Greatest”  Carry  Trade  Ever?  Understanding  Eurozone  Bank  Risks, 
Working Paper, NYU Stern School of Business. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Hence,  this  strategy  further  intensified  the  negative  feedback  loop  between  banks  and 
sovereigns during the crisis. Several incisions will be needed if we are to sever these links. 
The first of these will be the Single Supervisory Mechanism, which is tasked with preventing 
banks from getting into difficulties at an early stage. 
But these are problems that cannot be entirely ruled out in the future, nor would we want to 
do  so.  After  all,  the  possibility  of  failure  is  vital  for  a  functioning  market  economy.  It  is 
important, therefore, to be able to allow banks to fail without governments – and thus also 
taxpayers – having to foot the bill. 
And that is why we need the European recovery and resolution mechanism. Its job will be to 
ensure  that  if  a  credit  institution  needs  to  be  restructured  or  wound  up,  its  owners  and 
creditors  will  bear  a  fair  share  of  the  losses.  This  guarantees  that  those  benefiting  from 
investment income also carry responsibility for the associated risk. 
But  the  feedback  loop  between  sovereigns  and  banks  needs  to  be  severed  in  the  other 
direction,  too.  The  close  ties  linking  sovereigns  to  banks  are  largely  the  result  of  the 
substantial volumes of government bonds which banks have in their books. This is where we 
need to make a further incision. First, government bonds should be backed by a sufficient 
quantity of capital. Second, the volume of loans that banks can extend to individual sovereign 
debtors needs to be capped. 
In  a  nutshell,  over  a  medium-term  horizon,  government  bonds  should  be  treated  just  like 
other bonds or loans to enterprises. For the previously held notion that government bonds 
are  entirely  free  of  risk  runs  counter  to  the  principle  of  individual  responsibility  as  well  as 
recent  experience.  Appropriate  risk-weighting  would  drive  yields  higher  for  unsound 
sovereigns  and  raise  their  refinancing  costs.  Hence,  the  market  mechanism  would  force 
these governments to exercise greater fiscal discipline. 
Yet the inadequate capital backing required for government bonds is not the only reason why 
they  harbour  risks for financial  stability.  Risk  diversification  is  a key  principle  for  investors. 
But this is a rule which European banks often tend to disregard where government bonds are 
concerned. 
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  European  banks  frequently  only  have  bonds  issued  by  one 
government in their books, mostly those of their home country. In fact, these banks’ holdings 
of government bonds as a percentage of their total assets are sometimes even higher than 
those of banks which spread their exposures across several sovereign debtors. This tightens 
the negative feedback loop between banks and sovereigns further still. And that is why we 
need limits on large exposures to individual governments as a vital addition to appropriate 
risk-weighting. 
I am well aware that such a reform at the current juncture of the crisis might exacerbate the 
financing problems that some countries are experiencing. That’s why I think that transitional 
periods  might  be  acceptable  as  well.  But  abandoning  a  reform  like  this  to  suit  short-term 
considerations would be the wrong approach. 
Work on the major building project dedicated to constructing the banking union is far from 
complete. The capital rules for sovereign bonds are an example which vividly illustrates the 
tension  that  exists  between  what  is  right  over  the  long  term  and  the  crisis  management 
measures which appear to be needed in the short term. 
The role of monetary policy 
5  
Yet this must not entice politicians to simply paper over the cracks rather than renovate the 
house from top to bottom. As you’ve probably already realised, I’m talking about the role of 
monetary  policy.  The  ECB  Governing  Council  agrees  unanimously  that  monetary  policy 
cannot solve the crisis. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
The most it can do is buy time. Indeed, one of the Delors Committee’s insights remains as 
valid  as  it  ever  was.  In  performing  its  task,  monetary  policy  is  bound  by  conditions  that  it 
cannot create itself. Monetary policy has already helped substantially in preventing a further 
escalation  of  the  crisis.  However,  this  has  taken  it  a  long  way  into  uncharted  –  and 
dangerous – territory. 
It’s  no  secret  that  I  am  critical  of  the  ECB’s  government  bond  purchase  programmes  in 
particular. If Eurosystem central banks buy government bonds issued by countries with poor 
credit  ratings,  this  will  distribute  the risks  of  unsound fiscal  policy  among  all  the  euro-area 
states.  Monetary  policy  thus  weakens  the  principle  of  individual  responsibility  and  entails 
redistribution, which is really the prerogative of fiscal policymakers. Such redistribution can 
only be legitimately authorised by democratically elected parliaments and governments. 
Thus, the most valuable contribution which monetary policy can make towards overcoming 
the crisis is safeguarding its credibility and upholding public confidence in the euro. It can do 
so best of all by focusing clearly on its primary mandate of safeguarding price stability. 
6  
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen 
The  crisis  has  caused  the  old  debate  over  the  architecture  of  monetary  union  to  flare  up 
again.  And  yet  the  construction  principles  sketched  out  by  the  first  architects  under  the 
leadership  of  Jacques  Delors  remain  as  valid  as  ever.  But  when  you  take  on  complicated 
major projects like monetary union, things don’t always work out at the first attempt – that’s 
something we’re probably not unfamiliar with in Germany. 
It is now all the more important to rectify the remaining construction defects. Then it will be 
possible  to  make  monetary  policy  what  it  once  was  –  a  boring  task.  And  as  Mervyn  King 
quite rightly stated with his “boring is best” remark, there is nothing that we central bankers 
long for with greater fervour. 
Thank you very much. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
