DeLisle Worrell: Our financial system – fit for purpose? 
Address by Dr DeLisle Worrell, Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados, to the Barbados 
Association of Insurance and Financial Advisors, Bridgetown, 26 April 2013. 
 How well does our financial system suit Barbados’ needs? In my address this morning I will 
examine how the system serves the needs of households and of businesses, and attempt to 
identify any gaps that should be attended to. 
I begin by discussing financial services for households. The main items of household credit 
are mortgages, and the financing of consumer durables. Households and individuals are well 
served  by  banks,  credit  unions  and  finance  companies,  in  the  provision  of  financing  of 
housing, durable consumption goods and amenities. Adequate availability of this household 
finance, on affordable terms, significantly enhances the well-being of the population, which 
has the benefit of the goods over the period when they are repaying their loans. In an earlier 
period,  before  mortgages  and  consumer  credit  were  widely  available,  consumers  were 
deprived of the use of goods while they accumulated the funds for cash purchases. 
Individuals and households are not as well served when it comes to alternatives for investing 
their savings. Commercial banks offer poor returns on deposits, invariably below the rate of 
inflation;  the  purchasing  power  of  monies  left  on  deposit  at  a  bank  is  eroded  over  time. 
Government paper is the most remunerative financial investment available to individuals. For 
those  with  gratuities  and  large  amounts  on  which  they  need  to  earn  interest,  longer  term 
securities  are  the  best  yielding.  For  those  investing  funds  set  aside  for  contingencies, 
savings bonds are the best bet. If held to their full term savings bonds carry an interest rate 
which  keeps  pace  with  inflation,  and  the  bonds  may  be  cashed  in  at  any  time  if  needed, 
albeit  with  an  interest  penalty.  Credit  union  shares  and  deposits  at  credit  unions  offer 
somewhat  better  returns  than  at  banks,  but  deposits  at  credit  unions  are  not  yet  insured, 
unlike bank deposits, which are protected up to a value of $25,000. 
Retirement income is vulnerable to inflation 
The financial system does not serve the needs of retirees very well because pensions are 
not adjusted in line with inflation in the typical domestic scheme. In less than a decade after 
retirement  the  average  pensioner  is  unable  to  maintain  his  or  her  standard  of  living  at 
retirement,  purely  because  of  the  ravages  of  inflation,  unless  they  have  supplementary 
income. Recent legislation mandating an inflation adjustment is a step in the right direction, 
but I would have like to see a more generous minimum stipulation. 
Working capital is no problem for established firms 
Working capital financing for well established firms with a solid track record is the bread and 
butter of commercial banks, along with loans to individuals. These firms have no difficulty in 
securing adequate bank funding for inventory and other current needs. Interest rate spreads 
are rather high compared to large industrial countries, but they are about what you will find in 
other small countries and regions. 
Established firms are usually able to secure the financing they need for capital projects and 
equipment from a combination of sources, with an emphasis on equity and retained earnings. 
We may infer this from a comparison between identified sources of long term finance from 
banks, insurance funds and credit unions on the one hand, and annual estimates of capital 
formation  in  the  country  on  the  other  hand.  However,  among  financiers  there  is  an 
understandable preference for real estate and distribution activity, where perceived risks are 
lower, and collateral security is more readily available. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The NIS, insurance companies and pension funds are the main sources of long term funds. 
They  need  investments which  will  yield  a  dependable  stream  of  income  over  many  years. 
The menu of investment options available to them includes Government securities – the least 
risky  option,  investment  in  real  estate  (including  mortgages),  and  investment  in  the 
production  of  goods  and  services  –  the  most  risky  option.  In  my  view,  the  most  important 
financial challenge Barbados faces is to ensure the continued growth of these funds, and that 
a  larger  proportion  of  these  long  term  funds  is  directed  towards  increasing  the  country’s 
capacity to produce goods and services. I will return to this issue as I conclude my address. 
There  should  be  no  scarcity  of  equity  finance  for  any  project  which  is  expected  to  be 
sufficiently profitable. If the project is too big to be accommodated by the pool of domestic 
equity  funding,  profitable  projects  will  attract  foreign  direct  investment.  The  challenge  for 
decision  makers  in  Government  and  the  private  sector  is  to  present  profitable  projects  to 
potential investors with convincing documentation and justification. 
We should recognise that it has become more difficult to do this, precisely because Barbados 
has been so successful over time in raising the standard of living of our workers, compared 
to that of our competitors. As a result, project and operational costs are higher than in other 
Caribbean countries where workers are not so well off. I believe there is a consensus among 
Barbadians  that  we  should  not  take  measures  that  would  reduce  living  standards  in 
Barbados to levels comparable to those in the Dominican Republic and Cancun, for example. 
Instead we must exploit and develop Barbados' reputation and appeal to the discriminating 
tourist who will pay a higher price for a more rewarding experience. We must become more 
adept  in  demonstrating  that  potential  investments  in  upmarket  projects  are  eminently 
profitable, and we must focus our competitive initiatives on countries and areas which serve 
the traveller who treasures an exceptional vacation experience. 
The  financing  of  small  business  presents  special  challenges  in  all  economies,  not  just  in 
Barbados,  for  reasons  that  have  been  aired  extensively,  and  are  familiar  to  all  of  us. 
Barbados  has  borrowed  from  experiences  in  the  UK  and  other  advanced  economies  over 
many  years,  to  establish  a  variety  of  funds  and  support  schemes  for  small  business. 
However, we could unquestionably do a much better job of coordinating services for small 
business, and channelling finance and support services in ways that are most helpful to each 
type of activity. 
Capital markets have not proven to be particularly useful for small open economies, and very 
little  investment  in  Barbados  has  been funded  by  new  issues  of  stock,  over  the  life  of  the 
Barbados  Securities  Exchange.  It  has  to  be  admitted  that  an  exchange  with  as  little  daily 
activity as characterises our own, has little potential to contribute to investment in producing 
goods and services. 
All that I have said so far paints a relatively benign picture of the efficiency of the financial 
services sector, in meeting the needs of Barbadians. However, availability of finance remains 
number  two  in  obstacles  to  doing  business  in  Barbados,  in  the  World  Bank’s  Global 
Competitiveness  Index.  The  reason  may  be  that  the  sources  of  available  finance  do  not 
cover innovation. It is the businesses which aim to break new ground which have difficulty in 
sourcing  finance  on  terms  which  they  can  afford. What  such  firms  need  is  equity  finance, 
funds from sources which will not expect an immediate return, and can wait until the project 
becomes  profitable. We  should  give  some  thought  to  this  problem.  It  may  be  argued  that 
there is an adequate supply of funds from sources that are prepared to take the long view, 
foregoing near-term returns on their investments in exchange for a higher yield over the life 
of the investment. Insurance and pension funds, for example, may wish to allocate a portion 
of  their  portfolio  in  this  way. What  they  may  lack  is  an  appropriate  vehicle  for  channelling 
those  funds  in  the  direction  of  innovators.  The  Stock  Exchange  does  not  provide  such  a 
platform,  because  innovating  firms  will  not  have  a  track  record  of  success  in  the  intended 
activity, as the basis for attracting investment in their equity. Investors on securities markets 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
gravitate  understandably  toward  well  established  firms  with  a  strong  track  record  in  areas 
with which the investor is familiar. In other words – the antithesis of innovation. 
Innovators often complain that commercial banks are reluctant to lend to them. In my view, 
firms  that  are  breaking  new  ground  should  avoid  bank  debt  if  possible,  because  any  new 
activity  needs  to  be  generating  a  reliable  on-going  stream  of  income  sufficient  to  meet 
operational costs, before it begins to take on bank debt, which comes with a monthly service 
cost. In its infancy the business will not  want to deplete its shareholders’ equity to service 
bank debt. Later, when the business is well established, the entrepreneur should have less 
difficulty securing bank financing for overhead expenses. 
It  is  this  disconnect  between  the  financing  needs  of  companies  that  wish  to  exploit  novel 
opportunities  in  areas  like  cultural  industries  and  green  energy,  on  the  one  hand,  and 
investors  who  need  long term  outlets for their money  on  the  other,  that  may  be  the  major 
lacuna in the domestic financial market. 
I  do  not  have  a  ready  solution  for  filling  this  gap,  if  indeed  I  have  correctly  identified  it.  I 
believe  the  members  of  your  Association  would  be  interested  in  participating  in  a  national 
dialogue on this question, because long-term funding is your forte. I am anxious to have your 
reactions to my thoughts on this matter, and the Central Bank would be willing to facilitate an 
informed discussion on this question, if there is interest. 
To summarise, I believe the financial system serves individuals, households, well-established 
firms  and  traditional  lines  of  business  very  well.  However,  the  further  development  of  our 
economy  requires  increasing  investment  in  activities  that  are  innovative  in  one  way  or 
another. I have already mentioned green energy, but there is a myriad of other possibilities 
related  to  tourism,  international  business  and  finance,  and  agro-processing.  Examples 
include  facilities  for  sports  such  as  polo  and  rallying,  heritage  sites,  the  production  of 
biodiesel and many more. 
For  these  and  similar  activities  we  need  to  find  the  appropriate  financial  channels  to 
overcome the perceived difficulty in securing adequate funding for their implementation. 
I invite your suggestions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
