Vítor Constâncio: Establishing the Single Supervisory Mechanism 
Speech  by  Mr  Vítor  Constâncio,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
BAFT-IFSA 2013 Europe Bank-to-Bank Forum, Frankfurt am Main, 29 January 2013. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure to be here today at this event organised by the BAFT-IFSA (Bankers’ 
Association  for  Finance  and  Trade  –  International  Financial  Services  Association)  in 
Frankfurt. 
Considering the recent steps towards a Banking Union, I would like focus my remarks on the 
establishment  of  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM),  following  the  landmark 
agreement reached by the ECOFIN Council on 13 December. 
Reasons for the establishment of the SSM  
I  will  start  with  some  considerations  on  the  expected  benefits  stemming  from  the 
establishment  of  the  SSM,  and  on  the  reasons  underlying  the  decision  to  confer  a  central 
role to the ECB. 
There are two main objectives in establishing the SSM.  
First,  it  aims  at  addressing  the  so-called  “financial  trilemma”,  which  can  be  defined  as  the 
impossibility  of  achieving  at  the  same  time,  financial  stability,  financial  integration  and 
maintaining national financial policies in an integrated financial market.1 This is especially the 
case  in  a  monetary  union  with  a  high  degree  of  interconnectedness  between  financial 
institutions  and  markets.  The  current  financial  crisis  showed  how  rapidly  and  forcefully 
problems  in  one  country’s  financial  system  can  spread  to  another  and  even  threaten  the 
stability of the entire euro area banking system. Such developments can best be assessed 
and  addressed  by  a  central  supervisory  authority  with  a  bird’s  eye  view  of  the  entire  euro 
area banking sector rather than through cooperation between national ones. 
The second objective of the SSM is to help breaking the negative feedback loops between 
sovereigns  and  banks,  which  were  key  features  during  the  present  crisis.  This  manifested 
itself in increasing debt levels of sovereigns that had to provide financial support to struggling 
banks as well as losses for banks from exposures to sovereigns under stress. We also saw 
increases in the correlation between the cost of funding of euro area banks and that of their 
respective sovereigns, particularly in some countries under stress.  
Against  this  background,  the  need  to  weaken  the  spillover  chain  between  banks  and 
sovereigns  by  taking  responsibility  for  the  stability  of  the  banking  system  at  the  European 
level with a single supervisory mechanism becomes evident. The SSM will also contribute to 
achieving  a  more  integrated  banking  system  which  supports  a  fully-fledged  Economic  and 
Monetary Union. This is also reinforced by the decision of the June 2012 euro area Summit 
that, when an effective SSM will become operational, the European Stability Mechanism will 
have the possibility to recapitalise banks directly. 
The European leaders have decided that within the SSM the ECB should play a central role. 
Several  arguments  for  allocating  the  task  of  banking  supervision  to  the  ECB  can  be 
highlighted.  
                                                
1   See  D.  Schoenmaker,  “The  Financial  Trilemma”,  Economics  Letters,  No  111,  2011;  X.  Freixas  “Crisis 
management in Europe”, in: J. Kremers, D. Schoenmaker, P. Wiert, (eds), Financial Supervision in Europe, 
Edward Elgar, 2009. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
First, the responsibility for monetary policy creates for the central bank an intrinsic and deep 
interest in a stable financial system.  
Second, there is a close relationship between micro-prudential control of individual financial 
institutions and the assessment of risks to the overall financial system, which constitutes the 
central bank’s macro-prudential responsibility.  
Third, information-related synergies also exist between the supervision of banks and central 
banking  functions,  such  as  the  oversight  of  payment  systems.  Central  banks  also  have  a 
depth  of  expertise  on  the  financial  sector,  because  of  their  role  in  monetary  policy  and 
oversight as well as their general interest in financial stability.  
These considerations have determined the attribution to the central bank of micro-prudential 
supervisory powers in most of the EU countries. 
Notwithstanding  these  arguments,  several  potential  risks  with  allocating  supervisory 
responsibilities to a central bank have been brought forward in the literature. I would argue 
that that that there are indeed some “true” risks but also some “false” risks. 
The  “true”  risk  is  the  issue  of  reputation  risk  of  the  central  bank.2  The  monetary  policy 
function of the central bank requires that it maintains a high level of credibility and reputation, 
since  it  is  essential  to  keep  expectations  of  rising  inflation  at  bay.  However,  if  the  central 
bank is responsible for both price stability and bank supervision, any negative event in the 
second task could damage the central bank’s reputation as a monetary authority. The risk is 
real because as we all know, supervision is an area that can never be perfect as it lacks the 
resources to see everything, meaning that accidents are always possible.  
What  I  would  call  “false”  risks  include  the  argument  that  conflicts  of  interest  might  arise 
between the different central bank functions. Could a central banks’ concern for the health of 
banks jeopardise  its  price  stability  objective? Would  a  central  bank  create  an  environment 
with low interest rates with the aim of supporting the banking sector’s health?  
I would argue that the answer to these questions is no. The ECB will have clear separate and 
hierarchical mandates that places price stability separate from other concerns. The ECB also 
has the advantage of having a very clear, transparent and measurable goal of price stability. 
This objective has never been compromised and it will not be compromised in the future.  
Internal  procedures  can  be,  and  will  be,  designed  in  a  way  that  the  separation  between 
monetary policy and banking supervision is efficiently implemented. Of course, central banks 
may  during  a  crisis  step  in  as  a  lender-of-last-resort.  But  they  might  do  this  regardless  of 
whether they have a supervisory mandate or not.  
Main features of the SSM  
Since the start of the discussion on the attribution of supervisory responsibilities to the ECB, 
the  ECB  has  clearly  highlighted  some  key  principles  from  which  in  our  view  the  new 
institutional  framework  should  be  inspired.3  I  am  very  happy  to  say  that  the  legislative 
framework  agreed  by  the  Council  (and  now  under  discussion  in  the  trilogue  with  the 
European Parliament and the Commission) respects all the identified principles. In particular, 
the  ECB  stressed  one  main  principle:  the  ECB  should  have  effective  supervisory  powers 
over all credit institutions in the countries participating in the SSM and should be able to fully 
                                                
2   C.  Goodhart,  “The  organizational  structure  of  banking  supervision”,  Occasional  Paper  1,  Financial  Stability 
Institute, 2000. 
3   See  ECB  Opinion  on  a  proposal  for  a  Council  regulation  conferring  specific  tasks  on  the  ECB  concerning 
policies  relating  to  the  prudential  supervision  of  credit  institutions  and  a  proposal  for  a  regulation  of  the 
European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010 establishing a European 
Supervisory Authority (European Banking Authority) (CON/2012/96), 28.11.2012. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
exploit  the  expertise  of  national  supervisory  authorities.  Today,  I  would  like  to  elaborate 
further on how this principle is fulfilled by the proposed legislation. 
The first important element is the “full inclusiveness”: the SSM framework should include all 
the  credit  institutions  from  the  participating  Member  States.  This  is  very  important  both  to 
preserve  a  level  playing  field  among  banks,  thus  preventing  segmentation  in  the  banking 
system, and to avoid that systemic risk could build up in parts of the banking system outside 
the monitoring of the SSM.  
But at the same time it is neither realistic nor desirable that the ECB would supervise alone 
more than 6000 credit institutions, considering both the wealth of expertise at national level 
and the advantages stemming from proximity in supervision. This is why the ECB stressed 
that the legislative framework should allow an efficient decentralisation of supervisory activity 
within the SSM, whilst ensuring effective decision-making.  
How the proposed legislation addresses this issue? The legislative framework provides that 
credit institutions of significant relevance (according to size, importance for the economy and 
cross-border activities, on the basis of methodology to be set out by the ECB), as well as 
those receiving assistance directly from the EFSF or the ESM, would be supervised directly 
by the ECB, which will be assisted by national competent authorities according to the ECB 
instructions. In practice, the ECB would be directly responsible for the supervision of a limited 
number of institutions which covers nevertheless more than 80% of the euro area banking 
system in terms of assets. The methodology also ensures that the majority of the financial 
system of SSM countries is covered.  
Moreover,  the  legislative  framework  provides  that  “less  significant”  credit  institutions,  i.e. 
below  the  identified  thresholds,  will  be  under  the  responsibility  of  national  competent 
authorities. The difference between the two groups of banks will concern only the degree of 
centralisation  of  supervisory  responsibilities  within  the  single  supervisory  mechanism 
composed by the ECB and the national supervisory authorities. 
The “singleness of the SSM” is ensured by the attribution to the ECB of a general oversight 
over the functioning of the system, as well as of the following important powers as regards 
the supervision on less significant banks: first, the national supervisory authorities will have 
to  abide  to  the  ECB  regulations,  guidelines  or  general  instructions.  Second,  the  ECB  will 
have access to the data concerning all credit institutions. Third and most important, the ECB, 
on the basis of the information and data received, may decide at any time to exercise directly 
supervisory powers also on one or more credit institutions, either on its own initiative or on 
request by the national competent authorities.  
Therefore, the legislation provides a framework that includes the right incentives to ensure 
that the level playing system among all credit institutions in the Member States participating 
to the SSM is maintained. At the same time, it allows fully exploiting the existing wealth of 
knowledge and experience by national supervisory authorities.  
The second important element is the “effectiveness”: the legislative framework provides the 
ECB with an effective set of powers that encompass all the elements of the toolbox related to 
micro-prudential supervision. We can say that the ECB tasks would concern all the span of 
life of credit institutions, from their birth (i.e. the authorisation to operate) to their death. More 
specifically,  the  ECB  will  have  the  tasks  to  grant  and  withdraw  authorisations  to  credit 
institutions,  to  assess  mergers  and  acquisitions  concerning  credit  institutions  under  its 
responsibility,  to  ensure  the  compliance  with  Pillar  I  and  II  requirements  and,  to  carry  out 
consolidated supervision. The ECB will be able to fulfil the tasks allocated to it both by using 
the direct supervisory and investigatory powers conferred by the SSM Regulation, as well as 
asking for the assistance of national supervisory authorities as appropriate. 
At this point in time you may wonder what would be the consequences for your banks, once 
the  proposed  SSM  regulation  would  be  finally  adopted  and  the  new  system  will  enter  into 
force.  An  important  point  to  stress  is  that  the  legislative  framework  agreed  by  the  Council 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
ensures full continuity with the existing supervisory system. As I said, the ECB will carry out 
its tasks within the single supervisory mechanism, working together with national supervisory 
authorities. Therefore, there would be no additional burden for the industry. On the contrary, 
banks are expected to greatly benefit from the fact that the SSM will facilitate the application 
of  the  single  rulebook  and  thus  likely  reduce  the  compliance  costs  for  banks  with 
cross-border presence across the participating Member States.  
The SSM and macro-prudential supervision  
Another  important  element  of  the  SSM  regulation  is  the  conferral  on  the  ECB  of 
macro-prudential tasks.  
Let  at  this  point,  turn  our  view  back  for  some  years.  In  most  countries,  before  the  crisis, 
banking  supervision  was  essentially  “micro-based”.  It  was  mostly  focused  on  ensuring  the 
safety and soundness of individual institutions while taking the rest of the financial system as 
given.  The  implicit  assumption  was  that  stable  individual  institutions  would  automatically 
deliver a stable system.  
This  micro-based  supervisory  approach  is  likely  to  underestimate  the  systemic  component 
and is not able to internalise and target the negative externalities that could build up as a 
result  of  increased  risks  for  the  system  as  a  whole.  The  lending  booms  that  we  have 
experienced in some euro area countries before the crisis offer a good illustration: During the 
upswing banks reported high levels of profitability and low levels of measured risk. Both of 
these factors tend to improve capital ratios, offering a reassuring picture of the solvency of 
individual banks from a micro supervisory perspective. Yet historical experience shows that 
rapid  credit  growth  is  usually  undertaken  at  the cost  of  increasing  the  systemic  –  or  tail  – 
risks  for  instance  by  lowering  lending  standards  via  undiversified  housing  exposures  or 
excessive reliance on short-term market funding. Again, the crisis vividly raised awareness 
on  the  endogenous  nature  of  many  systemic  episodes  of  financial  instability  and  on  their 
negative  externalities  that  could  be  of  great  importance  in  determining  macroeconomic 
outcomes.  
From  a  policy  perspective,  the  new  focus  has  led  to  an  increased  interest  in  the 
macro-prudential  approach  to  bank  regulation  and  supervision,  following  ideas  developed 
originally by the Bank for International Settlements. As a result, the international debate has 
shifted focus on how to detect and prevent systemic risks. In Europe the new regulatory and 
supervisory  infrastructure  currently  emerging  should  provide  supervisors  with  enough  tools 
also on the macro prudential supervisory side which should support them to curb these risks 
specifically and to reduce the pro-cyclicality of the financial sector. 
Regarding macroprudential instruments the initiative can be taken by national authorities but 
at the same time the ECB will also be empowered to apply higher requirements for capital 
buffers and other prudential measures specifically set out in relevant Union law, if deemed 
necessary to address systemic or macro-prudential risks. The application of these measures 
will,  however,  be  subject  to  the  procedures  set  out  in  the  Capital  Requirements  Directive 
(CRD IV).  
As you may be aware, the CRD IV will consist of a Directive and a Regulation. The legislative 
package  is  currently  being  finalised  under  the  trilogue  process  and  political  agreement  is 
expected 
the 
counter-cyclical capital buffer, the systemic risk buffer and possibly also the capital surcharge 
for Systemically Important Financial Institutions as well as Pillar II measures. On the other 
hand,  the  macro-prudential  toolkit  defined  in  the  Regulation  will  probably  contain  large 
exposure  limits,  public  disclosure  requirements,  liquidity  requirements,  risk  weights  for 
mortgage  exposures,  and  intra  financial  sector  exposures.  The  technical  details  of  the 
implementation  and  the coordination  mechanism  among  national  authorities,  the  SSM  and 
other EU bodies are still subject to discussions. 
to  be  reached  soon.  The  Directive 
instruments  such  as 
includes 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Conclusion 
The agreement by the Council on 13 December on the SSM regulation is strongly welcomed 
by  the  ECB.  The  ECB  looks  forward  to  a  swift  conclusion  of  the  trialogue  with  the  final 
adoption of the Council Regulation. In the meantime, we have already started the necessary 
preparatory activities.  
The  establishment  of  a  single  supervisory  mechanism  is  part  of  a  wider  project  aimed  at 
completing  the  Economic  and  Monetary  Union.  On  the  basis  of  the  Van  Rompuy  Report, 
prepared in close collaboration with the President of the institutions of the Union (including 
the ECB), the European Council adopted on 14 December 2012 a roadmap with a number of 
policy actions. In particular, the ECB supports the Commission’s announcement to present a 
legislative  proposal  for  a  single  resolution  mechanism,  having  at  the  centre  a  resolution 
authority.  Such  arrangements  are  an  important  complement  of  the  SSM  and  should  be  in 
place when the SSM would be fully operational. 
The prospect of the creation of Banking Supervision at the European level, complemented by 
future  European  banking  resolution,  is  the  more  far  reaching  change  introduced  since  the 
inception  of  the  euro.  It  reveals  the  willingness  of  Member  States  to  continue  to  deepen 
European  integration  and  create  at  the  same  time  a  better  framework  for  the  effective 
functioning of the euro area. Beyond that, the fact that the draft Regulation opens the SSM, 
in fair and equal terms, to countries outside the euro area creates a positive dynamics to the 
single  market  completion  and  to  the  future  of  European  integration.  The  scope  and 
repercussions  of  what  has  been  now  initiated  cannot  be fully  anticipated.  Indeed,  as  Jean 
Monnet cogently put it: “The change that comes from change cannot be predicted”  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
