Deepali Pant Joshi: Improving banking outreach and customer service in 
India 
Inaugural address by Dr Deepali Pant Joshi, Executive Director of the Reserve Bank of India, 
at  Conference  of  Principal  Code  Compliance  Officers  (PCCOs)  of  Regional  Rural  Banks 
(RRBs), organised by the Banking Codes and Standards Board of India (BCSBI), Mumbai, 
15 July 2013. 
 Assistance rendered by Mr. A.G. Ray, General Manager, Ms. Beena Abdulrahiman, Deputy General Manager and 
Ms. Jaya Bharathi Kannan, Assistant General Manager is gratefully acknowledged. 
1. 
It is a privilege to be here this morning and I would like to thank Shri A.C. Mahajan, 
Chairman, BCSBI, and Shri N. Raja, CEO, BCSBI, for giving me the opportunity to be here. I 
extend  warm  congratulations  to  the  BCSBI  on  the  initiative  of  hosting  this  Conference  of 
Principal Code Compliance Officers (PCCOs) of Regional Rural Banks (RRBs). I understand 
it is an annual event. 
2. 
The  purpose  is  to  interface  with  the  Chairmen  of  RRBs.  This  becomes  especially 
important as we all accept that the quality of customer service and the bank’s treatment of 
customers  depend  on  guidance  of  its  Top  Management  in  the  building  of  an  organization 
culture committed to high level of customer service with an ethical value system. 
3. 
The  Banking  Codes  and  Standards  Board  of  India  (BCSBI)  was  set  up  seven  years 
ago,  since  then  it  has  prepared  and  published  voluntary  comprehensive  Codes  and 
Standards for banks for providing fair treatment to customers. 
4. 
adopted by banks are adhered to, in true spirit in delivering the services, as promised. 
BCSBI had evolved two Codes for Member Banks to implement: 
It functions as an independent body to monitor and to ensure that the Codes voluntarily 
1. 
2. 
Code of Bank’s Commitment to Customers 
Code of Bank’s Commitment to Micro and Small Enterprises 
Now let us talk a bit about RRBs: 
These Codes are periodically updated keeping in view the contemporary recent changes. 
5. 
The  RRBs  are  now  treated  on  par  with  other  commercial  banks  and  as  banks,  they  must 
focus on customer empowerment and extending customer service. I have been a Director of 
several  RRBs  many  years  ago  and  have  keenly  watched  their  evolution.  I  will  now  spend 
some time in discussing their evolution and growth. 
Establishment of RRBs 
6. 
The Narasimham Working Group (1975) conceptualized the creation of RRBs in 1975 
as  a  new  set  of  regionally  oriented  rural  banks,  which  would  combine  the  local  feel  and 
familiarity of rural problems characteristic of cooperatives with the professionalism and large 
resource base of commercial banks. Regional Rural Banks (RRBs) were established under 
the Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976 to create an alternative channel to the cooperative credit 
structure and to ensure sufficient institutional credit for the rural and agriculture sector. RRBs 
are jointly owned by the Government of India, the concerned State government and sponsor 
banks,  with  the  issued  capital  shared  in  the  proportion  of  50  percent,  15  percent  and 
35 percent,  respectively.  As  per  the  provisions  of  the  Regional  Rural  Banks  Act,  1976  the 
authorized capital of each RRB is Rs. 5 crore and the issued capital is a maximum of Rs. 1 
crore. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
7. 
From  a  modest  beginning  of  6  RRBs  with  17  branches  covering  12  districts  in 
December, 1975 the number of RRBs increased to 196 RRBs with 14,446 branches in 1991 
operating  in  518  districts  across  the  country.  After  a  phase  of  consolidation  starting  from 
September, 2005, the number of RRBs was reduced from 196 to 82. In the current phase of 
consolidation  which  began  in  October,  2012  by  amalgamation  of  RRBs  across  sponsor 
banks within a State, the number of RRBs has further reduced to 61 RRBs as on date with 
over 18000 branches in 638 districts. 
Reforms in the RRB Sector have taken place in three phases : 
First Phase: 1993–2000 
Based on the recommendations of the Narasimham Committee Report (1992), reforms 
8. 
were initiated in 1993 with a view to improve the financial health and operational viability of 
RRBs.  Various  measures  including  recapitalization,  rationalization  of  branch  network, 
providing  better  access  to  non  fund  business,  expanding  avenues  of  investment  and 
advances, upgrading the level of technology and taking up select RRBs for comprehensive 
restructuring were taken. Further, they were permitted to lend to non-target group borrowers 
up to 60 per cent of new loans. From January, 1995 the investment avenues for RRBs were 
broadened  to  improve  the  operational  efficiency  and  profitability.  In  December,  1996  the 
investment policy was further liberalised, to accord parity with commercial banks, permitting 
RRBs  to  invest  in  shares  and  debentures  of  corporate  and  units  of  Mutual  Funds  with  a 
ceiling up to 5% of the incremental deposits of the bank during the previous year. Prudential 
accounting  norms  of  income  recognition,  asset  classification,  provisioning  and  exposure, 
were  implemented  during  this  period  to  provide  durability  to  the  reform  process.  In  April, 
2000,  RRBs  were  allowed  to  apply  for  permission  to  maintain  non-resident  accounts  in 
rupees. 
Second Phase: 2004–2010 
9. 
The next Phase of reforms started in 2004–05 with the structural consolidation of RRBs 
by  amalgamation  of  RRBs  of  the  same  sponsor  bank  within  a  State.  Capital  support 
aggregating Rs. 1796 crore was provided during the period 2007–08 to 2009–10 as part of 
this  process.  In  October,  2004,  RRBs  were  permitted  to  undertake  insurance  business 
without risk participation and in May, 2007 they were allowed to take up corporate agency 
business  for  distribution  of  all  types  of  insurance  products  without  risk  participation.  In 
December, 2005, to further extend support to RRBs for accelerating the flow of credit to the 
rural areas, the resource base of RRBs was expanded to include lines of credit from sponsor 
banks;  they  were  also  permitted  to  access  the  term  money  markets  and  CBLO/Repo 
markets.  Issuance  of  credit/debit  cards,  setting  up  of  ATMs,  opening  of  currency  chests, 
undertaking  government  business,  as  subagents,  were  allowed  to  enhance  business 
opportunities. In March, 2006, RRBs were permitted to apply for AD-Category II licence to 
undertake  non-trade  related  current  account  transactions  for  certain  specified  purposes  to 
further enhance the scope of business. In June, 2007 to increase their exposure to foreign 
exchange business they were allowed to accept FCNR deposits. RRBs were also allowed to 
participate in consortium lending with sponsor banks, DFIs and other banks within the area of 
operation.  The  capital  adequacy  standards  were  introduced  in  December,  2007  in  the 
context of financial stability and RRBs were required to disclose the level of CRAR in their 
balance sheets. 
Third Phase: 2010 onwards 
10.  Based  on  the  recommendations  of  Dr.  K.  Chakrabarty  Committee  (2010),  40  RRBs 
have been taken up for recapitalization to enable them to achieve and sustain a CRAR of 
9%. In November, 2010 the branch licensing policy was liberalized which allowed RRBs to 
open  branches  in  Tier  3  to  Tier  6  centres  (with  population  of  up  to  49,999  as  per  2001 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Census)  without  prior  approval  from  the  Reserve  Bank,  subject  to  certain  conditions.  This 
policy  was  further  liberalized  in  August,  2013  to  also  include  Tier  2  centres.  The  second 
phase of consolidation commenced from October, 2012 with amalgamation of RRBs across 
sponsor banks within a State. 
Performance of RRBs Post Amalgamation: 
11. 
has been consistent progress in the operations of RRBs. 
It can be seen from the data on performance of RRBs post amalgamation that there 
Post amalgamation, in terms of total business 2 RRBs are larger than some private sector 
commercial banks as can be seen from the graph below: 
 In terms of owned funds Andhra Pragathi Grameena Bank is much larger than some of the 
private sector commercial banks. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
 Financial Inclusion by RRBs 
12. 
In  order  to  achieve  the  objective  of  universal  financial  inclusion,  RRBs  have  been 
directed  to  use  a  combination  of  strategies,  which  include  (a)  provision  of  basic  banking 
products; (b) introduction of the Business Correspondent/Business Facilitator (BF) model; (c) 
adoption of the relaxed regulatory Know Your Customer (KYC) guidelines; (d) enhanced use 
of  technology;  and  (e)  setting  up  financial  literacy  centres  in  districts  to  achieve  greater 
outreach.  Though  the  share  of  RRBs  in  aggregate  deposits  and  gross  bank  credit  is  only 
around 2.5 to 3 per cent, they play a critical role in financial inclusion. RRBs are required to 
prepare Financial Inclusion Plans which are to be integrated with their business plans. The 
major  highlights  of  their  performance  under  the  first  FIP  for  the  period  April,  2010-March, 
2013 are as under. 
1. 
Banking Outreach 
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 The number of rural branches has increased by 15%. The self set FIP targets have almost 
been met. At the same time number of branches in unbanked villages has grown from 0 in 
2011 to 1175 as on year ended March, 2013. However, they could not completely full fill their 
targets  of  opening  up  the  total  number  of  branches.  The  target  was  set  around  18,755 
branches  while  they  were  able  to  open  close  to  17,867  branches  only  as  on  year  ended 
March 2013. 
2. 
a. 
Type of Banking Outlets- Based on Size of Population 
Population > 2000 
The  total  number  of  banking  outlets  can  be  viewed  in  terms  of  Bank  Branches,  Business 
Correspondents  (BCs)  and  Other  Modes.  For  villages  with  population  of  more  than  2,000 
there has been a considerable increase in the number of BCs. There was a steep rise from 
mere 703 BC outlets (year ended March, 2010) to close to 19,000 BC outlets (year ended 
March, 2012). 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
b. 
Population < 2000 
For villages with population less than 2000, the number of BCs registered a sharp growth. 
However, the RRBs failed in achieving the set target for BC outlets for the year ended March, 
2013. 
3. 
Basic Savings Bank Deposit Account 
 It is observed that most of the Basic Savings Bank Deposit Accounts (BSBDA) were opened 
through branches. The number of accounts opened through branches stood at 330.10 lakh, 
while only 72.84 lakh accounts were opened through BCs (year ended March 2013). 
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The  graphs  show  the  amount  mobilized  each  year  (in  percentage)  in  Basic  Savings  Bank 
Deposit Account (BSBDA) through branches and BCs. In the year 2012, there was a sharp 
fall in the amount mobilized through BCs but it has again picked up in 2013. 
 The total number of Basic Savings Bank Deposit Accounts has increased considerably. From 
around 230 lakh accounts (year ended March, 2010) to more than 400 lakh accounts (year 
ended March, 2013), the growth rate has been equal to 74%. 
4. Kisan Credit Cards 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  7 
The branches were successful in achieving their target number of KCCs (year ended March, 
2013). No KCCs were sourced through the BCs for the years ended 2010 and 2011. 
5. General Credit Cards 
 13.  The  BC  is  utilized  to  externalize  part  of  the  credit  cycle.  He  has  to  work  towards 
spreading  awareness  of  the  availability  of  the  bank’s  products  and  services.  BCs  can  be 
better  leveraged  by  the  RRB  branches.  They  are  in  need  of  greater  handholding  and 
necessarily of close and continuous supervision. 
14.  Though there has been reasonable progress with regard to extending the penetration 
of banking services and opening of basic bank accounts, the number of transactions through 
the ICT based BC outlets are poor. During the period of the next 3 year Financial Inclusion 
Plan  i.e.  2013–16  RRBs  should  endeavour  to  leverage  technology  to  the  optimum. 
Technology enables the bank to transcend the barriers of geography and to provide services 
at the borrower’s doorstep. Though the initial cost is high over time it pays for itself. Regional 
Rural Banks should through financial innovation  try to focus on mezzanine finance, on the 
creation  of  customised  products  linked  to  the  income  streams  of  the  poor  borrowers  and 
geared to meet the specific needs of the rural clientele. Mobile technology can be harnessed 
to improve access and usage of banking services. 
The Codes and RRBs 
15.  All banks offer the same products with variants but what distinguishes and sets apart 
and gives the competitive edge to a bank is the quality of customer service extended by the 
bank. 
16.  The Codes are the RRBs mandate, adopted by RRBs with the specific approval of the 
Board  of  Directors.  RRBs  must  take  full  ownership  of  these  Codes  and  facilitate  their 
adoption ensuring complete adherence. 
17.   RRBs have undergone a sea change. They are now almost treated on par with other 
commercial  banks.  The  customers  of  the  RRBS  are  illiterate  and  poor;  there  is  also  an 
asymmetry  of  information.  Hence  the  adoption  of  standards  of  behaviour  and  codes  of 
conduct framed by BCSBI for dealing with customers is an imperative. 
18.   At  one  point  we  are  all  customers  of  banks.  What  are  the  ingredients  of  treating 
customers  fairly?  Transparency,  proper  disclosure,  non-discriminatory  and  non-exploitative 
pricing, building a robust and responsive grievance redressal mechanism within the bank and 
also  making  the  customer  aware  of  redressal  available  through  the  Banking  Ombudsman 
Scheme. Transparency does not mean bombarding the illiterate customer with humungous 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
amount of information which she is neither able to understand or use. It merely means no 
hidden charges. The customer must up front understand what she is letting herself in for; the 
terms and conditions of the contract should be clearly understood. 
19.   The  codes  need  to  be  clearly  understood  and  fairly  implemented  by  Regional  Rural 
Banks.  Banks  are  commercial  establishments.  They  are  not  philanthropic  organizations. 
However, they enjoy great leverage and an oligopolistic position simply as the borrower in 
the  rural  areas  may  lack  choice  which  his  urban  counterpart  enjoys.  This  casts  a  much 
greater responsibility upon the RRBs. Knowledge and general awareness about the Codes of 
the  BCSBI  needs  to  be  increased.  Just  this  morning,  Mr  Mahajan  shared  with  me  that 
despite valiant attempts knowledge of and appreciation of the BCSBI codes was spreading 
very slowly and this was a cause of concern. The Chairmen of the RRBs must appreciate 
that the poor borrower who comes to the door step of the Bank is highly unlikely to meet the 
Chairman  of  the  bank.  For  him  the  frontline  manager  is  the  Bank.  The  frontline  manager 
needs to be sensitized to the importance of the Code of Bank’s Commitment to Customers. 
He  must  understand  and  believe  in  them.  This  affirmation  will  then  translate  to  increased 
sensitivity and in empathetic behavior towards the special niche clientele of the RRBs. The 
pay  off  in  terms  not  just  of  profitability  but  in  terms  of  job  satisfaction  assuredly,  will  be 
tremendous. 
20.   To close with a few clear messages for easy recall: 
• 
Please ensure that all the RRB staff are aware of, clearly understand and commit to 
the BCSBI Codes. 
The  Codes  are  evident  in  precept  and  practice  and  in  the  actual  business  of  the 
Banks 
Customer empowerment occurs as knowledge and awareness of customer rights is 
enhanced. 
  Once  again  I  thank  the  BCSBI  for  this  opportunity  and  commend  them  on  the  initiative  of 
hosting this conference. 
 
 
 
 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
