Sabine Lautenschläger: Supervisors without borders 
Speech by Ms Sabine Lautenschläger Deputy President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the 
evening  reception  of  the  ESE  (The  European  Supervisor  Education  Initiative)  Conference 
2013 “The future of European financial supervision”, Frankfurt am Main, 26 September 2013. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Good evening to you all, ladies and gentlemen, and a warm welcome to the Regional Office 
in Hesse. 
For many of you, this day of the conference has been quite intensive. You have listened to 
lectures  in  the  rooms  of  the  Goethe  University,  covering  a  wide  range  of  topics  including 
European supervisory systems, market and banking structures as well as systemic risks and 
macroprudential supervision; you may have had intense discussions following these lectures. 
And now you are back in the world of the famous author Johann Wolfgang Goethe. “What 
am  I  talking  about?”,  you  are  probably  wondering.  The  unifying  theme  of  the  art  in  this 
building  is  “Frankfurt,  Goethe,  Money”.  And  I  will  begin  at  the  core  of  my  remarks  this 
evening with a quote which from my point of view fits perfectly to our situation as banking 
supervisors. It is a quote from Goethe’s Faust: “In the beginning was the deed”. Under this 
motto, I would like to take three steps together with you. 
The preceding five years 
2. 
Let us first go back a step: to the preceding five years, which were marked by the collapse 
of Lehman Brothers and the ensuing crisis. A crisis which shaked the very foundations of the 
financial system and the European monetary union. The financial system’s weaknesses were 
abruptly laid bare. We observed, when push came to shove, how quickly banks’ inadequately 
small  buffers  were  depleted,  with  many  institutions  requiring  life  support  in  the  form  of 
government  assistance.  It  also  became  instantly  clear  that  banks’  internal  control  systems 
were no match for the complexity and interconnected nature of the risks involved. However, 
the  crisis  did  not  remain  confined  to  the  financial  system.  The  focus  soon  turned  to 
government budgets, which in some cases were already in critical condition, and which then 
threatened to collapse under the weight of the rescue packages. The distress which many 
countries were then undergoing made the banking sector’s problems even worse. 
However,  this  was  also  a  time  of  reforms  and  change.  At  the  initiative  and  under  the 
leadership  of  the  G20,  policymakers,  regulators  and  supervisors  undertook  to  develop  a 
programme  of  comprehensive  financial  sector  reforms,  which  are  now  gradually  being 
implemented.  This  time  also  included  the  establishment  of  ESE,  the  European  Supervisor 
Education initiative in 2009 – a project involving supervisors and central bankers as wells as 
academics. ESE is a joint venture which has set itself the task of ensuring uniform training of 
supervisors  at  a  high  level  in  Europe  and  promoting  the  sharing  of  knowledge  between 
researchers and practitioners. After all: a stable financial system requires not just good rules 
but also highly qualified supervisors in order to enforce these standards. 
The present 
3. 
Let us now take a step forward – to the present. Where do we stand now, five years since 
the  outset  of  the  crisis?  Despite  all  the  criticism  about  the  seemingly  sluggish  pace  of 
reforms:  I  believe  it  is  quite  fair  to  say  that  we  have  made  very  tangible  progress.  The 
implementation  of  the  revised  Basel  standards  will  make  banks  more  resilient.  We  have 
tightened  the  requirements  for  risk  management  and  expanded  our  horizon  by  integrating 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
macroprudential  knowledge.  And  these  are  just  a  very  few  items  from  among  the  many 
reform projects currently ongoing; I’ll spare you the full list. 
However,  a  decision  on  what  is  probably  the  most  important  innovation  was  taken  just 
recently.  I  am  referring,  of  course,  to  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism,  or  SSM,  here  in 
Europe. I have high expectations of the SSM and think it will help us to detect risks in the 
European  banking  sector  at  an  earlier  stage  in  future  and  to  tackle  them  more  rigorously. 
Although I am in favour of a different legal basis, one that could simplify matters a lot given 
the  now  very  complex  SSM  governance  structure,  I  am  nevertheless  convinced  of  the 
advantages of the SSM. 
One factor will be decisive for the success of the SSM: close and constructive cooperation 
between all parties involved. The SSM is designed as a system composed of the ECB at the 
centre  and  the  national  competent  authorities  carrying  out  decentralised  processes  and 
procedures. As members of the supervisory teams and the decision-making bodies, the only 
way we can meet the high expectations of the SSM is if we all pull together. I am especially 
looking forward to even closer cooperation in the future with our colleagues from the ECB 
and the other national supervisory authorities. 
Cooperation  is  also  the  guiding  star  of  ESE.  The  initiative  has  already  shown  us  how 
cooperation between supervisors can be made to work. As my fellow board member Rudolf 
Böhmler illustrated this morning, ESE seminars are attended by participants from a multitude 
of institutions and countries. This spirit of cooperation exemplifies what will be important in 
the SSM. 
Like  us  supervisors,  ESE,  too,  has  recently  seen  eventful  times.  Last  year,  we  saw  a 
considerable  increase  in  the  number  of  seminar  participants  –  a  noteworthy  success  and 
confirmation of the excellent work by those responsible for ESE. These parties include the 
Programme Council, composed of proven supervisory experts and responsible for keeping 
the content of the training measures up to date at all times. The Steering Committee and the 
ESE Secretariat naturally also play a pivotal role. At this juncture, I would like to express my 
sincere thanks to the representatives of ESE for all that you have done to make ESE one of 
the leading training initiatives for supervisors in Europe. 
The future 
4. 
Let us now take a further step – forward – and venture a look into the future. Now that the 
European  Parliament  has  approved  the  draft  legislation,  the  SSM  can  soon  be  officially 
launched. We have a year full of hard work ahead of us. Thankfully, the preparations are in 
progress  –  through  the  High  Level  Group  of  ECB  and  national  authorities’  representatives 
and the many affiliated working groups, the basic framework of the SSM has already been 
laid  out.  Over  the  coming  months,  we  will  define  the  further  details  of  the  cooperation 
between the ECB and national supervisors and codify them in a Framework Regulation. We 
will continue our work on the organisational and operational structure of the new supervisory 
regime and institute an efficient reporting process. However, in my opinion, it is the balance-
sheet assessment which represents the greatest challenge in the months ahead of us. The 
ECB  needs  a  clear  picture  of  the  actual  risk  faced  by  the  banks  it  will  be  supervising. 
Moreover, light needs to be shed on which balance-sheet burdens arose under the watch of 
national supervisors. We therefore need a thorough and rigorous review of balance-sheets. 
This  will  be  the  first  test  of  the  SSM  and  of  cooperation  between  the  authorities  involved. 
Though we don’t have much time at all to accomplish this extremely complex task, I believe 
that, if we act in unison, we will succeed. 
One year from now, the preparations will be completed and the SSM will take the helm. In 
order  for  the  SSM  to  exploit  its  advantages,  one  thing  will  be  paramount:  a  consistent 
supervisory  approach  incorporating  the  strengths  of  individual  national  approaches  and 
experiences. This common supervisory approach must build on established principles such 
as  risk-orientation,  proportionality  as  well  as  an  integrated  micro  and  macroprudential 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
supervision. It will be particularly important to strike the right balance between ensuring fair 
competition  by  treating  the  same  risks  equally  and,  at  the  same  time,  allowing  for  varying 
market and banking structures as far as these cater for the heterogeneous needs of the real 
economy. 
However, this supervisory approach must not exist only on paper, but must also be infused 
with  life. I  see  ESE  as  playing  an  important  role  here.  ESE  can  support  us  supervisors  in 
conveying the new supervisory standards and thus make a crucial contribution to consistent 
and  high-quality  supervisory  practice  in  the  SSM.  As  supervisors  in  a  system  currently 
encompassing 17, and soon 18 countries, however, we need not only technical expertise but 
also communication and teamworking skills. We need not only specialists but also first-class 
networkers.  This  corresponds  to  ESE’s  approach,  which  from  the  beginning  was  aimed  at 
creating a joint European supervisory culture. And this is why there has always traditionally 
been a social event at each ESE seminar. This conference is no exception, and I am already 
looking forward to an evening of exciting and stimulating conversation. 
Conclusion 
5. 
Ladies and gentlemen, ESE can look back upon a successful history, and I am convinced 
that  the  SSM  will  make  good  use  of  ESE’s  expert  knowledge  and  experience.  I  wish  the 
organisers of the European Supervisors Education initiative and all their helping hands every 
success for the coming challenges. There are two thoughts I want to leave you with before I 
invite you to help yourselves at the buffet and look more closely at the works of art under the 
motto of “Frankfurt, Goethe, Money”. The first thought is: the banking union can succeed only 
if  every  single  one  of  us,  supervisors  and  supervised  alike,  is  ready  to  take  action  and 
welcome  the  new.  The  second  thought  is  –  and  this  is  addressed  not  only  to  the  ESE 
seminar participants, but to all parties involved in the banking union – we must be willing to 
keep  learning,  to  open  ourselves  to  new  ideas  and  experiences,  and  to  bring  along  the 
“doubting Thomases”, the hesitant ones, for the ride. The Bundesbank will make every effort 
to support this process – with words, and with deeds. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
