K C Chakrabarty: Regulation for financial consumer protection – present 
status and future directions 
Opening remarks by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at 
the  Conference  of  Principal  Code  Compliance  Officers  –  2013,  organized  by  the  Banking 
Codes and Standards Board of India (BCSBI), College of Agricultural Banking, Pune, 29 April 
2013. 
 Presentation 
Shri A.C. Mahajan, Chairman, BCSBI; Shri C.K Krishnan and Shri M. M. Chitale, Members of 
BCSBI Governing Council; Shri N. Raja, CEO, BCSBI; Smt. Meena Hemachandra, Principal, 
College of Agricultural Banking; Principal Code Compliance Officers (PCCOs) from various 
scheduled commercial banks and urban cooperative banks; officials from BCSBI; colleagues 
from  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India;  ladies  and  gentlemen.  It  is  a  pleasure  for  me  to  be  here 
today at the PCCO Conference 2013, organized by the BCSBI. This annual conference is an 
important event as it provides a platform for interaction with PCCOs, who are a vital cog in 
ensuring adherence to BCSBI codes and maintenance of high standards of customer service 
within banks. I have also viewed this conference as an opportunity to understand the issues 
faced by banks and the constraints that prevent the roll out of an effective customer service 
framework. I hope to receive frank feedback from all of you today. 
Introduction 
2. 
Globalisation, liberalisation, increased competition and continued deregulation have 
changed  the  landscape  in  which  banks  and  customers  operate.  While  competition  was 
expected  to  foster  the  spirit  of  free  enterprise  and  confer  price  and  efficiency  advantages 
upon the consumer, this does not seem to have been the case. Is it deliberate? And if so, 
who is responsible for this state of affairs? A part of the blame has to be placed on the stiff 
entry  barriers  that  characterise  the  banking  sector  and  which,  in  turn,  has  curtailed  true 
competition  and  free-play  of  market  forces.  This  is  partly  due  to  the  responsibility  that 
regulators have towards the safety of depositors’ funds. This should not, however, take away 
the right of the customers to get a fair deal. The deregulation of interest rates and service 
charges was brought in with an implicit belief that banks would treat their customers fairly, in 
a  transparent  and  non-discriminatory  manner.  However,  we  still  need  to  go  a  long  way  to 
attain these objectives. While the goal of providing effective customer service has been long 
recognized,  we  cannot  yet  say  that  the  objective  has  been  successfully  met.  Though  the 
challenge of providing efficient customer service is universal, the challenge is greater in India 
given  that  it  has  to  be  balanced  with  the  objective  of  promoting  financial  inclusion  and 
financial literacy. 
3. 
As a regulator, we have several concerns with regard to customer service practices 
followed by banks such as the instances of mis-selling of products to vulnerable consumers, 
sale of unsolicited products-often by bundling them with other products, lack of transparency 
and  disclosure,  hidden  charges,  penalties,  etc.  and  improper  recovery  practices.  The 
widespread  proliferation  of  complex  products,  often  leveraging  on  technology  coupled  with 
the  rise  in  cross  border  and  electronic  transactions,  have  also  added  to  the  challenge  of 
ensuring effective customer service, especially for the most vulnerable groups. 
Role of BCSBI and PCCOs 
4. 
It  is  in  this  context  that  the  formation  of  the  BCSBI  was  announced  by  the  then 
Governor  of  RBI,  Dr.  Y.  V.  Reddy  in  his  Annual  Monetary  Policy  Statement  in  April  2005. 
Since then, the BCSBI has done a commendable job as an independent watchdog to monitor 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
the adoption and implementation of its codes and standards by banks. In this mission, the 
BCSBI has been assisted by PCCOs, who are single point Nodal Officers in member banks 
and  are,  thus,  extended  arms  of  BCSBI  for  monitoring  implementation  of  codes  and 
standards and for various matters relating to customer service. 
5. 
The  BCSBI  has  evolved  two  sets  of  codes,  viz.  Code  of  Bank’s  Commitment  to 
Customers  and  Code  of  Bank’s  Commitment  to  Micro  and  Small  Enterprises,  which  have 
been in existence for seven and five years respectively. However, despite the codes being in 
existence for a considerable period of time and having been adopted by banks, the quality of 
service delivered to customers still leaves a lot to be desired. This is reflected in the volume 
of complaints received by Banking Ombudsmen across the country and from the interaction 
with customers during Town Hall meetings. 
6. 
I  believe  that  an  important  cause  for  deficient  customer  service  is  the  inability  of 
banks  to  understand  the  specific  expectations  of  diverse  customer  groups  and  to  devise 
product, pricing and delivery strategies that are best suited to meet these expectations. Many 
banks would not be aware of the number of customers they have or the number of products 
they offer. While a plethora of products might be available on paper, many of them might not 
be actively offered to customers. Hence, understanding their customers and understanding 
their own product offerings needs to be the starting point of any customer service framework. 
7. 
I have been informed that a recent BCSBI study on the practices followed by banks 
in  respect  of  charges  levied  on  deposit  accounts  has  brought  out  several  anomalies  viz. 
fixing of charges based on competition instead of on cost plus basis, levying charges without 
providing  any  service  such  as  for  non-maintenance  of  minimum  balance,  levy  of  intersol 
charges,  etc.  Visits  by  BCSBI  representatives  to  bank  branches  also  reveal  several 
deficiencies in implementation of the codes. 
8. 
Clearly, more efforts are needed by PCCOs and banks to ensure that the codes are 
implemented and in turn, customer expectations are effectively met. I am told that the BCSBI 
is considering introducing a rating scheme for the banks based on their performance on code 
implementation and customer service parameters. Such an exercise should cajole banks for 
creating an effective internal framework for ensuring that the principle of “treating customers 
fairly” gets ingrained into the organizational ethos. 
Treating customers fairly 
9. 
What do we mean by treating the customers fairly? Can we define the principles of 
fair  treatment  and  can  we  measure  and  compare  quality  of  customer  service  within  the 
banking industry? Measuring quality of banking services is more difficult than measuring the 
quality  of  manufactured  goods  as  services  are  intangible  in  nature  and  there  is  no  “real” 
product that the customer takes home. Even within banking, there are a variety of dissimilar 
services  like  retail  banking,  commercial  banking,  investment  banking,  etc.  and,  hence, 
standardized  quality  measurement  becomes  difficult.  It  can  only  be  accomplished  by 
focussing  on  the  outcomes  of  customer  experience.  Do  we  have  the  systems  in  place  to 
seek feedback on what the customers feel about the services and quality of customer care? 
In  the  absence  of  an  effective  feedback  mechanism,  can  we  say  that  banks  ensure  fair 
treatment  of  their  customers?  Fair  treatment  of  customers  is  an  ideal  which  we  should  all 
strive to achieve. The TCF (“treating customers fairly”) principles define standards which the 
institutions  must  aspire  to  meet  so  that  the  consumers  are  benefited  and  have  increased 
confidence in the financial services industry. 
Specifically, TCF is aimed at: 
• 
helping  customers  fully  understand  the  features,  benefits,  risks  and  costs  of  the 
financial products they buy 
minimising  the  sale  of  unsuitable  products  by  encouraging  best  practices  before, 
during and after a sale 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 2 
  transparent and non-discriminatory pricing 
Financial innovations – whether fair or unfair to consumers? 
10. 
Every  innovation  in  the  financial  sector  has  purportedly  the  same  theme  –  of  the 
consumer, for the consumer, by the consumer. However, in reality, most financial innovations 
invariably  border  on  regulatory  arbitrage,  accounting  arbitrage  and  tax  avoidance.  An 
important  litmus  test  for  every  financial  innovation  must  be  the  contribution  such  an 
innovation  makes  to  the  real  economy  and  ultimately,  to  the  society.  Though  the  global 
financial system has witnessed crises, one after the other in quick succession, our learnings 
from  each  crisis  have  been  short-lived.  The  imperative  need  for  customer  centricity  and 
adherence to standards has often been recognized, but has been lost in the rush for short 
term business gains. Let me give some common examples of unfair treatment to customers: 
11. 
The product–based incentives for staff in banks selling insurance products or mutual 
funds creates perverse incentives and, thereby, shifts the focus from the customer’s original 
need. The staff is keen on bundling insurance along with term deposits (and in some cases, 
in lieu of term deposits) only because of the product-based incentive structures. Sadly, they 
lose sight of customer convenience, product suitability and blatantly indulge in mis-selling. 
12. 
Pricing of products is an area which gives rise to numerous customer grievances. 
This  is  because  banks  have  not  adopted  a  transparent  cost-plus  approach  to  pricing. 
Instead,  more  often  it  is  dictated  by  the  bargaining  power  of  the  customer  and  the 
competitor’s  prices.  Specifically,  pricing  practices  followed  in  case  of  floating  interest  rate 
based products is replete with instances of lack of transparency and fair play. The base rate 
may change due to changes in general interest rates in the market, but there is no reason 
why the spread on base rate charged to a customer should change without any change in 
the risk profile of the customer. Besides, banks are quick to adjust the interest rate upwards 
while they are reluctant to pass on the benefit of interest rate cuts to their customers. Another 
anomaly  in  this  area  is  the  treatment  meted  out  to  old  and  new  customers.  It  must  be 
logically expected that the floating rate of interest applicable to two customers, with identical 
risk profiles, will be the same at any point in time irrespective of the fact that a customer is 
new or old. Regrettably, this is not the case. 
13. 
Another market conduct and integrity related issue is the provision of festive rates. I 
have no idea how the banks’ cost of funds comes down during festivals. You may choose to 
waive off processing fee, which is transparent, but how can the rates come down? Similarly, 
there are several instances of levying charges without providing any additional services such 
as  charges  for  non-maintenance  of  minimum  balances,  cancellation  of  demand  drafts, 
prepayment penalties, intersol charges, etc. Also, while penal interest is imposed on smaller 
customers if they fail to meet their payment obligations, in case of larger borrowers, interest 
concessions  might  be  offered  under  restructuring  arrangements.  There  are  elements  of 
discrimination in all the above situations, which must be addressed. Let me emphasize that 
the  BCSBI  has  an  important  role  to  play  in  removing  these  anomalies  as  it  would  not  be 
appropriate  to  create  regulatory  prescriptions  for  all  issues.  Banks  also  need  to  take 
initiatives on their own. 
Implications for economic and social order 
I would like to point out that there may be situations where the customer demands 
14. 
banks  to  act  in  a  manner  that  would  suit  the  customer,  but  could  have  adverse  social  or 
economic  implications.  In  such  cases,  banks’  internal  processes  should  ensure  that  their 
frontline staff chooses the social and economic interests over customer demands. Adherence 
to high standards of conduct by banks has important implications for ensuring maintenance 
of economic and social order. Let me cite a recent instance, the expose by a media outfit on 
unethical practices at banks. Our enquiries have revealed that there were transactional and 
market conduct issues which need immediate redressal. At the transactional level, instances 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
of  bank  staff  facilitating  splitting  of  deposit  transactions  by  customers  for  avoiding  their 
reporting  as  CTRs/STRs  to  the  investigative  agencies  were  also  noticed.  If  these  are  not 
unfair  and  unethical  practices  then  what  is?  These  transactions  may  be  beneficial  to 
individuals but, eventually, they manifest in the form of societal cost. 
15. 
Let me highlight that unfair market conduct does not only mean being on the wrong 
side of the law or the regulations. What banks must consider is whether the transactions that 
they  undertake  or  approve  of  are  beneficial  for  the  society  as  a  whole.  The  delayering  of 
transactions on behalf of customers so as to facilitate tax management (or avoidance) is an 
example where societal interests are subverted to suit customer requirements. Likewise, how 
ethical  is  it  to  facilitate  customers’  transactions  by  allowing  them  to  have  several 
relationship/customer IDs within the same branch/ bank? 
16. 
There  may  also  be  instances  where  banks’  conduct  could  even  have  important 
implications for the economic health of the country. Take for instance the lack of follow up on 
the part of the authorised dealers in respect of export bills sent for collection. As the bills are 
not funded by banks, they feel that their obligation is limited merely to regulatory reporting of 
such cases, although some banks have been found to not be diligent even in reporting. For a 
forex starved and current account deficit country like ours, it amounts to colossal profligacy, 
which is unacceptable. Similarly, I do not know how the society benefits from the large scale 
off balance sheet transactions entered into by the banks. I know these actions/ transactions 
may not be illegal nor contravening any regulatory guidelines, but they certainly are a social 
drag and are, therefore, best avoided. 
17. 
Take  another  issue  of  “Unhedged  Foreign  Currency  Exposures  of  Corporates”.  It 
was  through  our  circular  of  October  2001  that  we  had  advised  the  banks  to  monitor  and 
review the unhedged portion of the foreign currency exposures of those corporates whose 
total foreign currency exposure was relatively large. These instructions have been reiterated 
over and over again subsequently. Despite all these instructions/reiterations, it is observed 
that unhedged forex exposure risks are not being evaluated rigorously and built into pricing 
of credit by banks. As you would appreciate, the unhedged forex exposure of corporates is a 
source of risk not only for the corporates’ balance sheet, but also for the financing bank and, 
ultimately, for the financial system. 
18. 
There  is  an  underlying  motivation  for  the  corporate  to  keep  their  exposures 
unhedged  as  hedging  has  a  cost.  But  banks  cannot  afford  to  be  complacent  against  such 
risky practices. They ought to have a risk limit for each of their exposure. We have already 
witnessed  instances  of  accounts  of  corporates  which  carried  large  unhedged  forex 
exposures on their books, turning non-performing. Theoretically, the foreign exchange rate 
can move to any level and, therefore, expose the corporate and consequently, the bank, to 
infinite  risk.  Therefore,  for  good  order,  it  is  necessary  that  the  banks,  on  the  basis  of  an 
internal Board-approved policy, stipulate limits on the unhedged position of corporates. For 
larger corporates which enjoy facilities from consortium of banks or under multiple banking 
arrangements, the onus would have to be on the consortium leader or the bank having the 
largest exposure to monitor the unhedged foreign currency exposure of the corporate. 
Shift to twin peaks regulatory architecture 
19. 
With  the  objective  of  focusing  specifically  on  the  market  conduct  and  customer 
protection issues, several jurisdictions across the globe are moving towards a “twin peaks” 
regulatory  architecture.  Conceptually,  twin  peaks  regulation  separates  the  Market  Conduct 
Regulation and Consumer Protection (i.e. how firms conduct their business, design and price 
their products and treat their customers); from Prudential Regulation, which is regulation of 
financial institutions through stipulation of liquidity and solvency parameters and regulation of 
the Payment system, with an underlying objective of ensuring financial stability. To tackle the 
challenges around customer protection and market conduct, we need to think rationally about 
what needs to change, what needs to be strengthened and what needs to be re-engineered. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Increasingly,  countries  are  moving  towards  twin  peaks  regulation  wherein  the  prudential 
regulation  and  the  market  conduct  regulation  authority  is  vested  in  different  institutions. 
Regulation and supervision on functional basis is being dispensed with. 
Twin peaks separation of remit and jurisdiction 
How  does  this  specialization  and  separation  of  functions  between  two 
20. 
independent supervisors work in praxis? Either there are two self sufficient apex bodies 
which address issues of Prudential Regulation and Consumer protection or varied regulatory 
agencies which address these separate functions and report to or fall within the ambit of two 
distinct  regulators.  Different  objectives  are  set  to  be  subserved  by  macro  prudential 
regulation  and  micro  prudential  consumer  protection.  As  I  mentioned  above,  the  goal  of 
Prudential Regulation is to secure financial stability and contain systemic risk through swift 
resolution of issues in systemically important financial institutions. 
21. 
The regulation of market conduct is, essentially, to secure consumer protection, for 
example,  in  the  sale  of  third  party  products,  remittances,  foreign  exchange  derivative 
transactions,  etc.  The  objective  is  to  build  and  beef  up  market  confidence,  to  protect 
customers,  make  available  financial  services  and  promote  access,  while  buffering  the 
financial system against financial crimes. The tools available include setting the bar high and 
specifying  service  standards,  which  we  trust  BCSBI  to  do.  Vetting  of  financial  products 
against these codes is also important. 
Global developments 
22. 
The twin peaks approach has been adopted by several jurisdictions over the years. 
Australia adopted this approach in 1997 with the Australian Prudential Regulatory Authority 
(APRA)  regulating  deposit  taking  institutions  with  a  mandate  of  ensuring  financial  stability 
and the Australian Securities & Investment Commission (ASIC) being the business conduct 
regulator,  responsible  for  market  integrity  and  consumer  protection.  Likewise,  in  the 
Netherlands,  the  central  bank  (DNB)  is  the  prudential  and  systemic  supervisor  of  financial 
services,  while  the  Netherlands  Authority  for  Financial  Markets  (AFM)  promotes  consumer 
protection through conduct of business oversight. 
23. 
In  the  UK,  the  Prudential  Regulatory  Authority  came  into  existence  on  1st  April 
2013,  with  a  mandate  for  prudential  regulation  of  financial  institutions  including  banks, 
investment  banks,  building  societies  and  insurance  companies.  The  integrated  regulatory 
structure  brought  in  by  the  UK  after  the  Barings  debacle  did  not  quite  measure  up  to 
expectations and has prompted a move to a twin peaks structure. Several other European 
nations including Belgium, France, Portugal, Italy etc. have also recognized the need for a 
twin peak regulatory architecture. In fact, both Australia and Netherlands were perceived to 
be relatively less affected by the Financial Crisis. 
24. 
But,  what  are  the  immediate  provocations for  various  jurisdictions to  consider  this 
change?  I  see  two  –  one,  the  boundary  between  sectors  has  become  blurred.  The 
liberalisation  and  globalisation  ushered  in  over  the  past two  decades  has  made  distinction 
between  sectors  absolutely  meaningless.  Today,  a  bank  branch  has  virtually  turned  into  a 
financial  supermarket  selling  all  types  of  financial  products  –  loans,  insurance  policies, 
mutual funds, gold, securities, etc. The interdependence between the mutual funds and the 
banking sector is a well acknowledged fact. This development has also found resonance in 
the way in which the financial market players have reorganised themselves. Almost all major 
banking  groups  have  insurance  and  securities  subsidiaries/  JVs.  The  other  non-bank  led 
groups  have  set  their  sights  on  getting  a  banking  license.  Thus,  the  integration  of  the 
financial market place is a reality that hits us in the face. 
25. 
The other reason that has exacerbated the clamour for a change in the regulatory 
architecture, especially in the wake of the Financial Crisis, is a lack of concern for the man on 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
the  street.  Prior  to  the  crisis,  consumer  protection  was  viewed  through  a  narrow  prism  of 
safety  and  soundness  of  the  financial  entities.  If  the  financial  institutions  could  remain 
solvent, consumer protection could be ensured. This only reflected a very constricted view of 
what constitutes consumer protection and how the financial market players should conduct 
themselves. 
26. 
The inability of the financial market players to behave in a responsible manner in the 
lead  up  to  the  crisis  was  highlighted  in  the  acerbic  “Occupy  Protests”  which  united  the 
common  man  across  continents.  The  protests  gave  vent  to  the  seething  anger  that  the 
people had against the unethical practices followed by the financial institutions, including an 
utter disregard for the silent majority. Not only have the financial market players become an 
object  of  despise;  the  regulators, Governments and  the  Central  Banks have  also  lost  their 
credibility in the eyes of the public. 
Desirability in Indian context 
27. 
Having  seen  the  twin  peaks  structure  and  a  heightened global  preference  for  this 
form,  let  us  focus  on  its  desirability  in  the  Indian  context.  Is  there  a  case  for  a  separate 
agency  for  consumer  protection?  Since  so  many  agencies  BCSBI,  BO,  Consumer  courts, 
Courts of law, SEBI, IRDA, PFRDA, RBI, MCA already exist, will a separate regulator dilute, 
duplicate or damage existing mechanism? Or will the creation of a separate market conduct 
regulator  facilitate  greater  customer  protection?  In  the  West,  the  financial  crisis  has 
demonstrably  proved  that  shadow  banks,  with  their  large  customer  base,  pose  a  huge 
systemic risk which only twin peaks regulation can effectively stem. We too have a plethora 
of financial products which fall between two stools. 
28. 
In  India,  in  order  to  ensure  financial  stability  and  closer  monitoring  of  financial 
conglomerates, recently, RBI, SEBI, IRDA and PFRDA have entered into an MOU enabling 
consolidated supervision and effective monitoring of financial conglomerates which presently 
exist. But, this MoU broadly has a financial stability objective. 
29. 
We need to have an open mind on the subject and look at it as an opportunity to 
bring  customer-centricity  to  our  regulation.  The  role  regulators  presently  have  in  product 
design and pricing is minimal. The advent of market conduct regulation would mean greater 
role  and  responsibility  of  the  regulator  in  design  and  pricing  issues.  This  sort  of  an 
intervention may force the banks to focus more on appropriateness of selling strategies and 
product development. The pricing freedom conferred on banks will continue to be in place 
but would be ring-fenced with a lot of responsibility towards the consumers. 
30. 
In the Indian context, we additionally have the twin challenges of financial inclusion 
and  financial  education.  The  need  of  the  hour  is  to  ensure  that  our  unbanked  population 
gains  access  to  formal  sources  of  finance,  their  reliance  on  informal  channels  and  on  the 
shadow banking system subsides, and, in the process, consumer exploitation is curbed. A 
glaring example is the recent case of a chit fund defrauding poor people of their hard earned 
savings. The fact that people have to rely on such entities for their saving needs indicates a 
failure on the part of the formal financial system to reach out to such groups and earn their 
trust and confidence through a transparent and responsive customer service regime. Hence, 
the financial sector architecture that we aspire for should be one that is most conducive to 
meeting the objectives of financial inclusion and financial literacy, besides meeting the goals 
of customer service. 
31. 
The  adoption  of  a  twin  peaks  approach  would  imply  that  the  larger  financial 
institutions would have to comply with the requirements set by two regulatory entities. This 
would result in rise in compliance costs for such institutions as they would have a broader 
framework of rules and regulations to comply with. The rise in business costs could increase 
the  cost  of  providing  financial  intermediation,  which  could,  potentially,  have  an  adverse 
impact on the financial inclusion objective. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Conclusion 
32. 
I  can  go  on  with  examples  that  highlight  the  need  for  consumer  protection  and 
adherence to codes and standards in the banking industry. The principle of fair treatment of 
customers is yet to be ingrained into the ethics and culture of financial institutions in India. 
Hence, our endeavour should be to try and develop a culture that enshrines these values, 
and  to  ensure  that  we  conduct  our  operations  in  a  transparent  and  non-discriminatory 
manner.  This  change,  in  order  to  be  successful,  needs  to  be  driven  by  the  Board/  Top 
management and should percolate down to the field level. Good and quality customer care is 
not a charity; it is a sound, long term investment in your brand. Let me add that the brand of 
a bank signifies the highest level of trust and would have the most instantaneous recall in the 
minds  of  its  customers.  I  have  always  believed  that  banks,  by  and  large,  sell  the  same 
products and services. So what would distinguish them from each other in the coming days is 
the quality of customer care and service. 
33. 
The  global  focus  on  regulation  of  the  financial  services  industry,  with  particular 
emphasis  on  consumer  protection,  continues  to  dominate  the  proceedings  at  various 
international fora such as the IMF, World Bank, OECD, G 20, Financial Stability Board, etc. It 
needs to be recognized that efficient market conduct and fair treatment to customers are not 
only in the best interests of the consumers and financial service providers, but are also an 
essential pre-requisite for financial stability. 
34. 
During my address at the last year’s conference, I had raised certain issues such as 
the need for a change in attitude towards customers right from the top management down, 
need  for  effectively  communicating  with  the  consumers,  need  for  being  proactive  while 
compensating  for  lapses,  lending  responsibly,  transparency  in  disclosure  of  incentives 
received  while  selling  insurance/  mutual  fund  products,  protection  of  customers  in  case  of 
electronic banking transactions, etc. I notice that a lot more still needs to be done in these 
areas  as  the  position  is  far  from  satisfactory.  I  hope  banks  and  the  PCCOs  refocus  their 
efforts on meeting regulatory and customer expectations in these areas. 
35. 
The BCSBI and all of you as PCCOs have a vital role to play in ensuring that banks 
rise  to  meet  the  above  challenges.  Pro-active  and  dynamic  PCCOs  can  make  a  real 
difference to the quality of customer service rendered by banks. You are the eyes and ears 
of BCSBI within the bank and, hence, can positively influence your respective organization’s 
approach  towards  adherence  to  codes  and  standards. We  count  on  all  of  you  assembled 
here today to act as change agents within your respective organizations and ensure that the 
principle of treating customer fairly becomes part of your organization’s DNA. 
36. 
Let me remind that in the wake of the global financial crisis, the public gaze is firmly 
fixed  on  the  conduct  of  financial  institutions.  In  case  banks  do  not  demonstrate  customer 
centricity in their operations, it would be fair to expect that the society would not only demand 
but force a change in the financial sector architecture involving a move towards a twin peaks 
approach  with  a  dedicated  market  conduct  regulator.  For  regulated  entities,  such  a  move 
would mean a huge spiral in regulatory obligations and resultantly, compliance costs. It is, 
therefore,  in  banks’  own  interest  to  convincingly  demonstrate,  through  effective  customer 
service and consumer protection initiatives, that the existing framework is adequate to meet 
the market conduct objectives envisaged under the twin peaks model. 
37. 
With the above aspirations in focus, I hope that today’s deliberations would be able 
to  generate  practical  ideas  on  how  the  institution  of  BCSBI  and  PCCOs  can  be  best 
leveraged to ensure that the customer service and conduct standards of banks soar high and 
meet the expectations of customers and the society at large. 
Ladies and gentlemen, I sincerely thank you for your patience. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
