Jwala Rambarran: Financial stability issues in Trinidad and Tobago 
Remarks by Mr Jwala Rambarran, Governor of the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago, at 
the presentation of the Financial Stability Report, Port of Spain, 14 January 2013. 
 Macroeconomic risks to financial stability 
Let me begin with a brief overview of macroeconomic risks to financial stability.  
The global recovery remained fragile throughout 2012. The economic recovery in the US lost 
momentum by mid-June 2012, while the Euro area slipped into recession in the third quarter. 
Growth prospects in a few large emerging market economies weakened and most Caribbean 
countries were affected by weaker global growth prospects and high public debt levels.  
Perhaps the most serious threat to global financial stability in 2012 came from the sovereign 
debt crisis in Europe, which renewed financial turbulence, weakened investor confidence and 
threatened to derail the fragile world recovery. On-going weaknesses in the balance sheets 
of some banks and governments in the euro area will continue to dominate global financial 
stability concerns in 2013.  
In the United States, fiscal uncertainty surrounding the “fiscal cliff” heightened over the past 
year, especially as 2012 came to a close. Although US lawmakers passed a bill by January 
1st 2013 to avert the automatic spending cuts and tax rises due to take place, the situation 
was not fully resolved. Instead, three mini fiscal cliffs have been created that would impact 
risks to global financial stability in 2013.  
Reflecting the sentiment in global financial markets, the US Volatility Index, more popularly 
known as the VIX peaked in June 2012, following the downgrade of several Spanish banks 
and  the  request  by  the Spanish  government for  bailout funding  to  recapitalize  the  banking 
system. Subsequently, the VIX trended downward following actions taken by the ECB and 
other central banks to calm markets. Market anxieties were also reflected in the roller coaster 
performance of global equity and bond markets in 2012.  
Financial stability issues in Trinidad and Tobago  
Ladies and Gentlemen, this brings me to my second point. While there is an immediate focus 
on  rekindling  economic growth  in  Trinidad  and Tobago,  the  Central  Bank  is mindful  of  the 
threats  that  a  turbulent  global  setting,  sluggish  domestic  economy  and  persistently  low 
domestic interest rates pose to the performance and profitability of local financial institutions.  
Banking system 
Notwithstanding these difficulties, banks which dominate the financial system in Trinidad and 
Tobago  remain  very  well  capitalized,  highly  liquid  and  profitable.  At  the end  of  September 
2012,  commercial  banks’  regulatory  capital  to  risk-weighted  assets  stood  at  just  over 
25 percent,  well  above  the  statutory  minimum  requirement  of  8  percent  and  among  the 
highest in the Latin American and Caribbean region.  
Credit quality improved in 2012, as banks took aggressive steps to restructure and write-off 
non-performing credit facilities,  especially  in  the  luxury  real  estate  sector. One  commercial 
bank  also  sold  a  significant  portion  of  a  large  non-performing  facility  to  its  merchant  bank 
subsidiary.  Some  banks  also  allocated  larger  provisions  to  absorb  potential  losses, 
particularly on identified impaired loans. As a result, banks’ non-performing loans declined to 
around 5.5 percent of gross loans in September 2012, from around 7.5 percent in September 
2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The low interest rate environment eroded commercial banks’ interest income, resulting in the 
banks continuing to lower deposit rates to counteract the impact on profitability. In addition, 
banks benefited from a significant increase in dividend income, which assisted in bolstering 
profitability. In 2012, commercial banks’ profitability ratios were, on average, slightly higher 
than  in  previous  years.  At  the  end  of  September  2012,  the  return  on  assets  increased  to 
2.5 percent from 2.3 percent in September 2011. The return on equity ratio rose to just over 
17.5 percent from around 17 percent over the same period.  
While the direct exposure of local banks to foreign markets is low in relation to their asset 
base,  continuing  economic  stress  in  a  few  countries  calls  for  on-going  monitoring  and 
vigilance.  Total  foreign  country  exposure  increased  to  nearly  one-third  of  foreign  currency 
assets at the end of September 2012, from just over 26 percent in September 2011.  
The largest foreign exposure of local banks was to the United States, most of which is in the 
form  of  US  treasury  bills.  The  second  largest  exposure  was  to  CARICOM,  especially 
Barbados.  Local  banks,  however,  have  very  little  direct  foreign  exposure  to  the  distressed 
Euro area.  
The most recent stress tests conducted by the Central Bank confirm that the banking system 
remains  resilient  to  significant  shocks,  supported  by  ample  capital  buffers,  conservative 
provisioning,  and  high  profitability.  System  vulnerability  to  large  shocks  to  interest  rates, 
exchange rates and even a deposit run appears limited. Nonetheless, some banks exhibited 
greater  vulnerability  than  others  to  specific  shocks,  warranting  the  need  to  pay  greater 
attention to their specific risk profiles.  
Non-bank financial institutions  
The  non-bank  sector,  which  comprises  finance  houses,  trust  and  mortgage  finance 
companies and merchant banks, has been affected more severely than commercial banks by 
the weaker economic environment. Non-bank financial institutions continued to experience a 
contraction in their balance sheets, with their assets falling to just under 4 percent of the total 
assets of the financial system in June 2012 compared with a share of 12 percent in 2008.  
Credit  quality  in  the  non-bank  sector  deteriorated  in  2012,  as  a  few  institutions  which 
extended  loans  to  the  luxury  real  estate,  hospitality  and  tourism  sectors  were  negatively 
affected by the continued fallout from the global macroeconomic environment. The sale of a 
significant  portion  of  a  commercial  bank’s  non-performing  loan  facility  to  its  non-bank 
subsidiary also contributed to the worsening of credit quality. At the end of September 2012, 
the ratio of non-performing loans increased to around 7.5 percent of total loans, from a little 
over 4 percent a year earlier.  
Low interest rates and subdued capital market activity dampened profitability of non-banks. 
In the nine months to September 2012, non-banks saw a downturn in profitability, due to a 
plunge in interest income and a substantial fall in fee income. The return on assets fell to just 
over 7 percent by September 2012 from 8 percent in 2011, while the return on equity ratio 
declined to 18 percent from 22 percent over the same period.  
Despite  these  challenges,  non-banks  appeared  to  be  sufficiently  capitalized  to  deal  with 
financial strains. At the end of September 2012, non-banks’ capital adequacy ratio stood at 
almost 39 percent, well  above the statutory limit of 8 percent, and providing some level of 
financial stability to the sector. 
Life insurance companies  
The  insurance  sector  as  a  whole  remained  relatively  stable  in  2012  despite  the  sluggish 
economic environment which impacted the growth of new and renewal business and despite 
low  interest  rates  which  affected  asset  performance  and  profitability.  Nonetheless,  several 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
non-life companies, particularly those dealing with motor insurance, continued to face issues 
related to inadequate claims provisioning.  
Gross  premium  income  for  life  insurance  companies  was  driven  mainly  by  growth  in  non-
traditional life business, especially wealth management products. At the end of June 2012, 
wealth  management  products  accounted  for  over  53  percent  of  total  insurance  contracts, 
while the share of ordinary life business fell to almost 35 percent of total insurance contracts.  
Capital  adequacy  indicators  for  the  life  insurance  sector  have  been  trending  downwards 
since 2008, as the industry builds its actuarial reserves to meet the new capital rules in the 
proposed  Insurance  Bill.  The  ratio  of  capital  to  technical  reserves  for  life  insurance 
companies  stood  at  28.5  percent  at  the  end  of June  2012,  down  from 37  percent  in  June 
2008,  and  well  above  the  international  benchmark,  which  usually  ranges  between  
7–10 percent.  
Asset quality has been steadily improving as life insurers reduce their exposures to related 
parties  and  as  they  boost  the  share  of  low-risk  government  securities  in  their  investment 
portfolios.  Asset  quality  (measured  as  the  ratio  of  real  estate  plus  unquoted  equities  plus 
accounts  receivables  to  total  assets)  stood  at  nearly  11  percent  at  the  end  of  June  2012, 
compared with almost 15 percent a year earlier.  
Limited  re-investment  opportunities,  persistent  low  interest  rates  and  the  rise  in  operating 
expenses  have  all  combined  to  negatively  affect  the  earnings  and  profitability  of  the  life 
insurance industry. Hence, the return on investment fell to around 5.5 percent in June 2012 
from over 6 percent in the previous year, and the return on equity slowed to 12 percent from 
almost 14.5 percent over the same period.  
At the end of June 2012, the Statutory Fund for the consolidated life insurance sector was in 
surplus. However, two life insurance companies were non-compliant with the statutory fund 
requirements and reported deficits. The Central Bank is working with these two life insurance 
companies to correct the deficiencies in their Statutory Funds.  
Non-life insurance companies  
In  the  non-life  insurance  segment,  growth  in  gross  premium  income  was  driven  mainly  by 
property business in 2012, as motor business remained tepid. Non-life insurers continued to 
retain  less  risk  for  property  business  by  ceding  a  larger  share  to  international  reinsurers. 
Consequently, the retention ratio declined to around 42 percent as at June 2012, compared 
with about 45 percent in June 2011 and over 52 percent in June 2008.  
While the asset quality of non-life insurers improved in 2012, concerns remain in relation to 
debtors,  prompting the Central  Bank  to recommend  that  companies  strengthen their  credit 
collection mechanisms.  
The net technical reserves ratio (which is a measure of net technical reserves held relative to 
net claims paid out) increased significantly in 2012 due to regulatory action by the Central 
Bank requiring companies to strengthen their claims reserves for motor vehicle business. 
Despite the low interest rate climate, the ratio of investment income to net income increased 
for the non-life industry in 2012. This was due to an increase in income from trade financing 
activities at one institution. As a result, the return on equity and return on assets ratios both 
displayed increasing trends.  
At the end of June 2012, the non-life industry reported a net surplus in the Statutory Fund in 
respect of motor insurance business. However, three non-life companies were non-compliant 
with the statutory fund requirements and reported deficits. The Central Bank is also working 
with these three companies to correct the deficiencies in their Statutory Funds.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Private pension plan industry  
The  private  pension  fund  industry  in  Trinidad  and  Tobago  largely  comprises  occupational 
plans  administered  by  insurance  companies  and  annuity-type  products  sold  by  insurance 
companies,  banks  and  trust  companies.  Three  corporate  trustees  administer  assets  that 
represent 90 percent of the total assets owned by pension funds. Based on the information 
submitted  by  these  trustees,  pension  plans  continued  to  face  challenges  posed  by  limited 
new opportunities and the prevailing low interest rate environment.  
As  a  result,  many  pension  plans  have  been  forced  to  hold  large  amounts  of  cash  in  their 
investment  portfolios.  At  the  end  of  June  2012,  pension  plans  held  over  $5.2  billion  or 
16 percent  of  their  funds  under  management  in  cash  and  near  cash  instruments. 
Nevertheless, private pension plan assets rose to $32.5 billion, a  year-on-year increase of 
nearly  8  percent  to  June  2012,  and  represented  nearly  13.5  percent  of  total  assets  of the 
financial system.  
According  to  the  valuation  reports  prepared  by  actuaries,  the  number  of  private  pension 
plans in surplus declined from 97, for the triennial period 2006 to 2008, to 83 for the triennial 
period  2009  to  2011.  In  addition,  the  number  of  private  pension  plans  in  deficit  increased 
from 16 in the triennial period covering 2006 to 2008 to 30 plans in the more recent period 
from  2009  to  2011.  The  average  funded  ratio  (assets/liabilities)  of  all  plans  remaining  in 
surplus  fell  to  158  percent  in  the  period  2009  to  2011  from  177  percent  in  the  previous 
triennial period 2006 to 2008.  
More private pension plans recorded deficits mainly on account of the lowering of the interest 
rate  assumption  used  by  actuaries  to  determine  pension  plan  earnings  on  long  term 
investments.  In  2012,  actuaries  assumed  long  term  interest  rates  would  average  around 
5.5 percent,  down  from  an  average  of  7.2  percent  in  2005.  Higher  than  initially  projected, 
salary increases have also contributed to the decline in pension plan surpluses.  
Legislative reform and the Central Bank  
I now turn to my third point – the work of the Central Bank in strengthening the regulatory 
and  supervisory  architecture  of  the  financial  system,  while  preparing  the  groundwork  for 
much needed legislative changes.  
The Bank participated in several meetings with the Legislative Review Committee of Cabinet 
to finalize policy positions relating to the Insurance Bill based on consultations with ATTIC. 
The Insurance Bill is expected to be laid in Parliament in the first quarter of 2013. 
The  Bank  also  collaborated  with  the  TTSEC  to  review  the  draft  Securities  Insurance  Bill, 
which was laid in Parliament in November 2012 and passed in both the House and Senate. 
The Securities Act (2012) became law at the end of 2012.  
Regarding  credit  unions,  the  Central  Bank  is  considering  comments  received  from  the 
industry  on  the  draft  Credit  Union  Bill  and  is  finalizing  a  response  to  the  industry.  This 
legislation is expected to be taken to Parliament by the middle of 2013.  
In November 2012, the Central Bank issued the third and final version of the Policy Proposal 
Document  relating  to  the  new  Occupational  Pension  Plan  Bill.  The  main  objectives  of  the 
new  pension  legislation  are  to  protect  members  and  beneficiaries  from  undue  loss  and  to 
promote good governance and proper administration of private pension plans.  
Finally, the Central Bank is preparing the financial system to comply with the requirements of 
the  Foreign  Account  Tax  Compliance  Act  (FATCA).  FATCA  requires  financial  institutions 
around  the  world  to  enter  into  an  agreement  with  the  US  Internal  Revenue  Service  to 
disclose information pertaining to accounts owned by US citizens, green card holders living 
in the US or abroad, or non-US entities in which US taxpayers hold a substantial ownership 
interest.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Conclusion  
In summary, the volatile global environment, sluggish domestic economy and persistently low 
domestic  interest  rates  all  pose  risks  to  the  performance  and  profitability  of  local  financial 
institutions, but the impact varies across the financial system.  
• 
Banks  remain  very  well  capitalized,  highly  liquid,  profitable,  and  resilient  to 
significant shocks.  
Non-banks continued to experience a contraction in their balance sheets, although 
they appeared to be sufficiently capitalized to deal with financial strains.  
Life insurance companies remained relatively stable even low interest rates affected 
asset performance and profitability.  
Several  non-life  companies,  particularly  those  dealing  with  motor  insurance, 
continued to face issues related to inadequate claims provisioning.  
Private pension plans’ funding surpluses are declining partly due to persistently low 
interest rates.  
    In  closing,  I  give  you  the  assurance  that  the  Central  Bank  is  prepared  to  take  early  and 
decisive  corrective  actions  to  prevent  a  build-up  of  unmitigated  risks  in  individual  financial 
institutions, or in the financial system as a whole.  
I thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
