Peter Praet: Transition of the financial system  in the wake of the 
financial crisis 
Speech by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at 
the 8th Annual European Market Liquidity Conference of the Association of Financial Markets 
in Europe, London, 13 February 2013. 
 Introduction 
It is a pleasure for me to give this keynote address on the occasion of AFME’s 8th Annual 
European  Market  Liquidity  Conference.  The  ECB  has  a  vested  interest  in  the  efficient 
functioning of financial markets and, in particular, in their liquidity. In this context, I will also 
address the important topic of trade transparency, including AFME’s work regarding the post-
trade  transparency  calibration  under  the  Markets  in  Financial  Instruments  Directive II 
(MiFID II). 
Restructuring funding and markets: central bank and market initiatives 
The ongoing transition of the financial system in the wake of the financial crisis is driven by 
market initiatives, regulators and central banks. Before addressing financial regulation, let me 
start  with  some  thoughts  regarding  the  contributions  of  the  central  bank  and  respective 
market participants. 
As we know, bank funding channels have changed significantly during the crisis. Several of 
the  measures  implemented  by  the  ECB,  notably  the  three-year  longer-term  refinancing 
operations  (LTROs)  and  the  adjustments  in  our  collateral  policy,  have  been  effective  in 
alleviating  bank  funding  constraints  and  containing  the  risks  of  a  disorderly  bank 
deleveraging  process.  Further,  non-standard  measures  –  most  recently,  the  Outright 
Monetary  Transactions  (OMTs)  –  have  significantly  contributed  to  an  improved  euro  area 
financing environment, mainly stemming from an improvement in financial market sentiment 
and  an  alleviation  of  vulnerabilities  affecting  the  supply  of  bank  credit  to  firms  and 
households. In addition, the OMTs announcement has helped to narrow sovereign spreads 
and to restore investor confidence. 
However,  the  ECB’s  (non-standard)  measures  can  only  be  temporary  solutions.  Most 
importantly, market participants have to continue their efforts to facilitate the transition to a 
less  central-bank  reliant,  more  market-based  financial  system,  for  which  the  ECB’s 
measures,  as  well  as  the  recent  progress  concerning  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism, 
have hopefully laid the foundations. 
One market segment that suffered considerably during the financial crisis was the market for 
asset-backed securities (ABSs), the revival of which I consider essential for the provision of 
finance  to  the  corporate  sector.  Given  the  restricted  funding  sources  and  elevated  bank 
funding  needs,  a  trend  towards  more  disintermediation  from  larger  corporate  issuers  has 
been observed in recent years, and this trend will most likely continue. 
By  contrast,  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises  (SMEs)  are  more  dependent  on  their 
respective domestic banking sectors and are subject to tighter credit conditions than larger 
firms  that  have  greater  access  to  global  financial  markets.  The  question  arises  as  to  how 
these restrictions could be overcome. A reopening of the ABS market may be one  way of 
enhancing funding conditions for SMEs. 
It will therefore be essential to better understand the factors that still constrain the recovery in 
this market and why investors are shying away, despite proven good performance and very 
few  defaults  on  European  ABSs.  The  regulatory  treatment  of  ABSs,  in  particular  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
proposed regulatory capital charges for banks and insurers, could be a factor, as could a lack 
of secondary market liquidity and the relative opacity of the loans packaged in an ABS. 
In this respect, let me also mention the Eurosystem’s ABS loan-level initiative. In November 
2012  the  ECB  informed  the  public  about  the  implementation  of  loan-level  data  reporting 
requirements for asset-backed securities as part of the Eurosystem’s collateral framework.1 
The ABS loan-level initiative makes use of the European DataWarehouse, the single loan-
level data repository for the handling of loan-level data reporting, which became operational 
on  3  January  2013.  As  a  consequence, for  residential  mortgage-backed  securities  and for 
asset-backed  securities  whose  cash-flow-generating  assets  comprise  loans  to  SMEs,  the 
reporting  requirements  became  mandatory  as  of  3  January  2013.  Commercial  mortgage-
backed  securities  must  comply  as  of  1  March  2013,  and  other  asset  classes  (auto  loans, 
consumer finance loans, leasing receivables) as of 1 January 2014. 
While  the  ECB  launched  this  initiative  in  the  context  of  its  collateral  framework,  a  positive 
externality  is  that  the  initiative  should  also  support  the  revival  of  this  market  segment  by 
increasing its transparency and therefore investor confidence. 
The  ECB  also  helps  to  accompany  the  fundamental  change  in  the  financial  sector  by 
changing the market structure and infrastructure, e.g. by actively supporting the Legal Entity 
Identifier  (LEI)  initiative  as  well  as  enforcing  financial  integration  via  the  Eurosystem’s 
TARGET2-Securities  (T2S)  project,  which  will  make  cross-border  settlement  identical  to 
domestic  settlement  and  hence  the  whole  European  securities  market  will  become  more 
attractive and cost effective. 
Financial regulation and transparency 
I  will  now  expand  on  this  morning’s  discussion  on  “Making  markets  work:  liquidity  and 
regulation”. Apart from central bank and market initiatives, a number of measures in the field 
of financial regulation, which are intended to prevent another crisis on the scale of the one 
we  have  just  witnessed,  have  been  decided  upon  or  initiated  by  various  authorities.  Such 
measures contribute to structural changes in the institutional set-up of financial markets and 
are expected to restore market confidence and, ultimately, to support growth. 
Yet the intended positive effects of regulatory measures have to be carefully weighed against 
their  costs  and  unintended  side  effects.  Market  participants  point  out  that  the  regulatory 
measures must be consistent with one another. The speed of regulatory innovation should 
not  mean  that  too  little  consideration  is  given  to  the  impact  one  measure  will  have  when 
taken  in  conjunction  with  others.  Also,  consistency  on  the  international  level  has  to  be 
ensured. 
Very importantly, financial regulations should be designed and implemented carefully in order 
to  avoid  potentially  adverse  effects  on  market  liquidity  and  price  formation.  For  the  ECB, 
efficient,  resilient  and  liquid  financial  markets  are  a  key  prerequisite  for  the  smooth 
implementation  and  transmission  of  monetary  policy.  The  ECB  therefore  strives  to  ensure 
that  regulatory  reform  initiatives  do  not  impose  restrictions  which  may  hinder  the  efficient 
functioning of markets or impair their liquidity. 
Formally,  the  Treaty  on  the  Functioning  of  the  European  Union  assigns  to  the  ECB  an 
advisory  role  as  regards  proposed  EU  acts2,  i.e.  the  ECB  is  consulted  on  proposed  EU 
directives  (general  framework  legislation).  Furthermore,  delegated  and  implementing  acts 
                                                
1   Press  release:  ECB  announces  rescheduling  of  loan-level  data  reporting  requirements  for  asset-backed 
securities, 27 November 2012. 
2   See Articles 127(4) and 282(5) of the Treaty. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
qualify as proposed EU acts, and therefore the scope of the ECB’s consultation also extends 
to such acts as well as to draft technical standards.3 
In addition, we continually exchange views with market participants, for example via our ECB 
market contact groups.4 The regulatory debate has become a standard agenda item in those 
meetings. 
A  number  of  regulatory  measures target financial  markets.  Let  me focus  in  the  rest  of  my 
speech on a very important regulatory initiative and on a concrete example: the review of the 
MiFID  II  and,  specifically,  the  proposed  price  transparency  requirements.  The  ECB  also 
provided an opinion on the MiFID II proposal.5 
As you know, the MiFID II proposal extends pre- and post-trade transparency requirements 
from  equity  instruments  (MiFID  I)  to  additional  asset  classes  such  as  bonds,  structured 
finance  products,  derivatives  admitted  to  trading  or  traded  on  a  regulated  market,  a 
multilateral trading facility or an organised trading facility and derivatives considered eligible 
for  central  clearing.  The  aim  is  to  enhance  price  formation  and  to  support  the  evaluation 
process of such instruments. 
The  requirements  cover  pre-trade  transparency  –  i.e.  the  provision  of  quotes  and  market 
depth to market participants ahead of a trade – and post-trade transparency – i.e. the timely 
publication of the prices and volumes upon trade execution. These mandatory transparency 
requirements represent a major change, especially for the fixed income market. For brevity, I 
will only address the issue of post-trade transparency. 
As we have known since the publication of the seminal work of the Austrian economist and 
philosopher Friedrich Hayek, prices reveal information that is dispersed among the numerous 
individual  members  of  an  economy.  As  a  consequence,  market  outcomes  are  directly 
influenced by the time and degree to which prices and volumes are disclosed to the public. 
In  reality,  different  markets  are  subject  to  different  transparency  regimes  and  disclosure 
requirements, which are a consequence of the existing heterogeneity among both financial 
assets and market participants. While this implies that a one-size-fits-all level of transparency 
is unlikely to exist, a number of economic forces are omnipresent and therefore allow us to 
draw some conclusions from the academic literature on post-trade transparency. 
In those market segments that the MiFID II review aims to address, liquidity providers play a 
central role as they intermediate between end investors and thereby help to secure a well-
functioning  marketplace.  Yet  an  efficient  and  resilient  market  requires  a  sufficient  level  of 
competition. Several studies6 show that a lack of transparency can be a serious threat to a 
level playing field because intermediaries may use their private knowledge of customer order 
flow  as  an  informational  advantage  that  allows  them  to  exert  market  power.  Therefore, 
                                                
3   See opinion of the ECB of 25 January 2012 on a proposal for a Directive on the access to the activity of credit 
institutions  and  the  prudential  supervision  of  credit  institutions  and  investment  firms  and  a  proposal  for  a 
Regulation on prudential requirements for credit institutions and investment firms (CON/2012/5). 
In particular the Money Market Contact Group, the newly established Bond Market Contact Group, the Foreign 
Exchange  Contact  Group  and  the  Operations  Managers  Contact  Group  (see  the  ECB  website  for  more 
information on these groups). 
4  
5   See  ECB  Opinion  of  22  March  2012  on  (i)  a  proposal  for  a  directive  on  markets  in  financial  instruments 
repealing Directive 2004/39/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council, (ii) a proposal for a regulation 
on  markets  in  financial  instruments  and  amending  Regulation  [EMIR]  on  OTC  derivatives,  central 
counterparties and trade repositories, (iii) a proposal for a directive on criminal sanctions for insider dealing 
and  market  manipulation  and  (iv)  a  proposal  for  a  regulation  on  insider  dealing  and  market  manipulation 
(market abuse) (CON/2012/21). 
6   See e.g. Madhavan, A., “Consolidation, fragmentation, and the disclosure of trading information”, The Review 
of Financial Studies, Vol. 8, No 3, pp. 579-603 and Bloomfield, R. and O’Hara, M., “Can transparent markets 
survive?”, Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 55, No 3, pp. 425–459. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
opacity  enables  the  extraction  of  rents  and  can  lead  to  increased  price  dispersion7,  with 
negative consequences for market integrity and fairness. Furthermore, a low  level of post-
trade transparency can significantly distort the informational role of prices by preventing the 
diffusion  of  value-relevant  information,  which  may  hamper  market  liquidity  because  of 
adverse selection. 
In  line  with  this  rather  positive  view  of  post-trade  transparency,  a  number  of  empirical 
studies8  have  found  that  the  introduction  of  mandatory  trade  reporting  has  significantly 
improved formerly opaque market segments, such as the market for US corporate bonds. 
At  the  same  time,  one  must  be  aware  of  potentially  negative  side  effects.  For  example, 
liquidity  providers  may  be  reluctant  to  take  on  a  large  inventory  position  because  they  will 
find themselves in an unfavourable bargaining position if this information is known to others. 
They  may  ask  for  an  additional  premium  in  order  to  take  on  such  a  risk,  which  can  raise 
transaction  costs  for  investors.9  Similarly,  very  large  market  participants,  such  as  pension 
funds,  may  find  it  more  difficult  to  execute  large  transactions  without  being  front-run  by 
predatory traders. In very transparent markets such as those for equities, this has become a 
substantial concern. 
With  these  issues  in  mind,  it  is  imperative  that  the  new  regulatory  environment  carefully 
considers  all  possible  implications  of  increased  market  transparency.  In  particular,  it  is 
important  that  the  new  set  of  rules  is  calibrated  in  a  way  that  avoids  excessive  market 
liquidity distortions, in particular in those market segments whose functionality is still partially 
impaired  as  a  consequence  of the  market  disruptions  that  we  have  witnessed  over  recent 
years. 
With this in mind, the ECB explicitly welcomes private sector initiatives such as the AFME 
framework for post trade transparency, which I believe is a constructive proposal because it 
aims to fine-tune the reporting requirements across different liquidity categories, something 
that is certainly a sensible approach given the economic trade-off I have just outlined. 
Concluding remarks 
So, I will now conclude my keynote address, and I look forward to participating in what I am 
sure will be an interesting panel discussion. 
                                                
7   De  Frutos,  M-A.  and  Manzano,  C.,  “Trade  disclosure  and  price  dispersion”,  Journal  of  Financial  Markets, 
Vol. 8, No 2. pp. 183–216. 
8   See  Goldstein,  M.,  Hotchkiss,  E.  and  Sirri,  E.,  “Transparency  and  Liquidity:  A  Controlled  Experiment  on 
Corporate Bonds”, The Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 20, No 2, pp. 235-273, and Edwards A., Harris, L. 
and  Piwowar,  M.,  “Corporate  Bond  Market  Transaction  Costs  and  Transparency”,  The  Journal  of  Finance, 
Vol. 62, No 3, pp. 1421–1451. 
9   See Naik, N., Neuberger, A. and Viswanathan, S., “Trade Disclosure Regulation in Markets with Negotiated 
Trades”, The Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 12, No 4, pp. 873–900. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
