Sayuri Shirai: Monetary policy and forward guidance in Japan 
Speech  by  Ms  Sayuri  Shirai,  Member  of  the  Policy  Board  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the 
International  Monetary  Fund,  Washington  DC,  19  September  2013,  and  at  the  Board  of 
Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington DC, 20 September 2013. 
 Introduction 
I. 
It is a great honor to have this opportunity to address you today on Japan’s economy and its 
monetary  policy.  Since  April  2013,  when  the  Bank  of  Japan  introduced  quantitative  and 
qualitative monetary easing (QQE) that further strengthened existing monetary easing, nearly 
six  months  have  passed.  In  these  six  months,  a  number  of  positive  outcomes  have 
materialized:  these  also  reflect  stimulus  measures  taken  by  the  Japanese  government. 
Compared with last year, stock prices have been higher; more active transactions are taking 
place  in  the  financial  and  real  estate  sectors;  the  yen’s  exchange  rate  has  been  at  more 
depreciated levels; and funding costs for firms and households in the loan and bond markets 
remain very accommodative. 
Most  importantly,  the  growth  momentum  of  Japan’s  economy  is  gaining  traction  –  this  is 
evidenced by the positive economic growth rates seen in the last three consecutive quarters 
(with an annualized real GDP growth rate of 3.8 percent in the second quarter of 2013). The 
unemployment  rate  dropped  to  3.8  percent  in  July  2013,  approaching  the  lowest  level  in 
recent years of 3.6 percent recorded in July 2007, before the financial crisis. There are some 
signs  of  the  economy  moving  out  of  deflation  with  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the 
consumer price index (CPI) for all items less fresh food, or the core CPI, turning positive at 
0.4 percent in June and 0.7 percent in July. 
Given the amount of global media attention being paid to QQE, it appears that its content is 
becoming  increasingly  familiar  to  many  experts  and  market  participants.  For  this  reason,  I 
would rather talk today about QQE from a somewhat different perspective, namely from the 
standpoint  of  “forward  guidance”  –  a  topic  that  has  been  hotly  debated  globally  in  recent 
years. In general, forward guidance refers to communication strategy undertaken by a central 
bank to provide information to the markets and the public (households and firms) on its future 
monetary  policy  stance.  Forward  guidance  is  currently  used  by  some  central  banks  in 
advanced  economies  facing  the  zero  lower  bound  on  short-term  interest  rates  (hereafter 
called the zero lower bound) as an accommodative monetary policy. 
I will begin my speech by explaining why forward guidance is important for Japan in Section 
II.  Section  III  will  focus  on  general  issues  related  to  forward  guidance.  I  will  then  give  my 
viewpoint on the current practice of monetary policy as adopted by the Bank, compare it with 
previous  monetary  policy  practices,  and  highlight  some  of  the  ways  the  practice  differs  in 
Japan compared with other economies. Section IV will review QQE progress to date through 
an  overview  of  current  price  performance  and  its  outlook,  followed  by  an  overview  of 
economic activity. 
Why is forward guidance so important for Japan? 
II. 
I want to first address the question of why forward guidance is so important for Japan. As you 
know,  the  Bank  is  attempting  to  overcome  the  mild  deflation  that  has  lasted  in  Japan  for 
nearly  15  years  since  1998  and  to  achieve  the  2  percent  price  stability  target  adopted  in 
January  2013.  The  rate  of  price  changes  since  1998  is  averaged  at  minus  0.3  percent. 
Before proceeding with my speech, let me pause here for a moment. I would like to bring up 
a  question  that  I  often  encounter  abroad.  That  is  What  is  the  problem  with  having  mild 
deflation in Japan when the unemployment rate has remained so low even throughout the 
global financial crisis? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Long-standing mild deflation  
It is a legitimate question. It is true that Japan’s unemployment rate has been much lower 
than that of other economies: the highest level it reached so far during the global financial 
crisis was only 5.5 percent in July 2009. Certainly, deflation is persistent, but it is mild and 
has avoided a deflationary spiral. On the surface, therefore, it may be difficult to comprehend 
Japan’s fundamental problems. 
My  response  is  normally  provided  as  follows.  Mild  deflation  has  been  exerting  adverse 
effects on Japan’s economy because it reflects a long-standing negative output gap (chronic 
demand shortage), low expectations of future economic and market growth by firms, as well 
as sluggish expectations of future income growth by households (Chart 1). Deflation is also 
closely associated with the long-term yen appreciation trend that adds to the pessimism of 
firms already struggling to maintain price competitiveness. These phenomena – together with 
a decline in total population, the rapid pace of aging of the population, and the slow pace of 
structural  reforms  –  have  discouraged  firms  from  actively  engaging  in  business  fixed 
investment and innovative activities, have led to households saving more because of growing 
concerns about the future, and have prompted financial institutions to undertake risk-averse 
investment strategies. 
In this environment, households take the lower prices of goods and services for granted as 
they  develop  a  deflation-oriented  mindset  and  thus  believe  that  prices will  not  increase.  In 
addition, firms follow a deflation-oriented pricing behavior and hence use the sales prices of 
their  rivals  and  the  purchasing  behavior  of  customers  to  set  their  prices,  even  when  the 
supply-demand  balance  improves.  Moreover,  financial  institutions  become  increasingly 
accustomed to deflation-oriented investment strategies, and shift their investments from risk 
assets  (such  as  stocks,  corporate  bonds,  mutual  funds,  loans,  real  estate,  and  foreign 
securities)  to  safer  assets  (such  as  Japanese  government  bonds  [JGBs],  deposits,  and 
cash). 
Why was the 2 percent target adopted? 
As I mentioned earlier, in January of this year the Bank established a target of 2 percent to 
achieve  price  stability.  I  would  like  to  explain  here  why  this  course  was  decided  on.  In 
essence, Japan’s economy had been quite depressed and gradually eroding for some time. 
Given this background the reason for setting the 2 percent target, in my view, is the belief 
that deflation is more harmful to an economy than inflation, and that it is important to achieve 
a comparable level of (mild) inflation to that of major advanced economies.1 The Bank’s aim 
of achieving the 2 percent price stability target is particularly challenging. It implies that the 
medium- to long-term inflation expectations of both the markets and the public need to be 
increased and anchored at around the 2 percent level. No other major economies have ever 
had to face such an undertaking. In more formal economic terms, the important point is that 
by  raising  inflation  expectations  toward  2  percent,  the  Phillips  curve  shifts  upward  and  its 
slope  steepens,  thereby  enhancing  the  responsiveness  of  price  changes  to  the  supply-
demand balance (Chart 2). 
Forward guidance used for anchoring inflation expectations 
I stress that “forward guidance” is essential to anchor inflation expectations, particularly in the 
case  of  Japan,  with  its  requirement  to  firmly  establish  2  percent  medium-  to  long-term 
inflation expectations in the minds of the markets and the public. We should note here that 
the  Bank  needs  to  undertake  an  accommodative  monetary  policy  with  two  main  aims: 
(1) achieving economic recovery, and (2) anchoring inflation expectations at the target level. 
                                                
1  See Sayuri Shirai, “Japan’s Economic Activity, Prices, and Monetary Policy: Monetary Policy in the Past and 
Present,” Speech at a Meeting with Business Leaders in Asahikawa, Bank of Japan, 2013. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Contrast this with the situation of other economies’ central banks. Their inflation expectations 
are  already  well-anchored  at  the  target  level  of  inflation,  and  thus,  their  primary  aim  is 
achieving  economic  recovery  (see  Section  III).  In  Japan,  the  second  aim  of  anchoring 
inflation expectations requires the Bank to first help transform the deflation-oriented behavior 
of all entities and then to steadily raise their inflation expectations. In this context, the Bank’s 
task can be considered more challenging than in other economies, and its forward guidance 
operates under different circumstances. It needs to particularly target price movements and 
have a stronger commitment regarding monetary easing policies. 
General issues on forward guidance and its implementation in Japan 
III. 
Forward guidance is now a popular topic among the central banks of advanced economies; 
however, it has been practiced in Japan for some time. Indeed, the Bank was the pioneer in 
using forward guidance as an accommodative  monetary policy tool in the face of the zero 
lower bound, initiating the practice as early as 1999 when the zero interest rate policy was 
adopted (Chart 3). Since then, the Bank has come up with various forms of forward guidance 
at  each  monetary  easing  period,  as  I  will  later  discuss.  Moreover,  since  the  onset  of  the 
global financial crisis, forward guidance has attracted global attention mainly as a result of its 
active  use  by  the  Federal  Reserve  under  the  zero  lower  bound.  It  has  also  recently  been 
implemented as a tool by the European Central Bank (ECB) and the Bank of England (BOE), 
which is discussed in the Appendix to my speech. 
General issues relating to forward guidance 
A. 
The  term  “forward  guidance”  is  now  frequently  used  by  a  number  of  central  banks  and 
experts but it appears to have different meanings under different contexts. For clarity here, I 
assume that forward guidance simply refers to the provision of information by a central bank 
about future monetary policy to the markets and the public, regardless of whether or not the 
central bank calls it forward guidance. For example, the Bank does not officially use the term 
“forward guidance” to describe its communication strategy, but it could be regarded as such. 
Essentially, forward guidance is aimed at enhancing the effectiveness of monetary policy. It 
can be classified into two types depending on the objective. The first objective is to clarify a 
normal  monetary  policy  reaction  function  (or  the  conduct  of  normal  monetary  policy) 
envisaged by a central bank. By contrast, the second objective commits to the continuation 
of  a  more  accommodative  policy  under  the  zero  lower  bound  than  would  otherwise  have 
been  anticipated  with  the  normal  policy  reaction  function.  I  will  further  explain  these 
objectives shortly, but one difference between them is that the impacts on financial markets  
–  such  as  generating  downward  pressure  on  long-term  interest  rates  (and  raising  asset 
prices) – are not necessarily intentional and present in the case of the first objective, but are 
always  deliberately  pursued  as  a  result  of  the  unconventional  monetary  policy  tool  in  the 
case of the second objective. While forward guidance has attracted recent attention for the 
role it takes in formulating exit strategies from monetary accommodation, as is the case in 
the United States, my speech today focuses instead on its role in introducing and maintaining 
a monetary stimulus. 
Forward guidance to clarify a normal monetary policy stance 
Forward guidance with the first objective may be regarded as communication strategy by a 
central bank to inform the markets and the public about the normal policy reaction function of 
the  monetary  policy  (such  as  the  Taylor  rule).  This  can  be  classified  as  “Delphic  forward 
guidance” according to Campbell et al. (2012).2 Forward guidance in this instance can take 
the form of (1) indirect signals about a future monetary policy stance (for example, about a 
                                                
2   Jeffrey R. Campbell, Charles L. Evans, Jonas D. M. Fisher, and Alejandro Justiniano, “Macroeconomic Effects 
of Federal Reserve Forward Guidance,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring 2012: 1–54. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
future policy interest rate path) through publishing comments and projections on the outlook 
for  prices  and  economic  activity  with  risk  balance  assessments,  or  it  can  take  the  form  of 
(2) direct  signals  through  releasing  the  future  policy  interest  rate  numerical  projections.  In 
any  case,  the  future  policy  stance  of  a  central  bank  is  a  forecast  based  on  the  currently 
available  information  and  the  normal  reaction  function.  This  forecast  is  updated  as  new 
information becomes available. The important point here is that the central bank makes no 
commitment on its future monetary policy. 
Generally, this type of guidance is used to enhance transparency and predictability for the 
markets  and  the  public,  so  it  does  not  necessarily  affect  financial  markets.  Nonetheless, 
there  are  some  cases  where  this  guidance  may  favorably  influence  financial  markets.  An 
example of this would be a case where forward guidance results in a clearer understanding 
by the markets and the public of a central bank’s policy reaction function. They thus adjust 
their expectations accordingly, even if the central bank’s monetary policy stance is constant. 
There may also be cases where their better understanding contributes to lowering the degree 
of uncertainty, and may result in, for example, reducing the volatility of the bond market and 
term  premiums.  Finally,  there may  be  instances where  the  markets  and the  public  believe 
that a central bank has superior information that can be used for assessing future prices and 
economic activity. 
Forward guidance used to signal a more accommodative policy stance 
The second objective of forward guidance is to signal a more accommodative policy stance. 
In  this  instance,  it  is  used  as  communication  strategy for  a  central  bank  at  the  zero  lower 
bound  and  also  as  a  deliberate  additional  monetary  easing  measure,  by  shifting  from  the 
normal policy reaction function. Campbell et al. refer to this type of guidance as “Odyssean 
forward  guidance.”  Here  the  central  bank  commits  to  a  longer  duration  of  accommodative 
monetary policy than is generally anticipated by the markets and the public. This commitment 
to  a  longer  accommodative  monetary  policy  is  needed  to  compensate  for  the  period 
constrained  by  the  zero  lower  bound.  There  has  been  gradual  accumulation  of  theoretical 
and empirical analyses on this perspective in the last decade.3 Its most extreme form is an 
“unconditional commitment” to continue the current monetary easing policy in the future. In 
other words, a central bank will maintain its already-promised accommodative stance even 
after economic recovery strengthens and whatever shocks take place in the future. 
The lower the degree of conditionality, the more effective monetary policy is. However, there 
is  a  trade-off  between  greater  effectiveness  and  higher  flexibility  regarding  the  conduct  of 
future monetary policy. In practice, it is not realistic for a central bank to make an extreme 
unconditional commitment because of the time-inconsistency issues. It is difficult for a central 
bank to commit to a current accommodative monetary policy in the long term without taking 
any consideration of the fact that an excessive rise in inflation may dis-anchor medium- to 
long-term inflation expectations. A similar concern is often raised in relation to the impacts on 
excessive financial instability and asset price bubbles when a policy of low interest rates is 
sustained for too  long. Therefore,  “conditional  commitment”  or the  use of  expressions  that 
reduces the degree of commitment is a form generally undertaken by central banks. 
                                                
3   See,  for  example,  Paul  R.  Krugman,  “It’s  Baaack:  Japan’s  Slump  and  the  Return  of  the  Liquidity  Trap,” 
Brookings  Papers  on  Economic  Activity,  1998  (2);  137–205;  David  Reifschneider  and  John  C.  Williams, 
‘‘Three  Lessons  for  Monetary  Policy  in  a  Low-Inflation  Era,’’  Journal  of  Money,  Credit  and  Banking,  32  (4) 
Part 2, 2000: 936–66; Gauti B. Eggertsson and Michael Woodford, “The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and 
Optimal Monetary Policy,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2003 (1); 139–211; and Michael Woodford, 
“Methods  of  Policy  Accommodation  at  the  Interest-Rate  Lower  Bound,”  Speech  delivered  at  the  2012 
Economic Policy Symposium, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 2012. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Open-ended, calendar-based, and state-contingent forward guidance 
Forward guidance can take various forms. For example, it can be applied solely to the policy 
interest rate or to a broader set of monetary stimulus measures including the policy rate and 
asset purchases. It can be categorized as open-ended, calendar-based, or state-contingent 
(or  threshold-based).4  Open-ended  guidance  can  refer  to  an  abstract  description  of  the 
monetary easing policy duration (such as “a considerable period” or “an extended period”) or 
of the economic conditions under which the accommodative policy will be maintained (such 
as “until deflationary concerns are dispelled”). Calendar-based guidance uses specific date 
expressions for monetary easing, such as “over the next six months.” Some people consider 
that  calendar-based  forward  guidance  is  superior  to  open-ended  forward  guidance  from  a 
transparency and effectiveness perspective. 
State-contingent  guidance  provides  a  clear  description  of  the  economic  conditions  under 
which the accommodative policy will be maintained by using, for example, a threshold on the 
inflation  outlook.  When  comparing  calendar-based  and  state-contingent  forward  guidance, 
the state-contingent approach is regarded as being superior for two reasons. First, it provides 
assurance of a central bank’s intention to maintain its accommodative monetary policy even 
after  economic  recovery  strengthens  by  introducing  such  specific  expressions  in  the 
guidance.  Second,  a  clear  description  of  the  relationship  between  the  conduct  of  future 
monetary  policy  and  the  economic  conditions  contributes  to  enhancing  transparency  and 
predictability in the eyes of the markets and the public. The major drawback of the calendar-
based  approach  is  the  difficulty  in  distinguishing  whether  an  extension  of  the  period  for 
maintaining  the  current  accommodative  monetary  policy  is,  for  example,  (1)  the  result  of 
more pessimistic forecasts by a central bank on prices and economic activity or (2) the result 
of a more accommodative policy. The former may discourage aggregate demand while the 
latter  may  promote  aggregate  demand.  The  state-contingent  approach  may  help  to 
distinguish between these two cases. 
In  relation  to  economic  conditions  (or  thresholds),  forward  guidance  can  focus  solely  on 
prices or can include a wide set of economic variables (e.g., the unemployment rate). The 
different  forms  here  reflect  (1)  the  presence  of  other  mandates  given  to  the  central  bank, 
such as the dual mandate in the case of the Federal Reserve; (2) the specific environment 
surrounding monetary policy at the time (e.g., whether current inflation trends are above or 
below the inflation target); and (3) the detailed measures adopted (e.g., policy interest rate, 
asset purchases, or a combination of both). The most important point I wish to highlight here 
is that the degree of details contained in the description of forward guidance can vary over 
time. It can be refined over time as economic recovery becomes firm, by giving more specific 
information about the duration of monetary accommodation or the economic conditions. 
Forward guidance in Japan 
B. 
Let me now focus on forward guidance in Japan. The Bank has a long history of practicing 
communication strategy to generate monetary easing under the zero lower bound. There are 
a  number  of  empirical  analyses  pointing  to  the  effectiveness  of  this  policy  in  Japan, 
particularly in regard to the impacts on financial markets.5 Forward guidance also constitutes 
an important element of QQE. I will first explain the forward guidance used under the current 
                                                
4   See, for example, Bank of England, “Monetary Policy Trade-Offs and Forward Guidance,” 2013. 
5   See, for example, Nobuyuki Oda and Kazuo Ueda, “The Effects of the Bank of Japan’s Zero Interest Rate 
Commitment  and  Quantitative  Monetary  Easing  on  the  Yield  Curve:  A  Macro-Finance  Approach,”  Bank  of 
Japan Working  Paper  Series,  No.  05-E-6,  2005;  Hiroshi  Ugai,  “Effects  of  the  Quantitative  Easing  Policy:  A 
Survey  of  Empirical  Analyses,”  Bank  of  Japan  Working  Paper  Series,  No.  06-E-10,  2006;  and  Jouchi 
Nakajima, Shigenori Shiratsuka, and Yuki Teranishi, “The Effects of Monetary Policy Commitment: Evidence 
from Time-varying Parameter VAR Analysis,” IMES Discussion Paper Series, No. 2010-E-6, Bank of Japan, 
2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
QQE,  then  provide  my  personal  views  on  the  rationale  for  its  structure,  followed  by  a 
comparison with past measures and other countries’ experiences. 
Forward Guidance under the Current QQE 
The Bank released a statement on April 4, 2013, with the introduction of QQE, containing the 
following two descriptions regarding the time span of monetary accommodation: 
(1) The Bank will achieve the price stability target of 2 percent . . . at the earliest possible 
time,  with  a  time  horizon  of  about  two  years  (I  will  call  this  “the  first  set  of  forward 
guidance”). 
(2) The Bank will continue with QQE, aiming to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent, 
as long as it is necessary for maintaining that target in a stable manner. It will examine both 
upside  and  downside  risks  to  economic  activity  and  prices,  and  make  adjustments  as 
appropriate (I will call this “the second set of forward guidance”). 
You might wonder what the relationship between these two descriptions is. In answer to this, 
Bank  of  Japan  Governor  Haruhiko  Kuroda  explained  in  his  speech  on April  12,  2013, that 
QQE included all the necessary measures to achieve the 2 percent target with a time horizon 
of approximately two years. He stressed, however, that because there is uncertainty in any 
economy and there is always a degree of latitude in people’s expectations, it was appropriate 
to state that the Bank would continue with monetary easing as long as it was necessary to 
achieve  the  2  percent  target  in  a  stable  manner  so  that  everyone  was  convinced  that 
sufficient monetary easing would be implemented. Thus, these two descriptions are closely 
connected to reinforce the credibility of the Bank’s commitment to achieving its stated target. 
I would like to further elaborate on this with my personal view, which does not necessarily 
reflect the consensus among the Bank’s Policy Board members, focusing on the respective 
roles of both parts of the released statement as forward guidance. In essence, this unique 
structure of providing two sets of forward guidance is attributable to the Bank’s challenging 
tasks  of  transforming  the  deflationary  mindset  and  of  increasing  inflation  expectations  to 
anchor around the 2 percent level. 
The first set of forward guidance was included in the first part of the released statement and 
was  positioned  as  the  rationale  for  introducing  “a  new  phase  of  monetary  easing  both  in 
terms  of  quantity  and  quality”  (Chart  4).  To  implement  this  bold  new  monetary  policy,  the 
Bank  decided  to  shift  the  main  operating  target  for  money  market  operations  from  the 
uncollateralized  overnight  call  rate  to  the  monetary  base.  Decisions  were  also  made  to 
double the monetary base and the amounts outstanding of JGBs and exchange-traded funds 
(ETFs)  in  two  years  by  end-2014,  as  well  as  to  more  than  double  the  average  remaining 
maturity of JGB purchases (from less than three years to about seven years). On an annual 
basis, the monetary base will be increased by about 60–70 trillion yen, JGBs (including those 
with maturities of up to 40 years) by about 50 trillion yen and ETFs by about 1 trillion yen 
(Chart 5). In addition, Japan real estate investment trusts (J-REITs) will be purchased at an 
annual pace of about 30 billion yen over the same period.6 
The purpose of this first set of forward guidance was to signal to the markets and the public 
the Bank’s strong determination to achieve its 2 percent target within a time horizon of about 
two years, normally pursued by other central banks under the inflation targeting framework. 
The  guidance  combines  both  calendar-based  (i.e.,  about  two  years)  and  state-contingent 
(i.e., 2 percent) features. The calendar-based feature was considered to be essential to gain 
the confidence of the markets and the public in both the Bank’s intention and the possibility 
                                                
6  
In addition, the Bank will continue the purchases of CP and corporate bonds until their amounts outstanding 
reach 2.2 trillion yen and 3.2 trillion yen, respectively, by end-2013. Thereafter it will maintain those amounts 
outstanding.  The  Bank  also  flexibly  purchases  treasury  discount  bills  (T-Bills)  and  conduct  money  market 
operations up to the maximum duration of one year. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
of  achieving  2  percent  at  the  earliest  possible  time.  An  improvement  in  confidence  may 
accelerate the pace of increasing the medium- to long-term inflation expectations and may 
enhance the responsiveness of price changes to the supply-demand balance. 
The second set of forward guidance was placed under the subheading “the continuation of 
QQE”  in  the  mid  part  of  the  statement.  It  is  a  conditional  commitment,  because  the 
continuation of monetary easing is subject to the examination of upside and downside risk 
factors (Chart 4). It is also a state-contingent one, linking to the continuation of QQE, and 
plays a greater role than the first set of forward guidance in stabilizing medium- to long-term 
inflation expectations at around 2 percent.  
As a related issue, the expression “in a stable manner” described in the Bank’s second set of 
forward guidance may give the impression of a broad description of the conditions. However, 
I  view  this  expression  to  be  appropriate  at  present,  because  the  formation  of  medium-  to 
long-term inflation expectations entails uncertainty. In my opinion, this is especially true when 
the Bank attempts to raise inflation expectations and subjective judgment by the Policy Board 
members  is  unavoidable  on  whether  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  will  be 
stabilized at around 2 percent, and when. Additionally, there is no example in other countries 
where central banks raised inflation expectations, for the Bank to use as a reference. Some 
measurement constraints also exist, including the fact that (1) there are no precise indicators 
measuring the inflation expectations of households and firms; (2) statistical bias is included in 
some  survey  data  –  for  example,  households’  inflation  expectations  tend  to  be  upward-
biased in Japan, while the diffusion index (DI) for expected sales prices in the Tankan (Short-
Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan) tends to be downward-biased; (3) in terms 
of market-based indicators, the impact of the Bank’s JGB purchases needs to be taken into 
account; and (4) the breakeven inflation rate (BEI) indicator also reflects the differences in 
liquidity between fixed-rate and inflation-indexed bonds. 
Nevertheless,  as  prices  and  economic  activity  firmly  improve  and  as  the  process  of 
increasing  inflation  expectations  becomes  clearer, I  personally  feel that, in  the  longer-term 
view  points,  there  may  be  an  opportunity  to  refine  the  second  set  of  guidance  with  more 
specific information. 
These two sets of forward guidance are not mutually exclusive, as the first set of guidance 
can  be  considered  as  the  “necessary  condition”  for  achieving  the  second,  whereas  the 
second set of forward guidance shows a strong commitment to continue QQE for as long as 
necessary to stably achieve the 2 percent target (Chart 4). Therefore, while the time horizon 
of these two sets of guidance overlaps, the second set of guidance may imply a somewhat 
longer  time  horizon.  In  addition,  the  second  set  of  guidance  plays  an  essential  role  in 
reducing volatility of long-term interest rates, and in preventing them from overshooting. 
In my view, this second set of guidance warrants any necessary actions by the Bank beyond 
the two-year horizon, if it judges it necessary to do so in light of stably achieving 2 percent. It 
also suggests that the Bank will not consider an exit from monetary easing before this state-
contingent guidance is achieved. 
Is the bank’s forward guidance open-ended? 
The  BOE  referred  to  the  Bank  of  Japan’s  second  set  of  forward  guidance  under  QQE  as 
“open-ended”  in  its  report  released  August  2013.7  Based  on  my  earlier  arguments,  this 
classification  is  not  consistent  with  my  assessment,  although  I  fully  respect  the  BOE’s 
judgment  and  analysis.  When  the  two  sets  of  forward  guidance  are  viewed  together,  my 
opinion  is  that  the  Bank’s  forward  guidance  is  multi-layered,  largely  state-contingent,  and 
focuses  on  the  2  percent  price  stability  target with  a  strong (conditional)  commitment. The 
BOE’s conclusion may have been drawn from the fact that only the second set of forward 
                                                
7   Bank of England, “Monetary Policy Trade-Offs and Forward Guidance.” 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
guidance was referred to in the Bank of Japan’s April 2013 statement under the subheading 
“The continuation of QQE” and that the expression “in a stable manner” may have appeared 
qualitative and vague. However, as described above, I feel that the expression “in a stable 
manner” is appropriate considering the circumstances. 
Clearer and stronger commitments compared with past practices 
C. 
The forward guidance used by the  Bank for the current QQE reflects clearer and stronger 
commitments  compared  with  previous  guidance.  In  the  past,  the  Bank  adopted  forward 
guidance at each period of monetary easing: (1) the zero interest rate policy (February 1999–
August  2000);  (2) 
the  quantitative  easing  policy  (March  2001–March  2006);  and 
(3) comprehensive  monetary  easing  (October  2010–March  2013),  as  summarized  in 
Charts 6 and 7. 
First round of forward guidance: 1999–2000  
The first round of forward guidance adopted in 1999 was transmitted to the markets and the 
public in the form of a declaration – rather than a statement – by the  then Bank of Japan 
Governor Masaru Hayami, at a press conference in April 1999, two months after the adoption 
of the zero interest rate policy. He indicated that he thinks the Bank will maintain the zero 
interest rate policy until deflationary concerns are dispelled. This could be classified as open-
ended forward guidance, linking to the continuation of the zero interest rate policy. 
However,  it  has  been  pointed  out  that  the  expression  “deflationary  concerns”  was  vague 
without providing any clear definition of deflation. As a result, this allowed for a wide range of 
interpretations of and judgments on the exit timing, thereby making it difficult for Policy Board 
members to make a collective judgment and for the markets and the public to be adequately 
convinced.  For  example,  while  industrial  production  and  exports  did  improve,  the  rate  of 
change in the (headline and core) CPI remained negative. Nonetheless, the Bank terminated 
this policy in August 2000 and raised the uncollateralized overnight call rate to an average of 
around  0.25  percent,  claiming  that  downward  pressure  on  prices  stemming  from  weak 
demand  had  markedly  receded.  A  number  of  external  commentators  have  expressed  the 
view that the exit timing was too early. 
Second round of forward guidance: 2001–2006 
The second round of forward guidance was adopted when the quantitative easing policy was 
initiated  in  March  2001,  after  the  policy  rate  was  lowered  to  an  average  of  around 
0.15 percent in the previous month. Under the policy framework, the Bank shifted the main 
operating target for money market operations from the uncollateralized overnight call rate to 
the current account balances held by financial institutions at the Bank. The target amount of 
the balances was raised nine times from the initial 5 trillion yen (which was higher than the 
required reserve level of 4 trillion yen) to approximately 30–35 trillion yen in January 2004. 
The  reserve  targeting  was  achieved  mainly  through  relatively  short-term  money  market 
operations  with  some  purchases  of  long-term  JGBs.  The  Bank  decided  that  the  economic 
conditions warranted drastic monetary easing. It issued a statement in March 2001 stating 
that monetary easing would continue to be in place until the core CPI registers stably zero 
percent  or  an  increase  year  on  year.  This  was  state-contingent  guidance,  linking  to  the 
continuation of the quantitative easing policy. It should be noted that the economic condition 
used in the guidance was based on the actual performance of the core CPI and was thus 
clearer than in the earlier zero interest rate policy case. 
In  October  2003,  the  Bank  provided  further  detailed  information  on  the  expression  “stably 
zero percent or an increase” to clarify its commitment for continuing the quantitative easing 
policy. It refined the expression so that (1) not only that the most recently published core 
CPI  should  register  zero  percent  or  above,  but  also  that  such  tendency  should  be 
confirmed over a few months, and (2) the prospective core CPI will not be expected to 
register  below  zero  percent.  These  conditions  were  regarded  as  necessary  to  terminate 
the  quantitative  easing  policy,  and  it  was  assumed  that  there  might  be  cases  where 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
quantitative  easing  would  be  continued  even  if  these  conditions  were  fulfilled. This  refined 
state-contingent guidance applied economic conditions based on both actual and projected 
price performance. 
In this circumstance, the core CPI growth rate turned positive in November 2005 (that of the 
headline CPI turned positive in January 2006). Judging that all the conditions were fulfilled, 
the Bank terminated the policy in March 2006 by reintroducing the uncollateralized overnight 
call rate as a money market operations operating target (initially at effectively zero percent). 
However, these CPI figures were retroactively revised downward and the previously positive 
figures fell into negative territory in August 2006, when the CPI base year was shifted from 
2000 to 2005. The scale of the downward revision was greater than in previous cases and 
was  thus  larger  than  projected.  Partly  because  of  this  downward  revision,  there  were  a 
number of external views that the exit timing was too early. 
Third round of forward guidance: 2010–March 2013 
The  third  round  of  forward  guidance  was  adopted  in  October  2010,  when  comprehensive 
monetary easing was introduced through a virtually  zero interest rate policy and the Asset 
Purchase  Program  (hereafter  the  Program).  The  type  of  assets  purchased  under  the 
Program covered JGBs (with remaining maturity from one to three years), treasury discount 
bills (T-Bills), CP, corporate bonds, ETFs, and J-REITs. The total amount outstanding of the 
Program was increased gradually from an initial 35 trillion yen to 65 trillion yen at the end of 
2012. The amount was scheduled to further expand to 101 trillion yen by the end of 2013 and 
to 111 trillion yen by the end of 2014. Thereafter, the amount of 111 trillion yen was to be 
maintained for an undefined period of time. The forward guidance statement indicated that 
the Bank will maintain the virtually zero interest rate policy until price stability is in sight on 
the  basis  of  the  “understanding  of  medium-  to  long-term  price  stability,”  on  the 
condition that no serious risk factors were identified. In addition, “medium- to long-term price 
stability” was defined as a positive range of 2 percent or lower, with the midpoints of most 
members’  “understanding”  being  around  1  percent.  This  was  state-contingent  guidance, 
based on the outlook for prices and linking to the policy interest rate. It was also a conditional 
commitment, as a risk factor consideration was introduced for the first time as an additional 
constraint. 
Importantly, in February 2012, the guidance was further strengthened with the statement For 
the time being, the Bank will pursue powerful monetary easing by conducting its virtually zero 
interest rate policy and by implementing the Asset Purchase Program . . . with the aim of 
achieving the goal of 1 percent. The Bank will continue pursuing the powerful easing until 
it judges that the 1 percent goal is in sight, on the condition that no significant risk factors 
were  identified.  This  refined  guidance  was  state-contingent,  linking  to  the  maintenance  of 
both the policy interest rate and asset purchases. It was clearer and more powerful than the 
original one for several reasons. First, it used the word “goal” (which is uniformly set through 
the consensus of all members of the Policy Board) rather than “understanding” (which was 
simply a collection of different member views). Second, it clarified that the Bank sets the goal 
at  1  percent  for  the  time  being,  while  maintaining  the  medium-  to  long-term  goal  within  a 
positive  range  of  2  percent  or  lower.  However,  the  drawbacks  were  that  it  was  not  clear 
whether the Bank was pursing the 2 percent goal or a lower one and how monetary easing 
was associated with the 2 percent goal.8. 
Factors leading to the adoption of QQE 
Taking these drawbacks into account, the Bank finally adopted the 2 percent price stability 
target  in  January  2013.  The  statement  it  released  indicated  that  the  Bank  will  pursue 
                                                
8   Sayuri Shirai, “Japan’s Monetary Policy in a Challenging Environment,” Speeches at the Bank of Italy and at 
the Eurasia Business and Economics Society Conference Held in Rome, Bank of Japan, 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
monetary easing and aim to achieve this target at the earliest possible time. Regarding 
the forward guidance, the statement indicated that the Bank will pursue aggressive monetary 
easing, aiming to achieve the 2 percent target, through a virtually zero interest rate policy 
and purchase of financial assets, as long as the Bank judges it appropriate to continue 
with  each  policy  measure  respectively.  This  was  a  remarkable  leap  in  the  history  of  the 
Bank’s  monetary  policy  conduct.  Nonetheless,  there  were  some  doubts  expressed  as  to 
whether  the  2  percent  target  would  be  achievable  within  the  existing  monetary  policy 
framework (such as the existing asset purchase schedule and a method to purchase assets 
without  defining  the  end  date,  which  was  scheduled  to  be  introduced  in  January  2014). 
These doubts eventually led to the introduction of QQE in April of this year.9 
Differences between QQE and past practices 
In  summary,  QQE  differs  from  the  past  practices  in  the  following  aspects:  (1)  a  greater 
emphasis on the expectations of the markets and the public over the future monetary policy 
stance  (this  is  why  aggressive  measures  and  an  active  use  of  forward  guidance  were 
adopted);  (2)  recognition  of  the  importance  of  their  medium-  to  long-term  inflation 
expectations; and (3) larger-scale purchases of longer-term JGBs. Overviewing the Bank’s 
current  and  past  forward  guidance  practices,  it  can  be  said  that  both  the  price  stability 
objective and the related monetary policy conduct are clearer under QQE than in  the past 
(Chart 7). 
Therefore,  the  effectiveness  of  QQE  may  be  greater  than  that  of  past  practices  –  mainly 
through  exerting  greater  downward  pressure  on  the  entire  yield  curve,  through  stronger 
impact on the portfolio rebalance and wealth effects, and through indirect impact on the yen’s 
exchange rate. QQE is also likely to promote an increase in inflation expectations, thereby 
contributing to lowering long-term interest rates in real terms. 
D. 
Forward guidance: Differences between Japan and other advanced economies 
Next, I would like to make a brief comparison between forward guidance in Japan and that 
undertaken in the United States and Europe, details of which are included in the Appendix to 
my speech. I consider that there are two fundamental differences between the Bank’s current 
forward guidance and those adopted in other advanced economies. 
Need to anchor inflation expectations at the inflation target 
First and most importantly, major advanced economies including the United States and the 
United  Kingdom  successfully  anchored  the  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  at 
around  2  percent,  as  opposed  to  the  case  in  Japan.  Central  banks  in  these  economies 
currently hold the view that the expectations remain well-anchored, although there may be 
some limited concerns on dis-anchoring inflation expectations (downward in the case of the 
Federal Reserve because of a decline in actual inflation, and upward in the case of the BOE 
because of a persistent deviation of actual inflation above the 2 percent target). Therefore, 
the Federal Reserve and the BOE focus on maintaining the anchored inflation expectations, 
whereas  the  Bank  of  Japan  focuses  on  increasing  inflation  expectations  to  around  the 
2 percent  target  and  anchoring  them  there.  This  difference  is  reflected  in  the  design  of  its 
forward guidance.  
Labor market issues 
The  second  difference  in  Japan’s  forward  guidance  practice  in  contrast to  other  advanced 
economies is that both the Federal Reserve and the BOE have adopted employment-related 
conditions in their forward guidance, unlike Japan. The Federal Reserve has a dual mandate 
of promoting price stability and maximum employment, so the reason for this is clear. The 
                                                
9   Shirai, “Japan’s Economic Activity, Prices, and Monetary Policy.” 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
BOE  places  price  stability  as  its  primary  mandate;  however,  the  inclusion  of  employment-
related conditions may reflect the need to clarify the BOE’s views with regard to the existing 
trade-off between high inflation and low economic and employment growth. 
In contrast, in Japan the Bank’s primary mandate, clearly stipulated in the Bank of Japan Act, 
is  to  achieve  price  stability.  In  addition,  the  current  unemployment  rate  is  not  a  significant 
issue in Japan. The figure for July 2013 was as low as 3.8 percent (3.3 percent for female 
workers), with the lowest point in recent years being 3.6 percent in July 2007 (3.4 percent for 
female  workers).  Thus,  it  may  not  be  relevant  for  Japan  to  consider  introducing  economic 
conditions  relating  to  employment.  In  general,  nominal  wage  rigidity  is  limited  in  Japan 
compared with the United States and Europe, which partly explains why the unemployment 
rate  remains  low.  The  reason  for  this  is  that  firms  tend  to  flexibly  adjust  wages  along  the 
business  cycle  through  active  use  of  bonuses  for  full-time  workers,  and  an  adjustment  of 
working  hours  and  days  for  part-time  workers.  There  are  issues  such  as  differential 
treatments  of  regular  and  non-regular  workers,  and  greater  flexibility  over  labor  market 
regulations  demanded  by  firms.  However,  these  are  structural  issues  that  are  beyond  the 
scope of monetary policy. 
Price and economic performance under QQE  
IV. 
Overviewing  the  framework  of  forward  guidance  in  the  context  of  QQE,  you  may  be 
interested  in  its  progress  to  date  in  Japan.  I  would  like  here  to  quickly  review  the  current 
performance  of  prices  and  their  outlook  first,  followed  by  the  performance  of  economic 
activity. 
Some positive signs observed in prices 
There  are  some  emerging  signs  that  actual  prices  have  begun  to  increase  (Chart  8).  The 
year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  core  CPI  finally  turned  positive  in  June  2013  at 
0.4 percent  and  0.7  percent  in  July,  after  a  period  of  consecutive  negative  or  0  percent 
change starting in May 2012. The headline CPI also turned positive at 0.2 percent in June 
and 0.7 percent in July, following a declining trend since June 2012. This movement reflects 
higher import prices, improvements in economic activity, and a rise in inflation expectations. 
So far,  the  major contribution  to this  movement  comes from  an  increase  in  electricity fees 
and gasoline prices mainly as a result of the increase in import prices driven by the yen’s 
depreciation,  as  well  as  the  base  effect.  However,  prices  of  a  wide  range  of  goods  and 
services have also begun to show an increase. Moreover, the consistently-declining trends 
on  durable  goods  (partly  owing  to  the  quality  adjustment)  appear  to  be  mitigated.  This 
reflects  the  fact  that  some  large  retail  stores  of  home  electronics  are  increasingly  shifting 
from  a  discount  price  sales  strategy  to  a  higher  value-added  or  higher  unit  sales  price 
strategy. Some restaurants are also attempting to raise their unit sales prices by providing 
higher  value-added  menus  and  services.  Hotel  and  lodging  charges  have  also  shown  an 
increase. 
Regarding other price indices, the domestic corporate goods price index has already shown 
an  upward  trend  with  a  positive  year-on-year  rate  of  change  for  five  consecutive  months. 
This  is  because  the  pace  of  transferring  higher  imported  commodity  prices  onto  corporate 
sales prices tends to be much faster than that of the CPI. It should be noted here that firms 
are likely to find it relatively easy to pass their increased input costs onto the sales prices in 
the near future, as compared with the past deflationary environment. The corporate services 
price index has also recorded a positive year-on-year rate of change for three consecutive 
months  and  there  are  other  positive  signs  such  as  an  increase  in  the  prices  of  civil 
engineering  and  architectural  services,  hotels,  and  in  leasing  and  rental.  Additionally,  land 
prices in the metropolitan areas recorded a turnaround recently, as evidenced by more active 
transactions and the resultant increase in residential and commercial land prices (Chart 9). 
Higher land prices help to improve the balance sheets of firms and financial institutions and 
the  value  of  collateral,  thereby  contributing  to  more  active  business  fixed  investment  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
risk-taking  behavior.  The  unit  sales  prices  of  housing  have  increased  recently,  possibly 
contributing to a shift in the deflation-oriented mindset and greater wealth effects. 
Price outlook and inflation expectations 
As  for  the  outlook,  the  CPI  performance  is  expected  to  improve  further;  and  the  price 
increase  contributions  arising  on  the  back  of  improvements  in  the  economy  and  higher 
inflation  expectations  are  likely  to  be  greater.  Conceptually,  the  rate  of  price  increase  is 
mainly  determined  by  the  supply-demand  balance  (or  the  output  gap)  and  inflation 
expectations.  Currently,  the  output  gap  measured  by  the  Bank  and  the  Tankan  composite 
indicator (the weighted average of the production capacity DI and the employment conditions 
DI)  remains  negative,  which  suggests  that  the  economy  is  still  operating  with  large  slack. 
However, these indicators are likely to improve on the grounds of resilient domestic demand 
and an expected gradual pick-up in overseas demand (Chart 10). 
Looking  at  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  of  market  participants,  economists, 
and households, we can see that the indicators are generally rising, but are still well below 
the  2  percent  target  (Chart  11).  It  should  be  noted  that  shorter-term  inflation  expectations 
tend to be more volatile. They are expected to exceed 2 percent for fiscal 2014 and 2015, if 
the  temporary  impact  of  the  scheduled  consumption  tax  hikes  is  taken  into  account.  It  is 
estimated that an increase in the consumption tax from 5 to 8 percent in fiscal 2014 would 
boost inflation by about 2 percentage points for fiscal 2014, and an increase from 8 percent 
to 10 percent from October 2015 would boost it by about 0.7 percentage point for fiscal 2015. 
Given these estimates, it appears that the short-term inflation expectations have not yet fully 
incorporated the impacts of the scheduled tax hikes and other impacts (such as higher import 
prices,  and  accommodative  monetary  policy),  as  shown  in  Chart  12.  There  are  only  very 
short-term  indicators  available  on  the  inflation  expectations  of  firms;  however,  the  DI  for 
expected  sales  prices  for  the  next  quarter,  as  well  as  the  computed  sales  price  inflation 
expectations, is now showing a rising trend (Chart 13). 
Higher inflation expectations help to lower long-term interest rates in real terms. Depending 
on  the  measures  undertaken,  some  indicators  show  that  the  real  interest  rates  may  have 
entered  negative  territory  (Chart  14).  This  creates  a  more  accommodative  financial 
environment. An increase in inflation expectations may also contribute to promoting current 
consumption and housing investment. 
According to the Bank’s baseline scenario, the year-on-year rate of change in the core CPI is 
projected to reach around 2 percent – the price stability target – toward the latter half of the 
Bank’s projection period (fiscal 2013–2015). Taking the median price forecast of the Policy 
Board members, the CPI year-on-year rate of change (excluding the impact of the tax hikes) 
is expected to reach 0.6 percent for fiscal 2013, 1.3 percent for fiscal 2014, and 1.9 percent 
for fiscal 2015 (Chart 15). The pace of achieving 2 percent depends on the future movement 
of the Phillips curve, which appears to remain largely flat at this stage (Chart 16). The closer 
the medium- to long-term inflation expectations are to the 2 percent target, the larger the shift 
in the curve (Chart 2). Additionally, the faster the pace of changing the deflation mindset of 
households  and  the  deflation-oriented  pricing  behavior  of  firms,  the  steeper  the  curve  will 
become (Chart 2). Because it may take some time before the full impact of QQE via these 
processes materializes, I consider there may be some degree of uncertainty regarding the 
duration of achieving the 2 percent target. 
Gradual rise in economic activity and outlook  
The favorable  price  developments  discussed  earlier  are  associated  with  positive  economic 
activities.  Both  consumer  and  business  confidence  indicators  have  shown  improvement 
(Chart 17). The high level of consumer confidence reflects the wealth effects driven by higher 
stock  prices  compared  with  last  year  and  steady  improvements  in  employment.  This  
– together with a front-loaded increase caused by an expected rise in the consumption tax 
hike  scheduled  in  April  2014  –  has  contributed  to  a  resilient  performance  in  private 
consumption and housing investment (Chart 18). Moreover, improved business confidence, 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
together  with  an  increase  in  sales  and  profits,  is  likely  to  expand  the  business  fixed 
investment further as planned by firms (Chart 19). 
The outlook for the economy is consistent with the outlook for increased prices. According to 
the Bank’s baseline scenario, the economy is expected to continue a moderate recovery on 
the back of the resilience in domestic demand and the pick-up in overseas economies. While 
the economy is likely to be affected by the front-loaded increase and subsequent decline in 
demand  prior  to  and  after  the  two  scheduled  consumption  tax  hikes,  it  is  expected  to 
continue growing at a pace above its potential growth rate (currently estimated to be about 
0.5 percent), as a virtuous cycle of spending, production, and income operates. According to 
the median of the Policy Board members’ forecasts, the real GDP growth rate is expected to 
be 2.8 percent for fiscal 2013, 1.3 percent for fiscal 2014, and 1.5 percent for fiscal 2015, 
averaging almost 2 percent (Chart 20). 
Concluding remarks 
V. 
I would like to conclude my speech today by emphasizing that the Bank’s task is not only to 
overcome deflation by promoting a change in the deflation-oriented mindsets of the markets 
and  the  public,  but  also  to  anchor  inflation  expectations  at  around  2  percent.  This  is  the 
greatest  challenge  facing  Japan’s  economy.  To  this  end,  I  believe  that  the  Bank’s 
communication strategy – which in my view is constructed with two sets of forward guidance 
–  is  essential  to  accomplish  this  task.  At  the  same  time,  the  Bank  will  do  its  utmost  to 
revitalize Japan’s economy and achieve sustainable economic growth. 
Let me also add that the success of the Bank’s monetary policy, QQE, is closely associated 
with  the  collective  efforts  of  all  entities  involved.  These  include  the  government  in 
implementing  economic  growth  strategies  and  credible  medium-term  fiscal  consolidation 
plans, firms in actively engaging in innovative activities and enhancing competitiveness, and 
financial  institutions  in  generating  risk  money  and  innovative  financial  services  needed  to 
revitalize Japan’s economy.10 
I  hope  that  my  speech  today  was  useful  in  fostering  your  understanding  of  the  Bank’s 
monetary policy. Thank you very much for your attention. 
 
                                                 
10   In  this  regard,  the  2013  Article  IV  Consultation  Report  on  Japan  released  by  the  IMF  in  August  2013 
concludes that the full implementation of structural reforms and medium-term fiscal consolidation, with QQE, 
may lead to a realization of 2 percent inflation within two years and that this level of inflation can be sustained 
subsequently. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
Forward guidance practices in the United States and Europe 
Appendix 
A. 
Forward guidance in the United States 
The 2003–2004 experience 
In the United States, the Federal Reserve provided forward guidance in 2003–2004, when 
the  economic  recovery  was  weak  and  unemployment  remained  high.  After  lowering  the 
target for the policy interest rate (i.e., the federal funds rate) to the historically low level of 
1 percent  in  June  2003,  the  Federal  Reserve  provided  forward  guidance  as  a  way  to 
generate monetary accommodation. The statement issued in August 2003 indicated that the 
[Federal  Open  Market]  Committee  [FOMC]  believes  that  policy  accommodation  can  be 
maintained for a considerable period. This open-ended guidance was meant to signal the 
FOMC’s intention to keep the low policy rate for a longer period than might otherwise have 
been  expected,  to  exert  a  greater  effect  on  longer-term  yields.11  This  expression  was 
subsequently modified in the statement issued in January 2004, stating that the Committee 
believes  that  it  can  be  patient  in  removing  its  policy  accommodation.  In  May  2004,  the 
FOMC reversed the course with an intention to gradually raise the policy interest rate. The 
interest rate was subsequently raised 16 times, by 25 basis points each, from June 2004 to 
June 2006. 
Forward guidance on the policy interest rate since the global financial crisis 
Since the global financial crisis onset, the Federal Reserve re-introduced forward guidance 
and  applied  it  separately  to  the  policy  interest  rate  and  to  large-scale  asset  purchases 
adopted as unconventional measures, after lowering the policy interest rate target range to 
the  lowest  rate  of  0  to  0.25  percent  in  December  2008.  The  descriptive  style  of  forward 
guidance  on  the  policy  interest  rate  has  become  clearer  and  has  evolved  over  time.  The 
Federal  Reserve  initially  started  with  the  statement  the  Committee  anticipates  that  weak 
economic conditions are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for 
some time. The open-ended guidance was then replaced in March 2009 with the expression 
“an  extended  period,”  bearing  the  nuance  of  a  somewhat  longer  duration.  It  was  further 
developed  into  a  calendar-based  style  from  August  2011  with  the  expression  “at  least 
through mid-2013.” It was subsequently adjusted to “at least through late 2014” in January 
2012. 
In  September  2012,  the  date  description  was  modified  to  “at least through mid-2015.”  In 
addition,  the  statement  included  the  following  description  the  Committee  expects  that  a 
highly accommodative stance of monetary policy will remain appropriate for a considerable 
time after the economic recovery strengthens. The key here is that the expression “for a 
considerable  time  after  the  economy  recovery  strengthens”  was  added  to  the  original 
description adopted in January 2012. The FOMC viewed that this modified description was 
consistent  with  the  calendar-based  description  “at  least  through  mid-2015.”  Moreover, 
Janet Yellen, Vice Chair of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, pointed 
out in November 2012 that the date “mid-2015” is estimated to be later than the liftoff date 
implied by the normal policy rule (such as the modified Taylor rule). Moreover, this date is 
estimated  to  be  shorter  than,  but  closer  to  the  liftoff  date  predicted  by  the  optimal  policy 
simulation (a rule to minimize the deviations of inflation from 2 percent and the deviations of 
                                                
11   Clemens  J.  M.  Kool  and  Daniel  L.  Thornton,  “How  Effective  Is  Central  Bank  Forward  Guidance?”  Federal 
Reserve Bank of St. Louis Working Paper Series, 2012–063A, 2012. 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
the unemployment rate from 6 percent with equal weight on both objectives).12 This appears 
to prove that the monetary easing policy is consistent with the second objective of forward 
guidance (or Odyssean guidance). 
The most recent style, which was adopted in December 2012, has been transformed from a 
calendar-based  to  state-contingent  one.  The  statement  indicated  that  the  Committee  .  .  . 
currently  anticipates  that  this  exceptionally  low  range  for  the  federal  funds  rate  [0  to 
0.25 percent]  will  be  appropriate  at  least  as  long  as  the  unemployment  rate  remains 
about  6.5  percent,  inflation  between  one  and  two  years  ahead is projected  to  be  no 
more than a half percentage point above the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run goal, 
and longer-term inflation expectations continue to be well anchored. The FOMC viewed 
that these thresholds were consistent with the previous calendar date description of “at least 
through  mid-2015.”  These  thresholds  are  regarded  as  a  kind  of  zone  of  combinations  of 
inflation and the unemployment rate, which is projected to allow the ongoing low levels of the 
policy interest rate. 
This guidance also implies that the 2 percent goal is an average concept – not a ceiling – so 
that the medium inflation outlook could temporarily exceed 2 percent, although the deviation 
will be contained to ensure that long-term inflation expectations remain well anchored. This is 
a clear signal that the Federal Reserve permits a more accommodative policy to fulfill both its 
mandates.  This  latest  guidance  was  apparently  influenced  by  the  approach  proposed  by 
Charles Evans, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, in 2011.13 According to 
his  proposal,  the  FOMC  should  state  that  the  low  levels  of  the  policy  rate  would  be 
maintained  until  the  unemployment  rate  falls  substantially  to  7  percent  as  long  as  the 
medium-term inflation outlook stayed below 3 percent. Narayana Kocherlakota, President of 
the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, meanwhile suggested thresholds of 5.5 percent 
for unemployment and 2.25 percent for the medium-term inflation outlook. 
Forward guidance on the asset purchase program  
Regarding forward guidance on the asset purchase program, the FOMC statement issued in 
December 2008 pointed out its plan to purchase agency debt and mortgage-based securities 
(MBSs)  using  calendar-based  guidance  with  an  expression  “over the next few quarters.” 
The subsequent statements continued to maintain calendar-based guidance (such as “this 
year” and “over the next six months”) every time the Federal Reserve increased its asset 
purchases including Treasury securities. When the Federal Reserve resumed the purchase 
of  the  agency  MBSs  (in  September  2012)  and  Treasury  securities  (decided  in  December 
2012 to be introduced from January 2013), forward guidance was shifted from a calendar-
based  to  state-contingent  one.  In  the  statement  issued  in  December  2012,  the  economic 
these  asset  purchases  were  described  as  until  such 
conditions 
[substantial] improvement [in the labor market] is achieved in a context of price stability. 
for  maintaining 
Forward guidance in the euro area 
B. 
The Governing Council of the ECB adopted forward guidance for the first time in July 2013. 
The  introductory  statement  to  the  press  conference  indicated  that  the  Governing  Council 
expects  the  key  ECB  interest  rates  to  remain  at  present  or  lower  levels  for  an  extended 
period  of  time.  This  expectation  is  based  on  the  overall  subdued  outlook  for  inflation 
extending into the medium term, given the broad-based weakness in the real economy and 
                                                
12   Janet L. Yellen, “Revolution and Evolution in Central Bank Communications,” Remarks at the Haas School of 
Business, University of California, Berkeley, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 2012. 
13   Charles  L.  Evans,  “The  Fed’s  Dual  Mandate  Responsibilities:  Maintaining  Credibility  during  a  Time  of 
Immense Economic Challenges,” Speech at the Michigan Council on Economic Education, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Chicago, 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
subdued monetary dynamics. This is open-ended guidance, linking to the maintenance of the 
low  policy  interest  rate  (i.e.,  the  main  refinancing  operations  rate,  currently  set  at 
0.5 percent). 
Peter  Praet,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  ECB,  explained  that  the  objective  of 
adopting the guidance was to reassert the ECB’s monetary easing policy.14 He pointed out 
that  the  guidance  envisages  both  the  first  (Delphic)  and  second  (Odyssean)  objectives  of 
forward guidance mentioned earlier. It is Delphic because the guidance reveals the ECB’s 
future monetary policy stance based on currently-available information. It is also Odyssean 
as it clarifies the ECB’s commitment to the medium-term objective (i.e., below but close to 
2 percent) and its determination to apply policy measures if necessary to meet the objective. 
The ECB’s action reflected concerns that the markets’ expected duration regarding the low 
interest  rate  policy  had  shortened  in  May  2013  as  a  result  of  a  change  in  global  financial 
conditions (largely caused by a rise in U.S. long-term interest rates due to speculation over 
the timing of “tapering” quantitative easing). This shortening occurred even though the ECB’s 
assessment  of  prices  and  economic  activity  and  its  monetary  policy  inclination  remained 
constant. The earlier-than-projected hike in the interest rate implies a faster-than-projected 
monetary  tightening,  which  may  undermine  the  economic  recovery  process.  In  this  sense, 
the ECB’s action can be interpreted as a provision of monetary accommodation, because it 
helped lengthen the expected duration of the current interest rate policy by financial markets 
in line with the ECB’s view. 
Forward guidance in the United Kingdom 
C. 
In the United Kingdom, the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) of the BOE made a new move 
in  July  2013,  although  it  was  not  forward  guidance  describing  the  future  monetary  policy 
stance. After expressing concerns about the significant upward movement in market interest 
rates, the statement it issued indicated that in the Committee’s view, the implied rise in the 
expected future path of Bank Rate [the policy interest rate] was not warranted by the recent 
developments in the domestic economy. Because the statement helped to lower the market 
interest rates, the effects were similar to those of the ECB. 
Following  a  new  remit  letter  from  George  Osborne,  the  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer,  in 
March  2013,  the  MPC  released  a  comprehensive  set  of  forward  guidance  over  the  future 
conduct of monetary policy in August 2013. The statement indicated that the MPC intends 
not  to  raise  Bank  Rate  from  its  current  level  of  0.5  percent  at  least  until  .  .  .  the 
unemployment  rate  has  fallen  to  a  threshold  of  7  percent,  subject  to  the  conditions 
further  asset  purchases  while  the 
below.  The  MPC  stands  ready 
unemployment rate remains above 7 percent, if it judges that additional monetary stimulus 
is warranted. It was also stated that the stock of asset purchases would be maintained until 
the 7 percent threshold is reached and subject to conditions. 
The conditions are then defined in the form of the following three “knockouts”: (1) the CPI 
inflation  18  and  24  months  ahead  will  be  above  2.5  percent;  (2)  medium-term  inflation 
expectations  do  not  remain  well  anchored;  and  (3)  the  Financial  Policy  Committee  (FPC) 
judges that the stance of monetary policy poses a significant threat to financial stability that 
cannot  be  contained  by  the  substantial  range  of  mitigating  policy  actions  available  to  the 
FPC.  If  any  of  these  knockouts  are  breached,  the  MPC  will  cease  the  above-mentioned 
guidance. It is state-contingent guidance, linking to the policy interest rate, asset purchases 
and sales. The BOE explained that the objective of introducing explicit forward guidance is to 
provide greater clarity about the MPC’s views on the existing trade-off between inflation and 
unemployment and the associated monetary policy stance. Charlie Bean, Deputy Governor 
to  undertake 
                                                
14   Peter Praet, “Forward Guidance and the ECB,” Column published on VoxEU.org, Centre for Economic Policy 
Research, 2013. 
16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
of  the  BOE,  explained  in  August  2013  that  the  release  of  the  guidance  was  to  clarify  the 
MPC’s  existing  monetary  policy  stance  rather  than  to  provide  additional  monetary 
accommodation.15.By  reducing  uncertainty,  it  aimed  at  lowering  term  premiums  and 
preventing upward movements in market interest rates. While the MPC showed that the low 
policy  interest  rate  is  likely  to  remain  throughout  the  three-year  forecast  period  given  the 
current  unemployment  rate  outlook,  there  are  some  views  that  the  possibility  of  breaching 
knockouts sooner than this forecast period might have added uncertainty regarding the future 
accommodative monetary stance. 
 
 
 
                                                  
15   Charlie Bean, “Global Aspects of Unconventional Monetary Policies,” Speech delivered at the 2013 Economic 
Policy Symposium, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 17 
  18 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  19 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   20 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  21 
   22 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  23 
24 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  25 
  26 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  27 
