Patrick Honohan: Banking Union challenges 
Opening statement by Mr Patrick Honohan, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, to the 
Joint Oireachtas Committee on EU Affairs, Dublin, 30 April 2013. 
 We thank the Committee for the invitation to appear before it and contribute to its important 
work on the future of Economic and Monetary Union. Important because of the scale of the 
challenge to restore stability and create sustainable growth and jobs. Important also because 
of the role of the Committee in ensuring democratic participation and accountability on EU 
issues. 
The euro area has been battered by the fall-out from the great financial crisis that broke out 
in  2007. When  the  flood  of  financial  globalisation  receded,  it  exposed  interrelated  banking 
and  fiscal  and  competitiveness  weaknesses  in  many  euro  area  countries.  Cross-border 
banking  claims  threatened  to  transmit  weakness  from  stressed  countries  such  as  Greece, 
Portugal and Ireland, to banks elsewhere in the monetary union. High indebtedness of some 
countries  no  longer  seemed  as  easily  supportable  as  had  previously  appeared.  And  even 
stronger countries experienced sizable banking losses. 
Accelerated  balance  sheet  repair  associated  with  aggregate  macroeconomic  demand 
weakness  has  meant  that  recovery  has  been  slow  and  tentative.  This  combination  of 
pressures  –  primarily  related  to  banking  and  wider  financial  sectors,  as  well  as  to 
macroeconomic and fiscal imbalances and divergences in competitiveness, has represented 
a  significant  challenge  to  the  cohesion  of  the  Union.  Both  borrowers  and  lenders  became 
apprehensive  and  protective  of  their  interests.  At  certain  moments  in  2011–12,  the 
combination of problems seemed to market participants to threaten the very sustainability of 
the institutional arrangements supporting the common currency. 
While such fears have been allayed by the credibility of subsequent action, most notably the 
announcement  of  the  Outright  Monetary  Transactions  (OMT)  programme  of  the  ECB,  the 
wider  need  to  rebuild  trust  and  strengthen  the  institutional  architecture  of  the  system  is 
evident  and  confirmed  in  a  general  recognition  that  progress  needs  to  be  made  on  four 
dimensions, Banking, Fiscal, Economic, and Political, as adumbrated in the report of the four 
Presidents  (of  the  European  Council,  the  European  Commission,  the  Eurogroup  and  the 
ECB) last June. 
I think it will be most appropriate for me to focus my remarks today chiefly on the Banking 
pillar, i.e. Banking Union. 
We need Banking Union to transform the financial system from a source of risk and instability 
to a source of growth and support to the real economy. We have in fact made considerable 
progress  in  recent  months  –  especially  under  the  Irish  Presidency  –  in  its  construction. 
However much remains to be done. 
Announcement of action to build a Banking Union combined with the firm commitment of the 
ECB has contributed greatly over the past several months to the gradual but clear restoration 
of confidence in euro area financial markets. While it is not appropriate for me to touch on 
monetary policy issues today (ahead of the ECB Governing Council meeting), it is evident 
that  (with  some  exceptions)  sovereign  spreads  have  generally  declined  in  the  stressed 
economies, not least in Ireland, and this trend has held, even through the Cyprus situation. 
The financial markets are counting on the completion of Banking Union. We must avoid that 
any easing of tensions in the markets leads to a slackening in the pace of reform. 
Banking Union, shifting supervision of banks to the European level, combined with a single 
resolution  regime  and  a  common  system  for  deposit  protection  will  reassure  citizens  and 
markets  that  a  common,  high  level  of  prudential  regulation  is  being  consistently  applied. 
Together with greater fiscal and economic coordination it will help build the necessary trust 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
between  member  states  which  is  a  pre-condition  for  the  introduction  of  common  financial 
arrangements 
The Irish Presidency has given top priority to the Banking Union files. At the Central Bank we 
have  been  heavily  involved  and  a  large  number  of  my  colleagues  in  the  Bank  have  been 
assisting in the discussions and negotiations around the large body of legislative reform that 
is associated with Banking Union. 
First  the  Irish  Presidency  brokered  final  agreement  on  the  Capital  Requirements  Directive 
and Regulation (CRDIV). This will greatly strengthen the capital and liquidity provisioning of 
Europe’s banks and improve governance and remuneration practices. It is now expected to 
apply from January 2014. 
Agreement has also been reached, following the informal ECOFIN held in Dublin in April, on 
the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  for  banks  in  the  Euro  area.  This  will  transfer  bank 
supervisory tasks to the European level and will provide strong and consistent supervision. 
Preparations are well advanced within the ECB to take on this task as early as July 2014, 
depending on the formal implementation date. It has been a remarkable success to obtain 
agreement on this proposal within 7 months of its publication. 
Attention is now focused on negotiations to agree a Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive. 
This  would  ensure  that  authorities  throughout  Europe  would  have  the  means  to  intervene 
decisively  when  problems  occur  and  that  the  costs  of  dealing  with  failing  banks  fall  in  a 
clearly defined order on the owners and creditors. Ministers will discuss this text on May 14th 
and there is a target to reach agreement by the end of the Irish Presidency. 
Linked  to  this  is  the  need  to  get  agreement  on  a  common  scheme  of  Deposit  Guarantee 
Funds throughout Europe, also an objective of the Presidency. 
However  the  combination  of  a  European  supervisor  of  banks  with  responsibility  for  the 
resolution of bank failures remaining at the national level may not be a stable equilibrium in 
political economy terms, as individual member state governments may question and resent 
the  imposition  from  the  SSM  of  bank  resolution  requirements  potentially  including 
recapitalisation  costs.  Supervision  and  resolution  should  therefore  be  placed  at  the  same 
level.  The  need  for  this  has  been  acknowledged  at  successive  European  Councils  which 
affirmed that it is imperative to break the vicious circle between banks and sovereigns. Now 
that  there  is  agreement  on  a  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  it  is  especially  important  to 
press  ahead  with  establishing  a  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  and  Authority  and  a  Single 
Deposit Guarantee scheme. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
