Lim Hng Kiang: Singapore – pursuing broader and deeper economic 
integration with major economies 
Opening keynote speech by Mr Lim Hng Kiang, Minister for Trade and Industry and Deputy 
Chairman  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore,  at  Deutsche  Bank  Access  Asia 
Conference 2013, Singapore, 20 May 2013. 
 Distinguished guests, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
A very good morning to all of you. It is my pleasure to join you at Deutsche Bank’s Access 
Asia Conference 2013. 
Let me first thank Deutsche Bank for the invitation to speak at your conference. This is the 
largest  event  hosted  by  Deutsche  Bank  each  year  globally,  and  a  huge  turnout  is  a  clear 
indicator of the strong corporate and investor interest in Asia. 
In the last 10 years, the centre of gravity of the world economy has been moving away from 
the US and Europe to Asia. Asia is expected to continue to prosper in the decades ahead as 
the middle class expands in line with strong economic growth. China is set to be the largest 
economy  in  the  world  by  2030  and  is  already  creating  megacities  of  over  10  million  at  an 
average  rate  of  one  per  year.  Besides  China,  India’s  middle  class  is  expected  to  grow  to 
almost  600  million  people  by  2025.  In  Indonesia,  almost  60  per  cent  of  Indonesian 
households, in a country of 240 million people, are expected to reach middle-class status by 
2020. 
Being a very small state, Singapore has and will continue to maintain an open economy. We 
will  participate  actively  to  propagate  free  and  open  trading  alliances  as  Asia  grows  and 
becomes more economically integrated. In this way, we help to unlock the value, spin off new 
opportunities and create good jobs for Singaporeans. 
ASEAN and AEC 2015 
One key market for Singapore is ASEAN. ASEAN is a growing region and has a combined 
population  of  600  million  people.  ASEAN  also  has  a  GDP  that  is  the  third  largest  in  Asia, 
after China and Japan. In recent years, ASEAN has embarked on an enterprise to integrate 
our economies into a regional bloc. ASEAN today, through initiatives like the ASEAN Free 
Trade Area, has resulted in virtually no tariffs for flows of goods between our countries. 
Going forward,  ASEAN  is  making good progress  towards  becoming the single  market  and 
product base envisioned in the ASEAN Economic Community (AEC). The realisation of the 
AEC by 2015 will result in an even more tightly integrated region, and this has opened up 
more opportunities for corporates as well as investors. 
A key principle underpinning the AEC 2015 is the free flow of goods, services and investment 
within the region by 2015. Let me update you on the progress so far. 
• 
On trade in goods, virtually all goods in ASEAN already move throughout the region 
tariff-free1. We are now working on reducing non-tariff barriers. 
                                                
1   ASEAN-6 countries have eliminated tariffs on 99.65% of tariff lines effective 1 Jan 2010. The CLMV countries 
have  reduced  tariffs  on  98.86%  of  their  tariff  lines  to  the  0–5%  tariff  range  in  2010,  and  are  expected  to 
eliminate tariffs on these goods by 2015, with flexibility for a few tariff lines until 2018. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  On services, ASEAN Member States have recently completed the eighth package of 
commitments  under  the  ASEAN  Framework  Agreement  on  Services.  What  this 
means  is  that  we  can  expect  the  reduction  of  services  barriers,  such  as  foreign 
equity limits in the ASEAN countries. 
On  investment,  the  ASEAN  Comprehensive  Investment  Agreement  entered  into 
force  in  March  last  year.  This  agreement  has  established  stronger,  pro-business 
rules, with enhanced investment protection for both ASEAN-owned investments and 
also foreign-owned investments based in ASEAN2. 
Singapore’s multilateral agreements 
However,  to  enable  businesses  to  access  major  markets  more  easily,  Singapore  has  also 
broadened our engagement with Asia Pacific beyond ASEAN. By doing so, we aim to reduce 
trading  costs.  To  this  end,  Singapore  actively  participates  in  negotiations  of  several 
multilateral  trade  agreements.  One  example  of  such  a  multilateral  trade  agreement  is  the 
Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership, or RCEP, which is a partnership between 
ASEAN  and  six  other  countries,  namely  Australia,  New  Zealand,  China,  Japan,  India  and 
South Korea. 
Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP) and Renminbi (RMB) 
Internationalisation 
This agreement builds upon the existing ASEAN+1 free trade agreements (FTAs) FTAs by 
bringing together ASEAN’s existing FTAs with its key partners into a single comprehensive 
agreement. RCEP will be one of the biggest FTAs in the world, covering 3 billion people and 
accounting for one-third of the world’s GDP. 
RCEP is a significant agreement for ASEAN. It is an ambitious attempt to deepen regional 
economic  integration  and  to  link  ASEAN’s  various  trading  partners,  many  of  whom  do  not 
have existing trade agreements with one another. 
One key partner for ASEAN in RCEP is China. China  will continue to play an increasingly 
important role in trade with ASEAN, and this  will grow even further with its participation in 
RCEP. In 2012, ASEAN-China trade volumes reached a record high of US$400 billion, and 
by 2015, ASEAN is expected to be China’s top trading partner. As a result, in the next few 
years,  we  can  expect  a  greater  acceptance  and  use  of  the  Renminbi  (RMB)  as  a  trade 
settlement currency, especially in ASEAN. 
What  does  this  mean  for  us?  China  has  already  signed  bilateral  currency  swap 
arrangements  with  key  ASEAN  countries,  such  as  Singapore,  Malaysia  and  Indonesia. 
Corporates, investors and financial institutions need to be prepared if they are to capitalise 
on the opportunities brought on by the increasing internationalisation of the RMB. 
In February this year, Singapore became the first country outside Greater China to have a 
Renminbi clearing bank when the Singapore branch of the Industrial and Commercial Bank 
of China (ICBC) was designated as such. This was followed by MAS and the People’s Bank 
of China signing an enhanced bilateral currency swap agreement in April. 
                                                
2   Examples  of  these  stronger  and  pro-business  rules  are:  (i)  The  procedures  for  investors  to  register  their 
investment in order to benefit from protection under the agreement, are outlined clearly so that the procedures 
are  transparent  to  investors;  (ii)  Policy-makers  can  more  easily  consider  the  views  and  feedback  of  the 
business community, as the ACIA has a consultations mechanism giving ASEAN countries an official platform 
to stay engaged on ACIA matters and its implementation; and (iii) The ACIA has a robust Investor-to-State 
Dispute  Settlement  (ISDS)  mechanism  which  will  give  investors  additional  recourse  to  seek  redress  or 
compensation if they have been treated unfairly by a government. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The appointment  of  a  Renminbi  clearing  bank  in  Singapore  brings  new functionality  to  the 
Singapore financial system. The build-up of Renminbi liquidity in Singapore will encourage 
financial institutions in Singapore to develop and offer a wider range of Renminbi products 
and services. This will help meet the financing, investment, and risk management needs of 
the market. It will also strengthen the role of Singapore as a leading global financial centre 
that serves Asia and beyond. 
Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) 
Besides the RCEP, Singapore is also actively engaged in the Trans-Pacific Partnership, or 
the  TPP.  The  TPP  negotiations  currently  involve  11  countries:  Australia,  Brunei,  Canada, 
Chile, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Peru, Singapore, Vietnam and the United States. It 
aims  to  bring  comprehensive  duty-free  market  access  as  well  as  reduced  restrictions  on 
services,  investment  and  government  procurement.  It  also  seeks  to  enhance  regional 
connectivity  by  reducing  behind-the-border  non-tariff 
trade  barriers  and  promoting 
consistency in regulation across all the member countries. Singapore views the TPP, along 
with  the  RCEP,  as  complementary  tracks  that  will  lead  towards  increased  regional 
integration, and eventually, to a Free Trade Agreement of the Asia Pacific. 
The recent decision by Japan to join the TPP will further reinforce the TPP as a platform for 
broader  economic  integration  across  the  Pacific.  With  Japan’s  inclusion,  the  TPP’s 
membership has now expanded to 12 countries. This represents nearly 40 per cent of the 
global economy and one-third of world trade. 
As you all know, joining the TPP is a key element of the three-arrow strategy embodied in 
Abenomics.  The  prognosis  for  Japan  has  improved  considerably  compared  to  six  months 
ago. After stagnating for much of last year, the Japanese economy rebounded strongly in the 
first quarter of this year, with GDP growth of 3.5 per cent on a pick-up in consumer spending. 
Growth  forecast  for  the  whole  of  this  year  has  been  progressively  raised,  with  room  for 
further  upward  revision.  Sentiments  have  improved  strongly  since  the  announcements  of 
aggressive monetary and fiscal policy measures to revive the Japanese economy. The sharp 
depreciation of the Yen has also helped to boost expectations for GDP growth and corporate 
profits. One example of this is Toyota Motor. It has reported consolidated operating profit of 
1.3 trillion yen for the 2012 business year, about 3.7 times that of the previous year. Toyota’s 
worldwide car sales have also increased by some 20 per cent to 8.9 million units. 
As a result of the economic policies being implemented by the government of Prime Minister 
Shinzo  Abe,  we  may  increasingly  see  some  spillover  effects  on  ASEAN  and  other  Asian 
economies.  ASEAN,  however,  is  unlikely  to  be  too  negatively  affected  and  may  instead 
benefit from a weaker yen given its role as a “downstream producer” for Japan. For example, 
countries that serve as a production hub for Japanese companies are likely to benefit from 
Japan’s increased export competitiveness. Overall, stronger Japanese growth is expected to 
stimulate its imports from ASEAN. 
In contrast, economies with a high degree of export similarity to Japan, such as Korea, and 
to some extent Taiwan, could face greater competition in the short run due to the negative 
substitution effect favouring relatively cheaper Japanese goods. 
We  may  also  see  increased  capital  inflows  into  the  region,  as  Japanese  institutions  are 
increasingly hard-pressed to secure adequate returns at home. As long-term interest rates 
decline further in Japan due to the Bank of Japan’s new asset purchase programme, we can 
expect more “search for yield” activities. As interest rates are already very low in the region 
and asset price inflation is becoming a concern in many economies, ASEAN policy makers 
need to remain vigilant against a build-up of domestic financial and asset market excesses. 
EU-Singapore FTA (EUSFTA) 
Finally, as we seek to maintain an open economy and to stay relevant, Singapore will work 
on  deepening  our  engagement  beyond  the  Asia  Pacific,  for  example,  with  the  EU. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Negotiations on the EU-Singapore FTA were recently concluded. This is the first FTA which 
the  EU  has  concluded  with  an  ASEAN  country.  The  EU-Singapore  FTA  can  serve  as  a 
pathfinder  FTA  for  EU’s  on-going  bilateral  FTA  negotiations  with  other  ASEAN  countries, 
such as Malaysia and Vietnam, and it signals the EU’s interest to engage with the region. 
When  implemented,  the  EU-Singapore  FTA  will  enhance  Singapore’s  attractiveness  as  a 
gateway for EU companies seeking to tap the opportunities in our region. 
Conclusion 
So  ladies  and  gentlemen,  to  summarise,  Singapore  is  pursuing  a  strategy  of  broader  and 
deeper economic integration with major economies through multilateral agreements, such as 
the RCEP, TPP and EU-Singapore FTA. In addition, we are enhancing our role as a trusted 
and  modern  financial  hub  by  expanding  into  new  services,  such  as  offshore  Renminbi 
trading.  These  initiatives  will  help  investors  and  companies  based  in  Singapore  to  “open 
doors” and “unlock value”. 
Let  me  once  again  express  my  appreciation  to  Deutsche  Bank  for  holding  the  annual 
Deutsche Bank Access Asia Conference in Singapore and bringing together thought leaders, 
investors  and  policy  makers  together  to  find  ways  to  tap  the  opportunities  that  are  being 
created by Asia’s economic growth. I wish you all a very fruitful conference. Thank you. 
 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
