Deepak Mohanty: Impact of the euro area crisis on South Asia 
Paper by Mr Deepak Mohanty, Executive Director of the Reserve Bank of India, presented at 
the SAARCFINANCE Group Meeting, Islamabad, 18 June 2013. 
 The assistance provided by Dr. Mohua Roy and Mr. Somnath Sharma is gratefully acknowledged. 
The global financial crisis originated in the US and then spread to Europe. While the global 
growth has recovered from the trough of 2009, Europe has lapsed into recession again. The 
continuing uncertainty in the euro area poses a major risk to the global economy today. It has 
affected  the  growth  prospects  of  both  advanced  and  emerging  market  economies  through 
trade,  financial  and  confidence  channels.  Given  the  interconnectedness  of  global  financial 
markets, the principal risk to emerging markets and developing countries (EMDEs) arise from 
‘risk on’ and ‘risk off’ behaviour of global financial market. Of late through following resolute 
policy actions, financial conditions have improved in the euro area (IMF, 2013)1. However, 
the  real  economy  has  shown  no  sign  of  improvement.  With  very  little  fiscal  space,  macro 
policy response to growth slowdown remains limited.  
The euro area crisis first surfaced in 2009 when Portugal, Ireland, Greece and Spain slipped 
into recession with exceedingly high budget deficits. The crisis deepened further in 2010 with 
credit rating agencies downgrading the sovereigns and banks in the peripheral Europe. This 
significantly  dented  confidence,  even 
the  euro. 
Consequently, the risks to the global economy rose. 
Against  this  backdrop,  I  briefly  touch  upon  the  causes  of  crisis  and  subsequent  stability 
enhancing policy measures in euro area. I then turn to how the crisis affected South Asia, 
particularly India. I conclude by highlighting some mitigating measures that we have taken to 
strengthen our external account.  
the  very  existence  of 
threatening 
Causes of the crisis 
The problems in the euro area are largely structural in nature and existed even prior to the 
crisis. The global crisis only amplified the weaknesses in the system. “In the years preceding 
the crisis, the EU became divided between countries with positive trade balances and sound 
budgets – the core - and those with growing budget deficits and external deficits financed by 
private  credit  flows  increasingly  sourced  from  the  first  group  of  countries  for  unproductive 
spending  –  the  periphery.  With  the  onset  of  global  financial  crisis,  the  external  deficits, 
budget deficits and levels of public debt of the countries in the second group largely became 
unsustainable once they were no longer financed by the rest of the EU (Draghi, 2013)2. 
The origin of the euro area crisis is in the high level of fiscal deficit and debt. First, a large 
part  of  the  fragile  fiscal  position  in  these  economies  is  attributable  to  expenditure  on 
entitlements due to an ageing population without commensurate increase in revenues and 
lack of growth- enhancing structural reforms. In this process, the public sector structure has 
become bloated. Second, due to low domestic saving rate, public debt had to be financed 
through  borrowings  resulting  in  widening  of  current  account  deficit  and  a  growing  external 
debt. While the membership of the euro area gave a false sense of comfort to the periphery 
countries, the intra-euro area financial imbalance remained severe. Third, as the euro area 
crisis  unraveled,  the  interconnection  between  sovereigns  and  banks  was  reflected  in  the 
                                                 
1  
2   Draghi,  Mario  (2013):  ‘The  euro,  monetary  policy  and  reforms’,  Speech  on  the  occasion  of  receiving  an 
IMF (2013): ‘Old Risks, New Challenges’, Global Financial Stability Report, April 2013. 
honorary degree in political science at LUISS “Guido Carli” University, Rome, 6 May. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
positive  correlations  between  sovereign  and  bank  credit  default  swap  (CDS)  spreads 
especially for the periphery countries.  
The  management  of  the  euro  area  crisis  has  become  complex  because  of  three  reasons. 
First, consequent to rating downgrades, a number of countries have faced rising bond yields 
and challenges in funding the sovereign debt. Second, euro area banks are undercapitalized, 
mainly due to losses on sovereign bonds, and have faced liquidity problems leading to credit 
constraints. Third, slow/negative economic growth accentuated fiscal risks (Chart 1). Let me 
now turn to policy measures taken to stabilize the euro area.  
 Policy measures 
The crisis has prompted the European Union (EU), the European Central Bank (ECB) and 
the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  to  take  several  measures  to  stabilize  the European 
economies. The creation of the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) in 2010 and the 
European Financial Stability Mechanism (EFSM) in 2011 responded to the urgency of crisis 
in the periphery. However, many subsequent improvements that led to the establishment of 
the European Stability Mechanism (ESM) have placed the regional financing arrangements 
on a much stronger footing.  
In addition, the EU is also addressing the institutional deficiencies in the monetary union by 
gradually moving towards banking and the fiscal union. Europe took its first big step towards 
banking  union  in  December  2012,  as  EU  finance  ministers  agreed  to  make  the  ECB  the 
common bank supervisor.  
The  EU  has  also  tried  to  make  fiscal  rules  more  stringent.  In  this  regard,  the  treaty  on 
stability,  coordination  and  governance  known  as  “fiscal  compact”,  has  come  into  force  in 
January  2013.  This  is  an  intergovernmental  Treaty  which  establishes  that  member  states 
must enact laws, preferably at constitutional level, requiring their national budgets to be in 
balance  or  in  surplus  within  the  Treaty's  definition.  The  laws  must  also  contain  a  self-
correcting  mechanism  to  prevent  any  breach.  The  Treaty  defines  a  balanced  budget  as  a 
general budget deficit of less than 3.0 per cent of GDP, and a structural deficit of less than 
1.0 per cent of GDP if the debt level is below 60 per cent. If the debt level is above 60 per 
cent of GDP, the structural deficit norm is more stringent at below 0.5 per cent of GDP. The 
“two-pack” regulations subject euro area countries to the obligation of ex ante notification of 
budgetary  plans  to  the  European  Commission  (EC).  Should  countries  be  subject  to  an 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
excessive  deficit  procedure  (EDP)  or  be  involved  in  a  financial  assistance  program  by  the 
ESM, they will also be subject to an enhanced monitoring by the EC (Praet, 2013)3. 
The ECB has taken a number of policy measures ranging from lowering the policy interest 
rate,  substantial  bond  buying  and  provision  of  concessional  loans  to  banks.  The  ECB 
launched  its  Long  Term  Refinancing  Operations(LTRO)  which  made  available  three-year 
loans to banks: 523 banks borrowed €489 billion in December 2011 and 800 banks borrowed 
€ 530 billion in February 2012. The ECB launched Outright Monetary Transactions (OMT) in 
September 2012 to make discretionary purchases of short-term sovereign bonds with a prior 
request by the concerned sovereigns for international assistance via the EFSF/ESM.  
The IMF contributed to emergency lending and has elaborated and monitored the economic 
adjustments programs for Greece, Ireland and Portugal in close cooperation with the EC and 
the  ECB  known  as  the  ‘Troika’.  Even  though  the  major  share  of  the  financial  support  has 
come from euro-zone countries, the scale of the IMF’s lending has been substantial. Since 
the size of the rescue packages has been huge, the cooperation with the EC and ECB was 
important as IMF alone would not have been able to raise the entire quantum of emergency 
funds. Let me now turn to the impact of the euro area crisis on SAARC region. 
Impact on South Asia 
The  euro  area  has  traditionally  been  an  important  economic  partner  for  South  Asia.  The 
share  of  exports  to  the  euro  area  in  total  exports  ranged  from  around  38  per  cent  for 
Maldives to 10 per cent for Nepal with India’s share being 13 per cent in 2012. Between 2011 
and 2012, share of SAARC’s export to euro area has contracted significantly (Table 1). 
 In addition to absorbing a significant share of the region’s exports, it has been a source of 
foreign direct investment and other forms of capital flows (Lee et al. 2013)4. It is interesting to 
note that when the euro area crisis hit the global economy in 2010, our exports to that region 
did not decline immediately. This was mainly because of our two major trading partners, viz., 
Germany  and  France,  which  were  doing  well.  In  the  subsequent  period,  as  the  crisis 
intensified, our exports to euro area declined (Chart 2).  
                                                 
3   Speech by Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the ECB, ‘The crisis response in the euro area’, 
Beijing, 17 April 2013. 
4   Lee,  Minsoo,  Donghyun  Park,  Arnelyn  Abdon,  and  Gemma  Estrada,  (2013)  ‘Economic  Impact  of  Eurozone 
Sovereign Debt Crisis on Developing Asia’ ADB Working Paper Series No. 336, January 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
 Another way in which euro area crisis has impacted the South Asian economies is through 
the finance channel. European banks have been an important source of credit to South Asia. 
According  to  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  (BIS),  at  the  end  of  December  2012 
consolidated  claims  of  the  European  banks  on  South  Asia  amounted  to  around  US  $164 
billion, equivalent to 44 per cent of the region’s total foreign banks’ claims. There has also 
been an impact through the stock markets. While deleveraging by European banks reduced 
lending to emerging markets, shifting of investor sentiment reduced flow to emerging stock 
markets (Avdjiev et al. 2012)5. Let me now turn to the impact on India.  
Impact on India 
Indian  economy  is  significantly  integrated  with  the  euro  area.  The  impact  so  far  has  been 
mainly through trade and finance channels. As a result of slowdown in euro area, the India’s 
merchandise exports to the region declined from US$ 42.7 billion in 2011 to US$ 37.8 billion 
in 2012 (Chart 3). Consequently, its share in India’s total exports declined from 13.9 per cent 
to 12.8 per cent. In fact, euro area’s share in India’s exports was much higher at 16 per cent 
in 2008 (Table 1). 
                                                 
5   Avdjiev,  Stefan  ,  Zsolt  Kut  ,  Előd  Takáts:  (2012)  ‘The  euro  area  crisis  and  cross-border  bank  lending  to 
emerging markets’, BIS Quarterly Review, December 2012. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Furthermore, the share of India’s software services exports to Europe declined from 26 per 
cent of total software export earnings in 2009-10 to 24 per cent in 2011-12. Europe accounts 
for  more  than  one-third  of  total  tourist  arrivals  in  India.  Travel  receipts  have  also  suffered 
because of lower tourist arrivals from the euro area, particularly from the affected countries.  
Deleveraging  in  European  banking  system  impacted  credit  flows  to  India  (Chart  4).  The 
consolidated  claims  of  the  European  banks  on  India  declined  from  US$  146  billion  in 
December 2010 to US $ 139 billion in December 20126.  
 Euro area is also an important source of foreign direct investment (FDI) to India. It accounted 
for around 18 per cent of the total FDI into India in 2012-13. Given the more stable nature of 
these flows as compared to foreign institutional investment (FII) flows, the crisis has had a 
                                                 
6   Excluding  UK  and  Switzerland,  European  banks’  claim  on  India  stood  at  US  $  56  billion  at  end-December 
2012. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
marginal impact on the FDI flows to India. When the crisis began, the FDI flows from euro 
area economies declined from about US$ 3.5 billion in 2009-10 to about US$ 3.1 billion in 
2010-11. However, it recovered to US$ 4.2 billion in 2011-12 and around US$ 3.5 billion in 
2012-13 (Table 2).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In  addition,  Europe  constitutes  a  major  source  of  private  transfer  inflows  to  India,  around 
19 per cent in 2008-09. As the unemployment situation in euro area continues to deteriorate, 
it may have an adverse impact on remittance flow to India.  
Conclusion 
The  uncertainty  about  the  duration  of  the  euro  area  crisis  persists  as  there  has  not  been 
much  improvement  in  its  real  economy  despite  a  string  of  policy  steps.  While  reforms  are 
being initiated, fresh concerns are surfacing: for example, recent downgrade of both Italy and 
France.  
In India, we have been proactive in addressing the challenges posed by the uncertainties in 
the  global  economy,  particularly  in  the  euro  area.  As  capital  inflows  to  our  economy  have 
turned volatile, financing of our large current account deficit has become a challenge. In this 
context,  various  policy  measures  have  been  undertaken  by  the  Reserve  Bank  and  the 
Government to moderate imports and to improve capital inflows.  
Oil and gold are the two major items of our imports. With regard to oil, the domestic pricing 
has increasingly been made market determined. It is expected that this will help economizing 
the  domestic  oil  consumption.  Recently  import  duty  on  gold  has  been  raised  and  bank 
finance against pledge of gold has been restricted. The efficacy of these measures, however, 
is  yet  to  be  tested.  We  have  also  introduced  inflation  indexed  bonds  which  should  help 
contain gold demand to the extent  these bonds are used as an investment hedge against 
inflation.  Notwithstanding  these  measures  for  a  fast  growing  economy  like  ours,  import 
demand is bound to be high. Hence, we have to step up exports to narrow the trade gap. But 
in  a  phase  of  sluggish  global  economy,  it  is  difficult  to  push  up  exports.  Nevertheless, 
initiatives  have  been  taken  to  diversify  trade  towards  emerging  markets.  On  balance, 
however, the current account deficit remains high thus needs to be financed through capital 
inflows.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The policy measures taken to encourage capital inflows include liberalisation of the interest 
rates on non-resident deposits and external commercial borrowings, rationalisation of norms 
related  to  foreign  institutional  investment  (FII)  in  infrastructure  debt  and  allowing  foreign 
direct  investment  (FDI)  in  multi-brand  retail.  The  sectoral  limit  for  FII  investment  in 
government securities and corporate bonds has been hiked.  
To sum up, while national authorities are taking steps, international financial institutions (IFIs) 
like  the  IMF  need  to  be  more  proactive  to  suggest  ways  to  limit  the  spillover  and  prompt 
actions to be taken to arrest further deterioration in global economic condition. In this context, 
speedy  implementation  of  a  complete  banking  union  in  the  euro  area  with  an  integrated 
regulatory  and  supervisory  structure  assumes  importance.  In  this  scenario  our  economies 
need  to  strive  for  increasing  resilience  while  being  prepared  to  deal  with  the  negative 
spillovers from the crisis. The immediate concern for India is to reduce the current account 
deficit  from  its  present  high  level.  Over  the  medium-term,  efforts  made  to  diversify  trade 
towards emerging market and developing economies should be stepped up. In this context, 
there is greater scope for trade and financial integration in the SAARC region which will be 
mutually beneficial. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
