Luis M Linde: Reflections on the crisis in the Spanish economy and its 
European context 
Address by Mr Luis M Linde, Governor of the Bank of Spain, at the Spanish Medical Surgery 
Academy, Madrid, 31 January 2013. 
 Mr President, distinguished members, ladies and gentlemen, 
It  is  a  pleasure  and  a  privilege  for  me  to  participate  in  this  ceremony  marking  the 
appointment of new members, all the more so given my own honorary nomination. 
I much appreciate the invitation by the President of the Academy, Professor Ortiz Quintana, 
a friend of mine, albeit only for a little over 50 years. It gives me the opportunity to share with 
you  some  reflections  on  the  crisis  the  Spanish  economy  is  undergoing  and  its  European 
context. 
A particularly severe crisis 
Certain parallels can be drawn between the work of those of us who attempt to understand 
the  causes  of  economic  crises  and  how  to  treat  them,  and  that  of  doctors,  who  seek  to 
understand illnesses and how to cure or alleviate their effects. 
Almost  invariably,  economic  crises  contain  common  elements,  meaning  that  each  new 
outbreak reveals problems that are familiar to us and which we have already learned to treat 
in the past. Not infrequently, however, these old and well-known viruses are accompanied by 
singular characteristics, which put to the test our diagnostic capacity and our ability to devise 
new  treatments.  And  crises,  like  illnesses,  are  also  more  or  less  acute,  may  overlap  one 
another and may have interconnecting feedback loops, with the consequent increase in risks 
to the health of the patient or, in this case, of the economy. 
Viewed  from  this  perspective,  the  current  crisis  in  Spain  is  very  serious.  It  has  seen  the 
confluence  of  different  tensions  and  problems,  which  tend  to  exacerbate  one  another  and 
make diagnosis and treatment more complex. And, as a particularly worrying characteristic, 
its social, institutional and political dimensions go beyond those of previous crises. 
The constraints arising from Monetary Union membership 
To understand the situation facing the Spanish economy, I must first briefly explain how the 
mechanisms of economic adjustment work in a monetary union and what the consequences 
are for economic policy management. 
First and foremost, in my opinion, the fact that Spain is part of the European Economic and 
Monetary  Union  has  been  and  will  continue  to  be  an  enormously  positive  factor  for  our 
economy.  As  a  founding  member  of  the  euro,  Spain  has  benefited  over  the  13  years  the 
single currency has been in place from conditions of economic stability which, most probably, 
would  not  have  been  possible  outside  monetary  union,  and  which  have  led  to  an 
improvement in our standard of living that the current difficulties should not let us forget. 
Yet  that  should  not  mask  the  fact  that  belonging  to  a  monetary  union  entails  a  series  of 
constraints or commitments which, among other things, involve the necessary adaptation of 
economic agents’ behaviour and of the means of pursuing economic policy. 
In  a  monetary  union,  the  control  of  two  essential  instruments  usually  at  hand  to  combat 
crises passes to a supranational level and, therefore, they cease to be available to meet the 
specific  needs  of  the  member  countries:  both  very  short-term  interest  rates  –  the  key  tool 
used by a central bank when setting its monetary policy – and the exchange rate have been 
set in the European Monetary Union, since 1 January 1999, on the basis of the aggregate 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
situation of the area as a whole. They cannot be managed to serve the specific needs of any 
national economy. It is the national economies that have to be in a position to live with the 
standards set for the whole. 
National  authorities retain  control  of the  other  economic  policies,  which  remain  under  their 
responsibility;  however,  the  proper  functioning  of  the  area  evidently  requires  that  their 
handling  should  observe  specific  common  principles,  preventing  misalignments  in  one 
country from prompting imbalances in the rest, or from destabilising the monetary union as a 
whole. 
The way in which these common principles have been implemented has differed depending 
on the specific economic policy tool in question. Thus, for instance, fiscal policy coordination 
mechanisms  have  been  the  focus  of  particular  attention,  with  monitoring  and  surveillance 
procedures  to  avoid  excessive  budget  deficits  (of  over  3%  of  GDP)  and  high  public  debt 
proportions  (over  60%  of  GDP) coming  into  play.  Indeed,  these  thresholds,  along  with  the 
procedures  for  their  prevention  and  ultimate  correction,  took  the  form  in  1997  of  an 
agreement known as the Stability and Growth Pact. 
In contrast, the rules for coordinating “structural” policy (e.g. those governing the workings of 
the labour market or the markets for goods and services) were fairly lightweight as a result of 
their  broader  scope  for  application  and  of  the  difficulties  involved  in  setting  common 
objectives.  Also,  in  the  area  of  financial  regulation  and  supervision  policies,  countries 
continued to enjoy a high degree of independence. 
The limitations of the monetary union’s adjustment mechanisms 
As  events  have  shown,  the  constraints  imposed  by  the  institutional  framework  were  not 
powerful  enough  to  ensure  the  appropriate  response  by  national  authorities  in  the  face  of 
potential slippage from the stability levels required. 
It  was  hoped  that  the  very  fact  of  monetary  union  membership  would  activate  sufficient 
response  mechanisms.  Among  these  potential  mechanisms,  particular  importance  was 
accorded  to  the  so-called  “competitiveness  channel”,  which  works  as  follows:  when  an 
economy’s inflation rate stands systematically above the average for the rest of the area, the 
very loss of competitiveness involved – or, what amounts to the same, the relative rise in the 
cost  of  output  in  that  economy  –  tends  to  reduce  demand-side  pressures  and  ease  the 
tensions  on  prices  that  led  to  the  initial  slippage.  However,  for  this  channel  to  work 
economies  should,  inter  alia,  be  adaptable  and  sufficiently  flexible,  something  which,  for 
social and political reasons, is evidently not easy to achieve. 
It was also thought monetary union membership would prompt greater discipline in economic 
policy management. It was assumed that, if a Member State’s management of the economic 
instruments available to it was inadequate, the subsequent adverse effects on its growth and 
employment-generating  capacity  would  lead  international  investors  to  demand  greater 
returns  for  investing  in  the  country,  or  even  to  freeze  such  investment.  The  subsequent 
tightening  of  financing  conditions  would  discipline  economic  agents  and  ultimately  redress 
economic management. But this mechanism did not work because financial markets, rather 
than  punishing  divergences,  instead  financed  excesses,  contributing  to  exacerbating 
tensions. 
Unsurprisingly,  then,  the  crisis  has  called  into  question  the  consistency  of  the  institutional 
arrangements underpinning the euro. The solution would involve a reformulation of the initial 
project, geared to fuller integration. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The adaptation of the Spanish economy to the euro was incomplete 
Turning now to the Spanish economy, our adaptation to the new rules of play derived from, or 
imposed by, monetary union has been insufficient and belated. 
Our  membership  of  the  euro  area  compelled  us  to  desist  from  long-established  practices 
among economic agents who regarded exchange rate devaluation as the “normal” means of 
resolving  the  problems  of  competitiveness  caused  by  inflation  and  did  not  consider  fiscal 
discipline as vital for maintaining economic growth. 
True, in the years before we joined the euro area, we took steps to adjust economic policy 
rules to a low-inflation environment and set in train some reforms so it would function more 
flexibly. Two factors were particularly important in achieving this goal. First, the anchoring of 
inflation expectations, which required fulfilment of the price stability convergence criteria. And 
second,  in  the  area  of  budgetary  policy,  the  enactment  in  2011  of  an  initial  Stability  Law 
laying the foundations for preventing excessive budget deficits. 
The transition to Monetary Union was also easier because the peseta/euro conversion rate 
agreed in 1999 was quite competitive as a result of the devaluations which had taken place 
between 1992 and 1995 during the functioning of the European Monetary System. However, 
those devaluations were a clear sign of the difficulties awaiting countries that make exchange 
rate commitments if these are not accompanied by price and cost discipline. 
In the first ten years of membership of the euro area, Spain enjoyed a long phase of growth 
in  an  environment  in  which  monetary  policy,  with  relatively  low  interest  rates,  was  highly 
expansionary.  This  period  saw  rapid  increases  in  the  standard  of  living  and  in  economic 
welfare,  as  reflected  by  the  rapid  rise  in  GDP  per  capita,  which  in  2007  edged  above  the 
average  of  that  of  the  countries  then  comprising  the  euro  area.  This  achievement  largely 
reflected very labour-intensive growth. 
The insufficient adaptation to the euro gave rise to significant imbalances 
However, the expansion in those years was based on a pattern of household and corporate 
spending  which,  driven  by  the  property  sector  boom  and  by  cheap  and  easy  credit, 
systematically exceeded the economy’s productive capacity. This imbalance has been at the 
root of the difficulties of the Spanish economy since the international financial crisis began. 
First, demand-side pressure led to significant pressure on costs, margins and prices, which 
tended  to  grow  systematically  faster  than  those  of  our  European  partners,  with  a  notable 
worsening of our external competitiveness. This was not at all consistent with the decision to 
forgo the exchange rate as an economic policy instrument. 
Second,  the  lack  of  sufficient  domestic  output  to  meet  domestic  demand  had  to  be 
increasingly covered by imports. This caused a sizeable imbalance in our foreign trade, as 
reflected  by  the  balance  of  payments,  which  in  2007–2008  ran  a  deficit  of  around  10% of 
GDP.  At  the  same  time,  the  financing  of  this  process  required  huge flows  of  funds  which, 
given  the  insufficiency  of  domestic  saving,  had  to  be  met  by  turning  to  foreign  saving, 
channelled to Spanish households and firms by credit institutions. Behind this whole process 
lay a real estate sector growing at an excessive pace in terms of both houses built and house 
prices. The excessive surge in construction was unquestionably fuelled by low interest rates 
and the practically unlimited supply of financing provided by foreign saving. 
The sound fiscal performance by the Spanish economy before the crisis, between 2005 and 
2007, masked the actual situation of public finances which  were distorted by extraordinary 
revenue  of  a  strictly  temporary  nature,  linked  to  the  exuberant  real  estate  sector.  These 
abundant 
the  necessary  public  expenditure 
rationalisation and control measures needed in both central and regional government. 
inflows  discouraged 
the  adoption  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
In short, the path followed by the Spanish economy in those years brought about substantial 
macroeconomic imbalances which crystallised in, among other things, a large external deficit 
and a sudden sharp rise in total external debt, both of which reached highs in 2007–2008. 
Finally and inevitably a far-reaching adjustment took place, unfortunately amid the turmoil of 
the  international  financial  crisis.  On  top  of  all  this,  in  the  middle  of  the  recession,  Spain’s 
public finances worsened markedly from a surplus of nearly 2% of GDP in 2007 to a deficit of 
more than 11% of GDP in 2009, and, in addition, the severe job destruction over the last five 
years has raised the unemployment rate to over 25% of the labour force. 
The  labour market  was  also  subject to  certain  illusions  during those  years. The  enormous 
growth in the construction sector lay, without a  doubt, behind the major immigration flows, 
and  this  strong  population  growth  drove  buoyant  consumption  and,  by  extension,  the 
increase in activity and employment in all sectors, delaying the reforms that would have led 
to a more balanced adjustment between wages and employment. 
the  recessionary 
To overcome the crisis further reforms are needed at the national and European levels 
However, it should also be noted that the size of the imbalances that built up in the Spanish 
economy  was  not  only  a  consequence  of  insufficient  adaptation  to  the  conditions  and 
restrictions of euro area membership. They are also related to the deficient functioning of the 
disciplinary mechanisms with which the euro area is equipped and the fragilities inherent in 
its  institutional  design  and  its  system  of  governance.  Hence  the  Spanish  crisis  is  closely 
related to the euro crisis, and overcoming it also depends on Europe’s ability to respond to 
the institutional problems of the Monetary Union. 
Aside from the important role that the solutions being considered in the European Union to 
better  control  budget  deficits  must  play,  overcoming 
tendencies 
experienced by the Spanish economy since 2008 requires the correction of some structural 
features that hinder its ability to adapt. The fall in employment, which has been much greater 
in Spain than in the other euro area countries during the crisis, is largely explained by the 
insufficient adaptation of labour conditions. Indeed, wages and prices continued to grow as if 
no  significant  cyclical  change  had  occurred.  The  labour  market  reform  has  addressed  the 
serious  distortions  that  have  existed  in  this  area  for  decades.  Their  effects  on  wage 
moderation have already begun to be noted and, although the improvement in terms of job 
creation is taking longer, I have no doubt that it will materialise, if the possibilities opened up 
by the reforms are fully harnessed and completed. 
The  sharp  deterioration  in  public  finances  since  2008,  which  only  began  to  be  corrected 
seriously  in  2012,  has  unavoidably  required  the  implementation  of  severe  and  unpopular 
austerity  measures  and  reforms.  Despite  their  initially  restrictive  impact,  they  are  vital  for 
restoring  confidence  in  the  sustainability  of  our  public  finances  and  for  normalising  our 
access to international financing, which is essential for our exit from recession and for the 
resumption  of  growth  in  the  euro  area.  Great  efforts  are  being  made,  involving  significant 
sacrifices from broad sections of society; but they will eventually bear fruit and help to absorb 
the mass unemployment that is currently Spain’s most serious problem. 
To overcome the deterioration in solvency stemming from the economic crisis and the end of 
the  unsustainable  growth  in  construction  and  related  lending  activity,  part  of  the  banking 
sector has required an extensive clean-up, restructuring and recapitalisation. The main thrust 
of this process is already well-advanced, and this is having positive effects on the ability of 
our banks to raise funds abroad. Its completion will be a fundamental step in the recovery of 
confidence, activity and employment. 
We  can  affirm  that  the  tensions  experienced  by  the  Spanish  economy  over  the  last 
18 months have begun to abate, as a result of greater confidence in both the ability of the 
euro  area  to  reform  and  in  the  adjustment  drive  of  our  economic  policy.  The  deep-seated 
change  in  our  trade  balance,  which  will  be  manifest  in  a  significant  balance  of  payments 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
surplus in 2013, is the prime example of the adjustment under way in the Spanish economy 
and of the competitiveness gains that are materialising. 
To conclude: you ask me what my prognosis is (not surprisingly, given who you are). I think 
you will understand if I reply that I still reserve my judgment. But, it was significantly worse a 
few months ago. I believe that the patient can of course be cured, must continue to take the 
prescribed medicine and should not be out on the town at night. 
Many thanks, again, to the Academy and the President for your invitation and to all of you for 
your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
