Duvvuri Subbarao: Looking at some of the Reserve Bank of India’s goals 
and aspirations 
Speaking  notes  by  Dr  Duvvuri  Subbarao,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  for  the 
Golden Jubilee Celebration Function of the Reserve Bank Staff College, Chennai, 8 July 2013. 
 1. 
• 
     Delighted to be participating in the Golden Jubilee of RBSC. 
Over the last 50 years, RBSC has established a formidable reputation for the quality 
of its training programmes, innovations in training techniques and for its commitment 
to be moving up the learning curve. 
The RBSC can take pride in having trained generations of RBI staff who are known 
for their subject matter expertise, professional integrity, and value based conduct. 
This is a tribute to the past chairmen of the Governing Council, Principals, faculty 
and staff of the College over the last 50 years. 
On  the  occasion  of  the college’s  Golden  Jubilee,  I  am  privileged  and  delighted  to 
place on record our homage to their contribution.  
In  particular,  I  want  to  acknowledge  the  past  principals  of  the  college  who  are 
present at the celebrations today:  
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
Some past principals who are not able to be present here today are the following:  
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
Shri R.C. Mody  
Shri O.P. Sodhani  
Shri P.K. Biswas  
Shri S. Venkataraman  
Shri T.R. Devarajan  
Shri M. Jesudasan  
Smt. Chitra Chandramouliswaran  
Shri S. Karuppasamy  
Dr. J. Sadakkadulla  
Ms. Uma Subramanian (present Principal) 
Shri K.K. Mukherjee  
Shri K.N.V. Nair  
Shri K. Hariharan  
Shri K. Sivaraman  
Shri S. Ganesh  
Looking ahead – goals and aspirations 
2. 
Golden  Jubilee  is  an  occasion  to  celebrate  past  achievements;  equally  it  is  an 
occasion  to  look  ahead  to  the  challenges  and  to  redefine  goals  and  renew 
aspirations. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
5. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
Looking ahead by looking back 
3. 
What I want to do in my comments is to look ahead by looking back and give some 
broad  contours  of  the  Reserve  Bank’s  goals  and  aspirations  which  in  turn  should 
inform the role and responsibilities of RBSC. 
Central banking is changing 
4. 
Over the last five years, the world has gone through an extraordinary financial and 
economic  crisis.  Central  banks  have  been  blamed  for  getting  the  world  into  the 
crisis. They are also being praised for getting the world out of the crisis. This is not 
the occasion to debate the faults or celebrate the heroics of central banks. 
All I want to do on this occasion is to acknowledge that as a result of the impact of 
the global financial crisis and the follow on euro zone crisis, central banking around 
the world is changing in dramatic ways. 
• 
about autonomy and accountability of central banks 
the mandate they must pursue with regard to monetary policy 
their mandate beyond monetary policy 
Vigorous debates 
– 
– 
– 
Debate playing out in different ways in different countries. 
Debate playing out here in India too. 
We know for sure that there will be changes in central banking everywhere; 
there will be changes here in India too. 
What those changes will be is not clear.  
  RBI – knowledge institution 
6. 
In one sentence – “by becoming a knowledge institution”.  
Hierarchy of learning: 
Data → Information → Knowledge → Wisdom 
How should the Reserve Bank manage that change? 
• 
If someone challenged me: What is a knowledge institution? 
Cannot define. But I can explain it.  
• 
• 
So, how do we become a knowledge institution? 
• 
• 
Knowledge institution – sufficient condition 
(i) 
(ii) 
By becoming a storehouse of knowledge. Accumulate knowledge 
Necessary but not sufficient 
Use that knowledge to achieve your goals. Knowledge → Wisdom 
In doing so, your conduct and action must be based on values and ethics.  
Focus of my comments 
11. 
Characteristics or attributes that the Reserve Bank must acquire to progress on the 
path to being a knowledge institution. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
12. 
13. 
1st  attribute:  managing  monetary  and  regulatory  policies  in  a  globalizing 
world 
• 
GFC  and  the  eurozone  crisis  have  demonstrated  the  uncertainties  and 
dilemmas of macroeconomic management in a globalizing world.  
Before the crisis – we thought we were decoupled. Crisis proved that to be 
wrong.  
Virtually  every  country  affected  by  the  crisis.  If  there  is  one  country  that 
should not have been affected, it is India. Among large EMEs, India least 
integrated into the world. Shows the power of globalization. 
Does  it  mean  we  are  paying  too  high  a  price  for  globalization?  Does  it 
mean we opt out of globalization?  
No. Perish the thought.  
Globalization  is  a  double  edged  sword.  Immense  opportunities.  Ruthless 
challenges. 
India  benefitted  from  globalization.  Great  Moderation  –  benign  global 
environment. India’s growth acceleration is due to Great Moderation. 
India also paid the cost of globalization. India being impacted by the crisis – 
example of costs of globalization 
Manage globalization – minimize the costs.  
– maximise the benefits. 
Managing globalization in monetary policy 
How do we manage globalization in making our policy? 
• 
Earlier  monetary  policy  by  looking  at  just  the  domestic  situation.  Credit 
policy  documents  in  the  1970s,  80s,  90s  –  no  reference  to  external 
situation. 
That has changed in a fundamental way.  
Because of India’s integration, external developments impact our domestic 
macroeconomic situation in complex, uncertain and capricious ways.  
Now  in  making  our  policy,  we  need  to  take  external  developments  into 
account.  Our  policy  documents  contain  an  important  section  on  global 
developments.  
         Example 1: great exit 
 Prospect of the Great Exit – US Fed tapering off its QE 
If you analyse – Fed did not say anything new. But markets reacted.  
Managing  globalization  means  we  need  to  understand  how  market 
participants  react  to  global  developments.  And  how  that  impacts  our 
economic and financial conditions. And what should be policy response? 
Example 2: Basel III 
14. 
Example from regulatory domain 
• 
• 
Basel III – started implementing wef April 1, 2013  
Why do we have to implement Basel III?  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
    Argument: AE banks that misbehaved. It’s they which had to be set right. 
It’s they that require higher capital standards. 
Argument  is  flawed.  Our  banks  are  operating  abroad.  Foreign  banks  are 
coming to operate in India. 
India cannot be an outlier. 
Admittedly,  higher  capital  requirements  and  tighter  regulation  will  make 
credit costlier. 
But  the  cost  of  not  implementing  Basel  III  greater  than  the  cost  of 
implementing it. Indeed, the cost-benefit calculus could be positive.  
Understand global developments 
Analyse implications for domestic economy 
Frame policies in that context 
After all the debate, all the analysis, policy decision is a matter of judgment 
Operating at the bridge from knowledge to wisdom 
1st attribute: knowledge institution – manage both economic and regulatory policies 
in a globalizing environment 
• 
• 
• 
2nd  attribute:  knowledge  institution  –  make  intelligent,  mature,  balanced 
judgement 
• 
• 
Example 1: monetary policy decision 
• 
• 
• 
Monetary policy decision (calibrate interest rate)  
Managing the crisis vs managing the recovery  
Crisis:  What  was  important  was  not  what  you  did,  but  that  you  did 
something at regular intervals. 
Recovery – calibration was very important  
• 
• 
Chakravyuh in Mahabharata: Getting in was easy. Getting out was difficult.  
Post-crisis: Applying judgement in treading the growth-inflation balance: If we alter 
interest  rates,  what  impact  will  it  have  on  inflation?  On  growth?  Transmission. 
Criticism of RBI. 
Example 2: deposit insurance 
• 
• 
• 
Example 3: costs and benefits to regulation 
• 
During the crisis – UK banks insured all their deposits  
Pressure on us to do the same  
Can we afford it? Will it not set off a panic?  
Tighter regulations – safe financial system but also a dysfunctional financial 
system. 
Excessive or premature tightening can mean loss of growth and welfare. 
Excessively loose regulation can result in financial instability. 
Drawing the right balance requires fine judgement.  
Ability  to  make  the  right  judgment  is  a  key  attribute  of  a  knowledge 
institution. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
15. 
16. 
17. 
18. 
19. 
20. 
4 
 21. 
22. 
2nd attribute: ability to make intelligent, mature and balanced judgment.  
3rd attribute: be open minded. no dogma. Galileo and the church 
• 
By far the most famous and high profile example of dogma in the history of 
science is the conflict between Galileo and the Church.  
Church refused to accept the heliocentric view of the universe against the 
prevailing geocentric view of the universe. 
No  dogma  means  when  new  evidence  that  invalidates  prevailing  view 
comes in, we are willing to change our view and accept the new proposition 
(Thomas Kuhn – Paradigm Shift).  
Galileo  himself  was  not  fully  correct  because  he  believed  in  a  stationary 
sun.  
Example: corporates into the banking sector 
23. 
Why are you allowing corporates into the banking sector? 
True, they have not been allowed so far.  
True, rules in this regard around the world are different. 
After extensive consultation, due deliberation and careful consideration, we 
have decided to allow corporates into the banking sector  
Why?  
– 
  Corporates  have  been  allowed  entry  into  other  financial  service 
sectors 
Corporates  have  a  long  and  credible  record  of  building  and 
nurturing new businesses in highly regulated sectors like telecom, 
power, airports.  
Corporates  can  bring  in  capital,  leverage  on  their  business 
experience and management expertise 
Innovative ideas for financial inclusion 
Scope for connected lending, using public trust for private gain  
Opportunities  for  regulatory  arbitrage  and  for  contagion  of  risk 
across the financial system 
Concentration of economic power and influence 
– 
Arguments against 
– 
– 
        24. 
Safeguards  (endogenous  and  exogenous)  against  self-centred  business  practices 
and self-dealing.  
3rd attribute: be open minded. 
4th attribute: learning institution 
25. 
You learn something every day (ICICI girl) 
Knowledge institution has to be a learning institution  
• 
Example 
• 
• 
Rogoff and Reinhart “This Time is Different”  
Studied 800 years of history of financial crisis  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   Every  time  a  crisis  has  occurred  –  economists  and  policy  makers  have 
said: “This time is different.”  
Yet over 800 years, the origins of all financial crises can be traced to the 
same fundamental causes.  
This is a controversial and contentious debate.  
Without  taking  a  position  on  this,  I  want  to  emphasize  that  a  knowledge 
institution tries to distil lessons from every experience.  
Example 2: humility 
• 
At the same time, a knowledge institution must have humility: We have to 
admit that we can’t control everything. 
Instead  of  believing  that  the  world  must  behave  according  to  what  our 
theories say, we have to take the work as given and try to fit theories into 
that.  
Known  unknowns.  We  have  to  accept  them  as  they  are  without  any 
presumption about superior knowledge.  
– 
– 
Einstein: Propounded the theory of relativity 
All his life couldn’t reconcile to the probabilistic nature Implied by 
quantum mechanics. 
“God doesn’t play dice” 
Neils Bohr: Stop telling God what he can or cannot do  
 26. 
4th  attribute:  knowledge  institution  is  conscious  that  it  is  forever  on  a  learning 
curve.  
5th attribute: generate knowledge 
27. 
Knowledge institution has to generate knowledge  
• 
• 
Research  
I’ve  asked  Research  Department  to  publish  papers  of  international 
standards. 
RBI  –  Public  Policy  Institution  – We generate  not  esoteric knowledge  but 
knowledge based on what we learn from experience. 
That should be our comparative advantage 
It’s here that our knowledge generation differs from that in natural sciences. 
In natural sciences, knowledge progression is a two way street  
– 
– 
Knowledge advances in both directions.  
From  empirical  findings  to  theory,  and  from  theory  to  empirical 
findings.  
Michelson Morley experiment that velocity of light is constant led to 
the theory of relativity. Progression from experience to theory.  
Search for Higgs Boson triggered by prediction of quantum theory. 
Progression from theory to experience.  
  In  public  policy,  learning  is  only  one  way  street  –  from  real  world  to 
knowledge 
     6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Other attributes of learning  
(i) 
– 
Shuns group think (risk managers who dissented were silenced) 
Plurality  of  views.  Minority  voices  and  opinion  are  heard  and 
considered with respect 
Internal Communication is very important 
Thematic Video Conferences in RBI  
Should be a two way learning process  
Great  learning  experience.  Some  staff,  especially  younger  staff, 
ask searching questions.  
No  working  in  silos.  Cross  fertilization  of  ideas  from  across 
disciplines and departments.  
Capacity to deal with complexity and uncertainty 
Conant-Ashby  Theorem  from  cybernetics  –  Every  regulator  of  a 
system must have a model of the system it seeks to regulate  
(ii) 
– 
– 
– 
(iii) 
(iv) 
– 
28. 
5th attribute: environment for generating knowledge 
6th attribute: open, communicative and consultative 
29. 
Knowledge institutions – Open, communicative and consultative 
• 
• 
Power of central bank communication is striking  
Fed – after 9/11: “The Federal Reserve System is open and operating. The 
discount window is open to meet liquidity needs.” 
Those  two  banal  sentences  had  remarkable  calming  effect  on  US  and 
world financial markets. Announcement effect is stunning. 
Mario  Draghi  “Whatever  it  takes”  Prevented  what  many  thought  was  an 
imminent collapse of the euro. 
During  the  crisis  –  RBI  communicated  about  uncertainty  but  also 
preparedness to act. Calming effect.  
“The  Reserve  Bank  is  committed  to  maintaining 
financial stability and flexible liquidity management 
using all policy instruments.” 
You  might  think  these  are  routine,  vacuous  statements  devoid  of  any 
content. Can be incredibly effective in restoring calm.  
    30. 
Dilemma in communication – how much do we communicate?  
• 
• 
Two views about it.  
First view: If you have something negative, don’t say it because it can have 
self-reinforcing negative impact. 
Mothers across cultures and across time: “If you don’t have anything nice to 
say, don’t say it.”  
Alternative view: “Say it as it is. You must present the true picture.” 
– 
– 
Example: Bernanke: Results of banking stress tests. 
If the central bank has credibility, communication can be effective. 
Our own experience supports this view.  
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
   Forward guidance on monetary policy – struggle with nuancing it  
“Little space for further monetary policy easing.” Governor doesn’t 
know English. 
Paradox here – Monetary Policy forward guidance most needed by 
market when there is uncertainty. 
But that is also the time when you are least able to give definitive 
guidance. 
 Communication 
to  wrong 
interpretations and unintended consequences. Recent statements from the 
US Fed on tapering of the QE.  
is  a  double  edged  sword. 
It  can 
lead 
31. 
Communication should not be one way. We should also listen. 
• 
  Town  Hall  Meetings  (at  least  once  every  year.  Chandigarh,  Jaipur, 
Pondicherry)  
June  29  –  on  illegal,  unlawful  financial  schemes  –  Ponzi,  multi-level 
marketing schemes – cheating people. 
Media Conferences  
Post-policy teleconference  
Pre-policy consultations  
Consultative:  Discussion  Papers  on  policy  initiatives.  On  new  bank 
licences,  on  subsidiarization  of  foreign  banks,  deregulating  interest  on 
savings bank deposits, white label ATMs, risk based supervision.  
32. 
6th attribute: open minded, communicative and consultative.  
7th attribute: outreach 
33. 
Knowledge institution – effort at outreach – to get exposed to the real world.  
• 
• 
inflation (middle aged people) 
growth (young people) 
Reserve Bank cannot function in an ivory tower. 
Growth, inflation, interest rates and exchange rates are not mere statistics. 
They impact people’s everyday lives. 
Outreach programme to listen and understand. To explain. 
Chennai  –  town  hall  meeting  (3  years  ago  on  the  steps  of  the  Egmore 
Museum) 
– 
– 
Village immersion programme for DRs  
– 
– 
Frontline Managers Conference 
– 
– 
You  learn  stuff  that  meetings,  seminars,  conferences  and  reports  do  not 
give you.  
how do the poor live? 
how do they manage their finances? 
BC : BM makes me wait in the line 
humiliated in front of clients. 
    8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
34. 
7th attribute: outreach. Understand the world for which we make policy. 
8th attribute: takes accountability seriously 
35. 
Knowledge institution – takes accountability seriously 
• 
• 
• 
As RBI, we jealously guard our autonomy  
“RBI is independent.” We know public interest. No one should interfere. 
But  the  autonomy  that  we  assert  so  vehemently  has  to  be  earned.  Not 
demanded. Need to earn by rendering accountability. 
We are an unelected body of officials making public policy with enormous 
implications for people’s everyday lives. 
Accountable for results – explain growth, inflation 
Open to be challenged  
Governor to go before the Standing Committee of the Parliament 
• 
• 
• 
8th attribute: takes accountability seriously.  
 9th attribute: think positive 
37. 
Knowledge institution – think positive  
• 
• 
• 
9th attribute: think positive.  
Executive of a shoe company to explore the demand for shoes 
Nobody wears shoes. No demand. 
Rival Company: Nobody wears shoes. Enormous demand.  
10th attribute: values and ethics 
39. 
Values and ethics ( Prof. Dipankar Gupta)  
• 
Sensitivity – inflation and the poor 
Humility – Financial markets are misbehaving  
• 
• 
Compassion  
• 
Always uphold larger public interest 
The difficulty of being good 
• 
 Every  character  in  Mahabharata  is  morally  flawed  in  some  sense  or  the 
other. Every episode raises a moral debate about “What is dharma?”  
Draupadi to Yudhistara : Whom did you lose first? 
Bhishma’s silence – Did his dharma become hostage to the abiding sense 
of loyalty to the king? 
Knowledge institution – upholding dharma 
• 
Ten attributes of a knowledge institution. Not comprehensive. Not a unique listing. 
RBI has come a long way. Becoming a knowledge institution is not an event but a 
process.  
Remind  ourselves  of  the  challenge  and  opportunity  of  becoming  a  knowledge 
institution. 
36. 
38. 
40. 
41. 
42. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
43. 
44. 
RBSC  –  will  be  the  prime  lever  of  the  Reserve  Bank’s  journey  to  become  a 
knowledge institution.  
My  privilege  to  be  at  this  knowledge  institution  when  RBI  celebrated  its  platinum 
jubilee in 2009/10 and when the RBSC is celebrating its Golden Jubilee in 2012/13.  
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
