Odo Tevi: Financial inclusion in Vanuatu 
Keynote address by Mr Odo Tevi, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Vanuatu, at the National 
Financial Inclusion workshop, Port Vila, 9–10 August 2012. 
 Honorable Minister of Finance and Economic Management, 
Deputy Governors, 
Development Partners,  
Distinguished Speakers, 
Bankers and Financial Services Providers, 
Public Figures from other jurisdictions in the Pacific and from Vanuatu, 
Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
World leaders now recognize Financial Inclusion as an important tool to promote sustainable 
economic  growth  and  development.  This  was  evident  during  the  G20  Pittsburg  Summit  in 
November 2009, where the leaders made fresh commitments to improve access to financial 
services to low income people by supporting the spread of safe and sound modes of financial 
services capable of reaching the low income earners and the remote rural population group. 
What is Financial Inclusion? 
Financial inclusion is about the delivery of affordable and sustainable financial services to the 
underserved.  Specifically  it  is  about  making  readily  available  safe  savings  products, 
appropriately tailored loans, and insurance and payment services affordable to low income 
earners, women, and those living in the rural areas. 
In  the  pacific  region,  in  2009,  the  Forum  Finance  and  Economic  Minister  Meeting  have 
agreed that each Pacific island nation be committed to achieve the Money Pacific Goals by 
2020. This is a commitment that our Governments have already made and I sincerely thank 
the  Honorable  Minister  of  Finance  for  re-affirming  the  Government’s  full  support  towards 
greater financial inclusion in Vanuatu this morning. 
The  Money  Pacific  Goal  number  one  recognizes  the  importance  of  financial  literacy  and 
therefore aims to incorporate financial education in the core national school curriculum. This 
approach  aims  to  impart  a  basic  life-skill  to  our  children  on  understanding  money  and 
managing income to benefit their families and their communities and sustainably participate 
in economic activities. The Reserve Bank of Vanuatu is currently working with the ministry of 
Education  to  address  this  goal  and  I  am  glad  to  mention  that  the  Ministry  of  Education  is 
keen on this initiative. 
The  Money  Pacific  Goal  number  two focuses  on  adult  financial  education  and  is  aimed  to 
make  it  available  to  all  adults  in  each  respective  nation  in  the  Pacific.  On  this,  I  wish  to 
sincerely acknowledge the National Bank of Vanuatu and VANWODS Microfinance for their 
financial  literacy  programs  on  the  Radio.  I  would  also  like  to  acknowledge  ANZ  Bank, 
Westpac Bank, Vanuatu Agriculture Development Bank, the Department of Cooperative and 
Ni-Vanuatu Business, and other institutions I did not mention, for their extensive community 
based financial  literacy  and  business  up  skilling  programs.  All  of these organizations  have 
committed a lot of efforts and resources to offer financial education to those who need it but 
are  underserved.  I  am  also  delighted  for  our  donor  partners  who  have  acknowledged  the 
importance  of  financial  inclusion  and  I  look  forward  to  working  with  you  to  expand  the 
financial literacy further. 
Goal  number  three  is  aimed  at  putting  in  place  a  simple  and  transparent  mechanism  to 
protect  consumers  of  financial  services.  I  am  happy  to  inform  us  this  morning  that  at  the 
request of the Pacific Island Financial Inclusion working Group in a meeting last year at the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Reserve Bank of Vanuatu, I have agreed that Vanuatu will take the lead in implementing the 
Consumer  Protection  Goal.  The  Reserve  Bank  is  currently  working  with  other  related 
Government ministries on this. It is highly expected that the application of a proper consumer 
protection  mechanism  will  enhance  the  confidence  and  trust  and  encourage  low  income 
earners and rural dwellers to access readily available financial services. 
Money Pacific Goal number four, as an overriding Goal, aims to reduce, by half, the number 
of people who do not have access to even the most basic financial services. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
To achieve the common purpose of a great inclusive financial environment, all stakeholders 
need  to  work  together.  The  Reserve  Bank  of  Vanuatu  in  collaboration  with  the  Financial 
Inclusion Programme and the Alliance for Financial Inclusion has purposely organized this 
workshop as a starting point to facilitate this partnership work approach. 
I acknowledge the commitments and efforts taken by the National Bank of Vanuatu, Digicel, 
VANWODS  Microfinance,  the  Department  of  Cooperative  and  Ni-Vanuatu  Business  and 
other small financial institutions not mentioned, for reaching out and making basic financial 
services  available  to  the  low  income  earners,  women  and  the  remote  rural  community 
dwellers in deferent islands throughout the country. 
Financial inclusion strategies can be defined as road maps of actions, agreed and defined at 
the  national  level  that  stakeholders  follow  to  achieve  financial  inclusion  objectives. 
Successful  strategies  coordinate  efforts  with  the  main  stakeholders,  define  responsibilities 
among them, and state a clear planning of resources by, for example, prioritizing targets. A 
strategy  can  promote  a  more  effective  and  efficient  process  to  achieve  significant 
improvements in financial inclusion, and is ideally prepared with the private sector in order to 
establish and achieve shared, achievable goals for financial inclusion. 
The  Reserve  Bank  of  Vanuatu,  like  all  other  central  banks  in  the  region,  is  committed  to 
promote  a  coordinated  partnership  work  approach  between  stakeholders  to  enhance 
efficiency  and  to  achieve  greater  financial  inclusion  in  Vanuatu.  This  commitment  was 
materialized in 2011 when the Board mandated the Reserve Bank of Vanuatu to incorporate 
financial inclusion in its tasks. 
By  extending  its  role  to  include  Financial  Inclusion,  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Vanuatu  aims  to 
reinforce  the  Bank’s  function  in  promoting  monetary  stability  and  sound  financial  structure 
and  to  foster  the  financial  conditions  conductive  to  the  orderly  and  balanced  economic 
development of Vanuatu, in line with the Reserve Bank of Vanuatu Act [CAP 125], Part II, 
Section 3. 
A  lot  of  ni-Vanuatu  does  not  have  insurance.  This  is  a  sad  reality  after  32  years  of 
independence.  It  is  now  important  that  insurance  especially  relating  to  micro-insurance 
becomes part of the financial inclusion strategy. I am sure that this topic will be discussed in 
our workshop and in the next few years I would like to see it integral part of our communities. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The  workshop theme  “Medium  Term  Strategy for  Financial  Inclusion  in  Vanuatu”  is timely. 
Financial  inclusion  is  essential  to  our  efforts  in  fighting  poverty  and  inequality  and  being 
innovative and thinking outside the box is key to achieving greater access. 
We  see  it  in  real  life,  we  see  it  on  TV,  we  hear  it  on  the  radio,  and  we  read  it  in  the 
newspapers. How people in the rural and outer islands struggle to make ends meet is a sad 
reality for us. Dokowia sang a song about “Class Six” and the difficulty of finding a job and 
putting food on the table. Hearing young people saying that their parent could not afford to 
pay for their education fees is difficult to accept. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
These are the gloomy realities of how some of our people live. Whilst we sit in the comforts 
of  our  homes  and  within  the  precinct  of  this  luxurious  hotel,  there  are  others  in  our 
communities that do not have that comfort and living standards that they should have. 
I am sure that we all have a role to play in Financial Inclusion and if we all make an effort to 
play that role well, we can make a difference in the lives of many of our people. After this 
meeting I would like to see concrete outcomes and I believe that with your experience and 
expertise it is possible. 
Last but least, I take this opportunity to thank the Government, sponsors, presenters and all 
the participants to this workshop and wish you all a fruitful discussion for the next two days. 
Thank you tumas. 
Merci beacoup. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
