Grant Spencer: Macro-prudential policy and the New Zealand housing 
market 
Speech  by  Mr  Grant  Spencer,  Deputy  Governor  and  Head  of  Financial  Stability  of  the 
Reserve Bank of New Zealand, to the Business NZ Council, Wellington, 27 June 2013. 
 There  has  been  much  discussion  around  the  increasing  pace  of  house  price  inflation  in 
New Zealand. We at the Reserve Bank have been highlighting the risks for financial stability 
and potentially also for broader price stability if house prices continue to accelerate.  
The strong housing market is starting to underpin household demand but, with some slack 
still in the economy, this cannot yet be described as a threat to overall inflation. Our most 
recent  projections  show  CPI  inflation  trending  gradually  back  towards  the  mid-point  of  our 
target band. We are also well aware that any Official Cash Rate (OCR) increases at this time 
would likely put unwanted pressure on the exchange rate. For these reasons, higher interest 
rates are not the right policy response at this time. 
This  brings  me  to  my  topic  today:  macro-prudential  policy.  You  will  be  aware  that  the 
Reserve  Bank  has  recently  been  developing  a  number  of  macro-prudential  policy  tools. 
Today  I  would  like  to  review  the  structure  and  intent  of  these  instruments  and  focus 
particularly on the loan to value ratio (LVR). This tool is more complex than the others we are 
considering, yet it also offers the greatest potential for moderating the current excesses in 
the housing market.  
First I will recap on why we see the housing market as a real threat to financial stability.  
Housing market a threat to financial stability 
Figure 1: 
House price inflation and effective mortgage rate 
Source: Property IQ, RBNZ. 
 The  current  housing  market  pressures  in  Auckland  and  Christchurch  are  due  to  a 
combination  of  factors.  The  pressures  in  Christchurch  are  a  direct  consequence  of  the 
significant  damage  to  the  housing  stock  from  the  earthquakes  and  the  demands  of  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
re-build. In Auckland, housing imbalances are the result of limited supply over a number of 
years  and  strong  demand,  supported  by  historically  very  low  mortgage  interest  rates  and 
easy  credit  terms,  including  a  willingness  by  banks  to  accept  relatively  low  deposits 
(figure 1). More recently it looks as though net inward migration is picking up and this could 
add further pressure to housing demand. 
While  demand  has  been  strengthening,  supply  remains  limited.  Low  rates  of  housing 
construction  since  the  global  financial  crisis  (GFC)  have  left  a  shortage  in  Auckland, 
assessed by the Auckland Council at 20,000 to 30,000 homes. The recent accord between 
the Government  and  Council  targets the  construction  of  39,000  new  houses  over  the  next 
three  years  and  we  fully  support  their  efforts  to  improve  the  responsiveness  of  housing 
supply to the growing demand. But with a myriad of planning and resourcing issues to deal 
with, it could take many years to clear the shortage. In Christchurch, the supply response has 
a similar range of obstacles to overcome, with the added complexity of insurance issues. It 
could take several years to complete the more than 10,000 homes needed.  
In our view the strength of housing and credit demand is not fully reflected in the aggregate 
credit data. Total outstanding mortgage credit growth is increasing but still at lower rates – of 
around 5 to 6 percent per annum – than in the previous boom. However these growth rates 
are net of debt repayments which have been significantly higher in the years since the GFC. 
New  mortgage  approvals  and  loans  have  been  growing  at  a  faster  rate  and  are  now 
comparable  with  the  pre-GFC  peak  levels.  The value  of  house  sales  is now  also  near  the 
2006–07 peak levels (figure 2). 
Figure 2: 
House sales and changes in mortgage credit 
(monthly) 
Source: REINZ, RBNZ. 
 If house prices and debt were rising from depressed levels, then these trends would not be of 
real concern. However the current house price and debt trends are on top of already high 
base  levels  –  both  by  historical  and  international  standards.  For  example,  figure 3  shows 
New Zealand having the fifth highest house price overvaluation, relative to incomes, in the 
OECD.  
The further house prices are stretched, the more likely it is we will see a disruptive downward 
correction at some point in the future. While the banks’ balance sheets are currently in good 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
shape with strong capital and liquidity buffers, such a correction could be very damaging if 
combined with a serious economic or financial shock to New Zealand. The Reserve Bank is 
not alone in its belief that the housing market is posing a growing risk to financial stability in 
New Zealand. This view was also expressed by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and 
OECD in their recent reports on New Zealand and also by the three major rating agencies. 
Figure 3: 
House price to income across OECD countries 
(deviations from historical average) 
Source: OECD 
 While the Reserve Bank’s mandate is to promote financial stability, not social equity, there 
are  clear  implications  here for  housing  affordability.  As  house  prices  and  debt  levels  trend 
increasingly  upwards,  so  too  housing  becomes  less  affordable,  particularly  for  first  home 
buyers.  While  macro-prudential  policy  measures  might  make  credit  less  accessible  for  a 
period,  they  should  help  to  make  house  prices  more  affordable  in  the  longer  term.  Such 
measures should also reduce the risk of a sharp housing downturn and the loss of equity that 
would result, particularly for highly indebted home owners. 
New macro-prudential framework 
The  aim  of  macro-prudential  policy  is  to  manage  risk  in  the  financial  system  arising  from 
transient but pervasive macro-financial developments, such as credit and asset price cycles 
or major international financial shocks.  
While  micro-prudential  policy  settings  (e.g.  capital  ratios  and  risk  weights)  are  fixed  on  a 
through-the-cycle  basis,  macro-prudential  policy  measures  are  introduced  as  an  overlay 
when needed in order to mitigate significant but transitory risks affecting the whole financial 
system.  Macro-prudential  policies  can  achieve  this  in  two  ways:  first,  by  increasing  the 
resilience  of  bank  balance  sheets  to  a  potential  shock  (which  also  gives  them  a  greater 
capacity to keep lending in the downturn); and second by seeking to dampen a credit and 
asset price cycle on the upswing in order to reduce the severity of the eventual downturn. 
Macro-prudential  policies  have  become  more  prevalent  since  the  GFC  because  that 
experience  highlighted  the  massive  financial  and  economic  damage  that  can  result  from 
macro-financial shocks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
A macro-prudential framework for New Zealand has been developed over the past year or 
so.  The  Reserve  Bank  has  communicated  the  framework  through  a  range  of  speeches, 
consultation documents and reports (see for example Spencer (2012), RBNZ (2013a), RBNZ 
(2013b)). A Memorandum of Understanding has been signed between the Reserve Bank and 
the  Minister  of  Finance  which  sets  out  the  key  objectives,  instruments  and  responsibilities 
under the new framework. The Reserve Bank has decision-making responsibility for macro-
prudential policy implementation but must consult with the Minister and Treasury prior to the 
deployment  of  any  instrument.  The  Reserve  Bank  has  also  undertaken  to  keep  the  public 
informed  on  macro-prudential  policy  through  speeches  and  publications,  with  the  main 
accountability document being our six monthly Financial Stability Report.  
Four potential instruments have been put forward and these are summarised in Table 1. The 
four  instruments  work  in  quite  different  ways  to  reduce financial  system  risk. The  counter-
cyclical buffer and sectoral capital overlay work by requiring banks to hold additional capital 
buffers  against  potential  shocks  in  asset  markets  or  particular  economic  sectors.  The 
additional capital requirement may give rise to some increase in lending rates as a result of 
higher  overall  funding  costs  and  may  also  reduce  the  supply  of  credit  to  housing  at  the 
margin, but is unlikely to have a major impact on the overall growth in housing credit. 
 
Table 1: 
Macro-prudential Instruments 
Counter-cyclical capital 
buffer (CCB) 
Adjustments to the 
minimum core funding 
ratio (CFR) 
Sectoral capital 
requirements (SCR) 
The CCB is part of the Basel III framework. It requires an additional capital 
overlay to be applied, normally of up to 2.5 per cent of risk weighted assets. 
Higher capital holdings would increase the resilience of bank balance sheets 
to credit shocks. The CCB might also moderate the credit cycle via upward 
pressure on bank funding costs. Banks would be given up to 12 months to 
raise the extra capital. 
Adjustments to the CFR would vary the proportion of stable funding (retail 
deposits and long term market funding) required relative to a bank’s total 
lending. A CFR tightening would increase the resilience of banks to liquidity 
shocks. It could also lean against the credit cycle by increasing bank funding 
costs. Banks would be given up to six months’ notice in which to meet an 
increase in the CFR. 
Sectoral capital requirements are akin to the CCB and would require banks 
to hold extra capital against lending to a particular sector. An SCR would 
provide an additional cushion against credit shocks in the relevant sector 
and could reduce the relative attractiveness of lending to that sector. Banks 
would be given up to three months’ notice in which to raise the extra capital. 
Restrictions on high 
loan-to-value ratio 
(LVR) residential 
mortgage lending. 
Restrictions would take the form of caps or “speed limits”, the latter 
restricting the share of new bank lending that has a high LVR. Such 
restrictions, if binding, would reduce the incremental risk in bank mortgage 
portfolios and would also have a direct effect on the supply of new bank 
credit, thus potentially moderating housing market pressures. Banks would 
be given at least two weeks’ notice of any LVR restriction. 
 
Similarly, a temporary increase in the core funding ratio would make banks more resilient to 
liquidity shocks but would likely have only a limited effect on credit growth through somewhat 
higher lending rates. This is to say, the instruments based on capital and liquidity overlays 
mainly reduce risk in the system by increasing the resilience of bank balance sheets rather 
than by having a significant dampening effect on asset cycles. LVR restrictions, on the other 
hand, have the potential to reduce risk more directly: both by reducing the riskiness of loan 
portfolios; and also by dampening asset prices through a reduced supply of credit. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
International precedents for use of the first three instruments are limited. The CCB is part of 
the new Basel III regime which is live from January 2014 for New Zealand and somewhat 
later for many other countries. The deployment of a SCR has been recently announced by 
the  Swiss  and  will  come  into  effect  in  September.  They  are  applying  a  capital  overlay  of 
1 percent  against  all  residential  mortgages.  The  CFR  is  an  existing  micro-prudential  tool, 
similar  to  the  Net  Stable  Funding  Ratio  (NSFR)  under  the  Basel  III  regime.  As  a  macro-
prudential  tool,  the  CFR  is  unique  to  New  Zealand,  although  the  possibility  of  using  the 
NSFR  as  a  macro-prudential  tool  has  been  under  consideration  in  the  United  Kingdom. 
There are considerably more precedents for the use of LVR restrictions and I will elaborate 
on these shortly 
The  point  I  want  to  make  here  is  that,  of  the  four  macro-prudential  instruments,  the  LVR 
instrument is the one with the best scope to dampen the current strong demand for housing, 
as well as reducing the riskiness of bank balance sheets. For this reason the Reserve Bank 
is looking closely at the use of LVR restrictions to address the growing housing market threat 
to financial stability. While all four of the macro-prudential instruments remain valid options, I 
will use the rest of my time to focus on LVR restrictions and how they would work. 
Loan-to-value restrictions 
As I mentioned, LVR restrictions have the most potential to reduce risk both by making bank 
balance  sheets  less  risky  and  by  dampening  housing  market  pressures  through  reduced 
credit supply. Borrowers with high LVR loans are often stretching their financial resources, 
paying  a  deposit  of  less  than  20  percent  and  often  also  having  high  debt  service  ratios 
(DSRs). Such borrowers are more vulnerable to an economic or financial shock such as a 
recession or an increase in interest rates. A high LVR loan is more likely to be underwater in 
the event of a default and is therefore a riskier proposition for the lender. A restriction on the 
volume of high LVR loans should reduce the inherent risk in banks’ mortgage portfolios as 
well as reducing the overall supply of credit to the housing market.  
The international evidence suggests that a prevalence of high LVR lending can accentuate 
loan  losses  and  worsen  economic  disruption  when  inflated  house  prices  correct  abruptly. 
Two examples are the United States and Ireland. While lending practices in these countries 
were far more extreme than we have seen in New Zealand, their experiences are instructive. 
In both countries, house price appreciation was fuelled by competition between lenders, and 
falling lending standards. By 2006, 20 percent of new mortgage lending in the United States 
was  sub-prime,  often  with  minimal  credit  checks  and  very  high  LVRs.  Similarly  in  Ireland, 
lending  was  often  occurring  at  LVRs  over  100  percent.  Annualised  house  price  growth 
peaked at 16 per cent and 15 per cent in the US and Ireland in the lead up to the GFC before 
falling sharply. The subsequent sharp downturns gave rise to considerable financial distress 
in  both  countries,  with  high  LVR  borrowers  particularly  hard  hit.  At  the  bottom  of  the  US 
housing market in 2010/11, around 25 percent of the 50 million or so mortgage holders had 
loans larger than the value of their houses. 
In  New  Zealand,  losses  from  housing  loans  in  the  wake  of  the  GFC  were  well  contained 
compared to many countries, although there was an increase in defaults. The Reserve Bank 
recently analysed data on banks’ loss rates, by LVR category, over the period from 2008 to 
2012. The increase in loss rates followed a fall in nominal house prices of around 10 percent 
from their peak in 2007. While there was some variation across banks, the data shows that 
loss rates on high-LVR loans generally increased more (and in several cases substantially 
more) than loss rates on lower LVR loans. This evidence of high and correlated loss rates 
supports  the  proposition  that  higher  LVR  loans  have  more  systemic  risk  than  lower  LVR 
loans.  
It  is  on  this  basis  that  the  Reserve  Bank  recently  took  the  (micro-prudential)  measure  of 
increasing  high  LVR  risk  weights  on  the  housing  exposures  of  the  major  banks  (RBNZ, 
2013c).  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
A  number  of  countries  have  applied  LVR  restrictions  over  the  past  few  years,  including 
Canada, Sweden, Norway, Israel, Korea and Hong Kong SAR. In the case of Sweden and 
Norway, the LVR restrictions are in the form of guidelines rather than hard regulatory limits. 
The LVR restrictions often work in concert with regulatory debt servicing limits (e.g. Korea), 
while insured mortgages in a number of economies are exempted from the restrictions (e.g. 
Canada  and  Hong  Kong  SAR).  The  available  evidence  suggests  that  LVR  caps  can  slow 
credit  and  asset  price  cycles.  In  addition,  the  IMF  has  studied  house  price  corrections  in 
OECD  economies  since  1980  and  concluded  that  the  fall  in  prices  was  significantly  more 
severe for economies with higher maximum LVR ratios (IMF, 2011a). 
With  regard  to  slowing  down  credit  growth  and  house  price  appreciation,  the  IMF  (2011b) 
has  found,  using  a  cross-country  analysis  since  2000,  that  credit  growth  and  house  price 
inflation slowed following the implementation of LVR caps in more than half of cases where 
the tool was used. A more sophisticated estimation approach found that the introduction of 
LVR caps reduced the pro-cyclicality of credit growth. Studies estimating the effects of LVR 
caps  in  Hong  Kong  (Craig  and  Hua  (2011),  Wong  et  al  (2011)),  Korea  (Igan  and  Kang 
(2011)), and most recently in Canada (IMF (2012)), have found that reductions in maximum 
LVRs  had  a  significant  impact  on  housing  transactions,  house  prices,  house  price 
expectations and/or housing credit growth.  
We are currently consulting with the banks on how LVR restrictions could be implemented in 
New  Zealand  (Refer  Consultation  on  framework  for  restrictions  on  high-LVR  residential 
mortgage  lending).  The  consultation  is  concerned  with  a  range  of  mainly  technical 
implementation  issues  such  as:  how  is  a  loan  defined,  what  is  a  valid  valuation,  how  will 
LVRs be measured and reported to the Reserve Bank, and what loans will be exempted. I 
will not go into all the details, but I will mention some key features of our preferred approach.  
First, an LVR restriction would apply to new lending by banks, not the banks’ existing loan 
portfolios. The banks can control the LVR of loans at origination, but they cannot control the 
effect of house price movements on LVRs of existing loans.  
Second,  we  favour  speed  limits  over  outright  restrictions. We  do  not  want  to  ban  high 
LVR  lending;  we  would  prefer  to  restrict  it  as  a  share  of  banks’  total  new  lending.  With  a 
speed limit approach, we expect banks would need to build in their own internal buffers to 
give  themselves  a  margin  of  error.  Such  buffers  could  reduce  as  banks  become  better  at 
controlling  their  proportion  of  high  LVR  lending.  Within  the  speed  limit,  each  bank  would 
make  their  own  assessment  of  which  customers  received  high  LVR  loans,  based  on  their 
own criteria including other risk measures, such as debt servicing capacity, and the potential 
long-term value of those customers to the bank. 
Exemptions 
A  number  of  submissions  to  the  recent  consultation  have  proposed  targeting  particular 
borrower segments. Our preference is to keep the policy simple and effective by not having 
major exemptions and by minimising the possibilities for avoidance. If for example there was 
a  carve-out  for  small  businesses,  the  potential  for  avoidance  would  increase  markedly  as 
individual borrowers set up companies for borrowing purposes.  
Categories where there is a clear case to exempt include Housing New Zealand mortgage-
insured  loans,  bridging  loans,  refinancing  loans and  high-LVR  loans  to borrowers  who  are 
moving home (but not increasing their LVR or loan amount). 
Unintended consequences 
While  we  believe  that  LVR  restrictions  could  have  significant  benefits  in  terms  of reducing 
systemic risk in the housing market, they are not a panacea. We recognise there would be 
costs and unintended consequences. Most obviously there would be implementation costs. 
Banks  will  need  to  change  systems  and  policies,  and  train  staff  to  implement  LVR 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
restrictions.  More  substantially,  there  will  be  system-wide  efficiency  costs  arising  from 
borrowers and lenders seeking to avoid LVR restrictions.  
The most obvious channel for avoidance is family loans, which could become more prevalent 
as a means of reducing the amount of bank finance utilised by first-home buyers. That is a 
family’s  prerogative  and  there  is  nothing  the  Reserve  Bank  could  or  should  do  about  it. 
Alternative  channels  could  include  unsecured  top-up  loans  or  high  LVR  mortgages  from 
non-bank housing lenders. Such disintermediation will tend to be greater, the longer that any 
restrictions  remain  in  place.  If  it  becomes  widespread, then  efficiency  costs  could  become 
significant at the same time as the effectiveness of the policy is reduced. 
If avoidance activity is so prevalent as to undermine the effect of the LVR policy then either 
the LVR restriction could be removed or the LVR policy could be applied more broadly and/or 
more  rigorously.  For  example,  following  the  introduction  of  LVR  restrictions  in  2002,  the 
Korean authorities expanded the regulatory perimeter in 2006 beyond banks to include non-
bank financial institutions. One factor that will constrain these alternative channels is the cost 
of funding. Unsecured lending is considerably more expensive than mortgage lending, and 
non-bank funding is more expensive than bank funding. In Sweden, for example, it is quite 
common for households to borrow a portion of house purchase costs via an unsecured top-
up  loan,  and  that  activity  increased  when  LVR  restrictions  were  applied  in  2010.  But  the 
borrowers who do that need to consider the higher interest rate on unsecured funds as well 
as the more rapid repayment of their top-up funds relative to their main mortgage. In this way 
there can be significant deterrent effects built into avoidance channels. 
The cooperation of the banks in implementing any LVR restrictions would be crucial for their 
success. We would expect bank management and directors to follow the spirit, not just the 
letter  of  the  restrictions.  In  particular,  they  would  need  to  ensure  that  the  policy  was  not 
abused  or  undermined  through  innovative  lending  practices.  Certainly  we  would  be 
maintaining a close dialogue with the banks. 
Removal of restrictions 
When would an LVR restriction be removed? This would need to be assessed in light of the 
assessed  impact  of  the  restrictions  on  housing  lending,  house  price  pressures  and  the 
riskiness of bank balance sheets. Once the housing market returned to a better balance of 
supply  and  demand,  the  restrictions  would  be  removed.  Alternatively,  we  would  look  to 
remove  the  restrictions  if  they  were  judged  not  to  be  achieving  their  purpose  of  reducing 
systemic risk and/or if they were causing material distortions. 
If  we  saw  a  sharp  correction  in  house  prices,  there  would  be  a  clear  case  for  promptly 
removing any LVR restrictions. In that situation there would be little risk that removal of the 
restrictions would result in a resurgence of risk appetite. For example, the correction in house 
prices  after  2007  resulted  in  a  sharp  decline  in  both  the  demand  and  supply  of  high  LVR 
lending,  suggesting  that  an  LVR  restriction  would  not  have  been  necessary  during  this 
period. 
A  preferred  outcome  would  be  a  “soft  landing”  in  the  housing  market,  where  house  price 
growth moderates without resulting in a sharp correction. In that situation, the Reserve Bank 
would  need  to  carefully  weigh  the  efficiency  benefits  of  removing  any  LVR  restrictions 
against  the  risk  that  this  might  stimulate  a  renewed  build-up  of  systemic  risk.  A  persistent 
moderation in household credit growth would argue in favour of removal. 
Conclusion 
We at the Reserve Bank see the current overheated housing market as a real threat to future 
financial stability. While limited housing supply is at the heart of the problem, strong demand 
supported by easy credit is underpinning the rapid escalation of house prices. The demand 
for mortgages is now close to pre-GFC peak levels. If this momentum persists, the housing 
market pressures could also become a threat to general price stability. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
The new macro-prudential policy framework has been developed to address just this kind of 
macro-financial imbalance. The Reserve Bank is therefore seriously considering the use of 
macro-prudential policy. 
While  the  LVR  restriction  is  more  complex  and  difficult  to  implement  relative  to  the  other 
macro-prudential instruments, we believe this is the best tool, apart from interest rates, that 
could  moderate  the  current  strength  in  housing  demand.  In  the  current  low  inflation 
environment, interest rate increases are not seen as an appropriate response. 
Although  they  would  have  benefits  for  financial  stability,  LVR  restrictions  would  bring  with 
them  efficiency  costs.  In  order  to  keep  these  to  a  minimum,  we  believe  any  restrictions 
should be set as speed limits, and have relatively few exemptions. It is also important to keep 
the  bigger  picture  in  mind  when  assessing  potential  efficiency  costs.  These  need  to  be 
compared  against  the  significant  economic  and  financial  damage  that  could  result  from  a 
housing boom that ends in a severe housing downturn.  
In the pre-GFC housing boom, with hindsight and with this macro-prudential framework, we 
would  most  likely  have  applied  macro-prudential  instruments  with  the  aim  of  reducing 
systemic risk. In the current situation, with house prices and household debt ratios starting 
from much higher levels, and with interest rates at historically low levels, the risks to financial 
stability may well be greater. 
References 
Craig and Hua (2011), “Determinants of Property Prices in Hong Kong SAR: Implications for 
Policy”, IMF Working Paper, 11/277. 
IMF  (2011a)  “Evidence  on  House  Prices,  Credit,  and  Housing  Finance  Characteristics  in 
Advanced Economies”, Annex 3.2 in Chapter 3, Global Financial Stability Report, April. 
IMF  (2011b)  “Macro-prudential  Policy:  What  Instruments  and  How  to  Use  Them?”,  IMF 
Working Paper, 11/238. 
IMF  (2012)  “Recent  experience  with  macro-prudential  tools  in  Canada:  Effectiveness  and 
options going forward”, Chapter 3 in 2012 Article IV. 
Igan, D and H Kang (2011) “Do Loan-to-Value and Debt-to-Income Limits Work? Evidence 
from Korea”, IMF Working Paper, 11/297. 
Reserve Bank of New Zealand (2013a) “A new macro-prudential policy framework for New 
Zealand – final policy position” available online at http://www.rbnz.govt.nz/financial_stability/ 
macro-prudential_policy/5270425.pdf 
Reserve Bank of New Zealand (2013b) “Framework for restrictions on high-LVR residential 
mortgage  lending”  available  online  at  http://www.rbnz.govt.nz/regulation_and_supervision/ 
banks/policy/5302259.pdf 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand  (2013c)  “Response  to  submissions  received  on  review  of 
bank  capital  adequacy  requirements  for  housing  loans  (stage  one)”  available  online  at 
http://www.rbnz.govt.nz/regulation_and_supervision/banks/policy/5253295.pdf 
Spencer, G (2012), “Prudential lessons from the Global Financial Crisis”, speech delivered to 
Financial Institutions of NZ 2012 Remuneration Forum in Auckland, 3 May 2012, available at 
http://www.rbnz.govt.nz/research_and_publications/speeches/2012/4770342.html 
Wong, E, T Fong, K Li and H Choi (2011) “Loan-to-Value Ratio as a Macroprudential Tool – 
Hong Kong’s Experience and Cross-Country Evidence”, HKMA Working Paper, 01/2011.  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
