Jörg Asmussen: Opening remarks at the closing ceremony of the Eurosystem 
Needs Analysis Project 
Speech  by  Mr  Jörg  Asmussen,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European  Central 
Bank,  at  the  closing  ceremony  of  the  Eurosystem  Needs  Analysis  Project  funded  by  the 
European Union, Skopje, 10 July 2013. 
 Governor Bogov, 
Ambassador Orav, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure to be here in Skopje today to mark the close of a successful needs analysis 
programme.  I  have  just  handed  over  the  related  report  to  my  colleague,  Governor  Bogov. 
This report lays down recommendations for changes to the central bank law and regulations, 
processes and practices in order to prepare the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia 
(NBRM) for EU accession. I hope that this report will help in developing the central bank’s 
strategy  going  forward.  In  fact,  we  are  confident  it  will,  as  we  know  that  some  of  the 
recommendations have  already been successfully implemented. The report is the result of 
the  nine  month  programme  and  was  produced  by  the  ECB  and  national  central  bank 
colleagues following an analysis of your current practices. 
[The  areas  covered  by  the  programme  are  accounting,  banknotes,  economic  analysis  and 
research, human resources, information technology, internal audit, legal services, monetary 
and exchange rate policy, payment systems and statistics.] 
I  would  like  to  stress,  however,  that  we  could  not  have  produced  such  a  comprehensive 
needs analysis report without the excellent cooperation and openness of NBRM staff. 
Let me emphasise that the programme with the NBRM stands in the tradition of other ECB-
coordinated  technical  cooperation  programmes  with  EU  candidate  and  potential  candidate 
countries  conducted  over  the  past  decade.  Central  banks  of  candidate  and  potential 
candidate countries are privileged partners for our technical cooperation. It is in the interest 
of all of us, that once a central bank joins the ESCB, and eventually the Eurosystem, it is 
able to fully perform its function in the system. 
The report is not the only tangible outcome of this programme. Throughout the whole project, 
NBRM staff have met many colleagues from national central banks as well as the ECB. This 
means  that  NBRM  experts  now  have  a  network  of  colleagues  to  whom  they  can  turn  for 
advice or to share information. Moreover, the information does not only flow in one direction. 
European  experts  have  also  expanded  their  lists  of  contacts  in  the  region.  The  benefit  of 
such programmes is that both parties gain in understanding and learn from each other. 
As you can well imagine, the crisis in several euro area countries has absorbed much of our 
energy  and  attention  in  the  past  years  at  the  ECB  and  in  the  national  central  banks. 
However,  we  remain  committed  to  international  cooperation,  and  in  particular  to  technical 
cooperation with central banks of EU candidate and potential candidate countries. 
As  regards  the  current  crisis,  let  me  briefly  mention  the  two  most  relevant  areas  policy-
makers need to focus on looking forward. 
Structural reforms, financial repair and fiscal consolidation at the national level are key and 
need to be pursued vigorously in the financially stressed euro area countries. There is simply 
no viable alternative. 
At the European level, further improving the institutional framework, the governance of the 
euro area is of utmost importance. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
While  EMU  needs  to  be  complemented  with  elements  of  a  stronger  fiscal,  economic  and 
political  union,  the  most  pressing  need  is  to  implement  a  comprehensive  and  effective 
banking union. 
We learnt the hard way how quickly and severely financial sector problems in one country 
can  spread  to  another.  We  also  experienced  the  severity  of  negative  feedback  loops 
between sovereigns and banks. National supervisors have been heavily challenged by cross-
border banking and financial activities. Ultimately, a monetary union with a single currency, a 
single  monetary  policy  and  increasing  financial  integration  cannot  function  properly  if 
financial stability policies (regulation, supervision and resolution) remain at the national level. 
The  setting  up  of  a  banking  union  with  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM)  and  the 
single resolution mechanism (SRM) as core elements is therefore key and will enhance the 
quality of supervision and the credibility of the system and remove the misalignment between 
the institutional frameworks for monetary policy and financial stability. 
Given  the  close  economic  and  financial  links  between  the  euro  area  and  south-eastern 
Europe, it goes without saying that progress in addressing the crisis in the euro area is in the 
interest of countries in this region. The SSM may bring particular benefits, as subsidiaries or 
branches of euro area banks are of systemic importance in the financial systems of many 
south-eastern  European  countries.  In  addition  to  enhancing  the  quality  of  supervision  of 
parent  banks,  the  SSM  has  the  potential  to  facilitate  home-host  country  cooperation  in 
banking supervision. 
I  am  confident  that  future  new  members  of  the  EU,  and  eventually  of  the  euro  area,  will 
ultimately  accede  to  a  stronger  Union.  In  this  context,  a  key  lesson  from  the  crisis  for  EU 
candidates and potential candidates is that membership of the EU and the euro area should 
not  be  seen  as  an  end in  itself,  but  rather  as  a  means to  an  end,  namely  to  enhance  the 
welfare of our citizens. The achievement of sustainable convergence and competitiveness is 
vital for the successful membership of the euro area. 
To conclude I would like to thank our host Governor Bogov. As stated in the report of the 
programme we are closing today, he has already brought the NBRM in line with or close to 
European standards in many areas. I wish him every success in working on the remaining 
issues and offer our services and support to this end wherever possible. I thank Ambassador 
Orav and the European Union for funding this initiative and hope that, given the importance 
of strong institutions, the EU also will support central bank cooperation with the NBRM in the 
future. And finally I would like to thank my colleagues from the ECB and the national central 
banks  who  are  also  represented  here  today  for  their  efforts  and  contribution  to  this  very 
successful cooperation programme. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
