Spencer Dale: Inflation and growth – what role for monetary policy? 
Speech by  Mr Spencer Dale, Executive Director, Monetary Policy, and Chief Economist of 
the  Bank  of  England,  to  the  Asian  Business  Association  and  the  Chinese  Business 
Association of the London Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Bank of England, London, 
15 March 2013. 
 I would like to thank Stephen Burgess, Matt Trott and Garry Young for their considerable help in preparing this 
speech.  The  views  expressed  are  my  own  and  do  not  necessarily  reflect  those  of  the  other  members  of  the 
Monetary Policy Committee. 
Monetary policy is under the spotlight. The previously sedate world inhabited by middle aged, 
grey suited – too often, male – central bankers has been turned upside down by the financial 
crisis. A global debate is raging about the role monetary policymakers can – and should – be 
playing  in  trying  to  stimulate  growth  in  their  economies.  Here  in  the  UK,  the  breadth  and 
urgency of that debate is unlike anything we have seen since the birth of inflation targeting 
21 years ago. 
Nobody should be surprised by this. Our recovery from the financial crisis is proving to be 
long and arduous. At the same time, inflation remains stubbornly above target. The Monetary 
Policy  Committee  (MPC)  faces  tough  choices  as  it  tries  to  both  support  the  recovery  and 
bring  inflation  down.  And  away  from  home,  central  banking  is  undergoing  considerable 
change:  both  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC)  in  the  United  States  and  the 
Bank  of  Japan  have  recently  made  policy  changes  that  emphasise  their  commitment  to 
provide further monetary stimulus until their economies recover.  
Against that  backdrop, people  are  understandably  asking  what  role  monetary  policy  in  the 
UK should play in determining growth and inflation? This is an important debate and one that 
is likely to be central to economic policymaking over the next few years. What I would like to 
do today is to offer some of my own thoughts on this issue. 
I want to focus on two aspects in particular. 
The first concerns the objectives of monetary policy. The inflation target, given to the MPC by 
the UK government, states that our primary objective is to ensure that CPI inflation is equal 
to 2%. But it also makes clear that, in so doing, we should be mindful of the implications that 
our  policy  actions  have  for  growth  and  employment.  How  should  we  go  about  reconciling 
those different objectives?  
The second issue relates to the current operation of monetary policy. What should we make 
of the view, repeated in many quarters, that the trade off between growth and inflation may 
be  unusually  favourable  in  present  circumstances.  That  we  could  buy  quite  a  bit  of  extra 
growth at little or no cost in terms of higher inflation? Do such free lunches really exist? 
The two objectives of monetary policy 
Let’s start with the objectives of monetary policy and the mission of the MPC to hit the 2% 
inflation target but to do so in a way that supports growth and employment. 
Those twin objectives were highlighted starkly only last month by the Committee’s reaction to 
its  updated  forecast  for  inflation  contained  in  the  February  Inflation  Report.  Inflation  was 
projected to rise further in the near-term – to above 3% in the second half of this year – and 
to remain above the 2% target for the next two years or so. But rather than tighten policy, we 
issued  a  statement  explaining  that,  in  present  circumstances,  we  thought  it  appropriate  to 
bring inflation back to target more slowly than usual.  
Our reaction was partly driven by the judgement that this protracted period of above-target 
inflation would, for the most part, reflect higher university tuition fees and domestic energy 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
bills.  Importantly,  these  price  rises  are  largely  the  consequence  of  regulatory  decisions, 
rather than market forces. In contrast, costs and price pressures resulting from the balance 
of demand and supply in the domestic economy looked to be well contained. Although the 
inflationary impact of these higher administered and regulated prices is likely to persist for 
several years – as is the impact of the recent weakening of sterling which is also pushing up 
on inflation – they are likely to wane over time. As such, inflation was expected to fall back to 
around the 2% target by the end of 2015. 
But the Committee was also explicit that its willingness to tolerate this period of above-target 
inflation was driven by the weakness in our economy and by the concern that attempting to 
bring inflation back to target more quickly would risk derailing the recovery. 
Indeed, this desire to support growth as well as to control inflation has been characteristic of 
the MPC’s behaviour since the onset of the financial crisis. CPI inflation has been above its 
2% target for much of the past 5 years, but during that period we have cut Bank Rate from 
over  5%  to  0.5%,  we  have  conducted  an  asset  purchase  programme  –  QE  –  on  a  scale 
equivalent to almost 25% of nominal GDP, and we have launched the Funding for Lending 
Scheme to boost credit growth to the real economy. 
I accept that for much of this period the Committee expected inflation to fall back to target 
more  quickly  that  it  actually  did.  Even  so,  it  remains  the  case  that  monetary  policy  was 
loosened very aggressively at a time when inflation was persistently above target in the near 
certain  knowledge  that  not  doing  so  would  lead  to  a  deeper  and  potentially  much  more 
painful recession. 
The  suggestion  made  in  some  quarters  that  the  MPC  has  slavishly  followed  the  inflation 
target in recent years – that it has been fixated with inflation at the expense of growth and 
employment  –  is  simply  at  odds  with  the  facts.  Based  on  the  MPC’s  central  projection  for 
inflation published last month, over the decade to the end of 2015, CPI inflation will average 
close to 3%. It will have been above its 2% target for 90% of that time, and above 3% for 
40% of the time.  
Yes: some of this might be the result of poor forecasting. But much more important was the 
recognition that a lower profile for inflation was possible only by tightening monetary policy at 
the cost of an even deeper recession and an even larger rise in unemployment.  
Monetary policy has been on the frontline in supporting our economy through the financial 
crisis and it continues to be so. 
Indeed, it is striking that while some criticise the MPC for focussing too narrowly on inflation, 
others argue that we’ve worried too much about the real economy and taken our eye off the 
inflationary ball. “Is the MPC’s job to hit the inflation target or not”, they ask? Has the inflation 
target become a sham? 
The remit given to the Monetary Policy Committee makes clear that our job is to hit the 2% 
inflation target. But it also acknowledges that inflation will on occasions deviate from its target 
as a result of shocks and disturbances, and that “...attempts to keep inflation at the inflation 
target  in  these  circumstances  may  cause  undesirable  volatility  in  output”.1  Although  the 
language  is  arcane, the  meaning  is clear:  monetary  policy  should  try  to prevent  damaging 
booms and busts in output and employment. 
This  secondary  objective  matters  and  has  been  central  to  the  recent  conduct  of  monetary 
policy. To repeat: we could have delivered lower inflation over recent years, but only at the 
                                                
1  The relevant clause of the remit states “The framework is based on the recognition that the actual inflation  
rate  will  on  occasions  depart  from  its  target  as  a  result  of  shocks  and  disturbances.  Attempts  to  keep  
inflation  at  the  inflation  target  in  these  circumstances  may  cause  undesirable  volatility  in  output.”  See 
http://www.hmtreasury.gov.uk/d/open_letter_from_chx_to_boe_22032011.pdf 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
expense  of  providing  less  support  to  growth  and  employment  in  the  midst  of  the  most 
significant economic downturn of our generation. 
That monetary policy should be concerned with growth as well as inflation is nothing new. 
Indeed, way back in 1997 – the year that the MPC was first established – Mervyn King, then 
just  the  lowly  Chief  Economist  of  the  Bank  of  England,  referred  to  the  value  of  the 
“constrained discretion” built into the inflation targeting regime.2 The “discretion” relates to the 
speed  with  which  inflation  is  returned  to  target.  In  response  to  certain  kinds  of 
developments  –  in  the  jargon,  so-called  “supply  shocks”  that  move  output  and  inflation  in 
opposite directions – inflation can be returned to target relatively slowly in order to minimise 
harmful  fluctuations  in  output.  But  this  is  subject  to  the  “constraint”  that  inflation  ultimately 
has  to  be  returned  to  the  target  and  has  to  be  done  so  in  such  a  way  that  maintains  the 
target’s credibility. 
Inflation targeting is not a sham: the discipline of the inflation target is paramount. But it can 
be operated in a manner that also supports output and employment as long as – and only as 
long as – our credibility is maintained. Without credibility there can be no discretion.  
This concern with the consequences for growth and employment within an inflation targeting 
regime is sometimes referred to as “output smoothing”. Monetary policy does not have the 
ability  to  affect  the  level  of  output  in  the  long-run,  but  it  can  help  to  smooth  out  cyclical 
variations.  More  recently,  it  has  underpinned  references to  “flexible  inflation  targeting”:  the 
MPC has the flexibility to vary the speed with which inflation is returned to target depending 
on  the  circumstances.  Most  colourfully  was  the  observation,  again  made  by  Mervyn  King, 
that an inflation target does not compel policymakers to behave like “inflation nutters”: there 
is scope to care about stabilising output and employment as well as controlling inflation.3  
That  monetary  policymakers  should  be  concerned  with  the  implications  of their  actions for 
the real economy – for the growth of output and for the strength of employment – must surely 
seem right to all of us. The late Eddie George – who, together with Mervyn King, perhaps did 
more  than  anyone  to  cement  the  importance  at  the  Bank  of  England  of  low  and  stable 
inflation – stressed repeatedly that low inflation “is not an end in itself .... [it is] a necessary 
means to the end of sustainable growth of output and higher living standards”.4 It’s important 
that we don’t lose sight of this overriding aim. 
Eddie was equally clear that, in the long run, the best contribution that monetary policy could 
make to achieving a prosperous and vibrant economy was to deliver enduring price stability. 
He had seen at first hand the pernicious costs of the high and variable inflation of the 70s 
and  80s:  companies  and  households  unable  to  budget  and  plan  efficiently;  resources 
misallocated; long-term contracts avoided for fear that large swings in inflation would end up 
biting one party or the other. The value of hard-earned savings eroded. Out of that pain and 
misery emerged a consensus – a hard won consensus – that low and stable inflation was a 
prerequisite for economic prosperity. 
More recently, though, there have been some worrying signs that cracks may be appearing 
in  that  consensus.  A  sense  that  inflation  is  somehow  yesterday’s  war.  That  central  banks 
should focus more on growth. That a period of higher inflation may even aid the recovery. 
This is dangerous talk.  
It sometimes feels like we’ve been here before. One of the mistakes made by policymakers 
in the late 1960s was to allow inflation to get out of control after nearly two decades of price 
                                                
2  King (1997), “Inflation targeting 5 years on”, speech given at the London School of Economics. 
3  King  (1997),  “Changes  in  UK  monetary  policy:  Rules  and  discretion  in  practice”,  Journal  of  Monetary 
Economics. 
4  George (1999), Annual Cornwall Lecture. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
stability. As Sir Alec Cairncross, who worked in a host of senior economic roles in the heart 
of  the  civil  service  during  this  period,  put  it  “...governments  in  the  last  years  of  the  1960s 
…allowed  inflation  expectations  to  develop  that  proved  increasingly  difficult  to  extinguish” 
(Cairncross 1992). There is little doubt that policymakers of that time had a strong aversion 
to inflation, but they were complacent about the risks posed by further stimulus. It would be 
irresponsible to repeat the same mistakes again. 
How do we ensure that the lessons of yesteryear are not forgotten? That a period of relative 
price  stability  does  not  breed  complacency?  That  the  collective  national  memory  is 
maintained? 
A  key  part  of  the  answer  can  be  found  in  the  role  of  regimes  and  institutions.5  Individual 
policymakers  and  officials  come  and  go.  Intellectual  ideas  pop  in  and  out  of  fashion.  The 
inflation target and the MPC are the result of a long and painful search for a credible money 
anchor.  They  provide  the  memory  to  ensure  that  we  don’t  return  to  the  inefficiency  and 
inequity of the 70s and 80s. They provide the memory that underpins the consensus that low 
and stable inflation is a perquisite for economic prosperity. And they provide the memory that 
guards against some of the dangerous talk of late. 
Let me sum up this section on the twin objectives of monetary policy.  
The  MPC  has  objectives  for  growth  as  well  as  for  inflation.  The  current  inflation  targeting 
regime provides considerable flexibility for the MPC to support output and employment. And 
in  recent  years,  the  MPC  has  used  that  flexibility  to  the  full.  Indeed,  some  have  argued 
excessively  so.  The  MPC  has  been  at  the  forefront  in  supporting  growth  and  employment 
and continues to be so. But that flexibility is constrained by the discipline that monetary policy 
must  be  set  in  a  manner  consistent  with  inflation  coming  back  to  its  target.  Without  that 
credibility,  monetary  policy  wouldn’t  have  the  flexibility  to  support  the  real  economy.  And 
ultimately  delivering  low  and  stable  inflation  is  the  best  contribution  monetary  policy  can 
make to achieving a robust and sustainable recovery. 
The trade off between growth and inflation 
Let me turn now to the second issue I wanted to discuss today which concerns the operation 
of monetary policy and, in particular, the likely trade-off between growth and inflation in the 
current environment.  
As I said, in February the MPC made clear that we thought it appropriate to bring inflation 
back to target more slowly than usual in order to support the nascent recovery. But is there a 
case for monetary policy going even further? What if, as some commentators have claimed, 
it were possible for the MPC to inject additional monetary stimulus, thereby providing even 
greater support to growth, with relatively little consequence for inflation. Stronger growth with 
little or no higher inflation: surely that would be a good use of the MPC’s flexibility? 
There  are  two  strands  of  argument  put  forward  as  to  why  the  current  trade-off  between 
growth and inflation may be unusually favourable.  
The  first  is  that  cost  and  price  pressures  in  the  current  environment  may  be  relatively 
insensitive to the degree of slack in our economy. If that were the case, the economy could 
grow relatively rapidly, absorbing spare resources and capacity, without putting much upward 
pressure  on  wages  and  prices.  In  economists’  speak,  the  so-called  Phillips  curve  –  which 
sketches out the relationship between spare capacity and cost and price pressures – may be 
relatively flat at the moment. 
                                                
5  King (2012) and Tucker (2012) make similar arguments in the context of financial stability and the role that the 
newly formed Financial Policy Committee can play in this respect. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The  second  possibility  is  that  the  effective  capacity  of  the  economy  to  supply  goods  and 
services depends on the state of demand: the stronger the demand, the greater somehow 
the capacity of companies and employees to meet it. The likely responsiveness of supply to 
an increase in demand, it’s argued, means that it would be possible for the economy to grow 
relatively  rapidly  without  significantly  reducing  the  degree  of  slack  in  the  economy  and  so 
without adding markedly to cost and price pressures. 
Let’s consider briefly each of these possibilities in turn. 
The suggestion that the Phillips curve may be relatively flat appears, at least at first blush, to 
be consistent with our experience over recent years. Following the worst recession in living 
memory,  our  economy  has  barely  grown  over  the  past  two  years.  Output  is  well  below  its 
pre-crisis level, unemployment close to 8%. But inflation remains stubbornly above target.  
The trade-off between output and inflation has indeed been remarkably flat. But that doesn’t 
mean that the flatness of this trade-off can be relied upon to continue in the future: it depends 
on why inflation has been so sticky. 
Much of the slack in our economy is concentrated in the labour market, where unemployment 
remains painfully elevated. And, as would be expected, that higher unemployment has been 
associated  with  a  marked  moderation  in  wage  growth.  Indeed,  as  shown  in  Chart  1,  the 
relationship between wages and unemployment over the past three years looks pretty similar 
to what we experienced in the mid-90s when the unemployment rate was similar to what it is 
today. There is no strong evidence to suggest that the wage Phillips curve in the UK is flatter 
now than it was twenty years ago.6  
If not in the labour market, is it possible that spare capacity within companies may be having 
less impact than usual on pricing decisions? Maybe, especially if cash-struck companies are 
less willing or able to cut their prices in order to utilise spare capacity and gain market share. 
But  to  the  best  we  can  tell  from  surveys  measures  and  the  intelligence  gathered  by  our 
network of Agents, the current margin of spare capacity within companies is not particularly 
pronounced. So even if companies’ pricing strategies have become less sensitive to space 
capacity, this is unlikely to explain much of the recent stickiness in inflation. 
All told, I’m not particularly persuaded that the relationship between economic slack and cost 
and price pressures has become unusually weak. Wage growth has moderated broadly as 
expected  given  the  rise  in  unemployment.  And  there  does  not  appear  to  be  a  significant 
margin of spare capacity within companies.  
What  is  unusual  is  that  the  moderation  in  wage  growth  has  not  been  reflected  in  a 
corresponding fall in domestic cost pressures. From an accounting perspective, that reflects 
the  unprecedented  weakness  in  productivity  in  recent  years.  The  level  of  private  sector 
productivity is around 15% below the level  implied by a continuation of its pre-crisis trend. 
This weakness in productivity has meant that, despite muted pay growth, unit labour costs  
–  the  single  biggest  determinant  of  companies’  costs  –  have  grown  at  or  above  their 
historical rate for much of the four years since the financial crisis. 
And  indeed,  it’s  this  weakness  of  productivity  that  underpins  the  second  argument  put 
forward  for  why  the  relationship  between  growth  and  inflation  may  currently  be  unusually 
favourable. 
The suggestion here is that the recent stagnation in productivity – and of the supply side of 
our economy more generally – is in large part a direct consequence of demand weakness. If 
only demand were to pickup, this – on its own – would prompt an increase in the effective 
supply capacity of companies. The economy could recover without significantly reducing the 
degree of spare capacity and with little or no additional inflation. 
                                                
6  My MPC colleague Ben Broadbent made a similar point in a speech last year (Broadbent 2012).  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
The  possibility  that  persistent  demand  weakness  may  erode  supply  capacity  is  not  new. 
Indeed, it was central to the economic doldrums that characterised our economy in the first 
part of the 1990s. But what is different is that many of the channels which were important in 
detracting  from  our  supply  capacity  then  don’t  seem  to  be  operating  particularly  strongly 
today. In particular, the scourge of long-term unemployment and of discouraged job seekers 
leaving  the  labour  market  that  typified  the  malaise  of  the  early  90s  has  been  in  far  less 
evidence  in  this  downturn.  The  rate  at  which  the  long-term  unemployed  are  able  to  move 
back  into  employment  has  remained  around  its  historical  average  (Chart  2).  And  labour 
market  participation  has  held  up  pretty  well  (Chart  3).  Likewise,  the  surge  in  corporate 
insolvencies and associated increase in capital scrapping seen in the early 90s has not been 
repeated (Chart 4). 
If demand deficiency is weighing on the supply side of our economy, it’s doing so via different 
channels than in the past. But that is not to deny that it may be happening.  
There are a number of other mechanisms through which persistent demand weakness may 
be eating away at the effective supply capacity of our economy. Indeed, many of you may 
have  experienced  these  firsthand.  The  need  to  retain  core  skills  and  maintain  minimum 
staffing levels means that as demand falls some companies – especially smaller companies 
– have not been able to reduce their workforces by a corresponding amount. Others choose 
to hold on to experienced workers, even if currently underutilised, for fear of losing valuable 
experience and knowhow. Companies comment to us that the time and resources needed to 
win new business and secure contracts has increased sharply in the face of weak demand.7  
I’m sure that these mechanisms and many more like them are at work today. But are they 
sufficiently  strong  for  us  to  be  confident  that  the  likely  relationship  between  growth  and 
inflation  would  be  unusually  favourable  were  demand  to  increase  strongly?  Why  should 
these mechanisms be so much more pronounced now than in previous recessions? Wouldn’t 
most of them have seemed equally important in the past? I find it hard to believe that these 
types  of  effects  are  the  entire  –  or  even  the  main  –  explanation  for  the  weakness  in 
productivity.  
What  is  unusual  about  this  downturn  is  that  it  has  been  associated  with  a  severe  and 
prolonged  financial  crisis.  Several  of  our  banks  are  still  not  in  a  position  to  lend  normally. 
Many  firms  have  had  to  economise  on  working  capital  as  the  cost  has  increased  and  the 
availability reduced. The ability of many SMEs to raise finance to fund new investments or 
business expansion has been constrained. The efficiency with which banks have been able 
(or  willing)  to  reallocate  funds  from  outdated  businesses  and  sectors  towards  new  and 
dynamic companies has been stunted. It seems implausible to assume that the impairment 
of our banking system – the very life blood of our market economy – has not affected the 
productivity and general efficiency with which companies operate.8 If that is the case, we may 
be  less  confident  that  the  supply  capacity  of  our  economy  will  pickup  markedly  purely  in 
response  to  an  increase  in  demand,  unless  and  until  some  of  these  credit  frictions  are 
repaired. 
Where does all this leave us? 
The argument that it’s possible to grow the economy without much increase in inflation is, of 
course, seductive and enticing. It’s like being offered a free lunch. And yes, there are some 
grounds for  thinking  that  the  trade-off  between  growth  and  inflation may  well  be  unusually 
favourable. But how strong those mechanisms actually are  is far from clear. And it seems 
                                                
7  For a more detailed discussion of some of these points, see McCafferty (2013). 
8  There are a number of empirical studies that suggest financial crisis can have material effects on productivity 
and output. See, for example, Furceri, D and Mouragane, A (2009), Oulton, N and Sebastía-Barriel, M (2013), 
IMF World Economic Outlook (2009). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
particularly optimistic to assume that the financial crisis and the near crippling of our banking 
system has played little role in the recent limp supply-side performance of our economy. 
Taken  to  its  limit, the  argument  that monetary  policy  can  be  used  to  expand  demand  with 
little or no implications for inflation challenges the consensus that the best contribution that 
monetary policy can make to the long-term health and prosperity of the economy is to deliver 
price  stability.  That  consensus  is  based  on  painful  experience  that  monetary  policy  can’t 
affect the level of output in the long run. That we can’t generate permanently higher output 
and permanently higher employment simply by printing more money.9 We should be nervous 
about how quickly we overturn that consensus. 
Conclusion and summary 
Let me conclude. 
The  financial  crisis  has  thrust  the  rather  reserved  world  of  central  banking  and  monetary 
policy into the spotlight. That is both understandable and healthy. Monetary policy failed to 
prevent the financial crisis. And in many countries, including the UK, it has failed to stimulate 
the  growth  that  we  all  long  to  see.  It’s  only  right  that  inflation  targeting  –  the  dominant 
paradigm governing the  operation  of  monetary policy  in  much  of the  industrialised  world  – 
should be questioned and challenged. 
And  to  my  mind  it  has  a  good  story  to  tell.  The  inflation  target  ensures  that  the  primary 
objective of monetary policy is to deliver price stability. But it affords the flexibility that it can 
be operated in such a way as to support output and employment. The MPC has used that 
flexibility to the full in recent years: it has been at the forefront of providing support to our 
economy in the aftermath of the financial crisis and it will continue to be so. 
But we must remember our mistakes of the past. Without credibility there can be no flexibility. 
And  ultimately,  the  best  contribution  that  monetary  policy  can  make  to  sustainable  growth 
and long-run prosperity is to deliver enduring price stability. That is important to remember in 
the  face  of  suggestions  that  inflation  is  somehow  yesterday’s  battle  and  that  the  focus  of 
monetary  policy  should  be  turned  even  more  firmly  towards  growth.  It  should  also  be 
remembered when making difficult judgements about the likely trade-off between growth and 
inflation and about how far to push the MPC’s flexibility. 
 
 
                                                 
9  This  consensus  is  a  reflection  of  the  belief  that  the  long-run  Phillips  curve  is  vertical.  Taken  literally,  the 
suggestion  that  it  is  possible  for  monetary  policy  to  stimulate  increased  output  with  little  or  no  increase  in 
inflation points to a near horizontal long-run Phillips curve, at least over some range of output expansion. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
References 
Broadbent,  Ben  (2012),  “Productivity  and  the  allocation  of  resources”,  speech  given  at 
Durham Business School, available at:  
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/2012/599.aspx 
Cairncross,  Sir  Alexander  and  Cairncross,  Frances  (1992):  “The  Legacy  of  the  golden 
age: the 1960s and their economic consequences” (Routledge)  
Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  (2012):  Letter  to  the  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England, 
reaffirming the remit of the MPC, available at:  
http://www.hmtreasury.gov.uk/d/open_letter_from_chx_to_boe_22032011.pdf  
Furceri, D and Mouragane, A (2009), “The effect of financial crises on potential output: new 
empirical  evidence  from  OECD  countries”.  OECD  Economics  Department  Working  Papers 
no. 699.  
George, Lord Edward (1999): “Annual Cornwall Lecture”, available at: 
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/.../1999/speech62.aspx 
King, Sir Mervyn (1997), “Inflation targeting 5 years on”, speech given at the London School 
of Economics, available at:  
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/1997/speech09.pdf  
King, Sir Mervyn (1997), “Changes in UK monetary policy: Rules and discretion in practice”, 
Journal of Monetary Economics, Volume 39, Issue 1 (p81–97) 
King,  Sir  Mervyn  (2004),  “The  institutions  of  monetary  policy:  the  Ely  Lecture  2004”, 
available at: 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/2004/208.aspx 
King,  Sir  Mervyn  (2012),  remarks  given  at  the  Panel  discussion  on  “Challenges  for  the 
Future”, Federal Reserve Board Conference “Central Banking: Before, During and After the 
Crisis”, available at: 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2012/speech556.pdf 
International Monetary Fund (2009), “What is the damage? Medium term output dynamics 
after financial crises”, World Economic Outlook, October, chapter 4, pages 121–151.  
McCafferty,  Ian  (2013),  “Monetary  policy  in  a  changing  economy”,  speech  given  at 
Bloomberg, London, available at: 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/2013/627.aspx 
Monetary Policy Committee (2013), February 2013 Inflation Report, available at: 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/monetarypolicy/Pages/framework/framework.aspx  
Monetary Policy Committee (2013), Minutes of the February 2013 MPC meeting, available 
at: 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/minutes/Pages/mpc/default.aspx 
Oulton,  N  and  Sebastía-Barriel,  M  (2013),  “Long  and  short-term  effects  of  the  financial 
crisis on labour productivity, capital and output”. Bank of England Working Paper no. 470 and 
Centre for Economic Performance, Discussion Paper no. 1185. Available at:  
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/workingpapers/wp470.pdf 
Tucker, Paul (2012): “Competition, the pressure for returns, and stability”, speech given at 
the British Bankers’ Association Annual Banking Conference, London, available at:  
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/2012/611.aspx 
 
 8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Annex: Charts 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
