Matthew Elderfield: The regulatory agenda facing the insurance industry 
Address by  Mr  Matthew Elderfield, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, to the 
European Insurance Forum 2013, Dublin, 9 May 2013. 
 It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  be  invited  here  to  speak  at  the  European  Insurance  Forum  for 
another  year.  My  topic,  unsurprisingly,  will  be  the  regulatory  agenda  facing  the  insurance 
industry.  I  approach  this,  however,  with  an  appreciation  that  for  many  in  the  industry  this 
regulatory agenda – at a European level at least – has a high degree of uncertainty, probably 
more so  than  when  I  last  spoke  here. This  is, of  course,  due  to  the  difficulties facing final 
agreement on the Solvency II package of directives and regulations, so let me in fact start 
there,  with  a  discussion  of the  prospects  of  Solvency  II.  And  let me  introduce  a theme for 
these  remarks:  that  while  the  exact  implementation  timeline  of  the  directive  is  uncertain, 
frustratingly  so  for  both  authorities  and  industry,  European  regulators  are  nevertheless 
strongly  committed  to  using this  intervening  period  to  prepare for the  directive  and  also  to 
make sure that the debate on the exact shape of future European standards does not distract 
from some pressing supervisory issues. 
The drawn out process of Solvency II negotiation and implementation has perhaps naturally 
resulted  in  a  combination  of  fatigue  and  exasperation,  with  the  high  costs  of  preparation 
compounding concerns, and indeed with those costs being multiplied by the lack of a clear 
timeline and all the challenges that poses for cost effective project management; more of that 
in a moment. However, it is important to remind ourselves of the compelling reasons that led 
to  the  Solvency  II  project  and the  need for reform  of the  existing  regulatory framework for 
insurance.  To  be  blunt:  it  is  unacceptable  that  the  common  regulatory  framework  for 
insurance  in  Europe  in  the  21st-century  is  not  risk-based  and  only  takes  account,  very 
crudely,  of  one  side  of  the  balance  sheet.  The  European  Union  urgently  needs  a  new 
regulatory  standard  which  differentiates  solvency  charges  based  on  the  inherent  risk  of 
different lines of business and which provides incentives for enhanced risk management. It 
urgently  needs  a framework  that  takes  account  of  asset  risks  in  an  insurance  company.  It 
urgently  needs  a  framework  that  encourages  better  governance  and  management  of  risk. 
And it urgently needs a framework that provides better disclosure to market participants – on 
a consistent basis – of the health of insurance companies. 
Solvency II, imperfect though it is, is designed to do all that. And in the absence of Solvency 
II, we not only have the problem of a protracted period of living with the greater imperfections 
of the current regulatory framework, but we also have the serious risk of fragmentation and 
extra cost to industry and consumers if each regulator in each jurisdiction goes off and does 
its  own  thing.  Solvency  II  does  indeed  have  its  imperfections:  I  have  had  long-standing 
concern  regarding  the  potential  for  excessive  reduction  of  solvency  buffers  due  to  over 
optimistic calibration of internal models, for example, and I would like share a few thoughts 
on this in a moment. Also, while a more complex framework is almost certainly inevitable as 
a result of the need to develop a risk-based system, this complexity has clearly gone too far 
in some areas – and makes implementation very difficult for smaller companies. All that said, 
in my view, the benefits of moving ahead with Solvency II outweigh the costs and risks of 
retaining the existing EU framework and the development of a myriad of competing national 
regimes. That way means fragmentation of the single market and, in the long run, increased 
costs for international insurance companies and their customers. 
As  you  know,  there  is  a  protracted  delay  in  concluding  negotiations  on  the  Omnibus  II 
directive, which is the last piece of the legislative jigsaw before Solvency II itself comes into 
force  and  with  it  the  necessary  pieces  of  level  II  technical  standards  and  guidance.  This 
protracted  delay  is  a  source  of  considerable  concern  to  regulators  and  industry  alike.  It  is 
disappointing that the political process has in effect stalled and that the entire framework is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
essentially stuck on one issue, albeit a very important one. The open issue, as you know, is 
the treatment of long-term guarantees. In this area, the political institutions of the European 
process, namely the Council, the European Parliament and the Commission have reached 
an impasse and have commissioned a quantitative impact study on the issue. I’m grateful for 
those Irish companies that have taken part in the exercise. But frankly, at the heart of the 
issue  are  strongly  held  views  which  will  require  a  political  compromise.  The  results  of  the 
quantitative impact study will not automatically provide an answer to this. 
The  heart  of  the  issue  is  whether  long-term  guarantee  products  should  be  subject  to  the 
same  market  consistent  evaluation  framework  as  other  insurance  liabilities  under  the 
directive.  After  considerable  debate  there  is  acceptance,  but  by  no  means  universal 
acceptance, of a compromise whereby certain annuity products that cannot be exited early 
and which have clearly defined and matched assets can effectively be carved out from the 
full  rigour  of  market  consistent  valuation,  by  allowing  a  matched  premium  adjustment. 
However, more contentious is the question of whether this more liberal treatment should be 
extended  to  a  wider  range  of  long-term  guarantee  products  where  asset  matching  is  less 
clear  and,  crucially,  the  ability  to  exit  a  policy  is  permitted.  The  advocates  of  a  wider 
application of the matched principal framework argue that the contractual ability to surrender 
a policy should not be the only concern and that companies can model the likely behaviour of 
policyholders.  Detractors  worry  that  early  termination  of  policies  can  crystallise  impaired 
market  values  in  matching  assets.  Underlying  this  debate  is  the  suspicion  that  if  some 
insurers  apply  a  market  consistent  valuation  approach  to  the  back  book  of  existing 
guarantees  in  current  market  conditions  then  this  will  lead  to  severe  strains  on  solvency 
levels. 
It  is  important  that  a  sensible  solution  be  found  to  this  issue  if  we  are  to  get  Solvency  II 
concluded.  The  treatment  of  long-term  guarantees  is  however  an  issue  of  considerable 
prudential concern, as will be evident when I shortly explain the work of EIOPA on long-term 
low interest rates. Nevertheless, my personal view is that prudent insurance regulators could 
live with a more flexible approach to allow matched premium adjustments for a wider range 
of long-term guarantee products on three conditions. First, that the regime would only apply 
to  back  books  and  would  therefore  be  transitional  in  nature.  Second,  that  insurance 
companies be required to make a pillar III disclosure setting out their solvency position both 
with  and  without  the  matched  principal  adjustment.  And  third,  that  national  supervisory 
authorities  have  flexibility  to  impose  supplementary  pillar  II  charges  to  take  account  of 
inadequate solvency buffers on a case-by-case basis. This framework would, I believe, allow 
a transition period for back book guarantee products while also providing a clear line of sight 
as to the solvency position of individual firms alongside the necessary supervisory tools to 
deal with particular problem cases. 
One  way  or  another  it  is  important  that  a  balanced  compromise  is found  and  the  directive 
package  can  be  brought  to  a  swift  and  successful  conclusion.  With  European  elections 
looming next year, it is important that this process concludes in the autumn at the latest. Like 
those in the industry, the regulators around the EIOPA table find the delay in concluding the 
political  negotiations  frustrating.  It  is  important  that  we  have  a  credible  new  timetable  for 
implementation.  While  a  significant  portion  of  the  costs  of  Solvency  II  implementation 
involves a necessary and welcome upgrading of risk management systems and techniques, 
it  is  equally  clear  that  the  level  of  cost  has  been  exacerbated  by  the  uncertainties  in  the 
implementation  timeline  and  the  delays  in  the  political  process.  These  unnecessary  cost 
overruns are insupportable. This autumn, the political process has one further chance to put 
this right. 
When it became clear that the Solvency II process had become temporarily stuck towards 
the end of last year, the Central Bank engaged in a process of consultation with the principal 
insurance  trade  bodies  in  Ireland,  including  DIMA,  the  Irish  Insurance  Federation  and 
Financial  Services  Ireland. We  had  a  very  frank  and  open  discussion  around  the  practical 
challenges caused by the delay in the directive and sought input from industry as to how to 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
navigate through these issues. I was very pleased by the constructive engagement we had 
from  industry  at  the  time.  There  was  quickly  a  meeting  of  minds  on  a  central  proposition: 
That it did not make sense for the Central Bank to move ahead in isolation on aspects of 
Solvency  II  implementation  but  rather  that  we  should  support  the  European-wide  effort  to 
continue  to  progress  Solvency  II.  That  has  indeed  been  our  approach  and  in  fact  is  very 
similar  to  the  approach  taken  by  other  regulators  around  the  EIOPA  table.  There  is  a 
common and welcome view that it would be counter-productive for each authority to head off 
in  its  own  direction  to  fill  in  the  gap  while  Solvency  II  is  concluded.  Instead,  there  was  a 
strong consensus in favour of actions at a European level to continue the preparations for the 
package of directives. This has, as you  will know, manifested itself in EIOPA’s initiative to 
publish  interim  guidelines  to  help  prepare  for  the  directive,  so  let  me  take  a  little  time  to 
describe these and the Central Bank’s approach to their implementation. 
EIOPA has on 27 March published a consultation paper setting out its proposals for interim 
guidelines  covering  aspects  of  the  Solvency  II  package  relating  to  system  of  governance, 
forward  looking  assessment  of  the  undertaking’s  own  risks  (based  on  ORSA  principles),  
pre-applications  for  internal  models  and  submission  of  information  to  national  competent 
authorities. This package is an important initiative in a few respects. It provides a foundation 
for  the  ultimate  implementation  of  the  Solvency  II  framework  and  ensures  effective 
preparation  of  industry  and  regulator  alike.  Much  of  the  Solvency  II  framework  is  already 
clear, so it is possible and indeed prudent to begin this preparation already, even if there are 
important loose ends to be resolved in the political process. In taking this action, EIOPA is 
also crucially maintaining momentum in the overall Solvency II implementation process and 
is  helping  “fill  the  gap”  created  by  the  hiatus  in  the  political  negotiation  –  an  otherwise 
uncertain period where national authorities could have headed off in different directions. In 
this  respect,  I  think  the  EIOPA  initiative  should  be  strongly  welcomed  by  regulators  and 
industry  alike  and  I  would  like  to  acknowledge  the  leadership  that  Gabriel  Bernardino, 
EIOPA’s  chairman,  Carlos  Montalvo,  EIOPA’s  Executive  Director,  and  their  team  have 
shown. It would be easy to sit back and wait for the political process to restart, but this poses 
significant risk of drift and divergence in the single market. 
I would hope that the implementation of the system of governance provisions and own risk 
assessment  of  the  interim  guidelines  will  be  manageable  and  useful  transitional  steps 
towards full Solvency II adoption. 
There  are  also  proposed  interim  guidelines  concerning  Pillar  3  reporting  by  insurance 
companies. The guidelines suggest a one-year period of parallel reporting, to help prepare 
for  Solvency  II  and  effectively  test  the  quality  of  reporting  arrangements  in  firms.  Certain 
quarterly  reporting  obligations  would  also  be  phased  in  during  this  period.  Helpfully,  the 
guidelines provide various exemptions from reporting on proportionality grounds for smaller 
insurers. The one-year period of parallel reporting seeks to strike a balance between the goal 
of adequate preparation (where regulators typically see early problems with reporting for new 
regimes and therefore the need for a period of debugging) as opposed to the cost of dual 
requirements.  The  Central  Bank  is  sensitive  to  this  issue  and  the  need  to  strike  a  careful 
balance.  We  will  expect  best  efforts,  especially  from  the  High  Impact  insurers,  but 
understand that there may be very good reasons for firms not being fully compliant during 
this period as insurers prepare for all the aspects of Solvency II. The use of statutory powers 
including sanctions will only be considered in extreme cases and as a last resort. 
Indeed, this will generally be our approach to the implementation of the interim guidelines as 
a whole. We will certainly take the approach in this interim period of working collaboratively 
with industry on implementation. We will adopt a proportionate approach and our thinking will 
be informed by our existing risk-based supervisory framework. We expect firms to make their 
best  efforts  and  show  a  willingness  to  respond  to  supervisory  feedback  on  their 
implementation plans and content, and be transparent and up front with us in terms of the 
challenges  they  face  with  full  implementation.  As  in  reporting,  the  use  of  statutory  powers 
including  sanctions  will  only  be  considered  in  extreme  cases  and  as  a  last  resort. We  will 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
elaborate  further  on  our  approach  to  the  implementation  of  the  EIOPA  guidelines  at  an 
industry briefing on May 24th, which no doubt many of you here plan to attend. 
The  interim  guidelines  also  speak  to  the  arrangements  for  continuing  internal  model 
assessment and preparation. It is not practical to try to bring the model approval process to 
an early conclusion with the final Pillar 1 provisions still uncertain and the full legal framework 
incomplete. Nor is it sensible to do a hard stop on model approval work, to be recommenced 
at  a  later  date, for fear of  losing momentum  and  later going  over  old ground. Instead,  our 
approach is to re-programme the level and intensity of engagement on internal models with 
firms  in  order  to  seek  to  maintain  progress.  This  is  not  ideal,  in  terms  of  protracting  the 
overall process but should allow better development of models against regulatory standards 
in the interim period and also a less intensive level of engagement at the end of the process. 
Stepping back from the logistics of internal model approval programme management, there 
is  still  an  important  broader  policy  question  in  this  area.  As  I  have  discussed  at  previous 
forums, the Central Bank (in common with a number of other supervisors) is concerned to 
ensure  that  the  design  of  models  enables  a  prudent  recognition  of  diversification  effects 
within  insurance  company  balance  sheets,  but  does  not  go  so  far  as  to  erode  solvency 
buffers  through  over-optimistic  correlation  assumptions  that  do  not  stand  up  in  times  of 
stress. This is partly a design weakness in the text of Solvency II, as the directive does not 
impose  specific  constraints  on  correlation  and  diversification  recognition  in  internal  models 
per  se,  but  requires  this  to  be  thrashed  out  between  firm  and  supervisor  in  the  approval 
process.  (In  contrast,  the  banking  regulatory  framework  provides  such  hard,  binding 
constraints  on  diversification  in  internal  models.)  As  I  have  explained  previously,  I’m 
concerned that this case-by-case approach is vulnerable in a number of ways. Supervisory 
quants  are  at  risk  of  being  outgunned  by  industry  quants  in  the  minutiae  of  a  correlation 
debate. Supervisors are exposed to the weakest link of an overly generous approval in some 
perhaps  under-resourced  jurisdiction  which  sets  the  bar  too  low  and  creates  competitive 
equality pressures. 
Fundamentally,  what  is  needed  is  a  broad  agreement  on  the  outer  bounds  of  acceptable 
levels of diversification in the model approval process. One approach being explored actively 
in another jurisdiction is that of setting a floor at some proportion of the MCR derived under 
Solvency  II,  when  agreeing  the  SCR  output  from  an  internal  model.  Pending  active 
development at a European level of an agreed approach to ensure a level playing field, the 
Central Bank’s message to Irish firms is to take a conservative approach to the recognition of 
diversification  and  to  think  very  hard  about  how  well  this  will  hold  up  in  extreme  tail  event 
stress scenarios. 
While the interim guidelines covering models, system of governance and reporting are at the 
top of EIOPA’s agenda in terms of standard-setting, the key supervisory issue at the top of 
the  EIOPA  list  of  concerns  is  the  impact  of  long-term  low  interest  rates  on  the  insurance 
sector. One of the principal instruments deployed by monetary policy authorities in combating 
the current financial crisis has, of course, been the policy of maintaining low interest rates for 
a  sustained  period  of  time  in  light  of  price  stability  and  in  order  to  address  economic 
weakness.  However,  this  has  the  potential  to  have  adverse  side-effects  for  insurers.  Of 
greatest concern to EIOPA, and indeed the Central Bank, is the potential adverse impact on 
life insurers with long-term guarantees to policyholders which exceed the available yield on 
assets in current market conditions. We need only look back to the Japanese experience of 
the  1990s  to  see  the  severe  damage  that  this  can  do.  However,  general  insurers  are  not 
immune  from  the  side-effects:  low  yielding  investment  portfolios  expose  uncompetitive 
combined  ratios,  and  therefore  put  extreme  pressure  on  underwriting  performance  at  the 
time of continuing soft markets. 
These considerations have led EIOPA to recently publish an opinion setting out its concerns 
on  the  prudential  implications  of  a  sustained  period  of  low  interest  rates.  This  encourages 
supervisors  to  take  a  range  of measures to  monitor  and  tackle  the  potential  risks  that  are 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
these  measures  help  deal  with 
front  book  problems  (and  would 
building up. This issue is relevant to the Irish market, especially because of the concentration 
of variable annuity writers that are based in Ireland and operate internationally. 
To my mind, the issues for this particular business can be conceptually divided between a 
front book and a back book problem. For newly written business, it is important that firms are 
adjusting  their  product  design  and  improving  their  risk  management  capabilities.  We  are 
largely  seeing  this  happening  already  for  the  Irish  based  VA  writers.  And  our  regulatory 
actions in the past few years have had this in mind. For example, the Central Bank tightened 
solvency  requirements  on  newly  written  variable  annuity  business  at  the  start  of  2011  and 
has also developed a more intense supervisory program of reviewing hedging efficacy at VA 
writers.  We  now  have  a  good  understanding  of  dynamic  hedging  operations  and  conduct 
quarterly  reviews  of  hedging  efficiency  with  firms.  There  has  been  good  engagement  with 
firms  as  part  of  this  process,  for  which  we  are  grateful. While  the  largest  international  VA 
writers are taking measures to adapt product design and pricing in order to de-risk the front 
book, it is however not yet clear whether this is a widespread enough development across 
European markets for guarantee products more generally. 
While 
therefore 
accommodate  a  more  conservative  and  market  consistent  valuation  approach  under 
Solvency II), it is clear that back books of VA and guaranteed business are likely exposed to 
a long period of low interest rates. These back book risks could also be amplified by adverse 
trends in terms of surrenders and longevity, causing a build-up of solvency problems. The 
Central Bank believes that the most effective way to assess these back book risks is through 
robust  stress  testing  and  we  plan  to  roll  out  such  stress  tests  with  those  firms  that  have 
potentially vulnerable back books. We would expect management and boards to already be 
thinking  hard  about these  risks. They  should  be  looking  beyond  their  current  non-stressed 
solvency buffers and contemplate what management actions may be necessary as a prudent 
measure  for  such  stress  scenarios.  This  will  clearly  be  a  point  of  discussion  following  our 
own supervisory exercises in this area. 
This  Central  Bank  initiative  on  stress  testing fits  clearly  within  the  EIOPA  opinion  on  long-
term low interest rates, which calls for such action by supervisors. On the purely domestic 
front, there is one further development I would like to share with you and then I will say a few 
final  words  about  our  early  experience  of  implementing  PRISM,  our  new  risk-based 
supervisory framework at the Central Bank. 
The most disruptive development in the domestic Irish insurance market in the past 3 years 
has,  of  course,  been  the  failure  of  Quinn  Insurance  Limited  following  serious  persistent 
breaches  of  solvency  requirements.  There  has  been  much  said  and  written  about  Quinn 
Insurance already and I do not propose to look backwards and review  the specifics of the 
case.  However,  one  clear  supervisory  concern  relates  to  the  emergence  of  the  significant 
deficit in the company’s reserves despite unqualified audit and actuarial reports, which in turn 
has required a significant call on the Insurance Compensation Fund. While we accept that 
Quinn  Insurance  is  not  a  proxy  for  the  insurance  industry  as  a  whole,  lessons  must  be 
learned by the Central Bank and the industry in relation to the assessment of the adequacy 
of both reserving and pricing. Both areas have come under additional supervisory scrutiny 
from the Central Bank during 2012 and 2013 and firms can expect this to continue further in 
the future with the introduction of specific governance and oversight requirements. This new 
approach  to  assessing  reserving  adequacy  will  be  closely  integrated  with  our  risk-based 
supervisory  framework, which  we  call  PRISM.  This  has  now  been  in  place for  insurers for 
more than a year, so let me take an opportunity for a few reflections. 
Our  risk-based  supervisory  framework  starts  with  an  allocation  of  resources  based  on 
impact: that is, for insurers, the impact of failure on policy holders. This is used to calibrate 
the  level  of  engagement  with  firms  and  the  frequency  and  intensity  of  risk  assessment.  It 
prompts  front  line  supervisors  to  conduct  a  systematic  assessment  of  a  range  of  risk 
categories for higher impact firms, leading to a formal scoring which is communicated to the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
firm in question, along with a risk mitigation plan setting out a “to do” list of actions to address 
areas  of  concern.  Not  all  issues  identified  in  an  assessment  merit  further  action  –  this 
depends  on  their  magnitude  and  their  probability  of  crystallising  –  and  firms  have  an 
opportunity  to  both  correct  factual  errors  in  a  risk  assessment  and  suggest  alternative 
mitigation actions. 
Looking back over more than a year’s operation of PRISM for insurance companies, it’s clear 
that we are still some way from fully embedding our new approach and further refinements 
and fine tuning should take place. But, I’m pleased that the framework is delivering in three 
critical  respects.  First,  that  it  is  indeed  delivering  its  core  objective  of  requiring  front  line 
supervisors  to  think  critically  about  the  risks  present  in  insurance  firms  and  to  do  so  in  a 
structured  and  consistent  manner.  This  is  therefore  flushing  out  issues  and  concerns, 
improving standards of risk management and compliance. 
Second, the process is resulting in mitigation plans that seek to tackle the risks identified in a 
time-bound  and  decisive  way.  One  of  the  criticisms  of  supervisors  in  the  pre-crisis  period 
relates  to  a  tendency  to  keep  studying  a  risk,  kicking  the  can  down  the  road,  rather  than 
being more decisive in terms of actions. By and large, the mitigation plans are designed to do 
this, although clearly we will need to go through a cycle of assessments to see how well they 
have achieved their desired outcome. I would hope these plans provide clarity to a board or 
senior management in terms of where the Central Bank is coming from and can be part of a 
“no surprises” approach. 
Thirdly, the PRISM framework includes an important role for risk governance panels. These 
are  challenge  and  quality  assurance  forums,  chaired  by  more  senior  supervisors  and 
involving experienced risk advisers from industry or regulatory backgrounds. I’m pleased by 
how these are working, in terms of providing challenge to supervisory teams, both to be more 
robust in some cases, but also more proportionate and focused in others. 
It  is,  however,  important  that  the  Central  Bank  is  prepared  to  fine  tune  and  continuously 
improve  our  supervisory  framework.  Part  of  this  will  mean  a  continuing  investment  in  staff 
training  and  development:  our  staffing  numbers  have  levelled  off  (and  indeed  will  be 
somewhat  lower  than  we  projected  necessary  a few  years  ago),  but  we  know  we  need  to 
work  harder  to  improve  our  understanding  of  business  models,  market  developments  and 
financial analysis, to balance out more established audit and compliance skill sets. We also 
plan to take stock of PRISM implementation before too long. 
Good supervision involves a commitment to continuous improvement, keeping up with best 
practice supervisory techniques and also improving skills and industry knowledge in front line 
supervisors.  The  last few  years  has  seen,  I  believe,  a  significant  upgrading  in  supervisory 
approach  and  capability  in  Ireland.  As  these  are  probably  my  final  public  remarks  on  the 
subject while at the Central Bank, I would like to comment that while the tide of regulation – 
that is rule-making – may naturally ebb and flow over the years, it is important to maintain a 
constant commitment to strong supervision. 
Before I develop that thought, I think it is only appropriate that I recognise the big effort that 
most management teams and Boards of Directors have taken to step up and adapt to the 
significant changes that are happening internationally and here domestically. That’s not only 
the insurance industry – which has put in a lot of effort to prepare for Solvency II – but other 
firms  in  other  sectors  too  who  have,  for  example,  implemented  important  strengthening  of 
rules  on  corporate  governance  and  fitness  and  probity,  and  who  are  now  subject  to  more 
rigorous supervisory assessment. I recognise that this has involved a lot of work on the part 
of industry and for the most part we have been pleased by the engagement we see and by 
the  improved  standards  of  compliance  that  are  resulting;  most  firms’  management  and 
Boards  “get  it”  and  realise  that,  post  crisis,  higher  standards  are  here  to  stay  and  that 
Ireland’s  reputation  as  a  place  to  do  business  depends  on  good  regulation  and  strong 
supervision. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  So, let me finish by setting out my personal thoughts on the four key elements that need to 
be preserved to ensure strong supervision continues: 
• 
Element one is an adequately resourced and high quality supervisory staff. In this 
context, concerns over costs (in the aggregate to industry or at the level of pay that 
will be required to retain staff when austerity eases and markets return) need to be 
tempered by recollection of the terrible costs to Ireland’s taxpayers and  society of 
financial failure. The €1.65 billion projected insurance guarantee scheme support for 
Quinn Insurance is in the order of 80 times the current year costs of supervision of 
the insurance industry. And the €64 billion capital investment from the taxpayer into 
the Irish banking system represents a staggering 1,409 times the current year costs 
of banking supervision; 
A second element is a strong set of powers, such as is currently being adopted in 
the  Dail.  These  are  important  to  allow  effective  legal  powers  for  supervisory 
intervention and require an ongoing commitment to periodically update them in light 
of emerging supervisory best practice and industry developments; 
A third element, which I’ve already spoken about, is a supervisory philosophy that 
encourages  challenge  of  firms  and  that  problems  are  tackled  decisively  and 
definitively,  rather  than  being  allowed  to  fester,  even  if  that  is  uncomfortable  or 
inconvenient; and 
The  final  element  is  a  supervisory  institution  that  is  independent.  This  does  not 
mean  immunity  from  feedback  or  accountability.  But  it  does  involve  being  truly 
independent in its supervisory decision making from industry or political intervention. 
It was not so long ago that a now notorious banker complained on the radio about regulation 
saying, “It’s time to shout stop: The tide of regulation has gone far enough.” At some point 
the debate about over-regulation and supervision will return, if indeed it has ever gone away. 
That is healthy and reasonable. But I would hope that debates on regulation and supervision 
are  done  transparently  and  that they  are given  short shrift  if they  take place  as  a  vaguely 
articulated concern about burden and competitiveness without being grounded in specifics to 
ensure  an  informed  debate  on  policy.  And  when  this  debate  does  resurface,  it  would  be 
sensible  to  cast  a  watchful  eye  on  whether  adequate  resources,  best  practice  powers,  a 
challenging  approach  with  firms  and  genuine  independence  are  being  maintained,  so  that 
strong  supervision  survives  this  ebb  and  flow  intact,  through  bad  times  and,  in  the  future, 
good ones too. 
Thank you. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
