Jwala  Rambarran:  Countercyclical 
loans  for  the  management  of 
exogenous  shocks  in  small  vulnerable  economies  (SVEs)  and  non-
traditional sources of development finance 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Jwala  Rambarran,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Trinidad  and 
Tobago, at the Joint Commonwealth Secretariat and United Nations Development Program 
workshop  on  “Countercyclical  loans  for  the  management  of  exogenous  shocks  in  small 
vulnerable economies (SVEs) and non-traditional sources of development finance”, Port of 
Spain, 29 January 2013. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen,  
I  thank  the  Commonwealth  Secretariat  and  the  United  Nations  Development  Program 
(UNDP) for the invitation to deliver opening remarks at this joint workshop on what I consider 
to be one of the more critical issues facing small vulnerable economies, but which ten years 
after the Monterrey Consensus on Financing for Development has been largely ignored by 
the international policy community.  
While  developing  countries  have  made  much  progress  in  meeting  the  8  Millennium 
Development  Goals  (MDGs)  to  free  humanity  from  extreme  poverty,  hunger,  illiteracy  and 
disease  by  2015,  substantial  challenges  still  remain,  especially  in  reaching  the  most 
vulnerable.  Multiple  financial,  food,  energy  and  economic  crises,  which  often  respect  no 
borders, further aggravate matters. As the deadline approaches, we have the opportunity to 
design a post-2015 framework that builds on successes, learn from past shortcomings, and 
addresses the gaps in the current MDGs.  
Jeffrey Sachs, Professor of Sustainable Development at Columbia University, warns us in his 
January  24th  2013  article  entitled  “Writing  the  Future”  that  humanity  faces  no  greater 
challenge than to ensure a world of prosperity rather than a world of ruins. Professor Sachs 
strikes a prescient note when he states “Like a novel with two possible endings, ours is a 
story yet to be written in this new century. There is nothing inevitable about the spread – or 
the collapse – of prosperity. More than we know (or perhaps care to admit), the future is a 
matter of human choice, not mere prediction.”  
I therefore commend the Commonwealth Secretariat and the UNDP for mounting this first of 
three  workshops  here  in  the  Caribbean,  with  the  other  two  to  be  held  in  the  African  and 
Pacific regions. Perhaps this will be the first chapter on the post-2015 development story of 
new financing arrangements for small vulnerable Caribbean economies, whose future might 
be partly based on the choices you make at this workshop.  
I  certainly  look  forward  to  the  outcomes  of  all  three  workshops,  and  hope  that  the  shared 
positions will help to influence African, Caribbean and Pacific governments in their advocacy 
for innovative sources of development finance to be a front-burner issue on the international 
economic agenda.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, it is no secret that small vulnerable economies in the Caribbean have 
grappled  with  external  shocks  of  varying  magnitudes  and  duration  over  the  past  two 
decades. These shocks include a compression of aid flows, dismantling of preferential trade 
arrangements  for  sugar  and  bananas,  interventions  related  to  anti-money  laundering  and 
combating the financing of terrorism.  
More  recently,  the  Caribbean  has  been  gradually  recovering  from  the  shock  of  the  global 
financial crisis, which originated in the United States and spread to Europe, the region’s two 
closest  trading  and  investment  partners.  The  untold  story,  however,  is  that  the  combined 
influence  of  these  multiple  shocks  has  led  to  a  dramatic  and  fundamental  shift  in  the 
composition of external financing flows to the Caribbean.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
In my respectful view, the most significant change in the regional pattern of external resource 
flows  stemmed  from  the  sharp  compression  in  Official  Development  Assistance  (ODA). 
Flows of ODA to many Caribbean countries began falling in the 1990s, as donors redirected 
their  aid  priorities  to  the  newly  emerging  Commonwealth  of  Independent  States  and  the 
Least Developed Countries. This is certainly ironic because the eighth MDG recognizes that 
developing countries require more generous development aid to have the best chances of 
reducing poverty and accelerating development within the stipulated 15 year timeframe.  
Faced  with  declining  aid  resources,  many  Caribbean  governments  resorted  to  more 
expensive  commercial  borrowing  to  bridge  their  funding  gaps.  This,  combined  with  the 
growing inability of regional governments to generate high enough primary fiscal surpluses 
for debt servicing, contributed to a large public debt overhang. 
Gross public debt in the Caribbean climbed rapidly from 65 percent of GDP in 1998 to a peak 
of almost 100 percent of GDP in 2002, before falling to a still elevated 80 percent of GDP in 
2012.  The  accumulation  of  public  debt  was  even  faster  in  the  Eastern  Caribbean,  moving 
from just over 60 percent of GDP in 1998 to a high of almost 120 percent of GDP in 2004, 
before falling to 95 percent of GDP in 2012.  
Generally, a public debt ratio of over 90 percent of GDP is considered exceptionally high. By 
this measure, four countries in the Caribbean are projected to hold exceptionally high public 
debt in 2013: Jamaica (140 percent), St. Kitts & Nevis (139 percent), Grenada (109 percent), 
and Antigua & Barbuda (93 percent). Another six countries are projected to have heightened 
debt vulnerabilities, averaging in the range of 50 to 90 percent of GDP, in 2013. These are 
the Bahamas, Belize, Dominica, Guyana, St. Lucia and St. Vincent and the Grenadines.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  the  magnitude  of  the  fiscal  adjustment  required  to  stabilize  and 
eventually  reduce  the  Caribbean’s  public  debt  overhang  is  neither  socially  nor  politically 
feasible. Only two small island developing states in the Caribbean – Guyana and Haiti – have 
been able to access comprehensive debt relief under the enhanced Heavily Indebted Poor 
Country (HIPC) Initiative and under the Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative (MDRI). 
Other  small  vulnerable  Caribbean  economies  are  considered  not  poor  enough  and/or  not 
severely  indebted  enough  to  benefit  from  similar  international  debt  relief  measures.  In  the 
meantime,  a  few  Caribbean  small  island  developing  states  have  engaged  in  debt 
restructuring operations, sometimes more than once, but debt problems persist.  
The sombre picture, Ladies and Gentlemen, is one of wide external current account deficits, 
heavy public debt and slowing capital flows which are placing undue pressure on the region’s 
international  reserves  and  predominantly  fixed  exchange  rate  regimes  (inclusive  of  a 
currency board arrangement in the Eastern Caribbean). Caribbean countries are unwilling to 
devalue their currencies to support their weaker external positions. Barbados, in particular, 
remains  vehemently  opposed 
ill-conceived  and 
unsuccessful  at  correcting  the  low  growth,  high  debt  dilemma  facing  small,  vulnerable 
Caribbean economies.  
An  appropriate  balance  is  yet  to  be  struck  between  adjustment  and  financing.  Since 
September  2008,  nine  small  island  developing  states  in  the  Caribbean  have  turned  to  the 
IMF for increased financial support under various lending facilities. These are Antigua and 
Barbuda,  Belize,  Dominica,  Grenada,  Haiti,  Jamaica,  St.  Kitts/Nevis,  St.  Lucia  and  St. 
Vincent and the Grenadines. 
Yet, it is arguable whether the current lending facilities of the IMF, the World Bank and other 
international financial institutions are sufficient enough to help mitigate the impact of large, 
unforeseen external shocks on Caribbean and other small vulnerable economies.  
Over the past decade, the international community has championed several initiatives to help 
mobilize  more  resources  for  development  or  to  make  them  more  effective.  Well  known 
examples  include  the  International  Finance  Facility  for  Immunization,  debt  conversions, 
emissions trading, a financial transactions tax and use of the IMF’s Special Drawing Rights 
to  devaluation,  which 
it  considers 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
(SDRs).  The  jury  is  still  out  on  whether  these  major  schemes  have  created  additional 
financial flows for development.  
For many Caribbean countries, remittances have become an important and promising source 
of non-traditional external financing. In fact, the Caribbean is among the larger recipient of 
remittances  in  proportion  to  its  GDP.  For  countries  such  as  Haiti,  Jamaica  and  Guyana, 
remittances  represent  a  lifeline,  contributing  to  smoothing  household  consumption,  easing 
balance of payments pressures, and financing domestic investments.  
In effect, the Caribbean has created its very own large, highly educated diaspora pool that 
represents  a  potential  alternative  source  of  long-term  funding.  The  stock  of  the  Caribbean 
diaspora is estimated to be around 3.5 million people or more than one-fifth of the region’s 
population. Preliminary estimates place the annual savings of the Caribbean diaspora at over 
15  percent  of  the  region’s  GDP.  Despite  this  impressive  potential  market,  regional 
governments are yet to adopt innovative financing solutions such as diaspora bonds to tap 
into the wealth of its diaspora.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, I have noted the wide scope of this workshop agenda, which ranges 
from  exploring  the  feasibility  of  countercyclical  loan  instruments  from  the  IMF  and  World 
Bank to identifying new sources of revenues including new regional financing mechanisms 
for small vulnerable economies. I am also most impressed with the caliber of the presenters. 
I  have  no  doubt  that  you  have  the  right  ingredients  for  stimulating  and  fruitful  discussions 
over the next two days.  
But  we  must  be  realistic.  There  is  no  silver-bullet  solution  to  the  deep-rooted,  financing 
challenges facing small vulnerable economies. Stabilizing the Caribbean’s debt overhang as 
a priority is only a start. Putting in place the policies and institutions to allow pro-poor growth 
and  achievement  of  the  MDGs  in  the  Caribbean  will  require  persistent  action  from 
governments across the region. In this regard, I see both the Commonwealth Secretariat and 
UNDP continuing to play an active role. 
Conclusion  
In closing, Ladies and Gentlemen, I must remind our foreign participants that even as you 
devote attention to the rigors of the workshop, you have come to Trinidad and Tobago during 
the Carnival season, a most opportune time to witness the creativity, energy and passion of 
our people. So do take time if only to experience Super Blue’s “Fantastic Friday”.  
Let  me  assure  you  all  of  the  continued  support  and  collaboration  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Trinidad and Tobago in helping to move development finance issues facing small vulnerable 
economies onto the international agenda.  
I thank you. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
