Jwala Rambarran: Examining the performance of Caribbean economies 
Remarks by Mr Jwala Rambarran, Governor of the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago, at 
the CARTAC Steering Committee Meeting, Port of Spain, 29 May 2013. 
 Good morning, colleagues from the region and further abroad. 
It is with very great pleasure that I welcome you to Trinidad and Tobago. 
We at the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago are very pleased to host the first CARTAC 
Steering Committee Meeting for 2013, which takes place against the backdrop of what the 
IMF Managing Director has described as a “three-speed” global economy. 
Countries are either doing well (mainly the emerging markets and developing countries), or 
they are on the mend (such as the United States), or they still have some distance to travel 
(such as the Euro area and Japan). 
It is no secret that the small island states in the Caribbean are among those countries with 
some economic distance to travel. Several reasons account for the region’s relatively weaker 
economic  performance.  Perhaps  the  most  critical  reason  stems  from  the  lack  of  sufficient 
capacity,  whether  it  is  to  stimulate  and  sustain  potential  growth,  to  confront  unsustainably 
high  public  debt  burdens,  or  to  manage  risks  arising  from  financial  integration  in  the 
Caribbean. 
From  its  inception,  CARTAC  has  been  playing  an  important  role  in  helping  the  Caribbean 
region  to  strengthen  its  capability  in  macroeconomic  and  financial  management  and  in 
developing the statistical infrastructure. One of the distinguishing characteristics of CARTAC 
has been its flexibility, sensitivity and responsiveness to the specific needs of countries in the 
region. We commend CARTAC’s management and staff, the donor community, the Steering 
Committee, and the member countries for such a collaborative approach. 
Of the many areas in which the Centre has been involved is the fiscal arena. Here CARTAC 
has stepped up to the plate and has quietly and consistently been providing much needed 
training,  guidance,  handholding  and  expertise  on  issues  such  as  budget  planning  and 
execution,  revenue  management,  debt  sustainability  analyses,  customs  reform,  and 
introduction of Value Added Taxes. 
Clearly,  there  remains  a  lot  of  work  to  be  done  in  this  area.  While  a  few  Caribbean 
economies  have  engaged  in  ad  hoc  sovereign  debt  restructuring  operations,  sometimes 
more than once, these have not yielded lasting gains. 
Much work is also underway towards improving the regulatory and supervisory architecture 
across the region. This is most welcome given that financial systems in the Caribbean are 
becoming increasingly integrated with the emergence of major cross-border financial groups. 
The  collapse  of  the  insurance  subsidiaries  of  the  CL  Financial  Group  is  perhaps  the  most 
widely cited example of the systemic importance of these cross-border financial groups. 
CARTAC  has  already  done  some good  work  in  assisting  in  the  drafting  of financial  sector 
legislation  by  bringing  a  wider  international  perspective.  The  Centre’s  assistance  to  the 
Central Banks in producing a regional financial  stability report is anticipated to be of great 
benefit  in  assisting  the  region  to  diagnose  financial  vulnerabilities  and  develop  corrective 
strategies ex ante to forestall potential future crises. 
One aspect that is often unheralded is CARTAC’s work on macroeconomic statistics. Indeed, 
many  countries  have  severe  institutional  problems  that  inhibit  the  gathering,  accurate 
processing  and  timely  dissemination  of  data,  creating  a  weak  base  for  policy  design.  In  a 
difficult and sometimes frustrating environment, CARTAC has been able to help in providing 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
in 
the 
the 
financial  sector  as  well  as 
itself  a  strong  collaborator  of 
consultants and training local staff to improve statistics on consumer prices, the balance of 
payments and national accounts. 
Trinidad  and  Tobago  considers 
Institution  and 
wholeheartedly supports its work and vision. For our part, we have benefitted from technical 
assistance/consultancy  support 
fiscal  and  debt 
management. 
We continue to receive  support to strengthen the price and balance of payments statistics 
and just last week we hosted a consultant who is assisting us to develop and implement a 
plan to rebase our quarterly gross domestic product estimates. 
Our semi-annual bank stress testing exercises, which we have done over the past two and a 
half  years,  was  developed  with  a  CARTAC  consultant,  who  earlier  this  year  revisited  our 
shores and worked with us on upgrading the test parameters and methodology. 
Staff  at  the  Central  Bank  and  at  government  ministries  gained  valuable  training  on 
macroeconomic issues and policy design. This is a CARTAC contribution which we consider 
extremely important in helping to develop the capacity of our future policy makers. 
We also commend CARTAC for organizing the summer internship program – we have had 
the good fortune of having some excellent interns and we will continue to participate in this 
initiative. 
As with any technical assistance program, we recognize that sustainability must be a major 
objective.  As  we  discuss  the  recent  activities  of  the  Centre  and  the  way  forward  during 
today’s proceedings, we should keep constantly in mind the need to develop programs in a 
way that would progressively transfer the knowledge and expertise to recipient countries. In 
this way CARTAC’s contribution would be all the more durable. 
Moreover,  we  should  utilize  as  far  as  possible  the  avenues  for  greater  collaboration  with 
others. In this regard, I would like to see greater collaboration between CARTAC and other 
like-minded regional institutions such as the University of the West Indies, CEMLA and the 
CCMF. 
In  closing,  I  wish  to  remind  you  all  that  this  meeting  is  taking  place  the  day  before  two 
successive national holidays, Corpus Christi and Indian Arrival Day. The timing is therefore 
opportune for you to experience some of our country's religious and cultural heritage and to 
partake in our delicious indigenous cuisine. 
I thank you and wish you all a very productive meeting. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
