Vítor Constâncio: The global financial crisis – 5 years on 
Intervention  by  Mr  Vítor  Constâncio,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
China-Europe Economists Symposium, Beijing, 12 January 2013. 
 Ladies and gentleman, 
First  of  all,  let  me  extend  my  thanks  to  David  Marsh  and  OMFIF  for  inviting  me  to  this 
symposium today. There are many themes on the relationship between China and Europe 
that we could fruitfully discuss but I would like to focus my remarks today on the euro area 
and  the  evolution  of  the  sovereign  debt  crisis.  In  particular,  I  would  like  to  review  the  key 
lessons  from  the  experience  of  the  last  5  years  –  and  how  these  lessons  have  been 
incorporated into Europe’s response to the crisis. 
1.   Lessons of the crisis 
Let me begin with that first question: what have we learned about the euro area in the past 
5 years? In my view, there are three main lessons. 
First, the financial crisis demonstrated – quite compellingly – that financial contagion is the 
flip  side  of  European  financial  market  integration.  We  have  learned  that  deep  financial 
integration,  without  a  commensurate  deeper  integration  of  financial  stability  policies  is 
unstable.  
This  potential  vulnerability  has  been  characterized  by  Dirk  Schoenmaker  as  a  “financial 
trilemma”: the three objectives of european financial integration, european financial stability 
and national supervision of banks cannot be achieved at the same time.  
The  existence  of  this  trilemma  was  confirmed  in  the  euro  area  experience.  Indeed,  as  it 
happened, enormous capital inflows channelled by banks of core countries to banks in the 
periphery allowed for large financial imbalances in the public and private sectors of recipient 
countries. When these flows turned into outflows as the economic environment deteriorated 
after 2008, these imbalances not only led to problems for the countries concerned but also 
produced contagion to other parts of the euro area.  
Financial  stability  –  we  have  seen  –  is  a  common  good  and  as  such  requires  shared 
responsibility  for  its  preservation.  A  single  mechanism  for  financial  supervision  and  a 
common authority with strong tools for bank resolution – could have more easily dealt with 
the situation.  
Second,  we  have  learned  that  shock  absorbers  at  the  national  level  are  insufficient  in  the 
face of a major financial and economic crisis. Hence the European level has an  important 
role to play. 
The design of the euro area assumed that stabilisation would take place at the national level 
and to a large extent automatically. Stabilisation would be provided by national fiscal policies 
that would respond to idiosyncratic national conditions. Accordingly, a fiscal brake at the EU 
level,  codified  in  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact,  was  designed  to  prevent  fiscal  profligacy, 
preserve  fiscal  space  and  hence  allow  automatic  stabilisers  to  play  out  in  full  during 
downturns. Moreover, country-specific shocks were expected to become ever less important 
as the euro would spur market integration and the flexible single market to allow an easy and 
fast rebalancing after such shocks.  
However,  the  scale  of  the  shock  after  the  2008  financial  crisis  was  unprecedented  in  a 
number of countries and it far exceeded their national shock absorption capacity. The euro 
area had no mechanisms to provide financial support for countries in difficulty and stave off 
cross-border  contagion;  there  were  no  area-level  institutions  to  prevent  governments  from 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
being  pulled  down  by  their  domestic  banking  systems.  This  underscored  the  pitfalls  of  a 
design that relies exclusively on the national level to fulfil the stabilization function. 
Third,  we  have  learned  that  governance  of  economic  policies  at  the  EU  level  has  to  be 
broader and deeper than anticipated prior to the crisis.  
Besides fiscal surveillance, which essentially focused on public deficits,1 there was believed 
to be no need to closely monitor macroeconomic imbalances and disequilibria on the labour, 
product or financial markets. Disequilibria originating from the private sector were supposed 
to be only short-lived and eliminated by market forces.  
The data clearly show that this was insufficient. Between 1999 and 2007, the ratio of public 
debt to GDP in EMU declined on average by 5.6 percentage points. The improvement was 
by 
large  the  result  of  favourable  economic  conditions  rather  than  concrete  fiscal 
consolidation measures which should have aimed at approaching the reference value of a 
60% GDP to debt ratio at a satisfactory pace, as the Treaty prescribes it. In some countries – 
as we all know – the sovereign debt dynamics were much less favourable than the euro area 
average.  Nevertheless,  the  accumulated  private  sector  imbalances  seem  to  have  far 
exceeded those in the public sector.  
In  the  same  period  –  between  1999  and  2007  –  the  ratio  of  private  sector  debt  to  GDP 
increased by 26.8 percentage points. Also for the same period, in the stressed countries, the 
cumulative increase in the private debt ratio to GDP versus the public debt ratio, amounted 
respectively, to 49 and 24 per cent for Portugal, 75 and minus 35 per cent for Spain, 101 and 
minus 10 per cent for Ireland, 217 and 4 per cent for Greece. In 2007, at the beginning of the 
crisis, the public debt ratio was just 62.7% in Portugal, 46.4% in Spain and 26.6% in Ireland, 
in all cases well below the euro area average.  
Nevertheless, the increase in total debt, both public and private, was associated with various 
destabilizing  developments,  ranging  from  rising  asset  prices  to  losses  of  wage  and  price 
competitiveness.  Clearly,  the  euro  area  needed  a  framework  to  monitor  macroeconomic 
imbalances and suffered from its absence. 
2.   Responses to the crisis 
So how has Europe incorporated these lessons into its policy responses to the crisis? 
It is useful to conceive of the European response in two phases. First, Europe has had to 
respond to what might be called the acute challenges, by which I mean the shifts in investor 
sentiment and market psychology that have led to market panic and cross-border contagion. 
These had to be addressed to manage the on-going crisis. 
Second,  it  has  had  to  respond  to  the  systemic  aspects  of  the  crisis,  by  which  I  mean  the 
underlying  economic  and  institutional  weaknesses  that  have  led  these  acute  effects  to 
appear. These have to be addressed to find a sustainable solution to the crisis and prevent a 
re-emergence. 
Acute challenges 
a.  
The  acute  challenges  have  been  addressed,  first  and  foremost,  by  establishing  crisis 
management tools  at the  European  level.  This  included  the  temporary  European  Financial 
Stability  Facility  and  Mechanism  in  May  2010  and  more  recently  the  permanent  European 
Stability Mechanism. Their significance cannot be overstated. Financial support can now be 
given  swiftly  and  efficiently,  conditional  on  strong  macroeconomic  adjustment.  This 
arrangement  maintains  the  core  principle  that  Member  States  are  responsible  for  their 
economic  policies,  while  at  the  same  time  removing  the  tail  risk  of  a  self-fulfilling 
                                                
1   Within the Excessive Deficit Procedure of the Stability and Growth Pact. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
liquidity/solvency crisis. This partly remedies the lack of a ‘federal’ shock absorber, while not 
altering the fundamental balance of competencies within the euro area, which would require 
fundamental  Treaty  changes.  The  capacity  of  these  arrangements  also  ensures  sufficient 
scope for support. The ESM is a permanent institution that can raise up to 500 billion euros 
in  financial  markets  –  actually,  one  of  the  world’s  largest  and  most  flexible  international 
financial institutions. 
Systemic challenges 
b.  
As  regards  the  systemic  aspects  of  the  crisis  –  the  underlying  economic  and  institutional 
challenges that lie at the heart of Europe’s current difficulties – reforms have taken place on 
two main levels. 
First,  Member  States  have  undertaken  major  internal  and  external  adjustments  to  reduce 
fiscal  and  macroeconomic  imbalances.  Encouragingly,  it  is  those  Member  States  with  the 
deepest vulnerabilities that have undertaken the most far-reaching adjustments.  
For  instance,  on  the  fiscal  side,  Greece  has  closed  its  structural  primary  budget  deficit  by 
around  13  percentage  points  of  GDP  since  2009,  Portugal  by  almost  7.5  pp,  Ireland  by 
around 6.5 pp, and Spain by more than 4.5 pp. This compares with an average reduction in 
the structural primary deficit of 2.6 pp for the euro area.  
The competitiveness losses these countries accumulated over the first decade of EMU are 
also being tackled. From October 2008 to Jun 2012, unit labour costs decreased in Ireland 
relative to the euro area average by around 19%, around 12% in Greece, 10% in Spain, and 
by around 6% in Portugal. The internal rebalancing within the euro area is underway.  
Current  account  positions  have  also  improved.  The  three  countries  under  full  EU-IMF 
programmes have current account deficits that are on average around 8 percentage points of 
GDP lower than they were in 2008 and are approaching full balance or even in surplus as in 
the case of Ireland. This rebalancing is not just the results of declining imports associate with 
a recessionary period but are the consequence of a great increase in exports that in the case 
of  Portugal  and  Spain  exceeded  the  European  average  since  2009.  The  second  level  on 
which  fundamental  reforms  have  taken  place  to  address  underlying  weaknesses  is  the 
strengthening of the institutional architecture of the euro area.  
Fiscal  governance  has  been  strengthened  on  several  occasions.  Very  recently,  25  EU 
countries signed up to the Treaty on Stability, Coordination and Governance, known as the 
European  Fiscal  Compact,  and  which  entered  into  force  in  the  beginning  of  this  year. 
Member States commit to run structurally balanced budgets and introduce a respective fiscal 
rule  into  their  national  primary  legislation.  Additional  regulations  have  strengthened  the 
European fiscal governance framework, of which the final pieces – the so-called “two-pack” – 
will significantly add to the fiscal rule book for euro area countries. It will be important to have 
the  new  rules  fully  implemented  and  complied  with.  This  should  give  credibility  to  fiscal 
policies, hence reducing investor concerns about fiscal sustainability. 
The  absence  of  any  oversight  framework  for  macroeconomic  policies  has  been  redressed 
through  the  creation  of  a  dedicated  procedure  for  the  monitoring  of  macroeconomic 
imbalances such as excessive credit growth or exuberant house price increases. In addition, 
a new idea of “reform contracts” will be explored further next year, by which Member States 
would commit to specific measures to boost competitiveness and receive targeted financial 
support from the euro area in return.  
Towards a banking union 
c.  
However, the most significant governance development has been the commitment to create 
a real banking union in the euro area – to resolve the “financial trilemma” I referred to at the 
beginning of my remarks. Its first component is the elevation of supervisory responsibilities to 
the European level. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
In  mid-December  last  year,  the  Finance  Ministers  of  the  EU  Member  States  unanimously 
reached  an  agreement  on  the  legislative  framework  for  a  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism 
(SSM)  through  the  attribution  of  banking  supervision  tasks  to  the  ECB.  This  legislative 
framework is expected to be enacted in the course of the first quarter of this year.  
The  agreement  on  the  SSM  is  a  milestone  in  European  integration,  with  no  precedent  in 
monetary  union  historical  experiences.  Member  States  have  agreed  to  assign  to  the 
European level a full and complete set of banking supervision powers over all banks of the 
euro area Member States and also over the banks of the EU countries wishing to join the 
SSM. The supervisory powers range from authorisation, Pillar 1 and Pillar 2 tasks to early 
intervention  and  sanctioning  powers.  Furthermore,  the  SSM  will  also  have  responsibilities 
regarding macro-prudential supervision of the euro area financial system as a whole also of 
individual countries, which is a necessary complement for both central banking and banking 
supervisory policy, as the crisis has taught us. 
The  establishment  of  the  SSM  is  essential  for  the  functioning  of  Monetary  Union.  The 
independent  supranational  supervision  by  the  SSM  will  help  to  restore  confidence  in  the 
banking sector. This should reverse the trend towards financial fragmentation, prevent flows 
of  deposits  due  to  the  lack  of  confidence,  and  help  restart  a  well-functioning  interbank 
market. 
It is also a major step for the single financial market. The SSM will simplify supervision and 
support  the  development  of  a  single  rulebook  by  the  European  Banking  Authority,  while 
helping to better address systemic risks in Europe.  
The Single Supervisory Mechanism, although very important, is only the first step towards a 
banking  union.  The  next  step  is  the  establishment  of  a  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  –  a 
necessary  complement  to  the  SSM.  Building  on  a  strong  legislative  framework  on  bank 
recovery and resolution (which is under preparation) such a Single Resolution Mechanism, 
with  a  Single  Resolution  Authority  at  its  centre,  is  essential  to  enable  timely  and  impartial 
resolution decisions focused on the European dimension and to minimise resolution costs. It 
will  contribute  to  breaking  the  vicious  bank-sovereign  nexus  and  minimize  the  risk  of 
supervisory  forbearance  in  the  absence  of  workable  resolution  options.  The  European 
Commission will present a proposal in the course of the year.  
As  you  can  see  Europe  has  responded  decisively  to  the  challenges.  Member  states  have 
progressed individually in rebalancing their economies and in common in strengthening the 
union’s institutions. 
Notwithstanding  the  achievements  made,  no  time  should  be  wasted  in  complacency. 
Continued policy actions are necessary to sustain confidence and revive the growth potential 
of euro area countries. The imperative is to further reduce fiscal and structural imbalances as 
well as to advance with financial sector restructuring and with European institution building. 
Additional progress on those reform fronts will send a strong signal to markets. 
The monetary policy response  
d.  
Let me also briefly touch upon the response of monetary policy. As you know, our primary 
objective is to maintain price stability in the euro area. Neither our mandate nor our resolve to 
deliver on it has changed in the face of the crisis.  
However, the range of instruments we use to achieve price stability had to be widened. The 
crisis severely damaged the transmission mechanism of monetary policy and thus changes 
in  the  ECB’s  key  interest  rates  could  not  be  transmitted  uniformly  across  the  euro  area. 
Moreover,  the  sources of  disruption  in  the  transmission  varied  over  time.  Hence,  we  used 
different types of non-standard measures as the crisis evolved: we provided liquidity in fixed-
rate, full allotment mode, considerably extended the maturity of central bank credit, widened 
the  eligible  collateral  set,  bought  government  and  covered  bonds  outright  and  reduced 
reserve requirements.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
This is also the case for the last measure we announced: the Outright Monetary Transactions 
– OMTs. The OMTs are designed to tackle unfounded fears of the reversibility of the euro 
that distorted the sovereign bond markets in the euro area. The perceived redenomination 
risk had led to a fragmentation of financial markets along national borders and jeopardised 
the  singleness  of  our  monetary  policy.  Thus,  the  OMTs  were  designed  as  a  credible 
backstop  to  self-reinforcing  negative  market  expectations  and  has  been  successful  in 
alleviating some of the acute crisis challenges I have alluded to before.  
Yet, they were also designed to preserve incentives for prudent economic policies. The ECB 
will  only  intervene  in  government  bond  markets  for  countries  that  are  subject  to  effective 
conditionality of certain ESM programmes – thereby re-enforcing also the resolution of the 
systemic challenges I mentioned before. The credibility in the eyes of the market of the OMT 
as a backstop certainly underpins the significant improvement of sovereign bonds’ yields and 
spreads since the beginning of August, when the ECB’s Governing Council took the decision 
to create the programme.  
Conclusion 
3.  
The  global  financial  crisis  –  more  than  5  years  on  now  –  exposed  several  structural 
deficiencies  in  the  institutional  set-up  of  the  euro  area.  However,  the  lessons  learned  now 
translate into policy action. The Euro area has been making progress in all domains of the 
necessary  response  to  the  crisis:  countries  have  been  successfully  applying  adjustment 
programs; financial backstops have been created; monetary policy has delivered in its role of 
liquidity  provision  to  the  banking  sector  and  Member  States  have  started  an  ambitious 
programme of institutional reforms that is deepening European integration and improving the 
framework for monetary union.  
Once again we can see the wisdom of one of the founding fathers of the European project, 
Jean  Monnet,  when  he  wrote:  “Men  only  act  in  a  state  of  necessity  and  usually  only 
recognise necessity in a situation of crisis”.  
Once again, European countries have shown their resolve in making the euro a success and 
reaffirmed the deep political commitment to work together towards a stronger union. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
