Christian Noyer: Financial Stability Review “OTC derivatives: new rules, 
new actors, new risks” 
Speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France and Chairman of the Board 
of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  the  launch  of  the  latest  issue  of 
Bank of France’s Financial Stability Review on “OTC derivatives: new rules, new actors, new 
risks”, New York, 22 April 2013. 
 I  am  very  happy  to  be  with  you  today  to  launch  the  latest  issue  of  Banque  de  France's 
Financial Stability Review on “OTC derivatives, new rules, new actors, new risks”. 
As  you  know,  every  year  since  2002,  our  Review  has  brought  together  contributions  from 
prominent  academics,  practitioners  and  policy-makers  from  all  over  the  world  on  a  topical 
issue. 
I  warmly  thank  all  the  contributors  who  have  enabled  us  to  produce  a  Review,  of  great 
interest,  thanks  to  their  papers  of  exceptional  quality  and  density.  I  cannot  mention  all  of 
them and only some authors are with me today; [but you can find all articles in the online and 
paper versions of the Review, copies of which  are available on tables  at the back]. Those 
contributions are very diverse, or even divergent, in their analysis and proposals. That’s how 
we want it. It is clear we don’t necessarily share the views expressed in the articles but we all 
believe in the exchange of ideas. 
For introducing this FSR, we are extremely fortunate to gather an exceptional panel: 
• 
An outstanding US lawmaker: Senator Dodd, thank you, it’s a privilege to welcome 
you today; 
A  prominent  regulator:  Paul  Tucker,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  in 
charge of Financial Stability. Paul, you also chair the Basel Committee on Payment 
and Settlement Systems and co-chair the CPSS/IOSCO Steering Group on central 
counterparties: your views on the subject are particularly sharp; 
Two  top  market  practitioners:  Michael  Bodson,  President  and  CEO  of  DTCC  and 
Craig Overlander, CEO of Société Générale Americas. You will provide us with the 
“insider” vision. 
A  distinguished  academic,  who  specialized  notably  on  counterparty  risk  and  OTC 
derivatives: Manmohan Singh, from the IMFThank you all for being with us today. 
   As you know, for our FSR issues, we always try to pick up topics which are both analytically 
complex  and  relevant  to  current  policymaking.  This  is  clearly  the  case  with  this  issue:  the 
crisis  has  led  the  G20  leaders  to  commit  to  changing  the  rules  for  over-the-counter 
derivatives markets, with a view to strengthening their security and transparency. 
First,  strengthening  security:  all  sufficiently  standardized  derivatives  should  be  subject  to 
mandatory clearing through a central counterparty in order to reduce counterparty risk and 
foster market liquidity. Second, on transparency, the aim is a registration of all transactions 
with  trade  repositories  to  provide  authorities  with  a  consolidated  overview  of  derivatives 
trading. 
The  contributions  to  the  FSR  show  that  most  commitments  have  been  materialized  in  a 
regulatory framework that is currently being finalized: in particular, at the international level, 
in April 2012 the CPSS (Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems) and the IOSCO 
(International Organization of Securities Commissions) published the “Principles for Financial 
Market Infrastructures” that update, strengthen and broaden the former standards applicable 
in the different jurisdictions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
I will pay a particular tribute to the leadership of the US lawmakers in this field of regulation 
and the personal action and involvement of Senator Dodd, with the law named after him and 
his  colleague  Senator  Frank.  European  Union  legislation  with  EMIR  (European  Market 
Infrastructures Regulation) has also marked a decisive step to address the need for further 
security and transparency on OTC derivatives markets. 
But  the  contributions  to  the  Financial  Stability  Review,  also  show  that  reforms  must  be 
pursued. 
Before we get to the discussion, let me briefly give you some personal thoughts on this. 
Efforts in the reforms should tend to establish a comprehensive, adequately calibrated and 
consistent regulatory framework. 
There is a need for a comprehensive framework. 
1.  
This means that we have to extend and complete security and transparency. 
• 
First, pay a close attention to the regulation of OTC derivatives that will remain non-
cleared. 
Second,  pay  a  close  attention  to  the  implementation  of  PFMIs  and  different 
regulations to ensure that CCPs maintain state of the art risk management practices 
(margining, collateral, default funds) and adequate governance both for the sake of 
both their own soundness and the resiliency of the markets they serve. 
Third, define appropriate principles for resolution and recovery of Financial market 
infrastructures, and particularly CCPs which now concentrate a high level of risks. 
Last,  bring  transparency  in  the  area  of  secured  and  unsecured  interbank  lending, 
which  are  the  underlying  reference  for  interest  rate  derivatives.  Monetary  policy 
considerations  also  call  further  transparency  in  that  regard  as  it  requires  detailed 
knowledge of the organization of money market and the real conditions under which 
transactions take place. 
2.  
Meanwhile due attention should be paid to an adequate calibration of the 
framework. 
The  development  of  multiple  concomitant  regulations  (capital,  liquidity  etc…)  calls  for  a 
perfect coordination. We cannot pile up these different approaches without assessing their 
impact and the costs incurred for the market and the public. This is a particular concern when 
considering the collateral requirements that stem from the different regulations. 
Last but not least, we need to promote a consistent framework. 
3.  
Consistency has several sides 
• 
Consistency across jurisdictions: it is vital as most players on OTC derivatives are 
global actors: we need to minimize the incentives for regulatory arbitrage; 
Consistency with respect to the localization of market infrastructures, which should 
remain  coherent  with  respect  to  the  currencies  traded:  infrastructures  should  be 
under the direct reach of the Central Bank concerned by the systemic risk attached 
to the clearing of large positions in a given currency; 
Consistency  regarding  the  different  types  of  players/counterparties:  in  order  to 
prevent the move from regulated spheres to unregulated ones, we need to set up a 
framework where financial innovation, a key factor for economic growth, continue to 
develop in regulated spheres, and benefit from appropriate risk regulation. 
     2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
I will not dwell further on these topical issues, which are about to give rise to a fascinating 
discussion. 
It is my hope that we can collectively contribute to enlighten the policy debate. 
Let me now give the floor to our panelists. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
