Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Review of 2012 plus global and domestic 
developments shaping 2013 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (the central 
bank of the Philippines), at the Rotary Club of Manila’s First Membership Meeting for 2013, 
Manila, 3 January 2013. 
 Introduction 
Officers  and  members  of  the  Rotary  Club  of  Manila  (RCM),  led  by  President  Obet 
Pagdanganan,  who  are  joined  by  the  officers  and  members  of  the  Rotary  Club  of  Leon 
Guinto headed by President Lody Garcia and of the Rotary Club of Manila-Sta Ana led by 
President  Marci  Bautista  and  of  the Inner Wheel  Club  of  Manila,  led  by  Pres.  Dolly  Gupit, 
esteemed  guests,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  let  me  begin  by  greeting  you  all  a  Peaceful  and 
Prosperous 2013. 
It  is  a  pleasure,  once  again,  to  be  part  of  the  Rotary  Club  of  Manila’s  first  Membership 
Meeting of the year and to have the opportunity to share with Rotarians the BSP’s views on 
the year just past and the expected global and domestic developments that could help shape 
the year ahead of us. 
Having done this for five or six years now, I’ve lost count, I feel like I am a member of this 
jolly group already. Although I know I have to put in more time to earn one of those metal 
badges of honor. 
I am told that to deserve that golden metallic nameplate will take decades. Unfortunately, the 
BSP Charter has imposed a two-term limit to the central bank governor. 
Before I digress any further, I hope you will not mind if I, as one who feels part of the group 
already, would go directly to the meat of my remarks this afternoon. 
2012 – A year of transition for the global economy 
2012 has been described by economic analysts as a year of transition.  
The  year  began  with  economic  policy  makers  in  the  advanced  economies  wrapped  with 
uncertainty  about  whether  their  politicians  would  be  able  to  deliver  the  required  votes  on 
economic reforms essential for the resolution of the European sovereign debt crisis and the 
aversion of the US fiscal cliff. Markets were jittery and credit spreads were high.  
In the meantime, emerging market (EM) economies policy makers on the other side of the 
globe  while  doing  relatively  better,  had  become  increasingly  concerned  with  “spillover”  to 
their economies, given the relative importance of Europe and the US as trading partners to 
these economies. 
In meeting after meeting among EM central bankers, the questions we asked of each other 
were: “How could we avoid any adverse effect on our own economies? How much would any 
spillover be?” 
Crisis  prevention  and  mitigation  had  thus  become  the  mantra  of  policy  makers  across  the 
globe. 
In  a  major  way,  central  bankers  stepped  in  while  the  markets  waited  for  the  political 
resolution to the twin issues.  
Central  bankers  became  the  catalysts  for  preventing  another  global  financial  crisis  from 
erupting. Among others, the ECB’s OMT (or Outright Monetary Transactions Program) and 
the Fed’s QE3 (or its third offering of Quantitative Easing) provided the financial markets with 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
both the “actual” liquidity and the “psychological” calm that they needed to break their crisis 
mentality.  
Now,  Europe  seems  to  be  getting  closer  to  a  resolution  to  its  debt  problems.  The 
US economic  growth  appears  to  be  gaining  some  traction,  although  it  is  still  a  work  in 
progress. 
Even as the medium-term implications are still unclear, the fact that the US fiscal cliff has 
been  avoided  over  the  weekend  provided  support  to  the  markets  when  they  opened 
yesterday. 
Risk appetite has again emerged. And as one commentary I read said, “Happy New Year – 
Risk on!” 
In our own backyard and in response to these dual concerns, the BSP calibrated domestic 
monetary conditions by cutting our policy rates by a cumulative 100 basis points. This move 
reduced our borrowing rate from 4.5 percent to 3.5 percent. 
The  BSP  was  able  to  reduce  its  policy  rates  by  this  much  because  the  domestic  inflation 
outlook continues to be manageable.  
The  easy  monetary  policy  encouraged  banks  to  also  reduce  their  lending  rates,  thereby 
supporting domestic investment and consumption. 
The Philippine banking system remained sound and stable in 2012, allowing it to effectively 
intermediate funds to productive uses even during times of global uncertainty.  
Our  banking  system  continued  to  experience  solid  asset  growth,  improve  the  quality  of  its 
assets, and keep its capitalization above international norms and national standards.  
As events unfolded, the projected weak growth in the advanced economies didn’t spill over to 
all emerging markets in the form we thought they would.  
As  you  are  aware,  the  Philippine  economy  grew  stronger-than-expected  in  the  first  three 
quarters of 2012. 
The 6.5 percent growth posted during the period surpassed the national government’s (NG) 
target range of 5.0–6.0 percent growth for the year. 
In fact, the country’s growth in the third quarter of 2012 of 7.1 percent was the highest among 
the ASEAN countries, which all posted positive growth. 
Indonesia  grew  at  6.2  percent,  Malaysia  5.2.  percent,  Vietnam  4.7  percent,  Thailand 
3.0 percent, and Singapore 0.3 percent.  
In  addition to  easy  monetary  conditions,  the timely  increases  in  government spending  and 
increased private sector activity helped the Philippines stay on this uptrend. 
The robust output growth was achieved in a low inflation environment. 
Headline inflation during the first eleven months of 2012 of 3.2 percent remains well-within 
the  government’s  inflation  target  range  of  3.0–5.0  percent  for  the  year.  This  would  make 
2012  the  fourth  consecutive  year  that  the  BSP  is  able  to  keep  inflation  to  within  the 
government’s target range. 
With  this  continued  benign  inflation  outlook,  businesses  could  expect  the  BSP  to  keep 
interest rates at low levels in 2013. 
In  other  words,  ladies  and  gentlemen, the  Philippines  has  again  achieved  the  sought-after 
alignment of strong growth and low inflation…  
This could lead one to ask: Is the Philippine economy a super economy that it appears to 
have been immune from any adverse impact from global developments?  
The answer – ladies and gentlemen –  is no, it isn’t.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
2012 – A year of continued strong capital flows for the Philippines. A year that tested 
institutions 
Global developments did spill over to the Philippines but not in the form of slower economic 
growth. 
Global developments spilled over to the Philippines in the form of surges in capital flows to 
the economy. Which have been manifested in volatilities in the financial markets. 
Take the exchange rate. This slide shows that in 2012, the peso has been on an appreciating 
trend. 
Take a look at the stock market. This slide shows an appreciating trend also for the stock 
market. 
Take a look at the Tbills market, where yields have been on a downtrend. 
All  these  point  to  strong  investor  interest  in  our  currency,  our  stock  market  and  our 
GS market. In this year of transition, our better growth prospects have continued to make the 
economy a magnet for capital flows. With investment grade status just around the corner, we 
could continue to see more foreign capital come into our domestic financial markets. 
How has the BSP addressed these surges in capital flows? 
BSP  follows  a  pragmatic  approach. We  employ  a  menu  of  policy  options  –  our  enhanced 
policy tool kit.  
First, our use of policy tools is targeted. For structural flows (such as strong remittances and 
other  current  account  receipts),  we  allow  for  some  currency  appreciation.  It  would  be 
imprudent to go against a trend supported by fundamental flows.  
But  for  the  speculative  kind,  we  impose  market-based  regulations  aimed  at  providing  the 
incentive  structure  for  market  participants  to  correctly  price  their  transactions,  taking  into 
account associated risks. 
Second, we use tools to address systemic risks. 
As we showed through earlier graphs on the movements in the peso, PSE and GS, capital 
flows  have  not  only  impacted  the  exchange  rate.  They  also  affected  the  other  financial 
markets and economic prices.  
During  this  crisis,  we  learned  that  monetary  policy  tools  are  not  enough  to  contain  the 
broad-based  impact  of  capital  flows.  During  this  crisis,  we  learned  that  there  is  a  need  to 
complement monetary policy with macroprudential policy tools. 
The BSP has never targeted an exchange rate level nor mandated specific price levels for 
specific market transactions. Instead, our policy has been to craft regulations that would help 
ensure that market participants appreciate the inherent risks of the transactions they enter 
into. In the case of capital flows, the market must be aware that flows which come in quickly 
into the economy, could also just as quickly flow out. This is often referred to as sudden stop 
or capital flow reversal. 
So  far,  this  policy  has  resulted  in  containing  the  volatility  in  exchange  rate  movements  to 
within the middle of the range of other regional currencies, although the peso has performed 
relatively more strongly than in previous years.  
In an environment where the movement of the exchange rate determines the financial wealth 
of  different  economic  sectors  and  affects  different  sectors  differently,  this  policy  has  been 
determined as fair. 
Beyond capital flow management policies, the economy has been successful against shocks 
from external volatilities because of past reforms that have built stronger institutions. What 
are some of these? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
First, a disciplined monetary policy framework, with a clear focus on our mandate. Second, 
sound and stable banking system, as reflected in well-capitalized and better-governed banks. 
Third, a robust external position and payment dynamics characterized by continued build-up 
in foreign exchange reserves and a lower external debt-to-GDP ratio. The NG is targeting a 
GDP growth of 6–7% in 2013 while for inflation, its 2013 target range is 3–5%. 
Clearly, the Philippines performed quite well in 2012. 
While 2012 was a year of transition for the global economy. For the Philippines, I believe, 
2012  could  more  appropriately  be  characterized  as  a  year  of  consolidation,  when  all  the 
outcomes,  as  desired  from  reforms  instituted,  have  essentially  fallen  into  place  and  fitted 
together.  Sound  macroeconomic  policies  and  structural  reforms  have  led  to  investor 
confidence and steady economic growth in a non-inflationary environment.  
2013 – Are we out of the woods yet? No, continued vigilance is needed amid relative 
stability 
Going into 2013 in a state of relative calm, is the global economy out of the woods? With the 
confluence of strong domestic growth and low inflation, is the Philippines in a clearing? 
While we expect the Philippines to be resilient, we are also aware that the country is not fully 
immune to the volatilities in the external front. While there seems to be relative global stability 
at the moment, risks remain. 
What are some of these risks? 
• 
There  may  be  delays  in  further  political  reforms  needed  for  dealing  with  the  euro 
area sovereign debt crisis. 
The US still faces sizable medium-term fiscal tightening. 
These  two  risks  are  highly  politically-related  problems,  which  again  may  require 
central banks in advanced economies to keep easy monetary conditions. 
In turn, these could lead to more capital flows to emerging economies. 
We are also monitoring developments in China, to see if we would see a slowdown 
or  a  return  to  strong  growth  that  together  with  a  recovery  in  the  US,  could  push 
global commodity prices higher. 
We are also watchful of geopolitical developments in the Middle East as these could 
impact on the supply chain for oil. 
   These are some of the risks that we keep an eye on. Given the highly integrated nature of 
economic  and  financial  transactions  today,  external  developments  such  as  these,  could 
impact  on  our  domestic  growth  and  inflation  processes  –  including  on  domestic  utility  and 
gas pump prices. 
BSP’s policy thrusts moving forward 
The BSP welcomes the seeming respite from crisis which we are now experiencing, but we 
continue  to  keep  our  ears  close  to  the  ground  to  identify  looming  pressures.  More 
specifically: 
On  monetary  policy,  we  will  sharpen  economic  surveillance  of  shifts  in  the  domestic  and 
global inflation dynamics, including any brewing asset price pressures. 
On financial sector policy, we continue to improve the microprudential supervision of banks 
and pursue macroprudential regulation with equal vigor to address potential systemic risks. 
In  line  with  this,  we  will  implement  the  Basel  3  capital  requirements  for  universal  and 
commercial banks (U/KBs) by January 2014. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Beyond  the  preservation  of  monetary  and  financial  stability,  the  BSP  will  also  continue  its 
advocacies to support local enterprises, promote inclusive growth and help alleviate poverty. 
Thus,  the  BSP  will  sustain  its  advocacies  on  microfinance,  financial  inclusion,  consumer 
protection and financial education with greater energy. 
On the external front, the BSP will continue to maintain a market-determined exchange rate; 
keep a comfortable level of reserves; and continue to promote external debt sustainability by 
keeping the country’s outstanding external debt manageable. 
In  2013,  as  policies  further  engender  a  sound  domestic  macroeconomy,  we  foresee 
continued solid economic growth amidst stable prices, a relatively stable exchange rate, and 
a responsive banking system that is able to withstand significant external shocks. 
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen, 2012 was a year of transition for the global economy and a year of 
further strengthening and consolidation for the Philippine economy. 
In the face of the relative economic stability we have gained during this transition, and the 
support of domestic policy makers in our period of consolidation, it is my hope that Rotarians 
would make 2013 a year of expansion. A year when all of you would seek – more actively – 
every opportunity to create a better life not only for yourselves, but for a greater majority of 
our countrymen.  
Transition  brings  a  traveler  from  one  point  in  his  journey  to  the  next.  Consolidation 
strengthens  his foothold  at  every  point.  Expansion  provides  the  traveler  with  more  options 
during his journey. 
The  private  sector  represented  by  Rotarians,  and  the  government  are  all  travelers  on  this 
economic journey. It is my hope , therefore, that as you and the BSP take on the challenges 
that our path throw at us, we would be able to continue working together to bring our country 
to the next point. One that is prosperous for more, if not for all, Filipinos.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
