Andreas Dombret: Global derivatives markets in transition 
Guest contribution by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche 
Bundesbank, published in the Börsen-Zeitung on 2 August 2013. 
 The  global  derivatives  markets  are  close  to  reaching  a  turning  point.  In  future,  the  vast 
majority of risks associated with over-the-counter (OTC) derivative contracts will be shifted 
from market participants to central counterparties (CCPs). The aim of this regulatory change 
in  market  structure  is  to  use  CCPs  as  a  tool  to  limit  and  cushion  risks  in  the  derivatives 
markets. The G20, comprising the 20 main industrialised and emerging market economies, 
agreed  on  this  as  long  ago  as  2009.  Their  decision  has  been  followed  by  extensive 
legislative activity worldwide, with support being given by the Financial Stability Board (FSB). 
The  recently  found  compromise  between  the  US  Commodity  Futures Trading  Commission 
(CFTC) and the European Commission on cross-border derivatives business should be seen 
as  part  of  this  regulatory  convergence  process.  It  is  proof  that,  in  the  regulation  of 
derivatives, policymakers around the globe are pulling together. 
Worldwide,  only  a  small  percentage  of  OTC  derivatives  are  at  present  settled  via  central 
clearing.  For  instance,  a  mere  13  %  of  credit  derivatives  are  cleared  through  CCPs.  The 
majority are subject to bilateral clearing agreements between the counterparties. Thus, the 
OTC derivative contracts that are traded around the world have led to a network in which a 
very  small  number  of  globally  active  banks  play  a  major  role.  In  the  sub-market  for  credit 
default swaps, for example, the ten most important market participants are involved in more 
than  70  %  of  all  transactions.  Since  the  counterparties  often  cover  only  part  of  the 
counterparty risk associated with these transactions, these market participants in particular 
are a potential source of contagion risk. 
Counterparty risks can be reduced by relocating them to CCPs, which continuously evaluate 
the open positions of the trading participants and demand a relatively high level of collateral. 
They can act as a risk buffer because of the extensive financial resources they have at their 
disposal;  these  comprise,  among  others, the  clearing members’  collateral,  a  clearing fund, 
obligations to make further contributions under additional margin calls, and the CCPs’ own 
funds.  According  to  the  EU  European  Market  Infrastructure  Regulation  (EMIR),  in  future 
CCPs  will  even  have  to  be  able  to  withstand  the  simultaneous  default  of  the  two  largest 
clearing members. 
Juggernauts of the financial system 
At the moment, a requirement to clear derivatives with CCPs exists only in Japan and the 
United States. We expect mandatory CCP clearing to be introduced in the EU under EMIR 
from 2014 onwards. This means that the reforms are only slowly taking hold. Nevertheless, I 
am confident that the regulation will make itself felt in the foreseeable future and improve the 
structure of the derivatives markets. 
However,  we  must  be  aware  that  these  regulatory  requirements  will  turn  CCPs  into 
“juggernauts”  of  the  international  financial  system.  For  this  reason,  particular  attention  will 
have to be paid to the following points. 
First, every CCP must have robust risk management structures in place. Competition among 
CCPs  is  growing  more  and  more  intense.  This  could  lead  to  a  race  to  the  bottom,  ie  a 
situation in which CCPs undercut each other in terms of the size and quality of their margin 
requirements.  It  is  up  to  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  authorities  to  prevent  this  from 
happening.  Above  all,  it  has  to  be  assured  that  the  CCPs’  models  for  calculating  margin 
requirements are sufficiently conservative. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Second, appropriate recovery and resolution regimes need to be available for CCPs in case 
of emergencies. The envisaged loss allocation rules are one core element in designing these 
regimes.  The  main  problem  with  CCPs  is  that  losses  could  only  be  distributed  among 
clearing participants – a small group of market participants usually including, in particular, the 
globally active big banks –, giving rise to potential contagion risks and domino effects. 
Risks through interoperability 
Third, it must be ensured that central financial stability concerns do not take a back seat to 
issues of competition and efficiency. It would certainly be desirable from the derivative user’s 
viewpoint  if  the  CCPs  became  interconnected,  ie  interoperable.  Market  participants  would 
then  not  need  to  join  a  number  of  different  CCPs  in  order  to  settle  contracts  with 
counterparties that use other CCPs. However, in the interests of financial stability, I  would 
warn against subscribing to the idea of CCP interoperability prematurely. We cannot yet say 
for sure that we would actually be able to handle the new dangers that interoperability would 
create – in particular because of the new channels of contagion that would arise. 
Fourth,  in  the  derivatives  market  we  must  beware  of  focusing  exclusively  on  the  function 
performed  by  CCPs.  It  is  possible  that  a  small  number  of  banks,  too,  may  in  future 
accumulate  high  levels  of  risks. I  refer  here to banks  which,  as  general  clearing members 
(GCMs),  are  directly  linked  to  CCPs,  making  them  the  “eye  of  the  needle”  through  which 
CCP  clearing  must  pass.  The  GCMs’  central  role  has  implications  for  financial  stability  on 
three accounts. They link the CCPs indirectly with each other, as in most cases they have 
connections with several CCPs; the default of one such bank would affect a number of CCPs 
simultaneously. Furthermore, the services provided by a GCM are crucial for its many clients; 
the question arises as to whether a GCM could be replaced. And finally, a bank acting as 
GCM faces additional risks, as it is liable vis-à-vis the CCP for the fulfilment of the obligations 
of its clients, who are indirectly linked to the CCP through the bank. 
These points all serve to illustrate why supervisors will continue to keep a close watch on the 
future development of the derivatives markets. In Europe, EMIR in particular offers a good 
starting  point  for  supervisory  authorities  to  ensure  that  the  change  now  under  way  helps 
achieve greater stability in the financial system.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
