Louis Kasekende: Financial stability – restructuring and resolution of 
financial institutions 
Speech  by  Dr  Louis  Kasekende,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda,  at  the  Bank  of 
Uganda–Deutsche Bundesbank seminar on “Financial stability – restructuring and resolution 
of financial institutions”, Kampala, 3 July 2013. 
 from 
initiative  emerged 
financial  conglomerates.  This 
Distinguished Guests  
Good morning ladies and gentlemen.  
On  behalf  of  Bank  of  Uganda,  I  wish  to  formally  welcome  you  all  to  this  seminar  with  the 
underlying theme “Financial Stability – Restructuring and Resolution of Financial Institutions”.  
This  seminar  is  occurring  under  the  Bank  of  Uganda  and  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank 
technical  cooperation.  The  main  objective  is  to  strengthen  the  Resolution  framework  for 
dealing  with  banks  and 
the 
recommendations  of  the  IMF  Regional  Crisis Preparedness  Mission of  February  2011  and 
the FSAP Mission of August 2011. Both these missions recommended that Bank of Uganda 
reviews  the  Bank  Resolution  framework  and  in  addition,  ensure  that  it  conforms  to  the 
Financial Stability Board’s (FSB) guideline on Key Attributes of Effective Resolution Regimes 
for Financial Institutions.  
At the Seoul Summit on 11–12 November 2010, the G20 Leaders endorsed the FSB policy 
framework  for  reducing  the  moral  hazard  of  systemically  important  financial  institutions 
(SIFIs).  This  framework  called  for  action  in  five  areas,  of  which  a  key  area  was  to  make 
improvements  to  resolution  regimes  so  that  any  financial  institution,  whatever  its  size  and 
complexity, can be resolved without disruption to the financial system. The Key Attributes of 
Effective  Resolution  regimes  for  Financial  Institutions  outline  the  policy  framework  to  meet 
this  objective.  These  key  attributes  have  been  identified  by  the  Financial  Stability  Board 
(FSB)  jointly  with  its  members  including  the  IMF,  World  Bank  and  the  standard-setting 
bodies.  
The purpose of an effective resolution regime is to make possible the resolution of financial 
institutions without severe system-wide disruption. Such a resolution regime needs to take 
into account the taxpayers, and minimize the losses to them, while protecting vital economic 
functions.  It  should  employ  mechanisms  which  make  it  possible  for  shareholders  and 
unsecured and uninsured creditors to absorb losses in a manner that respects the hierarchy 
of claims in liquidation. Finally, the resolution regime should provide for timely and early entry 
into resolution before a firm is balance-sheet insolvent and before all equity has been fully 
depleted. These attributes set out the responsibilities, instruments and powers that national 
regimes  should  have  to  resolve  failing  financial  institutions,  some  of  which  may  be 
systemically important financial institutions (SIFIs).  
Any  financial  institution  that  may  be  systemically  significant  or  critical  if  it  fails  should  be 
subject to a resolution regime and to this effect, the FSB Key Attributes help to address one 
of the key themes of “too-big-to-fail” in global finance by making it possible to resolve any 
financial  institution  in  an  orderly  manner,  regardless  of  the  size  and  complexity  of  the 
financial institution.  
Two  key  themes  emerge  in  this  overarching  area  of  resolution  of  SIFIs;  one,  resolution 
authority,  powers  and  hierarchy  of  stakeholders  and  two;  the  detailed  mechanisms  for 
resolution such as the collateralization, safeguards and funding of firms in resolution.  
For resolution to be feasible, the authorities should have the required legal powers and the 
operational  capacity  to  apply  them  in  order  to  ensure  the  continuity  of  functions  that  are 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
significant to the economy. The mechanisms employed in resolving problematic firms should 
follow  the  “Respect  of  creditor  hierarchy”  and  “no  creditors  worse  off  than  in  liquidation” 
principle’ as laid down in the FSB Key Attributes. In other words, resolution powers should be 
exercised in a way that respects the hierarchy of claims while providing flexibility to depart 
from  the  general  principle  of  equal  treatment  of  creditors  of  the  same  class.  In  particular, 
equity should absorb losses first, and no loss should be imposed on senior debt holders until 
subordinated  debt  has  been  written-off  entirely.  Creditors  should  have  a  right 
to 
compensation where they do not receive at a minimum what they would have received in a 
liquidation of the firm under the applicable insolvency regime. Directors and officers of the 
firm under resolution should be protected in law, for instance, from law suits by shareholders 
or  creditors  for  actions  taken  when  complying  with  decisions  of  the  resolution  authority.  I 
hope that the first training session this morning on the institutional framework within the EU 
and  the  sharing  session  on  Thursday  about  the  German  Bank  Restructuring  Act  will  shed 
light on some of these issues.  
Second  key  issue  is  that  there  is  a  need  to  put  in  place  pre-determined  methods  of 
resolution,  sources  of  funding  and  identified  assets  acceptable  as  collateral  against  such 
emergency  funding  in  a  crisis.  Most  importantly,  authorities  should  have  statutory  or  other 
policies in place so that authorities are not constrained to rely on public ownership or bail-out 
funds as a means of resolving firms. Therefore, in support of the preparations of recovery 
and resolution plans and the effective implementation of resolution measures in a crisis, a 
framework should be developed in advance. As they say, it is already too late to dig a well 
when you are thirsty. These are some of key issues which have prompted international best 
practices  in  the  area  of  resolution  regimes,  and  we  are  looking  forward  to  understanding 
these from the historical examples and restructuring case studies that will be shared during 
the training seminar.  
The  G20  and  the  FSB  are  calling  on  countries  to  undertake  the  reforms  necessary  to 
implement these standards. In Uganda, this will require cooperation amongst authorities, that 
is,  among  the  Bank  of  Uganda,  the  Ministry  of  Finance,  Planning  and  Economic 
Development,  the  Insurance  Regulatory  Authority  and  the  Capital  Markets  Authority,  to 
review  business  structures,  legal  powers,  policies  and  operations  to  improve  recovery  and 
resolution planning as well as the mechanisms employed in resolution of firms. Therefore, as 
a capstone, I am glad that the participants will also have the opportunity to do some hands-
on decision making in the group exercises at the end of each day.  
Over the course of the next three days, the team from Deutsche Bundesbank which includes 
Mr. Peter Spicka and Mr. Martin Pontzen, with their wealth of experience will be taking us a 
step further towards these areas. I believe that the seminar will be enriching as they share 
their  experience 
for 
macroprudential supervision. Of particular importance will be the section where the seminar 
goes  into  the  details  of  international  and  European  initiatives  for  developing  efficient 
resolution  frameworks  for  financial  institutions  and  explains  fundamental  features  of  the 
German Bank Restructuring Act.  
I hope that this seminar, bringing all the players in the financial sector together, will help to 
facilitate sharing of ideas and experience and will promote the development of an effective 
framework for the restructuring and resolution of financial institutions, especially SIFIs so as 
to  safeguard  financial  stability  in  Uganda.  I  am  very  grateful  for  the  opportunity  to  have 
addressed you this morning. Thank you very much. 
relevant  areas 
in  Europe  on 
the  analytical 
including 
tools 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
