Már Guðmundsson: Recent economic and financial developments in 
Iceland 
Speech  by  Mr  Már  Guðmundsson,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland,  at  the 
52nd Annual General Meeting of the Central Bank of Iceland, Reykjavík 21 March 2013. 
 Madame Prime Minister; Ministers; Madame Chairman; Directors and Ambassadors; Ladies 
and Gentlemen:  
As  we  convene  for  the  52nd  Annual  General  Meeting  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland,  the 
domestic economic recovery that began in mid-2010 continues, although it has slowed down 
in recent months. At least to a degree, the slowdown is due to developments internationally. 
The margin of spare capacity in the economy continues to narrow. Inflation has proven more 
persistent  than  previously  hoped,  however.  Early  on,  wage  increases  far  in  excess  of 
productivity growth played a leading role in raising inflation well above the inflation target, but 
since last autumn the weakening of the króna, triggered by deteriorating terms of trade and a 
heavy foreign debt service burden, has played a greater part. Monetary policy responded to 
these  developments  with  interest  rate  increases  beginning  in  August  2011.  The  Bank’s 
interest  rates  have  been  unchanged  since  November,  however,  and  intervention  in  the 
foreign  exchange  market  has  supported  the  exchange  rate  in  the  recent  term,  thereby 
supporting the monetary policy goal of bringing inflation back to target. 
Global output growth lost pace in 2012, but to differing degrees in various regions. There was 
a  contraction  in  the  euro  area  and  marginal  growth  in  the  UK  and  elsewhere  in  Europe. 
Among Iceland’s major trading partners, weighted output growth measured 0.8% in 2012, as 
opposed  to  1.7%  in  2011.  To  a  degree,  the  capital  controls  have  shielded  the  Icelandic 
financial  system  from  the  euro  area  crisis.  The  effects  felt  through  external  trade  were 
unavoidable, however, and Iceland’s terms of trade deteriorated over the course of the year, 
while  the  import  purchasing  power  of  export  revenues  stagnated.  This  played  a  part  in 
slowing  down  output  growth,  even  though  Iceland’s  growth  rate  was  much  faster  than  in 
trading partner countries.  
According to preliminary figures from Statistics Iceland for 2012 as a whole, output growth 
measured  1.6%  during  the  year,  which  is  somewhat  below  the  Central  Bank’s  February 
forecast of 2.2%. On the other hand, year-2011 growth figures have been revised upwards, 
from 2.6% to 2.9%. This is well in line with the Central Bank’s first forecast of GDP growth in 
2011.  It  is  not  uncommon  that  output  growth  figures  are  revised  upwards  during  upward 
cycles, when more detailed investment figures become available. It will be interesting to see 
how estimates of 2012 develop.  
Output  growth  in  2012  was  driven  by  growth  in  private  consumption  and  business 
investment,  while  other  items,  such  as  net  trade  and  public  consumption,  made  a  slightly 
negative  contribution.  This  is  similar  to  the  whole  recovery  phase  in  2010–2012,  where 
business  investment  and  private  consumption  contributed  to  output  growth  more  or  less 
equally, with business investment holding a slight advantage. Last year’s growth was sound 
in the sense that it was not “borrowed” but based on an underlying current account surplus 
measuring almost 4% of GDP.  
In  spite  of  the  slowdown  in  GDP  growth  last  year,  the  slack  in  the  economy  continued  to 
diminish.  The  economic  recovery  is  continuing,  with  current  forecasts  providing  for  GDP 
growth  of  over  2%  this  year  and  in  the  3½–4%  range  in  2014  and  2015.  Labour  market 
statistics  support  this  forecast  of  a  diminishing  slack  in  the  economy.  For  instance, 
seasonally  adjusted  unemployment  measured  4½%  of  the  labour  force  in  February,  its 
lowest  point  since  November  2008.  A  survey  carried  out  regularly  by  the  Central  Bank  in 
collaboration  with  the  Confederation  of  Icelandic  Employers  shows  that,  for  the  first  time 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
since March 2008, respondents wishing to recruit staff members outnumber those interested 
in downsizing.  
The  slack  in  the  economy  still  exists,  but  these  developments,  together  with  disappointing 
inflation figures (which I will mention again later on), give rise to the question of how big that 
slack is. Every time they take a decision on interest rates, monetary policy decision-makers 
must  ask  themselves  this  question,  as  previous  economic  policy  mistakes  in  Iceland  and 
elsewhere – mistakes that have ended in inflation and instability – have often originated in an 
overestimation  of  output  slack  and  potential  output  growth.  It  is  vital  to  seek  out  structural 
reforms that  could  result  in  higher  growth  potential,  and  important  work  in  that  direction  is 
currently  underway.  But  it  is  equally  important  not  to  give  rise  to  unrealistic  expectations 
about how fast potential output can grow. The Central Bank’s analysis and forecasting work 
always aims to answer this question, which is one of the most important in monetary policy 
implementation.  
Inflation subsided somewhat in 2012, falling from 6½% at the beginning of the year to just 
over 4% at year-end. The Bank’s February forecast assumed that this trend would continue, 
provided that the króna did not weaken further. According to the forecast, inflation should be 
close to target around the middle of next year. Whether that happens earlier or later depends 
primarily  on  developments  in  the  exchange  rate.  It  was  therefore  a  disappointment  to  see 
how  much  prices  rose  in  February,  raising  twelve-month  inflation  once  again.  It  is  always 
imprudent to read too much into individual measurements, and it has yet to come to light how 
much of that increase was based on temporary factors. Furthermore, the exchange rate has 
risen  more  than  5%  since  the  beginning  of  the  year,  which  could  affect  the  next 
measurements. Nonetheless, this inflation measurement gives good reason for caution, and 
if  the  role  of  temporary  factors  proves  smaller  than  might  appear  at  present  and  inflation 
declines to the target more slowly than previously forecast, it will be necessary, other things 
being equal, to withdraw monetary accommodation sooner than would otherwise be required.  
The Central Bank’s interest rates have been unchanged since November 2012, when they 
were  raised  by  0.25  percentage  points.  In  its  November  statement,  the  Monetary  Policy 
Committee implied that the Bank’s nominal rates could remain unchanged in coming months 
if developments were in line  with the forecast and no additional pay rises were negotiated 
during the wage settlement review early this year. This has been borne out so far, and the 
Committee kept rates unchanged at its December, February, and March meetings.  
At  present,  the  Central  Bank’s  effective  real  interest  rate  is  positive  by  just  under  1%. 
Although  it  has  risen  by  nearly  2  percentage  points  in  the  past  year,  it  is  still  below  the 
equilibrium real rate once the economy has recovered and the slack has disappeared. If the 
economic  recovery  maintains  its  pace  in  coming  months,  it  will  therefore  be  necessary  to 
withdraw the accommodative monetary stance still further. The pace at which this happens 
depends on economic developments, and the degree to which this normalisation takes place 
through higher nominal Central Bank rates will depend on future developments in inflation.  
Towards  the  end  of  last  year  and  in  the  past  several  weeks,  the  Central  Bank  has  sold 
foreign currency in the interbank market. The Bank also announced that it had temporarily 
suspended  its  programme  of  weekly  foreign  currency  purchases.  These  measures  were 
approved  at  an  extraordinary  meeting  of  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  in  early  January. 
The intervention measures amount to 7 b.kr., including 4 b.kr. this year. In comparison, the 
Bank was a net buyer of foreign currency in the amount of 60 b.kr. in 2010–2012, and those 
foreign  currency  purchases  were  made  at  a  considerably  lower  exchange  rate  than  the 
recent  sales.  Furthermore,  on  19  February  the  Bank  concluded  a  forward  currency  swap 
agreement with Landsbankinn in the amount of 6 b.kr., which means that Landsbankinn will 
not need to accumulate foreign currency to comply with the Bank’s foreign exchange balance 
requirements. 
The Monetary Policy Committee is of the opinion that intervention of this type is justifiable in 
order to mitigate temporary exchange rate volatility that is addressed more effectively  with 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
instruments other than interest rates. In recent weeks, the foreign exchange market has been 
characterised  by  an  unusual  combination  of  features:  weakening  terms  of  trade,  foreign 
exchange  accumulation  in  anticipation  of  heavy  foreign  debt  service,  foreign  exchange 
mismatches  in  the  banks’  balance  sheets  and,  in  part,  self-fulfilling  expectations  of  a 
currency depreciation. Because these conditions are in part temporary and increased foreign 
exchange inflows are expected as the spring advances, limited one-off foreign currency sales 
by the Central Bank were considered appropriate to prevent excessive currency depreciation 
and stem the tide of these self-fulfilling expectations of market participants. This is consistent 
with  the  strategy  outlined  in  the  Bank’s  report  Monetary  Policy  After  Capital  Controls, 
published in late 2010.  
Capital controls were imposed early in the winter of 2008 as part of the Government’s IMF 
programme.  In  addition  to  changes  to  the  expiry  date  of  the  controls,  major  amendments 
have  been  made  twice:  in  October  2009,  when  cross-border  transfers  of  krónur  were 
prohibited and outflows deriving from new investment were liberalised; and in March 2012, 
when exemptions from the Central Bank of Iceland were required for disbursements from the 
failed banks.  
Parliament  has  just  passed  amendments  to  the  Foreign  Exchange  Act,  with  broad-based 
support  from  its  members.  The  Central  Bank  participated  in  drafting  this  amendment  and 
supports  it.  The  amendment  creates  a  stronger  foundation  for  the  work  that  lies  ahead  in 
finding a solution to the settlement of the banks’ estates that is consistent with monetary and 
exchange rate stability and facilitates larger steps in liberalising the controls. The Bank also 
welcomes the enhanced understanding of the nature of the capital controls and the fact that 
they are a necessary evil, as is reflected in the consensus on the issue.  
The  aim  of  the  controls  was  to  arrest  the  decline  of  the  króna,  provide  shelter  for  the 
restructuring of private sector debt and the financial system as a whole, and create the space 
for economic policy to mitigate the recession and ultimately support recovery. In broad terms, 
these goals have been realised. Without the controls, much stricter monetary policy  would 
have been required in the early stages of the crisis. The Treasury would have had much less 
scope  to  mitigate  the  contraction  in  2009,  as  domestic  financing  of  the  deficit  would  have 
been much more expensive. In this context, it is worth noting that, on average, real interest 
rates on new domestic Treasury borrowings were negative by almost half a percentage point 
in 2009–2012.  
But  these  stabilisation  gains  of  the  capital  controls  will  diminish  over  time.  The  capital 
controls also have efficiency costs associated with them – costs that were probably modest 
to start with but increase with time. There is little or no research on how high these costs are 
at present, and assertions to that effect are not well founded. It is still more difficult to make a 
quantitative  assessment  of  the  risk  accompanying  liberalisation  of  the  controls,  which  is 
presumably greater the faster the controls are lifted and as the economy is less prepared for 
it. From a theoretical standpoint, we should lift the controls the moment the present value of 
future efficiency costs exceeds the present value of future stabilisation gains, including the 
risk accompanying speedy liberalisation. That precise moment can never be identified with 
any  certainty,  however,  although most  signs  indicate  that  it  has  not  come  yet,  for  if  it  had 
arrived, rapid liberalisation would be underway. At this point, it is likely that the benefits of 
lifting the controls more gradually are still greater than the cost of retaining them for a little 
longer. The pivotal issue here is what tools they give us in order to prevent the settlement of 
the failed banks from jeopardising financial stability.  
But none of this changes the fact that we must lift the controls as soon as it is safe to do so, 
both because of the economic cost of retaining them and because of Iceland’s international 
obligations.  In my  speech  a  year  ago,  I  said  that  this  was  one  of  the  most  complex  tasks 
facing the Icelandic authorities at the time. That has not changed. A prerequisite for success 
is  that  we  base  our  efforts  on  the  best  possible  analysis  of  the  problem  and  the  potential 
solutions  to  it.  Until  now,  the  controls  have  been  viewed  as  providing  shelter  during  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
resolution  of  the  balance  of  payments  problems  caused  by  the  collapse  of  the  financial 
system. If all non-residents’ potentially volatile claims on residents were paid in a short period 
of time, Iceland would pay down foreign debt much more rapidly than is desirable. If worse 
comes to  worst, the  deleveraging could  amount  to  roughly  half Iceland’s  GDP  in  relatively 
few years. Under such circumstances, the króna would depreciate significantly, at least over 
a  considerable  period  of  time,  the  banks’  liquidity  would  be  weakened,  and  public  sector 
finances would do likewise. Domestic and foreign Treasury financing would be much more 
difficult and expensive to come by.  
But  is  this  analysis  correct?  Is  Iceland  faced  with  a  balance  of  payments  and  refinancing 
problem rather than a debt sustainability problem? The difference between the two lies in the 
fact that a household, firm, national treasury, or nation is facing a debt sustainability problem 
if cannot service its debt with the available revenue surplus no matter how long the debt is 
stretched out. Then debt relative to income rises without limits. In that case, there are only 
three solutions: increased revenue surpluses, reduction of debt, or reduction of interest rates. 
On the other hand, a payment and refinancing problem exists when a longer loan duration 
would eliminate temporary debt service shortfalls. But two provisos must be made here. First 
of all, the boundaries between the two are not always clear. Unlimited loan durations are not 
available.  A  sustained  refinancing  problem  can  lead  to  a  default  and  a  debt  sustainability 
problem. It  can  also  change  into  a  debt  sustainability  problem  if  interest  rates  rise  steeply 
upon  refinancing.  Second  of  all,  a  nation’s  debt  is  different  in  nature  than  the  debt  of  an 
individual. A nation consists of numerous legal entities, and if some of them cannot handle 
their debt, it need not have severe consequences for other parts of the whole, provided that 
the sovereign is not involved. Under a flexible exchange rate regime, national debt service in 
excess of surpluses will also cause the currency to depreciate and the surplus to grow. But 
this process is not without limits.  
Earlier  this  week,  the  Central  Bank  published  a  report  on  Iceland’s  underlying  external 
position, in which it addresses the question of whether Iceland is facing a debt sustainability 
problem  or  a  balance  of  payments  problem  as  I  have  just  defined  them.  But  in  order  to 
answer that question, it is necessary to peer through the settlement of the estates resulting 
from the financial crisis – a process that is nowhere near completion – and correct for the 
effects of certain international corporations operating in this country. These companies have 
a  profound  effect  on  Iceland’s  international  investment  position  as  measured  according  to 
international standards, but they would have a negligible impact on the state of the domestic 
economy  if  they  defaulted  on  their  debt.  As  a  result,  the  task  requires  a  great  deal  of 
estimation and entails some uncertainty, as previous findings have shown. The estimates are 
now more reliable than before, however, as time has clarified a number of factors concerning 
the failed banks’ estates and analysts have now gained access to the best available data.  
The results are the same as in previous appraisals, however, in that there are no signs of a 
debt sustainability problem as I have just defined it. Iceland’s net underlying debt position is 
estimated at 60% of GDP, the lowest since 1999. Furthermore, it is lower than that of many 
countries  that  no  one  would  claim  faced  a  sustainability  problem.  New  Zealand’s  net  debt 
position,  for  instance,  has  hovered  around  80%  for  more  than  one  decade.  Based  on  the 
outlook for Iceland’s underlying trade balance and the prospects for domestic output growth, 
this would be sufficient to reduce its debt position by 18 percentage points of GDP through 
2017.  Considering  the  uncertainties  in  the  estimate,  it  is  likely  that  the  net  external  debt 
position  lay  in  the  range  of  35–80%  of  GDP  at  year-end  2012.  But  the  upper  end  of  this 
range is not enough to create a debt sustainability problem as, even in this case, Iceland’s 
debt will still continue to decline through this period. In addition, it should be noted that this 
estimate  assumes  that  the  current  stock  of  offshore  krónur  is  assessed  at  the  onshore 
exchange rate and the failed banks’ ISK assets are assessed at nearly full book values and 
at the onshore exchange rate. That will not be  the case, of course. In order to gain some 
perspective  on  the  amounts  involved,  it  is  useful  to  note  that  each  25%  reduction  in  the 
valuation  following  the  sale  of  these  assets  from  the  estates  and  their  expatriation  from 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Iceland reduces the measured debt position by a full six percentage points of GDP. The final 
figure will be much large than this, of course.  
Is  there  no  problem,  then?  Yes,  there  is.  The  report  shows  that  the  balance  of  payments 
problem could become substantial in a very few years if domestic access to foreign capital 
and  refinancing  does  not  improve.  It  is  estimated  that  there  will  be  a  surplus  on  the 
underlying current account balance this year – just under 4% of GDP – but this excludes the 
estates  of  the  failed  banks  and  the  effects  of  pharmaceuticals  company  Actavis.  Iceland 
could therefore reduce its net external debt by that amount. The problem is, however, that 
the  calculations  shown  in  the  Bank’s  report  assume  this  surplus  could  contract  in  coming 
years and may even turn into a deficit at a time of rising foreign debt service for borrowers 
without access to foreign refinancing. If these parties do not gain access to the market on 
acceptable terms in the near future, or if other capital inflows are not forthcoming, significant 
downward pressure on the Icelandic króna will be inevitable. Weighing heavily in this context 
is the debt owed by new Landsbankinn to the old bank. Negotiations concerning the possible 
lengthening of the maturity of this debt are underway.  
It  is  possible  to  argue  that  this  outlook  is  based  on  extremely  pessimistic  assumptions. 
Market access has already opened up, as Arion Bank’s recent foreign borrowings show. The 
calculations  in  the  Bank’s  report  assume  that  foreign  interest  rates  will  return  to  pre-crisis 
levels in a few years, but there are few signs of this at present. It is also assumed that the 
import ratio will return to pre-crisis levels. The Central Bank will examine additional scenarios 
for possible developments in the balance of payments in coming years, and developments in 
market access in coming months will have a significant effect on the outlook.  
In  spite  of  this  proviso  and  the  necessity  of  not  presenting  unrealistically  pessimistic 
scenarios that could undermine confidence needlessly, this scenario does not go so far, and 
we must determine what we can do to prevent such an outcome. Economic policy and the 
structural reforms must ensure that Iceland’s competitive position does not deteriorate more 
than can be expected following a normal rise in the real exchange rate from historically low 
levels,  given  that  we  will  have  a  current  account  surplus  while  we  are  working  our  way 
through the bulk of the debt. It is most important that public sector finances be well in surplus 
during this period and that attempts be made to ensure a higher level of national saving than 
prevailed in Iceland before the crisis. Furthermore, it is clear that the scope to use the current 
account  surplus  to  release  non-residents’  ISK  assets  will  be  extremely  limited  in  coming 
years.  
How likely is it, then, that we can lift the capital controls in the next few years? Obviously, it 
would  be  much  easier  if  new  capital  inflows  were  forthcoming,  either  through  new  foreign 
borrowing or through foreign direct investment. In addition, it is clear that no decisive steps 
can be taken to lift the controls before a suitable solution is found to the settlement of the 
failed  banks’  estates.  That  solution  could  take  many  forms,  and  these  would  affect  the 
subsequent approach to lifting the controls. A revised liberalisation strategy would therefore 
look quite different depending on what route is chosen for the settlement of the failed banks’ 
estates. A solution to this problem must therefore come first.  
I won’t discuss these possibilities at greater length here, as a great deal of work lies ahead, 
and it would be unwise to show our hand at this point. Furthermore, it is necessary to have 
more  than  one  option  at  hand,  in  case  the  one  that  seems  best  at  the  outset  proves 
infeasible later on. It is possible, however, to make a few comments that will enhance the 
general  understanding  of  what  needs  to  happen.  If  a  portion  of  the  estates  are  settled 
through composition agreements, it is of key importance that the ISK asset recoveries add as 
little as possible (or nothing at all) to the stock of volatile ISK assets owned by non-residents. 
It  is  important  to  bear  in  mind  that  selling  the  banks  at  a  relatively  low  price  to  foreign 
investors  interested more  in  the  short  term  and  in  handsome  dividend  payments  does  not 
solve the problem and could even exacerbate it.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
It is the role of the estates to divest the assets and make payments to creditors. The question 
is, however, what is a realistic price for the assets, and at what exchange rate will they be 
converted into foreign currency. That depends on who wants to buy them and is willing and 
able  to  bring  in  the  necessary  currency,  which  cannot  come  from  export  revenues  or  the 
Bank’s foreign exchange reserves.  
In lifting the capital controls, we are faced with the question of how far we are willing to go. 
Shall  we  return  to  the  way  things  were  before  the  crash?  History  shows  that  Iceland  has 
generally  done  best  when  it  has  maintained  open  business  ties  with  the  rest  of  the  world. 
Iceland  is  not  alone  in  this  regard,  of  course,  as  both  history  and  economic  theory  have 
shown  that  international  trade  generally  enhances  well-being.  This  is  also  true  of  capital 
transactions. But it is also a fact that most severe financial crises in small, open economies 
like  Iceland  originate,  at  least  in  part,  in  excessively  volatile  capital  flows  to  and  from  the 
country, which foster debt accumulation and asset bubbles during upswings and then shut 
down the mains during the downward cycle. Unrestricted capital flows are thus coupled not 
only with benefits but also with risk. This risk can be mitigated with sound economic policy 
and an appropriate regulatory and supervisory framework, but it will never disappear entirely. 
Consequently, there are a number of signs that, contrary to generally accepted ideas about 
free trade in goods and services, financial integration with the outside world can actually go 
too far. This is supported by studies indicating that there are “thresholds” in terms of benefits 
from financial integration and that form matters. For instance, foreign direct investment does 
not  usually  jeopardise  economic  stability,  while  short-term movements  and  carry  trade  are 
riskier.  
It can be argued that Iceland had gone too far in financial integration in the years before the 
financial  crisis.  In  part  because  of  this,  the  Central  Bank  recommended,  in  its  2012  report 
entitled Prudential Rules Following Capital Controls, that before the capital controls are lifted, 
restrictions should be placed on financial firms’ foreign exchange risk and their ability to expand 
their  foreign  currency  balance  sheets  with  the  associated  maturity  mismatches.  Restrictions 
would  also  be  placed  on  foreign-denominated  borrowing  by  households,  firms,  and 
municipalities  without  income  in  the  borrowed  currencies.  These  ideas  are  being  developed 
and honed, and some of them could be implemented with the entry into force of new liquidity 
and foreign exchange balance rules that the Central Bank intends to issue this year.  
It  has  been  said  that  a  reassessment  of  the  monetary  policy  framework  must  take  place 
before the capital controls can be lifted in full. This is perhaps not as critical as it might seem, 
however, as countries with unrestricted capital flows have various kinds of monetary policy 
framework.  Nonetheless,  it  is  necessary  to  review  our  monetary  policy,  and  the  Bank  has 
published reports on this topic in the recent term, one entitled Monetary Policy After Capital 
Controls  and  the  other  entitled  Iceland’s  Currency  and  Exchange  Rate  Policy  Options.  In 
addition,  there  could  be  a  number  of  policy  formulation  tasks  ahead  for  the  Central  Bank 
which  are  beyond  the  scope  of  my  speech  today,  such  as  financial  system  structure  – 
including questions on the extent to which further restrictions should be placed on maturity 
mismatches  in  financial  institutions’  balance  sheets  and  how  the  system’s  public  goods 
elements can be protected against leveraged speculation.  
Honoured guests: In closing, I would like to thank the Central Bank’s many collaborators for a 
successful co-operative relationship over the past year. First among them are the ministries 
with which the Bank works most closely – in particular, the Ministry of Finance and Economic 
Affairs, which now is responsible within the ministries for the affairs of the Central Bank. In 
this  context,  I  wish  to  thank  the  two  Ministers  who  have  led  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and 
Economic  Affairs  since  this  arrangement  was  introduced.  I  would  also  like  to  thank  the 
Parliament  of  Iceland,  particularly  the  Economics  and  Commerce  Committee,  for  their 
cooperation during the year. Thanks are due as well to the Financial Supervisory Authority 
for  growing  collaborative  relationship.  I  thank  the  outgoing  Supervisory  Council  for  good 
cooperation.  And  last,  but  certainly  not  least,  I  would  like  to  thank  the  staff  of  the  Central 
Bank for their hard work and excellent contribution during the year.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
