William C Dudley: Are recent college graduates finding good jobs? 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York and Chairman of the Committee on the Global Financial System 
(CGFS), at the Regional Economic Press Briefing, New York City, 27 June 2013. 
 Good morning  and  welcome  once  again  to  the New  York  Fed’s  Regional  Economic  Press 
Briefing. I am pleased to have this opportunity to talk with the journalists covering our region 
– and through you to the people in our District. This morning I will briefly discuss conditions in 
the  national  economy  and  then  focus  on  regional  economic  conditions,  with  particular 
attention to the question of whether recent college graduates are finding good jobs. We will 
examine the trends and see how they are playing out in the region.  
As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal 
Open Market Committee (FOMC) or the Federal Reserve System.  
National economic conditions  
I would like to begin by taking stock of where we are at the moment. Then I will address my 
expectations for the performance of the economy over the remainder of 2013 and into 2014. 
Since the end of the Great Recession in mid-2009, we have had 15 consecutive quarters of 
positive growth of real GDP. However, the average annual growth rate over that period has 
been  just  2.1  percent.  Although  the  unemployment  rate  has  declined  by  2.5  percentage 
points from its peak of 10 percent in October of 2009, much of this decline is due to the fact 
that  the  labor  force  participation  rate  has  fallen  by  1.5  percentage  points  over  this  period. 
Recall  that  discouraged  workers  who  do  not  actively  look  for  work  are  regarded  as  not 
participating in the labor force and so are not counted as unemployed even though they are 
without jobs. Using an alternative measure, the employment to population ratio, which is not 
influenced  by  changes  in  the  number  of  discouraged  workers,  there  has  been  limited 
improvement in labor market conditions. Job loss rates have fallen, but hiring rates remain 
depressed  at  low  levels.  Taken  together,  the  labor  market  still  cannot  be  regarded  as 
healthy. Numerous indicators, including the behavior of labor compensation and household 
assessments of labor market conditions, are all consistent with the view that there remains a 
great deal of slack in the economy. 
That being said, I see persuasive evidence of improved underlying fundamentals for much of 
the private sector of the U.S. economy. Key measures of household leverage have declined 
and are now at the lowest levels they have been in well over a decade. Household net worth, 
expressed  as  a  percent  of  disposable  income,  has  increased  back  to  its  average  of  the 
previous decade, reflecting rising equity and home prices and declining liabilities. Banks are 
beginning  to  ease  credit  standards  somewhat  after  a  prolonged  period  of  tightness.  As  a 
result,  we  are  now  experiencing  a fairly  typical  cyclical  recovery  of  consumer  spending  on 
durable  goods.  For  example,  light-weight  motor  vehicles  sold  at  a  seasonally-adjusted 
annual rate of 15.3 million in May, not far from the 16.1 million sales in 2007.  
Similarly, after five years in which housing production was well below what is consistent with 
underlying demographic trends, it now appears that we have worked off the excess supply of 
housing built up during the boom years of the last decade. Housing starts and sales are now 
on  a  clear  upward  trend,  and  a  widely  followed  national  home  price  index  is  up  around 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
12 percent over the twelve months ending in April.1 Indeed, anecdotal reports suggest that 
this higher-than-expected increase in home prices is due to a lack of homes for sale. 
Unfortunately, the improvements in consumer spending on durable goods and housing are 
not yet showing through in the overall GDP growth rate due to the significant headwinds that 
we  continue  to  face.  First,  federal  fiscal  policy  has  recently  become  quite  contractionary. 
Estimates from the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) indicate that this fiscal restraint is on 
the  order  of  1.75  percentage  points  of  potential  GDP  this  year.  In  the  period  since  1960, 
there have been only two previous episodes of fiscal contraction of this order of magnitude – 
1969 and 1987 – both of which occurred when the economy was on a more solid footing than 
it is today. Second, the euro area is experiencing a protracted recession and growth in many 
of the largest emerging economies has slowed. This has resulted in a very sharp slowing of 
U.S. exports, with an associated slowing in production and employment growth in the U.S. 
manufacturing sector. 
Thus,  I  continue  to  see  the  economy  as  being  in  a  tug-of-war  between  fiscal  drag  and 
underlying fundamental improvement, with a great deal of uncertainty over which force will 
prevail  in  the  near-term.  This  tug-of-war  is  clearly  seen  in  the  monthly  employment  data. 
Over April and May, the average monthly gain in employment in the private service-providing 
sector has been well maintained at 175,000. In contrast, employment in the manufacturing 
sector and the federal government declined a combined 20,000 per month. And the resulting 
uncertainty is, I believe, an important contributing factor behind the relatively sluggish pace of 
business investment spending. 
My best guess is that growth for all of 2013, measured on a Q4/Q4 basis, will be about what 
it has been since the end of the recession. But I believe a strong case can be made that the 
pace  of  growth  will  pick  up  notably  in  2014.  The  private  sector  of  the  economy  should 
continue  to  heal,  while  the  amount  of  fiscal  drag  will  begin  to  subside.  I  also  see  some 
indications that growth prospects among our major trading partners have begun to improve; 
for example, the rise in the June euro area composite Purchasing Managers’ Index. And this 
combination  of  events  is  likely  to  create  an  environment  in  which  business  investment 
spending will gather strength. 
Finally, I believe this tug-of-war analogy is useful in explaining the recent inflation dynamics. 
As  is  well  known,  total  inflation,  as  measured  by  the  personal  consumption  expenditures 
(PCE) deflator, has slowed sharply over the past year and is now running below the FOMC’s 
expressed goal of 2 percent. Much of the slowing of total inflation is due to declining energy 
prices  resulting  from  the  weakening  of  global  growth  mentioned  earlier  combined  with 
increased energy production here in the U.S. However, it is also the case that core inflation, 
that  is,  excluding  food  and  energy,  has  slowed  sharply  as  well.  A  decomposition  of  the 
slowing in core inflation reveals that some of it is due to slowing in the rate of increase in 
prices of non-food and non-energy goods. This probably is due in large part to the softening 
of global demand for goods and the modest appreciation of the dollar that has occurred since 
mid-2011.  
In  the  service  sector,  the  rate  of  increase  in  prices  of  medical  services  and  “non-market” 
services – the latter includes some financial services – also has slowed notably recently. In 
contrast,  the  rate  of  increase  in  prices  for  other  non-energy  services  has  been  relatively 
stable. Comparing this set of conditions to that in 2010, the recent slowing of inflation has 
been less widespread across core goods and core services, and inflation expectations so far 
have declined less appreciably than they did in 2010. Thus, my best guess is that core goods 
prices  will  begin  to  firm  in  the  months  ahead  as  global  demand  begins  to  strengthen  and 
inventories get into better alignment with sales.  
                                                
1   CoreLogic Report Shows Home Prices Rise by 12.1 Percent Year Over Year in April. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
As is always the case, there is substantial uncertainty surrounding this forecast. Moreover, 
there is always the possibility of some unforeseen shock. Thus, we will be monitoring U.S. 
and global economic conditions very carefully and will adjust our views on the likely path for 
growth, inflation and the unemployment rate accordingly in response to new information. 
At its meeting last week, the FOMC decided to continue its accommodative policy stance. It 
reaffirmed its expectation that the current low range for the federal funds rate target will be 
appropriate at least as long as the unemployment rate remains above 6.5 percent, so long as 
inflation  and  inflation  expectations  remain  well-behaved.  It  is  important  to  remember  that 
these  conditions  are  thresholds,  not  triggers.  The  FOMC  also  maintained  its  purchases  of 
$40 billion per month in agency MBS and $45 billion per month in Treasury securities, with a 
stated goal of promoting a substantial improvement in the labor market outlook in a context 
of price stability. 
In  its  statement,  the  FOMC  said  that  it  may  vary  the  pace  of  purchases  as  economic 
conditions evolve. As Chairman Bernanke stated in his press conference following the FOMC 
meeting, if the economic data over the next year turn out to be broadly consistent with the 
outlooks that the FOMC sees as most likely, which are roughly similar to the outlook I have 
already laid out, the FOMC anticipates that it would be appropriate to begin to moderate the 
pace of purchases later this year. Under such a scenario, subsequent reductions might occur 
in measured steps through the first half of next year, and an end to purchases around mid-
2014.  Under  this  scenario,  at  the  time  that  asset  purchases  came  to  an  end,  the 
unemployment  rate  likely  would  be  near  7  percent  and  the  economy’s  momentum 
strengthening, supporting further robust job gains in the future.  
Here, a few points deserve emphasis. First, the FOMC’s policy depends on the progress we 
make  towards  our  objectives.  This  means  that  the  policy  –  including  the  pace  of  asset 
purchases – depends on the outlook rather than the calendar. The scenario I outlined above 
is only that – one possible outcome. Economic circumstances could diverge significantly from 
the FOMC’s expectations. If labor market conditions and the economy’s growth momentum 
were to be less favorable than in the FOMC’s outlook – and this is what has happened in 
recent years – I would expect that the asset purchases would continue at a higher pace for 
longer.  
Second,  even  if  this  scenario  were  to  occur  and  the  pace  of  purchases  were  reduced,  it 
would still be the case that as long as the FOMC continues its asset purchases it is adding 
monetary  policy  accommodation,  not tightening  monetary  policy.  As  the  FOMC  adds  to  its 
stock  of  securities,  this  should  continue  to  put  downward  pressure  on  longer-term  interest 
rates, making monetary policy more accommodative.  
Third, the Federal Reserve is likely to keep most of these assets on its balance sheet for a 
long time. As Chairman Bernanke noted in his press conference last week, a strong majority 
of  FOMC  participants  no  longer  favor  selling  agency  MBS  securities  during  the  monetary 
policy normalization process. This implies a bigger balance sheet for longer, which provides 
additional accommodation today and continuing support for mortgage markets going forward.  
Fourth, even under this scenario, a rise in short-term rates is very likely to be a long way off. 
Not only will it likely take considerable time to reach the FOMC’s 6.5 percent unemployment 
rate threshold, but also the FOMC could wait considerably longer before raising short-term 
rates.  The  fact  that  inflation  is  coming  in  well  below  the  FOMC’s  2  percent  objective  is 
relevant here. Most FOMC participants currently do not expect short-term rates to begin to 
rise until 2015.  
Some  commentators  have  interpreted  the  recent  shift  in  the  market-implied  path  of  short-
term interest rates as indicating that market participants now expect the first increases in the 
federal funds rate target to come much earlier than previously thought. Setting aside whether 
this  is  the  correct  interpretation  of  recent  price  moves,  let  me  emphasize  that  such  an 
expectation would be quite out of sync with both FOMC statements and the expectations of 
most FOMC participants.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Regional economic conditions 
Let  me  turn  now  to  the  regional  economy,  the  focus  of  our  presentations  today.  Our  last 
briefing  on  the  regional  economy  took  place  at  a  difficult  time  –  soon  after  Superstorm 
Sandy. While economic life has returned to normal across most of the metro area, some of 
the hardest-hit areas are still struggling to recover and rebuild. Just blocks from here, in fact, 
the South Street Seaport business district is still far from business-as-usual. And there are 
many  such  neighborhoods  across  the  metropolitan  region,  from  the  low-lying  and  coastal 
areas of New Jersey to Brooklyn, Queens and Long Island; from Staten Island to southern 
Connecticut. One encouraging sign, though, is that our broader regional economy has shown 
remarkable  resilience.  It  has  been  growing  and  adding  jobs  at  a  reasonably  good  pace. 
Moreover,  the  rebuilding  effort  appears  to  be  giving  a  bit  of  a  boost  to  the  job  market  in 
industries such as construction.  
As we’ve discussed before, the New York Fed produces economic activity indexes to help 
monitor the performance of New York State, New York City and New Jersey. Based on these 
measures, New York City has continued to grow strongly, and New Jersey’s economy has 
seen some pickup in growth since the beginning of this year. However, growth in New York 
State  has  slowed,  and  Puerto  Rico’s  economy  is  not  faring  well  at  all;  the  activity  index 
produced  by  the  Government  Development  Bank  for  Puerto  Rico  shows  that  the  Island’s 
economy has yet to show any signs of bottoming out.  
The job situation has varied somewhat across our region. Improvement has generally been 
broad-based, with New York City and Long Island doing particularly well, though Puerto Rico 
continues to weaken. Both Connecticut and New Jersey have recently been growing roughly 
in line with the nation thus far in 2013. Unemployment rates across the region are roughly 
matching  the  national  rate,  with  the  exception  of  the  relatively  high  rate  that  has 
characterized Puerto Rico’s labor market for some time. Housing continues to be a focus of 
our regional monitoring efforts and home prices in our region appear to have bottomed. Our 
economists will elaborate on these points this morning.  
Are recent college graduates finding good jobs? 
The special topic of today’s press briefing is a look at how well recent college graduates are 
faring  in  the  job  market,  both  nationally  and  here  in  our  region.  A  college  education 
represents  an  important  investment  in  one’s  human  capital,  meaning  the  knowledge  and 
skills people build. Historically, it’s been pretty clear that those who’ve invested in a college 
education  have  tended  to  earn  a  sizeable  economic  return.  And  the  benefits  of  college-
educated  citizens  go  well  beyond  the  individual.  Regions  with  a  higher  concentration  of 
college graduates tend to be more innovative, have higher living standards and experience 
more  rapid  economic  growth.2  So  a  college  education  plays  an  important  role  in  helping 
individuals prosper, as well as in strengthening the broader economy. 
More recently, though, rising costs, increasing student debt and widespread reports of recent 
college  graduates  not  being  able  to  find  good  jobs  have  raised  some  troubling  questions 
about whether going to college is still a good investment. In fact, some of our own research, 
including  material  that  we  discussed  at  our  last  press  briefing,  has  shown  the  dramatic 
increase  in  student  debt  over  the  past  decade.3  In  today’s  briefing,  we’re  going  to  take  a 
                                                
2   See, for example, Edward L. Glaeser, Jose A. Scheinkman, and Andrei Shleifer (1995) “Economic Growth in a 
Cross-Section of Cities,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 36, 117–43; Gerald A. Carlino, Satyajit Chatterjee, 
and  Robert  M.  Hunt  (2007)  “Urban  Density  and  the  Rate  of  Invention,”  Journal  of  Urban  Economics,  61,  
389–419;  and  Jaison  R.  Abel  and  Todd  M.  Gabe  (2011)  “Human  Capital  and  Economic  Activity  in  Urban 
America,” Regional Studies, 45, 1079–90. 
3  See, for example, Press Briefing on Q4 2012 Household Debt and Credit Report; Meta Brown and Sydnee 
Caldwell, “Young Student Loan Borrowers Retreat from Housing and Auto Markets Liberty Street Economics 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
close look at the question of just how weak today’s labor market is for new college graduates 
by putting their recent experience into context using some hard data. 
It is important for us to undertake this kind of analysis because, as we’ll show, newly minted 
graduates always take some time to transition into the labor market and find jobs that utilize 
their  education.  And  young  people  with  college  degrees  still  fare  far  better  than  those 
without. At the same time, with the sluggish jobs recovery from the recession, it’s clear that 
the  transition  of  recent  graduates  into  the  labor  market  is  taking  longer,  and  they’ve 
experienced  higher  unemployment  and  higher  underemployment  than  in  years  past.4  Still, 
while  times  have  gotten  tougher  for  recent  graduates,  we  shouldn’t  be  too  hasty  in 
concluding that getting a college education won’t help people find good jobs.  
I will now ask Jason Bram to present an update of economic conditions in our region. 
                                                                                                                                                   
Blog Post, April 17, 2013; and Andrew Haughwout, Donghoon Lee, Wilbert van der Klaauw, and Joelle Scally, 
“Just Released: The Geography of Student Debt,” Liberty Street Economics Blog Post, May 14, 2013. 
4   Underemployment, for purposes of this presentation, refers to college graduates working in jobs that typically 
don’t require a college degree. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
