Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas’ Stakeholders’ 
Awards – a celebration of solid partnership 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (the central 
bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  2013  Awards  Ceremony  and  Appreciation  Lunch  for  BSP 
stakeholders, Manila, 16 July 2013. 
 Magandang umaga sa inyong lahat! 
On  behalf  of  my  colleagues  at the  Monetary  Board  and the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas, I 
thank all of you for accepting our invitation today to our Stakeholders Awards Ceremony and 
Appreciation Lunch for BSP Stakeholders. 
As in years past, this ceremony takes place during the Bangko Sentral’s anniversary month. 
This year however, is more special: this month – July 3 to be exact – we commemorated the 
20th anniversary of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas. And today, we mark the 10th year of our 
Stakeholders Awards, the annual celebration of our fruitful partnership and collaboration. 
Ladies and gentlemen. In observing these milestones, we take the opportunity to express our 
deep  appreciation  to  all  our  guests  in  this  hall  and  to  our  other  stakeholders  across  the 
country for helping us craft policies and implement programs that make lives better for our 
people. 
Among  others,  the  continuous  improvement  in  the  quality  of  our  surveys  provides  a  good 
anchor  for  the  monetary  policies  of  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas,  the  main  objective  of 
which is to keep prices low and stable. 
With your support, we continue to be successful in this effort. We have tamed inflation at low 
single digit levels – 2.8% as of June 2013, with year-to-date inflation at 2.9 percent. 
One of the monetary tools used by the Bangko Sentral to influence inflation is its policy rates, 
the benchmark used by banks to transact with their own customers. 
Under  the  Bangko  Sentral’s  inflation  targeting  framework,  policy  rates  are  adjusted 
appropriately and pre-emptively to  ward off inflation threats. In general, it takes policy rate 
decisions  from  18  to  24  months  to  work  their  way  through  the  economy.  Thus,  the  BSP’s 
Monetary  Board  ensures  that  its  policy  rate  settings  are  based  on  accurate  information-
intensive studies such as business and consumer outlook. 
This  includes  the  quarterly  Business  Expectations  Survey  which  covers  the  top  7,000 
corporations in the country and the quarterly Consumer Expectations Survey  which covers 
5,000 households. 
We  are  happy  therefore  that  when  we  tracked  the  correlation  between  the  results  of  our 
expectation  surveys  with  actual  data  on  the  GDP,  inflation,  interest  rates  and  foreign 
exchange we found high overall convergence. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  we  continue  to  achieve  high  correlation  because  you  provide  us 
accurate, comprehensive and timely survey inputs. Thank you! 
As  a  result,  the  Bangko  Sentral’s  policy  decisions  continue  to  provide  the  stability  that 
preserves the public’s purchasing power and creates a planning environment conducive to 
strong and sustainable growth. 
With BSP’s policy rates now at record low levels, average interest rates charged by banks to 
their  customers  have  also  dropped  to  single digit  levels.  This  has  benefitted  consumers  in 
terms of access to more affordable credit while business is able to expand and create new 
jobs with lower financing costs. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Moving forward, therefore, the Bangko Sentral will continue to focus on fighting inflation and 
safeguarding price stability to achieve sustained and inclusive growth. 
The  Bangko  Sentral  also  needs  your  support  for  other  surveys  including  Cross  Border 
Transactions,  Coordinated  Portfolio  Investment,  Information  Technology-BPO  Outsourcing 
Services, and Foreign Direct Investment. 
Among others, these surveys help us determine our Balance of Payments position, a closely-
watched indicator of our transactions with the rest of the world. 
We are pleased to report that our external accounts remain robust, providing much-needed 
insulation  from  external  shocks.  External  payment  dynamics  remain  strong  on  the  back  of 
rising foreign exchange reserves, sustained influx of overseas Filipino remittances and BPO 
receipts, and declining external debt to GDP ratio. 
I am also happy to note that our network of committed partners continues to expand. From 
seven  in  2004,  we  now  have  71  awardees,  42  of  whom  are  in  areas  outside  the  National 
Capital Region. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen.  As  we  take  stock  of  our  achievements,  we  also  take  note  that the 
resiliency  of  our  economy  strongly  reflects  the  efficient  performance  of  our  information 
sharing  initiatives.  Indeed,  our  partnership  continues  to  generate  synergies  that  lead  to 
transformational growth. 
And while recent developments in the external front have made economic conditions more 
challenging,  we  have  been  able  to  ride  out  these  headwinds  to  economic  growth.  We 
attribute these largely to the strength of our partnerships and to the buffers that the Philippine 
economy has built through the years. 
Another  source  of  strength  of  the  Philippine  economy  is  our  sound  and  stable  banking 
system.  Deposits  continue  to  increase  to  record  levels,  in  tandem  with  healthy  growth  in 
lending.  And  the  quality  of  loans  continues  to  improve  even  as  non-performing  loan  ratios 
drop to record low levels. Equally important, banks continue to build strong buffers against 
systemic shocks and have kept their capitalization well-above the regulatory threshold. 
Against this favourable backdrop, major multilateral financial institutions have upgraded their 
outlook  on  the  Philippine  economy.  Credit  rating  agencies  such  as  Fitch  and  Standard  & 
Poor’s  acknowledge  the  Philippines’  strong  economic  and  fiscal  gains  by  raising  the 
country’s credit rating to investment grade. 
Nevertheless,  given  the  constant  shift  in  the  global  landscape,  we  continue  to  face 
challenges.  Over  the  last  month,  we  have  seen  great  volatility  as  global  financial  markets 
react  to  the  Federal  Reserve’s  announcement  on  the  unwinding  of  its  accommodative 
monetary  policy.  Foreign  exchange  and  equity  markets  gyrated  as  investors  searched  for 
safe havens and higher returns in developed economies. 
On  the  upside,  the  current  market  movements  may  help  reduce  the  build-up  of  asset 
valuations that could contribute to financial market imbalances. We can also be assured that 
recent market volatility notwithstanding, our economy’s growth remains firm, underpinned by 
strong macroeconomic fundamentals, broad-based economic growth, manageable inflation, 
strong  external  payments  position,  sufficient  fiscal  space,  as  well  as  a  sound  and  stable 
banking system. 
Ladies and gentlemen. The resilience of our economy brings us to the heart of this year’s 
celebration,  which  has  the  theme:  “Hand  in  Hand  in  Sustaining  a  Steadfast  and  Strong 
Economy.” This is a timely reminder that by working together we can and shall overcome the 
challenges and uncertainties faced by our economy. 
Among others, we acknowledge the support of banks who work with the Bangko Sentral in 
handling  remittances  of  our  overseas  Filipinos  efficiently  at  significantly  lower  costs.  Your 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
reliable service not only benefits our overseas Filipinos and their families, but our economy 
as well. 
Ladies and gentlemen, your support in empowering Filipinos through the development of a 
more inclusive financial system is also important to us. Together, let us work to extend the 
delivery of a broader range of financial services to the unbanked and underbanked segments 
of our population. Imagine the benefits a microentrepreneur and his family can derive from 
gaining access to a lower-priced bank loan in place of a 1,000% loan from non-bank sources. 
Finance  education  and  consumer  protection  are  equally  important  components  of financial 
empowerment.  In  this  connection,  we  salute  the  Department  of  Education  for  being  our 
active partner in bringing financial education to millions of our schoolchildren. 
We also acknowledge the banks who help our  youth develop the habit  of saving and give 
lessons on personal finance to teachers and parents. 
So far, we have made significant strides in the development of the Philippine microfinance 
sector that  has  liberated  millions  of  entrepreneurial  Filipinos  from  poverty  and  transformed 
them  into  net  savers  in  banks.  In  fact,  our  latest  data  indicate  that  for  the  first  time 
consolidated bank deposits of microentrepreneurs at over P8 billion have now exceeded their 
total bank loans. 
I also thank all the industry groups, all companies – big and small, our partners from both 
public and private sectors for your support in Bangko Sentral’s advocacies that promote coin 
recirculation  and  clean  banknotes,  as  well  as  protection  against  counterfeit  money  and 
financial scams. 
Once  again,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  we  at  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  thank  and 
congratulate  all  of  you  for  being  our  active  partners  in  the  pursuit  of  our  mandate  and  in 
making lives better through better policies and programs. Together, let us steer the economy 
toward balanced, sustained and inclusive growth. 
Maraming salamat sa inyong lahat! 
Mabuhay ang ating mahal na bansang Pilipinas! 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
