Gill Marcus: Employment and the economics of job creation 
Speech by Ms Gill Marcus, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 26th Annual 
Labour Law Conference, South African Reserve Bank, Pretoria, 31 July 2013. 
 Dr Erich Fromm, in his 1976 book “To have or to be?” provides an analysis of the crisis of 
modern  civilisation  and,  when  addressing  the  features  of  a  new  society,  wrote:  “The  first 
requirement  in  the  possible  creation  of  the  new  society  is  to  be  aware  of  the  almost 
insurmountable difficulties that such an attempt must face … Those who have not given up 
hope can succeed only if they are hard-headed realists, shed all illusions and fully appreciate 
the difficulties … (the new society) would have to create work conditions and a general spirit 
in which not material gain but other, psychic satisfactions are effective motivations … ” 
Akerlof  and  Shiller,  in  their  book  “Animal  Spirits”  (2009)  write:  “We  are  facing  the  same 
problem today that we faced in the latter years of the Great Depression – business today is 
inhibited  by  uncertainty  about  the  future,  about  the  tolerance  of  an  angry  public,  about  a 
disaffected labour force and about what further government actions may be coming … We 
identified five psychological factors that we thought were of particular importance. They are 
confidence, fairness, corruption and bad faith, money illusion and stories …” 
It is almost twenty years into our young democracy, the past six of which have been seriously 
impacted by a global financial crisis to which there is no end in sight. And one of the hardest 
hitting impacts has been on ordinary people from all walks of life, who have seen their hopes 
for the future evaporate; millions will never work again; others will never know the dignity and 
independence  that  work  brings.  As  the  above  quotes  reflect,  creating  an  inclusive  society 
requires  courage,  foresight  and  the  ability  to  make  very  tough  choices.  We  also  better 
understand our circumstances and challenges through stories, and it is imperative that we 
both tell and hear the many varied South African stories that make up the complex fabric of 
our society. 
Each  year,  the  World  Bank  publishes  its  World  Development  Report  covering  a  particular 
theme of development. This year, it has titled its report “Jobs”. This simple title says much 
about the most pressing economic issue facing the world today. The IMF, too, has released a 
substantive  paper  on  Employment  and  Growth  and  recently  the  International  Labour 
Organisation released its World of Work report with the theme of “Repairing the Social and 
Economic Fabric”. In recognition of the scale of the employment crisis and its impact on both 
social cohesion and longer term growth, several other global institutions and economists are 
focusing  their  attention  on  employment,  seeking  ways  to  tackle  unemployment  and 
underemployment. 
These  discussions  on  employment  occur  in  a  global  context  where  unemployment  has 
increased sharply since the onset of the financial crisis. Of great concern is the fact that the 
number  of  young  people  who  are  unemployed,  and  the  length  of  time  that  people  remain 
unemployed, are rising. South Africa has had an unemployment crisis for the better part of 
three decades. A few years ago South Africa was an outlier with an unemployment rate of 
around  25  percent.  Today  there  are  several  countries  in  the  periphery  of  Europe  with 
unemployment rates at least as high as ours – not that this is any reason for complacency or 
comfort.  The  International  Labour  Organisation  estimates  that  there  are  about  200  million 
unemployed people in the world today. This figure excludes the millions more who are either 
underemployed  or  are  discouraged  from  seeking  employment.  The  ILO  estimates  that  the 
number  of  unemployed  people  in  advanced  economies  is  likely  to  remain  above  the  pre-
crisis level up to at least 2017, a full decade after the crisis first began. In South Africa, total 
employment is still about 400 000 below the peak reached in in 2008. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The unemployment crisis represents a massive waste of lives and resources. It has profound 
social implications and its effects will be with us for decades to come. Economists refer to the 
term  hysteresis,  which  in  this  context  describes  the  loss  of  skills  and  productivity  when  a 
person  has  been  out  of  the  workforce  for  a  long  period  of  time,  thereby  lowering  future 
potential growth. Reducing unemployment on a sustainable basis is arguably the single most 
important economic objective at the present moment. In part, creating jobs is about raising 
the level of economic growth. However, it is also about addressing the structural factors that 
limit employment growth. 
My address today will try to give you a sense of how central banks think about employment 
and how they factor employment issues into their reaction function. I will also explore broader 
structural and cyclical factors relating to employment. Before concluding, I will briefly make 
some observations about the future of work and the likely impact of technological change. 
The  policies  of  central  banks  are  not  often  associated  directly  with  employment  creation. 
However, monetary and financial sector policies have a role to play in at least two respects. 
Firstly, the conventional view is that monetary policy can affect cyclical  employment, but it 
cannot  determine  the  longer  run  potential  output  of  the  economy.  This  is  the  basis  for 
countercyclical  monetary  policy.  However,  in  a  recent  paper,  Phillipe  Aghion  and  Enisse 
Kharoubbi, argue that better macroeconomic stability can actually contribute towards higher 
potential growth and that the absence of macroeconomic stability has a profound impact on 
employment rates. 
Our  task  as  monetary  authorities  is  to  provide  a  stable  environment  for  balanced  and 
sustainable  economic  growth  to  occur;  to  ensure  that  investors  can  take  a  longer  term 
perspective  and  that  the  value  of  earnings  and  savings  are  not  eroded  by  inflation.  Price 
stability is an important contribution to this environment because inflation is a regressive tax, 
impacting on the earnings and wealth of poor people far more than on the rich, who often 
have the means to protect themselves. In South Africa, high inflation contributed significantly 
to widening inequality in the 1970s and 1980s. 
Secondly, central banks also play an important role as regulators of the financial sector in a 
manner  that  contributes  to  the  efficient  allocation  of  resources  in  the  economy,  to  prevent 
financial crises from occurring and to ensure that that money and credit is flowing to those 
who seek it. A key lesson from the financial crisis is that when the financial sector implodes, 
when  confidence  in  the  banking  sector  evaporates,  the  real  economy  is  seriously  affected 
because if money and credit are unavailable, the economy grinds to a halt. And one of the 
consequences is that people lose their jobs. 
One of the measures taken as part of a global move to create a safer and more accountable 
financial sector has been a series of regulatory reforms, including what is known as Basel III, 
which creates a framework for regulating the conduct and risk-taking of banks. South Africa 
sees these measures as critically important, and is in the process of introducing the so-called 
twin peaks model to regulate the financial sector in a more holistic manner. 
Beyond  these  important  contributions  to  the  broader  economic  environment,  which  are 
essential  for  job  creation,  central  banks  do  not  have  the  policy  instruments  to  create  jobs 
directly.  Central  banks  also  do  not  usually  have  the  institutional  authority  or  tools  to 
undertake  the  structural  reforms  required  to  ensure  that  an  economy  grows  faster  or  that 
unemployment is reduced at a faster pace. Furthermore, the room for central banks to direct 
credit to one sector over another or to one firm over another is limited. Fiscal policy, industrial 
policy and quasi-fiscal institutions such as development finance institutions are more suited 
to implementing such policies, which also fall within their areas of responsibility. 
The on-going global crisis has, since inception, mutated from a sub-prime crisis to a systemic 
banking crisis, a fiscal deficit and sovereign debt crisis to one that has seen countries and 
regions  move  in  and  out  of  recessions.  Some  measures  taken  to  address  these  issues, 
including in some instances the introduction of extreme fiscal austerity policies, exacerbated 
the adverse effects of the crisis on unemployment. The latest mutation appears to be one 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
that has impacted on emerging market economies, which are experiencing significant capital 
outflows, depreciating currencies, slowing growth and rising inflation. All of this impacts on 
local economies and jobs. 
Some  of  the  rise  in  global  unemployment  is  due  to  cyclical  factors,  including  the  austerity 
measures introduced following the crisis, and part of the rise is due to structural changes to 
the  economy.  It  is  often  difficult  to  differentiate  one  from  the  other,  especially  when 
unemployment has been so high for so long. In the South African context, a relatively small 
proportion  of  our  unemployment  is  cyclical;  the  bulk  of  it  is  structural  with  deep  and  long 
historical underpinnings. 
Drawing  on  reports  by  the  IMF,  World  Bank,  ILO  and  other  institutions,  several  themes 
emerge. The key ones include: 
• 
What  is  the  appropriate  fiscal  and  monetary  response  to  unemployment  or  more 
generally to the present state of poor economic growth? 
What  labour  market  reforms  are  required  to  support  economic  efficiency  and 
productivity growth? 
What labour market and other social policies can protect workers? 
What  other  microeconomic  or  structural  reforms  are  needed  to  raise  the  level  of 
growth and employment going forward? 
  There  is  general  support  for  strong  fiscal  and  monetary  responses  to  cyclical  downturns. 
Countercyclical monetary and fiscal policy can stimulate investment and employment when 
the private sector and households are less inclined to spend or to invest. On the fiscal side, 
there  is  strong  support  for  investment  in  infrastructure  and  for  subsidies  to  firms  to  train 
people  rather  than  retrench  workers.  There  is  also  increasing  evidence  that  greater  public 
support  for  research  and  development  can  contribute  towards  economic  development  and 
productivity growth, especially at a time when private firms are spending less on investment. 
Monetary  policy  in  much  of  the  globe  has  been  supportive  of  credit  extension  and 
consumption.  In  most  countries,  including  our  own,  interest  rates  are  at  historic  lows  and 
have been for some time. In some jurisdictions, central bank purchases of a broader range of 
assets, also known as quantitative easing, has provided further stimulus, enabling banks to 
improve their balance sheets. In general, central banks in advanced countries have tried to 
assure  economic  participants  that  interest  rates  will  be  kept  low  for  some  time  in  order  to 
encourage  investment.  But  there  are  limits  to  what  monetary  policy  can  achieve  in  this 
respect. As indicated earlier, monetary policy can only provide short to medium term relief 
and is not a substitute for necessary structural reforms. 
On  both  the fiscal  and monetary fronts there  are  debates  about the  sustainability  of these 
measures  and  the  debate  has  shifted  to  the  timing  of  the  normalisation  of  such 
unconventional policies, and a concern about the possible unintended consequences as has 
been seen over the past few weeks. 
Labour market reforms that enable more efficient movement of workers from one sector to 
another  are  necessary  because  they  help  economies  adjust  to  changing  circumstances. 
They  are  also  controversial  because  they  reduce  job  security.  Drawing on  the  work  of the 
Spence  Commission  (the  Growth  Commission),  policymakers  are  focusing  more  on 
protecting workers than on protecting jobs. This is a subtle distinction, but a significant one. 
Policies such as unemployment insurance, training vouchers and placement assistance can 
help  workers  who  have  lost  their  jobs  find  alternative  opportunities.  Policies  that  limit  the 
ability to downsize or restructure are seen as inefficient and are being adjusted. 
Some countries have introduced innovative programmes to enable firms to keep people on 
their payroll, albeit at lower wages, instead of retrenching workers. These programmes are 
generally  tied  to  training  and  re-skilling  of  workers.  The  most  successful  of  these 
programmes is in Germany where a significant proportion of the workforce chose lower pay 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
and  the  chance  to  be  retrained  rather  than  retrenchment.  Many  countries,  including 
developed ones, have public employment programmes not too dissimilar to our public works 
programme. Other active labour market policies include matching activities for both people 
and firms. Several jurisdictions offer tax credits to employers to take on specific categories of 
workers. 
There is also recognition that structural reforms aimed at improving economic efficiency are 
needed  to  raise  the  level  of  employment.  These  policies  include  tougher  anti-competition 
policies and microeconomic reforms aimed at lowering costs in key network industries. 
Education,  training  and  the  retraining  of  workers  are  essential  to  maintain  long-run 
competitiveness and ensure higher levels of employment. After declining for decades, many 
advanced economies are spending more on education and training since the financial crisis, 
despite significant pressure to reduce public spending. 
South Africa’s high level of unemployment is not a new phenomenon. According to Haroon 
Bhorat, a labour market economist at UCT, in 1970 the number of African people in formal 
employment  was  5.3  million.  This  number  increased  in  the  1970s  and  early  1980s  but  by 
1995, 25 years later, it was exactly the same at 5.3 million. This is despite the working age 
population almost doubling. While we cannot simply look backwards and blame our past, we 
also cannot simply wipe away its terrible and enduring legacy. The deep structural features 
of apartheid – in the form of poor quality education for black people, job reservation, curbs on 
trading  and  owning  businesses,  forced  removals,  land  dispossession,  dormitory  townships 
and the homeland system – have all contributed to the situation where we have one of the 
highest levels of inequality in the world and over a third of adults are out of work. 
Since  1994,  we  have  made  steady  progress  in  creating  jobs,  but  clearly  the  rate  of  job 
creation has been too low to absorb the bulk of people seeking work. Sound macroeconomic 
performance combined with higher growth has contributed to rising employment since 1995. 
The problem has been that the increase in the labour force has outpaced the number of jobs 
created.  South  Africa’s  official  unemployment  rate  increased  from  17.6  percent  in  1996  to 
30.4 percent in 2002, before declining to 22 percent in 2007. 
The  legacy  of  apartheid  has  clearly  resulted  in  a  high  level  of  unemployment,  but  growth 
since  1994  has  not  been  as  high  as  we  would  like. The  rate  at  which  an  economy  grows 
consistently is critical. While we all recognise that jobs are not automatically created when 
countries grow, we do know that if a country is  not growing then it is extremely difficult to 
create new jobs, or even sustain existing ones. Government has frequently mentioned the 
desire to grow the economy at 7 percent a year. It takes decades for countries to make the 
transition from poor to advanced economies. Michael Spence, when examining this matter in 
his book “The Next Convergence”, says that “at a 7 percent rate of growth income doubles 
every decade, and that is very fast ... And even at such very high growth rates it takes well 
over half a century to make the full transition. What matters is sustained growth over a long 
period of time. Little growth spurts followed by stagnation simply lowers the average growth 
and prolongs the process.” It is in this context that we need to frankly assess our long term 
growth average, and our current growth rates, as while we are creating new jobs, they are 
not  sufficient  to  absorb  new  entrants  into  the  labour  market,  and  therefore  unemployment 
continues to rise. 
We also have to acknowledge that there remain deep structural weaknesses in our economy 
that  prevent  faster  growth  and  higher  labour  absorption.  These  structural  weaknesses, 
notwithstanding  the  legacy  issues  mentioned  earlier,  also  include  uncompetitive  product 
markets,  low  levels  of fixed  capital  investment, a  low  savings  rate,  inadequate  progress  in 
improving education and training and poor public services. 
Of particular concern has been the fact that the two sectors in the economy most intensive in 
low  skilled  workers,  mining  and  agriculture,  have  shed  jobs  for  much  of  the  past  twenty 
years.  While  there  has  been  some  job  creation  in  low  skill  sectors  such  as  the  private 
security  industry  and  the  retail  sector,  in  general  most  jobs  have  been  created  in  skills-
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
intensive sectors, locking out low skilled workers. Given the shortage of skilled workers, this 
trend has also pushed up the salaries of skilled people, contributing to rising inequality. 
This shift to more skills-intensive jobs is not a uniquely South African phenomenon. Globally, 
work has become more skills-intensive and the rates of return to education have been rising 
in most countries (IMF, 2013), meaning that skilled workers are capturing a larger and larger 
share of wages in the economy. This trend, referred to as skills-biased technological change, 
is also impacted by the introduction of China into the global trading system. Low skilled work 
has  been  outsourced  to  lower  cost  economies.  When  countries  have  highly  skilled 
populations,  this  trend  is  a  positive  one  for  both  productivity  and  employment.  When 
workforces are insufficiently skilled to move up the value chain, then these workers get left 
behind. Even some developed countries, such as the US, are confronted by this problem. 
One of the most controversial aspects of post-apartheid policies has been the labour regime 
and the institutional structure of the labour market. The labour regime we have has sound 
intentions. Its aims are to balance the power of employers and employees following a history 
where  workers,  black  workers  in  particular,  were  exploited  and  subjected  to  arbitrary 
dismissal.  The  labour  regime  aimed  to  reduce  tensions  in  the  workplace  by  setting  up 
complex  quasi-legal  dispute  resolution  mechanisms.  Policy  has  also  sought  to  broaden 
access  to  unemployment  insurance,  health  insurance,  workmen’s  compensation,  maternity 
leave as well as training opportunities through the establishment of sectoral education and 
training authorities. 
Following the enactment of the Labour Relations Act, the number of days lost to strike action 
fell sharply with about one million strike days a year on average from 1996 to 2007. Since 
2007 however, the number of strike days lost have increased sharply and strike activity has 
also  become  more  violent.  More  recently,  there  has  been  a  sharp  increase  in  illegal  or 
unprocedural strikes. Today, many labour intensive sectors are characterised by high levels 
of tension which are not conducive to investment, job security or employment creation. 
In other respects too, the labour regime has not lived up to expectations. We have not seen 
the  dynamic  growth  of  small  and  medium  sized  firms  as  one  would  have  expected  in  a 
country  at  the  level  of  development  of  South  Africa.  While  collective  bargaining  has 
contributed to labour peace, it has also favoured big firms at the expense of smaller ones. 
New  labour  entrants  also  find  it  difficult  to  break  into  the  labour  market.  While  in  general 
salaries  are  not  high  relative  to  other  countries  with  a  similar  level  of  productivity,  starting 
salaries are higher than other countries, discouraging employers from hiring inexperienced 
workers  (OECD,  2010).  Firing  costs,  especially  for  smaller  firms,  are  also  high  by 
international standards (WEF, 2012). 
A major feature of the labour market regime has been the inability to more closely link pay to 
productivity growth. This was not what was intended. When the Labour Relations Act of 1996 
was passed, the intention was for collective agreements to serve as framework agreements, 
covering  minimum  pay  and  basic  benefits.  The  intention  was  that  within  these  framework 
agreements,  firms  would  negotiate  firm-specific  agreements  linking  salary  increases  to 
productivity gains. In practice, this is the exception rather than the rule. To introduce greater 
links  to  performance  one  does  not  have  to  change  the  law.  Within  the  existing  legal 
framework such agreements are possible. 
South  Africa’s  youth  unemployment  rate  is  particularly  high,  now  above  50  percent. 
Programmes  to  encourage  firms  to  hire  young  people  have  so  far  not  yielded  the  desired 
results. Our view is that it is possible to incentivise firms to hire younger people without the 
threat  of  displacing  more  experienced  workers.  Several  OECD  and  developing  countries 
have some variant of incentive, including tax breaks, to firms to hire inexperienced workers 
and young people while protecting the existing workforce and older workers. 
Given the scale of unemployment in South Africa and the fact that most of the unemployed 
lack the skills to fit into most of the skills-intensive parts of the economy, it is critical that we 
focus on growing labour intensive sectors, including mining and agriculture. It is also critical 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
that  government  expands  and  strengthens  the  quality  of  its  public  services,  including  the 
social wage, to enable low skilled workers to live meaningful lives. This requires an implicit 
understanding that wages on their own may not meet the desired living standards for newer 
workers, a controversial question given the high levels of inequality in our society. 
While South Africa has made praiseworthy progress in expanding access to early childhood 
education,  school  education,  further  education  and  training  and  university  education,  the 
quality  of  outcomes  in  the  education  system  remains  below  international  averages. 
Education provides the single most-effective route to breaking the intergenerational cycle of 
poverty. Lack of education is also the greatest exclusion a person can experience. It is also 
critical to obtaining a job and to higher productivity. Given that the economy is short of skills, 
importing skilled workers can be a sensible strategy because of the multiplier effects for low 
skilled employment. It is estimated that for each high skilled immigrant that comes into the 
country, between four and eight low skilled jobs are created. 
South Africa is faced with a difficult set of trade-offs. In general, countries get rich by moving 
up  the  value  chain,  by  becoming  more  skills-intensive.  South  Africa  lacks  the  skills  to 
compete with advanced economies such as Germany and the US. On the other hand, our 
cost  structure  does  not  allow  us  to  compete  with  poorer  economies.  South  Africa  has  to 
therefore adopt a dual strategy of promoting growth in advanced sectors that can compete 
globally  while  also  creating  jobs  in  lower  productivity  sectors.  Both  legs  of  this  strategy 
should focus on the need to raise exports in general which is the only realistic strategy to 
address our inequality problem on a sustainable basis. While mining will remain critical to our 
development prospects, the economy has to diversify to be able to create more jobs going 
forward. 
Since  the  industrial  revolution,  there  have  been  many  debates  about  the  impact  of 
technology  on  employment.  The  general  consensus  is  that  while  technology  may  displace 
workers  in  some  firms  or  industries,  the  productivity  gains  and  resulting  welfare  benefits 
imply that new industries emerge and overall employment continues to rise. There could of 
course be huge inter-temporal factors that complicate the picture with long delays and lags 
between  the  destruction  of  a  job  in  one  sector  and  the  emergence  of  new  jobs  in  other 
sectors. There are also distributional effects which have to be considered. Well-paying jobs 
in  the  auto  industry  in  the  US,  for  example,  may  be  destroyed  through  outsourcing  or 
mechanisation  while  the  jobs  created  in  the  growing  services  sector  may  offer  lower  pay. 
Furthermore,  the  returns  that  go  to  the  developers  and  designers  of  technology  now  far 
exceed the returns to the people who assemble the products or even the people who extract 
the raw materials for the product. 
These distributional challenges arise in a global context. With a rising share of profits going 
to the design companies who are generally located in advanced economies, less of the value 
addition  occurs  in  poorer  countries.  To  put  it  differently,  more  of  the  value  of  the  product 
accrues from the research, development, marketing, logistics and intelligence of the product 
than in any other part of the supply chain. 
The  pace  of  technological  change  appears  to  be  accelerating  exponentially.  The  internet, 
mobile  telephony,  networked  computing  and  more  recently  artificial  intelligence  have 
implications for the world of work and for our lives that are difficult to comprehend. Joseph 
Stiglitz in his 2010 book Freefall, argues that the jobs lost in agriculture at the end of the 19th 
century  contributed  to  lower  aggregate  demand,  leading  to  the  Great  Depression.  This 
catastrophe  was  only  resolved  through  the  rise  of  manufacturing,  initially  prompted  by  the 
demands  arising  from  the  outbreak  of  Second  World  War.  Is  the  unemployment  we  are 
witnessing today a result of a great dislocation of workers from manufacturing to services, or 
a replacement of workers – both skilled and unskilled – by artificial intelligence, or are there 
new  work opportunities that are yet to be identified that could absorb the growing army of 
unemployed across the globe? 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
These trends pose complex questions for policymakers. Should we protect certain sectors, 
and if so, how? Does protecting certain sectors or firms weaken the ability of the economy to 
transform  or  to  innovate?  Again  referring  to  the  Growth  Commission  report,  the  preferred 
approach  is  to  protect  people  through  sensible  welfare  safety  nets  and  retraining 
opportunities rather than protecting specific jobs. It also brings back into focus the role of the 
public  sector  not  only  as  provider  of  public  goods  such  as  education  and  research  and 
development  but  also  as  employer  in  labour  intensive  services  such  as  health  care, 
transport, crime prevention and education. Does this level of unemployment not require all of 
us to reconsider the role and responsibility of the state in filling the gaps in services to all 
citizens that the private sector is not adequately meeting? 
Conclusion 
South Africa and the world face difficult challenges in reviving economic growth and creating 
jobs. Sensible counter-cyclical policies combined with longer term structural reforms aimed at 
promoting growth, employment and a more equitable distribution of incomes are the way to 
navigate out of this crisis. For South Africa, there is also a need to improve the functioning of 
the  labour  market,  to  strengthen  its  institutions  and  to  walk  that  careful  balance  between 
hard-won rights of workers and the need to promote inclusive growth through encouraging 
new entrants into the workplace. 
From  our  perspective  at  the  Reserve  Bank,  we  will  continue  to  contribute  towards  an 
environment conducive to creating jobs and encouraging long term investment. This implies 
a  continued  focus  on  price  stability  and  the  prevention  of  financial  sector  crises.  It  also 
implies policies aimed at reducing the volatility of the business cycle and of ensuring as little 
disruption to the macroeconomy from external shocks as we can manage. 
I  leave  you  with  a  quote  from  the  World  Development  Report  on  jobs:  “In  today’s  global 
economy the world of work is rapidly evolving. Demographic shifts, technological progress, 
and  the  lasting  effects  of  the  international  financial  crisis  are  reshaping  the  employment 
landscape in countries around the world. Countries that successfully adapt to these changes 
and meet their jobs challenges can achieve dramatic gains in living standards, productivity 
growth, and more cohesive societies. Those that do not will miss out on the transformational 
effects of economic and social development.” 
Thank you 
References 
Aghion,  Philippe  and  Kharoubbi,  Ennis.  Cyclical  Macroeconomic  Policy,  Financial 
Regulation, and Economic Growth. 2013. 
Akerlof, George A and Shiller, Robert J. Animal Spirits: how human psychology drives the 
economy, and why it matters for global capitalism. Princeton University Press. 2009. 
Bhorat, Haroon, Decomposing Sectoral Employment Trends in South Africa, 2000. 
Commission  on  Growth  and  Development.  The  Growth  report:  Strategies  for  Sustained 
Growth and Inclusive Development. 2008 
Fromm, Erich. To have or to be? Harper and Row. 1976. 
International Labour Organisation. World of Work, 2013. 
International Monetary Fund. Jobs and Growth – Analytical and Operational Considerations 
for the Fund, 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development. Jobs Report. 2013. 
Stiglitz, Joseph. Freefall. 2010. 
World Bank. World Development Report – Jobs. 2013. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
