Manuel Sánchez: Mexico’s economic outlook and challenges 
Remarks by Mr Manuel Sánchez, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Mexico, at the Conference 
“Regulatory reform, the global economic outlook, and the implications for Mexico’s financial 
sector”,  organized  by  the  Institute  of  International  Finance  and  Banorte,  Mexico  City, 
20 February 2013. 
 It is a privilege to speak at the close of this conference devoted to the implications for Mexico 
of  recent  regulatory  reforms  and  the  global  economic  outlook.  I  would  like  to  thank  the 
organizers  of  this  seminar,  the  Institute  of  International  Finance  and  Banorte,  for  the 
opportunity  to  share  some  thoughts  with  you  on  Mexico’s  economic  conditions  and 
prospects. 
I would like first to review the recent developments in the Mexican economy and its outlook in 
today’s weak world economic environment. Then, I will analyze the implications of currently 
benign  financial  conditions.  And  finally,  I  will  discuss  some  of  the  present  challenges  for 
monetary policy in Mexico. As usual, my remarks are entirely my own responsibility and do 
not necessarily reflect the views of the Bank of Mexico or its Governing Board. 
The Mexican economy in a weak global environment 
The performance of the Mexican economy last year continued to be constrained by a weak 
global  environment.  The  world  economy  expanded  at  a  slower  pace  than  the  average 
observed in the two decades before the big financial crisis. In the United States, GDP grew 
moderately, and for a fifth consecutive year, output remained below its secular trend. Signs 
of  improvement  in  several  variables  in  the  United  States  are  encouraging,  including  those 
suggesting the beginning of a turnaround in the housing market and the gradual recovery of 
bank lending to the private sector. However, the level and characteristics of unemployment 
as well as the sluggishness of private investment remain sources of concern. 
Additionally,  U.S.  industrial  production,  which  exerts  substantial  influence  on  Mexico’s 
production and trade, has lately exhibited a deceleration. The rebound in U.S. output after 
the crisis has been disappointing, especially in light of significant stimulus provided through 
previous fiscal packages and the ongoing extraordinarily expansionary stance of monetary 
policy. Subpar economic performance may be partly explained by uncertainty regarding the 
speed  and  distribution  of  costs  in  the  pursuit  of  fiscal  consolidation.  Recent  fiscal  accords 
may have reduced the risk of a GDP contraction. 
On the other hand, during 2012, the euro area fell into recession with unemployment rates at 
record highs. To a large extent, the problems in the region stem from institutional limitations 
of  the  design  of  the  monetary  union  that  have  complicated  dealing  with  the  aftermath  of 
national financial crises. Progress in revamping the EMU architecture, bailout programs for 
troubled  economies  and,  especially,  decisive  measures  undertaken  by  the  ECB  have 
lowered perceived risk for sovereign and bank debt, especially in the peripheral countries. 
Although  further  meaningful  structural  measures  will  be  required  to  attain  a  full  economic 
recovery, the financial stabilization achieved may suggest that the worst of the crisis is over 
in the euro area. 
Consistently,  the  most  recent  consensus  estimates  for  2013  and  2014  posit  a  gradual 
recovery  for  the  world  economy,  moderate  deceleration  followed  by  higher  growth  in  the 
United States, and a slight contraction and later an expansion in the Eurozone.1 
                                                 
1  See Consensus Economics (2013), Consensus Forecasts, February. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
In  spite  of  this  challenging  environment,  last  year  Mexican  economic  activity  continued  to 
exhibit  a  positive  trend,  with  a  firmer  expansion  in  services  than  in  industry.  In  the  fourth 
quarter, annual growth was the same as in the previous quarter, although both figures were 
not  as  high  as  in  the  first  half  of  the  year.  Annual  GDP  growth  for  the  full  year  was 
3.9 percent, virtually the same as in 2011; this growth is noteworthy, especially in the present 
world context, as it is almost one percentage point higher than Mexico’s average growth rate 
during the twenty years prior to the crisis. 
On  the  back  of  this  progress,  external  demand,  as  reflected  prominently  in  manufacturing 
exports, has shown some moderation in growth in the past several months, with a recovery 
in the most recent quarter. By far, the main source of deceleration came from countries other 
than  the  United  States,  and  in  particular  in  automotive  exports.  This  slowdown  is  partly 
explained by restrictions imposed by Brazil and Argentina on auto imports from Mexico. 
At the same time, domestic demand continued expanding. Private consumption, the largest 
component of domestic spending, maintained its momentum, as indicated by available data 
on  retail  sales  up  to  November.  The  strength  of  consumption  has  been  supported  by  a 
sustained  increase  in  formal  employment,  a  moderate  decline  in  unemployment,  and  a 
significant expansion in consumer lending. 
Gross  fixed  investment  kept  rising,  with  machinery  and  equipment  showing  higher  growth 
rates than construction. Additionally, measures of business confidence up to January 2013, 
such  as  the  Manufacturing  Orders  Indicator  (IPM),  reveal  that  business  managers  foresee 
that the economy will maintain its expansion. 
Given  the  expected  slowdown  in  the  U.S.  economy  largely  due  to  fiscal  consolidation, 
analysts predict that Mexico’s economic growth in 2013 will be slightly lower than that of the 
previous year, with a recovery occurring in 2014.2 There are both downside as well as upside 
risks to this scenario. A fiscal adjustment in the United States applied in a disorderly way or 
lacking credibility, or a complication in policy implementation in the Eurozone that augments 
financial uncertainty, stand out as possible negative external factors. However, the recovery 
in the United States may be faster than forecast, and investor confidence in Mexico could 
increase as a result of progress on structural reforms favoring long-term growth. 
Capital inflows and benign financial conditions 
During the last four years, the yield curve in Mexico has successively shifted downward, a 
process that has continued so far this year, leaving current interest rates for all terms close to 
or  at  their  all-time  lows.  Aside  from  variations  due  to  changes  in  risk  aversion,  the  main 
driving  force  for  these  shifts  has  been  almost  synchronic  shifts  in  the  U.S.  yield  curve, 
resulting from the different stages of monetary easing there. 
The main transmission mechanism for lower interest rates has come from persistent capital 
inflows. As in other emerging economies, Mexico has received substantial capital flows from 
foreign  investors  seeking  higher  yields  in  both  equity  and  bond  markets.  Also,  foreign 
investors  may  feel  more  confident  about  the  Mexican  economy  because  of  its  sound 
macroeconomic and financial fundamentals, the openness of its capital account, the flexibility 
and  depth  of  its  foreign  exchange  market,  and  higher  expectations  for  structural  reforms, 
among other factors. 
As  a  result,  from  2009  to  2012,  the  proportion  of  non-equity  financial  assets  held  by 
foreigners relative to the broadest monetary aggregate, M4, increased from five to seventeen 
percent. There are indications that inflows have speeded up during the current year in many 
emerging economies, including Mexico. 
                                                 
2   Expected growth is 3.6 percent for 2013 and 4.0 percent for 2014. See Banco de Mexico (2013), “Encuesta 
sobre las expectativas de los especialistas en economía del sector privado,” January. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The  abundance  of  foreign  savings  was  supportive  of  Mexico’s  recent  economic  growth. 
However, the possibility of a change in the perceived conditions that gave rise to the inflows 
makes  it  likely  for  those  flows  to  stop  and  even  revert.  Such  reversals  have  occurred  on 
innumerable  occasions  in  many  countries,  including  Mexico,  for  reasons  not  necessarily 
related to the recipient country, causing substantial financial disturbances. The obvious case 
at  present  could  be  the  expectation  that  the  Federal  Reserve  will  start  unwinding  its 
expansionary monetary policy. 
Before such an eventuality occurs, for whatever reason, and about which only the timing and 
magnitude  are  uncertain,  it  is  absolutely  necessary  for  savers  and  borrowers  as  well  as 
financial intermediaries to take into account that interest rates will eventually rise. The real 
danger  is  to  believe  that  this  time  will  be  different  and  that  somehow  present  favorable 
conditions  will  last  forever.  Such  myopic  behavior  has  often  led  to  excessive  risk-taking, 
overleveraging and the formation of bubbles in credit and real estate markets, frequently the 
prelude to financial crises and painful massive redistributions of wealth.3 
Fortunately,  Mexico’s  banks  have  been  operating  cautiously,  thereby  maintaining  strong 
balance sheets and healthy loan portfolios. Also, no lending bubble is apparent. However, 
authorities  will  have  to  continue  monitoring  threats  to  stability  in  any  part  of  the  financial 
system, in order to act in a timely way if they emerge. 
The challenges to monetary policy 
In 2012 annual inflation exhibited a rising trend to a maximum of 4.8 percent in September. 
During seven months it surpassed the upper limit of the variability interval of plus or minus 
one percentage point around the permanent target of 3 percent established by the Bank of 
Mexico.  Factors  exerting  pressure  on  inflation  included  the  international  draught  and  the 
domestic bird flu epidemic that resulted in significant agricultural price increases, and some 
pass-through from peso depreciation to merchandise prices. 
In  December  2012  and  January  2013,  inflation  fell  to  below  4  percent,  a  welcome 
development in light of the previous considerable deviation from the target. Nevertheless, the 
recent decline in inflation should be seen with caution. This is because, first, it is based only 
on two observations, which cannot yet be proven to be the beginning of a new trend. 
Second, the drop in inflation depended significantly on sharp declines in telecom prices and 
moderating agricultural price increases. If one were to exclude the effect of telecom prices on 
inflation in December and January, inflation would have been above and practically on the 
upper limit of the variability interval, respectively. Also, as occurs with negative disturbances, 
positive shocks like the recent ones sooner or later die out and could be followed in their own 
turn by adverse shocks. 
Third, the proportion of the components of the National Consumer Price Index (INPC) basket 
with annual increments higher than 4 percent is still substantial. Fourth, the two most recent 
inflation  prints  exceed  the  target  and  do  not  even  correspond  to  the  lowest  inflation  rates 
observed in Mexico during recent years. 
These caveats are all the more important as the target has not been achieved in the past, in 
the sense that inflation has not been fluctuating around 3 percent. In fact, since the end of 
2003  when  this  objective  became  effective,  inflation  has  varied  around  a  mean  of 
4.3 percent. Moreover, during the nine years after the establishment of the target, inflation 
has not exhibited any clear path of convergence towards it. This lack of convergence may 
                                                 
3   For an excellent account of the persistence of financial crises and their common causes see Reinhart, C. and 
K. Rogoff (2012), This Time Is Different: Eight Centuries of Financial Folly, Princeton University Press. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
partially explain why inflation expectations for  the short and medium terms, as reflected in 
analysts’ surveys, have long remained stubbornly above the target.4 
These considerations call for vigilance in monetary policy. The target is the principal guide 
and  has  not  been  attained.  Furthermore,  negative  shocks  could  easily  complicate 
convergence.  Risks  include  the  following:  weather  and  animal  health  problems  could  fuel 
agricultural  price  rises;  new  episodes  of  heightened  risk  aversion  could  trigger  currency 
depreciation  with  some  effects  on  inflation;  public-sector  prices  could  be  higher  than 
anticipated; and finally, some aggregate demand pressures may arise in light of conventional 
measures suggesting that slack in the economy has disappeared. 
Concluding remarks 
In  spite  of  a  weak  global  environment,  Mexico’s  GDP  kept  growing  at  rates  surpassing 
historical records. Analysts’ outlook for the Mexican economy posits a slight deceleration in 
2013 and a recovery the following year. There are both downside and upside risks to this 
scenario, including on the positive side, further progress on structural reforms. 
Substantial capital inflows resulting in unusually favorable financial conditions in Mexico have 
been supportive of economic activity. However, economic agents should remain prudent as 
these flows, for many reasons, could stop and even revert. Finally, the short period of recent 
improvement  in  inflation,  the  extraordinary  factors  that  explain  it,  and  the  absence  of 
convergence toward the inflation target, require a vigilant monetary policy. Convergence of 
inflation to the permanent target demands more than a few months of good results. 
                                                 
4   For empirical evidence of the lack of anchoring of inflation expectations on the target, see Carrasco, C. and 
J. Ferreiro (2012), “Inflation targeting and inflation expectations in Mexico,” Applied Economics, July. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
