Nils Bernstein: Central banking at a crossroads – Europe and beyond 
Introduction  by  Mr  Nils  Bernstein,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Denmark,  to  the  DIIS 
(Danish  Institute  for  International  Studies)  conference  “Central  banking  at  a  crossroads  – 
Europe and beyond”, Copenhagen, 29 January 2013. 
 I have been given the privilege by DIIS to open this conference, and I would like to welcome 
You  all  to  the  conference  of  “Central  Banking  at  a  Crossroads:  Europe  and  beyond”.  A 
special welcome to our foreign guests. 
 Central banking has undergone major changes over the last half decade. The financial crisis, 
which began in 2007 and escalated into a worldwide financial and macroeconomic crisis in 
the autumn of 2008, has in many ways been a game changer. Not least in terms of the way 
in  which  central  banks  operate.  Old  paradigms  and  truths  have  fallen,  and  new,  in  many 
cases  untested,  monetary-policy  measures  have  been  introduced.  With  monetary-policy 
interest rates close to zero – and in Denmark’s case even below zero – “quantitative easing” 
has  become,  well  perhaps  not  exactly  a  household  term,  but  at  any  rate  part  of  the 
vocabulary of educated citizens. With the latest unconventional measure in the form of the 
ECB’s  Outright  Monetary  Transactions,  and  soon  also  a  single  European  supervisory 
mechanism for banks, under the auspices of the ECB, the division between central banking 
and  other  policy  measures  has  become  less  clear-cut.  How  this  will  work  out  in  practice 
remains to be seen. 
After  years  of  crisis  fighting  –  with  low  growth,  stubborn  unemployment  figures  and 
increasing government debt levels, it is being discussed if central banks have come to the 
limits  of  their  capacities  and  governments  left  to  design  and  implement  political  difficult 
structural reforms? One observation is that it is remarkable what the ECB has achieved in 
recent six months, fighting the European debt crisis by declaring what it intends to do under 
certain circumstances without actively having done it yet. 
The  first  workshop  is  about  “bank  resolution  in  a  comparative  perspective”.  This  is  a  very 
topical  issue.  In  Denmark  –  as  in  many  other  countries  –  we  had  been  used  to  handling 
distressed banks on a case-by-case basis. No two cases were identical, and the approach 
differed each time. 
Just before the collapse of Lehman Brothers in September 2008, Denmark’s 9th largest bank 
–  Roskilde  Bank  –  became  distressed.  It  had  already  been  attracting  the  attention  of  the 
authorities for some time. As in previous cases where banks failed, the action to be taken 
had not been laid down on beforehand, and Denmark clearly lacked the tools to manage the 
situation. 
Although the size of Roskilde Bank was not in itself sufficient to make it systemic, the turmoil 
in  the  financial  markets meant that  there  was,  in  Danmarks  Nationalbank’s  assessment,  a 
considerable risk of a knock-on effect on other banks. In the end, Danmarks Nationalbank 
and the rest of the banking sector purchased Roskilde Bank for zero kroner. In other words, 
the  subordinated  capital  had  been  lost,  and  the  private  banks  provided  a  guarantee  of 
kr. 750 million to cover further losses. But as it turned out the losses were in fact far greater. 
A  large  number  of  Danish  banks  became  distressed  in  the  period  around  the  autumn  of 
2008. From the beginning of 2008 to the beginning of 2009, 18 Danish banks were wound 
up, acquired or merged with other banks. All of these were small banks. 
With  Bank  Rescue  Package  3  of  September  2010,  a  bank  resolution  scheme  was 
established  in  Denmark.  The  government-owned  Financial  Stability  Company  was  put  in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
charge  of  the  resolution  of  distressed  banks,  thereby  assuming  the  role  that  Danmarks 
Nationalbank had had in connection with Roskilde Bank. Under Bank Rescue Package 3, not 
only shareholders, but also unsecured and subordinated creditors could lose their money if a 
bank  failed.  This  was  in  accordance  with  international  recommendations,  but  nevertheless 
caused a bit of a stir internationally, and led to a general downgrading of Danish banks. 
The  first  bank  to  be  wound  up  under  Bank  Rescue  Package  3  was  Amagerbanken  –  a 
regional bank based in the Copenhagen area. I will not go into detail, but merely note that we 
now have a mechanism for handling distressed banks which works and which ensures, that 
taxpayers will not ultimately pay for a distressed bank. 
Denmark was among the first countries to introduce a bank resolution scheme under which 
those who had lent money to the distressed bank could also lose their investment. This has 
made headlines, and I am surprised to note that even very small Danish banks in distress 
still find their way to the pages of the Financial Times. Recently it was a very small bank in 
the south of Jutland, Tønder Bank. In my opinion that is out of proportion. Over the weekend 
another  local  bank,  Sparekassen  Lolland,  has  been  taken  over  by  the  larger  Jyske  Bank 
along the same lines, i.e. a private solution. 
It has been a general principle in Denmark throughout the financial crisis that the banking 
sector  itself  should  fund  the  process  of  “tidying  up”  the  sector.  In  fact,  so  far  the  Danish 
government has made a profit of around kr. 10 billion, or 0.6 per cent of GDP, from the Bank 
Rescue Packages implemented. The final result cannot be calculated yet. 
 Tomorrow’s theme is “Central Banking in an Age of Collateral-based Finance”. The financial 
crisis has enhanced focus on bank liquidity, and the securities that are seen as liquid. This is 
reflected in the Basel III rules to be implemented in the coming years. Collateral is required 
when  borrowing  from  central  banks.  It  has  been  necessary  to  expand  the  collateral  basis 
during the financial crisis. 
Uncollateralised lending in the money market, which was common prior to the crisis, has all 
but  vanished  in  favour  of  collateralised  lending.  The  banks  also  need  to  pledge  collateral 
when borrowing from central banks. All this has increased the need for collateral in banks. 
In  many  countries,  collateral  is  restricted  to  government  bonds.  Denmark  is  unique  in  the 
sense  that  we  have  a  very  large  and  well-developed  mortgage-  credit  sector  and  hence  a 
large volume of outstanding mortgage bonds. These bonds may be pledged as collateral for 
loans  from  Danmarks  Nationalbank  in  the  same  way  as  government  bonds.  But  it  is  still 
uncertain to which extent they may be included in the liquidity reserves of the banks in future. 
Throughout the financial crisis, Danish mortgage bonds remained liquid  and new issuance 
took place. In general, lack of collateral is not a problem in Denmark, but naturally it may be 
so for a few banks, especially those under pressure. 
Danmarks  Nationalbank  has  on  several  occasions  expanded  the  collateral  basis  for 
borrowing by banks. Some of the measures were temporary and applied only at the peak of 
the crisis. For example, Danmarks Nationalbank has expanded the collateral basis to include 
banks’  lending  of  good  quality.  This  has  also  improved  the  liquidity  of  the  banks’  balance 
sheets. 
 The theme of this conference, “Central Banking at a Crossroads – Europe and beyond”, is 
highly  topical  and  those  present  here  today  include  many  outstanding  scholars  within  this 
field.  I  think  we  have  a  couple  of  very  interesting  days  ahead  of  us.  With  these  words,  I 
declare the conference open. 
Thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
