Andreas Dombret: Regulatory reforms between ambitions and reality 
Introductory  statement  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the  Alpbach  Financial  Market  Symposium,  Alpbach,  30  August 
2013. 
 Ladies and gentlemen 
It’s  a  pleasure  to  be  in  Alpbach  today  to  discuss  with  you  the  crucial  topic  of  regulatory 
reforms. Thank you for inviting me to these beautiful surroundings! 
Ambitions meet reality – let me start with a dire reality. The recent financial crisis highlighted 
weaknesses that prevailed in the financial system. Ever since, the financial sector has been 
undergoing ambitious regulatory change. Even though regulation is no panacea, it is a good 
measure to be applied wherever weaknesses are concentrated. To tackle these weaknesses 
at  an  international  level,  the  G20  are  pursuing  a  comprehensive  and  ambitious  regulatory 
reform agenda. I believe it is vital to mitigate the main weaknesses of the financial system. 
The new rules for banks’ capital and liquidity cushions, for example, are a good start in this 
respect. 
However, this is by no means enough. Tougher regulation for banks might lead to regulatory 
arbitrage. And in this regard, there is one place to focus on: the so-called shadow banking 
system.  The  shadow  banking  system  comprises  activities  that  are  conducted  outside  the 
sphere  of  regular  banking.  I  do  not  favour  the  commonly  used  expression  of  shadow 
banking, since the activities of the shadow banking system are not bad per se. Thus, I would 
prefer to call it “non-bank banking”. 
But still, it is a place where systemic risks can easily emerge because of unregulated liquidity 
and  maturity  transformation,  because  of  the  build-up  of  leverage,  and  because  of  pro-
cyclicality. In order to prevent the emergence of systemic risks in the shadow banking system 
it  is  therefore  essential  to  ensure  that  measures  are  implemented  consistently  across 
sectors. And this may well include regulation. 
Furthermore,  adequately  capturing  these  risks  presupposes  that  they  are  identified  and 
measured.  Shadow  banking  activities,  however,  are  beyond  the  reach  of  bank  reporting 
requirements. As a result, data availability posed and continues to pose a serious challenge. 
But at least we now have a regular monitoring of shadow banking activities. 
Yesterday, the Financial Stability Board published recommendations on the shadow banking 
system. These recommendations represent another milestone but they do not represent the 
end of the way. In my view the topic of shadow banking should play an important role at the 
G20-Summit in St. Petersburg. 
However,  one  thing  should  be  clear:  when  we  develop  regulatory  proposals,  we  need  a 
thorough  understanding  of  their  implications.  Let  me  briefly  touch  upon  repo  markets,  an 
important source of leverage and pro-cyclicality. In order to thoroughly assess the effects of 
envisaged  numerical  floors  on  haircuts  for  the  securities  lending  and  repo  market,  a 
quantitative impact study is just being launched. I strongly support this approach. It facilitates 
early recognition of inadequate measures and unintended side-effects. It therefore allows us 
to introduce effective measures. 
The shadow banking system will constantly challenge policy makers because it adapts very 
quickly in order to evade regulatory measures. Regulatory arbitrage is a reality we have to 
face. It  is  therefore  essential  that  we  make sure  regulatory  measures are  consistent  –  not 
only  across  sectors  as  I  already  pointed  out  but  also  across  jurisdictions.  Regulatory 
measures  must  be  developed  and  agreed  upon  in  international  cooperation.  In  addition,  I 
expect the financial industry to set in train a rethinking towards more risk awareness. Only in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
this way can the weaknesses that were exposed in the financial system be remedied in the 
long run, and the financial system be made more resistant to future crises. 
My  brief  excursion  into  the  shadow  banking  sector  and  the  challenges  it  presents  for 
regulators illustrates that the elimination of systemic risks is not easy. And in doing so, we 
face obstacles and challenges. Thus, I end almost where I began: reality requires ambition. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
