Duvvuri Subbarao: Strengthening IMF surveillance 
Talking points of Dr Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at a seminar 
on “Strengthening IMF surveillance”, IMF Spring Meetings, Washington DC, 16 April 2013. 
 Question 1: Over the next three to five years, what do you see as the critical issues for 
IMF Surveillance? 
Response 
There are several critical issues for IMF Surveillance over the next three to five years. I want 
to focus on two of them. 
(i) 
Is  the  IMF  able  to  analyze  and  understand  the  growing  complexity  of  global 
linkages? 
Does the IMF have an objective, unbiased and contestable view on various aspects 
of Capital Account Management! 
(ii) 
I will look at these issues from an Emerging Market (EM) perspective. 
(i) 
• 
Growing Complexity of Global Linkages 
We  are  all  agreed  that  global  interlinkages  have  become  stronger,  more  complex 
and potentially more disruptive. The IMF needs to be ahead of the intellectual curve 
in understanding these linkages. 
 Models used by IMF – Could not predict spillovers before crisis 
• 
So far research within and outside IMF has been focussed on trying to understand 
linkages through trade, finance and confidence channels. It is not clear that we 
have a clear understanding of the spillovers through these channels. The spillovers 
predicted by the models that we use are small relative to the reality of the large and 
pervasive  spillovers  that  we  saw  during  the  global  financial  crisis  and  are  seeing 
through  the  ongoing  eurozone  crisis.  This  clearly  suggests  that  the  assumptions 
underlying these models are incomplete if not flawed. Greece, Cyprus, Spain have 
had much greater impact on EMEs than we thought possible. 
Among  large  emerging  economies,  India  was  by  far  the  least  integrated  into  the 
global economy. Even so, India too was affected by the crisis by much more than 
we thought. 
Impact of QE on EMs 
• 
First, we all understand and admit that the extraordinary accommodative monetary 
conditions in AEs is transmitting to EMs through capital flows, exchange rates and 
global commodity prices. 
The question  is:  Has  this  transmission  channel  become  stronger  now  than  before 
because of: (i) the greater openness of EMs; (ii) the extent of monetary easing in the 
AEs; (iii) the duration of QE; (iv) forward guidance that QE will stay for an extended 
period. The question is, do our models reflect this new reality or are we still working 
with the old assumptions and coefficients? If we have not changed our models, are 
we not likely to underestimate the impact of the spillover? 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Non-tradeable Sector 
• 
Second,  do  we  understand  transmission  of  spillovers  which  originate  in  the 
non-tradeable sector? After all, the global financial crisis had origins in the housing 
sector, a quintessentially non-tradeable sector. 
Third, do we understand the working of the global supply chains sufficiently? In an 
interconnected world, global supply chains can be conduits for negative spillovers as 
in the case of the Japanese tsunami. 
Does the IMF understand how global supply chains operate? 
Global Supply Chains 
• 
• 
Deleveraging by Eurozone Banks 
• 
Fourth,  financial  developments  in  the  euro  area  have  given  rise  to  concerns  that 
euro  area  banks  could  deleverage  by  reducing  their  lending  to  emerging  market 
economies. The recapitalization needs of various euro area banking systems may 
also have an impact on credit flows to EMEs. BIS data show that the cross-border 
bank  lending  to  emerging  markets  has  dropped  sharply  since  the  second  half  of 
2011 as the euro area crisis intensified. Spillovers from both unwinding of QE and 
amplification  of  euro  area  uncertainties,  if  they  occur  together,  would  take  on  the 
dimension of a perfect storm for almost all members of the IMF. 
All these illustrations suggest that there is need to refine our understanding of the 
interlinkages and spillovers. 
Capital Flows 
The change in our world view on capital account management is by far one of the 
most remarkable intellectual shifts brought on by the crisis. 
Consensus Dissolved 
• 
In the pre-crisis period, there was consensus on several issues surrounding capital 
account. Those consensus views have now dissolved. 
Opening up of Capital Account 
Pre-crisis:  Consensus  was  that  every  country  should  move  towards  a  fully  free 
capital account. The only questions were about timing and sequencing. 
Now we are not so sure. 
- 
Argument:  Capital  Controls  protected  EMEs  from  adopting  some  of  the 
financial products that proved toxic in AEs. 
But there is the old argument that if countries are integrated economically, 
can they remain separate financially? 
There are also questions on whether capital controls can ever be effective 
permanently as interested parties can circumvent them. 
  Pre-crisis:  Consensus  was  that  capital  controls  are  bad  always  and 
everywhere. 
Now we are not so sure. 
New consensus: Capital controls are not only appropriate, but also necessary. 
But what type of controls and under what circumstances? 
Are they a substitute for or a complement to macroprudential policies? 
Price based or quantity based? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 (ii) 
• 
(a) 
• 
 (b) 
 2 
 • 
(c) 
• 
  Asymmetric as between controlling inflows or outflows? 
Pre-crisis: Consensus that foreign exchange intervention is sub-optimal. 
Now  we  are  not  so  sure  with  some  AEs  defending  their  currencies  from  the  safe 
haven impact. 
New orthodoxy: There may be circumstances when foreign exchange intervention is 
warranted. 
When is intervention appropriate? 
Is  intervention  symmetric  between  fighting  currency  appreciation  and  fighting 
currency depreciation? 
I  believe  the  IMF  management  has  issued  a  guidance  note  to  its  staff  on  capital 
account  issues. Whether  IMF will  be  even  handed,  as  between  source  and  recipient 
countries,  on  capital  flows  will  be  an  important  issue  for  surveillance  on  the  way 
forward. 
Question 2: How well do you think the IMF is now handling linkages and spillovers in 
today’s interconnected world, above all the Eurozone, but also in relation to global 
imbalances? 
The IMF needs to put in greater effort at being even handed in both its policy advice 
and  in  working  towards  its  acceptance.  This  has  to  be  done  both  at  country  and 
global levels. 
Let me cite two examples to illustrate this. 
Near consensus that one of the root causes for the global financial crisis was the 
unsustainable  build  up  of  global  imbalances.  Concern  that  currency  wars,  by 
preventing market based adjustment of exchange rates, may be aiding build up of 
global imbalances. 
Moscow G-20: “We will refrain from competitive devaluation. We will not target our 
exchange rates for competitive purposes, will resist all forms of protectionism and 
keep our markets open”. 
Useful to summarize the arguments of both sides on the currency wars. 
Arguments of Emerging Markets (EMs) 
(i) 
This liquidity not absorbed in AEs. Spilling over into EMs. 
This is money looking for quick returns. Hence inherently volatile. 
Extraordinary surge in global liquidity because of quantitative easing by  advanced 
economies. 
- 
- 
In the face of capital flows, we do not have any benign solution. 
- 
- 
If we don’t intervene, appreciation of currencies unrelated to fundamentals. 
If we intervene to stem appreciation, but do not sterilize, resultant liquidity 
will  lead  to  inflation  and  asset  price  bubbles  which  can  disrupt  financial 
stability. 
Response 
• 
Currency wars 
• 
   (ii) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
 If  we  sterilize  the  liquidity,  interest  rates  go  up  attracting  more  flows.  A 
classic case of Dutch Disease. 
There is really no benign option. 
- 
Contrary  to  popular  stereotype  view,  real  effective  exchange  rates  of  EMEs  have 
indeed appreciated since the 2008 crisis. 
AEs must be more sensitive to the spillover impact of their policies. 
- 
The burden of adjustment must be shared. 
(iii) 
(iv) 
Arguments of Advanced Economies 
(i) 
QE  is  driven  by  entirely  domestic  macroeconomic  consideration  of  stimulating 
demand. 
- 
- 
Currency depreciation is not an objective of easy monetary policy. 
If  any  depreciation  of  AE  currencies  has  occurred,  it  is  an  incidental  by 
product of the policy. 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
• 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
There  is  no  evidence  that  trade  weighted  exchange  rates  of  EMEs,  with  some 
exceptions, have appreciated relative to their values before the crisis. 
EMs are attracting capital flows because of pull factors, not push factors. 
Spillover  of  QE  is  in  fact  positive  because  if  AE  growth  recovers,  it  will  provide  a 
boost to EM exports and more than offset the impact of currency appreciation. The 
net impact of QE is +ve for EMs. 
Where does IMF Stand on currency wars? 
Does the IMF have an unbiased understanding of “currency wars”? 
Is the IMF being even handed in its evaluation of countries’ forex intervention and 
capital control policies? 
Is  the  IMF’s  job  done  just  by  bringing  out  the  spillover  reports?  Should  it  not  go 
beyond  that  to  more  assertively  sensitize  AEs  to  the  spillover  impact  of  their 
policies?  Should  it  not  be  more  proactive  in  dissemination  of  its  findings  and  in 
urging action? 
IMF needs to be more consultative 
• 
There has been a lot said and written about how the IMF economists must be more 
open  minded,  less  ideological,  be  bold  enough to  question  orthodoxies and  brave 
enough to differ from established wisdom. 
One  important  condition  for  this  to  happen  is  that  IMF  economists  should  talk  to 
people beyond governments and policy institutions. 
In federal systems, they must talk to state governments. 
They  must  talk  to  non-state  actors  such  as  NGOs,  self  help  groups,  chambers  of 
commerce. 
  Cyprus bail out 
• 
In  particular,  they  must  understand  how  financial  market  participants  will  react  to 
their  views  and  their  policy  advice.  The  initial  Cyprus  bail  out  was  an  example. 
Media reported that the IMF was against the tax on “insured depositors” but yet IMF 
let that go forward with damaging consequences as we now know. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 IMF should talk more to financial market participants – not just large banks but other 
players – hedge funds, PE firms, AMCs etc. 
Question 3: How should the IMF tailor its advice to different economies across the 
world? Is it doing a good job of this? 
Response 
• 
I  would  like  to  emphasize  two  points  here.  First,  how  far  is  IMF  advice  based  on 
country-specific factors? Second, is the Fund’s surveillance even handed? 
Viewed  from  these  two  standpoints,  there  is  a  lot  of  scope  for  improvement. 
According to the IEO survey, authorities of many large emerging market economies 
found  that  the  surveillance  process  added  little  value  and  offered  very  limited 
perspectives and that their advice failed to take into account country-specific factors. 
Advice  by  the  Fund  should  stem  from  a  complete  understanding  of  not  only 
macroeconomic, but also social and political settings of a country. 
Advice should be founded on hard evidence and driven by facts. Ideology should not 
play any role in analysis of facts. The Fund also needs to exercise extreme caution 
when it gives advice based on models. This is because in many cases even small 
changes  in  model  specifications,  definitions  of  variables  used,  and  time  periods 
used in estimation can lead to significant differences in the results. At times, models 
are also not amenable to country-specific factors. 
The  impact  of  IMF  surveillance  works  primarily  through  debate  with  country 
authorities  and  public  dissemination  of  its  findings  that  is  expected  to  condition 
market  and  public  response  to  IMF  advice,  and  thereby  work  indirectly  on  policy 
making. More transparent and wider dissemination of balanced surveillance analysis 
may be an important means to enhance the effectiveness of surveillance. The IMF 
must be open to criticism and advice. 
Now let me come to the issue of even handedness, which, I believe, is necessary to 
enhance the IMF’s legitimacy in its role as a trusted advisor. Surveillance is often 
believed to have less impact on large member countries relative to smaller ones (in 
terms of size of GDP or population). It is necessary to evaluate how this issue has 
been addressed since the 2011 TSR so as to ensure even handedness. In a recent 
IEO report on “Role of IMF as a Trusted Advisor”, it has been brought out that there 
is  a  perception  among some  country  authorities  that the  IMF  is  dominated  by  the 
interests  of  its  largest  shareholders.  Surveys  have  shown  that  about  a  third  of 
country authorities and half of the mission chiefs did not believe that the IMF has 
become  more  even  handed  since  the  onset  of  the  global  crisis.  Lack  of  even 
handedness can undermine the IMF’s ability to perform both its global watchdog and 
trusted advisor roles. There is a need to strike an optimum balance between these 
two objectives which will give a boost to the IMF’s credibility. 
The  issue  of  even  handedness  is  inextricably  woven  into  the  IMF’s  governance 
structure. Modernizing surveillance must flow from and cannot precede reforms in 
governance.  As  governance  reforms  progressively  reflect  the  changing  global 
economic realities, so also will the IMF’s surveillance gain legitimacy, incisiveness 
and traction. It is only by this that the IMF’s surveillance will remain meaningful and 
responsive to the rapidly evolving needs of an integrated global economy.  
      BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
