Yoshihisa Morimoto: Economic activity and prices in Japan and 
monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Yoshihisa Morimoto, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at a 
meeting with business leaders, Iwate, 29 August 2013. 
 I. 
Recent financial and economic developments and price developments 
U.S. economy 
Overseas developments 
Overseas economies 
A. 
1. 
First, I will talk about key developments in overseas economies that are likely to affect the 
outlook for Japan’s economy. With the recovery in the U.S. economy starting to clearly gain 
hold,  overseas  economies  as  a  whole  are  gradually  heading  toward  a  pick-up,  although  a 
lackluster performance is partly seen. As for the outlook, overseas economies are likely to 
start  recovering,  albeit  at  a  moderate  pace.  However,  amid  sluggish  growth  in  emerging 
economies, the pace of recovery is expected to remain moderate on the whole. 
I will now consider each region in more detail. 
2. 
Despite downward pressure from the fiscal side, the U.S. economy has been on a moderate 
recovery  trend  against  the  backdrop  of  steady  private  demand.  As  for  the  employment 
situation, total nonfarm payroll employment has been increasing by almost 200,000 a month, 
and the unemployment rate has been on a downtrend. In the household sector, although the 
tax increase at the beginning of the year continues to have an effect, with the employment 
situation following an improving trend and asset prices rising, household spending, including 
private consumption and housing investment, has been firm. Taking a look at the corporate 
sector, business sentiment has been improving on the back of firm private demand, although 
the  pick-up  in  production  has  been  moderate  partly  reflecting  a  large  cut  in  government 
expenditures.  For  the  time  being,  close  attention  needs  to  be  paid  to  fiscal  issues  
–  particularly  the  federal  debt  ceiling  problem  –  and  developments  in  financial  markets  as 
well as their effects on, for instance, housing investment. If household spending continues its 
uptrend,  however,  this  could  lead  firms  to  gradually  become  more  proactive,  thus 
strengthening the recovery momentum of the economy as a whole. Furthermore, the benefits 
of the shale gas revolution could help boost economic activity, mainly by reducing the volume 
of  crude  oil  imports,  lowering  energy  prices,  and  increasing  business  fixed  investment  in 
related sectors. 
3. 
In  the  euro  area,  with  the  European  debt  problem  dragging  on,  an  adverse feedback  loop 
among  the  fiscal  situation,  the  financial  system,  and  economic  activity  has  taken  hold  
– particularly in peripheral countries – and economic activity has receded slowly. Looking at 
unemployment  rates,  these  range  from  as  low  as  6–7  percent  in  Germany  to  as  high  as 
26 percent in Spain, indicating widening regional disparities in business sentiment. Recently, 
however,  there  have  been  gradually  growing  signs  of  a  bottoming  out.  Business  and 
consumer sentiment in the area – including peripheral countries – is improving in a situation 
where  financial  markets  have  stabilized  somewhat  and  the  European  authorities  have 
modified their stringent fiscal consolidation plans, temporarily easing the measures. Exports 
are also bottoming out, and GDP growth for the April-June quarter turned positive for the first 
time in seven quarters. With these developments continuing, the euro area economy is likely 
to bottom out and head toward a pick-up. 
Euro area economy 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
China’s economy 
Uncertainties regarding overseas economies 
4. 
With regard to emerging economies, the Chinese economy continues to see stable growth 
against the background of firm domestic demand, as evidenced in particular by stable private 
consumption  reflecting  a  favorable  employment  and  income  situation  and  by  rising  fixed 
asset investment, which is growing at a year-on-year rate of about 20 percent. Nevertheless, 
China’s  economic  growth  rate  has  been  at  a  relatively  low  level  of  around  7.5 percent. 
Underlying this are the structural reforms that the Chinese authorities are engaged in, which 
emphasize  quality-based  growth  and  lowering  income  disparities.  Specifically,  one  area  of 
focus is measures to curb the excess production capacity and the rapid expansion in credit 
accompanying the 4 trillion renminbi stimulus package implemented in the wake of the global 
financial  crisis.  The  so-called  shadow  banking  system  is  another  focal  point.  The  Chinese 
authorities are proceeding with policy responses to contain the risk of an overly rapid credit 
expansion  through  banks  as  well  as  non-banks.  As  a  result,  total  social  financing  –  a 
measure of aggregate credit supply to the economy mainly consisting of loans and corporate 
bonds  –  has  been  increasing  at  a  slower  pace.  Although  these  structural  reforms  tend  to 
restrain growth, the authorities have also made clear that they will remain vigilant regarding 
economic  growth,  stating  that  they  will  fine-tune  policies  in  a  timely  manner  to  achieve  a 
growth  rate  of  about  7.5  percent  for  2013.  With  the  authorities  aiming  for  well-balanced, 
sustainable growth, the Chinese economy is likely to continue growing steadily at the current 
pace. 
5. 
Uncertainties in overseas economies that require careful monitoring include (1) the effects of 
speculation about the direction of U.S. monetary policy on financial markets and on emerging 
and commodity-exporting economies, (2) developments in the Chinese economy, and (3) the 
prospects for the European debt problem. 
In the United States, the Federal Reserve’s tapering of its asset purchases has become a 
matter of discussion. The background to this is the moderate but steady recovery in the U.S. 
economy,  and  this  recovery  itself  is  a  positive  development  for  the  world  economy. 
Furthermore,  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC)  has  repeatedly  conveyed  the 
message that it will begin to adjust the pace of its asset purchases only when there continues 
to be substantial improvement in the outlook for the labor market. Although this stance of the 
Federal  Reserve  is  gradually  being  understood  in  the  market,  market  participants  have  in 
some cases withdrawn funds from markets in emerging and commodity-exporting economies 
in anticipation of an eventual tapering of the Federal Reserve’s asset purchases, and the risk 
of similar responses in the future remains. The world economy’s momentum for recovery is 
still weak, and there is high uncertainty regarding the possible effects on financial markets 
and economic activity in the event of a rapid outflow of funds. 
As for the Chinese economy, a key point of focus is whether it will be able to maintain stable 
growth.  Specifically,  it  is  necessary  to  pay  close  attention  to  whether,  in  grappling  with 
various challenges such as overcapacity in the manufacturing sector and income disparities 
to achieve stable growth, the authorities can restrain credit expansion, such as in the shadow 
banking  system  at  a  pace  exceeding  economic  growth,  while  steadily  proceeding  with 
structural reforms and rebalancing the economy from investment to consumption. 
Uncertainty regarding the European debt problem remains, even though the extreme tail risk 
of a potential disintegration of the euro, which some had feared at one time, has receded. 
However, market tensions could rise yet again if efforts to strengthen economic and financial 
union of the euro area and to push through fiscal reforms are seen to be in retreat. Political 
developments in euro member countries warrant vigilance, starting with the outcome of the 
German federal election scheduled in September. Geopolitical risks, particularly in the Middle 
East, also require close attention. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Japan’s economy and prices 
Current state of and outlook for Japan’s economy 
B. 
1. 
I will now explain the current state of, and outlook for, Japan’s economy given the overseas 
economic  developments  I  have  just  outlined.  Japan’s  economy  was  relatively  weak  in  the 
second half of 2012 as exports and production decreased mainly reflecting the deceleration 
in overseas economies, which in turn adversely affected domestic demand such as business 
fixed investment in the manufacturing sector. Economic conditions, however, have become 
favorable  since  the  beginning  of  2013.  Recently,  domestic  demand,  in  particular  public 
investment  and  private  consumption,  has  been  firm,  exports  have  been  picking  up  in  a 
situation where overseas economies are gradually heading toward a pick-up, and industrial 
production  is  increasing  moderately.  Against  this  backdrop,  the  June  2013  Tankan  (Short-
Term  Economic  Survey  of  Enterprises  in  Japan)  showed  a  significant  improvement  in 
business  sentiment  not only  in  the  manufacturing  sector,  which  has greatly  benefited from 
the  correction  of  the  yen’s  appreciation,  but  also  across  a  wide  range  of  other  sectors 
including nonmanufacturing, as well as upward revisions in firms’ business forecasts such as 
with  regard to  profits  and fixed  investment. Taking  into  account  that the  level  of  economic 
activity  had  been  rising  moderately  and  a  virtuous  cycle  from  income  to  spending  had 
gradually started operating, the Bank of Japan, at the Monetary Policy Meeting held on July 
10  and  11,  2013,  raised  its  basic  assessment  of  the  domestic  economy,  from  the 
assessment that the economy “has been picking up” to the assessment that it “is starting to 
recover moderately.” 
As for the outlook, exports are expected to increase moderately, mainly reflecting the pick-up 
in  overseas  economies  and  the  correction  of  the  yen’s  appreciation.  As  for  domestic 
demand,  public  investment  and  housing  investment  are  expected  to  continue  trending 
upward,  business  fixed  investment  is  projected  to  increase  moderately  reflecting  the 
improvement in corporate profits and the employment situation, and private consumption is 
expected  to  remain  resilient.  In  this  situation,  industrial  production  is  also  expected  to 
increase  moderately,  judging  from  interviews  with  firms  and  other  relevant  information. 
Against the backdrop of these developments in demand both at home and abroad as well as 
in production, Japan’s economy is expected to recover moderately. 
Let me elaborate on these developments for a moment. Due in part to the correction of the 
yen’s appreciation and the rise in stock prices since the end of 2012, business and consumer 
sentiment has improved, and this improvement is likely to help underpin private consumption 
for  the  time  being  and  gradually  entice  firms  to  increase  their  spending.  Increased  private 
consumption is particularly evident among the middle-aged and the elderly, who hold more 
stocks than other age groups. Consumption activity of the baby-boom generation is expected 
to remain firm due to their higher propensity to consume than other generations and to firms’ 
efforts  to  capture  new  demand.  Meanwhile,  business  fixed  investment  is  projected  to 
increase  moderately,  mainly  due  to  the  resumption  of  postponed  investment  for  the 
maintenance  and  replacement  of  items  such  as  machinery  and  to  investment  related  to 
disaster prevention and energy. Upward pressure on the economy from the public demand 
side is expected to gather full momentum as seen in the fact that the value of public works 
contracted, a leading indicator of public investment, has already increased significantly. 
The key to ensuring that this trend toward economic recovery continues and to achieving the 
price stability target of 2 percent in terms of the year-on-year rate of change in the consumer 
price  index  (CPI)  is  that  improvements  in  business  performance  lead  to  increases  in 
employee  income.  Looking  at  the  recent  employment  and  income  situation,  supply  and 
demand conditions in the labor market have improved, as evident in the unemployment rate 
and the active job openings-to-applicants ratio, and the year-on-year rate of change in the 
number  of  employees  has  been  positive.  In  this  situation,  despite  the  downward  pressure 
resulting  from  the  uptrend  in  the  ratio  of  part-time  employees,  the  year-on-year  rate  of 
change  in  nominal  wages  per  employee  has  turned  slightly  positive,  with  special  cash 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Prices 
earnings for June – which include summer bonus payments – showing an increase for the 
first time in three years. While uncertainty regarding the outlook remains, the Bank would like 
to confirm whether these developments also lead to a rise in scheduled cash earnings. 
Keeping these points in mind, I would like to summarize the outlook for Japan’s economy for 
the next three fiscal years. While the economy will be affected by the front-loaded increase 
and  subsequent  decline  in  demand  prior  to  and  after  the  two  scheduled  consumption  tax 
hikes, it is likely to continue growing at a pace above its potential, as a trend, as a virtuous 
cycle  among  production,  income,  and  spending  is  maintained.  In  the  Bank’s  interim 
assessment in July of the April 2013 Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (hereafter the 
Outlook Report), the median of the Policy Board members’ forecasts for the economic growth 
rate is a somewhat high 2.8 percent for fiscal 2013 due to the effects of various economic 
measures and the front-loaded increase in demand, 1.3 percent for fiscal 2014 partly due to 
the subsequent decline in demand, and 1.5 percent for fiscal 2015. 
2. 
Next, I will talk about price developments. The year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all 
items  less  fresh  food)  had  been  in  negative  territory  through  April  2013,  but  has  recently 
turned  positive  for  the  first  time  in  14  months,  partly  reflecting  the  correction  of  the  yen’s 
appreciation. Energy prices including those for petroleum products and electricity have been 
rising,  and  increases  in  the  costs  of  raw  materials  have  started  to  be  passed  on  to  sales 
prices of, for example, foodstuffs. Sales prices of some imported consumer goods such as 
personal computers and handbags have also been raised. Recently, there have been more 
signs  of  a  change  in  firms’  price-setting  behavior,  including  the  introduction  of  higher-end 
products  and  services  in  some  areas  within  the  food  service  industry.  Under  these 
circumstances,  firms’  forecasts  for  supply  and  demand  conditions  and  prices  in  the  June 
2013 Tankan have clearly improved. As for the outlook, the year-on-year rate of increase in 
the CPI is likely to rise, reflecting factors such as the improvement in the aggregate supply 
and demand balance due to the recovery of Japan’s economy as well as the rise in medium- 
to  long-term  inflation  expectations  in  response  to  fundamental  changes  in  the  public’s 
expectations. The rate of increase in the CPI is likely to reach around 2 percent – the price 
stability  target  –  toward  the  latter  half  of  the  projection  period,  spanning  from  fiscal  2014 
through fiscal 2015, as the overall economy improves in a balanced and sustainable manner. 
Specifically, in the Bank’s interim assessment in July of the April 2013 Outlook Report, the 
median of the Policy Board members’ forecasts for the year-on-year rate of increase in the 
CPI (all items less fresh food; for fiscal 2014 and fiscal 2015, excluding the direct effects of 
the  consumption  tax  hikes)  is  0.6  percent  for  fiscal  2013,  1.3  percent  for  fiscal  2014,  and 
1.9 percent for fiscal 2015. 
II. 
Conduct of monetary policy 
Introduction of “Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing” (QQE) 
Framework of QQE 
A. 
1. 
Next, I would like to turn to the Bank’s conduct of monetary policy. 
In  order  for  Japan’s  economy  to  overcome  deflation  as  early  as  possible  and  achieve 
sustainable growth with price stability, the Bank introduced in January 2013 the price stability 
target  of  2  percent  in  terms  of  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI.  It  concurrently 
released  a  joint  statement  with  the  government,  in  which  the  government  and  the  Bank 
clearly acknowledged the role each had to play and stated that they would work together to 
overcome  deflation  and  achieve  sustainable  economic  growth.  Then,  in  April,  the  Bank 
introduced QQE to achieve the price stability target at the earliest possible time, with a time 
horizon of about two years. This policy measure represents a considerable departure from 
the Bank’s previous practice both in terms of quantity (the size of increase in the amount of 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
currency  provided  by  the  Bank)  and  quality  (the  type  of  assets  the  Bank  purchases  to 
increase the amount of currency). 
Specifically, the Bank decided upon the following. First, with a view to pursuing quantitative 
monetary easing, the Bank changed the main operating target for money market operations 
from  the  uncollateralized  overnight  call  rate  to  the  monetary  base,  which  is  the  sum  of 
banknotes in circulation, coins in circulation, and current account deposits held by financial 
institutions at the Bank. On this basis, the Bank will increase the monetary base at an annual 
pace  of  about  60–70  trillion  yen,  thus  doubling  it  in  two  years.  Second,  the  Bank  will 
purchase Japanese government bonds (JGBs) so that their amount outstanding will increase 
at an annual pace of about 50 trillion yen. As a result, the amount outstanding of JGBs held 
by  the  Bank  is  likely  to  more  than  double  in  two  years.  Moreover,  the  Bank  extended  the 
average remaining maturity of its JGB purchases from slightly less than three years to about 
seven years. It should be noted that in practice the average remaining maturity is subject to 
fluctuations, depending on bids by financial institutions; thus, it is appropriate to allow for a 
range of about six to eight years. And third, the Bank will purchase exchange-traded funds 
(ETFs) and Japan real estate investment trusts (J-REITs) so that their amounts outstanding 
will increase at an annual pace of about 1 trillion yen and about 30 billion yen, respectively. 
The  Bank  will  continue  with  QQE  –  consisting of  these measures  –  aiming to  achieve  the 
price stability target of 2 percent, as long as it is necessary for maintaining that target in a 
stable  manner.  It  will  examine  both  upside  and  downside  risks  to  economic  activity  and 
prices, and make adjustments as appropriate. In order to achieve the price stability target, it 
is important to create a virtuous cycle in which prices rise moderately along with a balanced 
and  sustainable  improvement  in  economic  activity  that  is  accompanied  by  increases  in 
corporate profits, employment, and wages. 
Furthermore, in order to fully ensure the effectiveness of monetary easing, it is important for 
the government to ensure market credibility of fiscal consolidation. Japan is facing serious 
fiscal imbalances, and if the credibility of its fiscal management were to decline, long-term 
interest  rates  would  likely  rise  in  a  manner  inconsistent  with  economic  and  price 
developments. The government  indicated  in  the  joint  statement  released  in  January  that  it 
would  steadily  promote  measures  aimed  at  establishing  a  sustainable  fiscal  structure. 
Moreover, in the Medium-Term Fiscal Plan, approved on August 8, 2013, it stated its targets 
of halving the primary deficit-to-GDP ratio by fiscal 2015 and of achieving a surplus in the 
primary balance by fiscal 2020. Based on these targets, it is expected that the government 
will continue making efforts toward fiscal consolidation. 
2. 
The transmission channels of QQE are as follows. First, the purchases of financial assets will 
encourage  declines  in  long-term  interest rates and  risk  premiums  on  assets. This  helps to 
increase firms’ and households’ investment and consumption by lowering their funding costs 
and through wealth effects. Second, both financial institutions and institutional investors are 
expected to change their investment behavior and rebalance their portfolios to loans and/or 
risk assets, such as stocks, in the pursuit of higher returns. This is referred to as the portfolio 
rebalancing effect. This effect may strengthen the growth potential of Japan’s economy if risk 
money is increasingly allocated to a wider range of emerging firms, for example. And third, 
the clear commitment to achieving the price stability target at the earliest possible time and 
the  continuation  of  massive  purchases  of  assets  are  expected  to  drastically  change  the 
expectations  of markets  and  economic  entities. With  these  channels  acting  together, QQE 
will  contribute  to  pushing  up  prices  by  raising  inflation  expectations  and,  by  stimulating 
private demand, improving the aggregate supply and demand balance. 
3. 
Financial market developments since the introduction of QQE 
Looking at developments in economic activity and financial markets since the introduction of 
QQE, the monetary base has been increasing at an annual pace of about 60–70 trillion yen  
– in line with the Bank’s guideline for money market operations – owing to progress in the 
Transmission channels of QQE 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Bank’s  large-scale  JGB  purchases  as  it  proceeds  with  QQE.  Despite  some  instability 
observed in the JGB market at the onset, the intended effects of QQE seem to have begun 
to materialize on the whole, with favorable developments spreading to economic activity and 
financial markets. 
Meanwhile, financial conditions remain accommodative. In terms of firms’ funding costs, the 
average  contracted  interest  rates  on  new  loans  and  discounts  have  been  low,  reaching  a 
historical  low,  and  the  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the  amount  outstanding  of  bank 
lending has increased somewhat to a range of around 2 percent. Issuing conditions for CP 
and  corporate  bonds  have  continued  to  be  favorable  on  the  whole,  and  there  have  been 
several  major  corporate  bond  issues.  The  year-on-year  rate  of  growth  in  the  money  stock 
(M2) has increased to its highest level since 1999, reaching almost 4 percent. 
Looking  at  financial  markets,  money  market  rates  for  all  maturities  have  been  stable, 
hovering at a level slightly below 0.1 percent. Long-term interest rates exhibited increased 
volatility  and  temporarily  reached  1  percent,  but  have  regained  stability  as  the  Bank 
conducted  JGB  purchases  in  a  flexible  manner  while  maintaining  a  close  dialogue  with 
market participants. Japan’s long-term interest rates have generally been flat in spite of a rise 
in  overseas  long-term  interest  rates  reflecting  speculation  about  the  direction  of  U.S. 
monetary policy, and have recently been contained at a level of 0.7–0.8 percent, below the 
historical average. Meanwhile, it can be said that inflation expectations have been on a rising 
trend on the whole, as evidenced (1) by the rise in the diffusion index for output prices in the 
June 2013 Tankan as well as the rise in the inflation expectations of firms, households, and 
economists, and (2) by the upturn in market-related indicators following a halt in their decline. 
Under these circumstances, real interest rates – calculated as nominal interest rates minus 
the expected inflation rate – have been on a declining trend. If inflation expectations were to 
rise, this would exert upward pressure on long-term interest rates. The key to strengthening 
monetary  easing  effects  therefore  lies  in  maintaining  real  interest  rates  at  a  relatively  low 
level, by exerting downward pressure on nominal interest rates through a compression of risk 
premiums  (including  term  premiums).  As  for  the  outlook,  downward  pressure  on  interest 
rates is likely to become increasingly pronounced as the Bank proceeds with its large-scale 
JGB  purchases.  In  this  situation,  portfolio  rebalancing  –  in  which  investors  and  financial 
institutions that used to invest their funds in JGBs shift their investment to lending and other 
assets – is likely to spread steadily. 
Reflecting the wealth effects brought about by the rise in stock prices since the beginning of 
the  year  and  the  improvement  in  corporate  profits  due  to  the  correction  of  the  yen’s 
appreciation,  business  and  household  sentiment  has  recently  improved and fundraising  by 
the  private  sector  has  increased  moderately.  Looking  ahead,  with  the  effects  of  QQE  on 
economic  activity  becoming  increasingly  pronounced,  a  virtuous  cycle  –  in  which  positive 
developments  in  economic  activity  and  changes  in  expectations  bring  about  further 
improvement  in  economic  activity  and  further  increases  in  inflation  expectations  –  would 
enable the Bank to achieve the 2 percent price stability target. 
Loan support program 
B. 
In  order  to  maintain  this  virtuous  cycle,  it  is  important  that  firms  and  households  actually 
make use of the accommodative financial conditions for funding and increase investment and 
spending,  which  in  turn  will  lead  to  an  improvement  in  the  aggregate  supply  and  demand 
balance.  However,  although  some  positive  developments  can  now  be  observed  in  the 
demand for credit, many firms still do not borrow to finance their business fixed investment 
and  instead  invest  only  as  much  as  their  cash  flow  will  allow.  To  promote  full  use  of  the 
accommodative  financial  conditions  by  firms  and  households,  the  Bank  –  in  addition  to 
implementing  aggressive  monetary  easing  measures  –  has  established  the  Loan  Support 
Program. The program consists of two measures: the fund-provisioning measure to stimulate 
bank  lending  (hereafter  the  Stimulating  Bank  Lending  Facility)  and  the  fund-provisioning 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The stimulating bank lending facility 
measure  to  support  strengthening  the  foundations  for  economic  growth  (hereafter  the 
Growth-Supporting Funding Facility). 
1. 
The  Stimulating  Bank  Lending  Facility  was  introduced  with  the  aim  of  prompting  financial 
institutions  to  take  a  more  active  lending  stance  and  stimulating  greater  proactive  credit 
demand  of  firms  and  households.  With  this  facility,  the  Bank  provides  long-term  yen-
denominated  funds  at  a  low  interest  rate  to  financial  institutions  that  have  increased  their 
lending, at their request, up to an amount equivalent to the net increase in their lending for a 
period of five quarters – the January-March 2013 quarter until the end of the January-March 
2014 quarter – from the base period of the October-December 2012 quarter. There shall be 
no  upper  limit  to  the  total  amount  of  funds  provided  by  the  Bank  under  this  facility.  The 
lending,  based  on  which  the  net  increase  is  calculated,  can  be  either  yen-denominated  or 
foreign currency-denominated. Japanese firms’ international operations as well as financial 
institutions’ activities to provide funds for such operations play an important role in capturing 
global demand, so that the Bank’s measure to support lending to firms located overseas or 
lending  by  domestic  financial  institutions’  overseas  offices  –  including  foreign  currency-
denominated lending – contributes to strengthening Japan’s growth potential. In the first loan 
disbursement under this facility in June 2013, loans amounted to as much as 3.1 trillion yen, 
underlining the strong demand for such funds. 
2. 
The growth-supporting funding facility 
The Growth-Supporting Funding Facility was introduced with the aim of supporting the flow of 
funds to areas with growth potential. The Bank introduced this facility because, in order to 
overcome deflation and achieve sustainable economic growth with price stability, the Bank 
deemed it important to (1) reverse the downward trend in Japan’s growth rate in the face of 
the unparalleled decline in the birthrate and aging of the population, (2) increase medium- to 
long-term  growth  expectations  for  Japan’s  economy,  and  (3)  put  Japan’s  economy  on  a 
higher  medium-  to  long-term  growth  path.  With  this  facility,  the  Bank  provides  long-term 
funds – both yen-denominated and foreign currency-denominated – at a low interest rate to 
financial institutions for their lending and investment to areas that are expected to contribute 
to  strengthening  Japan’s  growth  potential,  such  as  medical  and  nursing  care;  environment 
and  energy;  agriculture,  forestry,  and  fisheries;  and  tourism.  The  total  amount  of  lending 
under  these  arrangements  was  set  to  about  5.5  trillion  yen,  and  the  current  amount 
outstanding is nearly 4 trillion yen. The amount of lending and investment actually provided 
by  private  financial  institutions  using  this  facility  greatly  exceeds  the  amount  of  loans 
disbursed  by  the  Bank,  demonstrating  its  usefulness  as  a  catalyst.  These  measures  are 
expected  to  continue  promoting  lending  activity  by  financial  institutions  and  to  lead  to  an 
increase in firms’ proactive demand for credit, such as that for business fixed investment. 
In order to sustain this cycle for strengthening the economy’s growth potential, it is necessary 
to help private economic entities to realize their potential to the fullest. In addition to support 
from  the  financial  side,  it  is  therefore  important  to  build  an  economic  environment  where 
innovations in a broad sense – including the development of new business models – can be 
achieved  more  easily.  Recently,  firms  have  been  making  active  efforts  in  a  wide  range  of 
areas  to  capitalize  on  social  changes,  including  business  focusing  on  the  elderly,  the 
environment and energy, and information and telecommunications. Such developments need 
to be supported on the policy side as well. Moreover, securing the labor force by increasing 
flexibility in the labor market is another significant issue. The labor force participation rate of 
women currently forms an M-shaped curve, declining to about 70 percent for women aged 
25 to 45. If this rate were to rise gradually as a result of greater support for working mothers 
to both pursue a career and raise children, the decrease in the labor force overall would be 
moderated.  Moreover,  if  an  increasing  number  of  those  aged  60  and  above  were  to 
participate in the labor force, it would be possible to maintain the labor force at the current 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
level for the time being, even in the face of the decline in the birthrate and the aging of the 
population. 
In the joint statement with the Bank released in January 2013, the government made clear its 
intention  to  formulate  measures  for  strengthening  competitiveness  and  growth  potential  of 
Japan’s  economy  and  promote  them  strongly,  in  order  to  revitalize  the  economy.  In  the 
government’s Japan Revitalization Strategy formulated in June, three action plans – (1) the 
Plan for the Revitalization of Japanese Industry, (2) the Strategic Market Creation Plan, and 
(3) the Strategy of Global Outreach – have been laid out as concrete measures to be given 
top priority among other steps forming the growth strategy. If these measures are steadfastly 
implemented and firms’ growth expectations rise further as a result, and given declining real 
interest  rates,  this  would  further  enhance  the  stimulative  effects  of  monetary  easing.  The 
Bank, on its part, will also continue to make its utmost contributions. 
Efforts on the financial side in response to the Great East Japan Earthquake 
C. 
I would now like to talk about the Bank’s efforts on the financial side following the Great East 
Japan  Earthquake.  Since  immediately  after  the  earthquake,  financial  institutions  in  the 
disaster  areas  have  made  strenuous  efforts  to  maintain  the  functioning  of  financial  and 
settlement  systems  by  restoring  their  offices  and  establishing  temporary  ones.  They  have 
also responded to the needs of people and firms in the disaster areas in various respects, 
such  as  permitting  the  withdrawal  of  deposits  in  cases  where  depositors  had  lost  their 
passbook,  allowing  for  the  exchange  of  damaged  banknotes  and  coins,  and  providing 
support for the funding of disaster-stricken firms. More recently, these institutions have been 
providing strong support for the restoration of local economies, mainly in business matching 
and support for corporate turnarounds. 
From immediately after the earthquake, the Bank swiftly took a range of measures, such as 
the provision of ample liquidity and the further enhancement of monetary easing, focusing on 
three  major  aspects:  maintaining  the  functioning  of  financial  and  settlement  systems, 
ensuring the stability of financial markets, and supporting the economy. In this situation, in 
April 2011 the Bank decided to introduce a funds-supplying operation that provides financial 
institutions in the disaster areas with longer-term funds at low interest rates in order to lend 
support to their initial efforts to meet demand for funds for restoration and rebuilding. It also 
decided to broaden the range of eligible collateral for money market operations. As for the 
former operation, the deadline for new applications for loans was initially set at end-October 
2011, six months after the introduction, but was successively extended thereafter up to the 
current deadline of end-April 2014. 
Looking  at  the  usage  of  loans  under  this  funds-supplying  operation  to  support  financial 
institutions in the disaster areas, the amount outstanding of loans a year after the earthquake 
reached about 500 billion yen vis-à-vis the 1 trillion yen ceiling, and most recently has been 
about 400 billion yen. The reason that financial institutions in the disaster areas have made 
little use of loans under this operation relative to the ceiling is that their funding conditions 
have  generally  been  favorable  as  they  have  been  receiving  funds  for  reconstruction  from 
various  sources.  Nevertheless,  the  operation  can  be  regarded  as  effective  in  that  it  has 
provided a safety valve for any unanticipated demand for funds, providing leeway for these 
institutions  in  their  efforts  to  meet  demand  for  funds  for  restoration  and  rebuilding.  As  the 
disaster areas are expected to see an increase in the demand for funds as reconstruction 
progresses, the Bank will continue to provide firm support to financial institutions engaged in 
reconstruction efforts so as to allow for active lending. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
