Prasarn Trairatvorakul: Financing tomorrow – the Greater Mekong 
Subregion 
Keynote  address  by  Dr  Prasarn  Trairatvorakul,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the 
Euromoney Greater Mekong Subregion Investment Forum, Bangkok, 13 June 2013. 
 Excellencies, Honorable Speakers, 
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
1.  
It is a great pleasure to be here at the Euromoney Greater Mekong Subregion (GMS) 
Investment Forum once again and an honour to give some remarks on the topic of ‘Financing 
Tomorrow: The GMS’. A year ago, I had the opportunity to talk about this topic once. At that 
time,  I  shared  my  thoughts  on  the  roles  of  Thai  financial  intermediaries  as  a  ‘connector’ 
bridging between global financial players and small local institutions. 
2.   This  year,  we  are  gathered  during  a  time  when  the  GMS  is  undergoing  tremendous 
economic reforms. Member countries are transitioning towards higher degrees of openness 
and are integrating with the global economic mainstreams. The GMS economies have grown 
at  some  of  the  fastest  rates  in  the  world  since  the  early  1990s,  averaging  close  to  8%, 
despite the gloom of the recent global financial crisis. This transformation has contributed to 
economic convergence and narrowed the development divide within the region. The gap of 
income differences between the GMS and the rest of Asian countries in their neighbourhood 
has been reduced continuously. 
3.   With the promising economic potentials ahead of us, I would like to reemphasize our 
shared  vision  of  “What  we  shall  expect  to  see  for  the  future  of  the  Greater  Mekong 
Subregion” and “How we can achieve such prosperity.” 
I  picture  the  Greater  Mekong  Subregion  (GMS)  in  the  next  twenty  years  as  a 
4.  
much more connected and integrated region: a region where we are not only connected 
solely by a river, but by various modes of transportation, where one can travel conveniently, 
where trade and investment can flow across efficiently, and where prosperity can be widely 
enjoyed even by those in the rural areas. Although we are not yet there, I strongly believe 
that this vision can come true. 
5.   We  always  hear  the  saying  “Rome  was  not  built  in  a  day”.  Thus,  we  have  to  start 
working  together  towards  our  shared  vision  starting  today.  There  is  a  great  deal  of 
preparatory  work  to  be  done;  but  in  my  view,  some  of  the  most  crucial  tasks  are 
infrastructure  development  and  businesses  access  to  funds.  The  first  task  is  channelling 
intraregional  funds  to  infrastructure  projects,  followed  by  the  second  task  of  promoting 
economic  growth  and  equality  within  the  region  through  enhancing  financial  markets  and 
supporting private financing. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
6.   Let  me  highlight  key  issues  on  the  first  preparatory  work,  which  is  financing 
infrastructure development. The ADB has already committed at least 9 billion US dollars1 
to  fund  its  GMS  development  projects  in  the  pipeline.  Besides,  it  has  also  estimated  that 
roughly 8 trillion US dollars2 will be required to meet the infrastructure needs of Asia over the 
next  decade.  Although  this  amount  is  daunting,  I  believe  that  it  can  be  fulfilled,  given  the 
current global capital surge and the fact that Asian savers put away around 7 trillion of US 
                                                
1   2012, ADB website (http://www.adb.org/countries/gms/news-releases) 
2   http://www.adbi.org/files/2009.08.31.book.infrastructure.seamless.asia.pdf pp.181 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
dollars3  each  year.  Like  directing  the  flow  of  flood  to  the  right  river  so  that  it  can  become 
benefit  for  those  living  in  the  area,  this  overflowing  capital  can  be  harnessed  to  benefit 
needed long-term projects. 
7.   To meet the region’s financing requirements, we should look into new means to attract 
funding. 
Firstly,  by  promoting  private  sector  participation  in  infrastructure  development 
through public-private partnership (PPP). The PPP model can improve the efficiency of 
long-term  projects  by  adopting  the  private  sector’s  expertise  and  reducing  the  burden  on 
government budget. Although the PPP model has long been discussed, the implementation 
of  this  model  is  still  a  trial-and-error  practice.  Regardless,  I  believe  that  through  clear 
governance  and  suitable  regulatory  framework,  PPPs  could  promote  private  sector’s 
participation and bring in the untapped resources. 
Secondly,  by  customizing  innovative  financial  instruments.  This  calls  for  inter-agency 
collaborative efforts to introduce innovative financial instruments which link specific funding 
requirements  and  market  preferences.  To  name  a  few,  Thailand  has  recently  launched  its 
first infrastructure fund to finance its sky train extension. On an international scale, financial 
cooperation initiatives, such as the ASEAN Infrastructure Fund (AIF) would also complement 
domestic endeavors in channelling intraregional savings to needed projects. 
8.   This  leads  me  to  the  second  of  the  preparatory  work,  which  is  improving 
supportive  framework  for  private  financing.  The  Mekong  river  is  made  up  of  small 
tributaries flowing towards the same end to form a large fertile river. The benefits we receive 
from the confluence of these small tributaries as opposed to one waterway are incomparable. 
Likewise, strengthening domestic capital markets would help allocating available savings to 
the  most  productive  use,  thus,  facilitating  real  sector’s  economic  activities  and  supporting 
economic growth. 
9.   A  deep  and  liquid  financial  market  could  reduce  business  over-reliance  on  bank 
financing  channel.  On  the  other  hand,  it  could  also  serve  as  a  less-expensive  alternative 
source of funds for local entities. 
The initial stepping stone towards a well-developed financial market is to improve the 
cross-country  interconnectedness  of  local  financial  markets.  Financial  connectivity 
could be enhanced by linking capital and bond markets, creating regional exchange trading 
system, as well as developing a network of payment and settlement system. 
Another important step is to streamline rules and regulations to facilitate cross-border 
movement of capital. Such a process can be achieved through promoting flows of capital 
among member countries via reducing regulatory obstacles to stimulate foreign participation 
and  outward  investment.  Currently,  Thailand  allows  non-residents  of  ASEAN  to  issue  both 
foreign currency-denominated and local currency bonds. The derivative market also serves 
investors to hedge against financial risks. In addition, regional financial cooperation such as 
the Credit Guarantee and Investment Facility (CGIF) and the Asian Bond Markets Initiative 
(ABMI) could also help support the development of local bond markets. 
10.   To  sum  up  my  remarks,  the  process  of  strengthening  financial  markets  and 
enhancing  their  capacity  to  absorb  large  long-term  development  projects  is  a  long-
drawn  process  in  which  the  commitment  of  public  sector  alone  cannot  guarantee 
success.  Of  course,  the  public  sector  must  fulfill  its  integral  role  in  creating  a  supportive 
regulatory  framework  and  in  distributing  public  goods  so  that  economic  benefits  can  be 
enjoyed and shared by social participants through the whole range of the income spectrum. 
                                                
3   Gross  national  savings in  2012  of 32  Asian  countries is approximately  7.14  USD  trillion  (Countries used  in 
calculation  include  China,  Japan,  South  Korea,  Singapore,  Thailand,  Indonesia,  Malaysia  and  others)  from 
IMF Source; WEO 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
However, private entities must collaborate with the public sector and step in to bridge 
current financing gaps and take part in the structural reform process. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
In light of our historical background, we, as part of the GMS community, have shared 
11.  
long-lasting  prosperity  throughout  the  Mekong  River  areas.  Looking  ahead,  it  will  be  our 
future that needs more commitments and a more united aspiration from each of us to move 
forward together as a cohesive region. The opportunities ahead are apparent, if we can 
transform  each  member  countries’  strengths  into  regional  competitiveness,  these 
opportunities can be multiplied. By taking this conference today as a platform to share our 
common vision, I believe this is the initial important step that shall lead our region towards its 
sustainable and inclusive potentials. 
Thank you. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
