Jens Weidmann: Who calls the shots? The problem of fiscal dominance 
Speech by Dr Jens Weidmann, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the 4th Bank of 
France-Deutsche  Bundesbank  Macroeconomics  and  Finance  Conference,  Paris,  24  May 
2013. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
I would like to thank you for the opportunity to speak here today. Indeed, in springtime there 
is no better place to be than Paris. As Henry Miller put it: “God knows, when spring comes to 
Paris the humblest mortal alive must feel that he dwells in Paradise”. 
However, other parts of Europe are currently a long way from Paradise. Numerous countries 
are  experiencing  a  severe  crisis,  and  many  people  are  going  through  a  time  of  great 
hardship. Thus, our most important challenge is to overcome the crisis, restore growth and 
lead Europe back to prosperity – without endangering price stability. 
To achieve this objective many difficult and far-reaching decisions have to be taken. Against 
this backdrop, conferences such as this one are essential. After all, scientific research is a 
central pillar of good decision-making. Thus, I would like to thank the Banque de France for 
hosting this event. 
This session of the conference is titled: “Fiscal Policy in a Monetary Union”. What is a central 
banker’s role in such a discussion? Well, Mervyn King once said: “Central banks are often 
accused of being obsessed with inflation. This is untrue. If they are obsessed with anything, it 
is  with  fiscal  policy.”  As  so  often,  Mervyn  King  was  right,  we  central  bankers  are  indeed 
obsessed with fiscal policy – and German ones quite probably somewhat more so than those 
of a different nationality. 
This  obsession  is  driven  by  two  interrelated  observations:  First,  high  levels  of  public  debt 
harbour  the  risk  of  higher  inflation.  Second,  sooner  or  later  high  levels  of  public  debt  are 
bound to hurt economic growth. 
Given the high levels of public debt in many European countries, one would expect a broad 
consensus in favour of consolidation – and not just among fixated central bankers. 
However, the reality is a bit more complex than I just implied. There are different views on 
the dangers and merits of public debt. In fact, we are currently observing a change of mood 
that has been dubbed the “austerity backlash”. Some politicians claim that their countries are 
dying  from  mere  austerity  on  its  own;  others  convey  the  impression  that  the  policy  of 
consolidation has reached its limits. Consequently, they call for it to be postponed. 
These “backlashers” argue that in the current economic situation inflationary pressure is only 
of limited concern. Along the same lines they argue that consolidation rather than debt hurts 
growth the most – at least in the short run. 
In my speech I would like to discuss these two issues: first, the relationship between public 
debt and inflation and second, the question of consolidation and growth. 
Sound public finances as a prerequisite for monetary policy 
2. 
Public debt and inflation are related on account of monetary policy’s power to accommodate 
high levels of public debt. Thus, the higher public debt becomes, the greater the pressure 
that  can  be  put  upon  monetary  policy  to  respond  accordingly.  Suddenly  it  might  be  fiscal 
policy that calls the shots – monetary policy no longer follows the objective of price stability 
but rather the concerns of fiscal policy. A state of fiscal dominance has been reached. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Technically, fiscal dominance refers to a regime where monetary policy ensures the solvency 
of  the  government.  The  traditional  roles  are  reversed:  monetary  policy  stabilises  real 
government debt while inflation is determined by the needs of fiscal policy. 
In  the  conventional  view,  fiscal  dominance  entails  the  famous  “unpleasant  monetarist 
arithmetic”. In the words of Sargent and Wallace: “…the monetary authority … must try to 
finance  with  seigniorage  any  discrepancy  between  the  revenue  demanded  by  the  fiscal 
authority and the amounts of bonds that can be sold to the public.”[1] In their setup, fiscal 
policy runs a chronic primary deficit which leads to a corresponding increase in the money 
supply. As a simple money demand holds in the model, the price level adjusts to establish 
equilibrium  in  the  money  market.  Put  more  bluntly:  the  central  bank  finances  government 
deficits through the printing press. 
Recently,  however,  another  concept  of  fiscal  dominance  has  gained  much  attention  in  the 
academic literature: the fiscal theory of the price level. According to this theory, fiscal policy 
can affect inflation even if it does not monetise public debt along the lines of Sargent and 
Wallace. In the words of Woodford: “Fiscal dominance manifests itself through pressure on 
the central bank to use monetary policy to maintain the market value of government debt.”[2] 
The main pillar of the fiscal theory rests on the fact that bonds are claims to nominal payoffs. 
Now,  if  governments  are  unable  to  raise  sufficient  real  resources,  a  new  direct  link  arises 
between current and expected deficits and inflation. 
Intuitively, the logic of the fiscal theory can be described as follows: Let us assume additional 
expenditure, for instance higher transfers, which are not financed by additional taxes but by 
issuing additional bonds. Consequently the value of real debt is now higher than the present 
value of future tax payments. Households feel richer and thus consume more, causing output 
and inflation to increase. Monetary policy has to stabilise real debt to avoid an inflation spiral, 
with the result that it responds at a rate of less than 1 to 1 to inflation, thereby violating the 
Taylor principle. Thus, higher inflation reduces debt in real terms and lower real interest rates 
reduce the real debt service burden of existing government debt. 
In each of the two cases, a regime of fiscal dominance is characterised by higher inflation 
and  probably  also  more  volatile  inflation.  Monetary  policy  is  no  longer  able  to  control  the 
inflation rate, and therefore welfare losses will occur.[3] 
However, the story does not end here. Remaining within the world of theory, we can continue 
as  follows:  because  economic  agents  are  forward-looking,  it  is  quite  possible  that  the 
consequences  I  have  just  described  could  manifest  themselves  before  the  economy  has 
entered the regime of fiscal dominance. Looking ahead, public debt cannot be accumulated 
forever.  Sooner  or  later,  governments  that  run  large  deficits  for  a  long  period  of  time  risk 
hitting a fiscal limit – a point at which government revenues can no longer be increased to 
stabilise government debt. 
This inability to raise revenues might have economic reasons, such as a crossing of the peak 
of the Laffer curve. But there might also be political reasons that make it infeasible to raise 
taxes.[4] 
Certainly, the actual fiscal limit is highly uncertain in many ways: it is a probability distribution 
rather than a point and depends on expectations, shocks and policy measures taken.[5] And 
forward-looking agents know: once the government hits the fiscal limit, either an adjustment 
of  fiscal  spending  or  an  adjustment  of  monetary  policy  needs  to  occur.  Otherwise  debt 
cannot be stabilised. And as a consequence, monetary policy might come under pressure to 
step in and stabilise government debt. 
Thus, even if fiscal policy has not yet reached its limit, the economic mechanisms attached to 
the  fiscal  theory  of  the  price  level  might  already  swing  into  action.  To  be  specific:  let  us 
assume that agents expect, with some probability, that monetary policy will bear the burden 
of  adjustment  and  stabilise  real  government  debt  through  higher  inflation.  Once  inflation 
expectations start rising, the same might happen with inflation as well. Thus, even if the fiscal 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
limit has not been reached, it may still affect inflation. In other words, how policy makers are 
expected to cope with the fiscal limit, including their efforts to consolidate, not only affects 
expectations concerning future policy regimes but can also affect today’s welfare.[6] 
Against  the  backdrop  of  this  theoretical  analysis,  one  thing  should  be  made  clear  from  a 
monetary policy perspective: policymakers should not assume that they are on safe ground 
just because inflation expectations are firmly anchored. Only if agents expect deviations from 
a  “virtuous  regime”  of  monetary  dominance  to  be  short-lived  –  say,  because  policymakers 
still  enjoy  high  credibility  –  will  inflation  expectations  remain  well  anchored.  However,  if 
agents learn that the deviation is going to last for longer than initially expected, their inflation 
expectations will change. And this might happen very suddenly.[7] 
Hence, the case for consolidation 
3. 
What conclusion can we draw from this theoretical analysis? Well, the right conclusion is that 
fiscal consolidation is crucially important to keep inflation expectations anchored. 
On  this  basis,  one  could  make  a  solid  case  for  consolidation.  For  it  is  incumbent  on 
governments  to  reduce  the  level  of  public  debt.  Indeed,  they  have  to  do  this  to  promote 
economic growth and to ensure price stability. As Olivier Blanchard put it: we have to get out 
of the danger zone. 
Certainly, over the past three years many countries have made great efforts to consolidate 
their public finances. However, the main driver of these efforts was not academic theory but 
profane  market  pressure.  As  Simon  Nixon  recently  wrote  in  the  Wall  Street  Journal:  “For 
euro-zone countries facing high borrowing costs or reliant on international aid to fund their 
budget deficits, fiscal consolidation wasn’t a choice but a necessity.” And it still is. 
Even  so,  now  that  market  pressure  has  eased  somewhat,  so  has  the  political  will  to 
consolidate. Many argue that consolidation has gone too far and that it will impede growth 
given the current state of the economy. But is that a tenable argument against the need to 
reduce  public  debt,  to  get  out  of  the  danger  zone?  Let  us  take  a  closer  look  at  the 
relationship between consolidation and growth. 
But will consolidation hurt growth? 
4. 
To  put  my  view  in  a  nutshell:  I  see  no  conflict  between  consolidation  and  growth.  And, 
indeed,  there  is  not  much  controversy  regarding  the  long-term  relationship  between 
consolidation and growth. Various studies have confirmed that, in the long run, solid public 
finances  have  a  beneficial  effect  on  growth  –  and  I  am  not  just  referring  to  the  Reinhart-
Rogoff study that has received some criticism recently. Cecchetti and others, for  instance, 
also find that high debt levels inhibit potential growth.[8] 
Nevertheless, the short-term relationship between consolidation and growth is hotly debated. 
And  this  debate  is  currently  obscuring  the  consensus  on  the  longer-term  effects  of 
consolidation.  This  is  because  the  debate  relates  directly  to  policy  decisions  and  to  their 
short-term  effects  on  which  politicians  are  very  strongly  focused.  More  specifically,  the 
debate is focusing on the appropriate pace of consolidation in the current circumstances. 
The discussion, therefore, is revolving around the size of the fiscal multiplier. The larger the 
multiplier, the greater the negative effect consolidation has on short-term growth. In general, 
the size of the multiplier depends on a number of factors. It depends on the specific fiscal 
and economic situation of the relevant country, including the size of the export sector, the 
exchange  rate  regime,  trust  in  fiscal  sustainability  and  the  concrete  design  of  the 
consolidation measures. 
Recent research has highlighted the fact that the multiplier might also be state-dependent. 
This  would  imply  the  possibility  that  the  multiplier  is  larger  in  a  crisis.  One  reason  for  this 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
could be that monetary policy is constrained by the zero lower bound. Another reason could 
be that the number of liquidity-constrained households is increasing.[9] 
Empirical studies tend to find that multipliers are indeed larger in recessions and in situations 
where consolidation takes place during a financial crisis.[10] However, many of these studies 
suffer from a lack of data as deep recessions tend to be quite rare events. Moreover, the way 
in which such studies are set up is often rather basic and fraught with estimation challenges. 
Finally,  there  are  also  studies  which  imply  that  the  fiscal  multiplier  might  be  smaller  when 
public debt ratios are high and the sustainability of public finances is in doubt.[11] 
Now,  what  does  all  this  tell  us  about  the  current  situation  and  the  appropriate  pace  of 
consolidation?  Blanchard  and  Leigh,  in  a  recent  working  paper,  suggest  that  the  fiscal 
multiplier  is  currently  larger  than  previously  thought.  Therefore,  they  conclude  that 
consolidation  would  currently  be  rather  costly  in  terms  of  growth  and  more  “backloading” 
would be desirable. However, the data set from which these results have been obtained is 
rather small. Once other control variables are included and variation of the country sample is 
taken into account, the results are no longer robust. 
All  things  considered,  the  size  of  fiscal  multipliers  seems  to  be  subject  to  considerable 
uncertainty – both in general and with regard to the current situation. Consequently, I think 
we  should  look  beyond  the  size  of  the  short-term  fiscal  multiplier  when  discussing 
consolidation.  In  general,  if  consolidation  is  achieved  by  reducing  public  spending,  for 
instance,  it  will  enhance  potential  growth.  In  addition,  consolidation  will  foster  fiscal 
sustainability. 
In  this  regard,  it  is  important  to  consider  how  financial  markets  judge  a  country’s  fiscal 
situation and translate the results in their risk assessment. There is widespread agreement 
that  the  influence  of  country-specific  fiscal  characteristics  has  risen  over  the  course  of  the 
crisis. 
The current crisis is, to a large extent, a crisis of confidence – financial markets have lost 
their confidence in the sustainability of public finances. Against this backdrop, sustained and 
credible consolidation would send a clear signal. Also, with regard to political acceptance, I 
doubt that turning deferment of consolidation into a never-ending story will find more public 
support than a fairly swift correction. 
And this is why I believe that determined consolidation would help convince the markets that 
the  future  fiscal  position  is  going  to  be  sound.  This,  in  turn,  would  bring  down  long-term 
interest  rates  or  ensure  that  they  remain  at  a  low  level,  which  would  be  beneficial  for 
economic growth. By delaying consolidation, on the other hand, governments would risk an 
increase  in  market  uncertainty.  As  a  consequence,  sovereign  bond  spreads  would  remain 
high or go up even further. 
5. 
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen 
High levels of public debt are one of the major economic policy challenges of our times – 
especially from a central banker’s point of view. Sustainable public finances are a necessary 
prerequisite for a stable currency – a prerequisite that monetary policy itself cannot create. 
Given  that  high  levels  of  public  debt  also  hurt  economic  growth,  there  is  a  solid  case  for 
consolidation. 
True, in the short run, consolidation can dampen growth; that is undisputed. Nevertheless, a 
credible commitment to sound public finances will also inspire confidence. And confidence is 
what is lacking in the euro area. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
References 
[1] Auerbach, A.; Y. Gorodnichenko (2012), Fiscal Multipliers in Recession and Expansion. 
In: Fiscal Policy After the Financial Crisis, NBER. 
[2] Bianchi, F.; L. Melosi (2013), Dormant Shocks and Fiscal Virtue, NBER Macroeconomic 
Annuals 2013, forthcoming. 
[3]  Blanchard,  O.  J.;  D.  Leigh  (2013),  Growth  Forecast  Errors  and  Fiscal  Multipliers.  IMF 
Working Paper No. 13/1. 
[4] Cecchetti, S.; M.S. Mohanty; F. Zampolli (2011), The Real Effects of Debt, BIS Working 
Paper No. 352. 
[5]  Christiano,  L.;  M.  Eichenbaum;  S.  Rebelo  (2011),  When  is  the  Government  Spending 
Multiplier Large? Journal of Political Economy, Vo. 119, No. 1, pp. 78 – 121. 
[6]  Corsetti,  G.;  A.  Meier;  G.  J.  Müller  (2012),  What  Determines  Government  Spending 
Multipliers? IMF Working Paper No. 12/150. 
[7]  Davig,  T.;  E.  M.  Leeper;  T.  B.  Walker  (2011),  Inflation  and  the  Fiscal  Limit,  European 
Economic Review 55 (1), pp. 31–47. 
[8] Leeper, E. M. (2013), Fiscal Limits and Monetary Policy, Mimeo, Indiana University. 
[9]  Nickel,  C.;  A.  Tudyka  (2013),  Fiscal  Stimulus  in  Times  of  High  Debt  –  Reconsidering 
Multipliers and Twin Deficits. ECB Working Paper No. 1513. 
[10]  Sargent,  T.  J.;  N.  Wallace  (1981),  Some  Unpleasant  Monetarist  Arithmetic,  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review 5, pp. 1–17. 
[11]  Schmitt-Grohé,  S.;  M.  Uribe  (2007),  Optimal  simple  and  implementable  monetary  and 
fiscal rules, Journal of Monetary Economics 54 (6), pp. 1702–1725. 
[12] Woodford, M. (2001), Fiscal Requirements for Price Stability, Journal of Money, Credit 
and Banking 33 (3), pp. 669–728. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
