Njuguna Ndung’u: The importance of the banking sector in the Kenyan 
economy 
Remarks by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the Bank of 
India, Kenya Branch, Diamond Jubilee Celebrations, Nairobi, 12 April 2013. 
 Mrs. V.R. Iyer, the Chairperson and Managing Director of Bank of India; 
Dr. Manu Chandaria, Chairman, Bank of India Local Advisory Committee; 
Mr. R.K. Verma, Chief Executive, Bank of India, Kenya; 
The Local Advisory Committee Members;  
Management and Staff of Bank of India, Kenya; 
Distinguished guests; 
Ladies and gentlemen: I am delighted to join you on this auspicious occasion to celebrate 
the Diamond Jubilee of Bank of India’s operations in Kenya. As the regulator for the banking 
sector,  Central  Bank  is  pleased  to  be  associated  with  the  achievements  of  the  banks  we 
regulate,  particularly  where  these  developments  lead  to  increased  access  to  banking 
services for the Kenyan public. In this regard, Bank of India, Kenya certainly has made its 
mark on the Kenyan market. 
Ladies and gentlemen: Bank of India, Kenya Branch, was established in Mombasa in 1953, 
it  has  four  branches. With  regard  to  its  performance,  I  note  that  as  at February  2013,  the 
bank  had  a  total  asset  base  of  Ksh.27  billion.  Net  Loans  and  Advances  stood  at 
Ksh.11.5 billion  while customer deposits were Ksh.20.8 billion, supported by a core capital 
base of Ksh.3.9 billion. The bank returned a profit before tax of Ksh.568.4 million for the year 
ended December 2012. This impressive performance of Bank of India is consistent with the 
continued commendable performance of Kenya’s banking industry. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen:  The  banking  sector  and  the  totality  of  the  financial  sector  is  very 
important  to  the  economy.  Let  me  share  with  you  some  key  highlights  of  the  Banking 
Industry’s  performance  for  the  last  10  years  that  is  the  period  2002  to  December  2012  to 
consolidate the importance of the banking sector in the Kenyan economy:  
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Assets grew from Ksh.456.7 billion to Ksh.2.35 trillion; 
Total deposits grew from Ksh.360.6 billion to Ksh.1.76 trillion.  
Net advances increased from Ksh.222.8 billion to Ksh.1.27 trillion,  
Profit before tax of Ksh.5.8 billion increased to Ksh.107 billion.  
The  number  of  bank  accounts  has  increased  from  1.9  million  accounts  to 
17.6 million. 
Deposit insurance has evolved to cover fully 94% of the total deposit accounts. 
• 
This  phenomenal  growth  has  been  supported  by  the  expansion  of  banks  into  new  market 
segments, prudent risk management and enhanced economic prospects underpinned by a 
stable  macroeconomic  environment.  The  Central  Bank  expects  the  banking  sector  to 
continue on this growth trajectory. Ongoing reforms and initiatives by the Government and 
CBK will serve to further propel the banking sector to new frontiers of financial inclusion for 
more Kenyans to access these services. 
Ladies and gentlemen: Kenya’s financial industry is currently one of the fastest growing not 
only  in  the  East  African  region  but  in  the  continent.  The  Government  is  committed  to  the 
implementation  of  sound  policies  towards  financial  deepening  and  overall  economic 
development  of  this  country  as  captured  in  Vision  2030.  It  goes  without  saying  that  the 
banking industry is and will remain a major player towards this end. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Ladies and gentlemen: We need now to concentrate on reducing costs of doing business 
for banks so that we can bring down costs of financial services. For example, the recently 
introduced credit information sharing platform has enabled banks via reduced risk, to extend 
more credit to productive sectors boosting wealth and employment creation. The information 
sharing  platform  will  support  development  of  Information  Capital  as  a  new  collateral 
technology  in  the  market  and  reduce  the  information  search  costs  and  hence  the  risk 
premium  over-load  in  the  lending  rates.  In  addition,  the  introduction  of  positive  information 
sharing  with  Credit  Reference  Bureaus  will  allow  good  debtors  to  leverage  on  this  and 
bargain for lower costs of borrowing. 
The second area in reducing cost of doing business is the cost of rolling out branch networks 
to reach Kenyans cost-effectively. This has  worked and will continue to  work well  with the 
introduction of Agent Banking. The CBK has so far licensed 16,333 Agents since the roll out 
in May 2010. The third area that has lowered the cost of doing business is banks introducing 
innovative  products  to  the  market  by  leveraging  on  advanced  technology  and  the  mobile 
phone  financial  services  platform.  Lower  cost  on  these  products  has  ensured  uptake  and 
volumes have grown. Finally, the currency centres have helped to de-congest services at the 
branch and headquarters of CBK and physical distances, lowering costs for banks.  
In addition, the Central Bank will continue more forcefully with its four dimensional approach: 
Advise;  Cultivate  Partnership;  Agent  of  Development,  but  also  a  Regulator.  This 
approach  will  ensure  innovative  policies  that  work  for  the  market  and  ensure  financial 
inclusion  for  all  Kenyans,  lower  unit  cost  of  financial  services  and  also  ensure  the  market 
stability. 
Ladies and gentlemen: In conclusion, I would like to assure the banking sector and other 
market  players  that  the  Central  Bank  will  continue  to  support  the  market  development  by 
providing  an  enabling  environment  for  growth  in  the  banking  sector.  We  shall  continue  to 
ensure that the sector operates efficiently, effectively and soundly, supported by the following 
three pillars:- 
• 
First, strengthening Financial Stability, through a robust Supervisory and Regulatory 
Framework. In this regard, the Central Bank has adopted a consolidated supervision 
approach  to  take  cognizance  of  the  growing  pan-African  nature  of  the  Kenyan 
banking sector – and where applicable, supervisory colleges will be used. 
Second, enhancing Financial Integrity in the Banking Sector so as to ensure that the 
financial  systems  are  safeguarded  against  money  laundering  and  financing  of 
terrorism in line with international best practice. 
Third, promoting Financial Inclusion for financial deepening and development in line 
with the aspirations under the Kenyan Vision 2030. 
  We expect banks to strengthen their screening and monitoring role of their clients, new or 
potential ones for market development. The Kenyan Bank of India should take advantage of 
the  market  vibrancy  as  well  as  initiatives  put  forth  by  the  Central  Bank  to  grow  its  market 
share even further in the coming years. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen:  with  these  few  remarks,  let  me  once  again  applaud  the  Kenyan 
Bank  of  India,  as  you  celebrate  your  Diamond  Jubilee  and  wish  the  bank  continued 
prosperity in the years to come – not only in Kenya but also in the East African Community 
region. 
Thank You and God bless you all. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
