Mario Draghi: ECB press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  and 
Mr Vítor  Constâncio,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  Frankfurt  am  Main, 
7 February 2013. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Vice-President  and  I  are  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  our 
press conference. We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing 
Council. 
Based on our regular economic and monetary analyses, we decided to keep the key ECB 
interest rates unchanged. HICP inflation rates have declined further, as anticipated, and are 
expected to fall below 2% in the coming months. Over the policy-relevant horizon, inflationary 
pressures should remain contained. The underlying pace of monetary expansion continues 
to be subdued. Medium to longer-term inflation expectations for the euro area remain firmly 
anchored in line with our aim of maintaining inflation rates below, but close to, 2%. Overall, 
this allows our monetary policy stance to remain accommodative. The economic weakness in 
the euro area is expected to prevail in the early part of 2013. In particular, necessary balance 
sheet  adjustments  in  the  public  and  private  sectors  will  continue  to  weigh  on  economic 
activity.  Later  in  2013  economic  activity  should  gradually  recover,  supported  by  our 
accommodative monetary policy stance, the improvement in financial market confidence and 
reduced  fragmentation,  as  well  as  a  strengthening  of  global  demand.  In  order  to  sustain 
confidence,  it  is  essential  for  governments  to  reduce  further  both  fiscal  and  structural 
imbalances and to proceed with financial sector restructuring.  
With regard to the liquidity situation of banks, counterparties have so far repaid €140.6 billion 
of  the  €489.2 billion  obtained  in  the  first  of  the  two  three-year  longer-term  refinancing 
operations  (LTROs)  settled 
the 
improvement in financial market confidence. Repayments are provided for in the modalities 
of  the  three-year  LTROs  and  are  at  the  discretion  of  the  counterparties,  who  must 
appropriately assess their funding situation, their ability to provide new loans to the economy 
and their resilience to shocks. We will closely monitor conditions in the money market and 
their  potential  impact  on  the  stance  of  monetary  policy,  which  will  remain  accommodative 
with the full allotment mode of liquidity provision. 
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. 
Euro  area  real  GDP  declined  by  0.1%,  quarter  on  quarter,  in  the  third  quarter  of  2012, 
following  a  contraction  of  0.2%  in  the  second  quarter.  Available  data  continue  to  signal 
further weakness in activity in the fourth quarter and at the beginning of 2013. This weakness 
reflects  the  adverse  impact  of  low  consumer  and  investor  sentiment  on  domestic 
expenditure, as well as subdued foreign demand. However, financial market sentiment has 
improved  and  the  latest  survey  indicators  confirm  earlier  evidence  of  a  stabilisation  in 
business  and  consumer  confidence,  albeit  at  low  levels.  Later  in  2013  a  gradual  recovery 
should start, with domestic demand being supported by our accommodative monetary policy 
stance,  the  improvement  in  financial  market  confidence  and  reduced  fragmentation,  and 
export growth benefiting from a strengthening of global demand. 
The  risks  surrounding  the  economic  outlook  for  the  euro  area  continue  to  be  on  the 
downside.  They  relate  to  the  possibility  of  weaker  than  expected  domestic  demand  and 
exports, slow implementation of structural reforms in the euro area, as well as geopolitical 
issues and imbalances in major industrialised countries which could both have an impact on 
developments in global commodities and financial markets. These factors have the potential 
to dampen the ongoing improvement in confidence and thereby delay the recovery. 
in  December 2011  and  March 2012.  This  reflects 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
According to Eurostat’s flash estimate, euro area annual HICP inflation was 2.0% in January 
2013, down from 2.2% in November and December and from 2.5% in October. On the basis 
of current futures prices for oil, inflation rates are expected to decline further to below 2% in 
the coming months. Over the policy-relevant horizon, in an environment of weak economic 
activity in the euro area and well-anchored long-term inflation expectations, underlying price 
pressures should remain contained. 
Risks to the outlook for price developments continue to be seen as broadly balanced over 
the medium term, with upside risks relating to higher administered prices and indirect taxes, 
as  well  as  higher  oil  prices,  and  downside  risks  stemming  from  weaker  economic  activity 
and, more recently, the appreciation of the euro exchange rate. 
Turning to the monetary analysis, the underlying pace of monetary expansion continues to 
be subdued. The annual growth rate of M3 decreased to 3.3% in December 2012, from 3.8% 
in November. Shifts from overnight deposits to short-term time deposits led to a decrease in 
the  annual  rate  of  growth  of  M1,  which  declined  to  6.2%  in  December,  from  6.7%  in 
November,  and  outflows  from  marketable  instruments  dampened  overall  M3  growth.  A 
further  strengthening  in  the  deposit  base  of  MFIs  in  a  number  of  stressed  countries  took 
place  in  December,  in  combination  with  further  capital  inflows  into  the  euro  area,  both  of 
which continued to reduce fragmentation. 
The  annual  growth  rate  of  loans  to  the  private  sector  (adjusted  for  loan  sales  and 
securitisation)  remained  negative  in  December.  This  mainly  reflected  ongoing  negative 
annual  growth  of  loans  to  non-financial  corporations,  which  was  –1.3%  in  December  after  
–1.5% in November. However, annual growth in MFI loans to households remained broadly 
unchanged  at  0.7%  in  December.  To  a  large  extent,  subdued  loan  dynamics  reflect  the 
current stage of the business cycle, heightened credit risk and the ongoing adjustment in the 
balance  sheets  of the financial  and  non-financial  sectors. In  line  with  these  developments, 
the  bank  lending  survey  for  the  fourth  quarter  of  2012  confirms  the  weakness  in  credit 
demand  and  the  continued  effect  of  credit  risk  considerations  on  the  tightening  of  credit 
standards.  At  the  same  time,  the  survey  confirms  the  positive  impact  of  Eurosystem 
measures  on  banks’  overall  funding  and  liquidity  situation.  In  particular,  banks  reported 
improvements across all funding categories in the fourth quarter. 
In  order to  ensure  adequate transmission  of monetary  policy  to  the financing  conditions  in 
euro area countries, it is essential to continue strengthening the resilience of banks where 
needed.  Decisive  steps  for  establishing  an  integrated  financial  framework  will  help  to 
accomplish this objective. The future single supervisory mechanism (SSM) is one of the main 
building blocks. It is a crucial move towards re-integrating the banking system. 
To sum up, the economic analysis indicates that price developments should remain in line 
with price stability over the medium term. A cross-check with the signals from the monetary 
analysis confirms this picture. 
As regards other policy areas, structural reforms and fiscal adjustment can complement 
each  other,  thereby  improving  the  outlook  for  job  creation,  economic  growth  and  debt 
sustainability.  Past  policy  action  is  bearing  fruit,  in  terms  of  both  the  unwinding  of  existing 
fiscal  imbalances  and  the  reduction  of  current  account  deficits.  In  particular,  in  several 
countries  with  particular  adjustment  needs,  contained  growth  in  unit  labour  costs  signals 
greater price competitiveness and exports are performing better. Governments should build 
on the progress achieved in fiscal consolidation, strengthen competition in product markets 
and continue with labour market reforms. This would boost the euro area’s growth potential, 
reduce high structural unemployment and improve the adjustment capacities of the euro area 
countries. 
We are now at your disposal for questions.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
