Guy Debelle: Funding the resources investment boom 
Address by Mr Guy Debelle, Assistant Governor (Financial Markets) of the Reserve Bank of 
Australia, to the Melbourne Institute Public Economic Forum, Canberra, 16 April 2013. 
 Thanks to Ivailo Arsov, Ben Shanahan and Tom Williams for all their work and to Rachael McCririck and Florian 
Weltewitz for their help with the balance of payments data. 
As you’re all well aware, the Australian resources sector has been undergoing a historically 
large investment boom. Investment spending in the sector has grown from just under 2 per 
cent of GDP to around 8 per cent currently.  
Today, I am not going to talk about the direct macroeconomic impact of this, which has been 
extensively  described  elsewhere  by  my  colleagues.1  Instead,  I  will  focus  on  how  the 
investment  has  been  financed.  In  doing  so,  I  will  draw  extensively  on  a  recent  article 
published in the RBA Bulletin by Ivailo Arsov, Ben Shanahan and Tom Williams.2  
Their  work  highlights  the  fact  that  the  investment  boom  has  been  financed  almost  entirely 
from  the  balance  sheets  of  the  companies  doing  the  investing.  That  is,  it  has  been  cash-
financed from earnings. There has been very little borrowing associated with the investment 
spending,  and  to  the  extent  that  there  has  been  any,  it  has  generally  been  directly  from 
capital markets rather than intermediated through the banking sector.  
Another important aspect of the financing is that it has constituted a sizeable capital inflow for 
the Australian economy. This in turn has had implications for the composition of Australia’s 
balance of payments and also the exchange rate.  
The resources investment boom 
I will start by describing some of the main features of the investment boom.  
Between 2003 and 2012, investment in new projects and expansions of existing capacity in 
the  resources  sector  is  estimated  to  have  totalled  $284  billion,  according  to  ABS  data.  A 
detailed analysis of project-level data on the projects completed since 2003, or still underway 
at the end of 2012, suggests that Australian companies have accounted for just over half of 
this (54 per cent), with the balance coming from foreign entities.3 Here I am counting BHP 
and Rio Tinto as Australian companies.  
The overwhelming majority, over 90 per cent, of the investment has been by publicly listed 
companies (Graph 1). The investment has been predominately in iron ore, coal, oil and gas 
(mainly LNG), with these four commodities accounting for 84 per cent of the investment in 
physical infrastructure during the boom.  
                                                 
1   See, for example, Bishop J, C Kent, M Plumb and V Rayner (2013), “The Resources Boom and the Australian 
Economy: A Sectoral Analysis”, RBA Bulletin, March, pp. 39–49. 
2   Arsov  I,  B  Shanahan  and  T  Williams  (2013),  “Funding  the  Australian  Resources  Investment  Boom”,  RBA 
Bulletin, March, pp. 51–61. 
3   Arsov et al describe the exact methodology that has been used here. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Graph 1 
  Funding the boom 
Given that the vast bulk of the investment has been carried out by listed companies, we were 
able to use the financial statements of the relevant companies, both Australian and foreign, 
to estimate how the investment was actually funded. This exercise involved examining the 
financial  accounts  of  all  the  listed  Australian  resources  companies  (around  900)  and 
37 foreign companies.  
This  analysis  shows  that  since  the  start  of  the  resources  boom  in  2003,  Australian 
companies  have  raised  no  equity  in  net  terms.  While  they  raised  substantial  amounts  of 
equity in 2009, the Australian companies have been returning greater amounts of capital to 
shareholders  since  2011.  The  foreign  companies  have  been  consistently  returning  large 
amounts  of  capital  to  their  shareholders,  and,  as  a  group,  have  not  resorted  to  external 
equity funding during the resources boom.  
The funds raised by these resources companies have been used overwhelmingly to make 
new physical investments, with Australian and foreign companies using around 80 per cent 
of their funding for this type of spending (Graph 2). The rest of the funding has been used 
primarily to acquire existing assets from other companies, while funding for other investment 
purposes has been negligible.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Graph 2 
  In general, companies’ funding is fungible. However, certain types of funding are more suited 
to  specific  purposes.  In  particular,  this  is  the  case  for  acquisitions  that  are  usually  large 
relative to the acquirers’ balance sheets, and require large one-off payments. These types of 
transactions  are  often 
funding 
requirements, funding for these acquisitions has been excluded. That is, debt raised to fund 
takeovers is excluded from the subsequent analysis.  
funded  with  syndicated 
loans.  Given 
their  distinct 
Graph 3 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  3
In  terms  of  the  sources  of  funding,  the  analysis  shows  that  80  per  cent  of  investment 
spending  by  Australian-listed  resources  companies,  and  over  90  per  cent  by  foreign 
companies,  has  been  funded  through  internal  sources  (Graph  3  and  Table  1).  Operating 
cash  flow  has  been  the  predominant  source  of  internal  funding,  made  possible  by  the 
historically high level of commodity prices throughout the period.  
Table 1 
Funding of the Australian Resources Investment Boom(a) 
Per cent of total 
 To the extent that these companies have resorted to external sources of funding, this has 
been  mainly  in  the  form  of  bonds  issued  directly  into  capital  markets.  Very  little  has  been 
funded  by  borrowing  from  banks.  The  companies  have  tapped  bond  markets  rather  than 
banks in part because of the longer tenors available in the bond market which match the long 
investment horizons of these projects. Another reason is that a number of these resources 
companies  are  able  to  access  financial  markets  at  a  cheaper  price  than  the  banks 
themselves can.  
This absence of borrowing from the banking sector is one of the reasons why (intermediated) 
business credit in Australia remains relatively subdued despite the around trend growth in the 
Australian economy in recent years. It also means that unlike previous investment booms in 
Australia’s history, this one has been associated with very little leverage.  
The other notable fact from Table 1 is that the funding for the Australian resources boom has 
been sourced extensively from overseas. At face value, given the share of foreign companies 
involved, the analysis implies that around half of the investment during the boom has been 
funded  from  offshore.  However,  the  actual  use of  foreign sources  of  funds  is  much  higher 
than  that.  This  is  because  wherever  companies  are  partly  foreign  owned,  funding  from 
internal sources is equivalent to partial funding from foreign sources. Consequently, since the 
Australian  listed  resources  sector  is  around  three-quarters  foreign  owned,  the  same  large 
proportion  of  internal  funding  is  attributable  to  foreign  sources.  For  instance,  the  three-
quarters  foreign  ownership  of  BHP  implies  that  three-quarters  of  BHP’s  internal  funding  is 
recorded as foreign. Taking all this together suggests that around four-fifths of the investment 
funding has been sourced from offshore.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
So while the focus of the effect of the resources sector on the balance of payments has been 
on  its  effect  on  imports  of  capital  goods  for  the  investment  and  on  the  export  revenue 
generated, there has also been a material impact on the capital flows to Australia, which I will 
now discuss. 
The effect on capital flows 
The  impact  of  the  above  developments  has  been  reflected  in  the  Australian  balance  of 
payments (BOP) data, which indicate that foreign capital flows into the Australian resources 
sector have grown from an average of around 1 per cent of annual GDP in 2007 to around 
3½ per cent in 2012.4  
This  constitutes  a  significant  change  in  the  composition  of  capital  flows  in  the  Australian 
economy; one of three noteworthy changes in recent years.  
In the decade prior to the global financial crisis, around two-thirds of foreign capital flows into 
Australia  was  directed  to  the  financial  sector,  amounting  to  an  average  inflow  of  around 
6½ per  cent  of  GDP  over  this  period.  Since  2007,  as  I  have  noted  on  other  occasions,5 
inflows  into  the  banking  sector  have  declined  considerably  to  the  point  where  the  banking 
sector has been a net repayer of offshore borrowing (Graph 4).  
Graph 4 
 At  the  same  time,  foreign  purchases  of  Australian  government  debt  have  increased 
significantly,  which  has  seen  the  foreign  ownership  share  of  Commonwealth  Government 
securities increase from 50 per cent to around 70 per cent currently, even as the stock of 
issuance has risen fivefold.  
                                                 
4   The ABS began publishing an industry breakdown of capital flows data in September 2006. 
5   Debelle G (2011), “In Defence of Current Account Deficits”, Address at ADBI/UniSA Workshop on Growth and 
Integration in Asia, Adelaide, 8 July. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Both  of  these  two  large  changes  in  the  composition  of  capital  flows  directly  relate  to  the 
upheavals in global financial markets over the period.  
In contrast, the large increase in capital flows to the resources sector is not related to the 
financial  crisis  –  being  obviously  a  direct  product  of  the  resources  boom,  which  is  itself  a 
function of the large increase in commodity demand from emerging markets.  
In thinking about the effect of capital flows on the value of the Australian dollar, it is important 
to take account of all of these changes in capital flows. Simply focusing on the developments 
in  only  one  particular  type  of  capital  flow  can  give  a  partial  picture  of  what  is  going  on. 
Moreover, I have not talked at all here about changes in the outward flows of capital. While 
these flows are also large, over the period in question here, changes in their size have not 
been so noteworthy.  
So in terms of the effect on the Australian dollar, of the three major changes in capital flows 
we have seen over the past six years, two of them: the capital inflow to the resource sector to 
fund investment along with the increased purchases of government debt, have been putting 
upward pressure on the currency. But at the same time, the reduction in offshore borrowing 
by the banking system has been putting downward pressure on it. The net effect of all these 
flows  however,  is  that  the  Australian  dollar  is  higher  than  one  would  expect,  given 
fundamentals such as the terms of trade and interest differentials.  
Turning  to  another  effect  of  the  pattern  of  resources  investment  funding  on  Australia’s 
balance of payments, as noted above, around 75 per cent of the foreign direct investment in 
the resources sector since 2007 has been in the form of reinvested earnings. In the balance 
of payments statistics, a proportion of the profits earned by resources companies accrue to 
foreign  shareholders  and  contribute  to  Australia’s  net  income  deficit  (NID;  a  part  of  the 
current account deficit). If the profits on these direct investment holdings are reinvested, this 
constitutes a corresponding direct investment “inflow” captured in the capital account surplus. 
In this way the activities of the resources sector are, to some extent, “grossing up” the figures 
in the capital account and the NID (Graph 5 shows this relationship for the economy as a 
whole).  That  is,  the  reinvested  earnings  are  recorded  as  a  capital  inflow,  even  though  the 
money  remains  in  Australia.  As  a  result,  the  recorded  current  account  deficit  and 
corresponding  net  capital  inflow  are  larger  than  the  actual  cross-border  flows  of  funds 
associated with this investment.  
Graph 5 
6 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
Conclusion 
The historic investment boom in the resources sector has not only had a significant impact 
on the real side of the Australian economy, it has also had a material effect on the financial 
side. In my talk today I have highlighted two noteworthy aspects of this:  
Firstly, unlike most other parts of the economy, the investment by resources companies has 
been  almost  entirely  self-funded  from  internal  cash  flows.  Very  little  of  it  has  been  funded 
through the banking sector.  
Secondly,  because  a  large  share  of  the  resource  sector  is  foreign  owned,  this  internal 
funding has been reflected in large capital inflows into Australia in the form of foreign direct 
investment.  This  has  had  an  impact  on  both  the  capital  and  current  account  sides  of 
Australia’s balance of payments.  
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
