Haruhiko Kuroda: Japan’s unconventional monetary policy and 
initiatives toward ensuring stability of the global financial system 
Remarks by Mr Haruhiko Kuroda, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Federal Reserve 
Bank  of  Kansas  City  Economic  Policy  Symposium,  Jackson  Hole,  Wyoming,  24  August 
2013. 
 Introduction 
I am honored by the invitation to be a panelist at this traditional policy symposium hosted by 
the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. 
The global economy is yet to completely recover from the aftermath of the Lehman shock, 
and each country is grappling with its own thorny issues. Japan has not been able to escape 
from  a  vicious  cycle  of  deflation  and  stagnant  economic  activity  for  the past  15  years  and 
dynamism  has  gradually  vanished  from  economic  activity.  For  a  sustained  economic 
recovery, it is necessary to overcome deflation and turn firms’ and households’ actions into 
more proactive ones. 
The content of my presentation is described in Chart 1 of the handout. I will first outline the 
“Quantitative  and  Qualitative  Monetary  Easing”  (hereafter  QQE)  that  the  Bank  of  Japan 
introduced  in  April,  and  then follow  this  with  the  characteristics  of  the  QQE’s  transmission 
channels, focusing on the effects on real interest rates and on the natural rate of interest. I 
will  conclude  by  touching  on  several  issues  on  the  relationship  between  unconventional 
monetary policy and the global financial markets. 
I. 
Unconventional monetary policy in Japan 
Outline of the QQE 
As  represented  in  the  wording  “quantitative  and  qualitative,”  the  Bank’s  QQE  aims  to 
overcome  deflation  through  both  a  “quantitative”  increase  and  “qualitative”  changes  in  the 
Bank’s balance sheet. As shown in Chart 2, there are three points. 
First, the Bank aims to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent in terms of the year-on-
year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI) at the earliest possible time, with a 
time horizon of about two years. 
Second,  as  shown  in  Chart  3,  in  terms  of  “quantity,” through  purchases  of  various  assets, 
mainly Japanese government bonds (JGBs), the Bank aims to double the monetary base in 
two years from 138 trillion yen at end-2012 to 270 trillion yen at end-2014. When looked at in 
terms of a ratio to nominal GDP, this has already exceeded 30 percent in the second quarter 
of 2013. Although it depends on future growth in nominal GDP, the ratio is likely to increase 
to a level of over 50 percent in the fourth quarter of 2014. 
Third,  on  the  “quality”  front,  JGBs  with  all  maturities,  including  40-year  bonds,  were  made 
eligible  for  purchase.  As  a  result,  the  average  remaining  maturity  of  the  Bank’s  JGB 
purchases will more than double to about seven years. By working on interest rates across 
the  yield  curve,  it  is  expected  that  the  effects  of  the  QQE  on  financial  conditions  and 
economic activity will be strengthened. In addition, in order to affect premiums of risk assets, 
purchases  of  exchange-traded  funds  (ETFs)  and  Japan  real  estate  investment  trusts 
(J-REITs) were increased. 
Assessment of the QQE to date 
The  QQE  has  already  started  to  exert  effects.  Let  me  point  to  three  favorable  turns,  as 
shown in Chart 4. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
First, there has been a favorable turn in financial markets and corporate finance. As shown in 
Chart  5,  stock  prices  are  rising.  Long-term  interest  rates,  while  once  faced  with  increased 
volatility,  have  been  almost  flat  recently  despite  a  rise  in  interest  rates  overseas.  Also,  in 
terms of corporate finance, bank lending has gradually been increasing its growth rate, and 
lending rates have been at historical low levels. 
Second, there has been a favorable turn in the public’s expectations. Consumer sentiment 
and  business  sentiment  have  improved  markedly.  Many  indicators  suggest  that  inflation 
expectations have been picking up in the market, as well as among firms and households. A 
recent development in one such indicator is shown in Chart 6. This development, together 
with low and stable nominal interest rates, has been effective in lowering real interest rates. 
The  third  favorable  turn  is  in  economic  activity  and  prices,  as  shown  in  Chart  7.  Private 
consumption remains resilient on the back of improved household sentiment and the wealth 
effect from the stock market rally. Business fixed investment is showing signs of picking up, 
in  line  with  improved  business  sentiment  and  corporate  profits.  The  year-on-year  rate  of 
change in the CPI has turned positive, reflecting both improvement in the economy and the 
yen’s depreciation. 
II. 
Unconventional monetary policy, real interest rates, and natural rate of 
interest 
In  this  way,  the  Bank’s  QQE  has  already  started  to  gradually  exert  effects.  Now,  as  in 
Chart 8, let me next look at the transmission mechanism of the policy effects from the two 
perspectives of real interest rates and the natural rate of interest. 
Needless to say, the effects of monetary policy will be determined by the difference between 
real  interest  rates  and  the  natural  rate  of  interest.  Thus,  there  are  two  ways  for  monetary 
easing to be effective: First, lower real interest rates, given that the natural rate of interest is 
unchanged, or, second, increase the natural rate of interest, given that real interest rates are 
unchanged. 
The Bank of Japan’s QQE seems to have started to exert effects both in terms of lowering 
real interest rates and an increase in the natural rate of interest. Let me explain this in order. 
Lowering real interest rates 
First, let me consider the effect of lowering real interest rates. 
When lowering real interest rates as a policy, a central bank normally lowers nominal interest 
rates.  Of  course,  for  such  policy  to  be  taken,  there  should  be  sufficiently  large  room  for 
reduction  in  nominal  interest  rates.  For  example,  in  the  United  States,  based  on  the 
assumption that inflation expectations were anchored, it can be interpreted that real interest 
rates have been lowered as a result of reducing nominal interest rates. 
In  Japan,  as  nominal  interest  rates  were  already  at  low  levels,  there  was  limited  room  to 
lower  real  interest  rates  by  reducing  nominal  interest  rates.  Another  way  was  needed  to 
lower real interest rates. Namely, an increase in inflation expectations. While the purpose of 
lowering  real  interest  rates  itself  was  the  same  as  in  the  United  States,  there  was  a  stark 
contrast in terms of a strategy to achieve that purpose. 
The Bank aims to achieve the 2 percent price stability target with a time horizon of about two 
years  and  implement  measures  toward  achieving  the  target,  which  would  be  effective  in 
overcoming 
inflation 
expectations  have  actually  been  edging  up,  as  I  mentioned  earlier,  and  thus  the  Bank’s 
policy has started to exert its intended effects. 
the  policy  constraints.  With 
implementation  of 
the  QQE, 
the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
An increase in the natural rate of interest 
As the second issue for discussion, let me consider the relationship between unconventional 
monetary  policy  and  the  natural  rate  of  interest.  This  issue  has  been  little  discussed,  and 
thus might be controversial to some extent. 
To begin with, the natural rate of interest corresponds to expected returns from firms’ capital 
investment. The Bank’s QQE aims at conquering the “deflationary sentiment” that has been 
entrenched among the public and restoring what had been the intrinsic dynamism of Japan’s 
economy. As a consequence of the policy, if Japan’s growth potential recovers, investment 
opportunities will increase and the natural rate of interest will rise. 
As an unconventional monetary policy that contributes to strengthening growth potential, the 
Bank has established a facility called the “Loan Support Program.” The facility is composed 
of two measures. One is the fund provision for economic growth, which provides funds for 
financial institutions’ loans and investment that contribute to Japan’s economic growth. The 
second  is  the  fund  provision  to  stimulate  lending,  which  provides  long-term  funds  at  low 
interest rates for financial institutions’ incremental lending, in order to support their efforts to 
increase lending. The facility aims to promote financial institutions’ initiatives toward finding 
demand for funds in high-growth firms and business fields. 
I would like to add one point here; namely, that maintaining the natural rate of interest at a 
high level is also important as a means of increasing the resilience of the economy against 
various  shocks.  In  that  regard,  when  the  natural  rate  of  interest  increases  sufficiently,  the 
possibility that the policy rate will hit the zero lower bound again declines and the resilience 
of Japan's economy is likely to increase. 
Unconventional monetary policy and global financial markets 
III. 
Lastly, as already discussed in this symposium, let me touch on issues that relate to global 
liquidity and cross-border capital flows. Given the wide spectrum of important issues within 
this set of topics, let me focus on two such issues – taking into account my own experience – 
as shown in Chart 9. 
Unconventional monetary policy and cross-border capital flows 
First, the relationship between unconventional monetary policy and cross-border capital flows 
is quite complicated. 
While this is not new to central banks and related parties, almost all base money provided 
through  monetary  policy  will  be  accumulated  in  the  form  of  deposits  with  a  central  bank. 
Even  if  a  country  eases  monetary  conditions,  this  does  not  necessarily  mean  that  money 
being provided directly “spills over overseas.” 
Starting from such accumulated base money and changes in demand-supply conditions in 
asset markets  in  which  the  Bank  conducts  purchase  operation,  the  issue  is  with  regard  to 
how financial market participants’ expectations and transactions will change and how that will 
affect cross-border capital flows. 
This process is fairly complicated, and monetary easing does not necessarily lead to cross-
border  capital  outflows.  For  example,  if  growth  expectations  heighten  due  to  monetary 
easing, there might be capital inflows in search of a high natural rate of interest. 
Importance of international coordination among central banks 
Second, I would like to point out that – also in international coordination among central banks 
– “unconventional” initiatives have indeed been reinforced. 
In tandem with progress in financial globalization, the speed and magnitude of systemic risk 
contagion  among  countries  have  increased,  and  due  vigilance  is  called  for  regarding  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
possibility  that  destabilization  in  the  global  financial  markets  will  be  a  drag  on  the  global 
economy. 
Following  the  Lehman  shock,  the  Bank  of  Japan,  in  coordination  with  other  central  banks, 
has endeavored to maintain the stability of the global financial system through initiatives such 
as making currency swap arrangements, improving the framework of cross-border collateral, 
and enhancing regional financial infrastructures, including fostering Asian bond markets. 
As a person who has been involved in international finance in various positions, I would like 
to emphasize that it is increasingly important to have international coordination with regard to 
the prevention and management of a financial crisis. 
Concluding remarks 
The  QQE  aims  to  overcome  deflation  that  has  continued  for  15  years  and  to  rejuvenate 
Japan’s  economy.  While  maintaining  real  interest  rates  at  low  levels  through  increasing 
inflation expectations, the policy will exert its maximum effects by working also on the natural 
rate of interest rate together with the government’s growth strategy. The Bank of Japan will 
pursue proper policy conduct to achieve the price stability target, while continuing to make 
efforts to maintain the stability of the global financial system. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
 4 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   5 
 6 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   7 
  8 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
