H R Khan: Promoting retail investor participation in government bonds 
Valedictory address by Mr H R Khan, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
8th  Annual  National  Conference  on  Capital  Markets  on  the  theme  “Confidence  building 
measures for retail investors”, Mumbai, 9 January 2013. 
 I  am  extremely  happy  to  be  invited  for  this  important  conference  on  capital  markets 
organized by the ASSOCHAM, I am particularly pleased as the focus of the conference is on 
Investors  who  along  with  Issuers,  Instruments,  Intermediaries,  (market)  Infrastructure, 
Incentives & Innovation constitute, what I call, the 7’ I critical pillars of a robust and resilient 
debt market. Given the low level of participation of retail investors in equity and more so in 
debt  markets,  the  specific  theme  of  the  conference  aimed  at  the  retail  investors  is  most 
appropriate. Retail participation in financial instruments has assumed critical importance as 
the  decline  in  the  overall  savings  rate,  which  has  been  one  of  the  strong  points  of  our 
economy, has declined from the high of about 37 per cent to about 32 per cent of the GDP 
and the share of household financial savings as percentage of GDP has also declined from 
about 12 per cent to eight per cent last year. 
As  the  conference  schedule  indicates  that  different  aspects  relating  to  upscaling  of  retail 
participation  in  the  financial  markets  have  been  discussed,  I  have  chosen  to  share  my 
thoughts  primarily  on  one  very  important  segment  of  the  financial  market  –  that  of 
Government  securities  (G-sec)  where  retail  participation  has  been  unsatisfactorily 
non-existent. I would briefly look upon the importance of the G-sec market and the need for 
participation of the retail investor in this market, motivations for such investors for choosing 
G-sec,  measures  taken  by  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  to  encourage  participation  of 
retail/mid-segment  investors,  constraints  on  their  participation  in  this  market  and  some 
thoughts on measures that could be taken to fast-track the retail/mid-segment participation in 
G-sec market. 
Over the past two decades since we began the financial sector reforms, Indian government 
bond markets have come a long way. The annual gross market borrowing of the Government 
of  India  and  the  State  Governments  increased  from  ₹122.83  billion  in  1991–92  to 
₹6686.32 billion  in  2011–12.  The  amount  of  outstanding  Government  of  India  securities 
increased  from  ₹780.23  billion  in  1991–92  to  ₹27,881.56  billion  in  2011–12.  The  monthly 
volume  in  secondary  market  on  the  electronic  trading  platform  –  Negotiated  Dealing 
System-Order Matching (NDS-OM), which accounts for about 90 per cent of the trading, has 
increased from ₹314.30 billion in August 2005 to ₹2650.17 billion in November 2012. Over 
the  years  the  G-sec  market  has  become  broad-based,  with  yield  curve  spanning  up  to 
30 years.  The  infrastructure  for  trading,  clearing  and  settlement  in  the  form  of  trading 
platform  of  NDS-OM  with  the  Clearing  Corporation  of  India  Limited  (CCIL)  acting  as  the 
Central Counter Party (CCP) can be considered as world class, making it one of the safest 
financial  markets to  transact. The fact,  however,  remains  that  the market  is  predominantly 
institutional. 
Need for retail investors 
The  traditional  investor  base  for  G-sec  in  India  comprised  banks,  provident  funds,  and 
insurance  companies.  With  the  entry  of  co-operative  banks,  regional  rural  banks,  pension 
funds, mutual funds and non-banking finance companies, the institutional investor base has 
been  reasonably  diversified.  There  is,  however,  very  little  retail  participation  in  the  G-sec 
market. 
Catering to the needs of retail investors is often an essential part of the overall strategy to 
develop  a  more  diversified 
for  government  securities.  Reliance  by 
governments  on  captive  sources  of  funding  whereby  financial  institutions  are  required  to 
investor  base 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
purchase and hold government securities is diminishing in many countries. Instead countries 
are  developing  a  diversified  investor  base  for  their  G-sec.  In  Indian  context,  the  Statutory 
Liquidity  Ratio  (SLR)  prescription  in  terms  of  which  banks  are  required  to  hold  certain 
percentage of net demand and time liabilities (NDTL) has also been declining. 
Retail investors will contribute to a stable demand for government securities, which, in times 
of  volatility,  can  cushion  the  impact  of  sales from  institutional  and  foreign  investors.  Retail 
demand  has  been  developed  in  many  countries  through  special  non-tradable  instruments 
although this strategy will not contribute to development of the government securities market. 
In  India,  retail  investors  invest  in  small  saving  instruments  issued  by  government  some  of 
which  (e.g.,  National  Saving  Certificate  VIII  issue)  entail  tax  benefits  enhancing  their 
attractiveness. These instruments, however, do not have a secondary market thereby limiting 
liquidity and have no possibility of capital appreciation. 
Promoting  retail  and  mid-segment  participation  in  G-sec  market  is  beneficial  to  both  the 
issuer  and  the  investor.  From  the  issuer’s  perspective,  a  diversified  investor  base  for 
government bonds is important for ensuring stable demand in the market. A heterogeneous 
investor  base  with  different  time  horizons,  risk  preferences,  and  trading  motives  ensures 
active  trading,  creating  liquidity  and  allows  borrowings  at  reasonable  cost.  From  the 
investors’ perspective, there is a need for investment options that provide decent returns and 
protect  the  capital.  G-sec  are  apt  investment  products  that  would  cater  to  these  needs.  In 
spite of such features, there is low retail interest in the government bonds and this investor 
apathy needs to be tackled by the regulators and market bodies. 
Advantages for retail investors 
For the retail investor, government securities offer one of the better options for investment. 
The advantages for retail investors can be listed as under: 
• 
G-sec  are  risk  free  G-sec  in  domestic  market  context  are  risk  free  and  carry  no 
credit  risk.  Though  this  assertion  is  being  widely  debated  in  wake  of  the  events 
unfolding in the Eurozone sovereign debt crisis, the fact remains that G-sec in the 
Indian context are risk free. 
G-sec  offer  decent  yields  for  longer  duration  Currently  G-sec  offer  yields  ranging 
from 8.00 per cent to 8.30 per cent and the tenor of securities extend up to thirty 
years.  With  government  issuing  securities  at  different  points  on  the  yield  curve, 
G-sec offer an attractive option for savers who need low risk investment options for 
longer durations. 
G-sec  offer  prospect  of  capital  gains  As  there  is  an  inverse  relationship  between 
bond price and interest rate, there is a prospect of capital gains when the interest 
rates moderate. One, however, must be conscious of market risks that could result 
in losses in case the interest rate cycle reverses. 
G-sec  have  reasonable  liquidity  G-sec  have  reasonable  liquidity  and  can  be 
transacted on NDS-OM. Retail investors can trade easily through banks and primary 
dealers with an SGL account in RBI. 
G-sec help to diversify portfolio Investments in government securities would help in 
portfolio diversification and consequently reduce risk for retail investors. 
    Drivers of retail participation 
The reasons for low retail interest in government securities stems from reasons, such as, low 
awareness  and  understanding  regarding  the  market;  availability  of  competing  financial 
instruments of broadly similar characteristics; high transactions costs for intermediaries and 
lack of convenient access to the market. For market development, it is necessary to develop 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
efficient  mechanism  for  delivering  simple  products  to  retail  clients.  In  many  emerging 
markets,  the  administrative  and  information  technology  costs  of  going  straight  to  retail 
investors have been prohibitive. With advent of internet and wireless communication systems 
gaining  wide  acceptability,  this  situation  is,  however,  rapidly  changing,  and  possibilities  for 
cost-efficient sale and distribution of government securities are increasing. Leveraging such 
new technology to access a broader set of potential investors could also have implications 
for the design and functioning of the market and could change investor profiles. 
In order to promote retail participation, it is essential to promote financial literacy and investor 
education,  ease  access  to  the  G-sec  market  by  leveraging  technology  and  incentivising 
intermediaries including use obligation in primary dealers/banks, etc. to place securities with 
end investors; incentivising Collective investment vehicles, such as, mutual funds, to cater to 
investment needs of the retail investors in G-sec market. 
11.  They  can  also  serve  as  an  alternative  placement  for  funds  other  than  bank  deposits, 
inducing more competition in this part of the financial sector, and can be a cost-effective way 
for the government to reach retail investors. 
Measures taken by the Reserve Bank of India 
Notwithstanding the predominantly institutional character of the G-sec market, Reserve Bank 
of India has recognised merit in promoting retail participation and has initiated several policy 
measures to this end (Box 1). 
Initiatives taken by Government and 
the Reserve Bank of India to develop retailing of G-sec 
Box 1 
The Government Securities Act, 2006: The Act has several features, such as, allowing pledging the 
Government securities for availing loans, legal recognition of ownership to holdings in gilt accounts, 
introduction of nomination facility, etc. to facilitate retail investors holding G-sec. 
Non-competitive bidding in primary auctions: Non-competitive bidding facility has been allowed in the 
auction  of  dated  Central  Government  securities.  This  facility  is  open  to  any  person  including  firms, 
companies, corporate bodies, institutions, provident funds and trusts not maintaining a current account 
or an SGL account with the Reserve Bank. 
Introduction  of  odd  lot:  A  separate  odd-lot  segment  has  been  created  for  the  purpose  of  retail 
participation wherein the minimum market lot size has been kept at ₹10,000 for G-sec and ₹25,000 for 
T-bills. Odd lot segment has trades below ₹50 million. 
Improvement  in  settlement  mechanism:  A  new  settlement  mechanism  (Multi  Modal  Settlement) 
through commercial banks has been put in place for entities not maintaining a current account with the 
Reserve Bank and not regulated by Reserve Bank. 
Retail  debt  segment  on  stock  exchange:  Reserve  Bank  has  permitted  trading  of  G-sec  on  stock 
exchanges in 2003. NSE had launched a retail debt segment to encourage wider participation of all 
classes of investors across the country (including retail  investors) in G-sec. In order to attract retail 
investors, minimum lot size has been kept low at ₹1,000 (face value). 
Investor  education:  With  a  view  to  bringing  about  awareness  among  the  smaller  players,  such  as, 
co-operative banks, provident funds, trusts, etc., the Reserve Bank has been organizing workshops in 
major towns. Reserve  Bank has also  prepared  a primer on G-sec market which is available on the 
Reserve Bank website (http://www.rbi.org.in/commonman/English/scripts/ FAQs.aspx?SID=7). 
Web based access to Gilt account holders: Reserve Bank has introduced a web-based facility wherein 
gilt account holders can participate in primary and secondary g-sec market using internet. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Box 1 (cont) 
Initiatives taken by Government and 
the Reserve Bank of India to develop retailing of G-sec 
Incentives  to  financial  institutions  and  intermediaries:  PDs  have  been  allowed  to  take  into  account 
non-competitive  bids  for  fulfilment  of  bidding  commitment  and  prescribed  success  ratio.  Similarly, 
banks have been allowed for undertaking retailing in G-sec with non-bank clients on outright basis and 
there is no restriction on the period between sale and purchase. A scheme of liquidity support to the 
gilt funds has been put in place, under which Reserve Bank provides collateralized liquidity support up 
to 20 per cent of holdings in Government securities for a maximum period of 14 days. 
Widening  NDS-OM  membership:  With  a  view  to  widening  the  secondary  market  in  Government 
Securities  to  mid-segment investors,  well-managed  and  financially  sound  Urban  Cooperative  Banks 
(UCBs) have been permitted to become direct members of NDS-OM. 
Retailing by PDs: In order to bring more retail and mid segment investors in Government securities 
market, under new authorisation policy for PDs (2011), Reserve Bank of India has mandated primary 
dealers to achieve an annual turnover target on behalf of mid-segment and retail investors that should 
not be less than 75 per cent of minimum NOF. 
DVP-III facility to gilt account holders: To enable the gilt account holders to get the benefit of efficient 
use  of  funds  and  securities,  Reserve  Bank  has  extended  the  DvP  –  III  facility  to  all  transactions 
undertaken by the Gilt Account Holders except transactions undertaken between Gilt Account Holders 
of the same custodian. 
To ease the process of investment by retail/mid-segment investors, a web-enabled platform 
which would seamlessly integrate their funds and securities accounts has been planned by 
the  Reserve  Bank  of  India.  Some  major  banks  have  also  initiated  measures  like  on-line 
trading  portal  for  the  retail  investors.  Recently  Reserve  Bank  has  introduced  a  web-based 
solution for direct participation of all gilt account holders in the primary auction for G-sec as 
well as the secondary market transactions (Box 2). 
Web-based access to retail & mid-segment investors in G-sec 
Box 2 
In order to facilitate direct participation of retail and mid-segment investors in the secondary market for 
G-sec,  a  web-based  secondary  market  module  was  launched  in  NDS-OM  in  June  2012.  The 
web-based system is in addition to the existing voice market. Before the launch of this facility, various 
non-NDS  members  {Gilt  Account  Holders  (GAH)}  were  placing  their  bids  through  Primary  Member 
(PM) i.e. the NDS Member with whom GAHs have gilt account and current account. In the web-based 
system, PMs continue to be responsible for settlement of both the fund and security leg of the G-sec 
transactions  of  GAHs.  In  the  web-based  system,  the  GAHs  are  in  a  better  position  to  control  their 
orders and have access to real time live quotes in the market which enhances transparency. Further, 
they  are  better  placed  to  manage  their  position  since  notifications  of  orders  executed  as  well  as 
various  queries  are  available  online.  The  GAHs  have  shown  a  reasonable  interest  in  web-based 
secondary market platform. 
To further enhance the access of GAHs to Primary Auction system, Reserve Bank has also introduced 
an  internet  based  solution  wherein  GAHs  were  given  direct  access  for  participating  in  primary 
auctions.  With  the  introduction  of  this  facility,  GAHs  have  better  control  over  their  bids  and  can 
participate  more  effectively  in  the  primary  auction  process.  PMs  continue  to  be  responsible  for  the 
settlement of such bids placed by their GAH as earlier. 
As  the  Core  Banking  Solution  (E-Kuber  system)  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  replaced  Primary 
Auction  module,  Reserve  Bank  is  in  the  process  of  providing  similar  features  (as  in  web-based 
system) in CBS E-Kuber system. 
Considering  wide  reach  of  exchanges,  approach  of  allowing  retail  investors  to  access  the 
G-sec  market  through  stock  exchanges  can  be  one  of  the  most  feasible  options.  The 
Reserve Bank had also allowed buying and selling of government securities through stock 
exchanges since 2003 to facilitate easier access and wider participation. Trading volumes, 
however,  continue  to  be  very  low  in  the  exchanges.  The  Working  Group  on  Enhancing 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
in 
the  Government  Securities  and 
Liquidity 
Interest  Rate  Derivatives  Markets 
(Chairman: R. Gandhi)  [Gandhi  Committee]  had  examined  this  aspect  and  had  made 
recommendations  to  simplify  operational  procedures  for  seamless  movement  of  securities 
from  SGL form to  demat form  and  vice  versa  and  permit  banks  and  PDs  to  obtain  limited 
membership  of  stock  exchanges  for  undertaking  proprietary  trades  in  G-sec  on  the 
exchanges to promote trading of G-sec on stock exchanges. Reserve Bank is examining the 
recommendations in consultation with all the stakeholders. It would be interesting to note that 
Australia  recently  passed  legislation  to  enable  retail  trading  of  Australian  government 
securities on the Australian Stock Exchange. The Australian government has put a mid–2013 
timeframe  for  trading  to  commence.  All  benchmark  bonds  issued  by  the  Australian 
government,  including  Treasury  bonds  and  Treasury  indexed  bonds  will  be  available  for 
trading.  In  India,  by  improving  access  to  order  matching  platforms  and  promoting  safe 
clearing and settlement systems, widening access to retail investors is being pursued with 
vigour. 
Factors inhibiting retailing of G-sec in the Indian context 
Penetration  of  G-sec  to  individuals  could  not  be  achieved  mainly  on  account  of  the 
competition from other instruments, many of them having tax benefits, such as, small savings 
schemes from the Government like Savings bonds and National Savings Certificates (NSCs). 
These  instruments  are  targeted  at  the  retail  investors  and  the  effective  return  on  these 
instruments work out to be higher than the yield on marketable securities which have no tax 
concessions. 
The predominance of institutional investors and large borrowing needs of the issuer, i.e. “the 
sovereign”  resulted  in  market  is  characterised  by  very  large  transaction  size.  Though  we 
have provided odd lot segment in NDS-OM for trading in small lot size, there are not many 
quotes available, thereby discouraging small investors. Thus, the present market for G-sec is 
not  well  suited  to  retail/individual  investors  who  trade  in  small  amounts  and  are  generally 
buy-and-hold investors. Moreover, G-sec are not actively traded on stock exchanges. 
Since volatility in prices of fixed-income securities is low vis-à-vis equity, investors generally 
gain through small changes in prices of debt instruments by committing large amounts. While 
institutional  investors,  by  nature,  are  big  players  who  transact  in  large  amounts  and  also 
have access to funding markets both collateralized and un- collateralized, they are in a better 
position to transact in this market. Due to a lack of similar facility to individual investors, they 
are  not  in  a  position  to  trade  in  these  instruments.  Thus,  speculative  interest  of  retail 
investors is minimal in G-sec. 
Normally, retail investors participate in sovereign debt market through mutual funds. G-sec 
holdings  of  the  mutual  funds,  however,  are  also  very  low  and  as  per  latest  information 
available,  their  holding  is  around  0.5  per  cent  of  total  outstanding G-sec.  Of  course  in  the 
recent times, thanks to huge spurt in market volumes due to transient as well as structural 
factors providing huge potential for capital gains, G-sec has received greater attraction of the 
MFs including the gilt funds. One of the reasons for lack of adequate participation of MFs in 
G-sec is lack of tax concessions on income from debt oriented MFs on lines similar to tax 
concessions  already  in  place  for  investment  in  equity  oriented  MFs.  It  may  be  noted  that 
dividend  received  by  unit  holders,  dividend  distribution  tax  payable  by  mutual  funds,  long 
term  capital  gain  are  exempted  from  tax  in  case  of  equity  oriented  mutual  funds.  Unlike 
equity  oriented  MFs,  debt  MFs  are  subject  to  dividend  distribution  tax  at  the  rate  of 
12.5 per cent.  Besides they  are  subject to tax  on  long-term  capital gains  at  20  per  cent  of 
capital gain after allowing indexation benefit or at 10 per cent flat without indexation benefit, 
whichever  is  less  and  short  term  capital  gains  are  subject  to  tax  as  per  the  tax  bracket 
applicable to the investor. Such differential taxation acts as a disincentive for mutual funds 
investments. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Lack of investor awareness is another factor impacting retail interest in G-sec market. The 
market  is  complex  and  awareness  of  the  risks  and  rewards  relating  to  investment 
opportunities is limited. The terminology like  yield curve, yield to maturity, etc. may not be 
easily comprehensible for a common investor. The market participants/intermediaries have 
not been proactive in providing adequate information/investor education. 
The way forward 
In  India, the  need  to  convert  savers  into  investors  is  paramount.  As  described  in  the  draft 
National  Strategy  for  Financial  Education  large  participation  of  domestic  retail  investors  in 
securities  market  will  reap  dividends  by  increasing  depth  of  securities  market,  reducing 
dependence on foreign investors and domestic savers reaping benefits of economic growth. 
In this regard all stakeholders including Government, Reserve Bank and financial institutions 
must treat promoting retail participation in G-sec market as a priority. I will detail few thoughts 
on the steps we need to take to revitalise the retail / mid-segment participation. 
Improving investor awareness & education 
Knowledge empowers investors. In case of G-sec market, the investor awareness is low. The 
national  focus  on  inclusive  growth  recognises  that  financial  literacy  and  education  play  a 
crucial role in financial inclusion. Draft National Strategy for Financial Education (NSFE) for 
India has been prepared under the aegis of FSDC and is in public domain. This document 
clearly articulates the future vision relating to financial literacy and empowerment leading to 
inclusive  growth.  The  draft  Strategy  seeks  to  create  a  financially  aware  and  empowered 
India. There is a need to encourage awareness among retail investor class to promote G-sec 
as an alternate investment instrument. In pursuit of this objective, stakeholders must make 
concerted  efforts  for  investor  education  with  regard  to  G-sec  market.  Given  their  reach, 
media,  both  print  and  electronic,  have  also  very  important  role  to  play  here.  Banks,  PDs, 
financial  institutions  and  stock  exchanges  may  take  lead  in  this  endeavour  by  creating 
awareness  about  the  products,  risks  and  rewards  associated  with  G-sec  market.  Reserve 
Bank  has  been  spreading  awareness  to  mid-segment  investors  by  conducting  training 
sessions / seminars on regular basis. 
Launching of new products 
There is merit in the issuer focusing on products catering to the retail investors. For instance, 
special  bonds  called  Obligasi  Ritel  Indonesia  (ORIs)  are  issued  by  the  Government  of 
Indonesia, especially for retail investors. These bonds carry higher yields compared to other 
fixed income options including time deposits and provide monthly coupon payments. These 
bonds are issued in denomination of Rupiah 5 million and can be purchased by only retail 
investors in the primary market but they can be traded in the secondary market by both retail 
as  well  as  institutional  investors.  In  Indian  context,  one  product  that  could  generate 
significant  retail  interest  is  the  “inflation  linked  bond”  for  retail  investors.  The  Gandhi 
Committee  has  recommended  Government  of  India  can  consider  issuing  inflation-indexed 
bonds  (IIBs)  specifically  for  retail/individual  investors  since  inflation  affects  the  poor  and 
middle  class  significantly.  The  retail  investors  generally  look  for  asset  class  which  could 
provide clean real return, i.e., an instrument which provide complete hedge against inflation. 
Furthermore,  in  view  of  retail  investors  not  having  complete  information  and  technical 
knowhow and thus, lacking expertise in pricing, greater use of non-competitive route could 
be  explored  for  generating  retail  demand  for  IIBs.  Towards  this  end,  we  are  considering 
increasing the non-competitive portion from five per cent of the notified amount as applicable 
to  the  primary  auctions  of  the  Central  Government  dated  securities  to  10  per  cent  while 
launching IIBs. We are in discussion with the Government with regard to issuance of IIBs as 
part  of  normal  market  borrowing  program  and  special  bonds  linked  to  inflation  could  be  a 
medium term target. Similarly mutual funds could design products based on G-sec to capture 
investor interests. Reserve Bank provides liquidity support on any day up to 20 per cent of 
the outstanding stock of government securities, including treasury bills, held by the gilt funds 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
investors 
in  Mumbai.  Catering  to  retail 
as at the end of the previous working day, to gilt funds to encourage such funds to create a 
wider investor base for government securities market. 
Improving access to the market 
The existing infrastructure for G-sec viz. depository, intermediaries, trading infrastructure is 
concentrated in Mumbai. This has led to the concentration of treasury activities of banks and 
PDs 
located  across  the  country,  requires 
establishment and maintenance of a wide distribution network. Banks, by having an existing 
network of branches spread across the country and on a CBS platform, and Post Offices with 
a wide geographical presence are well placed to offer investment services to retail investors 
in the G-sec. This potential must be tapped and leveraged as a distribution channel to cater 
to retail investors. Banks/PDs can create designated desks to focus on retail trades. 
Leveraging technology for promoting retail trades 
With  new  technologies  like  internet  and  wireless  communication  systems,  possibilities  for 
cost-efficient sale and distribution of G-sec are increasing. As such, there is an urgent need 
to  leverage  upon  technology  to  provide  easy  and  operationally  convenient  access  to  the 
retail investors. New distribution channels can be contemplated. For example, in Singapore 
bank networks/ATMs are being used to distribute G-sec. In India, some banks have started 
on-line  trading  portals  for  G-sec.  One  bank  has  infact  vigorously  marketing  their  product 
which provides wide accessibility to retail investors in G-sec. The bank is also integrating its 
portal  with  the  mobile  banking  platform.  Other  banks/primary  dealers  may  consider  similar 
initiatives for market development. 
Improving liquidity in G-sec market 
Secondary market liquidity in G-sec is limited to a few securities and hence it is difficult to 
find  a  market  quotes  for  a  large  number  of  G-sec.  Due  to  the  lack  of  secondary  market 
liquidity,  investors,  especially  retail/individual  investors  end  up  paying  large  illiquidity 
premium when they try selling the illiquid (off-the-run) securities. Lack of liquidity is a critical 
factor that needs to be addressed for ensuring participation by retail investors in the G-sec 
market.  Gandhi  Committee  has  examined  the  liquidity  problem  in  g-sec  in  detail  and  had 
made recommendations like consolidation of outstanding Government Securities, allocation 
of  specific  securities  to  each  PD  for  market  making  in  them;  gradual  increase  in  the 
investment  limit  for  FIIs  in  Government  securities,  prepare  a  roadmap  to  gradually  bring 
down the upper-limit on the HTM portfolio in a calibrated manner to make it non-disruptive to 
the  entities  and  other  stakeholders;  and  promotion  of  the  term-repo  market  with  suitable 
restrictions  on  “leverage”  and  introduction  of  tripartite  repo  in  Government  Securities. 
Further, Gandhi Committee also suggested a suitable mechanism for market-making by PDs 
in  the  odd-lot  segment.  The  Reserve  Bank  is  in  consultation  with  the  stakeholders  on  the 
modalities of implementation of these recommendations. There is also merit in the long-term, 
to  establish,  a  centralized  market  maker  for  retail  participants  in  G-sec  who  would  quote 
two-way prices of G-sec for retail/individual investors and leverage on existing and possible 
infrastructure for reaching retail/individual investors. 
Reduction in transaction costs 
Transaction  costs  for  trading  and  maintaining  gilt  accounts  are  high  for  retail  investors. 
Charges, such as, account-opening fee, which are high and not standardised, need review. A 
regime  of  reasonable  and  uniform  charges  is  customer  friendly  and  can  lead  to  tangible 
benefits  in  promoting  retail  investments  since  such  a  move  would  bring  in  much  needed 
transparency and induce competition among bank/PDs, which will be beneficial to the retail 
investors  in  the  long  run.  FIMMDA/PDAI  may  work  towards  this  objective.  In  order  to 
popularise opening of gilt accounts, the Reserve Bank of India could consider remunerating 
banks and PDs based on performance of opening gilt accounts in order to incentivise them to 
cater  to  retail  customers.  Banks/PDs/depositories  could  also  think  of  some  type  of  basic 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
gilt/demat accounts for limited number of transactions upto certain amount of holdings with 
reduced charges for the retail investors in debt segment. 
Trading in stock exchanges 
Considering  the  reach  and  familiarity  of  the  exchange  platforms,  promotion  of  trading  in 
G-sec  on  the  exchanges  can  be  an  another  means  of  activating  retail  interest  in  G-sec. 
Reserve Bank is considering allowing banks and PDs to become members of exchanges to 
undertake proprietary trades in G-sec. Reserve Bank is also in consultation with stakeholders 
to  simplify  operational  procedures  for  seamless  movement  of  securities  from  SGL  form  to 
demat  form  and  vice  versa  to  promote  trading  of  G-sec  on  stock  exchanges.  It  would  be 
beneficial  in  this  regard if  the  stock  exchanges focus  on  investor  awareness  to  encourage 
retail investors. 
Incentives for G-sec trading 
Government  may  consider  providing  tax  concession  on  income  from  debt  oriented  mutual 
funds  can  be  a  measure  aimed  towards  bringing  in  new  classes  of  investors  as  well  as 
encourage  further  investments  in  G-sec  by  existing  investors.  Providing  such  concession 
would incentivise mutual funds and investors to increase participation in the G-sec market. 
This would also remove the differential tax treatment between debt and equity oriented MFs. 
Though  there  is  a  possibility  of  loss  of  revenue,  there  is  high  probability  that  enhanced 
activity could neutralise the revenue loss. 
Summing up 
Though  internationally  and  in  India,  G-sec market  is  predominantly  institutional,  it  is  in  the 
interest  of  both  the  issuer  and  investor,  that  retail  participation  in  G-sec  market  is 
encouraged. It would provide a stable source of demand for government securities and this 
in  times  of  volatility,  can  cushion  the  impact  of  concerted  sales  by  sections  of  institutional 
investors.  Such  demand  is  essential  for  financial  stability  and  orderly  functioning  of  the 
markets. Reserve Bank has recognised the importance of retail and mid-segment investors 
many of whom are statutorily required to invest in G-sec in the G-sec market and has taken 
several steps to promote the same. Improving access to both primary and secondary market, 
providing  safe  trading  and  settlement  process  has  made  G-sec  market  more  efficient. 
Working  Group  (Gandhi  Committee)  constituted  to  examine  enhancing  liquidity  in  the 
government  securities  and  interest rate derivatives  markets  has  extensively  studied  issues 
pertaining to retail participation and made several useful recommendations. Reserve bank is 
evaluating these recommendations in consultation with the market players for their speedy 
implementation.  Certain  factors,  such  as,  lack  of  investor  awareness/education;  competing 
instruments and high transaction costs discourage retail investors from participating in bond 
market  in  India.  These  factors  could  be  addressed  by  taking  steps,  such  as,  improving 
awareness of investors, introducing new products, such as, the issuance of inflation linked 
securities  would  protect  retail  investor  from  effects  of  inflation,  thereby  preventing  loss  of 
purchasing power, improving access through leveraging technology and reducing transaction 
costs. Reserve Bank is committed to encourage diversification of the investor base to further 
deepen  and  widen  the  G-sec  market.  It  is  also  necessary  that  all  other  stakeholders  like 
banks, primary dealers as also the media work in earnest to promote retail participation by 
actively  engaging  with  the  investors  and  focusing  on  providing  high  standard  of  customer 
service and hassle-free transaction experience. This has become a very important imperative 
for our economy given the declining share of household financial savings. 
I thank ASSOCHAM, in particular Shri Raj Kumar Dhoot, President, ASSOCHAM and Shri. 
Prithvi  Haldea,  Chairman,  Capital  Markets  Committee  of  ASSOCHAM  for  organizing  this 
conference and taking this national mission forward. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
