Mervyn King: A Governor looks back – and forward 
Speech by Mr Mervyn King, Governor of the Bank of England, at the Lord Mayor’s Banquet 
for Bankers and Merchants of the City of London, London, 19 June 2013. 
 My Lord Mayor, Ladies and Gentlemen: 
Chancellor:  thank  you  for  those  generous  words.  It  has  been  a  privilege  to  work  with  you 
over the past three years, a period of great change both at home and abroad. Your support 
for the Bank has been much appreciated at this end of town, and you have changed for the 
better the regulatory framework that oversees the City. But we both know that the past few 
years would have been much more difficult without the continual support of two people. And I 
am so pleased that both Frances and Barbara are with us tonight. And I’m particularly happy, 
George,  that  neither  you  nor  I  have  to  speak  after  either  of  them  because  experience 
suggests that we would suffer from the comparison. 
Lord  Mayor:  let  me  thank  you  too  for  presiding  over  my  final  Mansion  House  Dinner.  We 
have  enjoyed  many  musical  evenings  together,  and  Barbara  and  I  look forward to  sharing 
many more with you and Clare after you shed the chains of office later this year. The City 
has been extremely fortunate to benefit from your energy, drive and can-do attitude as Lord 
Mayor. 
I shall not detain you this evening with a retrospective examination of my time as Governor. 
Suffice it to say that it was a game of two halves. And, far from a boring goalless draw, it 
turned out to be a rather exciting and dramatic game, full of incident, with a red card or two 
and a passionate and at times justifiably angry crowd. We shall have to wait for the historians 
of tomorrow to file the full match report. 
Instead,  tonight  I  want  to  focus  on  the  twin  challenges  of  engineering  a  recovery  and 
reforming the financial system. I want to look back on the huge amount that has been done, 
and  look  forward  to  the  unfinished  business  on  both  fronts,  much  of  it  for  the  Bank  of 
England.  I  shall  also  tell  you  a  story  about  the  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  the 
Governor of the Bank of Canada and a certain Mr Osborne. But that comes later. 
Since  2008,  the  Bank’s  Monetary  Policy  Committee  has  gone  to  extraordinary  lengths  to 
stabilise the economy and support growth and employment. In fact, we have pursued what I 
have called the “paradox of policy”: doing in the short run, by encouraging spending through 
an unprecedentedly loose monetary policy, the opposite of what we need to do in the long 
run, which is to raise national saving. But that has been necessary to prevent an even worse 
recession,  and  without  similar  action  from  other  central  banks  the  world  might  have 
experienced a major depression. 
Now there are clear signs that a recovery in the UK, albeit modest, is underway. From the 
beginning of this year, business surveys have improved, broad money growth has stabilised 
at around 5% a year, and the housing market is picking up. Despite this encouraging picture, 
growth is not yet strong enough to reduce the considerable margin of spare capacity in the 
economy. Nor is recovery at an adequate rate fully assured. The weakness of the euro area 
and  the  problems  of  the  UK  banking  system  continue  to  act  as  a  drag  on  growth.  So  the 
need to support the recovery remains. 
Of course we must be mindful of the risks from injecting more money into the economy. We 
cannot  afford  to  return  to  the  inflationary  episodes  of  the  past.  In  the  two  decades  before 
inflation  targeting  was  introduced  in  1992,  inflation  averaged  almost  10%  a  year.  The 
purpose of inflation targeting was to change the  way in  which  interest rate decisions  were 
made and to build credibility in the UK’s commitment to price stability. Over the following two 
decades, CPI inflation averaged only a fraction above 2%. Today, inflation is above the 2% 
target – as it has been for most of the past five years. But our economy has had to absorb an 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
oil price shock on a par with that of the 1970s, as well as a sharp depreciation of sterling. 
And yet there are few signs of domestically generated inflation, which has remained close to 
2%.1   Pay rises and underlying inflationary pressure are low, and the medium-term outlook is 
for inflation to fall back to the target. Inflation targeting achieved its objective. 
The  greater  risk  at  present  is  that,  over  the  next  few  years,  unemployment  remains 
unnecessarily high. We must not forget that one million more people are out of work than in 
the five years before the crisis. It is too soon to say the job of securing recovery is complete. 
There is a powerful case for more stimulus in the short run. 
The  present  extraordinary  monetary  policies  cannot,  however,  continue  indefinitely.  Both 
nominal and real interest rates are at unsustainably low levels. There is an understandable 
yearning for a return to normality. And in recent weeks bond yields have risen – up around 
45 basis points since the start of May. But such market moves should not be confused with a 
return to normality. 
A rapid return to higher interest rates would do great damage to the balance sheets of highly 
indebted  households,  companies  and,  especially,  financial  institutions.  The  challenge  in 
returning  to  normality  is  not  so  much  managing  market  expectations  when  that  eventually 
happens,  important  though  that  is,  but  in  creating  the  economic  conditions  in  which  it  is 
sensible to return to more normal levels of interest rates. The real challenge – on a global 
scale – is to rebalance the world economy so that very low interest rates are not required to 
exhort deficit countries to spend in order to absorb the surpluses elsewhere. 
Monetary policy cannot provide the answer. It can only buy time to bring about the necessary 
structural changes in investment, trade and capital flows. Whether they involve changes in 
currency values or restructuring of debt is a political choice, but a failure to deal with global 
imbalances will not only retard the recovery in the world as a whole, but worsen the scale of 
the adjustment ultimately needed. It will inevitably be a bumpy ride. 
The  other  obstacle  to  a  return  to  normality  is  our  banking  system  where,  despite  the 
generous  provision  of  liquidity  and  funding from  the  State,  lending  remains  lacklustre,  and 
risk premia high. Although the combined balance sheet of our largest banks has shrunk since 
the height of the crisis in 2008, it is still 400% of annual GDP. Leverage ratios have fallen, 
but all our major banks remain highly leveraged. And of course the two biggest lenders to the 
domestic  economy  remain  largely  in  state  ownership.  It  is  difficult  to  imagine  a  banking 
sector  like  that  making  a  real  contribution  to  any  economic  recovery.  It  must  be  time  for 
decisive action. 
Chancellor, you have made clear tonight that you embrace that view. Britain needs a thriving 
banking system to serve households and businesses, and Lloyds and  RBS  will be able to 
play that role to the full only when back in the private sector. I welcome your announcement 
that Lloyds Banking Group will be returned to private hands soon. And I very much support 
your plans for a full review of the future structure of RBS. 
The  return  of  banking  supervision  to  the  Bank of  England  has  also  seen  decisive  actions. 
The Financial Policy Committee (FPC) and the new Prudential Regulation Authority (PRA) 
have  acted  quickly  to  make  our  banking  system  more  resilient.  In  March,  the  FPC 
recommended  that  banks’  capital  should  be  assessed  using  more  prudent  estimates  of 
expected losses and risk weights. Since April, the Board of the PRA has been making those 
assessments and asking banks to take action to deal with any shortfall of capital. That work 
is now complete, the banks know the results, and tomorrow we will publish them for each of 
the  major  banks.  In  total,  the  eight  largest  banks  have  a  capital  shortfall  of  around  £25bn 
relative to the standard recommended by the FPC. After this exercise, our major banks all 
now have plans for actions to fill that shortfall. The first evidence is the announcement on 
                                                
1   As measured by the rate of increase in the GDP deflator. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Monday by the Co-operative Bank. Others will follow. By taking firm pre-emptive action, we 
have  shown  what  the  new  judgement-led  approach  to  supervision  means  in  practice.  It 
substitutes  substance  for  process  and  judgement  for  box-ticking.  We  need  not  more  but 
better  regulation  and,  just  as  with  monetary  policy,  we  have  changed  the  way  regulatory 
decisions are made. 
The PRA announcement tomorrow is another step in dealing with the legacy of the past. It 
will make our banking system more resilient and better able to support recovery. But it is too 
soon to say that the job is done. Many of our major lenders will still be highly levered. The 
levels of capital required by the Vickers reforms, on the one hand, and the Basel standards 
for large international banks, on the other, mean that there is clearly some way to go before 
we can claim to have a really well-capitalised banking system. 
In  future,  the  FPC  and  the  PRA  will  work  together  to  conduct  regular  stress  tests  of  our 
banks, starting in 2014. Those stress tests will I am sure be made public, and banks will be 
expected to set out their plans for making up any identified shortfall in capital. Managing this 
process, and the transition to a higher level of capital, will be key tasks for the FPC and PRA 
in the coming years. 
Those  who  argue  that  requiring  higher  levels  of  capital  will  necessarily  restrict  lending  are 
wrong. The reverse is true. It is insufficient capital that restricts lending. That is why some of 
our weaker banks are shrinking their balance sheets. Capital supports lending and provides 
resilience. And, without a resilient banking system, it will be difficult to sustain a recovery. 
Although higher capital does not restrict lending, requirements to hold more liquid assets do. 
Every pound of additional holdings of liquid assets is a pound that could otherwise be lent to 
the  real  economy.  That  is  why  the  Bank  has  stood  ready,  through  the  Special  Liquidity 
Scheme,  its  new  Discount  Window  Facility,  through  its  market  operations  (including  the 
ECTR) and through its Funding for Lending Scheme, to provide a backstop for the liquidity 
needs  of  the  banking  system  –  against  adequate  collateral  and  at  an  appropriate  interest 
rate.  Given  that  backstop,  the  FPC  has  over  the  past  year  been  recommending  that 
regulatory requirements to hold liquid assets should be loosened. 
The  Bank’s  provision  of  liquidity  to  the  banking  system  has  been  transformed  out  of  all 
recognition  in  the  past  six  years.  But  here too there  is  unfinished  business. We  asked  Bill 
Winters  to  review  our  system  and  make  recommendations  for  further  changes.  We  have 
reviewed  his  proposals  and  will  soon  be  taking  steps  to  expand  our  regular  auctions  to  a 
wider pool of collateral and to make our Discount Window Facility both cheaper and more 
easily accessible. 
All these policy actions have and will put our economy in position for a recovery. 
But we must also ensure that our financial system is truly reformed in a way that reflects the 
lessons of  the financial crisis. At this Dinner six years ago, before the crisis began, I said, 
“Excessive leverage is the common theme of many financial crises of the past. Are we really 
so  much  cleverer  than  the  financiers  of  the  past?”  We  are  all  much  wiser  now.  And  this 
country can claim to have been in the vanguard in learning lessons. Much has been done. 
But we cannot be complacent. As the memories of the crisis fade, and those who saw it at 
first hand retire, it is vital that the ‘audacity of pessimism’ is not lost. 
We must deal once and for all with the problem of financial institutions that are too big, or too 
important,  to  fail.  Some  progress  has  been  made.  When  the  crisis  hit,  we  in  the  UK  had 
neither an effective deposit insurance scheme nor a resolution framework to deal with failing 
banks. Now we have both. But there is unfinished business. Although the UK is leading the 
way  in  the  development  of  agreements  among regulators  worldwide  as  to  how  the  largest 
banks could be resolved, managing cross-border resolutions is still fraught with difficulty. We 
also need to implement the proposals of the Independent Commission on Banking as soon 
as possible, including the ‘ring-fence’ to separate commercial from investment banking, and 
the leverage ratio. A situation in which taxpayers again bear the burden when banks fail is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
unacceptable. That implicit guarantee is costly and distorts competition. The United Kingdom 
simply cannot afford to have an international banking centre if taxpayers have to underwrite a 
balance sheet that is many multiples of GDP. Too important to fail is too important to ignore. 
The economics of banking is changing, and the City has an opportunity to adapt and lead the 
new forms of banking that will emerge. The strength of the City of London has always been 
based  on  two  qualities:  its  ability  to  adapt  to  new  circumstances,  and  its  truly  global 
perspective. That will stand us in good stead now. But the future of banking will depend not 
only on changes to leverage but also on a greater degree of responsibility by all involved: the 
leaders  of  our  banks,  regulators  and  consumers.  We  must  restore  trust  in  our  banking 
system. 
Today’s substantial and authoritative Report from the Parliamentary Commission on Banking 
Standards is an important landmark in mapping the path to that goal. Changing the ethics 
and  culture  of  banking  is  a  precondition  of  restoring  trust.  As  the  Commission’s  Report 
shows,  the  sheer  size  and  complexity  of  global  banks  have  led  to  failures  of  governance. 
Governments,  regulators,  prosecutors  and  non-executive  directors  have  all  struggled  to 
come to terms with firms that pose a risk to taxpayers, cannot be prosecuted because of their 
systemic importance, and are difficult to manage because of their size and complexity. It is 
not in our national interest to have banks that are too big to fail, too big to jail, or simply too 
big. 
Solving these problems is the work of a generation, and I hope that the financial community 
will rise to this challenge and not shrink from it. The City as a whole does merit trust. And, 
when the historians look back on this period many years from now, they will conclude that 
although we were not wiser than the financiers of the past, we did learn and we reformed, 
and the country benefitted and prospered as a result. 
As I leave the scene, there is undoubtedly much unfinished business for my successor. I am 
delighted  that  Mark  Carney  will  be  the  next  Governor.  He  brings  a  new  generation  of 
leadership  to  the  Bank,  as  well  as  enormous  experience  from  his  time  as  a  central  bank 
governor and his role in steering the Financial Stability Board. He has my wholehearted best 
wishes for his term as Governor. 
Mark is, however, not the first Canadian to have been in the frame for the Governorship of 
the Bank of England. The very first Governor of the Bank of Canada, Graham Towers, was 
put  forward  by  Keynes  as  a  successor  to  Montagu  Norman.  The  proposed  transfer  fell 
through  –  apparently  the  Directors  of  the  Bank  viewed  the  Canadian  as  ‘too  Keynesian’. 
What that tells us about his views on monetary activism I do not know. But it is perhaps worth 
noting  that  Towers’  first  Deputy  Governor  was  a  Mr.  Osborne,  who  agreed  to  move  to 
Canada  from  the  Bank  of  England  for  a  spell  of  ‘up  to  5  years’.  Sadly,  the  partnership 
between the Canadian Governor and Mr. Osborne lasted only three years, before the latter 
departed. But, Chancellor, remember that history doesn’t always repeat itself. 
In Britain, and especially in the City, we have always welcomed talent from around the world 
in  academic,  business,  artistic  and  sporting  life.  Why  should  central  banking  be  different? 
George, you are to be congratulated on Mark’s appointment. 
I shall of course be sad to leave. But Governors come and Governors go – it is institutions, 
and the ideas they embody, that matter more. I leave behind a strong, independent, much-
changed  Bank  now  focused  on  its  two  main  responsibilities.  The  lessons  of  recent  years 
have  been  learnt  and  it  is  up  to  us  all  to  remember  them.  The  test  of  our  monetary 
arrangements is to see them work successfully under new leadership, none of whom were 
present at the creation. No doubt some things will change. No doubt some things need to 
change.  After  all  one  does  not  change  an  institution  in  order  to  set  it  in  concrete.  A 
successful institution, just like the City as a  whole, always adapts to new circumstances. I 
know the Bank will continue to do just that under Mark’s leadership. Mark inherits a wealth of 
young talent in the Bank, led by three outstanding Deputy Governors: Charlie Bean, Andrew 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Bailey  and,  of  course,  Paul  Tucker,  who  has  made  an  enormous  contribution  to  the  Bank 
over three decades. 
The Bank of England is in safe hands, and the country will be the better for it. 
Lord Mayor, the wheel may have come off your carriage at last year’s installation, but then 
we  saw  your  characteristic  ability  to  turn  every  situation  to  advantage  as  you  returned  in 
triumph to Mansion House in a Land Rover. As the City too faces the challenge of turning 
disaster  into  triumph,  it  would  do  well  to  follow  your  example  of  how  to  “treat  those  two 
imposters just the same”. 
Roger, your commitment to the promotion of the creative industries – crucial to this, the most 
exciting  city  in  the  world  –  as  well  as  opportunities  for  children,  aspiring  musicians,  even 
trees and bicycles, is well known. And all of us here tonight would like to pay tribute to you 
Lord Mayor, and to thank the Lady  Mayoress, Clare, and yourself, Roger, for the splendid 
hospitality which you’ve extended to us all this evening. 
So I invite you all to rise and join me in the traditional toast of good health and prosperity to 
“The Lord Mayor and the Lady Mayoress, Roger and Clare Gifford”. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
