Masaaki Shirakawa: Toward strengthening the competitiveness and 
growth potential of Japan’s economy 
Speech by Mr Masaaki Shirakawa, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Executive Member 
Meeting  of  the  Policy  Board  of  Nippon  Keidanren  (Japan  Business  Federation),  Tokyo, 
28 February 2013. 
 Introduction 
It is a great honor to have this opportunity to address the executive member meeting of the 
Policy  Board  of  Nippon  Keidanren  today.  Before  I  start,  let  me  express  my  deepest 
appreciation  for  the  information  and  views  on  current  developments  in  economic  and 
financial activities as well as on policy conduct provided to us by all the member firms. 
Today’s speech is the last one I will give as Governor of the Bank of Japan. However, it was 
not difficult for me to decide today’s main topic, “toward strengthening the competitiveness 
and growth potential of Japan’s economy”, because it is the most pressing issue for Japan at 
present.  It  is  also  a  very  important  theme  for  the  Bank  of  Japan.  As  you  know,  at  the 
Monetary Policy Meeting in January, the Bank decided to introduce a “price stability target” 
and set it at 2 percent.1 This target was introduced based on the recognition that progress 
would  be  made  by  a  wide  range  of  entities  in  their  efforts  toward  strengthening  the 
competitiveness  and  growth  potential  of  Japan’s  economy  (Chart  1).  For  this  reason,  it  is 
extremely  important  in  conducting  monetary  policy  whether  such  efforts  will  actually  make 
progress. In the following, I would like to talk about this theme while paying due regard to the 
perspectives of macroeconomics, corporate behavior, and economic policymaking. 
The aim of economic policy 
I. 
While there has been active discussion regarding the conduct of economic policies in Japan, 
I will first consider the aim of economic policy and the kind of situation we expect Japan’s 
economy to attain. Needless to say, the ultimate aim of economic policy is to raise the living 
standard of each citizen. While there is no single indicator for gauging people’s quality of life, 
if we were to put this in approximate terms, the key aim of macroeconomic policy is to raise 
the per capita consumption level, or to raise the real gross domestic product (GDP), which is 
closely  related  to  the  former,  in  a  sustainable  manner  (Chart  2).  Having  said  this,  a  more 
detailed discussion is necessary when considering the various options regarding economic 
policy on the basis of the situation facing Japan’s economy. 
First, there is a need to consider the effects of the decline in the labor force due to the rapid 
aging of Japan’s population. Japan’s current real GDP remains below the level seen prior to 
the Lehman shock. Looking at per capita real GDP figures, the drop for Japan is relatively 
small compared with countries such as those in Europe (Chart 3). Furthermore, in terms of 
the  level  of  real  GDP  per  working-age  person,  Japan  has  exceeded  the  pre-crisis  level, 
which is a better performance than that of the United States. While “population decline” is 
one of the clichés used in discussing Japan’s economy, this fundamental fact is oftentimes 
disregarded  when  discussing  economic  developments.  Of  course,  figures  do  not  differ 
significantly within short time periods of a quarter or a year, but when considering Japan’s 
                                                
1  For details on decisions made at the Monetary Policy Meeting on January 22, 2013, including the introduction 
of  the  “price  stability  target”,  please  see  Masaaki  Shirakawa,  “The  Roles,  Missions,  and  Challenges  of  the 
Central  Bank” 
in  Tokyo),  January  25,  2013. 
http://www.boj.or.jp/en/announcements/press/koen_2013/data/ko130130a.pdf 
the  Japan  National  Press  Club 
(Speech  at 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
economic policy in the medium to long term, it is important to think in terms of changes in per 
capita or per worker data. 
Second, we need to take account of the progress in economic globalization. Specifically, it is 
necessary to look not only at real GDP but also at real gross national income (GNI). Real 
GNI is a concept of income that results from making the following two  adjustments to real 
GDP. One source of adjustment is the overseas income of Japanese nationals. Looking at 
figures  for  2012,  overseas  income  amounts  to  14.3  trillion  yen  –  that  is,  3.0  percent  of 
nominal GDP. In recent years, profits from outward direct investment have been increasing in 
addition  to  profits  from  outward  portfolio  investment  (Chart  4).  The  other  source  of 
adjustment is the change in real purchasing power due to changes in the foreign terms of 
trade. Japan’s terms of trade have been deteriorating in recent years, mainly due to the rise 
in commodity prices against the background of high growth in emerging economies. Trade 
gains/losses – in other words, real purchasing power arising from changes in the terms of 
trade – have thus been on a declining trend (Chart 5). Terms of trade undergo changes, not 
only due to commodity prices but also in response to the pricing power of Japanese firms 
through the non-price competitiveness of exports. Fluctuations in foreign exchange rates, for 
example depreciation of the yen, will raise real GDP through an increase in exports but may 
at times adversely affect trade gains/losses. Effects on real GNI depend on the net result that 
takes  into  account  these  two  adjustments  (Chart  6).  Setting  2000  as  the  base  year,  real 
overseas income increased by about 2.5 times in 2012, pushing up real GDP for 2012 by 
1.9 percent compared with that in 2000. On the other hand, the trade gains pushed real GDP 
downward by 5.8 percent. 
Third, another topic for discussion is how to treat nominal GDP and real GDP in considering 
economic  policy.  On  this  point,  both  of  these  increase  when  the  economy  grows  in  a 
sustainable  manner,  suggesting that  the  direction  of  medium- to  long-term  policy  is  not  all 
that different depending on which figure we take into account. What I must mention here is 
the cause-and-effect relationship between the two. The basic causal relationship is that, as 
real GDP rises, the output gap tightens and prices subsequently rise, resulting in a rise in 
nominal GDP (Chart 7). There are situations, of course, where prices fluctuate first, as seen 
during  the  time  of  the  oil  crises.  In  such  a  situation,  however,  economic  conditions 
deteriorate,  and  this  is  different from  what  we  wish  to  see. What  we  are  trying  to  achieve 
through economic policy is to raise real GDP, as a result of which nominal GDP will rise. 
In  relation  to  this,  the  results  of  the  Opinion  Survey  on  the  General  Public’s  Views  and 
Behavior that the Bank conducts on individuals on a quarterly basis provide some interesting 
findings.  The  survey  results  reveal  that  approximately  80  percent  of  the  respondents  
– irrespective of their sex, age, and occupation – have consistently viewed the price rise as 
“rather unfavorable” throughout the past surveys (Chart 8). Underlying the survey results is 
the  concern  that  wages  may  not  rise  even  if  prices  rise.  A  considerable  portion  of  the 
Japanese  public  is  not  simply  looking  for  a  situation  in  which  prices  rise.  In  the  phrase 
“overcoming  deflation”,  people  are  looking  for  a  situation  in  which  one’s  salary  rises, 
employment is secured, and profits increase; in other words, a situation characterized by a 
well-balanced improvement in economic conditions and consequent rise in prices. 
The  fourth  point  involves  the  problem  of  how  to  distribute  the  fruits  of  economic  growth. 
While market mechanism plays a key role in order for the economy to grow, this requires a 
perspective of society as a whole that accepts such mechanism at large. On this point, the 
situation surrounding income distribution is one of the crucial factors. In the United States, 
during the period of economic expansion preceding the Lehman shock – from 2002 to 2007 – 
the  real  incomes  of  the  highest-income  households  in  the  top  1  percentile  increased  by 
86 percent  and  household  average  income  increased  by  20  percent.  In  contrast,  the 
“median” household income – that is, the income that represents the middle of a series of all 
household incomes arranged in order of size – increased only by 10 percent, which amounts 
to  just  half  the  growth  of  the  average  income  (Chart  9).  The  situation  surrounding  income 
distribution partly depends on the proportion of the elderly that does not have any earnings, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
and reviewing this through a single indicator can therefore be challenging. Japan’s case may 
not  be  as  extreme  as  that  in  the  United  States.  Nevertheless,  awareness  of  the  need  to 
achieve  well-balanced  economic  growth,  especially  for  the  middle  class,  has  increased 
around the globe. 
The need to strengthen competitiveness and growth potential 
II. 
Bearing these issues related to the aim of economic policy in mind, let me now move on to 
the need to strengthen competitiveness and growth potential.2 
Looking at developments in a country’s economic growth rate over the longer term, factors 
affecting it can be broken down into real or supply-side factors – namely, capital stock, labor 
force, and technological innovation. Explaining this within the framework of so-called growth 
accounting, the growth rate can be broken down into growth in the number of workers and 
that of value-added per worker, in other words, the labor productivity growth rate (Chart 10). 
Mechanically estimating future growth in the number of workers, based on the assumption of 
the most recent labor participation rate by gender and age, the number of workers in Japan 
will change at a rate of –0.6 percent per annum in the 2010s and –0.8 percent in the 2020s. 
Meanwhile,  the  labor  productivity  growth  rate  for  the  years  2000  through  2008  –  a  period 
characterized  by  relatively  favorable  economic  conditions  –  was  1.4  percent  on  an  annual 
basis.  Adding  this  to  the  aforementioned  growth  in  the  number  of  workers,  the  average 
growth will become 0.8 percent for the 2010s and 0.6 percent for the 2020s. This will merely 
amount to maintaining positive growth over the next two decades. Japan’s economy faces a 
considerably  strong  headwind  in  the  form  of  a  decline  in  the  labor  force,  and  we  need  to 
more  seriously  acknowledge  its  implications.  Raising  the  labor  productivity  growth  rate 
further  will  alleviate  the  problem,  of  course.  Japan  has  achieved  a  growth  rate  slightly 
exceeding the average for the G-7 countries for the past 10 years, however, and it is not very 
plausible to think that we can raise it by 1 percent or more at once (Chart 11). 
At  any  rate,  raising  Japan’s  growth  potential  continuously  into  the  future  requires  work, 
especially strenuous work, on both the number of workers and the labor productivity growth 
rate. While efforts by a wide range of entities are necessary in such case, the main actors 
here,  above  all,  are  private  firms.  The  corporate  sector  has  consistently  had  a  savings 
surplus, together with households, since 1998 (Chart 12). A significant savings surplus by the 
corporate sector is a phenomenon now observed outside of Japan as well: it has spread to 
major  advanced  countries  since  the  start  of  the  2000s.  In  terms  of  the  amount  of  savings 
surplus  relative  to GDP, figures for the  United Kingdom,  Japan,  and  the  United States  are 
6.1 percent, 4.6 percent, and 4.1 percent, respectively. The most significant underlying cause 
of  this  savings  surplus  is  the  lack  of  attractive  investment  opportunities  at  home  amid 
expanding  investment  opportunities  in the  emerging markets.  Recently,  other causes  have 
also been pointed out, including the securing of funds to offset additional costs that may arise 
from a lack of funds for corporate pensions mainly resulting from a decline in interest rates. 
I presume that in your day-to-day decision making, you cannot muster enough confidence to 
invest at home despite having ample liquidity on hand (Chart 13). In fact, on-hand cash and 
deposits at Japanese firms has been increasing steadily: the proportion of Japanese firms 
listed on the First and Second Sections of the Tokyo Stock Exchange (TSE) holding cash 
and deposits exceeding the amount of interest-bearing debt – in other words, firms without 
net external borrowings – has recently become as high as 43 percent. 
                                                
2  The  importance  of  strengthening  growth  potential  and  of  the  supply  side  is  something  many  central  banks 
emphasize. Please see, for example, Speech given by Mervyn King, Governor of the Bank of England, at the 
CBI  Northern  Ireland  Mid-Winter  Dinner,  Belfast,  22  January  2013.  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/ 
publications/Documents/speeches/2013/speech631.pdf 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Of  course,  firms’  ample  on-hand  liquidity  itself  is  reasonable  up  to  some  level,  taking  into 
account experiences such as the post-bubble financial crisis and the aftermath of the failure 
of  Lehman  Brothers  –  that  is,  the  shortage  of  U.S.  dollar  funds  and  the  decline  in  the 
functioning of the CP market. The current level of on-hand liquidity, however, appears to go 
well beyond the amount of such precautionary demand. As for the use of excess funds, there 
are only three options: making real or financial investments at home and abroad; disbursing 
funds  to  employees  in  the  form  of  wages;  and  returning  them  to  stockholders  through 
dividend payments and share buybacks. The economy will not see positive outcomes unless 
some kind of change is brought about to the increased liquidity via one of the aforementioned 
routes. In that sense, it is extremely important to change the business environment, thereby 
modifying firms’ incentives. That is why in achieving sustainable growth with price stability, 
efforts toward strengthening the competitiveness and growth potential of Japan’s economy 
are necessary as much as monetary policy is indispensable in this regard. 
Outline of the course of future measures 
III. 
Next, I would like to outline the course of future efforts toward strengthening the economy’s 
competitiveness and growth potential. 
Capturing increasing overseas demand 
The  first  course  is  to  capture  increasing  overseas  demand  in  the  form  of  expanding 
Japanese firms’ overseas business activities. It is inappropriate to negatively describe such 
efforts  as  the  “hollowing-out”  of  industries  in  an  environment  where  overseas  economies  
–  mainly  emerging  economies  –  have  grown  much  faster  than  Japan.  With  regard  to 
international  division  of  labor,  while  manufacturing  and  assembly  overseas  expands, 
increasing  the  export  of  intermediate  goods  from  Japan  and  reinforcing  domestic  R&D 
activity, whose value-added is relatively higher, will contribute to raising Japan’s real GDP. In 
addition, if surplus funds that have accumulated in the corporate sector are being used for 
overseas investment with high returns, the benefit of such investment will be passed back to 
Japan in the form of interests and dividends. This will not directly contribute to raising real 
GDP, but it does raise real GNI. While globalization of the economy continues, it is deemed 
imperative  to  make  balanced  efforts  as  a  nation  by  combining  domestic  production  with 
exports as well as with foreign direct investment, or local production overseas. 
Indeed,  overseas  investment  by  Japanese  firms  has  been  increasing,  especially  in  Asia. 
Such a trend has spread from large manufacturing firms to nonmanufacturing ones, as well 
as small and medium-sized enterprises (Chart 14). Nevertheless, the outstanding amount of 
Japan’s  foreign  direct  investment  remains  at  a  low  level  compared  with  that  of  other 
advanced  countries  (Chart  15).  Similarly,  in  terms  of the  profitability  of  foreign  investment, 
which  is  the  combination  of  portfolio  investment  and  direct  investment,  Japan  falls  a  little 
behind  countries  such  as  the  United  States,  partly  because  of  its  small  share  of  direct 
investment, which has a high rate of return (Chart 16). 
Huge  potential  demand  exists  in  emerging  economies,  particularly  Asia,  in  the  area  of 
building  core  infrastructure  for  transportation  systems,  energy  supply,  and  communication 
systems.  According  to  the  estimates  of  the  Asian  Development  Bank,  such  demand  will 
amount to approximately 8 trillion U.S. dollars from 2010 to 2020 (Chart 17). There are ample 
business opportunities for Japanese firms to make use of their globally recognized cutting-
edge technologies and wealth of experience – such as upgrading metropolitan infrastructure 
and  implementing  environmental  and  energy-saving  technologies,  as  well  as  deploying 
factory  automation  systems  to  address  labor  shortages  and  wage  rises  –  that  have  been 
nurtured in Japan over the years. It has become increasingly apparent that Japanese firms in 
such  sectors  as  retail,  healthcare,  and  education,  which  have  focused  mainly  on  the 
domestic market, are able to formulate sweeping business strategies in large Asian markets, 
where consumer demand is increasing briskly as these countries’ middle-income populations 
continue to expand. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Responding to the aging population 
The  second  course  is  to  respond  to  the  rapidly  aging  population.  The  long  average  life 
expectancy of the Japanese people implies that health, the condition most vital to well-being, 
is  being  fulfilled  at  a  high  level.  Having  said  that,  it  is  necessary  to  adjust  the  economic 
structure and social infrastructure as the population continues to age. Otherwise, it becomes 
difficult to maintain the current high quality of life. While this is sometimes misunderstood, the 
demographic  change  of  population  aging  itself  is  not  triggering  the  problem  for  Japan’s 
economy; the real issue is that Japan’s economic structure and social infrastructure have not 
sufficiently caught up with such demographic changes. 
The  aging  of  the  population  brings  about  various  changes  to  the  economy.  First,  it  will 
become a downside factor for economic growth via the economy’s supply side – namely, a 
decline in the labor force. In order to counter this trend, it is most important to increase labor 
participation,  particularly  of  the  elderly  and  women.3  The  labor  participation  rate  of  
60–69 year-olds  has  increased  continuously  over  the  last  few  years  (Chart  18).  The  labor 
participation rate of women is also increasing, but remains at a relatively low level compared 
with other advanced economies (Chart 19). 
Aging  will  also  substantially  change  the  demand  structure  of  the  economy.  The  area  of 
medical  and  nursing  care  is  one  worth  mentioning.  In  the  United  States,  the  elderly 
population aged 65 and older increased by 13 percent in the ten years from 2000, and as a 
result, the expenditure in medical and nursing care rose by 82 percent. By contrast, in Japan, 
while  the  elderly  population  increased  by  29  percent,  such  expenditure  only  rose  by 
17 percent (Chart 20). In relation to this, it has often been pointed out that, in Japan, due to a 
number of regulations and a shortage in the workforce, sufficient service in this sector has 
not been provided relative to demand. While one should be mindful of the fiscal implications, 
appropriate system design and regulatory reforms are likely to turn the potential demand in 
medical  and  nursing  care,  as  well  as  in  medical  equipment  and  infrastructure,  into  actual 
demand.  At  the  same  time,  medical  and  nursing  care  could  become  one  of  the  most 
promising  domestic  employers  as  Japanese  firms  expand  their  overseas  operations 
(Chart 21).4 
Population aging also brings about an expansion in demand in the housing market. For the 
child-raising generation, potential demand for larger housing is believed to be high, but such 
demand  has  not  been  satisfied,  particularly  in  the  metropolitan  areas.  On  the  contrary, 
members of the elderly generation continue to live in large houses that had been acquired 
during their working age. Indeed, in Japan, the share of second-hand dwellings in the total 
housing market (i.e., combining new and second-hand dwellings together) is only 12 percent, 
far  less  than  the  79  percent  in  the  United  States  and  86  percent  in  the  United Kingdom 
(Chart  22).  Once  the  housing  market  is  reorganized,  potential  demand  for  housing  will  be 
cultivated  by  meeting  the  different  needs  in  different  stages  of  life,  and  this  will  eventually 
invigorate related markets, such as electric home appliances and other household items, as 
well as remodeling. Change is also desirable on the financial front. It is often pointed out that, 
in  Japan,  household  financial  assets  are  concentrated  in  cash  and  deposits.  This  partly 
reflects that the share of residential assets, that is, real assets with large price fluctuations 
and  low  liquidity,  among  total  household  assets  tends  to  be  high  (Chart  23).  If  household 
assets  start  flowing  into  financial  assets  other  than  cash  and  deposits,  we  might  enjoy  an 
increase in the supply of long-term risk money. 
                                                
3  For details on the importance of raising the labor participation rate of women, please see Chad Steinberg and 
Masato Nakane, “Can Women Save Japan?” IMF Working Paper 12/248. International Monetary Fund, 2012. 
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/wp/2012/wp12248.pdf 
In the United States since 1990, while the number of employees in manufacturing has decreased by about 
6 million, mainly due to an acceleration in the shift of production overseas, that in the healthcare industry has 
increased by 6 million. 
4 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Promoting smooth transfer of resources 
The  third  course  is  to  promote  the  smooth  transfer  of  resources.  In  the  medical  care  and 
housing areas that I just talked about, not a shortfall in demand but the mismatch between 
demand  and  supply  has  become  the  essence  of  the  problem  in  the  sense  that  potential 
demand  and  actual  supply  do  not  correspond  to  each  other.  In  recent  years,  sales  of 
pre-packaged tours to the elderly and sales in health-related industries have shown marked 
increases.  This  suggests  that  firms  have  succeeded  in  cultivating  potential  demand  by 
making efforts to develop new products through shifting their human resources and capital to 
those businesses. 
Changes  will  surely  create  new  demand  and  promote  the  introduction  of  new  goods  and 
services.  It  is  imperative  to  realize  the  optimal  resource  allocation  by  shifting  labor  and 
capital  resources  within  a  firm,  as  well  as  among  firms,  industries,  and  regions,  in 
accordance with a changing demand structure. In short, the metabolic process is also crucial 
in achieving economic growth. Looking at the founding years of the top 300 firms in terms of 
market capitalization, there are more firms with long corporate histories in Japan than in the 
United  States  (Chart  24).  This  is  evidence  that  firms  themselves  have  made  efforts  to 
self-transform  and  have  successfully  managed  to  cope  with  a  series  of  environmental 
changes. It can also be said that dynamism is absent in terms of birth of firms. Changes are 
surely taking place, however. For instance, looking at developments in the stock market after 
the Lehman shock, comparatively small firms have recently been performing relatively well 
(Chart 25). The number of initial public offerings –  which showed a  large decline  in recent 
years – is gradually on a recovery trend, and such movements are now also being observed 
outside large metropolitan areas. I am quite encouraged by this development. 
IV. 
Regulatory and institutional reforms, corporate governance reform, and social 
values 
So far, I have talked about the outline of the measures toward strengthening competitiveness 
and growth potential. In principle, this should happen in an economy as a result of individual 
firms’  rational  choice.  The  fact  that  this  is  not  happening  in  reality  must  be  the  result  of 
economic,  institutional,  or  social  factors.  Accordingly,  there  is  a  need  to  improve  the 
economic environment, i.e., remove those obstructing factors. 
Regulatory and institutional reforms 
First, there needs to be an improvement, promoted by the government, in the environment 
that will serve to back firms’ efforts aimed at bringing about change. More specifically, it is 
necessary for the government to carry out bold regulatory reform in order for firms to broaden 
the  areas  in  which  they  may  embark  on  new  challenges,  and  to  make  institutional 
improvements  to  the  labor  market  so  as  to  allow  workers  to  move  more  smoothly  into 
businesses  and  industries  with  high  growth  potential.  In  order  to  avoid  an  increase  in 
excessive social friction arising from responses to changes in the economic environment, it is 
also necessary to provide support for career changes and to enhance the safety net. 
Corporate governance reform 
Second,  it  is  necessary  to  ensure  the  appropriate  functioning  of  corporate  governance  by 
stockholders and investors.5 On this issue, Germany is a good source of reference. Until the 
                                                
5  For  details  on  the  effects  of  various  legal  institutions  including  corporate  governance  on  corporate  profits, 
please see Nobuyuki Kinoshita, “The Institutional Background to Characteristics of Japanese Firms’ including 
Low  Profitability”  (available  only  in  Japanese),  IMES  Discussion  Paper  Series  2012-J-12,  Institute  for 
Monetary  and  Economic  Studies,  Bank  of  Japan,  2012.  http://www.imes.boj.or.jp/research/papers/ 
japanese/12-J-12.pdf 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
beginning  of  the  2000s,  Germany  was  named  as  a  country  putting  off  essential  structural 
reforms, and the country indeed suffered from slow economic growth in the first half of the 
2000s.  Under  such  circumstances,  however,  it  engaged  in  various  reforms  surrounding 
corporate  activity,  including  institutional  reforms  that  allowed  for  flexible  adjustments  to 
employment  as  well  as  enhanced  information  disclosure  to  investors.  On  this  point,  Japan 
falls behind Germany, especially when it comes to reforming enterprise law in such areas as 
corporate rehabilitation, as well as mergers and acquisitions. This is said to hinder dynamic 
corporate  restructuring,  thereby  eroding  the  international  competitiveness  of  industries 
across the board. It is also said that such an environment has accentuated the anxiousness 
over  legal  liquidation  or  removed  the  fear  of  being  taken  over,  and  encouraged  to  some 
extent the excessive accumulation of cash and deposits at firms. 
Social values 
Third,  society  needs  to  face  possible  trade-offs  between  stability  and  change.  Japan  has 
been somewhat dominated so far by a perspective that stressed the importance of stability. 
The method of adding gradual “improvements” to one’s company’s products in accordance 
with  consumer  needs  in  the  existing  domestic  market  can  be  considered  a  business 
management  style  that puts  importance  on  stability.  Merely  making  improvements focused 
on the domestic market amid a population decline, however, carries the risk of the economy 
falling into a shrinking cycle. Corporate profits will suffer even more in the long term if firms 
continue to keenly compete in terms of prices while maintaining their commitment to securing 
employment. If  I may  make  a  sweeping  generalization,  firms  are facing a  judgment  call  of 
choosing  between  “improvement”,  which  represents  continuity,  and  “innovation”,  which 
represents discontinuity. If the shock against the economy is temporary, there may be a point 
to  overcoming  any  difficulties  in  the  immediate  future  via  “improvements”,  thus  prioritizing 
stability  in  the  long  term.  Confronting  long-lasting  shocks  such  as  globalization  and 
population  aging  by  means  of  the  same  “improvement”  as  before,  however,  may  delay 
responses to significant changes. 
Reform cannot proceed without public consensus. Bringing about innovation requires firms’ 
willingness  to  take  on  challenges  as  well  as  the  transfer  and  reallocation  of  necessary 
resources. Frictions may well be experienced in the process. While this is not necessarily an 
issue  with  one  indisputable  solution,  if  environmental  change  is  long-lasting,  I  find  it 
extremely  important for society  as  a  whole  to  accept  such  changes  and  adopt  a  view  that 
encourages any and all efforts to take on new challenges, in order to successfully carry out 
reforms toward strengthening growth potential. 
Relationship with prices 
V. 
So  far,  I  have  talked  about  the  efforts  to  strengthen  the  economy’s  competitiveness  and 
growth  potential.  Next,  getting  slightly  off  track,  I  will  touch  upon  the  relationship  between 
economic growth and prices. 
The  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  consumer  price  index  (CPI)  is  currently  around 
0 percent,  but  is  expected  to  reach  0.9  percent  in  fiscal  2014,  according  to  the  Bank’s 
forecasts. This is based on the view that Japan’s economy will continue to grow above its 
potential  growth  rate  and  the  output  gap  will  be  filled,  assuming  that  overseas  economies 
moderately  improve.  However,  considering  the  fact  that  the  output  gap  has  narrowed 
significantly compared with its peak, and given the sensitivity of prices to the gap, the closing 
of the gap alone will not allow us to reach the target of 2 percent right away. What is the 
general image of an economy that achieved 2 percent inflation, and what is the mechanism 
behind the process leading up to this state? In theory, one can come up with several cases. 
The  first  involves  a  push  from  rising  import  prices  as  a  result  of  the  yen’s  depreciation  or 
rising international commodity prices. The second is related to rising wages. In the medium 
to  long  term,  wages  and  prices  are  closely  correlated.  The  third  sees  rising  inflation 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
expectations.  Finally,  the  fourth  corresponds  with  rising  growth  expectations  of  firms  and 
households. 
Which case are we looking for? In the case where import prices push up inflation, household 
real  income  is  squeezed.  The  ideal  situation  is  that  a  rise  in  wages,  a  rise  in  inflation 
expectations, and a heightening of firms’ and households’ growth expectations take place at 
the  same time. What  should  be  noted  here  is  the  relationship  between  wages  and  prices. 
One  of  the  main  factors  behind  low  inflation  rates  in  Japan  relative  to  other  economies  is 
Japan’s  employment  practice.  Specifically,  Japanese  society  since  the  second  half  of  the 
1990s  has  prioritized  securing  employment,  and  it  effected  reductions  in  costs  largely  by 
cutting back wages; consequently, prices fell (Chart 26). Looking at development patterns of 
corporate profits, wages, and prices during economic recovery phases, these three indicators 
moved together in the same direction during the high-growth era in the 1970s (Chart 27). At 
present, neither wages nor prices have changed materially even in the economic recovery 
phase,  as  corporate  profits  have  acted  as  a  buffer  to  absorb  shocks,  with  the  labor 
distribution  rate  rising  during  economic  recession  phases  and  declining  during  recovery 
periods. The primary cause for this is the decline in firms’ profitability, which in turn reflects 
the  decline  in  the  potential  growth  rate.  On  this  point,  looking  at  the  relationship  between 
medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  and  potential  growth  rates,  there  is  a  clear 
positive  correlation  in  Japan  (Chart  28).  If  firms’  and  households’  growth  expectations 
improve,  this  will  have  a  positive  effect  on  wages  and  prices  in  a  sustainable  manner. 
Consequently,  “deflationary  expectations”  that  had  taken  hold  over  a  prolonged  period  will 
fade away. 
The will to reform 
VI. 
While  it  generally  has  been  recognized  that  there  is  a  need  to  work  toward  strengthening 
competitiveness  and  growth  potential,  and  that  meeting  these  challenges  is  essential  in 
overcoming deflation and achieving sustainable growth with price stability, why is it that such 
efforts have not made progress? On this point, the key lies in the sense of urgency regarding 
the  need  for  reform.  The  problems  currently  facing  Japan’s  economy,  namely,  the  rapid 
aging  of  the  population  and  accompanying  issues,  are  not  temporary.  They  are  steadily 
affecting the economy in the manner of a chronic illness. Deterioration of fiscal conditions is 
a textbook example of such problems. In order to maintain fiscal sustainability, it is necessary 
to  reform  the  structure  of  expenditures  and  revenues  as  well  as  strengthening  growth 
potential. Unless the growth rate rises, a modest increase in the rate of inflation alone will 
barely improve the fiscal balance. While such chronic symptoms exist in Japan, acute ones 
have not appeared. The biggest reason for this lies in the fact that Japan holds a massive 
amount of external net assets reflecting the current account surplus that has continued over 
a prolonged period. Because of this, Japan tends to experience inflows of capital that search 
for a safe haven, even in the event of a global economic shock, and enjoy stable long-term 
interest rates while facing an appreciation of the yen. Japan has not experienced any sell-off 
of its currency in a crisis. 
In this regard, I would like to make reference to recent developments in financial markets. 
The  keywords  to  understanding  movements  in  the  global  financial  markets  over  the  last 
several years are risk-on and risk-off. When faced with a great amount of uncertainty about 
the future, investors stay away from risks – in other words, they become risk-off – but when 
such uncertainty is judged small, they become risk-on (Chart 29). The basic background to 
the  yen’s  appreciation  that  lasted  until  summer  2012  was  investors’  preference  for  safe 
assets as the European debt problem intensified. Indeed, it was in late July that the yen hit 
its recent peak in the nominal effective exchange rate and the Spanish and Italian sovereign 
rates reached the most elevated levels. After that, a variety of safety valves to cope with the 
European debt problem were put in place in Europe and the fiscal cliff was avoided in the 
United States. Against the background of these developments, global investors’ risk aversion 
has substantially receded. Broadly speaking, the yen’s recent depreciation and rise in stock 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
prices in Japan are also taking place amid such changes in those investors’ risk aversion. 
Put differently, investors’ attitude toward risk may influence market conditions. I believe this 
could be easily understood by looking back at the fact that yields on government securities of 
member  states  of  the  euro  area  had  remained  at  practically  the  same  levels  for  nearly 
ten years. What ultimately drives market developments is economic fundamentals. Over the 
last  15 years  in  Japan,  there  were  several  phases  when  the  yen  depreciated.  Although 
exports  and  production  increased  during  those  phases,  we  regrettably  did  not  succeed  in 
raising the potential growth rate (Charts 30 and 31). The important thing is to make use of 
the current favorable conditions and make steady efforts to strengthen the competitiveness 
and growth potential of the economy. 
Conduct of monetary policy by the Bank of Japan 
VII. 
Lastly, I would like to go over the recent monetary policy measures by the Bank of Japan. As 
I  mentioned  at  the  outset,  the  Bank  recognizes  that  the  inflation  rate  consistent  with  price 
stability  on  a  sustainable  basis  will  rise  as  efforts  by  a  wide  range  of  entities  toward 
strengthening  competitiveness  and  growth  potential  of  Japan’s  economy  make  progress. 
Based on this recognition, at the Monetary Policy Meeting held in January, the Bank set and 
announced the “price stability target” at 2 percent in terms of the year-on-year rate of change 
in the CPI. As stated in the Bank of Japan Act, the Bank conducts monetary policy based on 
the principle that the policy shall be aimed at “achieving price stability, thereby contributing to 
the sound development of the national economy”. Put differently, the Bank aims at achieving 
price stability with which Japan’s economy will grow in a sustainable and balanced manner, 
and under such a principle, the Bank has been pursuing aggressive monetary easing with 
the aim of achieving this price stability target at the earliest possible time. The Bank, under 
the Asset Purchase Program, will additionally purchase financial assets amounting to about 
36  trillion  yen,  mainly  JGBs,  by  the  end  of  this  year.  Furthermore,  from  January  2014 
onward, it will purchase about 13 trillion yen worth of assets, 2 trillion yen of which will be 
JGBs, every month without setting any termination date. The Bank is committed to pursuing, 
without loosening the reins, aggressive monetary easing with the aim of achieving the “price 
stability target”. 
Efforts  by  the  government,  in  parallel  with  appropriate  monetary  easing  measures,  are 
important  in  order  to  overcome  deflation  early  and  achieve  sustainable  growth  with  price 
stability, for the following reasons. 
First  of  all,  if  the  government’s  efforts  to  strengthen  competitiveness  and  growth  potential 
make progress, economic agents will take further advantage of the accommodative financial 
conditions  and  the  effects  of  monetary  easing  will  be  increasingly  amplified.  At  present, 
money,  or  liquidity  that  the  Bank  has  been  supplying,  is  increasing  significantly;  however, 
prices have not been responding accordingly (Chart 32).6 Private financial institutions have 
been increasing their government bond holdings rather than lending (Chart 33). On this point, 
the  government  has  stated  its  intention  to  advance  structural  reform  of  the  economy  by 
making use of all possible decisive policy actions, including carrying out bold regulatory and 
institutional reforms. The Bank expects that forceful efforts will be forthcoming in this regard. 
Meanwhile,  the  Bank  itself  has  established  a  “Loan  Support  Program”  through  which  to 
encourage  proactive  efforts  by firms  and financial  institutions,  using  the  levers  of finance.7 
                                                
6  On this point, Chairman Bernanke of the Federal Reserve stated during the press conference on December 
12,  2012  that  “there’s  no  effect  on  inflation  expectations  from  the  size  of  our  balance  sheet”.  For  details, 
please see  Federal  Reserve Board,  “Transcript  of  Chairman  Bernanke’s  Press  Conference”,  December  12, 
2012. http://www.federalreserve.gov/mediacenter/files/FOMCpresconf20121212.pdf 
7  The  Bank  established  the  “Loan  Support  Program”  by  integrating  the  “Growth  Supporting  Funding  Facility” 
introduced in June 2010 and the “Stimulating Bank Lending Facility” introduced in October 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
Together with the aforementioned Asset Purchase Program, the Bank will supply additional 
funds amounting to over 60 trillion yen in the next two  years. The amount outstanding will 
exceed  130  trillion  yen,  which  is  about  30  percent  of  nominal  GDP  (Chart  34).  While 
monetary easing by the central bank has a stimulating effect on current economic conditions 
by bringing forward tomorrow’s demand to today, so to speak, such effect will wane once it 
becomes tomorrow and unless demand for the day after is brought forward. At any rate, the 
size of the demand brought forward depends on future growth potential. This makes efforts 
to raise the potential growth rate itself all the more important. If such efforts by the Bank on 
the  financial  side  and  those  by  the  government  to  strengthen  the  growth  potential  could 
instigate  a  virtuous  cycle  and  bring  about  synergies,  the  policy  effects  are  likely  to  be 
amplified. 
Second, in order to pursue aggressive monetary easing, ensuring confidence regarding fiscal 
policy  is  also  important.  As  part  of  its  monetary  easing,  the  Bank  has  been  purchasing  a 
substantial  amount  of  government  bonds.  Given  the  severe  fiscal  conditions,  however,  if 
such purchases were regarded as monetizing government debt in the markets at home and 
abroad,  there  is  a  risk  that  long-term  interest  rates  would  rise.  In  particular,  if  efforts  to 
strengthen  the  growth  potential  do  not  make  progress  and  the  Bank’s  holding  of  JGBs 
continues to increase, that risk becomes more imminent. Were this to occur, not only would 
the effects of monetary easing weaken, but there would also be adverse effects on the real 
economy  through  the  impacts  on  the  businesses  of  financial  institutions  holding  a  large 
amount of government bonds.8 In that sense, discipline is expected of both the government 
and the Bank. Discipline within the Bank is stipulated by the purpose imposed on the central 
bank, that is, contributing to sustainable growth through price stability and financial system 
stability. Meanwhile, the government is required to uphold fiscal discipline. On this point, the 
government  stated  clearly  that  it  “will  steadily  promote  measures  aimed  at  establishing  a 
sustainable  fiscal  structure  with  a  view  to  ensuring  the  credibility  of  fiscal  management”. 
Once credibility is eroded and the economy falls into a state of confusion, there will be limited 
room for maneuver by the central bank. Economists generally refer to this kind of situation as 
“fiscal dominance”. In order to prevent such a situation from materializing, it is important to 
engage in efforts to achieve fiscal reform, thereby maintaining fiscal discipline in the medium 
to long term. 
Final remarks 
While  there  is  active  discussion  regarding  the  conduct  of  economic  policy  in  Japan,  I 
personally feel there is a need to earnestly discuss what it is that we truly want to achieve 
when  referring  to  “overcoming  deflation”,  and  what  it  is  that  we  must  carry  out  in  order  to 
accomplish this. The opportunity is right in front of us now. Once we find what we want, we 
must take action. 
The  Bank  will  continue  to  do  its  utmost  toward  overcoming  deflation  early  and  achieving 
sustainable  growth  with  price  stability.  The  purpose  of  the  central  bank  is  to  lay  stable 
economic and financial foundations that support the sustainable growth of the economy.9 In 
doing  so,  it  goes  without  saying  that  the  Bank  will  thoroughly  examine  the  outlook  for 
economic  activity  and  prices  and  risk  factors  to  sustainable  growth.  Independent  central 
                                                
8  On the relationship between fiscal sustainability and financial system stability, as well as price stability, please 
see Masaaki Shirakawa, “The Importance of Fiscal Sustainability: Preconditions for Stability in the Financial 
System  and  in  Prices”  (Remarks  at  the  Banque  de  France  Financial  Stability  Review  Launch  Event  in 
Washington 
http://www.boj.or.jp/en/announcements/press/koen_2012/ 
data/ko120422b.pdf 
D.C.), 
2012. 
April 
21, 
9  For more on this point, please see Masaaki Shirakawa, “The Roles, Missions, and Challenges of the Central 
Bank”  (Speech  at  the  Japan  National  Press  Club  in  Tokyo),  January  25,  2013.  http://www.boj.or.jp/ 
en/announcements/press/koen_2013/data/ko130130a.pdf 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
banks  are  obviously  expected  to  explain  the  effects  as  well  as  costs  of  measures  in  the 
longer term. I believe this is what accountability means. 
As the experience of the global credit bubble in the mid-2000s suggests, time and again, the 
seeds  of  new  problems  and  unexpected  crises  have  already  been  sown  as  authorities 
respond  to  a  problem.  This  provides  us  with  a  renewed  sense  of  awareness  of  the 
importance  of  humility  to  learn  from  history  and  of  stability  from  a  medium-  to  long-term 
perspective.  The  Bank  of  Japan  will  continue  to  listen  to  a  variety  of  views  and  conduct 
monetary  policy  appropriately  on  the  judgment  and  under  the  responsibility  of  its  Policy 
Board with the aim of overcoming deflation early and achieving sustainable economic growth 
with price stability. I ask for your continued support. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
    12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    13 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    15 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    17 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     18 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    19 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     20 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    21 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    22 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    23 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     24 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    25 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     26 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    27 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    28 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
