Ignazio Visco: The financial sector after the crisis 
Lecture by Mr Ignazio Visco, Governor of the Bank of Italy, at the Imperial Business Insights, 
Imperial College, London, 5 March 2013. 
 I wish to thank for useful discussions and help Fabrizio Balassone, Paolo Del Giovane, Alessio De Vincenzo and 
Giuseppe Grande. 
Introduction1 
The financial crisis has brought to the fore a number of problems. It has been severe and 
widespread,  and  has  affected  different  economies  in  different  and  long-lasting  ways. 
Financial  stability  has  once  again  become  a  fundamental  objective  of  policy  making,  and 
central  banks  are  being  heavily  involved  in  this  endeavour.  This  calls  for  a  substantial 
overhaul  in  financial  regulation  and  supervision,  and  the  financial  system  of  tomorrow  will 
most likely be rather different from the one that has developed over the last two decades. 
Scepticism has grown about the role of finance in the economic system, and especially its 
apparent separation from, if not conflict with, the real economy. We should take stock of what 
has gone wrong, and in so doing reflect on the way forward, as it is already taking shape, as 
well as, perhaps, on how to better link our theories to real world developments.  
In the decade before the financial crisis both the size of the financial system and its role and 
pervasiveness  in the economy increased dramatically. The process has only slowed down 
with the crisis. In the euro area, the overall amount of financial resources collected by the 
private sector (bank credit, bonds issued domestically and stock market capitalization) rose 
from 160 per cent of GDP in 1996 to 240 in 2007, and then declined to 230 in 2011. A similar 
pattern is found for the United States, where the ratio rose from 230 per cent in 1996 to 330 
in 2007 and then declined to 260 in 2011, and for the UK, where the ratio increased from 240 
to 330 per cent and then edged down to 320 per cent. The total outstanding notional amount 
of over-the-counter (OTC) and exchange-traded derivatives has risen from about 94 trillion 
U.S. dollars at the end of 1998 to around 486 trillion at the end of 2006, to reach 700 trillion 
in June 2012. 
Financial deepening, by allowing greater diversification of risk and making finance accessible 
to  larger  numbers  of  countries  and  firms,  can  be  instrumental  to  broadening  economic 
development. But there is a risk that finance turns into an end in itself, with consequences 
that can be more damaging as the system becomes more interconnected and the potential 
for  externalities  increases.  The  correct  conduct  of  credit  and  financial  business  requires 
competence  and good faith  on the  part  of  intermediaries  as  well  as  appropriate  regulatory 
and supervisory regimes. 
“Good” finance as a force for good  
Finance has long been viewed as a morally dubious activity. My appeal to authority on this 
matter is a reference to a lecture delivered by Amartya Sen more than twenty years ago as 
the  first  Paolo  Baffi  Lecture  on  Money  and  Finance  at  the  Banca  d’Italia.  Sen  wondered: 
“How  is  it  possible  that  an  activity  that  is  so  useful  has  been  viewed  as  being  morally  so 
                                                
1  This text, which has also been used for a lecture in Italian at the Accademia dei Lincei, in Rome, on 8 March 
2013,  partly  draws  on  “What  does  society  expect  from  the  financial  sector?”,  panel  discussion  remarks 
following the Per Jacobsson Lecture by Dr. Y. V. Reddy, in Basel, on 24 June 2012, and on “The financial 
crisis and economists’ forecasts”, lecture at "La Sapienza" University, Rome, on 4 March 2009 (downloadable, 
respectively, 
http://www.bis.org 
/review/r090423f.pdf?frames=0).  
http://www.bis.org/events/agm2012/sp120624_visco.htm 
from 
and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
dubious?”.2 He recalled a series of historical episodes: Jesus driving the money lenders out 
of  the  temple,  Solon  cancelling  debts  and  prohibiting  many  types  of  lending  in  ancient 
Greece, Aristotle describing interest as an unnatural and unjustified breeding of money from 
money. 
Superimposed  on  this  “structural”  mistrust,  one  can  detect  cyclical  patterns  in  the  public’s 
attitude  towards  finance,  affected  by  the  conditions  of  financial  systems  and  shifts  in  the 
political  mood  about  state  intervention  in  the  economy.  Until  the  1970s  it  was  taken  for 
granted  that  market  failures  required  the  presence  and  response  of  a  regulator  to  avoid 
suboptimal  results.  Then  came  the  great  inflation  of  the  1970s,  combined  with  high 
unemployment,  and  the  emphasis  shifted  to  government  failures.  Governments,  central 
banks  and  other  regulators  were  blamed  for  failing  to  prevent  these  developments.  This 
eventually led to an ideological swing: a push to reduce the extent of state intervention. The 
failures  of  the  “regulated  economy,”  the  pace  of  technological  advance  and  the  rapid 
expansion of international trade after the end of the Cold War fuelled a protracted process of 
financial deregulation that was halted only by the financial crisis that broke out in 2007. The 
latter triggered a move toward re-regulation – or better regulation – that is still under way. 
The pendulum keeps swinging and will certainly continue to do so. 
The  global  financial  crisis,  with  its  huge  costs  for  the  whole  society,  has  caused  a  further 
deep erosion of the trust in financial institutions. Witness to this are the widespread protests 
against the financial industry, from the Occupy Wall Street movement to the “Indignados” in 
Spain and their counterparts in other European countries. Anger has been fuelled not only by 
the discovery of wrongdoings and perverse incentives, but also by a perceived lack of action 
against those responsible, in a context of exceptionally high remunerations. The integrity of 
financial  intermediaries’  codes  of  conduct  has  been  called  into  question  under  many 
dimensions: honesty, the ability to manage financial risks and the commitment to take care of 
the interests of their clients. 
In the first place, public attention was caught by cases of investment fraud, in which Ponzi 
schemes  or  other  types  of  malpractice  and  malfeasance  led  many  people  to  lose  their 
savings.  Feelings  were  exacerbated  by  the  generous  severance  packages  paid  to  top 
managers after distressed financial institutions were rescued with taxpayer money. Dubious 
practices  were  found  in  key  junctures  of  the  financial  systems,  such  as  credit  ratings  and 
interbank reference rates, not to mention the allegations of financial institutions’ involvement 
in activities related to money laundering and other fraudulent practices. 
Most  importantly,  the  crisis  has  shown  that  market  participants  were  not  capable  of 
mastering  the  inherent  complexity  of  the  system  that  they  themselves  had  contributed  to 
develop  over  the  course  of  the  last  two  decades.  Favoured  by  the  breakthroughs  in 
information 
the  securitization  of  banks’  assets 
expanded considerably, together with the supply of so-called structured financial instruments 
(ABSs, CDOs, etc.). The traditional model of credit intermediation gave way, especially but 
not only in the United States, to a system in which loans granted were rapidly transformed 
into other financial products having these loans as collateral and sold on the market: the so-
called originate-to-distribute model (OTD). To the inherent difficulty of evaluating the quality 
of loans, these developments added the problem of fully understanding the effective role of 
structured financial products. 
Structured 
facilitate  risk 
management.  The  granting  of  mortgages  to  households  is  favoured  by  the  possibility  of 
managing the related interest-rate risk; the internationalization of firms depends crucially on 
the  possibility  of  hedging  foreign  exchange  risk;  and  the  provision  of  retirement  saving 
intermediation  model  can 
finance  products  and 
telecommunications, 
technology  and 
the  OTD 
                                                
2  A. Sen, Money and value: on the ethics and economics of finance, Paolo Baffi Lecture on Money and Finance, 
Rome, Bank of Italy, 1991, p. 28. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
products  at  low  cost  over  very  long  time  horizons  benefits  from  the  ability  to  mitigate  the 
impact of fluctuations in security prices. With the OTD model, credit risk is not concentrated 
in the banks’ books, but is potentially dispersed among a multitude of investors. By making 
bank loans tradable, it reduces their illiquidity premium thus decreasing their cost. 
However, we now understand that structured finance and OTD intermediation, coupled with 
lack of transparency, favoured excess risk taking and opportunistic behaviour. Transactions 
often  took  place  through  scarcely  regulated  financial  intermediaries  characterized  by  high 
leverage and risk exposure, in particular as regards their valuation (in  which a crucial role 
was  played  by  rating  agencies,  without  any  particular  control  by  regulatory  authorities  or 
information providers), by means of statistical models and often carried out on the basis of 
incomplete  and  insufficient  data.  In  many  instances  complexity  was  instrumental  to 
opportunistic behaviour fuelled by a distorted system of incentives especially with reference 
to executive compensation. The high leverage and complexity typical of structured financial 
instruments allowed them to be used to take high-risk, speculative positions.  
Unnecessarily  complex  and  opaque  assets  were  used  to  prevent  a  correct  assessment  of 
creditworthiness or mask the economic impact of previous transactions, exploiting the ample 
scope  for  interpretation  allowed  by  accounting  standards.  Banks’  misuse  of  these 
instruments  may  also  be  linked  to  the  drying-up  of  the  sources  of  income  from  traditional 
credit business. This may have triggered actions designed to conceal from the market and 
from supervisors the real object of derivatives transactions. 
The bottom line is that financial innovation can allow more efficient allocation of credit risk, 
but it also entails a number of dangers, some of them intrinsic to its mechanism, others more 
generally  related  to  the  greater  interdependence  of  the  financial  system.  The  ongoing 
process of financial consolidation and the OTD model have produced intermediaries that are 
closely intertwined with the capital markets. This has had some important consequences for 
financial  stability:  a  more  connected  world  improves  risk  diversification  and  can  make 
markets more resilient, but when contagion is actually set off, an interlinked financial system 
heightens the risk that it may spread more widely.  
But the negative perception of banking and finance should not lead to a blind backlash. As 
Amartya  Sen  argued,  “finance  plays  an  important  part  in  the  prosperity  and  well-being  of 
nations”.3  It  is  crucial  for  sharing  and  allocating  risk,  especially  for  poorer  societies  and 
people, insofar as risk aversion decreases with wealth. It is crucial for transferring resources 
over  time  and  removing  the  liquidity  constraints  that  hamper  the  economy  and  the 
exploitation  of  ideas.  It  is  very  important  in  promoting  economic  growth,  especially  by 
fostering innovation. 
Indeed,  we  have  countless  historical  examples  of  good  financial  innovations.  Think,  for 
example,  of  the  “letters  of  exchange”  introduced  by  Italian  merchants  in  the  Middle  Ages: 
they  were  probably  the  first  fiduciary  money,  and  trade  benefited  enormously  from  this 
financial  instrument.  More  recently,  consider  the  development  of  “micro-finance”  in  the 
1970s:  an  innovation  that  has  enhanced  financial  inclusion,  helping  poor  borrowers  to 
smooth their income and cope with illness or other temporary shocks. And, in the last two 
decades,  recall  the  role  of  the  “venture  capital”  industry  in  the  promotion  of  successful 
innovative corporations such as Apple, Intel and Google. 
Some countries are now increasingly investing in efforts to improve the financial literacy of 
the public, and this too is important. On the one hand, it helps to build the demand side of a 
more inclusive finance. On the other, financially literate citizens are better able to understand 
the efforts of regulators and policy makers to improve supervision and regulation, and less 
likely to subscribe to the simplistic view that “finance is evil”. But we should realise that – as 
                                                
3  A. Sen, ibidem, p. 28. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
the case of Bernard Madoff and others in the US and elsewhere clearly show – this is no 
panacea (Madoff’s customers were surely much better educated than average). Therefore, 
for  purposes  of  consumer  protection  in  the  financial  services  industry,  financial  regulation 
and good supervision are the necessary complements to financial education and inclusion.  
Complexity  was  also  used,  somewhat  perversely,  as  an  argument  in  favour  of  a  sort  of 
benign neglect on the part of regulators. The big financial players argued successfully that 
financial  innovation  was  too  complex  and  too  opaque for  the regulators  to  get  their  heads 
around. Indeed, they said, to safeguard the international financial system from systemic risk, 
the main priority was promoting an “industry-led” effort to improve internal risk management 
and related systems. This, in a nutshell, was the view espoused by the Group of Thirty report 
following  the  outbreak  of  the  Asian  crisis.4  But  this  thesis  was  often  accompanied  by  the 
argument to the effect that “you, regulators and supervisors, will always be behind financial 
innovation;  it  would  be  better  to  allow  us,  the  big  financial  international  players,  to  self-
regulate;  we  are  grown-ups,  we  can  take  care  of  ourselves”.  And,  after  all,  “if  someone 
makes mistakes some will gain what others lose; why can’t we be left alone to play this zero-
sum game of ours?”  
The regulators did not, in fact, have either the ability, or the right incentives to acquire the 
necessary  information,  for  two  reasons.  First,  the  big  financial  players  are  global,  and 
national  regulators  had  powers  too  narrow  to  be  able  to  confront  them.  The  difficulties  in 
coordinating the regulators’ actions, in the face of a natural tendency to preserve each one’s 
particular  sphere  of  influence,  was  a  powerful  drag  on  the  ability  to  rise  to  the  challenge 
posed  by  a  finance  gone  global.  Second,  the  phenomenon  of  regulatory  capture  was  a 
definite reality. Powerful political and economic influences were at play, and in some cases 
prevailed.  
Accepting the idea that benign neglect was the right course of action was, however, a critical 
mistake. The global financial crisis has highlighted the limits of the idea that self-regulation 
and market discipline are sufficient to ensure stable financial systems. Financial regulation 
and  supervision  have  to  keep  pace  with  developments  in  the  financial  industry.  National 
authorities need to be aware of the risk that their powers become narrow compared to the 
sphere of influence of the global financial players; the coordination of financial supervision 
across borders and across sectors is a key condition for the stability of the global financial 
system.  More  importantly,  regulators  and  supervisors  have  to  pay  attention  to  keeping 
financial industry lobbies at due distance.  
All this calls for a major effort, at a national but especially at an international level, to adjust 
and strengthen the regulatory and supervisory financial framework. And it explains why the 
work that is carried out at various levels of relevance and responsibility in international fora is 
so important. In what follows I will review and assess recent reforms in financial regulation, 
highlighting  those  improvements  that  still  need  to  be  achieved.  I  will  also  discuss  the 
importance of advances in our analytical understanding of the workings of financial markets 
and of its deviations from stationarity.  
In search of a better regulatory and supervisory regime 
Over  the  last  few  years  the  crisis  has  heightened  appreciation  of  the  benefits  of  a  more 
stringent regulatory regime. At an international level, under the political impulse of the G-20, 
the  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB)  and  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision 
(BCBS) have introduced substantial regulatory changes to reduce the frequency of financial 
crises and increase the resilience of economic systems. Much has been already achieved.  
                                                
4  Group  of  Thirty,  Global  institutions,  national  supervision  and  systemic  risk,  1997.  See  also  the  article  by 
J. Heimann, with the same title, and comments therein, in the special issue of Banca Nazionale del Lavoro 
Quarterly Review on “Globalization and stable financial markets”, March 1998. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The quantity and quality of capital that banks need to hold has been significantly enhanced to 
ensure  that  they  operate  on  a  safe  and  sound  basis.  Minimum  capital  requirements  have 
been raised. The improvement in the quality of capital aims to ensure that banks are better 
able to absorb losses on both a going concern and a gone concern basis. The risk coverage 
has been increased, in particular for trading activities, securitisations and exposures related 
to  off-balance  sheet  vehicles  and  arising  from  derivatives.  An  internationally  harmonised 
maximum leverage ratio is going to be introduced, to serve as a backstop to the risk-based 
capital measure and to contain the build-up of excessive leverage in the system. 
The  BCBS  has  also  introduced  international  standards  for  bank  liquidity  and  funding, 
designed to promote the resilience of banks to liquidity shocks. A milestone agreement was 
recently  reached  among  Central  Bank  Governors  and  Heads  of  Supervision  to  adopt  a 
minimum  requirement  for  the  ratio  between  high  quality  liquid  assets  and  net  liquidity 
outflows  that  banks  would  face  over  a  one-month  horizon  in  stress  conditions  (Liquidity 
Coverage Ratio – LCR). The minimum LCR will increase gradually in the coming years, so 
as to ensure that the new liquidity standard will not hinder the ability of the global banking 
system  to  finance  recovery.  And  countries  with  distressed  banking  systems  will  have 
flexibility in its application. 
At the behest of the G-20, the FSB has promoted initiatives to strengthen the regulation of 
the  OTC  derivatives  market.  The  aim  is  to  reinforce  market  infrastructures,  in  order  to 
minimise contagion and spill-over effects among players that have become more and more 
interconnected.  These  initiatives  increase  market  transparency  through  a  number  of 
measures:  contract  standardization,  the  requirement  to  trade  on  regulated  markets, 
settlement  through  central  counterparties,  the  reporting  of  the  terms  and  conditions  of 
transactions to trade repositories. 
But further  progress  is needed  in  important  areas.  Capital  and  liquidity  regulation  must  be 
accompanied by improvements in internal risk control arrangements and by actions aimed at 
correcting incentives to excessive risk-taking. Board members and senior managers should 
possess a thorough understanding of the bank’s overall operational structure and risks. It is 
also fundamental that supervisors regularly assess banks’ corporate governance policies and 
practices.  Compensation  policies  also  need  to  be  revised,  in  order  to  better  align 
remuneration with risk-adjusted long-term performance and avoid excessive risk-taking and 
short-termism. In particular, when designing compensation policies, banks should take into 
account a number of issues: the variable portion of the compensation of risk takers must be 
paid on the basis of individual, business-unit and firm-wide measures that adequately assess 
risk-adjusted  performance;  bonuses  must  reward  the  achievement  of  stable  earnings,  not 
simply  the  fruit  of  extraordinary  operations;  executives’  severance  packages  too  must  be 
clearly and effectively bound to the results attained, and reflect a more general evaluation of 
the manager’s performance; compensation must be deferred long enough to validate the true 
quality of management. 
The debate that has started with the so-called Volcker rule on the organizational structure of 
banks and the need to separate traditional credit business from activity in the financial field 
has  been  recently  reinvigorated  at  a  European  level  by  the  reports  of  the  Vickers 
Commission in the United Kingdom and the Liikanen Group for the European Commission. 
Both  the  Volcker  rule  and  the  reports  call  for  a  much  needed  discussion  around  business 
size and complexity in the financial sector; the experience of the crisis has indeed shown that 
we  should  not  be  shy  to  thoroughly  re-assess  relative  merits  and  costs  of  both  (size  and 
complexity). These reports trace out possible lines of intervention. Protecting retail deposits 
and  taxpayers’  money  from  the  risks  implicit  in  trading  activities  (what  used  to  be  called 
“speculation”) – the rationale behind these proposals – is crucial. The experience of the crisis 
has shown that, even if no specific business model has performed particularly well or poorly, 
the banks’ organizational structure has an impact on the propensity of managers to engage 
in excessively risky activities. We should recognize that both retail and investment banking, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
even if organizationally or institutionally separate, should be properly regulated, and should 
be careful not to have a too ample definition of market making activity. 
At all events, in today’s globalized world it is crucial to make sure that countries cooperate 
and  agree  on  the  appropriate  stringency  of  financial  regulation.  Countries  should  not 
compete  by  relaxing  rules  in  order  to  attract  financial  intermediaries,  as  this  generates 
negative externalities for other countries. This is a most delicate issue, and while a perfectly 
level playing field may not be achievable, we have to be conscious of the consequences of a 
“beggar-thy-neighbour”  approach  to  regulation.  The  transition  to  a  uniform  system  of  rules 
and oversight of the financial sector must be hastened. In the euro area, and in the European 
Union at large, the plan for a banking union is ambitious, but it goes in the right direction.  
Some  progress  has  been  made  on  the  convergence  towards  a  single  set  of  global 
accounting standards; but much remains to be done. The International Accounting Standards 
Board  and the  US  Financial  Accounting  Standards  Board  expect to make  progress  on  the 
two  key  outstanding  issues  of  impairment  of  loans,  where  their  deliberations  should  be 
completed  by  the  end  of  the  year,  and  insurance  contracts,  where  both  Boards  will  be 
holding  public  consultations  this  year.  Of  these  two  outstanding  issues,  the  need  for 
convergence  on  a  new  forward-looking  expected  loss  approach  to  provisioning  is  of  most 
immediate concern for end-users and from a financial stability perspective. 
One element that is essential for guaranteeing systemic stability is the method of measuring 
risk-weighted  assets  (RWA),  the  denominator  of  capital  adequacy  ratios.  RWA  measures 
have  recently  attracted  increasing  attention  from  market  analysts,  banks  and  supervisory 
authorities.  It  has  been  argued  –  and  this  seems  to  be  actually  the  case  –  that  the 
methodologies  for  computing  RWAs  may  not  be  comparable  across  institutions  and, 
especially,  across  jurisdictions,  and  that  they  should  more  properly  reflect  risk  in  order  to 
avoid  ultimately  jeopardising  financial  stability.  These  problems  highlight  the  relevance  of 
supervisory practices in determining banks’ capital requirements (for example, in validating 
internal  banks’  models  for  calculating  risk  weights).  Here,  rigorous  micro-prudential 
supervision  is  essential.  We  really  need  to  work  out  a  single  rulebook,  to  move  with 
determination towards taking joint responsibility and using peer reviews as much as possible 
in our supervisory activity.  
As  for  the  initiatives  to  strengthen  the  regulation  of  the  OTC  derivatives  market,  these 
complex  reforms  are  taking  somewhat  longer  than  originally  planned.  It  is  therefore 
necessary  to  pick  up  the  pace,  overcoming  the  difficulties  of  implementation  and  the 
industry’s  resistance.  Authorities  must  make  all  efforts  to  remove  the  uncertainties  arising 
when  transactions  involve  a  cross-border  dimension,  which  is  a  recurrent  condition  in  a 
global market. This is necessary to pre-empt regulatory arbitrage and, ultimately, to achieve 
the G20 objectives. Work is also in progress on other relevant issues at an international level 
(capital requirements for exposures to central counterparties, margining standards for non-
centrally cleared transactions, guidance on resolution of central counterparties, as well as on 
authorities’ access to trade repository data) and at a regional and national level. In Europe, at 
the  end  of  next  week  a  comprehensive  set  of  standards  for  the  implementation  of  the 
European Market Infrastructure Regulation will enter into force, complementing the European 
legal  framework  for  the  so-called  “clearing  obligation”  embodied  in  the  G20  statement  of 
September  2009.  From  a  global  perspective,  however,  the  regulatory  effort  needs  to  be 
carried out by the widest range of jurisdictions as made clear at the recent G20 meeting in 
Moscow. 
Significant  efforts  are  also  expected  from  the  industry.  The  last  FSB  report  on  the 
implementation of the OTC derivatives market reform estimates that “approximately 10 per 
cent  of  outstanding  credit  default  swaps  and  approximately  40  per  cent  of  outstanding 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
interest rates derivatives had been centrally cleared as of end-August 2012”.5 These shares 
should  grow  rapidly,  so  as  to  leave  to  customized  OTC  derivatives  the  sole  purpose  of 
meeting the specific hedging needs of financial and non financial counterparts which cannot 
be met by standardised, clearing-eligible contracts.  
It will be crucial to ensure that stricter regulation and supervision of banks will not push bank-
like activities and risks towards non – or less – regulated institutions (the so-called “shadow 
banking” sector). Let us not forget that the financial crisis originated in the US securitization 
market, largely populated by unregulated or scantily regulated operators. While we have to 
address  bank-like  risks  to  financial  stability  emerging  from  outside  the  regular  banking 
system, the approach should be proportionate, focussed on those activities that are material 
to the system, using as a starting point those that were a source of risk during the crisis. The 
FSB is currently refining the set of recommendations issued in November of last year. One 
should  bear  in  mind,  however,  that  the  new  recommendations  will  be  able  to  address  the 
specific  risks  that  arose  during  the  crisis,  and  we  all  recognise  the  ability  of  the  shadow 
banking sector to innovate.  
Although new regulations on systemically important financial institutions have recently been 
approved,  the  “too-big-to-fail”  issue  is  still  a  major  concern,  and  it  merits  strict  monitoring. 
Some progress is being made in developing and testing methodology for the identification of 
global  systemically  important  insurers  (G-SIIs),  and  in  developing  appropriate  supervision 
guidelines.  An  identification  methodology  for  all  non-bank  financial  institutions  of  global 
systemic  relevance  is  also  under  preparation.  For  banking  institutions  (G-SIFI)  the 
implementation of the framework recently agreed upon has much farther to go; we need to 
rapidly move forward. 
Negative externalities associated with banks’ behaviour (especially for large, interconnected 
financial firms) must be taken into account. A broad consensus has emerged on the idea that 
“macroprudential” policies directed towards preserving financial stability should limit systemic 
risk by addressing both the cross-sectional dimension of the financial system, with the aim of 
strengthening its resilience to adverse real or financial shocks, and its temporal dimension, to 
contain  the  accumulation  of  risk  over  the  business  or  financial  cycle.  Moreover,  given  the 
complementarity between macroeconomic stability and financial stability, and that between 
the instruments to pursue them, the exchange of information and the co-ordination between 
macroprudential and monetary authorities are crucial to counter at the same time the risks for 
price  stability  and  the  systemic  risks  for  financial  stability.  I  would  dare  to  say  that  proper 
understanding of how this can be effectively achieved is still in the making.6 
Finally, even after the completion of the regulatory overhaul, it would be foolish to pretend 
that defaults can always be avoided. They may be the result of imprudent behaviour or of 
fraudulent operations. We need to be prepared for their occurrence, as the costs of public 
support  tend  to  be  very  high.  According  to  the  latest  data  gathered  by  the  European 
Commission,  the  outstanding  amount  of  public  recapitalizations  as  of  June  2012  came  to 
0.1 per cent of GDP in France, 1.8 in Germany, 2.0 in Spain, 4.2 in the UK, 4.3 in Belgium, 
5.2 per cent in the Netherlands, and over 40 per cent in Ireland. For Spain and Ireland these 
amounts are at their highest since 2008, in the other countries they are lower than the peaks 
reached  in  2009.  For  the  Spanish  banks,  a  programme  of recapitalization  using  European 
funds of up to €100 billion was authorized in July, of which €41 billion (3.9 per cent of GDP) 
has  already  been  disbursed.  In  Italy,  even  taking  into  consideration  the  public  support 
                                                
5  FSB, Fourth progress report on implementation of the OTC derivatives market reforms, 31 October 2012. 
6  P. Angelini, S. Neri and F. Panetta, “Monetary and macroprudential policies,” Banca d’Italia, Working Papers, 
801,  March  2011  (http://www.bancaditalia.it/pubblicazioni/econo/temidi/td11/td801_11/td_801/tema_801.pdf). 
See  also  P.  Angelini,  S.  Nicoletti-Altimari  and  I.  Visco,  “Macroprudential,  microprudential  and  monetary 
policies: conflicts, complementarities and trade-offs”, Banca d’Italia, Occasional Papers, 140, November 2012 
(http://www.bancaditalia.it/pubblicazioni/econo/quest_ecofin_2/qef140/QEF_140.pdf). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
provided  last  month to the  Banca  Monte  dei  Paschi  di  Siena,  public  recapitalizations  have 
been  limited  to  0.3  per  cent  of  GDP.  These  figures  indicate  that  the  ongoing  work  on 
resolution regimes is very important in this regard, and rapid progress should definitely be 
made.  This  is  particularly  relevant  in  the  euro  area,  where  the  new  single  supervisor 
mechanism (the SSM) is being implemented. 
Observations on the analytical implications of economic and financial instability 
Economic systems constantly evolve and transform. Changes in institutional arrangements, 
technological  innovation  and  revisions  in  economic  policy  paradigms  continuously  reshape 
the framework in which economic agents (consumers and businesses) make their decisions. 
This  in  turn  leads  to  changes  in  economic  agents’  behavioural  patterns.  When  there  is 
marked discontinuity with the past, such changes may be far-reaching and the past fails to 
provide  enough  guidance  for  the  present  (never  mind  the  future).  We  should  always 
remember  that  the  financial  system  is  part  of  a  richer  social,  economic  and  political 
environment.  The  real  world  is  subject  to  shocks  that  at  times  may  have  dramatic 
consequences, such as those that we have experienced in the last twenty years or so, with 
the  end  of  the  cold  war,  globalization  and  the  sudden  emergence  of  new  major  economic 
actors,  the  ICT  revolution,  and  substantial  (not  completely  anticipated)  demographic 
changes. 
However, a stationarity assumption of sorts underpins our theoretical and statistical models, 
in  the  case  of  economic  forecasting  and  (macro)  policy  making  as  well  as  in  the  case  of 
financial analysis and risk management. In general, the basic tenet is that future outcomes 
will  be  drawn  from  the  same  population  that  generated  past  outcomes,  so  that  the  time 
average of future outcomes cannot be persistently different from averages calculated from 
past  observations  and  future  events  can  be  predicted  with  a  certain  degree  of  statistical 
accuracy. In non-ergodic environments, on the contrary, at least some economic processes 
are  such  that  expectations  based  on  past  probability  distribution  functions  can  differ 
persistently from the time averages that will be generated as the future unfolds.7 In case of 
acute  uncertainty,  no  analysis  of  past  data  can  provide  reliable  signals  regarding  future 
prospects.  
The  challenges  posed  by  the  non-ergodic  nature  of  economic  systems  may  be  met  by 
recognizing  that  our  models  are  by  necessity  “local”  approximations  of  very  complex 
economic and financial developments. One needs to be modest, using theory and empirical 
models  as  starting  points for,  not  straightjackets  in,  our  decision making.  And  perhaps  not 
enough  attention  has  been  paid  by  the  financial  community  to  the  need  for  establishing 
institutional and behavioural norms to reign on patterns of instability and developing proper 
learning devices to deal with major shocks and regime changes.  
These  challenges  are  compounded  by  another  general  characteristic  of  the  quantitative 
analysis of economic phenomena: the difficulty of running parallel worlds, i.e. producing data 
through experiments designed and controlled by the researcher. Even when economic forces 
do  follow  repetitive  patterns,  it  may  not  be  easy  to  spot  empirical  regularities,  because 
contingencies  –  especially  the  exceptional  ones  –  cannot  be  re-created  at  will,  in  the 
laboratory, for cognitive purposes. Our experience will always be limited, partial and episodic. 
These  aspects  are  not  always  taken  into  account  in  economics  or  finance.  As  Charles 
Kindleberger noticed: “For historians each event is unique. Economics, however, maintains 
that forces in society and nature behave in repetitive ways”.8  
                                                
7  P.  Davidson,  “Is  probability  theory  relevant  for  uncertainty?  A  Post  Keynesian  perspective”,  Journal  of 
Economic Perspectives, 5, 1, 1991. 
8  C. P. Kindleberger, Manias, panics and crashes: a history of financial crises, New York: Basic Books, 1989, 
p. 14. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Why  is  it  that  the  parameters  and  laws  governing  economic  systems  tend  to  change  over 
time?  A  distinction  can  be  made  between  exogenous  uncertainty,  when  an  individual’s 
actions do not affect the probability of an event occurring, and endogenous (or behavioural) 
uncertainty,  when  they  do.9  In  economic  systems,  this  second  type  of  uncertainty  can  be 
particularly  important.  This  has  not  been  sufficiently  recognized,  I  believe,  in  the  way 
(applied) macroeconomics and finance have evolved since the 1980s, with the ascendency 
of the rational expectations revolution in the former and the efficient market hypothesis in the 
latter.  
In  macroeconomics  this  may  have  led  to  placing  too  much  faith  in  the  ability  of  dynamic 
stochastic  general  equilibrium  (DSGE)  models  to  represent  or  sufficiently  approximate  the 
real world on which economic policy is applied. These fundamentally linear models are the 
result of the intertemporal optimization by representative agents of objective functions under 
conditions of uncertainty, given technological and budget constraints and the “rationality” of 
their expectations (i.e. perfect foresight barring a random error). Indeed, going beyond the 
assumption that society and nature always behave uniformly and consistently over time has 
deep implications in policy making as well. This can be easily seen in monetary policy, where 
no  mechanistic  use  of  forecasting  models  can  be  made  if  one  allows  for  the  possibility  of 
structural changes.10  
An  important  lesson  of  the  financial  crisis  –  one  that  is  generating  substantial  research 
activity – is that the interactions and feedbacks between the real and the financial sectors 
and the non-linearities that emerge especially during crises are not adequately captured by 
the  available  models.  Many  of  the  effects  associated  with  financial  and  asset  price 
imbalances are likely to be highly non-linear and complex. The reaction of monetary policy 
should  then  also  be  non-linear  and  it  should  respond  to  asset  price  misalignments  and 
financial  imbalances. When  the  probability  of  a crisis  becomes  non-trivial,  the  interest  rate 
path towards ensuring monetary stability might be different than in ordinary circumstances. 
These  aspects  were  not  well  captured  in  the  empirical  models  used  to  support  monetary 
policy  decisions,  something  understood  but  perhaps  not  adequately  recognized 
in 
discussions on flexible inflation targeting frameworks that took place a decade or so ago.11 
One of my preferred quotes is from Herbert Simon:12  
Good predictions have two requisites that are often hard to come by. First they 
require either a theoretical understanding of the phenomena to be predicted, as a 
basis  for  the  prediction  model,  or  phenomena  that  are  sufficiently  regular  that 
they can be simply extrapolated. Since the latter condition is seldom satisfied by 
data about human affairs (or even by the weather), our predictions will generally 
be  only  as  good  as  our  theories.  The  second  requisite  for  prediction  is  having 
reliable  data  about  the  initial  conditions  –  the  starting  point  from  which  the 
extrapolation is to be made. 
                                                
9 
I. Visco, “On the role of expectations in Keynesian and today’s economics (and economies)”, translated from 
“Sul ruolo delle aspettative nell’economia di Keynes e in quella di oggi”, in Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei, Gli 
economisti  postkeynesiani  di  Cambridge  e  l’Italia,  Convegno  Internazionale,  Rome,  11–12  March  2009 
(http://www.bancaditalia.it/interventi/intaltri_mdir/en_Visco_110309.pdf). 
10  See, among others, J. Vickers, “Inflation targeting in practice: the UK experience”, Bank of England Quarterly 
Bulletin, November 1998. 
11  See C. Borio and P. Lowe, “Asset prices, financial and monetary stability: exploring the nexus”, BIS Working 
Papers,  114,  July  2002  (http://www.bis.org/publ/work114.pdf).  See  also  C.  Bean,  “Asset  prices,  financial 
imbalances and monetary policy: are inflation targets enough?”, BIS Working Papers, 140 (with discussions by 
I. Visco and S. Whadwani, http://www.bis.org/publ/work140.pdf). 
12  H. A. Simon, The sciences of the artificial, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1972, p. 170. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
We must recognize that empirical models reflect historical experience in the values of their 
parameters  and  are  mostly  reliable  when  it  is  “business  as  usual”,  that  is,  as  long  as  our 
systems  are  not  subjected  to  unusual  pressure.  It  can  be  argued  that  their  contribution  to 
making  informed  decisions  is  limited,  as  they  tend  to  become  unreliable  precisely  when, 
following  signs  of  structural  discontinuity,  the  benefits  of  correct  forecasting  are  greatest. 
Indeed, anomalous observations that do not fit the main mechanisms at work in the historical 
period  used  for  statistical  estimates  are  frequently  put  aside  (“dummied-out”),  their 
information  content  is  neutralized.  This  is  reasonable,  as  episodic  observations  of 
exceptional phenomena are generally inadequate to capture complex inter-relations between 
economic and financial variables. And yet those very deviations from the norm may contain 
precious  information  on  how  the  economy  works  in  conditions  other  than  those  usually 
prevailing.  
Much of the same reasoning applies to the analysis of financial market developments. The 
wave  of  financial  innovation  in  the  last  two  decades  was  fuelled  by  the  idea,  in  principle 
correct and fruitful, that the proliferation of new (and complex) financial instruments, allowing 
agents to insure against many dimensions of risk, was a way to “complete the markets”, to 
get  closer  to  the  theoretical  Arrow-Debreu  world,  enabling  investors  to  transfer  resources 
efficiently across time, space and states of the world. But this idea relied on the presumption 
that the world is basically stationary, that the future is pretty much the same as the past, that 
we can extrapolate from relatively small samples, and that there is a single “data generating 
process” that we can identify and understand. 
But we know that the real world is more complicated. The determinants of asset prices are 
not  fixed,  but  vary  over  time.  Asset  returns  do  not  follow  a  normal  distribution,  as  it  is 
assumed by conventional valuation formulas. Myopic behaviour, herding and other types of 
distorted incentives on the part of individuals and financial institutions can generate negative 
externalities  and  move  financial  markets’  expectations  and  risk  premia  away  from 
fundamentals.  And,  lately,  scholarly  work  has  been  attributing  a  new,  enhanced  role  to 
psychological elements and the recognition that there are limits to what one can know. In the 
field of the so-called behavioural finance this may even go as far as to validate “irrational” 
actions.  And  eminent  economists  argue  that these  elements  play  a  role  in  explaining  both 
conservative attitudes and speculative bubbles.13 
The potential limitations of quantitative analysis are therefore not limited to macroeconomics, 
econometric  modelling  and  forecasting  but  also  apply  to  finance.  And  they  may  have  dire 
consequences. The case of the CDOs is instructive. These credit derivatives, that in the first 
half  of  the  last  decade recorded  an  impressive  growth,  were  priced  according to  valuation 
models whose results were very sensitive to modest imprecision in parameter estimates and 
highly exposed to systemic risk (i.e. strongly affected by the performance of the economy as 
a  whole).14  As  a  result,  CDOs  not  only  did  not  increase  the  risk  bearing  capacity  of  the 
economies, but their implosion between mid-2007 and mid-2008 was at the core of the global 
financial  crisis.  Innovative  financial  instruments  with  unsound  theoretical  foundations  may 
exacerbate negative externalities and be sources of instability in their own right. 
Rather  than  in  the  development  of  unlikely  “catch-all”  models,  the  key  to  tackling  the 
problems created by discontinuity must lie, first of all, in a better understanding of its nature 
and so in defining models in which the relations are based on parameters that remain stable 
in  the  long  term.  Research  must  therefore  aim  to  identify  sufficiently  fundamental  and 
reasonably  dependable  mechanisms  that  do  not  change  over  time.  To  provide  sensible 
                                                
13  G. A. Akerlof and R. J. Shiller, Animal spirits: how human psychology drives the economy and why it matters 
for global capitalism, Princeton, Princeton University Press, 2009. 
14  See  J.  Coval,  J.  Jurek  and  E.  Stafford,  “The  economics  of  structured  finance”,  Journal  of  Economic 
Perspectives, 23, 1, 2009. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
accounts  of  rational  choices,  quantitative  models  necessarily  have  to  focus  on  systematic 
factors,  and  draw  their  own  conclusions  on  the  basis  of  key  relations.  In  this  respect  it  is 
worth  recalling  Bruno  De  Finetti’s  argument  for  a  “theory  of  finance”,  made  as  early  as 
1957:15 
In  order  for  a  theory  of  behaviour  to  say  something,  it  must  necessarily  be 
restricted  to that  which  is  derived  as  the  consequence  of  a few  main  concepts 
and  criteria  and  which  can  accordingly  (if  somewhat  arbitrarily)  be  defined  as 
“rational behaviour”. Then the theory will set out conclusions that are valid in the 
absence  of  accessory  factors.  This  is  not  to  deny  or  downplay  the  possible 
presence or importance of such factors; only, it is preferable to shift the study of 
deviations from the “theoretical” behaviour implied by those conclusions to a later 
moment  and  to  the  detailed  plane  of  complementary  observations,  rather  than 
cloud  all  distinctions  in  a  single  theoretical  construct  which,  in  the  attempt  to 
embrace and set on an equal plane the congeries of systematic and accessory 
factors,  would  be  reduced  to  a  non-theory  suitable  solely  to  conclude  that  all 
kinds of behaviour are equally possible (for caprice or madness, even, as is in 
fact the case). 
Obviously, De Finetti’s “later moment” should not be overlooked in applied research. Against 
the  risk  that  the  theoretical  paradigms  underlying  the  approximation  of  reality  implicit  in  a 
model may prove particularly inadequate in certain situations, it is useful to employ a battery 
of  different  models  and  cross-checks.  This  “multi-pronged”  approach  to  modelling  and 
forecasting also makes it possible to more effectively filter and interpret the great mass of 
partial  and fragmentary  or  even  contradictory  data  that gradually  become  available.  But  in 
dealing with non-ergodic processes, what really is all the more essential is to integrate the 
signals  provided  by  quantitative  models  with  information  outside  the  models,  take  stock of 
related  historical  experience  in  its  entirety,  and  intervene  on  the  basis  of  both  theory  and 
good sense.  
In both empirical microeconomics and finance work is under way to deal with the issues that 
have been considered here. Deviations from the assumption of normal distributions, “fat tails” 
and  the  modelling  of  extreme  events  are  being  taken  into  account  both  in  research  and 
applications. And it should be recognized that the importance of human behaviour does not 
imply  that  economic  systems  necessarily  have  to  be  prone  to  instability.  In  fact,  the  very 
existence  of  behavioural  uncertainty  may  tend  to  create  a  set  of  institutions,  as  well  as 
conventions and habits, which help to deal with the problems highlighted in Keynes’ “beauty 
context” example and ensure the stability of the main economic processes, as emphasized 
by  Herbert  Simon.16  Still,  I  believe,  more  attention  should  be  paid  to  how  to  account  for 
learning in the crucial adjustment periods that follow extreme events that cannot be simply 
taken  as  random  extractions  from  a  stable,  even  if  non-normal,  probability  distribution. 
Widening  the  class  of  probability  distributions  remains  however,  for  the  time  being,  the 
practical response to phenomena such as the ones we have been dealing with in this difficult 
period. 
Final remarks 
The crisis has shown that benign neglect should never have been an option. It has called for 
a  major  overhaul  of  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  financial  framework,  especially  at  an 
international level. In a globalized financial marketplace, with large and powerful participants, 
individual  action  by  national  authorities  would  be  bound  to  fail.  By  the  same  token,  the 
                                                
15  B. De Finetti, Lezioni di matematica attuariale, Roma: Edizioni Ricerche, 1957, p. 71 (my translation). 
16  H.  A.  Simon,  “The  role  of  expectations  in  an  adaptive  or  behavioristic  model”,  in  M.  J.  Bowman  (ed.) 
Expectations, uncertainty and business behavior, New York, Social Sciences Research Council, 1958.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
boundaries  of  supervision  should  be  widened  to  encompass  all  relevant  intermediaries, 
regardless  of  the  specific  industry  sector  they  belong  to.  I  have  discussed  the  work 
underway,  highlighted  the  results  achieved  and  stressed  the  areas  where  more  effort  is 
needed.  
The correct conduct of credit and financial business also requires competence and good faith 
on  the  part  of  intermediaries,  both  factors  being  decisive  to  ensure  sound  and  prudent 
management  and  preserve  the  confidence  of  savers.  This  necessity  is  heightened  by  the 
complexity of the external environment, by the presence of large intermediaries, and by the 
economic  and  reputational  damage  that  can  result  from  illicit  behaviour.  No  market  can 
function  without  rules,  nor  is  prudent  management  possible  without  correct  conduct, 
embodied not only in scrupulous compliance with the law and the supervisory rules but also 
in complete adherence to business ethics.  
The dramatic events of the past five years have highlighted the limitations of modelling and 
quantitative analysis in finance and in economics. The common assumption of stationarity is 
at odds with the unpredictably changeable nature of the real world. This is not to say that all 
the analytical efforts of the past and the progress achieved should be disregarded. It means 
rather that in order to make the best out of them one needs to remember that models are by 
necessity “local” approximations to very complex phenomena and they should be used with 
good  sense  as  a  framework,  not  a  straightjacket,  for  our  decision-making.  Quantitative 
analysis and modelling can also help to establish institutional and behavioural norms to rein 
in  patterns  of  instability  and  developing  proper  learning  devices  to  deal  with  major  shocks 
and regime changes. In turn, models should take into account the impact of such norms on 
economic developments.  
Central  banks  have  a  crucial  role  to  play.  There  are  clear  complementarities  between 
financial  and  monetary  stability.  Sometimes  these  are  formally  recognized  in  their  official 
mandate, but even when this is not the case, central banks must take them into account in 
their policy decisions. In this respect, I would like to quote from a book by the brilliant Bank of 
Italy economist Curzio Giannini, who passed away prematurely about ten years ago. In that 
“beautifully written and illuminating” work, as Charles Goodhart describes it in his foreword, 
Curzio clearly saw the likely consequences of financial developments, and concluded:17  
In  the  years  to  come,  the  most  interesting  developments  will  probably  be 
precisely in the sphere of supervision and regulation. […] Whatever its detractors 
may  say,  the  central  bank  has  no  need  to  move  into  new  lines  of  business. 
Capitalism generated the central bank and capitalism will come to it again, even if 
the current infatuation with the financial markets’ self-regulating capacity were to 
endure. […] The central bank produces an intangible but essential good – trust – 
of which capitalism (based as it is on a pyramid of paper if not mere electronic 
signals)  has  an  immense  need.  We  must  not  forget  that  trust,  or  its  synonym 
“confidence”,  derives  from  the  Latin  fides,  meaning  faith,  which  cannot  be 
produced simply by contract. In fact the legitimacy of central banks does not lie in 
their policy activism, or the ability to generate income, or even, save in a highly 
indirect  sense,  their  efficiency.  Rather,  […]  it  derives  from  competence, 
moderation,  the  long-term  approach,  and  the  refusal  to  take  any  tasks  beyond 
their primary role. If, as I am sure, there is another phase in the development of 
central banking, it will spring from these values. 
In the end this is, perhaps, what society should expect, if not from the financial sector, from 
those who are called to look after financial stability. 
                                                
17  C. Giannini, The age of central banks, Cheltenham, UK, Edward Elgar, 2011, p. 255 and pp. 258–259, English 
translation, L’età delle banche centrali, Bologna, Il Mulino, 2004. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
