Vítor Constâncio: Towards the Banking Union 
Speech  by  Mr  Vítor  Constâncio,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at 
2nd FIN-FSA  Conference  on  EU  Regulation  and  Supervision  –  “Banking  and  Supervision 
under  Transformation”  organised  by 
the  Financial  Supervisory  Authority,  Helsinki, 
12 February 2013. 
 the 
time, 
that  monetary 
integration  would  spontaneously 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure to be here today and I am grateful to the organizers for having invited 
me. All of us have been reflecting on the lessons to be drawn from the crisis relevant for the 
European project and in particular the ones related to the monetary union. The initial choice 
for monetary union  was to have a minimalist framework: the adoption of a single currency 
plus a fiscal brake, the Stability and Growth Pact, to ensure stability, exclude free riders and 
help the single monetary policy. All other policies, economic or concerning financial stability 
like supervision, were left for the national level. It was assumed, in line with the economic 
thinking  of 
the 
synchronisation of the economic cycle and that national “shock-absorber” would be sufficient 
to deal with country specific developments. 
The  crisis  has  made  it  clear  that  a  highly  interconnected  and  integrated  area  such  as  the 
euro  area,  requires  a  stronger  institutional  framework.  An  important  element  to  strengthen 
the financial institutional framework is the creation of the Banking Union. 
The Council proposal on the Single Supervisory Mechanism of last December is testimony to 
the urgency in setting up a basic pillar of the Banking Union. 
A strong and independent supranational supervisor will contribute in a significant manner to 
the  smooth  functioning  of  the  monetary  union  and  to  restore  confidence  in  the  banking 
sector.  The  regaining  of  confidence  in  the  banking  sector  is  key  to  reverse  recent 
developments  towards  financial  fragmentation  and  help  restart  a  well-functioning  interbank 
market. 
My intervention today is divided into two parts. In the first part I will touch upon the different 
elements of the Banking Union and reflect upon the underlying rationale for its establishment. 
In the second part of my speech I will focus on the SSM by reviewing its main features as 
well  as  the  immediate  challenges  for  the  ECB  to  prepare  itself  to  assume  its  supervisory 
task. 
foster 
Part I – the Banking Union 
The key building blocks of a Banking Union 
The Banking Union aims at building an integrated financial framework to safeguard financial 
stability  and  minimise  the  cost  of  bank  failures.  As  we  all  know,  it  consists  of  five 
complementary building blocks, of which the SSM forms an integral part. 
The first block is the establishment of a single rulebook, which in a substantial way exists 
already.  The  European  Banking  Authority  (EBA)  has  the  legal  competence  to  monitor  its 
implementation.  The  addition  of  the  CRD  IV,  the  Resolution  and  Deposit  Guarantee 
harmonisation  Directives  will  lead  to  the  creation  of  a  single  rulebook  that  will  significantly 
contribute  towards  creating  a  level  playing  field.  Likewise,  the  SSM  will  also  contribute  to 
reinforce  the  single  rulebook,  as  a  European  dimension  will  be  provided  to  the  way 
supervision is conducted. 
The establishment of a EU framework for single supervision forms the second element 
of  the  Banking  Union  and  will  be  at  the  centre  of  my  talk  today.  The  SSM  will  be  a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
mechanism, composed of national competent authorities and the ECB, with the possibility of 
non-euro area Member States to participate. The process to establish the SSM is underway, 
with  the  Council  proposal  forming  the  basis  for  the  current  discussion  at  the  European 
Parliament.  We  at  the  ECB  are  quite  pleased  with  the  Council’s  proposal  which  is  being 
assessed by the European Parliament. In all my comments I will refer it as it corresponds to 
the current basis for the future SSM. 
A  third  element  of  the  Banking  Union  is  the  establishment  of  a  Single  Resolution 
Mechanism.  An  important  pre-condition  is  a  swift  adoption  of  the  Bank  Recovery  and 
Resolution  Directive,  as  it  lays  out  a  harmonised  toolbox  of  resolution  powers.  The  Single 
Resolution  Mechanism  would  build  on  the  measures  and  tools  laid  down  in  the  Directive, 
particularly  by  providing  a  robust  framework  that  allows  for  prompt  and  coordinated 
resolution action, specifically where cross-border banks are concerned. As we all know, the 
swift  and  orderly  resolution  of  cross-border  banks  is  the  Achilles  heel  that  needs  to  be 
addressed. 
The framework for the Single Resolution Mechanism is still to be defined and I look forward 
to the Commission’s upcoming legislative proposal. Let me nevertheless highlight the main 
features that in my view such a Mechanism should have. It would have the same institutional 
and  geographical  scope  as  the  SSM.  The  SRM  would  be  an  operationally  decentralised 
system, where the ultimate responsibility rests with a Single Resolution Authority. The Single 
Resolution Authority would be at its centre, govern the resolution of banks and coordinate the 
application  of  resolution  tools.  It  should  have  a  comprehensive  set  of  enforceable  tools, 
powers and authority to resolve all banks in the SSM. In particular it would ensure that failing 
banks  are  resolved  swiftly,  through  impartial  decision-making  focused  on  the  European 
dimension. The timely resolution of banks should avoid the cascading of problems from one 
bank to other banks, thereby affecting European financial stability. 
In  order  for  the  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  to  be  perceived  as  credible,  it  should  have 
sufficient funding. I am not talking about bailing-out banks with public money. Resolution is 
about resolving the situation of banks that have attained the point of non-viability and about 
doing it in a way that minimises the involvement of public money. 
First,  the  writing-down  of  capital  instruments  and  bailing-in  of  creditors  should  be  fully 
exploited.  Second,  funds  accumulated  in  a  European  Resolution  Fund  should  be  used  to 
provide  additional  funding  needed  to  realise  a  least-cost  resolution  strategy.  These 
contributions should be risk-based and collected ex-ante from all banks participating in the 
SRM. Third, as a last resort, if the resources of the European Resolution Fund do not suffice, 
funds could be drawn from a European-level fiscal backstop mechanism. However, any fiscal 
support to the SRM should come in the form of credit to the European Resolution Fund. The 
Fund would need to repay the loan through additional levies on the banks under the SRM 
according  to  pre-specified  rules.  This  should  ensure  that  the  mechanism  is  fiscally  neutral 
over the medium term. Resolution activity may require the temporary use of public money if 
the Resolution Fund would not have enough resources, for instance, to capitalise a bridge 
bank that is sold later on to the private sector thus recovering the capital involved. In the US 
this is ensured by the existence of Treasury credit line, limited to 50bn dollars that can be 
drawn upon by the FDIC and later repaid. 
The  existence  of  this  financial  backstop  can  be  considered  as  the  fourth  element  of  a 
complete banking union, especially because, as announced by the European Summit, there 
will  be  the  possibility  of  direct  capitalisation  of  banks  by  European  funds.  This  element, 
whatever its terms, will be of great important for the achievement of one goal of the banking 
union project, namely to mitigate the negative feedback loop between banks and sovereigns. 
Finally, the fifth element of the Banking Union will be the establishment of a common 
system  of  deposit  protection.  A  first  step  in  this  direction  will  be  the  adoption  of  the 
legislative proposal on deposit guarantee schemes, providing a harmonised framework. This 
framework  should  ensure  depositor  confidence  and  enable  the  national  deposit  guarantee 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
schemes,  built  on  common  EU  standards,  to  interact  with  the  SRM.  A  European  deposit 
guarantee  scheme  is  therefore  not  essential  in  the  short  term.  Nevertheless,  a  common 
system, built on common EU standards, will be important in the future to ensure enhanced 
depositor  confidence  in  the  robustness  of  all  European  banks.  This  element  would  also 
contribute to reduce the risks of financial fragmentation that results from contagion fears and 
is detrimental to the smoothing functioning of the single monetary policy. 
the 
is  necessary  because  of 
Rationale for a Banking Union 
I  see  the  Banking  Union  as  essential  to  sustain  and  strengthen  the  EMU  framework.  It  is 
worthwhile to dwell upon the reasons why I consider it so. After all, the nature and features of 
banking union must be strictly connected with what justifies its existence. 
increasing 
First,  a  single  supervisory  mechanism 
interconnectedness  between  financial  institutions  and markets  across  the  euro  area  over 
the  past  decade,  be  it  through  internationally  active  banking  groups,  bilateral  trading 
exposures,  or  presence  in  the  same  market  segments.  The  recent  financial  crisis 
demonstrated how quickly and powerfully problems in the financial sector of one country can 
spread to another. This is especially the case in a monetary union. As a result, problems in 
the banking sector might originate at the national level, but are more and more likely to affect 
other countries of the euro area as well, and may quickly threaten the stability of the entire 
euro area banking system. Such developments and the underlying financial structures can 
best  be  assessed  by  a  central  authority  rather  than  through  cooperation  between  national 
ones.1  
This has been captured by the so-called “financial trilemma”. The concept of the trilemma is 
adapted  from  the  famous  “monetary  trilemma”  on  the  impossibility  of  simultaneously 
achieving  three  objectives:  a  fixed  exchange  rate,  capital  mobility,  and  national  monetary 
policy.2  In  a  very  similar  way,  but  applied  to  international  finance,  as  put  forward  by  Dirk 
Schoenmaker  (2011)  following  a  model  by  Xavier  Freixas  (2003)3  the  “financial  trilemma” 
illustrates  the  impossibility  of  achieving  three  objectives  in  an  environment  with  globalized 
financial  markets:  financial  stability,  financial  integration  and  national  financial  policies, 
especially supervision. 
For instance, the financial stability objective could possibly be pursued with national financial 
policies  and  supervision  but  only  at  the  expense  of  further  integration.  The  resulting 
fragmentation of the single market is however clearly at odds with the EMU framework and 
the  requirements  of  the  single  monetary  policy.  Similarly,  financial  stability  cannot  be 
safeguarded  as 
integration  progresses  (with  an  ever  greater  degree  of 
interconnectedness between financial institutions and markets) and financial sector policies 
remain  a  strict  national  competence.  Pursuing  financial  stability  and  integration  as  joint 
objectives  requires  true  European  level  policies.  This  is  particularly  illustrated  in  a  ECB 
working  paper  by  Holthausen  and  Ronde  (2004)4  showing  that  with  increasing  financial 
financial 
                                                
1   See, e.g. Gros, D (2012), “An incomplete step toward banking union”, CEPS discussion paper. 
2   First put forward in Padoa-Schioppa, T. (1982) “Capital mobility: why is the Treaty not implemented?” Address 
to  the  Second  Symposium  of  European  Banks  and  reproduced  in  Padoa-Schioppa  (2000)  “The  road  to 
monetary  union  in  Europe”  OUP.  See  also  Paul  Krugman  (1987)  “Economics  integration  in  Europe:  some 
conceptual  issues”  in  T.  Padoa-Schioppa  “Efficiency,  stability  and  Equity”  OUP  and  Obstfeld,  M, 
J. Shambaugh, and A. Taylor (2005), “The Trilemma in history: tradeoffs among Exchange rates, Monetary 
Policies, and Capital Mobility”, Review of Economics and Statistics 87, 423–438. 
3   Schoenmaker,  D.  (2011):  “The  Financial  Trilemma”,  in  Economics  Letters,  111  pages  57–59;  Freixas,  X. 
(2003) Crisis management in Europe. In: Kremers, J., D. Schoenmaker, and P. Wiert (eds) 2009, “Financial 
Supervision in Europe” Edward Elgar p. 141–165. 
4   Holthausen,  C.  and  T.  Ronde  (2004):  “Cooperation  in  international  banking  supervision”,  ECB  Working 
Paper 245. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
integration,  pursuing  national  financial  policies  will  generally  not  lead  to  financial  stability, 
because  national  policies  seek  to  benefit  national  welfare,  while  not  taking  into  account 
externalities  of  their  supervisory  practices  on  other  countries.  This  leads  to  an  under-
provision of financial stability as a public good. From a different perspective, Goodhart and 
Schoenmaker (2009)5 show, both in a model and using European data, that a coordination 
failure emerges when ex-post coordination among different national supervisors leads to an 
underprovision recapitalisation of cross-border banks after a banking problem. 
A lesson of the trilemma is, therefore, that it is beneficial for the provision of financial stability 
to  replace  national  policies  with  policies  at  the  supranational  level,  thus  geographically 
aligning supervisory incentives with the effect such supervision has on the financial sector as 
a whole. Other welfare enhancing benefits will come from the reduction of reporting costs for 
international banks, the easier centralised management of liquidity and the improving of the 
overall management of risks. 
The  materialisation  of  all  these  benefits  will  depend,  however,  on  a  vital  condition  for  the 
functioning of the SSM, namely that it ensures a truly unified European perspective and does 
not act as a sort of an inter-governmental body  of national supervisors. The elimination of 
any possible national bias implies that it has to function really as one system with a strong 
center and this will be its greatest challenge. 
A  second  reason  that  justifies  the  banking  union  project  regards  the  requirements  for  a 
smooth  functioning  of  the  single  monetary  policy.  Its  transmission  mechanism  across  all 
member countries of the euro area requires an appropriate level of financial integration that 
ensures  well  performing  cross  border  money  markets.  After  a  spectacular  integration  of 
money  and  financial  in  the  first  10  years  of  monetary  union  we  have  observed  increasing 
fragmentation that only recently, after the creation of our OMT programme, started to abate. 
This fragmentation has impaired the transmission mechanism of monetary policy. It has, of 
course,  several  different  causes  but  could  have  been  mitigated  in  the  first  place  if  some 
elements of a banking union had been in place. This would have contributed to a stronger 
separation  between  sovereign  and  banks  by  creating  enhanced  confidence  in  the  national 
banking sectors´ solvency and liquidity situations. This would happen not only as a result of 
an  effective  overall  supervision  but  also  would  stem  from  the  elimination  of  ring-fencing 
practices condoned or even incentivised by some national regulators. 
The elimination or mitigation of the banks and sovereigns negative feedback loops will then 
be  promoted  by  several  elements  of  the  banking  union  acting  together:  the  Single 
Supervisory  Mechanism,  the  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  and  the  European  direct 
recapitalisation of banks. 
The third reason that justifies the banking union project has to do with the development of 
large  financial  imbalances  within  the  euro  area  in  both  public  and  private  sectors.  In 
particular,  the  development  of  macro  and  external  imbalances  was  significantly  driven  by 
private sector indebtness, proving that the fiscal brake was not enough to guarantee macro 
stability and excessive heterogeneity among member states. This provided the rationale for 
the  recent  creation  of  a  formal  Macroeconomic  Imbalances  Procedure  to  monitor  and 
promote  timely  policy  measures  to  avoid  the  building  up  of  macroeconomic  instability  in 
member states. 
This was in part because fiscal rules were implemented weakly, not applied rigorously and 
subsequently watered down. Some countries therefore ran persistent deficits in good times 
or maintained high levels of debt. But the greater imbalances in fact emerged in the private 
sector. 
                                                
5   Goodhart, C. and D. Schoenmaker, (2009) “Fiscal burden sharing in cross-border banking crises” International 
Journal of Central Banking, vol. 5,n.1, March. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Between  1999  and  2007,  the  ratio  of  public  debt  to  GDP  in  EMU  declined  on  average  by 
5.6 percentage  points.  But  in  the  same  period,  the  ratio  of  private  sector  debt  to  GDP 
increased  by  26.8  percentage  points.  For  the  same  period,  in  the  stressed  countries,  the 
cumulative increase in the private debt ratio to GDP versus the public debt ratio, amounted 
respectively, to 49 and 24 per cent for Portugal, 75 and minus 35 per cent for Spain, 101 and 
minus 10 per cent for Ireland, 217 and 4 per cent for Greece. In 2007, just before the crisis 
started,  the  level  of  public  debt  on  average  in  the  euro  area  was  73%  but  was  63%  in 
Portugal, 46% in Spain and 26% in Ireland. 
Private debt levels were able to increase so significantly because the integration of national 
markets  allowed  for  higher  borrowing from  abroad  and  increased  leverage.  Banks  were  at 
the centre of this process both in lending and borrowing countries. As we now know, these 
flows  were  not  perfectly  optimised  by  rational  private  agents.  The  minimalist  institutional 
construction of the euro area lacked the tools to discourage these developments. 
The official bodies that could – and perhaps should – have intervened more to prevent these 
developments were national supervisors both in lending and borrowing  countries. Yet they 
lacked the perspective to do so and also the instruments to contain private capital flows that 
were  considered  to  result from  optimizing  self-equilibrating  markets. Only  macro-prudential 
measures  agreed  through  a  consensus  at  the  European  level  could  have  dealt  with  the 
situation. In other words, there was a mismatch between the degree of integration and the 
scope of governance. In retrospect, the euro area was not prepared to deal with the build-up 
of systemic risks. 
This was in a large part the result of two features of the dominant economic thinking at the 
time: 
first that the private sector is essentially stable and self-correcting composed of fully 
–  
rational  agents  always  optimizing  inter-temporally  with  knowledge  of  the  future  probability 
distributions  to  infinity  of  economic  returns  and  variables.  In  such  a  world  no  defaults  are 
admitted  or  dangerous  bubbles  possible.  Only  the  public  sector  can  create  instability.  The 
Stability Pact was then supposed to be enough to ensure stability. 
second, that finance does not matter for real economy fluctuations. After the Real 
–  
Business  Cycles  school,  the  rational  expectations  hypothesis  and  the  intertemporal 
optimization  paradigm,  money  and  finance  were  considered  not  relevant  anymore.  Money 
crept back in the new consensual macro model through the introduction of wage and price 
rigidities, allowing for short-term real economy effects of monetary policy. On the contrary, 
finance  continued  to  be  invisible  with  the  Efficient  Market  Hypothesis  ensuring  a  reliable 
plumbing of the real economy. Banks and capital markets were not considered endogenous 
sources  of  instabilities  with  real  economy  effects.  They  were  absent  from  macroeconomic 
models. 
All  these  features  are  being  corrected,  both  in  economic  theory  and  models  and  in 
institutions. The important consequence for the monetary union framework is the launching 
of the banking union project and within its supervision component the attribution to the SSM 
of macroprudential policy instruments. Previously, the ESRB had been created only with the 
competence 
the 
overwhelming evidence of the importance of systemic risk in the crisis explain why the ECB 
insisted  from  the  beginning  that  concrete  macroprudential  instruments  were  given  to  the 
SSM. The participant countries in the mechanism, which also can use those instruments, can 
feel more reassured that systemic risk at the European level will be better addressed in the 
future. 
recommendations.  Economic 
issue  warnings  and 
theory  and 
to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Part II – the Single Supervisory Mechanism 
for 
feature  necessary 
the  effectiveness  of 
Main features of the SSM regulation 
The Single Supervisory Mechanism is to become operational in 2014. Let me briefly highlight 
its main features some of which are related with the previous analysis. 
SSM as one system 
The SSM will operate as a system, catering for all expertise of national supervisors and at 
the same time possessing a strong decision-making centre. As I mentioned before, this is an 
important 
the  new  entity.  Appropriate 
decentralisation  procedures  will  need  to  be  defined  while  preserving  the  unity  of  the 
supervisory system and avoiding duplication. 
To  ensure  a  strong  centre, the  ECB’s final  responsibility  for  supervision  within  the  SSM  is 
matched by control powers over the system as a whole, as well as by very close cooperation 
arrangements with national authorities. The first aspect in the draft Regulation approved by 
the  Council  that  ensures  that  the  intention  is  indeed  to  create  one  system  of  European 
supervision  results  from  the  legal  competence  given  to  the  ECB  over  all  the  banks  in  the 
participating  countries.  Naturally  at  the  centre  of  the  system,  the  ECB  could  not  directly 
supervise all the thousands of existing banks. Only the more significant banks will be subject 
to  that  direct  supervision.  All  the  others  will  continue  to  be  supervised  by  the  competent 
national  authorities.  The  SSM  is  more  than  just  the  ECB  and  includes  all  the  national 
supervisors  and  central  banks  and  so  will  have  to  function  in  a  much  decentralised  way. 
Decentralisation  does  not  mean  fragmentation.  What  makes  the  SSM  work  truly  as  one 
system, besides the legal competence over all the banks, are some other main features: 
First,  all  the  components  of  the  system  will  have  to  act  in  accordance  with  a  system  of 
guidelines,  ECB  specific  regulations  and  manuals  of  supervisory  practices  that  will  be 
approved  at  the  center  by  the  Supervisory  Board.  The  respect  for  these  rules  will  be 
monitored and subjected to peer reviews. 
Second, the center at the ECB will receive all the supervisory data, regarding all the banks 
Third, the bodies at the center of the system, at the ECB, have the power to transfer to direct 
supervision  any  bank  or  group  of  banks  that may  be  considered  relevant  and  may  be  the 
origin of systemic risk. As we know from the crisis not only big banks may the source of more 
general  financial  instability.  This  legal  competence  is  also  an  important  persuasive  tool  to 
ensure harmonised supervisory practices throughout the system. 
Extensive powers of the SSM 
A  second  important  feature  of  the  SSM  regards  its  extensive  powers  in  the  conduct  of  its 
supervisory function. The SSM, with the ECB at its centre, is entrusted with an extensive 
set  of  micro-  and  macro-  prudential  powers,  covering  all  key  tasks  relating  to  the 
prudential supervision of credit institutions. This broad array of tasks and powers is crucial, 
as it is the foundation for the SSM to effectively supervise banks. 
In concrete, the micro-prudential tasks range from the authorisation of credit institutions to 
having the power to carry out early intervention when a bank is in financial distress. These 
tasks are matched with a broad set of powers to carry them out. In this context, the ECB may 
conduct  all  necessary  investigations  and  on-site  inspections  and  obtain  all  necessary 
information to carry out its task effectively. In addition, in order to enforce its decisions and 
rules, the ECB also avails of sanctioning powers. 
Beyond all these aspects that are usual in respect to supervisory authorities, there are two 
other  points  I  would  like  to  underline.  The  first  refers  to  the  so-called  early  intervention 
powers  as  they  are  foreseen  in  the  draft  Directive  about  bank  resolution  that  should  be 
approved  in  the  near  future  and  long  before  the  SSM  will  start  operating.  These  early 
intervention  are  vast  in  what  concerns  the  governance  and  scope  of  activity  of  institutions 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
that  start  to  have  problems  that  can  lead  them  to  a  point  of  non-viability.  As  such,  these 
powers are related to what is usually called “prompt corrective action” regarding problematic 
banks and can be applied before the bank is delivered to the Resolution Authority. 
Another important competence conferred upon the ECB as the centre of the SSM concern 
the  macro-prudential  instruments  to  be  possibly  applied  both  to  the  euro-area  financial 
system  as  a  whole  or  to  individual  countries.  These  powers  are  shared  with  national 
authorities that can also take measures in this field but it is nevertheless another essential 
element of the proposal. The crisis has shown that supervising the micro-prudential risks at 
individual banks separately is not sufficient and that macro- and micro- risks can actually be 
mutually reinforcing. 
Involvement of non-euro area Member States 
A third important feature of the SSM relates to the preservation and deepening of the Single 
Market, particularly the fact that national competent authorities of non-euro area Member 
States have an option to participate in the SSM. They can participate through establishing 
a close cooperation with the ECB. By giving non-euro area Member States full membership 
and  voting  rights  in  the  Supervisory  Body,  the  body  responsible  for  the  preparation  of 
decisions  on  supervisory  matters,  they  are  placed  on  an  equal  footing  with  euro-area 
Member States. However, as the ECB Governing Council is the ultimate the decision-making 
body of the ECB, its role in the SSM is reduced to the possibility of accepting of accepting or 
rejecting the decisions of the Supervisory Board. At the same time, a system integrating a 
mediation panel is foreseen in the Regulation in case of divergences that may involve a non-
euro area Member State. All these mechanisms were accepted at the level of the Council by 
all  governments  which  seems to  indicate that  we  might  see  an  extension  of the  SSM  well 
beyond the euro area. 
Separation of monetary and supervisory functions, while benefiting from synergies 
A  final  feature  of  the  SSM  Regulation  I  would  like  to  highlight  relates  to  the  principle  of 
separation  of  the  monetary  and  supervisory  function.  The  important  role  given  to  the 
Supervisory Board vis-à-vis the Governing Council, already referred to, is one of the various 
safeguards  ensuring  a  clear  separation  between  the  monetary  and  supervisory  function  of 
the ECB. Additionally, deliberations of the Governing Council on supervisory matters will be 
strictly separated, including separated agendas and meetings. 
The  ECB  fully  subscribes  to  the  need  for  a  clear  separation  between  its  monetary  and 
supervisory function and the provisions to this end mentioned in the proposed legislation. But 
let me stress that separation does not mean isolation. The conferral of supervisory tasks to a 
central  bank  is  in  line  with  the  responsibilities  of  many  other  central  banks  that  combine 
these  two  functions.  In  fact,  the  crisis  has  only  strengthened  the  trend  of  central  banks 
acquiring  supervisory  responsibilities  and  there  are  many  good  reasons  for  conferring 
supervisory powers to the central bank. 
A  first  argument  is  that a  stable financial  system  is  a  necessity  for  the  smooth  conduct  of 
monetary  policy  and  as  such  a  major  concern  of  any  central  bank.  Second,  there  are 
information  synergies  between  the  oversight  of  payment  systems  and  the  supervision  of 
banks. The ECB is not only responsible for the oversight of all large-value payment systems 
operating in the euro area, but also the owner of the TARGET2 system, the largest of such 
systems. Third, central banks have a lot of expertise on the financial sector. The constant 
monitoring of the different market segments in order to assess the transmission of monetary 
policy contributes to their understanding of the financial sector and to act quickly in situations 
of financial stress. Fourth, central banks will be able to achieve a better management of its 
counterparties´  creditworthiness  in  monetary  policy  operations.  Fifth,  central  banks  are 
particularly prepared to manage macroprudential policies as they have a deep knowledge of 
the macroeconomic and financial cycles and monetary policy shares the same concerns with 
macroprudential  policy, namely  the  stabilisation  of the  cycle  to ensure  price  stability  in  the 
medium and long term. This provides the justification for the fact that in Europe and around 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
the world Central Banks are given macroprudential authority even when they not have micro 
supervisory  powers.  In  fact,  the  usual  arguments  to  separate  monetary  policy  from 
supervision do not apply to macroprudential policy. In particular, the potential conflicts, the 
sensitivity  and  reputation  risks  resulting  from  decisions  about  individual  institutions  do  not 
arise in what regards macroprudential policies. It is then to be expected that the Governing 
Council of the ECB will show more interest in those policies. On the other hand, there are 
also advantages in not subsuming the macroprudential perspective in the micro supervisory 
body  as  the  systemic  risk  is  not  the  natural  standpoint  of  observation  of  such  body. 
Macroprudential concerns should be functionally separate in any organization that has both 
functions as it happens currently with various central banks in Europe. 
Thus, although the conduct of supervision will be a new task for the ECB, as the euro area’s 
central bank, we have built up extensive expertise in macroeconomic and financial stability 
issues.  While  safeguarding  any  potential  conflicts  of  interest  between  the  monetary  and 
supervisory function, the benefits of combining these two tasks in one institution are evident 
and should be reaped. 
Of  course  the  concentration  of  more  powers  at  the  ECB,  implies  a  higher  level  of 
accountability. The Council proposal also addresses the issue by creating a Review Panel 
of  the  SSM  decisions  from  a  legal  point  of  view  and,  in  particular,  by  defining  the 
accountability of the SSM before the European Parliament. 
Main immediate tasks of the SSM 
One of the main priorities for the ECB during 2013 is ensuring the operationalization of the 
SSM, so that it can assume its responsibilities effectively and efficiently. 
Building a strong centre 
Creating a strong centre in a decentralised system such as the SSM, will be crucial to ensure 
the  ECB’s  reputation  is  safeguarded.  The  monetary  policy  function  of  the  central  bank 
requires that it maintains a high level of credibility. This is essential to keep anchored inflation 
expectations.  When  the  central  bank  is  responsible  for  both  price  stability  and  banking 
supervision, weaknesses in supervision could damage the reputation of the central bank as a 
competent monetary authority. Furthermore, it could be argued that the central bank faces 
higher  reputational  risks  in  conducting  its  supervisory  function  than  its  monetary  policy 
function.  This  is  simply  due  to  the  very  different  nature  of  the  tasks.  News  about  a  failing 
bank can be automatically wrongly perceived as a result of deficient supervision cancelling 
out reputation built over a stream of years with no news about problem banks. 
In addition, the ECB will need to build up its reputation in its supervisory function. While the 
full independence and legal means are at the core of the system in the SSM construction, the 
close proximity with the supervised entities and expertise of national supervisory authorities 
are essential to ensure that no aspect is overlooked. As I mentioned before the system will 
be very much decentralised. Even in the case of banks directly supervised from the centre, 
the  experts  from  national  authorities  will  be  involved  in  on-site  inspections  and  these  and 
other  operations  should be  conducted  in the  context  of  joint  supervisory  teams  headed  by 
ECB´s experts. 
The  success  of  the  SSM  will  hinge  on  the  knowledge  and  skills  of  its  human  capital. 
Therefore the recruitment of skilled and experienced staff, including banking supervisors, will 
be a priority. This will be, to a large extent, built on the system resources, in line  with the 
experience in cooperation within the Eurosystem. 
Review of banks’ balance-sheets 
An immediate task of the SSM will be a comprehensive review of the banks brought under its 
responsibility, namely the banks that will come under the direct supervision of the ECB. This 
is requested in the Council Regulation in view of possible legacy issues, which could put the 
SSM reputation at stake further down the road. Ahead of assuming the responsibility for the 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
supervision of banks, the ECB in cooperation with national supervisory authorities will need 
to carry out a comprehensive assessment of their balance-sheets. This exercise will include 
elements  of  an  asset  quality  review  which  is  instrumental  in  identifying  potential  legacy 
problems. 
The  treatment  of  legacy  assets  in  the  overall  Banking  Union  project  is  an  important 
issue, notably in connection with the European direct recapitalisation of banks. It has 
to  be  ensured  that  in  the  setting  up  of  a  European  Resolution  Mechanism,  the  losses  of 
legacy assets, in accordance with good resolution principles, will be borne first by the banks’ 
shareholders and/or partly by the countries where they are domiciled, so that the use of any 
European  funds  do  not  raise  issues  of  moral  hazard  and/or  unjustified  excessive 
mutualisation of losses coming from the past. As it happens when a private investor takes a 
stake in the capital of a troubled bank, appropriate due diligence is conducted and will impact 
the determination of the price of entry thus diluting previous shareholders. Solutions will need 
to  be  worked  out  whenever  legacy  assets  threaten  to  overwhelm  the  fiscal  capacity  of 
Member  States.  In  such  cases,  mechanisms  would  need  to  be  found  so  as  to  provide 
support  at  the  European  level  ensuring  that  the  scheme  of  incentives  remains  aligned. 
Member  States  will  need  to  keep  a  fair  share  of  their  responsibilities  so  that  resolution 
objectives are fully and timely complied with. 
The  ECB  is  prepared  to  conduct  the  necessary  balance-sheet  reviews  and  related 
assessments  in  cooperation  with  other  national  and  EU  authorities  and  possibly  third 
parties.  This  is  particularly  the  case  for  forward-looking  analysis  of  banks’  solvency  in  the 
form of stress tests for individual banks, envisaged in the legislative proposal establishing the 
SSM. 
The  ECB,  similarly  to  other  national  central  banks,  has  over  the  years  strengthened  its 
analytical  capacity  to  support  its  financial  stability  function,  notably  the  need  to  carry  out 
systemic  risk  assessments  in  real  time  to  support  policy  discussions.6  Such  analytical 
capability  supporting financial  stability  assessment  work  has furthermore  been  essential  to 
support country-specific analysis to support discussions on the financial sector of countries 
under financial  assistance  and  in  support  to  the  EBA  in  conducting  EU-wide  macro  stress 
tests. The systemic risk concerns of macroprudential policies has led to the development of a 
suite of tools and models with a view to assess and quantify the impact of systemic risks on 
the  banking  sector  and  ultimately  on  the  real  economy.  The  existing  macro  stress  testing 
framework is particularly suited to assist the reviews of banks’ balance sheets and provide 
comparable forward looking assessments of banks’ solvency on an individual basis. 
More broadly, these comprehensive reviews  will provide transparency into the composition 
and credit quality of banks’ loan portfolios, in the spirit of asset quality reviews. Such financial 
due diligence  would furthermore inform about provisioning and loss mitigation policies and 
broadly validate banks’ reporting. This exercise should contribute to increase comparability 
across  banks  –  in  line  with  EBA  efforts  on  harmonisation  of  definitions  and  practices 
supervisory processes. 
Harmonising supervisory procedures and risk assessments 
At  a  larger  scale,  the  ECB  needs  to  conduct  fundamental  work  –  in  cooperation  with  the  
EBA – to develop a manual of supervisory practices, defining processes and procedures for 
conducting  supervision  in  the  EU.  This  should  ensure  a  harmonised  approach  to  the  way 
supervision is conducted and increase comparability across supervisory assessments – e.g. 
regarding  provisioning  and  risk  mitigation  policies  –  under  the  new  EU  supervisory 
framework. 
                                                
6   See  ECB  (2010),  Financial  Stability  Review,  June,  “Analytical  models  and  tools  for  the  identification  and 
assessment  of  systemic  risks”  as  well  as  (2012)  “Report  on  the  First  two  years  of  the  Macro-prudential 
Research Network”, October. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
Related work that is underway and coordinated by the EBA, notably on forbearance risk and 
impaired  asset  classification  will  represent  in  this  connection  valuable  contributions  to  the 
convergence of procedures to best practices. Provisioning and loss mitigation policies may 
differ quite substantially across countries at present. The need for harmonisation is apparent 
as these represent key elements affecting assessments of banks’ capacity to withstand credit 
losses.  Furthermore,  work  done  within  EBA  on  risk  assessment  inputs  to  the  supervisory 
review process – a topic that I will return to in a second – also represent important steps in 
this harmonisation process. 
The  establishment  of  the  SSM  also  requires  the  harmonisation  of  supervisory  risk 
assessment  frameworks.  In  fact,  amid  a  vast  range  of  indicators  of  bank-specific 
vulnerabilities  and  partial  analysis,  there  is  no  harmonised  risk  assessment  methodology 
across Europe that could support a common framework for supervisory assessments in the 
EU. 
This would entail the creation of some sort of European Supervisory Rating System in the 
spirit of the Uniform Financial Rating System introduced by US regulators in 1979. Special 
emphasis  is  needed  on  definitions  and  forward-looking  dimensions  that  could  signal  bank 
distress  further  down  the  road.  Quantitative  indicators  and  qualitative  judgements  about 
governance and risk management will be included in the risk profile of banks and their overall 
classification. 
Here as well, the ECB stands out as well equipped to support this SSM task, in cooperation 
with EU and national authorities. Over recent years, efforts have been made to strengthen 
the  risk  surveillance  function  to  assist  ECB  responsibilities  in  the  field  of financial  stability. 
This  has  to  a  large  extent  published  in  official  financial  stability  publications,  most 
prominently, the ECB Financial Stability Review. 
I  would  highlight,  in  particular,  the  importance  of  work  conducted  in  the  area  of  early 
warning  models.  Beyond  investments  in  developing  analytical  tools  and  models  that  can 
provide early warnings of the build-up of financial imbalances at the aggregated level, efforts 
have also gone in the direction of the analysis of individual banks. Methodologies combining 
bank-specific  indicators,  in  the  spirit  of  the  CAMELS  indicators,  with  country-specific 
indicators  for  the  banking  sector  and  country-specific  macro-financial  indicators  are  being 
used and will be further explored to predict distress in banks.7 In this respect, model-based 
frameworks of contagion accounting for vulnerabilities arising from interdependencies across 
banks are also being developed. There is a long way to go on the analytical front but these 
are  already  important  first  steps  that  should  cater  for  a  solid  establishment  of  the  new 
framework for  supervision  in  Europe. These  efforts  are  essential  in the construction  of the 
Banking Union. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. The agreement reached on the SSM by the Council shows the resolve to 
strengthen the EMU by strengthening the institutional financial framework. The SSM is a key 
component,  but  it  is  only  one  component  of  the  Banking  Union.  In  particular,  a  European 
framework for resolution of banks – with a Single Resolution Mechanism centerd on a Single 
Resolution  Authority  needs  to  follow.  We  fully  support  the  intention  announced  by  the 
Commission  to  present a  legislative  proposal for  a  single  resolution  mechanism,  having  at 
the  center  a  resolution  authority  that  should  be  approved  before  the  SSM  becomes  fully 
operational. 
                                                
7   ECB, (2012) Financial Stability Review, December, Special Feature A “Predicting bank distress and identifying 
interdependencies among European banks”. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The prospect of the creation of Banking Supervision at the European level, complemented by 
future  European  banking  resolution,  is  the  more  far  reaching  change  introduced  since  the 
inception  of  the  euro.  It  reveals  the  willingness  of  Member  States  to  continue  to  deepen 
European  integration  and  create  at  the  same  time  a  better  framework  for  the  effective 
functioning of the euro area. 
Few  could  have  foreseen  such  momentous  developments.  A  man  of  vision  and  a  great 
European,  Tommaso  Padoa-Schioppa,  who  preceded  me  as  the  member  of  the  ECB´s 
Board responsible for financial stability wrote in 1999 a few weeks after the inception of the 
euro:8 “I am convinced, however, that in the future the needs will change and the multilateral 
mode9 will have to deepen substantially. Over time such a mode will have to be structured to 
the  point  of  providing  the  banking  industry  with  a  true  and  effective  collective  euro  area 
supervisor. It will have to be enhanced to the full extent required for banking supervision in 
the euro area to be as prompt and effective as it is within a single nation”. 
At the time this might have sounded as premature to many but they should have listened to 
another  man  of  great  vision,  Jean  Monnet,  who  wrote  in  his  Memoires:  “There  are  no 
premature  ideas,  there  are  only  opportune  moments  that  it  is  necessary  to  wait  for  ….. 
Everything is possible in exceptional moments provided we would be ready.” 
I am confident we will be ready. 
Thank you for your attention. 
                                                
8   Padoa-Schioppa, T., “ EMU and banking supervision” Lecture in the London School of Economics, on 24 Feb 
1999. 
9   The way Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa named the European approach in this text. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
