Stefan Ingves: Managing structural risks in the Swedish banking sector 
Speech by Mr Stefan Ingves, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank and Chairman of the Basel 
Committee on Banking Supervision, at Affärsvärlden’s “Bank & Finans Outlook”, Stockholm, 
20 March 2013. 
 Today  I  intend  to  speak  about  the  Riksbank’s  view  of  the  structural  risks  in  the  Swedish 
banking sector and how they can be managed. As so often in recent years, I will take the 
crisis  of  2007–2009,  and  the  risk  reassessments  that  banks,  investors,  researchers  and 
decision-makers  all  over  the  world  were  forced  to  make  as  a  result  of  the  crisis,  as  my 
starting point. I will begin by saying a few words about the international work on regulations 
that arose as a consequence of the crisis. Then I will go into a little more detail about the 
structure and special characteristics of the Swedish banks. On the basis of this, I will present 
my  view  of  the  possible  implications  of  the  implementation  and  follow-up  of  the  Basel  III 
regulations for the Swedish banks. 
The risks associated with banking operations need to be limited 
First, however, I would like to give you a small example of the risks we are talking about. 
The US mortgage crisis became acute in 2007 and marked the start of the global financial 
crisis. At that time, the capital adequacy ratio, that is the amount of capital in relation to risk-
weighted assets, in the major Swedish banks averaged around 7 per cent. This means that 
for every SEK 1 000 in risk-weighted assets, the banks funded their operations with SEK 70 
of their own money and with SEK 930 in borrowed money. This is in fact a rather generous 
calculation and includes capital that turned out be of dubious quality.  
Decisions had also been made at that time that allowed the banks to use their own internal 
risk models to a greater extent to calculate their capital adequacy requirements. The banks 
were thus able to substantially reduce the risk weights of their assets, including mortgages, 
in  the  long  term.  The  major  banks’  internal  risk  models  indicated  that  the  risks  associated 
with mortgage lending were extremely low. In several cases this meant that the risk weight of 
a typical mortgage could easily be as low as 6 per cent, which meant that only 6 per cent of 
the mortgage would need to be covered. With a capital adequacy ratio of 7 per cent and a 
risk weight for mortgages of 6 per cent, this meant that a bank could fund each SEK 1 000 of 
a mortgage loan with SEK 996 in borrowed money and SEK 4 in its own money. The risk the 
bank itself took when it lent SEK 2 million for the purchase of a house thus corresponded to 
SEK 8 000 of its own capital. There were in fact transitional regulations that initially meant 
that  the  banks  were  not  able  to  calculate  so  liberally,  but  these  were  the  regulations  that 
would apply in the longer term and thus those that the banks and investors, and often the 
authorities, primarily focused on. 
Given  that  the  banks,  in  Sweden  and  in  other  countries,  only  needed  a  small  amount  of 
capital,  and  given  that  it  was  often  assumed  that  they  were  backed  by  government 
guarantees, it was highly profitable for them to take substantial risks. The banks themselves 
carried only a small part of these risks, while it turned out that the banks’ customers and the 
taxpayers had to carry the major part. In several countries – Spain, Ireland and Denmark for 
example, in addition to the United States – we have seen how substantial falls in the prices 
of the banks' assets, mainly in the form of mortgages, have led to major economic problems.  
The point is that the risk capital that the banks and their shareholders provide is limited to the 
value of the share capital. But society’s risks are greater than this. A mainstream assessment 
in  economic  research  is  that  a  national  crisis  in  the  financial  system  costs  the  economy 
around 60 per cent of GDP. In Sweden, this would be equivalent to over SEK 2 000 billion, or 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
more than SEK 200 000 per Swede. This is more than two and a half times the joint stock 
market value of the four major Swedish banks at the turn of the year 2012/2013.  
In Sweden, we succeeded in managing the acute phase of the financial crisis in 2008 and 
2009 in a way that made it possible to limit the costs to society. One contributing factor was 
probably that the crisis of the 1990s was fresh in the minds of the banks and they thus limited 
their risk-taking more than might otherwise have been the case, at least with regard to their 
operations in Sweden. As we know, not all countries were as lucky. The negative effects of 
the crisis are still in evidence in large parts of the world – not least in several countries in 
central and southern Europe – and will probably remain so for some time to come. 
In retrospect, it is easy to note that the combination of shortcomings in the regulations and 
the profit motives of the participants on the financial markets contributed to one of the worst 
financial crises of the modern era. The details regarding the build-up of risk and the course of 
the crisis have been described several times and I will not repeat them here. It is enough this 
time  to  note  that  banks  with  a  limited  amount  of  capital  and  banks  with  a  high  degree  of 
market funding proved to be vulnerable when the storm broke. 
These insights from the crisis lie behind the regulatory work that is now underway in Sweden 
and abroad today. There is broad agreement that risk-taking in the banking sector must be 
limited and that its costs must be taken into account by the banks and their investors to a 
greater extent. Important steps have been taken in this direction in the global agreement on 
future  standards  for  regulations  in  the  banking  sectors  referred  to  as  the  Basel  III  Accord. 
The worlds’ banks will be safer when this is implemented, which will benefit everyone.  
Basel III increases the safety margins in the system 
The  Basel  III  regulations  represent  the  introduction  of  much-needed  standards  that  will 
require  the  banks  to  hold  more  and  better  capital.  The  minimum  requirement  for  CET  1 
capital, that is share capital and retained earnings, will be raised to 4.5 per cent of the risk-
weighted assets. In addition to the minimum requirements there will be a capital-conservation 
buffer, a countercyclical capital buffer and a buffer for systemically-important banks, which all 
sharpen  the  requirements  for  the  level  of  CET  1  capital.  In  total,  the  Basel  III  Accord  will 
represent a capital-adequacy requirement of 7 to 12 per cent of CET 1 capital depending on 
how important the bank is in a global systemic perspective and where the country's economy 
is in the credit cycle. This is a much higher level than previously. 
The countercyclical capital buffer is particularly interesting. This will be built up in good times, 
when  credit  growth  is  higher  than  normal,  with  the  aim  of  creating  airbags  to  protect  the 
banking  sector  in  troubled  times.  So  far,  this  is  the  instrument  on  which  international 
agreement  has  been  reached  in  the  field  of  macroprudential  policy,  that  is  a  policy  that 
comprises measures to prevent financial crises that are directed at the system as a whole. 
A leverage ratio requirement will also be introduced under which, irrespective of risk weights, 
a  bank's  assets  may  not  exceed  33  times  its  own  capital.  A  leverage  ratio  requirement 
represents an extra safety measure that also limits the banks’ possibilities to use internal risk 
models to actually keep risk weights down. 
Basel  III  also  sets  quantitative  standards  for  the  banks’  liquidity,  a  short-term  (Liquidity 
Coverage  Ratio,  LCR) and  a  long-term  (Net  Stable  Funding  Ratio,  NSFR).  The  short-term 
measure means that every bank should have sufficient liquid assets to survive for at least 
30 days in a stressed scenario. The long-term measure, in principle, limits the gap between 
the maturity of a bank’s assets and the maturity of its liabilities.  
The standards stipulated in the Basel III Accord will be implemented in national legislation 
during the 2010s and should be implemented in their entirety by 2019, with several interim 
targets along the way.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Establishing  better  regulations  on  the  banks’  capital  and  liquidity  represents  a  major  step 
forward.  However,  in  a  wider  perspective  we  can  note  that  even  in  the  future  the  worlds’ 
banks will have capital that only amounts to a few per cent of their assets. This is almost 
within  the margin  of  error  for  a  valuation  of  the  total  assets.  The  equity/assets  ratio  in  the 
banking sector is only one fifth, or even one tenth, of that for companies in other sectors.  
However,  a  central  element  of  the  Basel  III  Accord  is  that  the  standards  are  minimum 
regulations – countries that want to impose stricter requirements may and should do so. We 
have already seen cases of this – for example in the United States, the United Kingdom and 
Switzerland.  Decisions  have  also  been  made  in  both  the  United  States  and  the  United 
Kingdom on more structural measures to protect the central functions of the financial sector, 
for example through the Dodd-Frank Act and the follow-up of the Vickers Report. In the EU, 
the  Liikanen  Report  has  taken  up  the  issue  of  ring-fencing,  that  is  separating  the  different 
operations of the banks from each other.  
The  reason  is  that  the  financial  systems  are  different  in  different  parts  of  the  world.  It  is 
therefore important to design regulations that are tailored to the banking system that has to 
comply  with  them.  We  also  need  to  maintain  a  respectable  distance  to  the  minimum 
regulations. Considering what we know about the Swedish banking system, there are good 
reasons  for  ensuring  that  Swedish  banks  comply  with  the  global  standards  by  a  broad 
margin. 
The Swedish banking system is special 
It is thus important to put the Swedish banking system into perspective. The total domestic 
and  foreign  assets  of  the  four  major  banking  groups  amount  to  400  per  cent  of  Sweden's 
GDP. In other words, out banking system is huge. Relatively speaking, it is on a par with the 
banking system in the  United Kingdom, for example. The Swedish banking system is also 
highly  integrated,  which  means  that  problems  in  one  bank  can  easily  lead  to  a  crisis  of 
confidence for the entire system. If we were hit by a financial crisis, the costs to society could 
thus be very high. 
With  this  in  mind,  I  intend  to  focus  in  more  detail  on  two  vulnerabilities  in  the  Swedish 
financial system that are interlinked. The first is the indebtedness of the Swedish households. 
The  second  is  the  banks’  funding  in  foreign  currencies  and  their  dependence  on  the 
currency-swap market.  
The Swedish mortgage market has structural weaknesses 
An  issue  that  has  been  widely  discussed  recently  is  the  indebtedness  of  the  Swedish 
households  and  the  risk  of  a  fall  in  housing  prices.  Experience  in  several  countries  has 
shown that indebtedness and the development of housing prices are the main explanations 
of  why  some  countries are  hit  harder  than  others  during  economic  crises.  Similarly,  crises 
that  are  preceded  by  a  credit  and  housing  boom  tend  to  be  longer  and  more  severe  than 
other  economic  crises.1  A  fall  in  housing  prices  may  lead  households  to  save  rather  than 
consume in order to compensate for the fact that the value of their homes has fallen. If many 
households behave in this way, this may weaken economic activity, increase unemployment 
and create loan losses in the banks' lending to companies. This, for example, is what has 
happened in our neighbouring country Denmark in recent years.  
What  we  can  note  is  that  the  credit  conditions  for  mortgages  changed  in  the  early  2000s. 
Interest-only mortgages became increasingly common at the same time as the loan-to-value 
ratios  increased.  The  banks  also  began  to  fund  mortgages  by  issuing  so-called  covered 
                                                 
1  See Claessens, S., A, Kose, and M, Terrones (2011), “Financial Cycles: What? How? When?”, IMF Working 
Paper. CEPR Discussion Paper, NO.8379. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
bonds on the financial markets to an increasing extent. Easy access to inexpensive funding 
in combination with a high demand for mortgages led to rapid credit growth. Now, the debts 
of the Swedish households are high in both historical and international terms. Although the 
rate of credit growth has slowed down and loan-to-value ratios have fallen – the mortgage 
cap  introduced  in  2010  has  probably  contributed  to  this  –  there  are  still  structural 
weaknesses on the Swedish mortgage market.  
For instance, the mortgage survey recently published by Finansinspektionen identifies one 
such  weakness:  approximately  half  of  all  new  mortgages  are  interest-only  loans.2  This 
increases the scope for the households to take larger loans, which in turn increases the debt 
stock. Figure 1 shows household debt in relation to disposable income. It also illustrates how 
indebtedness in the household sector grows under different assumptions about amortisation. 
This raises a number of questions about the future. For example, how will the average loan-
to-value ratio in the banks' mortgage stocks develop when older mortgages are paid off and 
new interest-only mortgages are paid out? What will the long-term consequences of a weak 
or non-existent amortisation culture be for peoples' private finances, the national economy 
and expectations of economic policy? These are questions that we are considering and that 
we will analyse further together with Finansinspektionen.  
Figure 1 
Household debt under different assumptions  
regarding amortisation behaviour 
Percentage of disposable income 
Note.  The  figure  presents  a  simple  illustrative  calculation  of  how 
indebtedness may develop given different assumptions about the 
households’  amortisation  behaviour  in  the  future.  The  figure 
should not be interpreted as the Riksbank’s forecast. 
Sources: Statistics Sweden and the Riksbank. 
 The banks’ extensive market funding in foreign currencies makes the system 
vulnerable  
Another  structural  weakness  in  the  Swedish  banking  system  is  that  the  degree  of  market 
funding is high. We can see this, for example, by looking at lending in relation to deposits. 
Lending is significantly higher in the Swedish banking system than in many other European 
                                                 
2  According to Finansinspektionen’s mortgage survey 2013. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
countries (see Figure 2). This is partly because Swedes to a large extent save in funds rather 
than in bank accounts. Another reason is that Swedish banks retain their mortgage loans on 
their balance sheets, while banks in many other countries “sell” them or securitise them.  
Figure 2 
Lending in relation to deposits in the banking systems  
of European countries 
Per cent 
350%
300%
250%
200%
150%
100%
50%
0%
Note. Refers to monetary financial institutions 
Sources: The ECB and the Riksbank. 
 Swedish  banks  are  thus  highly  dependent  on  the  capital  markets  to  fund  their  lending.  A 
large  proportion,  almost  45  per  cent,  of  the  funding  from  the  capital  markets  is  in  foreign 
currencies. This borrowing funds assets in both Swedish kronor and foreign currencies. This 
dependence  on  market  borrowing  in  foreign  currencies  gives  rise  to  two  risks.  The  first 
relates to the extent to which participants are prepared to buy the banks’ mortgage bonds 
and when necessary convert borrowing in foreign currencies to Swedish kronor. The second 
lies in the fact that the maturities for assets and liabilities in foreign currency differ. 
Few counterparties fund the long-term lending in Swedish kronor  
The borrowing in foreign currencies also funds lending in Swedish kronor to some extent, for 
example  for  housing  purposes.  The  Swedish  banks  typically  fund  their  mortgage  loans  by 
issuing covered bonds for which the mortgages act as collateral. A large proportion of these 
bonds are issued in foreign currencies, mainly euro and US dollars.  
The reason that the banks have chosen to get funding on the foreign markets is probably that 
they want to spread their sources of funding across different markets. This is also something 
that  the  credit-rating  agencies  encourage.  It  has  also  often  proved  to  be  an  inexpensive 
method of funding mortgage loans. However, broadening the investor base may also mean 
that it consists of a larger percentage of volatile investors. Problems on the Swedish housing 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
market may therefore lead to the banks finding it difficult to refinance their mortgage loans. 
We actually believe that the banks can manage rather substantial falls in the market value of 
housing, but if the investors' assessment is that the risk have increased they may choose not 
to buy the Swedish banks' bonds, despite the fact that they only entail a minor credit risk. 
Such  concerns  may  also  make  other  types  of  market  funding  more  expensive  and  more 
inaccessible if the investors choose to reduce their exposures to the Swedish banking sector.  
We saw examples of this in the autumn of 2008, when foreign investors wished to offload 
Swedish mortgage securities and the market demand for more liquid instruments, particularly 
Swedish  government  securities,  increased.  The  Swedish  National  Debt  Office  then  carried 
out  extra  issues  of  treasury  bills  and  provided  loans  through  reverse  repos  in  covered 
mortgage  bonds.  At  the  same  time,  the  Riksbank  expanded  its  list  of  approved  forms  of 
collateral. All in all, this meant that in principle the government assumed the risk that lay in 
the outstanding stock of Swedish mortgage loans.  
In  order  to  convert  borrowing  in  foreign  currencies  to  lending  in  Swedish  kronor  without 
taking  a  currency  risk,  the  banks  usually  conduct  currency  swaps.  In  simple  terms,  this  is 
done  like  this:  A  Swedish  bank  borrows  euros  in  Germany  at  a  maturity  of  five  years. 
However,  as  the  bank  does  not  really  need  the  euros  but  needs  kronor  to  fund  mortgage 
loans  to  Swedish  households,  the  bank  has  to  exchange  the  euros  for  kronor.  To  protect 
itself against the currency risk, the bank enters into a currency swap in which the euros are 
exchanged for kronor today under an agreement to exchange the kronor back to euro at a 
predetermined  rate  in  five  years’  time.  In  this  way  the  bank  matches  the  currencies  of  its 
assets (the mortgages) and its liabilities and thereby eliminates the currency risk.  
The  Swedish  banks  are  thus  dependent  on  acquiring  kronor  in  the  long-term  from  a 
counterparty  in  a  currency  swap.  They  can  in  principle  do  this  in  three  ways:  through  a 
foreign bank, another Swedish bank or an insurance company.  
Today, it is often a foreign bank that acts as the counterparty in these swaps. The foreign 
banks do not themselves usually have any natural access to Swedish kronor. They therefore 
fund part of their lending in kronor by borrowing kronor in the short-term from other Swedish 
banks. However, the risk is that foreign investors will leave the Swedish market if problems 
arise, as the Swedish krona is a small currency. There are also reasons for believing that the 
number  of  foreign  banks  that  act  as  counterparties  to  the  Swedish  banks  is  limited. 
Moreover, participating in the swap market is often not a central part of the operations of the 
foreign banks. This in turn has consequences for liquidity and pricing on the swap market. 
We saw an example of this when the last extraordinary loan that the Riksbank had offered 
the  banks  during  the  crisis  matured  in  the  autumn  of  2010.  Uncertainty  then  arose  on  the 
money market, and consequently swap counterparties abroad who had acquired short-term 
funding in kronor through Swedish banks became less willing to enter into swap agreements 
with  Swedish  banks.  It  thus  became  both  more  expensive  and  more  difficult  for  Swedish 
banks to convert foreign currency into Swedish kronor at long maturities.  
To a certain extent, Swedish banks also act as counterparties to each other in the swaps. 
However, from the perspective of the Swedish banking system this is really only a matter of 
redistributing the maturity risk. The fact that the banks act as counterparties to each other 
also forges the links within the Swedish banking system even tighter. 
A  natural  counterparty  for  the  Swedish  banks  could  be  the  Swedish  life  insurance  and 
pension  companies.  These  companies  have  long-term  liabilities  in  kronor  in  the  form  of 
pension savings that they partly invest in assets abroad. At present, these companies are not 
active on the long-term currency swap markets to any great extent.  
The  Swedish  banks  are  therefore  dependent  on  a  tight  circle  of  counterparties  on  the 
currency  swap  markets.  A  small  and  concentrated  market  means  in  turn  that  there  is  a 
considerable risk of disruptions and contagion effects. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Long-term assets and short-term funding in foreign currencies create risks  
Swedish banks have substantial assets in foreign currencies and also have a deposit deficit, 
that is they are dependent on market funding. As a large part of this market funding is short 
term, a liquidity risk in foreign currency also arises. The US dollar is a currency for which this 
risk  is  clear.  Following  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers,  when  the  dollar  market  was 
practically  closed  for  a  while,  the  Riksbank  needed  to  lend  the  equivalent  of  almost 
250 billion kronor in US dollars to the banking system to prevent the liquidity risk spreading to 
the real economy. However, as the Riksbank cannot create liquidity in foreign currencies in 
the same way as it can in Swedish kronor, there are limits on the size of the liquidity risks the 
banks  can  take  in  foreign  currencies  without  posing  risks  to  financial  stability.  There  are 
therefore  good  reasons  for  the  banks  to  examine  the  matching  of  the  maturities  of  their 
assets and liabilities in foreign currencies. 
The market for bank certificates in kronor has shrunk 
It  is  not  only  long-term  funding  that  takes  place  in  foreign  currencies.  A  large  part  of  the 
banks’  short-term  funding  also  takes  place  in  foreign  currencies,  mainly  US  dollars  and 
euros. The Swedish banks are, for example, important counterparties for US money-market 
funds. Sweden is the second-largest European market for the money-market funds – larger 
than the United Kingdom or Germany. Although this indicates a high level of confidence in 
the  Swedish  banks,  it  also  entails  risks.  During  the  crisis,  we  saw  that  the  money-market 
funds  were  among  the  more  volatile  investors.  A  high  degree  of  funding  from  the  money-
market funds also makes the banks dependent on US regulatory frameworks and legislative 
processes. 
For short-term funding in Swedish kronor there is a market for bank certificates. However, 
this  market  has  shrunk  (see  Figure  3).  We  may  wonder  why  this  market  has  declined  so 
dramatically when it seems that there should be incentives to maintain it. A thriving domestic 
market  for  bank  certificates  in  kronor  would  increase  the  banks'  scope  for  diversification. 
Their  dependence  on  markets  in  foreign  currencies  and  on  the  swap  market  would  be 
reduced.  Although  these  markets  usually  work  well  and  Swedish  banks  currently  have  a 
good reputation among investors this does not always need to be the case, as we saw in 
2008 and 2009.  
We should of course think about how to create a liquid market for bank certificates in kronor. 
One problem is that the benefits of such a market fall to the banks collectively while the costs 
in the form of higher borrowing costs fall to each bank individually. In this perspective it may 
be necessary to investigate whether the costs that each individual bank pays for its short-
term funding in foreign currencies reflects the true costs to the Swedish financial system and 
Swedish society.  
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Figure 3 
Outstanding certificates issued by banks  
in Swedish kronor 
SEK billion 
Note.  Refers  to  certificates  issued  by  banks,  mortgage  institutions  and 
other credit institutions. 
Source: Statistics Sweden 
 Swedish conditions require a complement to the reform agenda 
The  Swedish  banking  system  is  thus  marked  by  a  number  of  characteristics  that  make  it 
somewhat  special  in  an  international  perspective  –  characteristics  that  either  increase  the 
risk  of  problems  or  the  economic  costs  to  society  if  problems  arise  in  the  banking  sector. 
There are therefore good reasons for establishing a safe margin – a respectable distance – 
to the minimum regulations in the Basel III Accord.  
As  you  know,  we  have  already  taken  several  steps  to  strengthen  the  Swedish  banking 
system, over and above the commitments that Basel III entails. 
In  November  2011,  the  Riksbank,  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  Finansinspektionen 
announced  that  the  four  major  Swedish  banks  would  meet  the  capital  adequacy 
requirements  of  10  per  cent  of  the  risk-weighted  assets  from  1  January  this  year  and  of 
12 per cent from 1 January 2015. All of the four major banks now have CET 1 ratios that are 
higher than 10 per cent according to the definition in Basel III. Three of the banks are also 
above 12 per cent. 
The Swedish authorities have also said that the banks should meet the short-term liquidity 
measure in Basel III (the LCR) both in total and separately for the euro and the US dollar. 
This requirement has been compulsory for the eight largest Swedish banks since 1 January 
this year.3 
The  Riksbank  has  also  recommended  the  banks  to  improve  their  public  information  on 
liquidity risks and the degree of encumbered assets. This is because greater transparency 
increases both confidence and market discipline. I am pleased to say that the banks’ public 
                                                 
3  These  are  Nordea,  Swedbank,  Handelsbanken,  SEB,  SBAB,  Svensk  Exportkredit,  Kommuninvest  and 
Länsförsäkringar Bank. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
reporting  has  improved  in  line  with  the  Riksbank's  recommendations,  although  some  work 
still remains to be done (see Table 1).  
Table 1 
The banks’ public information on liquidity risks  
 These measures have contributed to the relative stability of the Swedish banks. But I don’t 
think  we  have  finished  yet.  The  financial  system  is  important,  and  the  risks  in  the  system 
must  be  constantly  reviewed.  Let  me  give  you  some  examples  of  areas  that  I  believe  will 
need to be investigated. 
As I mentioned earlier, the Swedish banks’ high dependence on market funding entails an 
increased  risk  that  they  will  suffer  liquidity  problems  in  a  stressed  situation.  It  is  of course 
always possible for the Riksbank to lend Swedish kronor, but it is unreasonable for the banks 
to take liquidity risks based on the expectation that the Riksbank will provide extraordinary 
loans  if  things  do  not  go  according  to  plan.  The  ability  of  the  banks  to  comply  with  the 
Liquidity Coverage Ratio in the Basel III Accord should therefore be investigated. 
The differences in the maturities of the banks’ assets and liabilities in foreign currencies that I 
described  above  are  also  a  potential  source  of  concern  in  more  troubling  times.  The 
Riksbank cannot after all offer unlimited liquidity in any other currency than our own. As you 
know, the Riksbank has therefore recently strengthened its foreign-exchange reserve so that 
in a situation in which the foreign-exchange market is seriously disrupted the Riksbank will 
be  able  to  provide  extraordinary  loans  in  US  dollars  and  euros.  The  aim  of  course  is  to 
strengthen  the  Riksbank’s  preparedness  to  safeguard  the  basic  workings  of  the  financial 
system and thereby help us to avoid major economic costs. Given that all the Swedish banks 
benefit from the Riksbank’s foreign-exchange reserve, it would not be unreasonable for them 
to share the costs of maintaining it. If we can price this in an effective way it will also give the 
banks  an  incentive  to  reduce  their  own  currency  risks.  This  would  reduce  the  risks  to 
financial stability in the Swedish economy.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
It is of course no secret that we are also looking at mortgage loans from the asset side in the 
banks’ balance sheets.  
As  I  have  already  pointed  out,  the  banks’  risk  weights  are  very  low.  Finansinspektionen 
intends  to  begin  applying  a  risk-weight  floor  of  15  per  cent  for  the  banks’  portfolios  of 
Swedish  mortgage  loans.  The  Riksbank  supports  the  proposal  for  a  risk-weight  floor  of 
15 per  cent.  We  also  believe  that  there  are  good  reasons  for  analysing  whether  this  floor 
needs to be raised even further.  
One important reason is that the public sector and non-financial companies would have to 
bear a large part of the risk if the debt-servicing ability of the households were to weaken.  
I  have  also  spoken  about  the  risks  arising  from  the  fact  that  a  large  proportion  of  the 
mortgage loans are interest-only loans. In this context, the Swedish Bankers’ Association’s 
recommendation that all mortgages that exceed a loan-to-value ratio of 75 per cent should 
be  amortised  is  of  course  welcome,  although  one  may  ask  whether  this  is  enough. 
Mortgages  were  amortised  to  a  greater  extent  a  few  decades  ago,  at  the  same  time  as 
inflation automatically reduced the real debt ratio. I believe that more amortisation may be 
needed, especially in the current situation with low and stable inflation. However, before the 
authorities impose amortisation requirements it may be worth reviewing other aspects of the 
provision  of  loans.  One  example  may  be  how  different  amortisation  alternatives  are 
presented to the borrowers. Another may be to demand that the borrowers have the financial 
scope  to  amortise  their  loans  at  a  certain  rate.  The  important  thing  is  to  restore  an 
amortisation culture so that the households’ margins are safeguarded and the economy is 
protected. 
The Riksbank focuses on these issues because we wish to safeguard the Swedish financial 
system.  All  our  analysis  and  all  our  measures  aim  to  reduce  the  risk  of  Sweden  incurring 
major economic costs when the banking sector gets into trouble. 
As a complement, Sweden also needs to put a clear framework for macroprudential policy in 
place. The global financial crisis demonstrated the need to complement traditional financial 
supervision  –  micro  supervision  –  which  focuses  on  risks  in  individual  institutions,  with 
supervision  that  focuses  on  the  risks  in  the  financial  system  as  a  whole.  In  January,  the 
Financial Crisis Commission presented an interim report which proposed how responsibility 
for macroprudential policy could be allocated in Sweden. We will therefore need to consider 
the Riksbank's stance on this issue. A guiding principle for us is that the body that is given 
responsibility  for  macroprudential  policy  needs  a  clear  mandate  with  both  the  right  and 
obligation  to  take  action  against  risks  that  arise  and  appropriate  tools  that  can  be  used  to 
limit the risks.  
The discussion of macroprudential policy also comprises the issue of the Riksbank’s balance 
sheet, and particularly the foreign-exchange reserve. As you know, the inquiry conducted by 
Harry  Flam  recently  presented  its  proposals.  Here  too,  the  Riksbank  is  in  the  process  of 
formulating its stance. 
The public are entitled to expect that the authorities act to prevent and manage 
financial crises in the best possible way  
All  of  the  things  I  have  talked  about  here  are  measures  that  aim  to  reduce  the  risk  of  a 
financial crisis recurring, or to limit the damage if a financial crisis nevertheless breaks out. 
The  international  process  that  has  come  to  expression  in  the  Basel  III  Accord  is  creating 
better regulations for the banks in all countries. This also benefits us here in Sweden.  
Over  and  above  this,  however,  we  have  to  manage  the  Swedish  banking  system  and  its 
special  characteristics.  Sweden  is  a  small  open  economy  with  its  own  currency  and  large 
banks. We need special regulations. This means that we, like a number of other countries, 
want to proceed more quickly and impose stricter requirements than those in the Basel III 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Accord. However, the measures we have taken so far have already clearly strengthened the 
Swedish banks. 
The financial sector is central in every modern society. We cannot afford recurring crises that 
threaten the basic functions of the financial sector. The public are entitled to expect that the 
authorities act to prevent and manage financial crises in the best possible way. Regulations 
that cover the special characteristics and structural risks of the Swedish banking sector are 
central instruments in the work to promote financial stability. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
