Mario Draghi: Building stability and sustained prosperity in Europe 
Speech by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at the event entitled 
“The  future  of  Europe  in  the  global  economy”,  hosted  by  the  City  of  London  Corporation, 
London, 23 May 2013. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 Introduction 
Let me begin by thanking you, Lord Mayor, for this kind invitation. 
I  have  always  been  deeply  impressed  by  the  sense  of  commitment  that  motivates 
distinguished City of London professionals such as yourself to take on the demanding role of 
your office. 
No doubt this sense of responsibility to the community has been instrumental in delivering 
the longevity and stability of the City of London Corporation. This institution has played an 
important role in developing the Square Mile into the premier financial centre of the world. 
I  cannot  say  which  of  the  two  sets  of  arguments  is  stronger,  the  economic  or  the  political 
ones,  but  what  I  can  say  is  that  Europe  needs  a  more  European  UK  as  much  as  the  UK 
needs a more British Europe. To limit myself to matters that are close to my own professional 
capacity, let me note a few reminders of the depth of the interconnection: 
More than twice as many euros are traded in the UK’s foreign exchange market as in all the 
countries of the euro area combined and more than in the US. 
All major euro area banks have important branches in the City of London – and UK banks 
are leading players in financial markets of the euro area. 
Around 40% of the deposits placed with euro area banks from outside the euro area come 
from the UK. 
At the same time, an equally large share, i.e. 40%, of all loans granted by euro area banks to 
non-euro area residents goes to UK borrowers. 
In fact, 40% seems to be a key figure when looking at the UK’s linkages with the euro area: it 
is also approximately the share of the euro in all the foreign currency-denominated loans as 
well as deposits in the UK. 
Finally, the euro area is the UK’s largest export market. It may not come as a surprise to you 
by now that no less than 40% of all the goods and services exported by UK businesses are 
delivered to euro area countries. In 2012 this amounted to 240 billion euros, or just short of 
200 billion pounds. 
With  such  deep  interconnections,  the  UK  and  the  euro  area  share  a  common  interest: 
stability in the functioning of our economic system and particularly of our financial markets. 
As  a  long-established  financial  powerhouse,  London  is  no  stranger  to  crisis.  “Lombard 
Street”, the classic work of Walter Bagehot on the London money market recounts multiple 
instances of panic gripping this market.1 
Bagehot’s book also made a series of recommendations for how the Bank of England should 
react  to  such  bouts  of  market  instability.  Today,  these  recommendations  are  commonly 
                                                
1  W. Bagehot (1873), Lombard Street: A Description of the Money  Market, Wiley, New  York, 1999, originally 
published by Henry S. King and Co., London, 1873. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
regarded as having set out the principles by which central banks should conduct lender of 
last resort operations. 
Of  course  the  world  has  changed  since  Bagehot  was  writing  in  the  second  half  of  the 
19th century.  And  the  crisis  that  we  are  facing  today  is  much  more  multi-faceted  than  an 
isolated panic in a specific market segment. This means that the policy response must also 
be multi-faceted – and it must involve a wide array of institutions. 
We  as  central  banks  have  acted  as  crisis  managers.  Our  response  was  immediate  and 
forceful. When called on to act, central banks have been able to draw on a wide and powerful 
toolkit to steer the economy in difficult times. 
In  my  remarks  this  evening  I  would  like  to  share  with  you  a  euro  area  perspective  on  the 
challenges  of  the  crisis  and  how  we  can  build  an  economy  that  will  ensure  stability  and 
sustained  prosperity  for  the  people  of  Europe.  I  will  discuss  the  monetary  policy  of  the 
European Central Bank (ECB), the actions of national governments as well as initiatives at 
the level of the European Union as whole. 
The ECB’s role in addressing the crisis 
Let me first  look  at the ECB’s  approach  to  the crisis. The  success  of the  ECB’s  monetary 
policy is based on two pillars: respect of the European Treaty (Treaty on the Functioning of 
the European Union) and a realistic assessment of the financial and institutional framework 
through which the effects of our monetary policy are propagated to the real economy. 
Article  127(1)  of  the  Treaty  assigns  to  the  ECB  the  responsibility  for  maintaining  price 
stability. This has been defined by the Governing Council as a rate of inflation that is positive 
and close to but below 2% in the medium term. This clearly stated objective and the ECB’s 
compliance with it have firmly anchored inflation expectations, which since 1999 have been 
on average 1.91% and thereby protecting the purchasing power of the citizens of the euro 
area. It is precisely this high credibility in reaching its primary objective that has allowed the 
ECB to tailor its response to the crisis in the most suitable way. 
And  in  defining  the  appropriate  response,  we  must  take  into  account  the  structure  of  our 
credit markets, where the role of the banks is more important than it is in the UK or in the US: 
in fact in the euro area about two thirds of financial intermediation go through the banking 
system as opposed to about one third in the UK and one fifth in the US.2  
Before  the  crisis,  banks  were  all  interconnected  and,  by  and  large,  could fund  themselves 
everywhere  in  the  euro  area.  Changes  in  interest  rates  were  equally  transmitted  through 
banks to all parts of the euro area economy. 
But a key feature of this crisis has been the fragmentation of financial markets along national 
borders. Businesses based in stressed countries now face worse borrowing conditions than 
equally risky competitors in non-stressed countries. 
We have responded to this situation by deploying measures that are part of a central bank’s 
toolkit but go beyond adjustments to policy rates. These measures have evolved as the crisis 
itself  has  morphed.  And  while  they  were  targeted  at  specific  immediate  challenges,  the 
overriding aim has been consistently to achieve our medium-term price stability objective. 
Let me give two examples. In late 2011 and early 2012 we launched two 3-year long term 
refinancing operations (LTROs). Our LTROs gave banks sufficient reassurance that access 
to liquidity will not be a problem over a relevant planning horizon. Without these operations, 
banks  would  have  defaulted  on  their  maturing obligations  or  would  have  discontinued  and 
withdrawn existing credit lines to companies. 
                                                
2  This refers to outstanding debt of the non-financial corporate sector. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The LTROs, therefore, helped to avoid a major credit crunch. 
Similarly,  my  second  example,  the  Outright  Monetary  Transactions  (OMTs)  have  been 
designed  with  a  view  to  combatting  fragmentation  while  preserving  the  credibility  of  the 
ECB’s monetary policy objective. The OMTs are aimed at eliminating “redenomination risk” – 
the unwarranted perception of a risk of euro breakup. OMT interventions in government debt 
markets  are  tied,  however,  to  an  effective  macroeconomic  adjustment  programme.  This 
prevents  them  from  becoming  a  subsidy  for  unsustainable  national  policies.  It  therefore 
safeguards the monetary policy nature of the interventions and bolsters the independence of 
the ECB in pursuing its medium term objective. 
Through countering fragmentation OMTs aim to preserve the singleness of monetary policy 
and  to  ensure  the  proper  transmission  of  our  monetary  policy  stance  to  the  real  economy 
throughout the euro area. This falls clearly and squarely within our mandate. 
Some  critics  have  argued  that  because  of  our  determined  policy  action,  the  shoring  up  of 
bank  capital  and  the  consolidation  of  fiscal  positions  have  been  delayed.  My  answer  is 
simple.  Our  measures  gave  breathing  space  from  markets  driven  by  panic,  which  were 
forcing  the  economy  into  a  position  where  inappropriately  high  interest  rates  would  make 
default a self-fulfilling prophecy. Adjustment would have been impossible. Instead of better 
capitalised  banks  and  stronger  fiscal  positions  we  would  have  been  left  with  financial  and 
economic meltdown. 
Today  we  are  seeing  some  encouraging  signs  of  tangible  improvements  in  financial 
conditions. Spreads in sovereign and corporate debt markets have narrowed considerably. 
Banks  in  stressed  countries  have  seen  the  deposits  placed  with  them  by  euro  area 
non-banks increasing by about 200 billion euro since August 2012. TARGET2 balances – the 
large intra-central bank positions that had accumulated due to the malfunctioning of financial 
markets – of the national central banks in these countries have declined by about 250 billion 
euros or 25% since their peak. Recourse to borrowing from the Eurosystem has also abated. 
We  have,  therefore,  started  observing  convincing  signs  that  fragmentation  on  the  funding 
side  for  banks  has  decreased  greatly.  And  although  bank  lending  to  businesses  and 
households remains anaemic, we are now seeing some signs of slight improvement on the 
lending  side  as  well,  as  our  regular  surveillance  of  bank  lending  conditions  and  access  to 
finance shows. 
These  improvements  are  in  no  small  part  due  to  the  fact  that  unwarranted  tail  risks  of  a 
systemic  collapse  of  the  monetary  union  that  were  being  priced-in  by  markets  have  now 
been largely removed. 
We can, therefore, safely say that our Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) is a more stable 
union today than it was a year ago. 
And the markets are fully confident that the euro is a strong and stable currency. To give you 
an example, the volume of international trade invoices denominated in euro is second only to 
those denominated in US dollars. 
The responsibility of national governments 
However,  economic  conditions  in  the  euro  area  remain  challenging.  Real  GDP  contracted 
again in the first quarter of 2013. Output has therefore declined for six consecutive quarters. 
Labour market conditions remain weak. 
To maintain and expand the productive capacity of our societies, national governments need 
to  improve  the  structural  functioning  of  their  respective  economies.  Let  me  outline  some 
examples. 
First, competition in product and service markets needs to be enhanced without regard for 
the vested interests that are fighting to supress it. This is necessary in its own right – but it is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
also  important  to  temper  the  social  consequences  of  the  required  adjustment  in  labour 
markets. 
Second,  narrowing  the  gap  between  labour  compensation  and  productivity  growth,  also 
across  countries,  is  absolutely  essential  for  improving  competitiveness  in  euro  area 
countries. 
Third,  the  structure  of  labour  markets  in  some  countries  needs  to  be  reformed  to  allow 
nominal adjustments to play out, and to avoid that the weight of more flexible labour market 
conditions falls disproportionately on young generations. 
In  particular,  reforms  are  needed  to  ensure  inter-generational  fairness  by  tackling  the 
phenomenon of “insiders versus outsiders”. In some euro area countries, this phenomenon is 
driving youth unemployment to levels that threaten the very fabric of society. 
Since  the  crisis  started,  there  has  been  important  progress  in  labour  market  reforms  and 
fiscal consolidation in euro area countries, particularly those under an EU/IMF programme. 
And  the  painful  measures  taken  are  starting  to  bear  fruit.  We  see  this  very  clearly,  for 
instance,  in  the  impressive  improvement  in  export  performance  in  Ireland,  Spain  and 
Portugal and in the recent uptick in industrial production in the latter two countries. 
The role of European policies and progress towards a banking union 
Let me turn now to my third and final theme. National policies alone are not enough to leave 
the crisis behind us once and for all. Policies at the European level are also necessary. 
For  one,  European  measures  to  complete  the  single  market,  especially  in  the  area  of 
services, are needed. And I know that this is a need that is urgently felt in this country. 
However, major progress has been made in defining a vision and a path towards a genuine 
economic and monetary union. 
The banking union is a major element of this effort. A first step towards establishing it has 
been taken with the decision to create the Single Supervisory Mechanism, and to entrust its 
responsibility to the ECB. 
This first step is important as it will pave the way towards severing the link between banks 
and  their  respective  sovereigns.  It  is  this  link  that  lies  behind  the  fragmentation  in  the 
financial markets of the euro area. 
But  to  sever  this  link  completely,  it  is  also  imperative  to  create  a  Single  Resolution 
Mechanism. Such a mechanism, much like the FDIC in the US, could give markets certainty 
about  the  ranking  of  creditors  and the  procedures  that  would  be  followed  in  the  case  of a 
bank resolution. 
If we are successful in establishing an effective banking union – as I am convinced we will be – 
the benefits will be large, not only for euro area countries but for all EU members. 
A  more  stable  union  will  be  one  where  financial  contagion  will  have  disappeared,  where 
business for the financial centres will vastly increase, where financial market integration will 
resume. 
A stable union, however, is not only about building new rules and procedures but also about 
applying  existing  ones.  In  the  past,  credibility  of  European  procedures  has  at  times  been 
weakened  because  they  were  not  followed  with  sufficient  rigour.  It  is  now  important  that 
existing and new rules be applied in a steadfast manner. 
Conclusion 
Let me draw to a close. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Today  we  need  to  focus  on  securing  economic  stability  and  prosperity  for  the  people  of 
Europe.  With  so  many  young  Europeans  feeling  deprived  of  the  opportunities  and  the 
prospects enjoyed by previous generations, the urgency of advancing this vision has never 
been greater. 
After a deep financial and economic crisis, we now see the restart of the European process, 
building on the agreement of the June 2012 Summit. This process ultimately entails some 
transfer of national sovereignty in the areas of budget and structural policies. And the efforts 
made by Germany and France in this regard are particularly encouraging. 
Last summer, speaking here in London, I said that “[w]hen people talk about the fragility of 
the  euro,  [they]  underestimate  the  amount  of  political  capital  that  is  being  invested  in  [it]”. 
Since then, even more political capital has been mobilised. The answer to the crisis has not 
been less Europe but more Europe. 
The ECB, as an institution at the frontier of European integration, has played an active role in 
addressing  the  crisis.  The  credibility  of  the  ECB’s  steadfast  commitment  to  its  primary 
objective is unshaken in the eyes of both the markets and the people of Europe. And this is 
because our credentials in preserving price stability have been tested both when risks were 
on the upside and when markets driven by panic were threatening to send the economy in a 
downward spiral. 
This is a time when the strength of all our institutions is being tested; first, by the financial 
crisis, then by the recession. The European Union and the European Monetary Union are no 
exceptions. The choice is between adapting them to the new conditions or do nothing and 
risk  their  dissolution.  These  institutions  were  created  through  the  efforts  of  millions  of 
European citizens since the end of World War II. These institutions have lifted Europe from 
the darkness of its past. They have given Europe peace and prosperity. Today, I am certain 
that  our  democracies  have  the  determination  and  the  cohesion  to  find  a  common  way  to 
strengthen  these  institutions  further  so  that  they  will  remain  for  our  future  generations  the 
same source of peace and prosperity that they have been for us. 
Thank you for your attention.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
