Jwala Rambarran: Re-engineering growth – doing business in the new 
global environment 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Jwala  Rambarran,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Trinidad  and 
Tobago, at the 5th Biennial International Business, Banking and Finance Conference, jointly 
hosted  by  the  Department  of  Management  Studies,  The  University  of  the West  Indies,  St. 
Augustine, 2 May 2013. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, Let me first thank the organizers for inviting me to deliver opening 
remarks  at  this  5th  Biennial  Business,  Banking  and  Finance  Conference.  This  is  my  first 
official visit to the St. Augustine Campus, where some 25 years ago I entered as a student of 
economics, and I am heartened to be “home”. I am also indeed proud to see an event that I 
helped to conceptualize and plan almost a decade ago now emerge as one of the leading 
fora  for  the  exchange  of  views  on  critical  issues  facing  emerging  economies,  particularly 
those  in  the  Caribbean.  This  year’s  BBF  Conference  on  “Re-engineering  Growth:  Doing 
Business in the New Global Environment” is taking place against the backdrop of a “three-
speed” global economy. Countries are either doing well (mainly the emerging markets and 
developing countries), or they are on the mend (such as the United States), or they still have 
some distance to travel (such as the Euro area and Japan). 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  it  is  no  secret  that  the  small  island  states  in  the  Caribbean  are 
among those countries with some economic distance to travel. Several reasons account for 
the region’s relatively weaker economic performance. I would like, however, to briefly touch 
on four main challenges facing the Caribbean which find resonance with the Conference’s 
sub-theme  2  on  re-engineering  finance  and  sub-theme  4  on  re-igniting  growth:  austerity 
versus stimulus. These challenges are as follows: low growth, high debt, mitigation of natural 
disaster risk and managing financial sector stress. Firstly, on growth, the good news is that 
the Caribbean has been gradually recovering from the impact of the global financial crisis, 
even though the region was ill-prepared to deal with such a protracted external shock. The 
IMF estimates that real GDP growth in the Caribbean is likely to bounce back to around 3 per 
cent over the medium term, from a cumulative flat performance in 2009 – 2012. 
Even  within  the  Caribbean  region,  growth  trends  vary.  The  largely  tourism  intensive 
economies  (Barbados  and  the  Eastern  Caribbean)  still face  headwinds from  the  lukewarm 
jobs recovery in North America and Europe. Growth prospects seem somewhat better for the 
commodity-based  exporters  (Belize,  Guyana,  Suriname  and  Trinidad  and  Tobago). 
Secondly,  many  Caribbean  countries  face  unsustainably  high  public  debt  burdens,  which 
jeopardize  their  medium  term  growth  prospects.  In  2013,  three  countries  are  projected  to 
hold exceptionally high public debt at over 90 per cent of GDP, while another seven countries 
are projected to have heightened debt vulnerabilities, averaging in the range of 50 to 90 per 
cent of GDP. Only two countries (Suriname and Trinidad and Tobago) have public debt ratios 
less than 50 per cent of GDP. Thirdly, the Caribbean has the unenviable reputation as one of 
the  most  disaster-prone  regions  in  the  world.  Over  the  last  60  years,  Caribbean  countries 
have  suffered  from  187  natural  disasters  (mainly  hurricanes  and  floods).  The  effects  on 
growth and debt associated with the frequent recurrence of these natural disasters are also 
significant. 
Sir Dwight Venner, Governor of the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank, captures these effects 
quite vividly: “Almost every year, we [St. Lucia] have a hurricane season, which can destroy 
the country’s GDP. In some countries, it can also lead to high debt levels. Their infrastructure 
is destroyed before they paid for it, so they borrow again. Then it is destroyed a second and 
sometimes  even  a  third  time”.  Finally,  financial  systems  in  the  Caribbean  are  becoming 
increasingly  integrated  with  the  emergence  of  major  cross-border  financial  groups.  The 
collapse of the insurance subsidiaries of the CL Financial Group is perhaps the most widely 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
cited example of the systemic importance of cross-border financial groups. Another indicator 
of the degree of cross-border ownership is that seven of the ten largest firms (by asset size) 
listed  on  the  stock  exchanges  of  Barbados,  the  Eastern  Caribbean,  Jamaica  and  Trinidad 
and Tobago are financial institutions. Given the multi-faceted nature of the challenges facing 
Caribbean small states, no single solution exists to address all of their problems. In fact, I 
remain  convinced  that  bold  and  new  regional  solutions  are  absolutely  essential  to  help 
individual countries mitigate the colossal challenges associated with their small size. Allow 
me to briefly discuss four potential regional solutions which come to mind.  
First, we need to find more effective ways to speed up the implementation of proposals and 
recommendations  stemming  from  regional  initiatives  to  stimulate  and  sustain  potential 
growth. Three noteworthy regional projects are already underway that can help to inform the 
Caribbean’s  growth  strategy.  These  are  the  ECCB  Debt,  Growth  and  Development  Task 
Force, the World  Bank’s  Caribbean  Growth  Forum,  and the  IMF’s  Group  on  Small  States. 
We need champions. The UWI is one such regional champion and well positioned to drive 
the knowledge and innovation-based model of growth which Principal Sankat spoke about in 
his  welcoming  remarks. Trinidad  and Tobago  is another  such champion,  over  the  last  two 
years,  we  have  been  actively  championing  the  case  for  small  states  in  the  halls  of 
international financial community. We are now seeing a new awakening and awareness of 
this issue from global policymakers, especially at the IMF and the G-20 Presidency. 
Second, we need to consider developing a regional approach to sovereign debt restructuring. 
With the exception of Guyana and Haiti, all other Caribbean countries are considered either 
not poor enough and/or not severely indebted enough to access traditional international debt 
restructuring and relief mechanisms such as the enhanced Heavily Indebted Poor Country 
(HIPC)  Initiative  and  the  Multilateral  Debt  Relief  Initiative  (MDRI).  This  leaves  fiscal 
consolidation  as  the  only  option.  However,  the  degree  of  fiscal  austerity  necessary  to 
stabilize and eventually reduce the Caribbean’s public debt overhang is neither socially nor 
politically  feasible.  While  a  few  Caribbean  economies  have  engaged  in  ad  hoc  sovereign 
debt  restructuring  operations,  sometimes  more  than  once,  these  have  not  yielded  lasting 
gains.  Further  work  is  needed  to  assess  under  what  conditions  innovative,  debt-based 
instruments can generate additional regional resources for growth and development. 
Third,  we  need  to  seriously  consider  tapping  into  the  wealth  of  the  Caribbean’s  very  own 
large, highly educated diaspora. The minimum size of the Caribbean diaspora is estimated at 
around  3.5 million  people,  or more than  one-fifth  of  the region’s  population,  whose  annual 
savings  amount  to  over  15  per  cent  of  the  region’s  GDP.  The  Caribbean’s  diaspora  pool 
therefore represents a potential alternative source of long-term funding. Diaspora bonds are 
viable  instruments  which  enable  the  region  to  borrow  from  its  diaspora  community.  For 
diaspora investors, these bonds offer the opportunity to help their country of origin while also 
providing an investment opportunity.  
Finally,  we  need  to  consider  a  regional  approach  to  managing  risks  arising  from  financial 
integration  in  the  Caribbean.  Growing  cross-border  linkages  requires  Central  Banks  and 
other regulators to strengthen arrangements for crisis management, develop mechanisms for 
early  coordinated  intervention  in  cross-border  institutions,  and  review  adequacy  of  deposit 
insurance schemes.  
In  closing,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  the  challenges  facing  Caribbean  countries  demand 
innovative economic solutions in the new global environment. I give you the assurance of the 
Central Bank’s continued support for this Conference and for the wider work of the UWI, St. 
Augustine.  I  look  forward  to  this  5th  BBF  Conference  generating  fruitful  discussions, 
stimulating  new  thoughts  and  ideas  on  re-igniting  growth  in  the  Caribbean.  As  the  1992 
Report of the West Indian Commission exhorted some twenty years ago “The Time for Action 
is Now”.  
I thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
