Duvvuri Subbarao: Release of Reserve Bank of India’s History Volume IV 
Welcome remarks by Dr Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
release  of  Reserve  Bank  of  India’s  History  Volume  IV  by  Prime  Minister  Dr  Manmohan 
Singh, New Delhi, 17 August 2013. 
 1. 
On behalf of the Reserve Bank, I have great pleasure in welcoming everyone to this 
function  for  the  release  of  Volume  IV  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  (RBI)  history  by  the 
Hon’ble Prime Minister Dr Manmohan Singh. 
Volume IV of the RBI history covers the period from 1981 to 1997 which subsumes 
2. 
the period when the Prime Minister was the Governor of the Reserve Bank during 1982 to 
1985,  and  the  subsequent  period  when  he  was  the  Finance  Minister  from  1991  to  1996. 
Today’s history release function is therefore historic in its own way.  
RBI since 1935 
3. 
Established in 1935, the Reserve Bank of India is one of the oldest central banks in 
the developing world. The history of the Reserve Bank reflects in many ways the economic 
history of India. The Bank’s journey over the last nearly eight decades has been marked by a 
host  of  historic  developments  both  at  home  and  abroad.  Internationally,  there  were  the 
aftermath of the Great Depression of the 1930s; the Second World War and the consequent 
challenges  of  war  financing;  the  establishment  of  the  Bretton  Woods  system  in  1944;  the 
unravelling of the gold standard and the oil price shocks of the 1970s; the Asian Crisis of the 
mid-1990s;  and  most  recently  the  global  financial  turmoil  and  the  ongoing  eurozone 
sovereign debt crisis. 
4. 
There were varied historic developments on the home front too – starting with the 
launching  of  the  five-year  plans  and  the  challenges  stemming  from  one  of  history’s  most 
ambitious  and  gigantic  experiments  in  economic  development;  the  after-effects  of  the  two 
wars  in  the  1960s; the devaluation  of the rupee  in  1966;  bank  nationalization  in  1969;  the 
balance of the payments crisis of the early 1990s and the follow on path-breaking economic 
reforms that moved India into a new economic era. The Reserve Bank is proud of the role it 
has played in shaping these developments, or responding to them as the case may be, and 
always doing so with sensitivity and integrity. 
RBI History – previous volumes 
5. 
It is a matter of pride and satisfaction for all of us in the Reserve Bank that it is one 
of a very handful of central banks which document their institutional history. We have so far 
published three volumes of history covering the period since the inception of the Bank up to 
1981.  Volume  I,  straddling  the  period  from  1935  to  1951,  highlights  the  early  efforts  to 
establish a central bank in India, particularly the concrete proposal made by John Maynard 
Keynes in 1913 to set up a “State Bank” in India by merging the three Presidency Banks to 
undertake some of the functions of a central bank. Volume II narrates the Reserve Bank’s 
role  in  the  process  of  development  planning  from  1951  to  1967.  The  highlight  of  the  third 
volume of history, covering the period from 1967 to 1981, is its depiction of Reserve Bank’s 
efforts to deepen banking into India’s hinterland. 
RBI History – Volume IV 
6. 
This brings us to the present Volume IV which covers the period from 1981 to 1997. 
This  straddles  the  leadership  of  six  Governors,  starting  with  the  last  phase  of  Governor 
I.G. Patel.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
Dr. I.G. Patel: 
Dr. Manmohan Singh: 
Shri Amitabha Ghosh: 
Shri R.N. Malhotra: 
Shri S. Venkitaramanan: 
Dr. C. Rangarajan: 
01.12.1977 to 15.09.1982 
16.09.1982 to 14.01.1985 
15.01.1985 to 04.02.1985 
04.02.1985 to 22.12.1990 
22.12.1990 to 21.12.1992 
22.12.1992 to 21.11.1997 
 
7. 
Apart from the Prime Minister, I am happy to acknowledge the presence here of two 
other  former  Governors  from  that  period  –  Shri  Amitabha  Ghosh  and  Dr.  Rangarajan. 
Shri Venkitaramnan is unable to be here today, but sends his best wishes for this function. 
As  this  is  a  “history  moment”,  our  thoughts  also  go  back  to  late  Dr.  I.G.  Patel  and  late 
Shri R.N. Malhotra, both of whom served the Reserve Bank with great dignity and distinction.  
8. 
The period covered by this fourth volume of RBI history was by far one of the most 
challenging times for our economy. The history takes us through the difficult times when the 
Government  and  the  Reserve  Bank  had  to  contend  with  unprecedented  strains  on  the 
external payments situation. In response to the balance of payments crisis, the Government 
embarked on a wide ranging programme of economic reforms that defined a paradigm shift 
in the economic management of the country. The Reserve Bank was a partner in this exciting 
process,  generating  ideas,  processing  proposals  and  implementing  reform  initiatives. 
Chapters 10 to 12 of this Volume provide a vivid account of this momentous phase in our 
economic history.  
Does history repeat itself? 
9. 
Does history repeat itself? This is a clichéd question but nevertheless an instructive 
one.  In  their  painstakingly  researched  book,  This  Time  is  Different:  Eight  Centuries  of 
Financial  Folly,  Kenneth  Rogoff  and  Carmen  Reinhart  argue  that  every  time  a  crisis  has 
occurred, experts have been asked why they did not see it coming. Every time, experts have 
replied  that  past  experience  was  no  guide  because  the  latest  crisis  is  a  result  of  new 
circumstances. In other words, their standard excuse has been, “this time is different”. Yet 
this  “this  time  is  different”  argument  does  not  hold.  Reinhart  and  Rogoff  put  forward 
impressive evidence showing that over eight hundred years, all financial crises can be traced 
to the same fundamental causes as if we learnt nothing from one crisis to another.  
10. 
The surmise therefore is that, at least in matters of economics and finance, history 
repeats itself, not because it is an inherent trait of history, but because we don’t learn from 
history and let the repeat occur. I believe this surmise holds notwithstanding the spreadsheet 
error in the Reinhart-Rogoff research. 
11. 
repeating in RBI history. I will give just one illustration 
Has RBI history repeated itself? That is a judgement call. But some issues do keep 
RBI and gold 
Take the issue of gold. RBI history documents that about 35 years ago, the Reserve 
12. 
Bank got into a controversy over its auction of gold. Again, in 1991, there was a heated, if 
also emotional, debate in the country when the Reserve Bank pledged its gold reserves to 
tide over the balance of payments stress. It will be interesting to conjecture on how history 
will judge the purchase of 200 MT of gold by the Reserve Bank from the IMF in 2010, and its 
more recent policies to restrain imports of gold? 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Looking ahead 
13. 
When  former  Chinese  Premiere  Zhou  En  Lai  was  asked  what  he  thought  of  the 
French  Revolution,  he  said  it  was  too  early  to  take  a  view.  Defying  Chinese  wisdom  of 
experience  is  not  for  the  faint  hearted.  Nevertheless,  I  am  tempted  to  look  ahead  to  how 
history might judge the Reserve Bank on some of the current debates. Please allow me the 
indulgence of defining some such issues.  
Growth-inflation balance 
14. 
The  first,  and  possibly  the  most  important  debate,  is  about  balancing  between 
growth  and  inflation  in  the  policy  context.  This  is  a  balance  that  both  governments  and 
central  banks  struggle  with.  In  my  view,  this  debate  has  been  clouded  by  some 
oversimplifications.  One  such  oversimplification  is  to  say  that  governments  are  for  growth 
and central banks are for price stability. Another oversimplification is to assert that there is a 
tension  between  growth  and  inflation,  and  that  one  necessarily  has  to  play  the  trade-off 
between growth and inflation in policy making.  
15. 
The  Reserve  Bank’s  monetary  policy  aims  at  three  objectives  –  price  stability, 
growth and financial stability. To contend that the Reserve Bank is obsessed with inflation, 
oblivious  to  growth  concerns,  I  think,  is  both  inaccurate  and  unfair.  The  Reserve  Bank  is 
committed to inflation control, not because it does not care for growth, but because it does 
care for growth. There is any amount of evidence to show that an environment of low and 
stable inflation is a necessary precondition for sustainable growth. How history will evaluate 
the  Reserve  Bank  on  its  balanced  commitment  to  growth  and  inflation  is  an  interesting 
conjecture. 
Fiscal dominance of monetary policy 
16. 
Another big debate today, not just in India but around many countries in the world, is 
on  fiscal  dominance  of  monetary  policy.  This  issue  is  playing  out  in  a  big  way  in  Europe 
today, but it is not new; nor is it unique to Europe.  
Here  in  India,  structural  reforms  piloted  by  Dr.  Manmohan  Singh  as  Finance  Minister, 
Dr. Rangarajan  and  Dr.  Y.V.  Reddy  in  the  Reserve  Bank  and  Shri  Montek  Ahluwalia  as 
Finance Secretary have helped establish the autonomy of monetary policy in India, free of 
fiscal  policy  compulsions.  Experience  over  the  last  five  years  has  shown  that  despite  that 
autonomy,  the  degrees  of  freedom  available  for  monetary  policy  management  can  be 
constrained by the Government’s fiscal stance. What will be history’s verdict on how we, as 
an economy, managed this tension between fiscal and monetary policies?  
Managing policy in a globalizing world 
17. 
I  am  often  asked  about the  challenges for  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  on  the  way 
forward. Looking ahead, one of the big challenges for the Reserve Bank will be to learn to 
manage  both  economic  and  regulatory  policies  in  a  globalizing  world.  Dr.  Jalan,  as  the 
Governor,  showed  extraordinary  competence  and  leadership  in  insulating  India  from  the 
impact  of  the  Asian  crisis  in  the  mid-1990s.  Dr.  Reddy  had  the  courage  of  conviction  to 
remove the metaphoric punch bowl before the party got wild.  
18. 
Yet the global financial crisis was so virulent that it affected virtually every country in 
the  world.  Did  the  Reserve  Bank  learn  from  the  sagacity  of  Dr.  Jalan  and  the  wisdom  of 
Dr. Reddy to manage the current crisis? Governor-designate Rajan, who will take over from 
me early next month, is here in the audience. The challenge for you, Governor Rajan, will be 
how  you  will use  your formidable intellect, scholarship and global experience to shape the 
Reserve  Bank  as  a  knowledge  institution  that  will  set  standards  for  how  an  emerging 
economy  central  bank  should  manage  macroeconomic  policy  in  a  globalizing  world.  I  am 
aware this is history in the future, but history that will nevertheless be historic.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Keep your ear to the ground 
19. 
When I was appointed Governor of the Reserve Bank in 2008, I went to call on the 
Prime  Minister  before  I  took  charge.  A man  of few  words  as  we  all  know,  he  told  me  one 
thing that stuck in my mind: “Subbarao, you are moving from long experience in the IAS into 
the Reserve Bank. In the Reserve Bank, one runs the risk of losing touch with the real world. 
With your mind space fully taken up by issues like interest rates, liquidity traps and monetary 
policy transmission, it is easy to forget that monetary policy  is also about reducing hunger 
and  malnutrition,  putting  children  in  school,  creating  jobs,  building  roads  and  bridges  and 
increasing the productivity of our farms and firms. Keep your ear to the ground.”  
20. 
In  the  five  years  that  I  have  been  at  the  Reserve  Bank,  I  had  followed  this  wise 
counsel to the best of my ability. I believe that the Reserve Bank is more conscious today 
than before that the policies it makes and implements have a meaning if, and only if, they 
make a positive difference to the real world. Admittedly, the Reserve Bank is still on a steep 
learning curve in this regard. How will the Reserve Bank traverse this learning curve? That 
will determine not only the history of the Reserve Bank in the years ahead but also, in some 
ways, the history of India.  
Thanks 
21. 
Let me now conclude. The preparation of this volume of history was guided by an 
Advisory  Committee  chaired  by  Dr.  Bimal  Jalan.  The  Members  of  the  Committee  were 
Dr. Subir Gokarn and Dr. Rakesh Mohan, both former Deputy Governors, Dr. A Vasudevan, 
former  Executive  Director,  Dr,  Amitava  Bose  of  IIM,  Kolkata  and  Prof.  Dilip  Nachane  of 
IGIDR, Mumbai. The staff members and consultants in the History Cell in the Reserve Bank, 
under  the  guidance  of  Executive  Director  Deepak  Mohanty,  produced  this  volume  with 
exemplary  diligence,  intelligence  and  commitment.  I  want  to  place  on  record  my  deep 
appreciation  for  the  work  of  the  Advisory  Committee,  the  staff  and  consultants.  They  are 
going to be more influential than they realize. 
22. 
volume of history today. It means a lot to all of us in the Reserve Bank. 
23.  
steering the writing of this volume of history to share his thoughts with us? 
May  I  now  request  Dr.  Jalan  who  provided  enormous  intellectual  leadership  for 
Finally, Prime Minister, Sir, thank you very much indeed for agreeing to release this 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
