Denton Rarawa: Financial inclusion 
Opening address by Mr Denton Rarawa, Governor of Central Bank of Solomon Islands, at 
the  10th  Meeting  of  the  Pacific  Islands  Working  Group  (PIWG)  on  “Financial  inclusion”, 
Honiara, 12–14 February 2013. 
 Salutations 
Governor Loi Bakani; 
Deputy Governor Peter Tari; 
Deputy Governor Gane Simbe; 
Co-Chairs Ms Lana Lome-Ieremia and Vereimi Levula; 
Resource persons for the Data workshop Ms Sandford and Mr Dermish; 
Representatives  from  our  key  partners:  Mr  Reuben  Summerlin  and  Jeff  Liew  from  Pacific 
PFIP and Mr Eliki Boletawa from AFI; 
Other participants of the Pacific Islands Working Group (PIWG) meeting; 
Ladies and Gentlemen; 
Welcome to Solomon Islands 
Good morning and let me warmly welcome you all to Solomon Islands. Thank all of you for 
making time to attend this 10th PIWG meeting. I am delighted to see a lot of familiar faces. 
And it is good to see everyone smiling this morning even though some of you have travelled 
a long way to be here. 
Pacific Islands Working Group – a family committed to each other 
The idea to set up the Pacific Islands Working Group was endorsed during the South Pacific 
Governors meeting here in Honiara in 2009. So this meeting can be described as the PIWG 
coming  back  to  its  roots.  The  exciting  agendas  before  us  and  the  opportunities  to  share 
country experiences amongst members during these three days are the main reasons why 
we are all here. 
I think it is important to regularly remind ourselves of the objectives of PIWG, when it was 
established four years ago. The objectives of PIWG are as follows: 
• 
To identify barriers and challenges to financial inclusion unique to the Pacific, and 
formulate appropriate policy responses. 
To work together to advance financial inclusion policy in the region, 
To learn from each other as members develop and implement policy solutions for 
financial inclusion. 
 I commend the PIWG for taking a collaborative approach to addressing the financial inclusion 
issues  and  challenges  in  the  region  by  working  together  and  sharing  our  individual 
experiences.  We  face  similar  but  also  different  “country-specific”  challenges.  For  example, 
our countries are separated by the sea but the level of separation differs between countries. 
With these inherent challenges, we have no choice but to work together as a group. 
I believe that is what we have done and already we have made progress and achieved a lot 
in our respective countries. We have ensured our voices are heard. International groupings 
like the Alliance for Financial Inclusion (AFI) have recognised our work and other regions are 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
trying to emulate what we are doing. We owe all that recognition and success to the PIWG. I 
am sure a lot of these achievements will be highlighted during the course of this meeting. 
Another  major  achievement  in  my  view  is  that  all  of  you  here  attending  this  meeting 
represent a pool of financial inclusion experts in the region. This is a key resource for our 
region  and  I  would  like  to  encourage  us  to  make  use  of  our  regional  experts  so  that  we 
continue to build our pool of experts. 
Financial inclusion activities in Solomon Islands 
Ladies and gentlemen, let me briefly share some of the efforts we are making in addressing 
financial  inclusion  issues  in  Solomon  Islands.  Our  current  focus  is  on  the  twin  pillars  of 
Access to and Use of financial services in the country. 
The  question  of  Access  requires  making  financial  services  available  and  affordable  to  as 
many people as possible. At the moment financial services in Solomon Islands are available 
only in Honiara and in the provincial centres. If we define access by say, less than 2 hours 
walk (or paddle) to the nearest financial services access point as the ideal, then more than 
80% of the Solomon Islands population is being denied access to financial services. This is 
huge challenge for the country. So the primary target in our national financial inclusion action 
plan is that by 2015 an additional 70,000 people should have access to financial services in 
the country. In order to achieve this, we are focusing on technology as a means of financial 
distribution  channels  and  community  based  approaches  to  promoting  and  delivering 
savings and credit activities. And to ensure that our legal framework supports these efforts, 
we have, with ADB support, completed a review of our current laws and policies last year to 
ensure any legal impediments to financial services innovation are identified and addressed. 
The second pillar of our approach to financial inclusion is on the Use of financial services. 
Financial services and products should be used by anyone anytime. This means we have to 
unlock  and  remove  barriers  that  deny  ordinary  people  from  using  the  available  financial 
services. This requires further effort in two areas: first to enable people who are being denied 
using financial services because of legal and administrative barriers and secondly to assist 
people who cannot use and benefit from financial services because of lack of knowledge and 
understanding.  Our  approach  in  trying  to  address  both  areas  has  been  to  identify  and 
remove  the  legal  and  policy  barriers  that  inhibit  usage  and  to  enhance  people’s 
understanding of financial services through financial education and literacy. 
We have made progress in some areas but a lot of work still needs to be done. Some of our 
recent achievements include: 
• 
New CBSI Act: A new CBSI Act was passed by Parliament in November last year 
and one of the new provisions in the law is to specifically include financial inclusion 
as a mandate of the Bank. This now formalises the Bank’s involvement in financial 
inclusion activities. 
Review of Legal Framework: And to ensure that our other laws also support these 
efforts, we have, with ADB support, completed a review of other laws and policies 
last  year  to  ensure  any  legal  impediments  to  financial  services  innovation  are 
identified and addressed. 
Simplified  KYC  requirements:  One  of  the  barriers  is  the  stringent  bank 
requirements  for  opening  bank  accounts.  So  in  collaboration  with  the  Anti  Money 
Laundering  Commission,  we  have  issued  to  the  commercial  banks  simple 
requirements for identifying customers when opening bank accounts. This will make 
it easier for more rural people to open accounts with the banks. 
Financial Education: In partnership with the Ministry of Education, we have set up 
a  Working  Committee  to  integrate  financial  education  into  the  national  school 
curriculum, targeting class one up to form three. The revision of the curriculum has 
   2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 been  done  but  further  work  is  required  to  prepare  course  materials  and  train 
teachers. 
Adult Financial Literacy: This is a very important area for us, given the low literacy 
level  in  the  country  especially  among  rural  adults.  The  Central  Bank  is  actively 
engaged  in  financial  literacy  through  its  Money  Smart  Day  programs,  its  weekly 
Money  Matters  Radio  program,  and  also  through  financial  literacy  workshops  for 
communities and women groups. 
These achievements have been possible because of close collaboration and partnership with 
key stakeholders. Working together with other stakeholders is critical if we are to achieve the 
goals and objectives we have set ourselves in terms of financial inclusion. I am sure this is 
also true for your respective countries. 
But  I  think  our  biggest  weakness  is  trying  to  measure  what  we  have  done.  How  are  we 
performing against our set targets? This is where data and indicators become very important. 
We need relevant data to measure progress and review our performance. And I am delighted 
to note that the whole of tomorrow is devoted to this very important issue. 
Concluding remarks 
I  would  like  to  conclude  by  reiterating  the  importance  of  continuing  to  work  together  to 
address  our  common  challenges  as  we  strive  to  enable  more  of  our  people  benefit  from 
financial services. At the same time I would like to register our appreciation to both of our key 
partners, the Pacific Financial Inclusion Program (PFIP) and Alliance for Financial Inclusion 
(AFI) for the tremendous support to PIWG. This support has enabled the group to progress 
their financial inclusion agendas and hopefully to make an impact in our countries and also 
on the international stage. 
Finally, I would like to wish you all a lively, interesting and productive meeting. 
Thank you for your kind attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
