Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Regulatory and governance for Islamic finance 
Speech  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia,  at  the  Brunei 
Darussalam  Islamic  Investment  Summit  2013  “Regulatory  and  governance  for  Islamic 
finance”, Bandar Seri Begawan, Brunei, 19 June 2013. 
 It is my great pleasure to be here in Brunei Darussalam to speak at this Islamic Investment 
Summit 2013. My remarks today will discuss the current landscape of Islamic finance in Asia 
in the context of the growing role of Asia in the global economy, and the important priorities 
for Islamic finance to strengthen its prospects for future growth and stability. 
Asia and the global economy 
The global economic landscape is now significantly evolving as it progresses towards a new 
more  multi-polar  world.  This  is  being  shaped  by  the  increasing  contribution  of  emerging 
economies to global economic growth, with some of the most vibrant and dynamic emerging 
economies  being  in  the Asian  region.  In  2012, the  Asian  region  contributed  56%  to global 
growth. This advancement takes place at a time when the world economy continues to be 
significantly  challenged  by  the  lingering  effects  of  the  2008  global  financial  crisis,  with  a 
sustainable economic recovery yet to be secured. 
Asia’s growth trajectory has been underpinned by several favorable fundamentals, which will 
continue to support its prospects for growth going forward. Asia is a highly diverse region in 
terms  of  its  economic  and  demographic  structure,  market  size,  stage  of  development,  and 
political  systems.  This  provides  immense  opportunities  for  the  region  to  leverage  on  its 
complementarities to boost economic growth. 
Being  the  most  populous  region  in  the  world,  Asia’s  favourable  demographic  structure, 
comprising a significant young population and a rising middle income segment, constitutes a 
huge  and growing  consumer  market. The  unlocking  of this  potential growth  has  also  been 
advanced  through  wide  ranging  policy  initiatives  to  promote  higher  consumption  demand. 
The  measures  have  essentially  aimed  at  strengthening  the  social  welfare  system  through 
increased  arrangements  for  healthcare  and  retirement,  and  improving  the  macroeconomic 
environment  and  reducing  the  income  gap.  These  measures  collectively  seek  to  support 
domestic  drivers  of  growth  thus  making  the  development  process  more  inclusive  and 
sustainable. 
In  parallel  with  these  measures  is  the  drive  towards  urbanization  and  the  infrastructure 
development in the region. The Asian Development Bank has estimated that Asia needs to 
invest  a  total  of  USD8  trillion  to  fund  infrastructure  development  such  as  rail  networks, 
airports, power networks and water treatment plants in the current decade to 2020. These 
investments, reinforced by the growing consumer market, have become an important driver 
of private investment activity. This trend is also well supported by the growing and resilient 
financial systems in the region. 
Intra-regional trade activity is also rapidly increasing, signifying the deepening of economic 
ties within the region. Intra-regional trade in East Asia has expanded from an average of 44% 
of  total  trade  in  1995,  to  50%  in  2010.  Similarly,  intra-regional  investment  activities  have 
been on a rising trend. More recent efforts have focused on strengthening regional financial 
integration  which  is  aimed  at  promoting  the  more  efficient  intermediation  of  funds  in  Asia. 
The  strengthening  of  domestic  demand  and  the  greater  regional  financial  and  economic 
connectivity within Asia has also enhanced the resilience of the region. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Islamic finance in the evolving new frontier in Asia 
Given that Islamic finance is a form of financial intermediation that is closely linked to the real 
economy arising from its requirement that financial transactions needs to have an underlying 
economic  transaction,  its  accelerated  growth  and  dynamic  expansion  across  the  financial 
landscape in Asia brings with it the tremendous potential to reinforce the transformative trend 
that  is  characterizing  the  region. With  greater  liberalization,  Islamic  finance  is  increasingly 
supporting  regional  and  international  trade  and  investment  flows,  intermediating  significant 
cross  border  financial  flows.  With  its  internationalisation,  Islamic  finance  has  become  an 
increasingly  more  important  channel  for  the  efficient  allocation  of  Asia’s  surplus  funds 
towards  productive  investments  in  the  region.  This  trend  is  also  contributing  towards  the 
strengthening of global financial and economic linkages, particularly between Asia and the 
Middle East. 
The  vast  population  in  Asia  and  the  growing  middle-income  group,  combined  with  high 
savings rates in the region have substantially heightened the demand for a wider spectrum of 
financial products and services. These trends have increased the opportunities in retail and 
investment banking, takaful, and fund and wealth management businesses in the region. An 
area that Islamic finance has a major potential role is in the reorientation towards achieving a 
more  inclusive  and  sustainable  growth  –  an  important  post-crisis  development  agenda. 
Serving the small and medium-size enterprises (SMEs) presents huge potential for Islamic 
financial institutions, particularly those with the capability to deploy innovative equity-based 
structures and alternative forms of financing, such as private equity and venture capital. 
Asia  is  also  now  becoming  a  primary  force  for  the  global  Sukuk  market,  with  68%  or 
USD120 billion  of  the  total  sukuk  outstanding  in  2011  originating  from  the  region,  thereby 
providing  an  important  investor  base  for  sukuk  issuance  from  different  parts  of  the  world. 
Whilst Malaysia has evolved a vibrant sukuk market, more Asian countries have turned to the 
sukuk  market  for  financing  large-scale  projects  including  for  infrastructure  development. 
Several countries in the region are currently reviewing their legislation and taxation to enable 
debut sukuk issuance. The Asian sukuk market has also been progressive in the innovation 
frontiers.  There  has  also  been  a  growing  trend  for  multi-currency  sukuk  issuances.  This 
provides  greater  prospects  for  tapping  a  wider  pool  of  investors,  including  from  the 
Middle East and Europe. 
In  Malaysia  and  more  recently,  in  Indonesia,  Sukuk  issuances  have  also  aimed  at  retail 
investors.  This  is  to  take  advantage  of  the  high  levels  of  surplus  savings  in  Asia,  whilst 
providing wider investment options to retail investors that have traditionally invested in bond 
funds and unit trusts. The trend for greater regional economic and financial integration will 
also  provide  substantial  opportunities  for  Islamic  financial  institutions  to  facilitate  the 
integration process in the region and with other parts of the world, and thus have a greater 
role in financing Asia’s future growth. 
Priorities for strengthening financial stability and growth 
Let  me  turn  to  the  priorities  for  strengthening  financial  stability  and  growth.  Whilst  there 
needs to be continued efforts at the national level to develop the institutional foundations for 
Islamic finance that will foster effective and efficient financial flows, and ensure that financial 
stability  is  preserved,  the  new  wave  of  internationalization  for  Islamic  finance  requires 
increased  collaboration  across 
financial 
infrastructure  of  Islamic  finance.  Going  forward  into  the  future,  this  will  be  particularly 
important given that the international environment has become more challenging. This is to 
ensure that the greater internationalization of Islamic finance takes place in an environment 
of financial stability. 
At the national level, the first priority relates to trend for the domestic Islamic financial system 
to  become  more  integrated  allowing  for  risks  to  be  rapidly  transmittal  across  the  financial 
system.  This  requires  the  development  of  enhanced  regulatory,  supervisory  and  legal 
to  strengthen 
international 
jurisdictions 
the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
the 
Insurance  Supervisors  (IAIS)  and 
frameworks that are also adaptive and effective to the innovative dynamics and unique mix of 
risks  in  Islamic  finance.  Fundamental  to  this  is  the  implementation  of  the  international 
regulatory  and  supervisory  standards  and  best  practices  for  Islamic  finance.  The  Islamic 
Financial Services Board (IFSB) has introduced prudential standards for the Islamic financial 
services  industry  –  in  all  key  areas  of  capital  adequacy,  risk  management,  corporate 
governance  and  Shariah  governance.  Their  implementation  would  in  turn  promote  more 
consistent regulatory and supervisory frameworks across borders. 
Importantly, the adoption of these international prudential standards which are aligned to the 
core principles and standards adopted by the Basel Committee, the International Association 
of 
International  Organization  of  Securities 
Commissions  (IOSCO),  would  serve  to  minimise  the  opportunity  for  regulatory  arbitrage 
arising from cross-sectoral and cross-border differences, whilst ensuring that the regulatory 
requirements  that  are  distinct  for  Islamic  finance  are  effectively  addressed.  A  survey 
conducted by the IFSB in 2011 indicated that 9 countries have implemented the standards 
issued by the IFSB and that 18 countries are expected to implement them within the next five 
years.  Their  consistent  implementation  will  be  vital.  This  harmonization  will  also  facilitate 
consistent  participation  in  Islamic  finance  across  borders  and  contribute  towards  global 
financial stability. 
Whilst  micro-supervision  is  an  integral  part  of  the  toolkit  for  ensuring  financial  system 
stability,  the  recent  global  crisis  highlighted  the  need  for  it  to  be  complemented  by 
macroprudential surveillance and measures. This dimension of prudential regulation involves 
the incorporation of horizontal assessments of risks across institutions, sectors and national 
borders, including the risks in asset markets. This is to address systemic risks and to take 
into account the interconnectedness within the financial system. This is particularly relevant 
for the Islamic financial services industry given the close link of Islamic finance with the 
real  economic  sector  through  the  various  modes  of  Islamic  financing  contracts.  In 
particular,  heightened  surveillance  is  needed  over  developments  in  the  real  estate  and 
commodity  markets.  Equally  important  is  a  greater  understanding  of  the  inter-relationships 
between the financial and the real sector, including the potential for second round effects that 
are transmitted across sectors of the financial system and the economy. 
The increased cross-border reach of Islamic finance has also underscored the importance of 
enhanced cross-border collaboration among the supervisory authorities. Information-sharing 
and  effective  coordination  among  supervisors  will  enable  a  complete  understanding  of  the 
entire risk spectrum of the risk taking activities undertaken across jurisdictions by the Islamic 
financial  institutions.  This  is  especially  important  in  crisis  situations,  given  the  serious 
ramifications  of  a  delayed  or  ineffective  response  to  cross-border  contagion.  Robust 
institutional  arrangements  are  therefore  vital  to  improve  the  efficiency  of  the  supervisory 
processes and to allow for the early detection and management of cross-border transmission 
of risks arising from group-wide activities. 
Another key area is the evolution of the legal framework for Islamic finance. This is to provide 
greater certainty and to build public confidence in the system as a whole. This necessitates a 
legal  framework  that  enforces  end-to-end  Shariah  compliance  in  the  Islamic  financial 
services  industry  –  through  provisions  and  mechanisms  that  unambiguously  define  the 
conduct  and  governance  of  Islamic  financial  institutions.  It  needs  to  recognize  the  distinct 
elements  in  Islamic  finance  and  identify  risks  and  challenges  associated  with  the  different 
Islamic  contractual  arrangements  and  the  instruments  for  the  appropriate  regulatory 
treatment of the Islamic financial transactions. There is also a need for court recognition and 
acceptance  of  the  Islamic  contracts  within  the  common  and  civil  law  systems,  with  a 
consistent  approach  of  interpreting  the  rights  of  the  contracting  parties  based  on  Shariah 
principles.  This  will  lend  certainty  and  predictability  to  the  financial  transactions  and  is 
particularly  important  in  evolving  legal  frameworks  that  are  facilitative  of  cross-border 
transactions as Islamic financial activities continue to venture beyond domestic borders. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
In Malaysia, the new legal framework for Islamic banking and takaful that will come into force 
this  year,  will  pave  the  way  for  the  development  of  an  end-to-end  Shariah  compliant 
regulatory  framework  for  the  conduct  of  Islamic  financial  operations.  This  new  framework 
provides clarity on the fundamental requirements of Shariah that must be adhered to for the 
contractual  arrangements  between  the  financial  institution  and  the  customer  to  remain 
enforceable.  The  framework  also  outlines  the  operational  requirements  for  the  effective 
application of Shariah principles in the conduct of Islamic financial institutions. This aims to 
strengthen the risk management practices beyond the traditional credit, market and liquidity 
risks,  to  also  include  inventory  risk,  ownership  risk  and  Shariah  compliance  risk.  The 
legislation  also  provides  for  the  resolution  of  Islamic  financial  institutions  to  be  in  line  with 
distinctive elements of the relevant Islamic contracts, thus improving the legal and procedural 
aspects for the orderly resolution of Islamic financial institutions. 
Another  important  area  of  priority  is  to  achieve  the  further  harmonization  and  mutual 
recognition of Shariah interpretations across jurisdictions. The progressive harmonization will 
be  a  major  driving  force  for  the  internationalization  of  the  Islamic  financial  system.  The 
reduced  uncertainty  from  differences  in  Shariah  interpretations  will  also  contribute  to 
safeguarding  financial  stability.  The  continuous  and  constructive  engagement  amongst 
scholars,  regulators  and  practitioners  within  and  across  the  regions  will  pave  the  way  for 
greater  understanding  and  mutual  respect  for  the  Shariah  views.  This  also  needs  to  be 
supported by in-depth research and greater transparency on Shariah rulings and resolutions. 
The  International  Shari’ah  Research  Academy  for  Islamic  Finance  (ISRA),  through  its 
Shariah  research  undertakings  and  activities  in  promoting  constant  engagement  among 
international  scholars,  has  been  at  the  forefront  in  driving  progressive  harmonization  of 
Shariah  at  the  regional  and  international  levels.  Its  annually  organized  Muzakarah 
Cendekiawan  Shari’ah  Nusantara  has  emerged  as  an  important  platform  for  greater 
consensus to be forged among the Shariah scholars in the Nusantara. 
Finally, is the imperative for a robust liquidity management infrastructure for Islamic finance, 
both at the national and international levels. This is vital not only to ensure the resilience and 
stability  of  the  Islamic  financial  system  but  also  to  reduce  the  cost  of  intermediation. 
Cross-border  liquidity  risk  management  in  the  Islamic  financial  system  still  remains  a 
significant  challenge,  with  the  lack  of  short-term  Shariah  compliant  instruments  in 
international  currencies.  The  global  efforts  to  strengthen  the  liquidity  arrangements  for  the 
international  Islamic  financial  system  will  be  an  important  breakthrough  in  facilitating  more 
efficient cross-border liquidity management by Islamic financial institutions, thereby meeting 
the challenges of the trend of greater internationalisation. 
Conclusion 
Let me now conclude. The growing role of the emerging economies as an anchor to global 
growth in particular, in Asia, represents a major shift in the global economic landscape. In 
this  environment,  Islamic  finance  is  well-positioned  to  assume  a  much  larger  role  as  a 
competitive  form  of  financial  intermediation  for  supporting  economic  activity,  and  as  a 
channel for enhancing greater global connectivity. Efforts to strengthen the foundations for 
Islamic  finance  to  ensure  its  continued  resilience  amid  the  more  challenging  environment 
must remain a priority going forward into the future. Indeed, our commitment to act guided by 
this  foresight  will  strengthen  the  prospect  for  Islamic  finance  to  realize  its  potential  in  the 
region and beyond.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
