Christopher Kent: Recent developments in the Australian housing 
market 
Address  by  Mr  Christopher  Kent,  Assistant  Governor  (Economic)  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of 
Australia, to the Australian Institute of Building, Sydney, 14 March 2013. 
 I would like to thank The Australian Institute of Building for the invitation to speak here today and the opportunity 
to discuss recent developments in the housing market. 
Housing is important in  our lives in  many ways, including as a secure place to live, a key 
asset and an important vehicle for saving. Housing is also a source of employment for a lot of 
people, including for those in the business of developing, building and renovating, as well as 
for  those  who  help  us  to  trade  and  move  between  dwellings,  and  oversee  the  legalities, 
insurance  and  financing  of  housing-related  transactions.  Hardly  surprising  then  that  it’s  a 
frequent  topic  of  conversation,  including  among  economists.  And  it  is  not  surprising  that 
central bankers pay it close attention, given that it plays an important role in the business 
cycle,  in  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy  and,  as  we’ve  seen  in  many  advanced 
economies of late, in the health of the financial system. 
My plan today is to add to this conversation, reviewing what’s been happening over the past 
year  or  two  and  discussing  some  of  the  factors  affecting  the  outlook  for  the  Australian 
housing market. 
The established housing market 
Overall, the data over recent months suggest that demand in the established housing market 
is  strengthening  gradually,  and  this  should  help  to  underpin  further  moderate  growth  in 
dwelling construction. 
This general strengthening has been helped, no doubt, by 175 basis points worth of cuts to 
the cash rate since late 2011, and the decline in mortgage interest rates that has followed 
from  these  cuts.1  Apart  from  a  brief  period  after  the  onset  of  the  global  financial  crisis, 
required mortgage payments on a new home are at the lowest level as a share of disposable 
income for the past decade (Graph 1). 
An assessment of what’s been happening to housing prices will depend somewhat on which 
market you are looking at and over what time period. For the country as a whole, housing 
prices  have  been  rising  gradually  since  about  May  2012,  and  are  now  about  4  per  cent 
higher  than  they  were  at  that  time  (Graph  2).  However,  if  you  were  a  developer  who  had 
made plans and purchased land for development around October 2010, when housing prices 
last peaked, then you might be forgiven for focusing on the fact that house prices are still 
below their previous peaks in many locations. In particular, prices are still quite a way below 
their peak in Brisbane and Melbourne, while prices have been quite flat for a few years in 
Adelaide and outside of the capital cities in the mainland states. 
With interest rates low and housing prices having picked up in much of the country,  more 
people are now confident that either housing prices will keep rising or at least not decline. 
We  can  see  this  in  some  of  the  available  survey  measures  of  housing  price  expectations. 
This  is  important  for  prospective  entrants  to  the  market,  particularly  for  developers  and 
investors, who might otherwise be wary of undertaking a new venture or purchasing a house 
                                                 
1   Standard variable housing loan rates have declined by 135 basis points on average since late 2011, as bank 
funding costs  have risen relative to the cash rate. The Board of the  RBA has taken this into  account in its 
monetary policy decisions and as a result, the cash rate is lower than it otherwise would have been. See Lowe 
P (2012), “What is Normal?”, Address to the Australian Business Economists Annual Dinner, 5 December. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
for fear of a capital loss. But again, not all markets across the country are in the same boat. 
In Melbourne, for example, there is some question as to whether supply has moved ahead of 
demand,  particularly  in  the  market  for  apartments  in  the  inner-city  area.  This  possibility  is 
certainly consistent with the fact that prices for houses and units in Melbourne are quite a bit 
lower than the peaks of early 2011. 
The  general  improvement  in  sentiment  is  also  apparent  in  auction  clearance  rates.  After 
falling sharply in 2011, these rates recovered to around average levels in both Sydney and 
Melbourne in late 2012 and they appear to have increased further early this year. This move 
may in part have been helped by a tendency of vendors to adopt more realistic expectations, 
as  evidenced  by  a  rise  in  vendor  discounts  –  that  is,  the  extent  to  which  a  property  sells 
below its listed price. These discounts had risen gradually as the market weakened through 
2011; more recently, the degree of vendor discounting has returned to more normal levels. 
Despite the improvement in conditions in the established housing market, turnover remains 
quite low, at least by comparison with most of the previous decade (Graph 3). However, it 
may  be  that  the  experience  of  that  era  is  not  the  right  comparison.  Perhaps  we  shouldn’t 
expect to see turnover sustained at those very high rates again. If that is right, it means that 
those who make a living from turnover – real estate agents being the most obvious example 
– are unlikely to see a return to the easier days of the first half of the previous decade. 
Financing 
Over the past 20 years or so, upturns in the housing market have been accompanied by an 
increase in the growth rate of credit. But those years were also a period of structural change 
as the economy moved to a higher level of household indebtedness (Graph 4). Generations 
of households yet to buy their first home, or still wanting to trade up, were taking advantage 
of easier access to credit, which among other things had been facilitated by the shift to lower 
inflation and lower interest rates in the early 1990s.2 As part of this change, the household 
saving  rate  declined  and  housing  prices  increased,  at  times  quite  rapidly.  With  household 
indebtedness no longer moving up since 2006, this long period of adjustment now seems to 
have run its course. 
Indeed,  in  recent  years  we  have  seen  a  rise  in  the  household  saving  rate  and  relatively 
stable  household  debt  as  a  share  of  income.  This  suggests  that  we  should  not  expect 
housing  credit  to  grow  anywhere  near  as  rapidly  as  it  had  in  previous  upturns.  Moreover, 
while  the  recent  pick-up  in  housing  prices  would  tend  to  imply  growth  in  housing  loans  – 
since buyers typically fund those purchases with debt – this effect will be lessened by the low 
level of turnover in the established housing market. 
Even so, the availability of credit does not appear to be a constraint for most homebuyers 
and  investors.  The  decline  in  mortgage  interest  rates  since  2011  has  underpinned  a 
moderate  increase  in  the  value  of  total  housing  loan  approvals  over  the  past  six  months 
(Graph 5). This has been driven by demand from repeat-buyer owner-occupiers as well as 
investors.3 
Despite  the  moderate  pick-up  in  new  lending,  growth  in  housing  credit  has  not  increased 
significantly and remains broadly in line with growth in incomes at an annual rate of around 
4½ per cent. Lower interest rates have given households more scope to make payments on 
                                                 
2   For further detail on the adjustment to a higher level of household indebtedness, see Bloxham P, C Kent and 
M  Robson  (2010),  “Asset  Prices,  Credit  Growth,  Monetary  and  Other  Policies:  An  Australian  Case  Study”, 
RBA Research Discussion Paper 2010–06. 
3   Discerning  the  strength  of  demand  from  first  home  buyers  has  been  complicated  by  recent  changes  to 
government  grants  and  tax  exemptions.  These  changes  have  significantly  increased  the  assistance  for 
purchasing new dwellings relative to established dwellings in some states. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
their mortgages ahead of schedule. This means that for a given growth rate of new lending, 
credit growth will be a bit lower than otherwise. We can see this effect in the behaviour of 
owner-occupier  housing  credit.  From  early  2012,  shortly  after  mortgage  rates  started  to 
decline,  owner-occupier  housing  credit  has  been  growing  at  a  slower  pace  than  investor 
housing credit (Graph 6). This makes sense because the incentive to make excess mortgage 
payments is greater for owner-occupiers than investors given the different tax incentives they 
face. 
While  finance  is  available  to  households  on  relatively  favourable  terms,  some  developers 
continue to report difficulties in obtaining finance for new construction, with banks requiring a 
higher proportion of pre-sales than was typical prior to the global financial crisis. According to 
the  Reserve  Bank’s  industry  liaison,  large  developers  that  have  a  good  reputation  and  a 
strong  balance  sheet  have  access  to  credit,  while  small  developers  have  tended  to 
experience more difficulty in borrowing funds. 
Dwelling investment 
The  availability  and  relatively  low  cost  of  finance  for  home  purchasers  combined  with 
improving  conditions  in  the  established  housing  market  have  been  supporting  dwelling 
construction in recent quarters. The expectation is that dwelling investment will continue to 
pick up from here. However, it is hard to know how strong this pick-up is likely to be. 
Private residential building approvals, though volatile, have picked up noticeably from their 
trough  in  early  2012  (Graph  7).  This  recovery  has  been  driven  by  an  increase  in  higher-
density approvals, mainly apartments, and was seen in all the larger states. Across almost 
every major region in Sydney, building approvals since mid-2012 have been higher than they 
were  in  the  previous  five  years  (Graph  8).  In  Melbourne  approvals  have  also  picked  up, 
though  by  somewhat  less  and  not  across  all  regions.  There  has  been  some  pick-up  in 
approvals  in  Western  Australia,  although  changes  in  building  approvals  processes  in  that 
state  around  the  middle  of  last  year  have  made  it  more  difficult  to  discern  the  underlying 
trends. Approvals in Queensland have been subdued, particularly on the Gold Coast and in 
the  south-east  of  the  state  more  generally;  however,  even  builders  in  that  region  have 
indicated to us that there are tentative signs of some improvement in demand more recently. 
While building approvals for higher-density housing have picked up, as yet there has been 
little sign of a rise in approvals for detached houses.4 Indeed, building approvals for detached 
houses  are  currently  at  levels  seen  during  the  low  points  of  previous  cyclical  downturns, 
while  approvals  for  higher-density  housing  are  at,  or  even  above,  previous  cyclical  peaks. 
This may be an early indication of a new trend in the housing market. There are a number of 
reasons why this might be so. First, as the price of land has increased relative to incomes 
over the past few decades, it makes sense that there is an incentive to economise on the use 
of land – that is, by living in higher-density housing. Second, it may be that the utility of living 
in detached houses on the fringes of many cities has decreased with increased congestion 
and  the  difficulties  of  travelling  into  cities  to  access  job  and  other  opportunities  there.  The 
third  and  closely  related  possibility  is  that  there  may  have  been  a  shift  in  people’s 
preferences towards living closer to the centre of cities and the existing infrastructure there. 
In  any  case,  if  this  is  a  durable,  structural  change  in  the  market,  it  will  have  important 
implications for builders and developers, particularly those whose business model is focused 
on detached housing. 
To understand what the strength of the increase in overall residential construction activity is 
likely to be, it is helpful to take a step back from the most recent few months’ worth of data 
                                                 
4   Also, alterations and additions have continued to fall. The low level of dwelling turnover may help to explain 
some  of  the  weakness  in  the  level  of  renovation  activity.  This  is  because  when  people  are  selling  their 
dwelling, or have bought a dwelling, they often undertake work of this sort. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
and look at developments over a longer period. The thing that really stands out over the past 
few years is that, despite the recent pick-up, dwelling investment as a share of the economy 
remains  close  to  the  troughs  of  over  a  decade  ago  (Graph  9).  This  relatively  low  level  of 
dwelling construction raises the question of whether demand has been particularly weak or 
whether supply issues have constrained construction activity. 
Factors affecting the supply of land for development will obviously have an important bearing 
on the cost of new housing, and the speed with which any increase in demand for housing 
can be accommodated by a rise in construction. I’ll come back to a discussion of some of 
these factors in just a minute. But the key point I want to make is that whatever these supply-
side  constraints  might  be,  they  don’t  seem  to  have  prevented  an  increase  in  construction 
across much of the country in 2009 and 2010. At that time, a general increase in incentives 
for first home buyers (for both new and existing dwellings), and the support provided for a 
time  by  lower  interest  rates,  led  to  a  sharp  run-up  in  construction  in  New  South  Wales, 
Queensland, Victoria and Western Australia (Graph 10). 
Further  evidence  that  the  supply  of  land  is  not  the  whole  story  can  be  found  by  looking 
across different regions within the states. If supply has been the critical constraint, we might 
have expected construction trends to have been very different across inner and outer parts of 
cities  and  the  regional  areas  beyond  the  cities.  For  example,  development  in  the  outer 
suburbs tends to be on greenfield land, while development in the inner suburbs tends to be 
higher-density  dwellings  on  brownfield  land.  However,  for  Victoria  at  least,  the  pick-up  in 
building activity in 2009 and 2010 was relatively broad based across these different areas 
(Graph  11).  For  New  South  Wales,  it  does  appear  that  there  was  a  larger  and  more 
sustained  pick-up  in  approvals  in  the  inner  and  middle  regions  of  Sydney,  than  in  outer 
Sydney and the rest of the state. This may have reflected some limitations in access to land 
on  Sydney’s  fringes,  but  nonetheless,  there  was  a  relatively  rapid  pick-up  in  approvals  in 
2009. 
Even so, this doesn’t mean that supply-side issues have not had an important bearing on the 
housing  sector.  This  point  was  made  in  research  published  in  one  of  the  Bank’s  Bulletin 
articles last year.5 Many public reports and the Bank’s own liaison with industry participants 
pointed  to  a  range  of  supply-side  impediments  in  the  Australian  housing  market.  These 
included  the  length  and  complexity  of  the  planning  process,  the  provision  and  funding  of 
infrastructure,  land  ownership  and  geographical  constraints,  as  well  as  the  challenges  for 
development within those city regions that are already well developed. While these factors 
may impose some constraints on the cost and responsiveness of new supply, it is less clear 
that they have been restraining the level of new construction more so now than in the past. 
One  way  that  is  often  used  to  assess  the  possible  outlook  for  dwelling  construction  is  to 
compare the number of dwellings that have been built over a period of time with a measure 
of what is termed “underlying demand”. The notion is that if we can assess the prospects for 
the average number of people living in each household, then we can gauge the strength of 
“underlying demand” by looking at what’s happening to population growth. The problem with 
this sort of analysis is that the average number of people in each household changes over 
time in response to a range of things, including the cost of housing. 
Over  the  20th  century,  demographic  and  social  factors,  such  as  a  declining  birth  rate  and 
rising separation rate, were accommodated by growth in the dwelling stock outpacing that of 
the population. In other words, there was a downward trend in the number of people in each 
household (Graph 12). A very similar change was also evident across advanced economies. 
However, over the past decade or so, these trends have abated and we’ve seen the average 
household  size  stabilise.  Indeed,  the  higher  level  of  house  prices  and  rents  (relative  to 
                                                 
5   See Hsieh W, D Norman and D Orsmond (2012), “Supply-side Issues in the Housing Sector”, RBA Bulletin, 
September, pp 11–19. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
incomes)  may  have  been  somewhat  of  a  constraint  on  household  formation  and  therefore 
demand for new housing. 
This leads me to what I think is arguably a better way to judge the strength of demand versus 
supply, which is to look at what prices and rents have been doing. What this suggests is that 
demand  has  shown  some  signs  of  strengthening  relative  to  supply.  In  particular,  housing 
prices  are  no  longer  declining  relative  to  incomes  (Graph  13).  Also,  the  rental  market 
appears to be relatively tight. Vacancy rates have been quite low since 2006 in comparison 
to  the  average  since  the  early  1990s,  and  (with  a  small  delay)  this  has  led  to  rents  rising 
relative  to  incomes  and  remaining  relatively  stable  at  around  levels  seen  during  previous 
cyclical peaks (Graph 14). The growth in rents has also meant that conditions for investors 
have become more favourable, with (gross) rental yields increasing across the capital cities. 
Our liaison with the housing industry confirms that demand for new housing has been more 
positive over recent months. At the same time, however, our contacts note  that conditions 
still  remain  relatively  subdued  in  most  states.  In  particular,  they  report  that  prices  for  the 
construction  of  new  dwellings  have  been  held  down  in  response  to  weak  demand,  with 
discounting  still  reported  across 
for  new  developments.  Not 
surprisingly,  developers  have  found  a  lack  of  buyer  urgency  during  the  earlier  period  of 
declining dwelling prices. In addition, they note instances of some earlier sales made off the 
plan  falling  through  ahead  of  settlement,  apparently  due  to  caution  by  lenders  regarding 
valuations and strict lending practices for new developments. 
the  market, 
including 
Summary 
Let  me  conclude  then  by  drawing  some  of  these  threads  together.  A  range  of  indicators 
suggest  that  low  interest  rates  have  been  supporting  the  established  housing  market,  and 
prices have been moving higher in many markets, though they remain below earlier peaks in 
most. Also, finance is available on reasonable terms for households. With these conditions in 
place,  dwelling  construction  is  beginning  to  pick  up  and  leading  indicators  point  to  further 
growth in the months ahead. In line with this, our expectation is that there will be a further 
gradual increase in dwelling construction activity over this year and the next. This moderate 
growth in dwelling investment will play some role in helping to support a gradual pick-up in 
economic growth more broadly from what is expected to be a rate a little below trend this 
year. But it is hard to know exactly how strong the recovery in the housing market might be, 
so we’ll continue to analyse these developments closely over the period ahead. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Graph 1 
 Graph 2 
    6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Graph 3 
 Graph 4 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
Graph 5 
 Graph 6 
    8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Graph 7 
 Graph 8 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  10 
   Graph 9 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
Graph 10 
 Graph 11 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  12 
 Graph 12 
Graph 13 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
Graph 14 
  14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
