Peter Praet: Interview in Handelsblatt 
Interview with Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
in  Handelsblatt,  conducted  by  Mr  Rolf  Benders,  Ms  Dorit  Heß  and  Mr  Jens  Münchrath  on 
8 July 2013, published on 12 July 2013. 
 Mr  Praet,  despite  all  the  help  provided  by  the  ECB,  half  the  continent  is  deep  in 
recession,  the  governments  of  Europe  are  scarcely  in  a  position  to  push  reforms 
through  and  even  the German  economy  is  showing weaknesses.  What  else  can the 
ECB do to save the euro? 
There are limits to monetary policy. But it is true that the recession in Europe has not yet 
been overcome. We expect a slight improvement in the second half of the year. But we still 
see  downside  risks. To put  the  recovery  on  a  solid  footing the  countries  must  significantly 
increase their efforts as regards structural reforms. 
What risks do you mean? 
In  China  certain  risks  are  emerging,  because  growth  is  too  credit-driven.  That’s  having 
consequences  now.  On  the  other  hand,  economic  conditions  have  been  improving  in  the 
United States. So it’s unclear whether foreign demand for European goods will rise or fall. 
The uncertainties in the economic analysis were – with the results of the monetary analysis – 
the main elements of our discussion at the last meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB. 
Were you in favour of a rate cut? 
What happens is that I, as chief economist, present the macroeconomic and monetary data 
at the beginning of a Governing Council meeting and make proposals for decisions. Then the 
discussion starts – it’s not all black and white – and at the end, after all arguments have been 
exchanged, a consensus is formed. 
What were the arguments for a key rate cut? 
In our discussions the first task is always to arrive at a common assessment of the situation. 
We were in agreement as far as the outlook for price stability was concerned, including the 
development of the economy and the fact that lending to companies has deteriorated – and 
that  there  are  signs  of  a  further  deterioration.  In  addition  we  have  noticed  that,  without 
monetary  policy  action  from  our  side,  long-term  interest  rates  have  risen.  Afterwards  we 
discuss  what  decisions  we  should  take  in  response  to  the  situation.  Here,  there  was  a 
discussion about rate cuts. But at the end we agreed on the decisions that you know. 
Instead  of  cutting  rates  you  have  now  committed  to  keeping  rates  low  “for  an 
extended  period  of  time”  or  even  lowering  them  further.  Experts  are  speaking  of 
“forward guidance”. Was that a compromise solution? 
It’s  not  a  compromise  solution,  it  was  a  matter  of  giving  a  clear  signal  to  eliminate 
uncertainties. We decided on it unanimously. And indeed we are not categorically ruling out 
further  interest  rate  steps. Our focus  is to  ensure  that market  expectations  as  regards  our 
monetary policy stance are more in line with our assessment of the medium-term outlook for 
price developments. There have recently been discrepancies. 
It  is  a  known  fact,  however,  that  by  contrast  with  the  practice  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve  System  and  the  Bank  of  Japan,  you  don’t  give  the  markets  any  objective 
criteria in order to manage interest rate expectations. Why not? 
Of  course  we  give  clear  criteria.  Unlike  the  Fed,  for  example,  the  ECB  has  laid  down  a 
quantitative definition of price stability from the outset, i.e. since 1999, and it clarified in 2003 
that  the  ECB’s  Governing  Council  aims  to  keep  the  euro  area  inflation  rate  at  below,  but 
close to, 2% over the medium term. The markets are well aware of this quantitative definition 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
of price stability and, as I said, it was and is our intention that market expectations about the 
path  of  our  monetary  policy  should  be  more  closely  in  line  with  our  assessment  of  price 
developments in the medium term. 
And what do you mean by “an extended period of time”? That recently caused some 
confusion. 
That  is  a  strong  signal.  The  period  of  time  is  based  on  our  assessment  that  inflation  will 
remain subdued. This development is indicated by the weak trends in monetary and credit 
dynamics as well as the weak aggregate demand. As long as these trends persist, the key 
interest rates will remain at present levels or will be lowered further. 
Does this strong signal constitute a revolution in the ECB’s communication? 
We  have  described  our  assessment  of  the  current  situation  in  order  to  give  markets  an 
indication of the basis for our future decisions. For us, that is a very significant change in our 
communication, but not in our monetary policy strategy. There has been no change in our 
objective  to  maintain  price  stability  in  the  medium  term  or  in  our  two-pillar  analysis 
framework. 
After  this  meeting  too,  people  speculated  about  which  of  the  Governing  Council 
members expressed which opinion. Wouldn’t it therefore make sense to publish the 
minutes of the meetings, as does the Fed? 
Indeed, these speculations confirm my opinion that, sooner or later, we should publish the 
minutes. 
What  do  the  other  Governing  Council  members  think  about  that?  When  could  the 
minutes be published for the first time? 
We are discussing this topic intensively. 
You  mentioned  that,  in  its  most  recent  decision,  the  Governing  Council  also 
responded to the deteriorated credit conditions. What is the reason for the steep rise 
in capital market rates? 
One  factor  is  the  changing  monetary  policy  in  the  United  States.  At  the  same  time,  the 
developments in the money market reveal fears about a withdrawal of the excessive liquidity 
in the market. After all, banks in the euro area are gradually repaying their funds1 
But that is surely a good sign. 
Yes, that indicates a return to normal conditions. On the one hand, banks can find funding 
more  easily  because  savers  and  enterprises  are  again  depositing  more  of  their  money  at 
banks. On the other hand, the banks are also repaying the loans from the ECB with funds 
obtained through the deleveraging of their balance sheets – that is the bad news. That in turn 
restricts their scope for extending credit. 
ECB  President  Mario  Draghi  described  the  promise  of  low  interest  rates  for  an 
extended period of time as “unprecedented”. Are you not afraid of making it too easy 
for the euro area governments to postpone reforms? 
We are aware of the risk that governments might take advantage of our decision in this way. 
We must find the right balance between monetary policy necessities and the avoidance of 
adverse incentives. History will tell whether we did so successfully. 
Where is the line that the ECB may not cross? 
In the end, we focus on our mandate. We must maintain price stability. Inflationary risks are 
currently low. 
                                                
1   Obtained through the three-year LTROs. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
You assume that inflation will remain within the set margins? 
We have every reason to assume so. And we will do everything to ensure that it stays that 
way. 
But with Mario Draghi’s promise to do “whatever it takes to preserve the euro”, isn’t 
the ECB giving the completely wrong signals? Surely the governments can now just 
sit back. 
So far we have successfully tackled acute crisis situations. However, the question is whether 
we  thereby  relieved  the  pressure  to  implement  reforms  to  such  an  extent  that  necessary 
adjustments in national budgets have not been sufficient. The reform efforts in many places 
are impressive, even if labour market and product market reforms in some countries leave 
something to be desired. All in all, reforms are proceeding too slowly, there is no doubt about 
that. 
What  could  the  ECB  do  to  stimulate  structural  reforms?  Or  is  the supposedly  most 
powerful institution powerless in this regard? 
Our  mandate  is to maintain  price  stability.  Structural reforms  are  in  the member  countries’ 
own interests and can only be realised by the governments and the social partners. 
If the situation in the euro area deteriorates further, what could the ECB do? Would 
you be more in favour of cutting interest rates or buying securitised loans? 
I  am  sceptical  about  buying  up  loans.  I  don’t  think  that  a  central  bank  should  interfere  in 
directing credit. With regard to the market for securitised loans, the ECB is currently playing 
an advisory role in a task force with the European Investment Bank. 
But these kinds of purchase are still being discussed at the ECB? 
We said that we would consider the matter. 
And  what  about  a  negative  deposit  rate,  i.e.  a  surcharge  for  banks  that  park  their 
money at the ECB? 
We  have  made  the  necessary  technical  arrangements  for  a  measure  of  this  nature.  But  it 
would not have only positive results: the banks could increase their lending rates in order to 
cover their costs, and that could be counterproductive for our monetary policy. So we have to 
consider very carefully whether we want to take this step. On the other hand, with a negative 
deposit  rate  we  could  bring  about  a  further  decline  in  money  market  interest  rates.  The 
decision on whether or not to take this step will depend on the circumstances. 
There is no doubt that the power of the central bank has grown. But doesn’t greater 
power ultimately mean a politicisation of the central banks? 
I wouldn’t call it a politicisation so much as a potential overburdening. The euro area was set 
up with too few institutions with the ability to act, and we are now paying the price. We are 
being encumbered with more and more tasks. 
Are you talking about taking over banking supervision, and the fact that you need to 
appoint 1,000 experts by next year? 
Exactly. It is a huge challenge. But it also represents a great opportunity. If we do it properly, 
we will be able to influence the health of the banking system and enforce adjustments. This 
has happened much too slowly thus far. 
So,  first  of  all  you  plan  to review the  quality  of  banks’  balance  sheets.  Do  you  now 
have all the experts that you need for this task? 
We  will  make  use  of  external  parties  from  the  private  sector  as  well  as  the  national 
authorities  in  order  to  speed  up  the  process  and,  most  importantly,  to  achieve  the  best 
possible  assessment.  The  80  or  so  people  we  have  so  far  for  this  task  are  simply  not 
enough. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
How long will the review take? 
It would be good if we could complete the review and the stress tests within a year. At the 
end  of  it,  the  banks  should  have  recapitalisation  plans.  I  would  not  be  in  favour  of  them 
improving their ratios simply by shrinking their balance sheets. This would reduce their scope 
for lending and basically undermine our monetary policy efforts. 
How great, in your view, is the need for recapitalisation? 
It is too early to say for sure. But my first impression is that the private sector can handle it in 
most cases. 
Some estimates run to the billions. 
The huge sums doing the rounds in the press are, in my view, a complete exaggeration. 
How many supervisors will be working in Frankfurt? 
That is still not clear. What is clear is that not all supervisors will be based in Frankfurt. Many 
of them will be in the same place as the bank headquarters. In the case of a large bank, a 
team  could  easily  consist  of  70  people,  including  representatives  from  the  national 
supervisory authorities. 
The programme for unlimited purchases of government bonds (OMTs) seems to have 
played  a  large  role  in  saving  the  euro.  Mario  Draghi  misses  no  opportunity  to 
emphasise the success of the OMTs. Bundesbank President Jens Weidmann, on the 
other hand, is strongly against OMTs. What is your position? 
As  you  know,  at  the  meeting  of  the  ECB’s  Governing  Council  where  the  matter  was 
discussed, there was only one dissenting voice. In recent years, we have been on the brink 
of a dangerous downward spiral three times. First of all, after US investment bank Lehman 
Brothers  collapsed,  then  just  before  we  introduced  the  three-year  LTROs,  and  again  in 
summer 2012, when we then announced the OMT programme. 
Thank you for your time, Mr Praet. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
