DeLisle Worrell: The strength of Barbadian institutions and the resolve of 
Barbadians will see us through the crisis 
Op-ed article by Dr DeLisle Worrell, Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados, 15 August 
2013. 
 Barbadians  have  every  reason  to  be  confident  that  we  can  cure  the  foreign  exchange 
imbalance  which  has  emerged  in  the  last  three  months,  and  revive  the  growth  of  our 
economy. First, we have the highest standard of living in the Caribbean, and we have earned 
it  by  transforming  the  economy  and  investing  in  infrastructure  and  human  resources,  over 
many decades. Figure 1 compares the Human Development Index (HDI) for Barbados with 
the  rest  of  the  Caribbean.  The  HDI  is  the  best  indicator  of  the  quality  of  life  available  for 
countries worldwide.  
Second, Barbados has strong institutions for decision making: our social partnership is the 
envy  of  countries  worldwide;  our  economic  information  systems  are  the  equal  of  many 
industrial  countries;  our  media  are  knowledgeable;  and  we  have  a  strong  mechanism  for 
putting policy into effect. Thirdly, we have preserved the value of our dollar, protecting the 
value of people’s savings, and providing more predictable returns for investors. Fourthly, we 
have  reserves  which  are  more  than  sufficient  to  ride  out  the  storm,  as  may  be  seen  in 
Figure 2.  
With these resources we may confidently address the challenges, which are twofold. The first 
is  to  balance  foreign  exchange  inflows  and  outflows.  Following  the  June  27th  Economic 
Consultation, Government is in discussion with the social partners on measures that will be 
introduced to reduce the fiscal deficit. The required adjustment is considerable, about 4.5% 
of GDP, but not sufficient to cause major social disruption, as may be seen in Figure 3. The 
adjustment  will  protect  the  value  of  our  currency,  which  is  vital  to  Barbados’  economic 
prosperity.  Figure  4  shows  how  the  Caribbean  countries  which  have  devalued  have  fared, 
compared with those that have maintained an unchanged value of their currency in terms of 
the US dollar.  
Economic growth is the second challenge. The social partners continue to pursue actions to 
revive  the  economy.  Investment  amounting  to  $2.3  billion  is  in  prospect  for  the  foreign 
exchange  sectors,  and  Government  contemplates  $1  billion  of  infrastructure  and  other 
projects.  Initiatives  are  underway  to  improve  access  to  finance  by  small  and  medium 
enterprises.  Labour  is  charged  with  an  urgent  need  to  improve  productivity  and  quality  of 
service  in  every  area  of  activity,  so  that  Barbados  becomes  a  byword  for  excellence  in 
service.  
It  is  all  about  self-confidence.  The  social  partners  know  what  we  must  do  to  grow  the 
economy, and each and every Barbadian must remind ourselves that we have the power to 
contribute  to  our  future  prosperity.  The  private  investment  projects  that  will  grow  the 
economy are known, the government infrastructure has been identified, the financing is being 
put  together,  and  the  fiscal  correction  package  is  being  stitched  together  in  meetings 
between Government and the other social partners. What remains is the piece that is up to 
each  and  every  one  of  us,  that  is,  to  increase  worker  productivity  and  commitment  to 
excellence. I am confident that we will each resolve to put our best efforts into playing our 
part in the revival of our economy, and to sustainable economic growth in the future.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 2 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  3 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
