Anselmo Teng: Internationalization of the RMB and the role of Macao as 
a financial platform 
Address by Mr Anselmo Teng, Chairman of the Monetary Authority of Macao, at the “2013 
Internationalization of RMB Global Forum”, jointly organised by the Shanghai Institute of the 
International Financial Centre of the Shanghai University of Finance and Economics and the 
Centre for International Finance and Regulation (Australia), Shanghai, 26 May 2013. 
 Dear Delegates, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
1) 
First  of  all,  I  would  like  to  express  my  gratitude  to  the  Shanghai  Institute  of  the 
International Financial Centre of the Shanghai University of Finance and Economics 
for inviting me to this forum. At the moment, the internationalization of the RMB not 
only  attracts  the  attention  of  the  Mainland  community,  but  also  global  financial 
markets.  I  am  very  pleased  to  take  this  opportunity  today  to  present  some  of  our 
views on this important topic and the role of Macao as a financial platform. 
The internationalization process of the RMB 
2) 
the  years, 
further 
towards 
in  order 
to  deepen 
financial  reforms, 
free  convertibility,  concerns 
Over 
the  RMB 
internationalisation process has been gradually implemented. In the 12th Five-Year 
plan, the Central Government has clearly stated the strategic plan of “expansion of 
RMB cross-border use and gradual realisation of RMB capital account convertibility”. 
In recent years, to steadily and consistently promote the RMB internationalisation, 
the  People’s  Bank  of  China  (PBOC)  and  relevant  government  agencies  have 
broadened  the  flow-back  channel  for  the  RMB,  increased  the  scope  for  RMB 
cross-border  use  and  opened  up  RMB  foreign  direct  investment  to  foreign 
enterprises. 
After the eruption of the global financial crisis in 2008/09, however, the international 
financial landscape has undergone significant transformation. While the world would 
welcome  China’s  currency  reform 
for 
destabilising capital flows, against a backdrop of prolonged adoption of quantitative 
easing  policies  by  advanced  countries,  have  notably  heightened.  International 
organisations such as the IMF holds a more “practical” position that capital controls 
are a legitimate part of the toolkit to manage capital flows in certain circumstances, 
especially for Emerging-Market Economies. With proper control of systemic risk in 
mind, 
financial  system  would 
correspondingly  affect  the  pace  of  the  currency  reform  in  China.  Relaxation  of 
capital  control  towards  free  convertibility  and  hence  the  internationalization  of  the 
RMB, while I believe would remain the ultimate goals of the currency reform, would 
proceed  at  a  gradual  pace,  ensuring  the  stability,  safety  and  soundness  of  the 
Chinese financial system. 
From  the  perspective  of  the  theory  of  international  finance,  the  realisation  of 
currency internationalisation hinges on two parameters, namely (i) free convertibility 
of  the  currency;  and  (ii)  use  of  the  currency  in  international  trade  and  financial 
transactions.  The  first  parameter  falls  into  the  scope  of  a  country’s  monetary  and 
exchange  rate  policies  while  the  second  is  directly  related  to  a  country’s  share  in 
international trade and financial activities. 
In  July  2009,  the  PBOC  and  relevant  ministries  of  the  State  Council  jointly 
promulgated  the  “Management  of  Cross-Border  RMB  Trade  Settlement  Pilot 
the  degree  of  stability  of 
international 
the 
3)  
4) 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Programme”,  which  was  a  pivotal  step  of  the  endeavour  of  the  government  to 
promote  the  internationalization  of  the  RMB.  With  the  incessant  expansion  of  the 
pilot units, virtually all Mainland enterprises which are qualified to import and export 
can  have  a  free  hand  in  using  the  RMB  to  settle  all  transactions  with  their  trade 
partners globally. 
An update of the RMB business in the Macao Special Administrative Region (MSAR) 
5)  
With  the  rapid  development  of  the  economy,  there  is  an  accelerated  economic 
integration between the Mainland and Macao. As a result, RMB business develops 
quickly in Macao. At the moment, RMB deposits in Macao accounts for about 10% 
of  the  deposits  in  the  banking  system.  There  is  a  marked  progress  in  the  RMB 
cross-border  trade  settlement  despite  a  slow  start.  Cross-border  trade  settlement 
transacted in 2011 increased substantially by 10 times from 2010 and the volume in 
2012 continued to record an increase of over 60%. In the first quarter this year, the 
substantial growth continued; the volume of cross-border trade settlement rose by 
almost 80% and already reached 40% that of last year. 
The Monetary Authority of Macao, in the course of managing the fiscal reserve of 
the government, has invested in the onshore market through the CIBM quota (i.e. 
China  Interbank  Bond  Market  quota)  granted  by  the  People’s  Bank  of  China.  We 
also  invest  in  the  RMB  offshore  market  in  Hong  Kong  as  a  supplement  to  the 
onshore RMB portfolio. From a more global perspective and looking ahead, along 
with  an  increasing  weight  in  the  RMB  in  global  trade  settlement  and  a  rising 
investment interests from abroad, the internationalization path of the currency would 
lead  to  more  market  opportunities,  both  for  the  domestic  mainland  investors  and 
offshore international investors. 
6) 
The economic situation and the banking sector of Macao and how the RMB business 
evolves 
7)  
Under  the  auspices  of the  Central Government,  the  Macao  economy  has  enjoyed 
rapid growth. Since its return to the Motherland, the overall economy of Macao has 
been expanding at a compound rate of 12.4%. In 2012, per capita income exceeded 
USD76,000.  As  a  special  administrative  region,  the  economy  of  Macao  can  be 
classified  as  small,  but  it  can  and  should  contribute  to  the  process  relating  to the 
“internationalization” of the RMB. As a matter of fact, Macao is always an advocate 
of  free  market  system,  there  is  no  exchange  control;  the  financial  markets  and 
institutions  operate  freely;  there  is  free  flow  of  funds  into  and  out  of  the  MSAR, 
which  together  laid  down  the  foundation  of  its  fine  system.  There  are  29  banks 
operating in the Macao banking system. They are of different origins; the Mainland, 
Chinese Taipei, HKSAR, Singapore, the US, the UK and Portugal. As at 31/03/2013, 
non-performing loan ratio  was a meagre 0.14%, profit for the first quarter of 2013 
was up 27.4% year-on-year, CAR (Capital adequacy ratio) was around 15%. There 
are  good  risks  management,  corporate  governance,  internal  control  and  effective 
supervision in the banking system. The banks have long been enjoying security and 
stability. 
Apart  from  servicing  local  needs,  Macao  banks  are  making  use  of  Macao  as  a 
platform  in  developing  cross-border  financial  business  with  other  nations  and 
regions. This has in fact provided facility and foundation for the “internationalization” 
endeavour  of  the  RMB.  Particularly,  Macao  banks  have  accumulated  ample 
experience in the operation and management of RMB business. As early as in 2004, 
Macao became one of the pilot areas for RMB offshore business while the PBOC 
appointed  a  clearing  bank  for  RMB  business  to  banks  that  offer  individual  RMB 
business in Macao relating to deposit, exchange, remittance and bank card. In July 
 2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
2009,  Macao  banks  were  allowed  to  conduct  settlement  for  cross-border  trades 
denominated in RMB. At the moment, RMB is freely circulated in Macao like other 
currencies. As long as the funds will not flow back to the Mainland, banks in Macao 
have a free hand in handling all types of RMB business to cater to the needs of the 
market. Besides, the Real Time Gross Settlement System of Macao has interface 
capabilities with the Mainland and will surely facilitate cross border clearing for the 
RMB. 
The role of Macao as a trade platform between the Mainland and Portuguese speaking 
countries 
8)  
On  a  more  international  perspective,  Macao  has  been  exploiting  its  special 
geographical and historical conditions in performing its liaison platform function for 
economic cooperation between China and Portuguese speaking countries, namely 
Angola, Brazil, Cape Verde, East Timor, Guinea-Bissau, Mozambique, Portugal and 
São  Tomé  e  Principe.  They  have  a  total  population  of  more  than  200  million  and 
endowed  with  abundant  natural  resources  and  energy  potentials.  In  the  12th 
Five-Year-Plan,  it  is  stipulated  that  Macao  will  have  strong  support  in  the 
development of a service platform for the economic cooperation between China and 
Portuguese  speaking  countries,  whereby  appropriate  economic  diversification  of 
Macao can be promoted. 
Recently,  there  is  an  increasing  rise  in  economic  activities  between  China  and 
Lusophone  countries.  Trade  volume  with  the  8  Lusophone  countries  amounted  to 
USD128.8  billion  in  2012,  which  was  a  10.1%  increase  year-on-year.  There  is  a 
great demand in the market for related financial services. Macao can fully embody 
its platform function by providing solid financial support services for trade. 5 
Some  Portuguese  speaking  countries  would  like  to  share  Macao’s  experience  in 
managing RMB business as well as the experience in dealing with investment in the 
currency. To this end, recently, the Central Bank of Mozambique, under the terms of 
the  “Memorandum  of  Understanding”  with  the  Monetary  Authority  of  Macao, 
arranged to send officers to Macao in mid-April with a view to making preparation for 
future development. 
On the other hand, banks with capital from China and Portugal account for the lion’s 
share in Macao’s banking industry. Some banks of Chinese capital have executed 
business  cooperation  agreements  with  financial  institutions  of  some  Portuguese 
speaking  countries.  Under  such 
the  MSAR 
Government is leading local financial institutions to make full use of the development 
opportunity  offered  by  Portuguese  speaking  countries  to  further  expand  their 
business. As such, we can grasp the chance and direct suitable financial institutions 
and  enterprises  to  invest  in  those  countries  through  Macao  as  the  platform.  We 
follow  the  strategic  direction  of  “internationalization”  as  postulated  by  our  country. 
Such a move will have spill-over effect on other economic/trade activities, and such 
support services can be provided by the Macao financial system. 
In November 2010, the then Premier of the State Council, Mr. Wen Jiabao, visited 
Macao  for  the  3rd  Ministerial  Meeting  of  the  “Forum  for  Economic  Cooperation 
between  China  and  Portuguese  Speaking  Countries”.  He  announced  a  series  of 
policy  measures  to  promote  Macao  to  be  the  platform  for  economic  cooperation 
between  the  countries.  He  hoped  that  Macao  would  perform  “core  function”  in 
promoting  RMB  trade  settlement  in  the  process,  which  would  further  embody 
Macao’s  position  as  platform  for  economic  cooperation  between  China  and 
Lusophone countries. 
Macao’s  uniqueness  and  competitive  edges  support  its  development  into  a  RMB 
settlement  platform for  commercial  and  trade  activities  between  the  Mainland  and 
indigenous  competitiveness, 
 9) 
10)  
11) 
12) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Portuguese speaking countries. At the moment, the division of labour between the 
two  financial  centres,  Shanghai  and  Hong  Kong,  is  clear  cut;  Shanghai  is  the 
“onshore”  RMB  centre  while  Hong  Kong  is  the  leading  “offshore”  centre.  It  is 
envisaged  that  Macao  can  strengthen  its  cooperation  with  Shanghai  and  Hong 
Kong,  exploring  the  opportunity  arising  from  the  orderly  financial  reform  in  the 
Mainland. To cope with the need of the country, Macao can serve as a platform for 
regional  economic  and  trade  cooperation,  by  which  it  can  help  create  an 
accommodative  environment  conducive 
trade,  overall  economic 
development, financial reform and modernization of our country. Under such positive 
interaction,  we  can  promote  jointly  the  process  of  the  internationalization  of  the 
RMB. 
to  external 
Thank you! 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
