Stefan Ingves: The evolution of the Basel Committee 
Welcome and keynote address by Mr Stefan Ingves, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank and 
Chairman of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, at a symposium to mark 25 years 
of  the  Basel  Capital  Accord  “25  years  of  international  financial  regulation:  Challenges  and 
opportunities”, Basel, 26 September 2013. 
 Good morning everyone. 
On behalf of the Basel Committee, I would like to welcome you to today’s symposium, which 
the Committee is hosting to mark 25 years since the first Basel Accord on bank capital was 
established. And let me at the same time also acknowledge Jaime Caruana and the BIS, not 
only for hosting this event, but also for their unwavering support of the Committee over the 
past almost 40 years. 
As many of you know, the Basel Committee started out in 1974 as the Basel Committee on 
Banking Regulations and Supervisory Practices. In the aftermath of the Herstatt collapse, the 
G10 Governors of the day were seeking ways to preserve and promote the stability of the 
international  financial  system.  It  is  worth  reflecting  during  the  morning,  as  we  discuss  the 
Committee’s achievements to date, that the basic problems we encounter today – poorly run 
institutions, interconnectedness and financial instability – are the same as those faced by the 
Committee when it was founded. 
This is not to imply that nothing has been achieved: on the contrary, a great deal has been 
done  and  the  world  has  benefited  greatly.  But,  despite  our  efforts,  banks  regularly  lose 
money  in  the  same  old  way:  while  pursuing  profits,  growth  and  market  share  without 
adequate heed to risk. Unfortunately, they often find clever new ways of doing this, so that it 
isn’t always easy to see how the same old habits will be repeated. 
While today’s Committee members are, I’m sure, looking for some respite from the ambitious 
work  programme  of  post-crisis  reforms,  we  also  need  to  recognise  that  nobody  can 
guarantee  a  crisis-free  future.  Therefore,  we  must  remain  vigilant  against  old  risks  re-
emerging in new shapes and forms. 
I will speak shortly about some of the key influences that have shaped the evolution of the 
Basel Committee over the years. Before I start, however, I would like to warmly welcome a 
number of special guests today: 
• 
First let me welcome Peter Cooke. Having headed the Committee for more than a 
decade, Peter has been our longest-serving Chair – and, probably more than any 
other  person,  he  was  instrumental  in  laying  the  foundations  for  the  Committee’s 
subsequent  achievements.  Indeed,  his  contribution  is  best  highlighted  by  the  fact 
that, for many years, people did not refer to the Basel Committee, but to the “Cooke 
Committee”  and  the  “Cooke  ratio”  –  although  I  know  Peter  is  the  first  to 
acknowledge that the credit for the Accord is shared by many. Peter – we are very 
pleased that you and your wife Julia can be with us today. 
Let me also acknowledge a number of Peter’s colleagues on the Committee through 
the critical period of 1986–88 when the Accord was settled. I am delighted that you 
were all able to join us today. 
Finally, I would especially like to welcome Paul Volcker to the symposium. Paul was 
instrumental within the G10 Governors in pushing for an international benchmark on 
bank  capital.  In  particular,  together  with  Robin  Leigh-Pemberton  of  the  Bank  of 
England,  he  was  critical  in  forging  the  agreement  that  produced  the  world’s  first 
international standard for bank capital. Paul – I don’t think it is too much to say that a 
great deal of today’s global financial regulation was founded on your original vision. 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
As  a  scene-setter  for  this  morning’s  discussions,  I  would  offer  some  thoughts  on  the  key 
influences on the evolution of the Committee to date. 
The  Basel  Committee  and  its  activities  have  changed  almost  beyond  recognition  since  its 
establishment  in  1974,  or  even  since  1988  when  the  first  Accord  was  agreed.  I  doubt 
whether  the  founding  Governors  really  foresaw  what  the  Committee  would  eventually 
become:  not  just  an  international  standard  setter,  but  also  one  that  now  conducts  peer 
reviews of members’ compliance with their agreements. Indeed, if they had, I suspect that a 
few of them might have been against the Committee’s establishment in the first place! 
But times change, the financial sector has evolved, and the Committee has moved with the 
times.  Among  the  many  factors  that  have  influenced  the  work  of  the  Committee  over  the 
years, I thought I would identify five that have shaped what the Committee is today and will 
continue to guide its activities in the future. 
The first and most obvious is the evolution from a coordinating and information-sharing 
group to one that has become a standard setter. Although the 1975 Concordat was the 
Committee’s first substantive agreement, and its first public document, it was not a standard 
per  se:  rather,  it  was  a  sensible  agreement  on  how  supervisory  responsibilities  could  be 
divided for banks operating across national boundaries. Its goal was modest: to make sure 
no bank could escape supervision. It did not try to harmonise supervisory standards. And, of 
course, it was primarily directed at supervisors, not banks themselves. 
In  subsequent  years,  the  Committee  pronounced  on  international  lending  and  foreign 
exchange positions. These documents began to set expectations for the way in which banks 
should manage these risks, but they were not standards in the way we use the word today. It 
was the first Basel Accord that really marked this new role for the Committee. As in 1974, a 
severe  crisis  triggered  this  step  –  in  that  case,  the  Latin  American  debt  crisis  of  the  early 
1980s, which raised the political pressure for banks to increase their capital base and for the 
regulators to create an international level playing field in this respect. 
Since then, the Committee’s role as a standard setter has only grown – to the extent that, 
today, this is seen as its primary purpose. Whereas the Committee took 10 years to publish 
its first 10 documents, this year alone it has published more than 30 – with more to come. 
But  with  all  the  public  focus  on  standard-setting,  it  is  important  not  to  forget  the  critical 
“behind the scenes” role of information-sharing, since we all well know that regulation cannot 
be successful without strong supervision and cooperation to back it up. 
The  second  important  influence  on  the  Committee  has  been  the  growing  sophistication 
and  complexity  of  international  financial  markets.  The  original  Basel  Accord  was 
beautiful in its simplicity – something that many people long for today – but it could not keep 
up  with  the  development  of  increasingly  complex  financial  instruments.  These  may  have 
offered substantial benefits to society, but they strained the simple Basel I methodology. The 
Committee’s  response  was  most  obviously  manifested  in  Basel  II.  This  marked  another 
turning-point  in  the  Committee’s  evolution,  moving  us  from  a  “one  size  fits  all”  regime  to 
differential approaches using internal models. This meant the regulatory regime was better 
aligned  with  banks’  underlying  risk  profile,  but  regulation  was  now  no  longer  simple  or 
completely  uniform  across  banks.  Like  any  change,  it  has  delivered  some  undoubted 
benefits, but it has also created a whole new range of challenges that we are still grappling 
with today. 
The  third  key  influence  on  the  Committee  stems  from  increasing  globalisation.  As  a 
creature  of  the  G10,  the  Committee  could  originally  lay  claim  to  coverage  of  most  of  the 
world’s  truly  internationally  active  banks.  But  as  banks  and  financial  markets  became 
increasingly  integrated  across  national  borders,  this  claim  to  be  the  standard  setter  for  all 
internationally active banks became more and more difficult to justify. 
During the 1990s and 2000s, the Committee made good use of its Core Principles Liaison 
Group to seek advice from members outside the G10. The CPLG’s contribution was highly 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
constructive when Basel II was developed, for example. But as the size and importance of 
jurisdictions “outside the tent” grew, even this arrangement became increasingly untenable. 
And so, in 2009, the Committee essentially stepped up from a G10 to a G20 foundation as it 
sought a truly coordinated response to the global financial crisis. Indeed, we now have more 
than 40 organisations representing 27 member jurisdictions around the table. As a result, the 
Committee’s  coverage  of  global  banking  assets  has  gone  from  about  60%  to  90%.  This 
much  greater  inclusiveness  lends,  in  turn,  greater  legitimacy  and  credibility  to  the 
Committee’s  standards,  as  they  are  now  set  by  a  process  that  is  truly  reflective  of 
international markets. 
The fourth key influence is a more recent one – the shift in thinking from a micro- to a 
macroprudential  perspective.  For  much  of  its  life,  the  Committee  focused  primarily  on 
microprudential issues. That is not to say the macroprudential angle was ignored, but there 
was certainly a view – quite prevalent in the pre-crisis world – that if banks were individually 
stable,  the  financial  system  would  itself  stay  upright.  During  the  Great  Moderation,  little 
appetite existed for new tools and international regulations of a macroprudential nature, even 
if the Committee could have foreseen all of the looming threats. 
The financial crisis brought home the lesson that financial stability could not be assured only 
through the use of microprudential tools. And so Basel III represents another important step 
in  the  Committee’s  development.  Basel  III  has  substantially  enhanced  the  microprudential 
framework.  And,  in  the  countercyclical  buffer,  it  has  also  introduced  the  first  international 
agreement  on  a macroprudential  tool.  Subsequent  work  on the framework for  systemically 
important banks (both global and domestic) has further expanded the Committee’s input into 
this relatively new field – a trend that is unlikely to be reversed. 
My  fifth  key  influence  on  the  Committee’s  evolution  is  also  quite  recent,  and  hence  its 
eventual impact on the Committee’s work is still difficult to foresee: its role in monitoring 
the implementation of Committee standards. 
Post-crisis, the Committee has not only expanded its membership, but it has also taken on 
the  role  of  monitoring  the  implementation  of  the  standards  agreed  by  its  members.  To  an 
outsider,  that  may  not  sound  significant  –  indeed,  some  might  reasonably  ask  why  the 
Committee wasn’t already doing this – but it is notable if only as an idea that the Committee 
had  previously  considered  and  rejected  on  more  than  one  occasion.  Indeed,  in  his 
authoritative history of the Committee’s early years, Charles Goodhart notes that, as far back 
as  1983,  there  was  discussion  whether  the  Committee  might  also  monitor  the  practical 
application of agreements. At the time, though, this was seen as somewhat awkward and a 
step too far. That the Committee now has just such a mandate shows that the commitment to 
consistent  international  regulation  is  undiminished  –  indeed,  it  is  stronger  than  it  has  ever 
been. 
Let me conclude by once again welcoming you to Basel, particularly those of you who have 
played  a  role  in  the  Committee’s  earlier  years  –  we  hope  that  returning  here  brings  back 
many good memories. For the current Committee members, it is a wonderful opportunity to 
learn  from  the  wisdom  of  those  who  have  grappled  with  these  issues  before  us. We  also 
hope to hear some different perspectives, from the banking industry, and from academia, on 
the challenges and opportunities that face the Committee. I am therefore looking forward to 
some productive – and hopefully provocative – discussions this morning. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
