Ardian Fullani: Overview of recent economic developments in Albania 
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  on  the  Monetary  Policy 
Decision-Making of the Bank of Albania’s Supervisory Council, Tirana, 26 June 2013. 
 Today,  on  26  June  2013,  the  Supervisory  Council  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  reviewed  and 
approved  the  monthly  Monetary  Policy  Report.  Based  on  the  most  recent  monetary  and 
economic  developments  in  Albania,  and  following  the  discussions  on  their  outlook,  the 
Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania decided to keep the key interest rate unchanged, 
at 3.75%. The Supervisory Council deems that the current monetary conditions are adequate 
to  meet  Bank  of  Albania's  inflation  target  in  the  medium  term.  At  the  same  time,  these 
conditions ensure the necessary monetary stimulus to support the domestic demand.  
Let  me  now  proceed  with  an  overview  of  the  economic  developments  and  key  issues 
discussed at today’s meeting.  
 Annual  inflation  continued  its  downtrend  in  May,  settling  at  2.1%.  Prices  of  agricultural 
products  fell,  thanks  to  the  higher  supply  in  the  domestic  market,  shifting  this  month's 
inflation  down.  On  the  other  hand,  prices  of  other  goods  and  services  of  the  CPI  basket 
ranged around the previous months levels.  
From the macroeconomic perspective, consumer prices continue to reflect low inflationary 
pressures, arising from both the demand and the supply side. The cyclical weakness of the 
economy  was  associated  with  strong  reduction  of  core  inflation  during  this  period.  Due  to 
spare  capacities  in  the  labour  market  and  capital,  production  costs  and  profit  margins 
increased at low levels, leading to lower increase in final prices of consumer goods produced 
in Albania. Furthermore, price stabilisation in global markets and economic agents' anchored 
expectations on inflation were reflected in low price rise in the domestic market. Consumer 
price  inflation  appears  to  be  at  low  rates  and  is  expected  to  range  in  these  levels,  in  the 
period ahead.  
The  macroeconomic  analysis,  updated  with  the  latest  available  information,  suggests  low 
aggregate  demand  growth  during  the  first  five  months  of  the  year.  Economic  growth  was 
supported  by  foreign  demand  and  higher  public  spending  during  this  period,  while 
consumption  and  private  investments  were  weak.  Over  the  last  quarters,  consumption 
and  private  investments  have  suffered  from  uncertainties  for  the  future  and  tighter  lending 
terms.  Their  performance  will  be  broadly  conditioned  by  the  improvement  of  these  two 
drivers.  
In  the  first  five  months  of  the  year,  the  fiscal  policy  was  stimulating  to  the  economy, 
materialised in the rapid expansion of the fiscal deficit and public spending. Additionally, the 
fiscal easing relied also on the taxation policy, as a number of taxes were reduced directly or 
indirectly.  Budget  expenditure  surged  13.3%,  mainly  due  to  public  investments  during  this 
period. Fiscal revenues fell 0.2%, mainly due to contraction in the tax component. For the 
first five months of the year, budget deficit stood at ALL 38.3 billion, about 1.1 times higher 
than  a  year  earlier,  affecting,  therefore,  the  increase  in  the  public  debt  to  GDP  ratio,  to 
62.4%. The Bank of Albania continues to draw the attention on the need for fiscal measures, 
which  would  guarantee  the  long-term  stability  of  the  public  debt,  boost  financial  markets' 
confidence  in  our  public  finance,  and  cut  long-term  costs  of  debt  service.  This  objective 
should be the main medium-term priority of public finances.  
Data on the external sector of the economy reveal that the net foreign demand contributed 
positively  to  economic  growth  in  the  first  quarter.  The  current  account  deficit  narrowed,  in 
annual terms, settling at 9.8% of GDP during this period. Foreign trade data for April point to 
further  narrowing  of  the  annual  trade  deficit  by  about  5.3%  in  annual  terms,  thanks  to  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
rising exports. Meanwhile, for the first time  since September 2012, total imports increased 
about  3.6%  in  this  month.  As  pointed  out  earlier,  the  current  account  deficit  constitutes  a 
structural  deficiency  of  the  Albanian  economy.  Its  adjustment  would  mitigate  one  of  the 
potential sources of risks to the Albanian economy and financial markets, and broaden the 
space for implementing stimulating macroeconomic policies in the future.  
Monetary  indicators  were  in  line  with  the  real-economy  developments  and  our  analysis 
reveals  that  the  monetary  inflation  pressures  are  weak.  Annual  increase  of  money  supply 
accelerated in April, reversing the deceleration trend that had started in July of last year. The 
broad  money  aggregate,  M3,  picked  up  5.2%  from  4.6%  in  March,  mainly  reflecting  the 
higher  demand  for  funding  by  the  public  sector.  By  contrast,  the  private  sector's  weak 
demand  is  reflected  in  the  sluggish  credit  performance.  Lending  to  the  economy  slowed 
down further in April, marking only 0.9% annual growth. Besides the weak demand, lending 
deteriorated also due to banks’ prudence in lending, materialised in relatively tight standards. 
This  phenomenon  is  regionally  dispersed  and  is  dictated,  to  a  large  extent,  by  the 
developments in the euro area's financial markets.  
The  main  feature  of  financial  markets  developments  has  been  the  downward  trend  of 
interest rates in recent months. The easing signals of the monetary policy were transmitted, 
though unevenly, across all the market segments. The interbank interest rates followed the 
latest key interest rate cut in March and remain anchored around it. In May and June, the 
yields continued to fall in the primary market in line with the monetary policy easing cycle. 
Deposits  and  loans  interest  rates  are  reacting  more  slowly  conform  to  the  time  lag  in  the 
monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism,  and  in  the  presence  of  economic  agents' 
uncertainties about the future and risk premia that accompany crediting.  
Insofar  factual  developments  have  not  altered  our  base  projections  on  economic 
developments.  For  2013,  economic  growth  rates  are  projected  to  be  close  to  those  of  the 
past  year,  although  the balance  of  risks  has  shifted  on  the down  side. Foreign  demand  is 
expected  to  contribute  less,  affected  by  the  economic  slowdown  in  partner  countries. 
Intensification of expenditures in the second quarter is expected to be counted as positive 
contribution  by  the  public  sector  to  the  aggregate  demand  in  this  period.  However,  its 
capacity to induct stable growth on the private sector appears limited in time and restricted 
by  requirements  for  compliance  with  budget  deficit  indicators.  Under  these  circumstances, 
the domestic private demand remains a determinant factor for boosting aggregate demand in 
the future. Accumulation of financial savings and easing stimulus of the monetary policy are 
expected  to  materialise  in  better  consumption  and  private  spending  in  the  period  ahead. 
Demand growth below the potential of the economy for the rest of the year will continue to 
exercise low inflationary pressures from the demand side.  
 At the end of discussions, the Supervisory Council decided to keep the key interest 
rate unchanged, at 3.75%. The outlook of economic and financial developments in Albania 
and abroad determines the continuation of the easing monetary conditions over the monetary 
policy-relevant horizon. This policy establishes the proper conditions for meeting the inflation 
target in the medium-term period, contributing at the same time to the growth of aggregate 
demand and full utilisation of production capacities in the economy.  
Expected  economic  and  financial  developments  require  that  the  easing  monetary 
conditions be maintained in the monetary policy-relevant horizon. The Bank of Albania 
stands  ready  to  react  duly  and  timely  to  provide  the  necessary  monetary  conditions  for 
meeting its inflation target. 
 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
