Philip Lowe: Internal balance, structural change and monetary policy 
Address  by  Mr  Philip  Lowe,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  the 
Australian Industry Group 13th Annual Economics Forum, Sydney, 19 March 2013. 
 I would like to thank David Orsmond for valuable assistance in the preparation of this talk. 
It  is  a  pleasure  to  participate  again  in  the  Australian  Industry  Group’s  Annual  Economics 
Forum. 
This is the fourth time I have participated in this Forum, having spoken in 2010, 2011, 2012 
and  now  2013.  Over  this  period,  the  Australian  economy  has  undergone  very  significant 
adjustment. My central message today is that, overall, this adjustment has proceeded pretty 
well, particularly in light of the extraordinary developments that have occurred in the global 
economy over these years. 
This message is not meant to downplay the disruptive and sometimes painful effects of the 
changes  that  are  taking  place.  At  the  Reserve  Bank,  we  have  spent  much  time  trying  to 
understand  the  stresses  and  strains  facing  parts  of  the  economy  as  a  result  of  structural 
change. But we have also spent time trying to understand the benefits that can come from 
this change, including an increase in our average living standards and higher productivity. 
From  an  overall  perspective,  it  is  important  that  we  do  not  lose  sight  of  what  has  been 
achieved in Australia. We have managed to maintain a fair degree of internal balance during 
a period in which there has been considerable structural change, a very large shift in world 
relative prices, a major boom in investment and a financial crisis in many of the North Atlantic 
economies.  Our  economic  performance  has  been  much  better  than  many  other  countries 
and we remain well placed to benefit from the shift of economic weight towards the emerging 
market economies, particularly those in Asia. While I understand that many companies face 
challenges, we should not lose sight of this bigger picture – a picture I suspect that many 
other countries wish they shared. 
Internal balance and structural change 
I would  like to begin this morning by briefly summarising the broad economic outcomes in 
Australia since I first spoke at this Forum in March 2010. 
Since that time, output in the Australian economy has increased by 9 per cent. The number 
of  people  with  jobs  has  risen  by  over  half  a  million.  The  unemployment  rate  today,  at 
5.4 per cent,  is  exactly  the  same  as  it  was  three  years  ago.  And  underlying  inflation  has 
averaged  2½  per cent  over  this  period,  which  is  the midpoint  of the medium-term  inflation 
target. 
So over these three years we have seen growth close to trend, a stable and relatively low 
unemployment rate and inflation at target. 
By the standards of most other countries, this represents a very good outcome and a high 
degree of internal balance. Remarkably, we have achieved this balance despite experiencing 
the biggest boom in business investment and the largest rise in the terms of trade for over a 
hundred  years  (Graph 1). In  the  past, much  smaller  investment  and  terms  of trade  booms 
caused outbreaks of inflation and the emergence of other imbalances in the economy. On 
this occasion this has not happened. The investment boom has not led to a large increase in 
the  current  account  deficit.  There  has  not  been  an  explosion  in  credit.  Increases  in  asset 
prices  have  generally  been  contained.  And  the  average  level  of  interest  rates  has  been 
below  the  long-term  average,  despite  the  very  significant  additional  demand  generated  by 
the record levels of investment and the terms of trade. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Graph 1 
 the  manufacturing, 
tourism  and  education  sectors.  But 
There are a number of factors that are important to understanding how domestic or internal 
balance has been maintained, with generally low interest rates, despite the very large shocks 
experienced by the Australian economy. This morning, I would  like to focus on just two of 
these. 
The first is the flexible exchange rate. 
The high levels of investment and commodity prices have been associated with a high value 
of the Australian dollar. This has clearly caused some difficulties for parts of our economy, 
including 
from  an  overall 
macroeconomic perspective, the appreciation of the exchange rate has played an important 
stabilising role. 
Had we not experienced the sizeable appreciation over recent years, it is highly likely that the 
economy would have overheated and that we would have had substantially higher inflation 
and  substantially  higher  interest  rates.  This  would  not  have  been  in  the  interests  of  the 
community at large or, I might add, in the interests of the sectors currently being adversely 
affected by the high exchange rate. It is also worth adding that, in any case, it is unlikely that 
we would have avoided a substantial real exchange rate appreciation, with it coming through 
the more costly route of higher inflation. 
This, of course, does not mean that, at each and every point in time, the exchange rate is at 
its ideal rate from a domestic balance perspective. We should not forget that exchange rates 
are relative prices between two countries’ moneys. This means that they are determined both 
by what is happening domestically and by what is happening abroad. This has been obvious 
over  recent  years,  with  the  very  accommodative  monetary  conditions  in  many  of  the 
developed  economies  tending  to  put  downward  pressure  on  the  value  of  their  currencies, 
including relative to the Australian dollar. As we have said a number of times, the Reserve 
Bank has responded to this development by lowering the cash rate. It is also worth repeating 
that this lowering of the cash rate has not been with the direct intention of achieving a lower 
exchange rate, but rather with the intention of offsetting some of the contractionary effects on 
the Australian economy of the high value of the Australian dollar. 
Over  recent  times,  our  extensive  discussions  with  Australian  businesses  confirm  that  they 
are adjusting to the high value of the currency. When I spoke at this Forum in 2010 and 2011 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
my  sense  was  that  many  businesses  were  hoping  that  the  high  exchange  rate  was  just  a 
temporary  development,  that  it  would  pass,  and  that  business  models  wouldn’t  have  to 
change too much. Today, I have quite a different sense. 
Nowadays,  there  is  a  greater  recognition  that  the  high  exchange  rate  is  likely  to  be  quite 
persistent  and firms,  including  in  the  manufacturing  sector,  are  adjusting  to this.  Many  are 
looking to improve their internal processes and address inefficiencies. They are focusing on 
products where value added is highest and where the quality of the workforce is a strategic 
advantage.  We  hear  from  businesses  right  across  the  country  that  they  are  looking  for 
improvements and that many are finding them. 
This  adjustment  in  business  processes  and  models  is  often  painful.  But  the  fact  that  it  is 
occurring is one reason why the Reserve Bank has been tentatively optimistic for some time 
that  productivity  growth  would  pick-up  from  the  low  rates  experienced  over  much  of  the 
previous  decade.  We  are  now  seeing  some  tentative  evidence  of  this  in  the  aggregate 
productivity data (Graph 2). While these data tend to be volatile from year to year and subject 
to sizeable revisions, productivity growth in 2012 was better than it has been for quite some 
time. Of course, we cannot be sure that this will continue, but the structural changes that are 
now occurring mean that there are reasonable prospects for a sustained lift in productivity 
growth. 
Graph 2 
 We  can  also  see  evidence  of  adjustment  in  the  detailed  industry  data,  including  in  the 
manufacturing  sector. While  there  has  been  little  net  growth  in  either  aggregate  output  or 
exports from the manufacturing sector for some years, some parts of the industry have done 
quite well. Output of machinery and equipment and of metals have both trended higher over 
recent years, and exports of specialised mining-related and other machinery have increased, 
as  have  exports  in  some  other  categories  (Graph 3).  Many  of  these  are  areas  where 
Australia  does  have  a  comparative  advantage  and  where  value  added  is  high.  It  is  by 
focusing on these comparative advantages that we can best build a strong and successful 
manufacturing sector, while at the same time living with a high exchange rate. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Graph 3 
I  would  now  like  to  turn  to  the  second  broad  factor  that  has  helped  maintain  domestic 
balance during the once-in-a-century investment boom. And that is the increase in household 
saving. Since the mid 2000s, the household sector net saving ratio has risen from around 
zero to around 10 per cent (Graph 4). In today’s money this represents about an additional 
$90 billion that is saved, not spent, by households each year. 
 Graph 4 
Now I know that this increase in household savings has not been universally welcomed by 
the retail sector. It has caused difficulties for some businesses, including those that based 
their business models on a continuation of the earlier trends. But consider how the economy 
might have looked over the past few years had households spent an extra $90 billion each 
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
year. It is likely that there would have been significant overheating. The exchange rate would 
have been higher. There would have been more borrowing from the rest of the world. And 
both  inflation  and  interest  rates  would  have  been  higher.  I  suggest  that  these  are  not 
developments that would have been warmly welcomed by most in the community. 
So,  somewhat  ironically,  two  of  the  factors  that  have  created  difficult  challenges  for  many 
businesses over recent years – the high exchange rate and increased household savings – 
are  the  very  same  factors  that  have  been  critical  to  Australia’s  good  macroeconomic 
performance. Importantly, these factors have helped Australia to digest a huge investment 
boom  without  generating  substantial  imbalances  in  the  economy.  At  the  same  time,  these 
factors  have  prompted  significant  structural  change  which,  while  difficult,  is  critical  to 
achieving higher overall productivity and higher living standards. 
There is clearly a lot of change going on in the Australian economy at the moment. How you 
view this change depends critically upon where you stand. However, no matter what one’s 
perspective,  we  should  not  lose  sight  of  the  fact  that  maintaining  overall  macro  balance 
through this period of change has been a significant achievement. And it is an achievement 
that has benefited the entire community. 
The contribution of monetary policy 
So far I have discussed structural factors, but monetary policy has also played some role in 
helping maintain this overall internal balance. In particular, Australia’s credible medium-term 
inflation targeting framework has served us well through this period of change. 
It is important though to point out that monetary policy cannot make the various global factors 
driving  our  economy  go  away.  Monetary  policy  cannot,  nor  should  it  attempt  to,  prevent 
structural change from occurring. What we can do is deal as best we can with the hand that 
the global economy has dealt us. We can help ensure that aggregate demand and supply 
remain  in  broad  balance,  so  that  when  firms  are  making  employment,  investment  and 
production  decisions  they  can  do  so  with  reasonable  confidence  about  the  health  of  the 
overall  economy.  Importantly,  we  can  ensure  that  inflation  remains  low  and  stable  so  that 
uncertainty  about  the  overall  level  of  prices  is  not  added  to  the  list  of  things  that  the 
community has to worry about. 
Since November 2011, the Board of the Reserve Bank has lowered the cash rate six times, 
by a cumulative 1¾ percentage points. These reductions have brought the cash rate down to 
3 per cent, which is equal to the lowest level on record. Lending rates have also come down 
substantially, although a number are still above earlier lows given the general rise in bank 
funding costs that has occurred since the global financial crisis. 
Recently,  there  has  been  some  discussion  as  to  whether  these  low  rates  are  actually 
working.  This  type  of  discussion  is  not  surprising  given  that  there  are  lags  between  when 
monetary policy is changed and when the full effect is felt in the economy. It is not a matter of 
simply changing interest rates today and seeing an immediate response tomorrow. Another 
complication  is  that  the  environment  in  which  interest  rates  are  being  adjusted  is  not  the 
same from one interest rate phase to the next. As a result, the exact way that movements in 
interest rates are transmitted to the economy can change over time. 
All  this  means  that,  as  always,  we  need  to  monitor  things  very  closely.  At  the  moment 
though, the  available  evidence  does  suggest that  lower  interest rates  are  doing their  work 
broadly as expected. 
In  general,  the  initial  responses  to  a  loosening  of  monetary  policy  would  be  expected  to 
include stronger asset prices, improved conditions in the housing market, a lift in consumer 
confidence and a lower exchange rate. 
Much  of  this  does  appear  to  be  occurring.  Nationwide  measures  of  house  prices  have 
increased  by  around  4  per  cent  since  mid  last  year,  after  having  declined  for  around 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
18 months.  Home  lending  approvals  and  auction  clearance  rates  have  both  risen.  Equity 
prices  are  up  over  20  per  cent  since  the  middle  of  last  year.  And  the  level  of  consumer 
confidence is now well above its long-run average level (Graph 5). Despite what one often 
hears,  households  do  appear  to  be  feeling  better  about  both  their  finances  as  well  as 
Australia’s medium-term prospects. 
Graph 5 
 The  one  notable  exception  to  the  expected  responses  following  a  substantial  easing  of 
monetary policy is that there has been little movement in the exchange rate. However, this 
reflects the global factors that I talked about earlier, and the Reserve Bank has attempted to 
calibrate the setting of monetary policy to take account of this. 
Now, if the monetary transmission mechanism works broadly as it has in the past, then an 
improvement in consumer sentiment and higher asset prices should feed through, in time, to 
higher  spending  by  households.  There  are  some  signs,  albeit  still  tentative,  that  this  is 
beginning to occur. ABS data and the Bank’s liaison suggest slightly firmer retail spending 
over recent months than over the second part of last year, though conditions remain mixed 
across  the  industry.  There  are  also  signs  of  a  pick-up  in  the  forward  indicators  for  new 
dwelling  construction  across  many  areas  of  the  country.  In  addition,  a  number  of  labour 
market indicators, after having softened last year, have had a slightly firmer tone of late. 
Another critical element in the monetary transmission process is a pick-up in private business 
investment. This is often the last link in the chain, and typically follows increased confidence 
and  higher  spending.  Given  the  nature  of  the  investment  boom  we  are  currently 
experiencing, it is non-mining investment where we are looking for this pick-up to occur. As 
mining  investment  inevitably  peaks  and  then  gradually  declines,  a  critical  question  for  the 
outlook is the strength of this expected pick-up in non-mining investment. 
We cannot know the answer to this question yet. What we do know is that other parts of the 
transmission mechanism appear to be working broadly in line with our expectations and that 
there are some tentative signs of a lift in investment intentions outside the resources sector. 
The most noteworthy of these was the capital expenditure data published by the ABS a few 
weeks  back,  which  show  that  firms  expected  to  increase  spending  on  non-mining 
construction and on machinery and equipment investment in the next financial year. Whether 
the  increases  will  be  sufficient  to  offset  the  expected  lower  levels  of  mining  investment  is 
something that we will be watching very carefully over the months ahead. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
So  let  me  conclude  by  restating  the  main  message  that  I  started  with  –  that  is,  that  the 
Australian  economy  has  adjusted  pretty  well  to  some  very  large  shocks  in  the  global 
economy  over  recent  years.  We  have  been  able  to  maintain  a  high  degree  of  internal 
balance,  while  at  the  same  time  accommodating  significant  change  in  the  structure  of  the 
economy. Businesses right across the spectrum, including in the manufacturing sector, are 
adjusting  to  the  new  realities.  This  adjustment  is  often  difficult,  but  it  does  hold  out  the 
prospect  of  higher  productivity  and  higher  living  standards.  Monetary  policy  has  played  an 
important  supporting  role  in  this  adjustment  by  keeping  inflation  low  and  stable  and  the 
Reserve Bank of Australia is committed to continuing to play that role. 
Thank you.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
