François Groepe: The role of chartered accountants in South Africa’s 
economic growth and development 
Address  by  Mr  François  Groepe,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  at 
IRBA’s Public Practice Examination Function, Johannesburg, 9 April 2013. 
 Strength of auditing and reporting;  
Regulation of securities exchanges; and  
Efficacy of corporate boards.  
Introduction  
I wish to thank the Independent Regulatory Board for Auditors (IRBA) for inviting me to speak 
and to be part of this auspicious occasion at which the top ten candidates in the most recent 
Public Practice Examination (PPE) are honoured.  
Allow me to extend my heartfelt congratulations to each of the top ten candidates.  
In  the  most  recent  World  Economic  Forum’s  Global  Competiveness  Report,  South  Africa 
achieved  a  country  ranking  of  52nd  out  of  144  countries  that  were  ranked,  and  beat  stiff 
competition to be ranked number one in the following areas:  
• 
• 
• 
It is therefore evident that South Africa’s auditing and accounting professionals are among 
the best in the world, and hence you should feel a deep sense of pride to be admitted to a 
profession, that is not only held in high regard in South Africa but very clearly throughout the 
world. You are fully justified to feel proud to use the designation CA (SA) – and so do all of 
us gathered here today share in that pride.  
I  wish,  however,  to  remind  you  of  a  quote  by  John  F  Kennedy,  “To  those  whom  much  is 
given, much is expected.” As newly qualified chartered accountants many of you have had 
the  benefit  of  good  schooling  and  tertiary  education.  You  have  further  benefitted  from  the 
investment in you and opportunities created for you by this society. This privilege imposes 
upon you a moral obligation to plough back into both, your immediate communities and our 
society  at  large  by  ensuring  that  you  adhere  to,  and  promote  the  high  ethical  and 
professional standards of your profession.  
I further wish to appeal to you to retain your sense of curiosity and eagerness to learn. The 
attainment of this qualification does not imply that you have acquired all there is to know. I 
would sincerely encourage you to continue on the path of learning, whether it is the pursuit of 
further formal qualifications or more informal modes of learning. I would also encourage you 
to broaden your knowledge base by studying other disciplines as it would add further depth 
and  perspective  to  your  analysis,  understanding  and  knowledge  of  various  issues,  and 
therefore  should  improve  the  quality  of  solutions  you  develop  for  the  evermore  complex 
problems that we face.  
I implore you to be critical thinkers. In your career, you will encounter those that will tell you 
“well this has been the way we have always done things around here”. Yes, it is indeed so 
that one does not fix something that is not broken, but simply continuing to do something in 
the same manner in an unquestioning way means that opportunities to come up with smarter 
and better ways to do things may be lost.  
You  should  also  continue  to  contribute  to  the  debate  and  continuous  improvement  of  the 
international  standards  and  frameworks.  Andy  Haldane,  Executive  Director  for  Financial 
Stability at the Bank of England, in a speech in December 2011 to a conference, hosted by 
the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales, for example, questioned the 
appropriateness of fair value accounting for the banking sector. He claimed that, “historically, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
fair value accounting principles have gained ground when the going has been good, and lost 
it  when  it  has  got  tough.  …During  the  downswing,  fair  value  principles  are  rolled  back.” 
Similarly, Brenton Saunders a director at an asset management firm in a recent article in a 
local financial magazine questioned the appropriateness of full fair value accounting and the 
mark-to-market of reserves and resources of mining companies.  
I shall refrain from expressing an opinion on the appropriateness of fair value accounting, as 
we  know  that  other  conventions  such  as  amortised  cost  valuation  also  have  their  own 
shortcomings, particularly when it comes, for example to the recognition of interest rate risk. I 
do, however, believe that both Andy Haldane and Brenton Saunders touch on issues that are 
worth debating and I would like to see far more robust public discourse by a wider range of 
stakeholders as to both the appropriateness but also the possible unintended consequences 
of some of the international reporting standards and frameworks.  
A  further  example  of  critical  thinking  would  be  that  you,  as  new  members  of  the  auditing 
profession  ask  whether  auditing  firms,  despite  being  private  bodies  but  given  their  public 
function, in the interest of greater accountability and transparency, should not fully disclose 
their  audited  financial  statements  regardless  of  the  fact  that  this  is  not  an  explicit  legal 
requirement.  
The global economy  
On the global front a number of concerns remain. Most recently, the euro-zone crisis flared 
up once again as Cyprus became the fifth European country to receive a bail-out. Cyprus is a 
relatively  small  country  with  a  population  of  about  1.1  million  but  interestingly,  it  has  a 
banking sector with assets approximately seven times its GDP.  
The  initial  bail-out  proposal  offered  on  16  March  2013  would  have  required  all  depositors 
(including those with balances below €100,000) to contribute a once-off levy of 10 per cent to 
raise  €5.8  billion.  This  proposal  was  rejected  by  the  Cypriot  Parliament  mainly  due  to  the 
“bailing-in” of small deposit-holders and thus, undermining the deposit insurance guarantee, 
which  is  a  central  tenet  of  their  banking  system.  The  final  agreement  reached  entailed, 
amongst  others,  a  substantial  haircut  to  be  imposed  on  deposits  above  €100,000,  the 
resolution of Laiki Bank into a “good” and “bad” bank with full protection of deposits under 
€100,000,  and  the  “good”  bank  being  absorbed  by  the  Bank  of  Cyprus.  The  rest  of  the 
Cyprus banking sector would be unaffected by the resolution process.  
The  Cyprian  banks  reopened  on  28  March  2013  and  one  hopes  that  the  authorities  can 
sufficiently restore public and investor trust in their banking sector so that they are able to 
quickly  lift  the  capital  controls  without  contagion  spreading  throughout  Europe,  as  such 
contagion may result in spill-over to the rest of the world.  
Whilst in the case of Greece the concept of private sector involvement was introduced, the 
Cyprus  package  involved  the  „bailing-in‟  of  bank  creditors  and  certain  categories  of 
depositors as part of the rescue effort. This may yet have wider unintended consequences, 
as it may contribute towards undermining of public confidence in vulnerable banks and also 
lead to outflows from the more risky peripheral euro-zone countries. This approach may also 
deter  investors  from  returning  to  periphery  bank  debt  markets,  and  has  the  potential  of 
reversing some of the recent improvements in wholesale funding conditions in that region.  
These developments must be seen against a euro-zone economy that contracted by 2.3 per 
cent in the final quarter of 2012 and that is expected to remain in recession during the first 
half of this year. Furthermore, unemployment is at a historically elevated level of 12 per cent. 
There  exists  the  real  possibility  that  cyclical  unemployment  could  evolve  into  structural 
unemployment,  while  the  social  implications  of  persistent  high  unemployment  levels, 
especially among the youth, in the euro-zone should not be underestimated.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The domestic economy  
South  Africa’s  economic  growth  accelerated  to  2.1  per  cent  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  2012 
compared  to  the  1.2  per  cent  recorded  in  the  third  quarter.  Despite  this  improvement,  the 
growth rate continues to remain significantly below the potential output growth rate of 3.5 per 
cent.  
The manufacturing sector recorded a robust growth rate of 5 per cent in the final quarter of 
2012.  However,  the  primary  sector  contracted  for  a  second  successive  quarter  and  this 
remains a matter of some concern. Although the primary sector have shrunk significantly in 
the last three decades and now contribute less than 12 per cent to GDP, the agricultural and 
mining  sectors remain  important  due to  their  significant  contribution  to exports,  and  hence 
the Balance of Payments situation. These sectors furthermore have relatively higher labour 
absorption rates.  
The picture is however not only doom and gloom. South Africa’s growth rates are expected 
to increase to 2.7 per cent in 2013 and to 3.7 per cent in 2014. While seemingly not very 
robust growth rates, it is important that these are considered against the challenging global 
economic climate.  
The current account deficit widened in 2012, to an average of 6.3 per cent of GDP compared 
to 3.4 per cent of GDP in the prior year. South Africa’s trade volumes in 2012 declined to 
below  pre-crisis  levels  –  resulting  in  the  largest  deficit  since  2008.  Export  volumes  have 
unfortunately not responded fully to the significant rise in export prices which have more than 
doubled over the last decade. The deterioration in South Africa’s international trade has in 
turn acted as a drag on domestic economic growth.  
Recent  analysis  by  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank  shows  that  South  Africa’s  export 
performance has been affected by, inter alia, the following factors:  
(i) 
The decline in the contribution of the gold mining sector;  
Binding constraints related to infrastructure bottlenecks;  
(ii) 
Skills shortages and mismatch;  
(iii) 
(iv) 
Competition  from  low-cost  production  bases  which  are  export  oriented  in  many 
emerging market economies; and  
Sluggish growth in South Africa’s key trading partners.  
(v) 
If we therefore wish to remedy the current account deficit in the longer term we would need 
to  address  these  factors  comprehensively.  It  is  therefore  clear  that  we  would  need  to 
undertake  significant  structural  adjustments,  improve  skills  and  human  development,  and 
labour  productivity  to  name  but  a  few  in  our  quest  to  grow  exports  and  in  the  process 
contribute towards lowering unemployment levels.  
The  recent  depreciation  in  the  exchange  rate  provides  an  opportunity  for  South  African 
exporters 
in 
competitiveness  requires 
in  check  and  productivity 
enhancements are achieved.  
to  become  more  competitive.  However,  a  sustainable 
that  cost  pressures  are  kept 
improvement 
The role of chartered accountants  
From the above it is clear that we face many challenges in the years ahead of us. The global 
recovery may continue to take several years before output gaps are closed. Domestically we 
have significant structural challenges to overcome, but I believe that all of us, including the 
accounting profession, have an important role to play in this regard.  
The profession can make a tangible contribution towards ensuring that our businesses and 
public  sectors  are  appropriately  capacitated  to  deal  with  their  many  challenges,  using  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
skills  and  knowledge  that  members  acquire  during  their  academic  and  practical  training, 
including analytical capability, professionalism, integrity, understanding complexity, etc.  
It  is  also  important  that  members  of  the  profession  respond  positively  to  the  call  of  public 
service.  Members  should  not  merely  become  service  providers  to  the  public  sector,  they 
should  also  join  the  ranks  of  the  public  service  in  order  to  address  the  shortage  of  skills 
within that sector. In this context, they have much to contribute to root out corruption, design 
monitoring  and  early  warning  systems  so  as  to  ensure  improved  service  delivery,  institute 
controls  that  would  minimise  instances  of  wasteful  and  fruitless  expenditure,  and  design 
reports  so  that  politicians,  officials,  and  other  stakeholders  have  access  to  accurate  and 
timely information. This should contribute to improved decision-making and policy outcomes.  
In time, the baton will pass to you and you will assume leadership positions both within the 
professional service firms, but also in the private and the public sectors. I do hope that you 
will do  your best to strive to uphold not only the professional and ethical standards that is 
expected of you, but that you would in fact improve it further and ensure that in the process 
you tirelessly work towards both transforming the profession but also ensuring that it grows in 
an inclusive way.  
Conclusion  
In  order  for  us  as  a  nation  to  move  forward  it  is  important  that  we  all  own  up  to  the 
responsibility that we have to ensure that South Africa reaches its full potential and, that it 
thrives and succeeds at all levels.  
As newly qualified chartered accountants many of you have a particular contribution to make 
to  improve  our  competitiveness  and  performance,  both  domestically  and  within  the  global 
context and in that way help to improve the lives of all our people.  
Once again, allow me to congratulate you on your outstanding achievement and be assured 
that we will be closely watching your progress.  
I thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
