Andrew G Haldane: Turning the red tape tide 
Remarks by Mr Andrew G Haldane, Executive Director, Financial Stability, Bank of England, 
at the International Financial Law Review Dinner, London, 10 April 2013. 
 (David 
(1985)).  This  history-dependence  may 
Regulatory  and  legal  frameworks  share  common  roots.  Both  are  complex,  evolutionary 
systems, shaped by history. They are the result of a set of well-intentioned historical actions 
by  technicians  charged  with  filling  cracks,  creating  certainty,  shaping  incentives  for  the 
common good. Both legal and regulatory frameworks have many of the characteristics of a 
classic public good. 
But  the  cumulative  consequences  of  even  well-intentioned  actions  may  not  always  deliver 
outcomes which necessarily serve society well. That is because such actions are typically a 
response  to  events  and  circumstance.  The  resulting  frameworks  have  a  history  of  path-
dependence 
“lock-in”  sub-optimal 
technologies, such as QWERTY keyboards and VHS video-recorders. 
The financial regulatory framework may be another example of a locked-in technology. The 
events  which  have  shaped  the  evolution  of  financial  regulation  include  crises,  scandals, 
innovation  and  liberalisation.  Each  has  elicited  a  response,  typically  the  addition  of  a  new 
regulatory layer. The cumulative consequence has been a regulatory tide which has tended 
to flow in only one direction – towards a lengthier, more complex rulebook. 
In this respect, financial regulation shares many evolutionary characteristics with elements of 
the legal framework – for example, the tax code. It too has been responsive to events and 
circumstance  including  crises,  scandals,  innovation  and  liberalisation.  And  for  many  of  the 
same  reasons,  it  too  has  resulted  in  a  rising  tide  of  rulebook  complexity.  The  facts  are 
striking.  
In the UK, the Banking Act (1979) covered 52 sections and 75 pages. By the mid-1980s, the 
Financial Services  Act  (1986)  and  an  updated  Banking  Act  (1987)  had  expanded  primary 
legislation  to  110 sections  (106  pages)  and  212  sections  (299  pages)  respectively.  The 
Financial Services and Markets Act (2000) took this to 433 sections or 321 pages. And the 
new  Financial  Services  Act  (2012)  takes  this  to  695  sections  or  534  pages  –  a  tenfold 
increase in primary legislation in a generation. 
In  the  US,  the  picture  is  no  less  dramatic.  Contrast  the  legislative  responses  in  the  two 
largest financial crises of the past century – the Great Depression and the Great Recession. 
The  Great  Depression  spawned  the  Glass-Steagall  Act  (1933)  –  perhaps  the  single  most 
important piece of financial legislation of the 20th century. That ran to a mere 37 pages. More 
recently, the Great Recession has spawned the Dodd-Frank Act (2010). It runs to 848 pages 
or more than 20 Glass-Steagalls. Once completed, Dodd-Frank might run to 30,000 pages of 
rulemaking. 
The tax code has followed a similar evolutionary trajectory. In the UK in 1997, Tolley’s Tax 
Guide ran to around 5,000 pages. By 2009, it had reached over 11,500 pages; just two years 
later, 17,795 pages. That is a threefold rise in less than 15 years. 
In the US, the Federal tax system is celebrating its centenary. In 1913, US Federal tax rules 
summed to 400 pages. By 1945, this had risen to 8,200 pages, by 1974 to 19,500 pages and 
by 2000 to 46,900 pages. In 2013, US Federal tax rules amounted to 74,000 pages. That is 
almost a two hundred-fold increase over a century.   
Viewed through the lens of history, it is not difficult to explain this evolution. As cracks have 
emerged  in  the  plaster  –  for  example,  regulatory  and  tax  loopholes  –  they  have  been 
papered over. Like a bad painter and decorator, new layers have been applied to support the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
layers below. These were rational responses to real problems. And for a time they will have 
filled cracks, reduced uncertainties, corrected incentives.  
Yet this evolutionary path leads inexorably towards a framework – whether regulatory or tax – 
which  is  a  patchwork  of  make-do-and-mend.  History  locks  in  the  idiosyncrasies  and 
complexities of the past, generating a steadily rising tide of red tape. As the regulatory and tax 
codes  attest,  the  resulting  frameworks  can  be  Byzantine  in  their  complexity  and  Heath-
Robinson in their design. For three distinct reasons, this patchwork may not serve society well. 
First, maintaining such a framework is a high-cost activity. In financial regulation, it makes for 
a steadily-rising standing army of regulators and compliance officers. In the US in the 1930s, 
there  was  roughly  one  regulator  for  every  three  banks.  Today,  there  are  roughly  three 
regulators for every US bank. In Europe, the cost of implementing Basel III is estimated at 
over  70,000  full-time  private  sector  jobs  (Harle et al (2010)).  In  the  US,  the  cost  of  Dodd-
Frank is estimated at tens of thousands of jobs. As these resources might otherwise have 
been profitably deployed in other industries, these are deadweight opportunity costs borne by 
society.  
The direct and opportunity costs of the tax system are no less great. The Taxpayer Advocate 
Service recently estimated that US households and companies spend as much as 6.1 billion 
hours  per  year  in  filling  out  tax  returns.  Others  have  estimated  the  annual  cost  of  tax 
compliance in the US at around 1% of annual GDP (GAO (2005)) – or about $160 billion in 
2012. Similar estimates are found in Europe.  
Second, complex frameworks tend ultimately not to solve the problems for which they were a 
response. They may be ineffective. In filling old cracks, complex rulebooks tend to open up 
opportunities  for  new  ones  to  emerge.  Indeed,  they  may  increase  the  likelihood  of  new 
loopholes or workarounds emerging. Using complex rules to control a complex environment 
carries the risk of chasing one’s tail in ever-decreasing circles (Gigerenzer (2007)). 
It  is  not  difficult  to  spot  this  tail-chasing  problem  in  the  financial  regulation  sphere.  For 
example, the shift to a highly-complex risk-weighting system for bank assets has resulted in 
the average amount of capital banks assign to these assets halving over the past 20 years. 
Why? Because complex rules have generated both the incentives and the means to exploit 
regulatory  loopholes.  That  is  why  simple  measures  of  bank  leverage,  untainted  by  such 
complexity, were ten times better at predicting banking failure during the crisis than complex 
regulatory alternatives (Haldane and Madouros (2012)). 
What is true of financial regulation is true too of tax. For example, studies have analysed the 
incidence of tax evasion and avoidance across different countries. They have found that the 
single  most  important  determinant  of  tax  evasion  is  often  the  complexity  of  the  tax  code 
(Richardson  (2006)).  The  greater  the  complexity,  the  more  numerous  the  loopholes,  the 
greater the incentive and means to exploit them. 
Third,  complex  regulatory  frameworks  tend  also  to  be  inequitable.  They  advantage  those 
best able to exploit the cracks, navigate the uncertainty, squeeze through the loopholes. This 
tends  to  be  those  with  the  deepest  pockets  who  can  afford  the  most  sophisticated  risk-
modeller, the slickest tax accountant. Complexity, in other words, acts like a regressive tax.  
That is why big banks (using in-house complex models) typically hold far less capital than 
smaller  banks  (using  simplified,  standardised  alternatives)  even  when  their  underlying 
exposures are identical. It is one reason why Warren Buffet claimed to pay a lower tax rate 
than his secretary. And it is why, over the recent past, regulatory and tax arbitrage have both 
become  high-growth  industries.  They  are  toxic  exhaust  fumes  from  the  Heath-Robinson 
vehicles history has created.  
If  complex  frameworks  come  with  economic  and  social  costs  –  inefficient,  ineffective  and 
inequitable  –  why  has  society  not  done  more  to  tackle  them?  Resistance  is  strong, 
particularly among those who gain most from squeezing through the loopholes. There is also 
an  in-built  professional  inertia  among  regulators,  lawyers  and  tax  accountants  with  large 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
amounts  of  human  capital  invested  in  complexity.  In  removing  complexities,  society’s  gain 
would be their loss. 
Nonetheless, in the light of the financial crisis, we may be nearing an inflection point, where 
the societal pendulum begins to swing in the opposite direction. There are certainly signs of 
the  red tape tide  beginning  to  turn  in  the  area  of financial  regulation.  A growing  chorus of 
concern has emerged recently about complexities and inconsistencies in banking regulation. 
Earlier  this  year,  the  G20  Finance  Ministers  and  Central  Bank  Governors  committed 
themselves  to  addressing  this  problem.  So  too  has  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking 
Supervision. 
This is a good start. But, at this stage, it is no more than that. One risk is that the regulatory 
inclination  may  be  to  tackle  this  problem  slowly  and  piecemeal,  to  unwrap  the  onion  one 
layer at a time, to avoid throwing the baby out with the bathwater. As Axel Leijonhufvud once 
remarked to me in a different context, while the bathwater in this case may be worth reusing, 
the baby would never have come of anything.  
Thin-slicing reform, whether regulation or tax, condemns us to failure. Peeling the onion one 
layer at a time tends to end in tears. It is only by removing all of the old layers that the painter 
and decorator can achieve a robust finish. Removing these one by one will simply reveal old 
cracks, open up old loopholes. Tax reform has been successful when it has recognised that 
fact and has started simple and afresh. Regulatory reform is no different.  
For  financial  regulation,  that  means  asking  some  big  questions.  Is  risk-weighting  of  bank 
assets worth the costs? Are bank’s internal risk models more regulatory trouble than they are 
worth? Does complexity unduly advantage large incumbents over small new entrants? Are 
armies of supervisors and compliance officers a sign of success or failure? These questions 
should form the new regulatory battleground.  
This could transform the regulatory framework, for the simpler, for the better. It could do the 
same for taxation. Some will argue that we face a Canute-like task in turning this tide – and, 
like Canute, that it will be in vain. But, unlike the seas, this complex tide is ours to turn. With 
the economy struggling for breath, the time has never been better. 
References 
David, P (1985), “Clio and the Economics of QWERTY.” American Economic Review, 77(2): 
332–337. 
Gigerenzer, G (2007), “Gut Feelings: Short cuts to Better Decision Making”, Allen Lane. 
Government  Accountability  Office  (2005),  “Summary  of  Estimates  of  the  Costs  of  the 
Federal Tax System”, available online at http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d05878.pdf.  
Haldane, A and Madouros, V (2012), “The Dog and the Frisbee”, paper presented at the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City’s 36th economic policy symposium. 
Härle et al (2010), “Basel III and European banking: Its impact, how banks might respond, 
and the challenges of implementation” McKinsey & Company. 
Richardson, G (2006), “Determinants of tax evasion: A cross-country investigation”, Journal 
of International Accounting, Auditing and Taxation 15 (2006) 150–169. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
