Mario Draghi: Introductory remarks at the French Assemblée Nationale 
Speech  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  French 
Assemblée Nationale, Paris, 26 June 2013. 
 Presidents, 
Honourable Members of Parliament, 
I would like to thank you very warmly for having invited me to address this historic chamber. 
As  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  it  is  an  honour  to  speak  in  a  nation  that  has 
done so much to promote and further the cause of European integration. 
It was exactly 300 years ago, in 1713, that the Abbé de Saint-Pierre presented his Project for 
Perpetual Peace, one of the first visions for a union between European nations. 
That this vision emerged into reality is thanks in large part to generations of French thinkers 
and  pioneers,  like  Jean-Jacques  Rousseau,  Victor  Hugo,  and  Aristide  Briand.  It  is  also 
thanks  to  the makers  of  the  modern  European Union  like  Robert  Schuman,  Jean  Monnet, 
and Jacques Delors. 
In other words, this country has played a key role in building the peaceful, open and united 
Europe we see today. 
But as you know, the EU, and the euro area in particular, is faced with important questions 
about its direction. It needs a new consensus on how to move forward. 
I am confident that France will again play a key role in that process. 
In my introductory remarks today, I would like to focus on three topics: the ECB’s monetary 
policy, growth and adjustment in the euro area, and the progress towards building a deeper 
economic and monetary union. 
I am here today to present the ECB’s views, but also to listen and to learn. I look forward to 
hearing your opinions and taking your questions. 
The ECB’s monetary policy 
Let me begin with the ECB’s monetary policy. 
The  ECB’s  mandate  is  to  maintain  price  stability,  which  is  essential  to  support  long-term 
growth, defend citizens’ purchasing power and maintain sustainable and high employment. In 
order  to  deliver  our  mandate,  the  ECB  has  done  a  great  deal  to  support  the  euro  area 
economy. 
First, we have reduced our main interest rate to the historic low of 0.5%. 
Second, we have introduced a series of measures to ensure that banks can pass on these 
low interest rates to borrowers in the real economy. 
These measures include allowing banks to borrow as much liquidity from the ECB as they 
need; expanding the range of collateral they can use to access that liquidity; intervening in 
bond markets that were malfunctioning, like the sovereign bond market or the covered bond 
market;  and  launching  two  three-year  Long-Term  Refinancing  Operations  (LTROs),  which 
injected more than 1 trillion euro into the euro area banking system. 
Overall, our balance sheet increased from just below 1.5 trillion euro before the crisis to more 
than 3 trillion euro at its peak. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Our measures are primarily focused on banks because, in the euro area, bank lending is the 
main channel through which firms and households get access to finance. 
Around  three  quarters  of  firms’  external  financing  comes  from  banks,  compared  with  only 
around  one  quarter  in  the  United  States.  Supporting  the  banking  system  is  therefore 
essential  to  support  growth  in  the  euro  area  –  and  to  fulfil  our  mandate  to  maintain  price 
stability. 
More recently, the ECB has acted to remove unfounded fears about the future integrity of our 
monetary  union.  These  fears  were  creating  severe  turbulence  in  financial  markets  and 
preventing our low interest rates from reaching the countries where they were needed most. 
As a result, we saw a risk of a widespread credit crunch in these countries. Questions over 
fiscal sustainability and growing market distrust were starting to spill over into their respective 
banking sectors. The effects for growth and employment would have been severe. 
Indeed,  investors  were  suddenly  losing  confidence  that  the  euro  area  could  survive  in  its 
current  composition.  The  prospect  that  claims  on  governments  and  private  companies  in 
certain countries could not be discharged in euros had become a possibility. 
Our  response  was  to  introduce  the  programme  of  Outright  Monetary  Transactions  (OMT), 
which allows for ex ante unlimited interventions in sovereign debt markets. OMT has been 
effective in restoring market functioning and trust in the euro area. 
For  example,  since  the  OMT  announcement,  bond  markets  have  steadied,  providing 
discipline  without  becoming  destructive.  Spreads  on  long-term  bonds  for  Spain,  Italy  and 
Ireland  have  declined  by  around  150–250  basis  points,  and  for  Portugal  by  almost 
500 basis points. 
And  this  has  helped  reduce financial  fragmentation  within  the  euro  area,  as  shown  by  the 
best indicator we have for fragmentation, the level of Target balances. These have declined 
by 285 billion euros, or 25%, since the peak last year. France, like all other member states, 
has benefited significantly from this stabilisation. 
In  short,  the  ECB  has  been  very  active  in  responding  to  the  crisis.  We  have  robustly 
defended the stability of our monetary union and therefore of our money. And we stand ready 
to act again when needed. 
However,  it  is  important  to  acknowledge  that  there  are  limits  to  what  monetary  policy  can 
achieve. This is not a question of the scope of our mandate. It is fundamentally about what 
different institutions are empowered to do. 
One pertinent example is the current shortage of credit for many households and small- and 
medium-sized  enterprises.  Credit  provision  requires  funding,  capital  and  a  positive  risk 
assessment.  The  central  bank  can  help  ensure  funding  and  address  macroeconomic  risk. 
But it cannot provide capital, nor can it affect banks’ assessment of the creditworthiness of 
individual borrowers. 
Similarly, monetary policy cannot create real economic growth. If growth is stalling because 
the  economy  is  not  producing  enough  or  because  firms  have  lost  competitiveness,  this  is 
beyond the power of the central bank to fix. 
Yet, the euro area needs sustainable growth. 
There  are  currently  more  than  19  million  people  unemployed  in  the  euro  area.  Almost  a 
quarter of young people are out of work. Such high levels of joblessness are a tragedy. 
Moreover, a weak economy means fewer taxpayers and lower revenues. This puts pressure 
on public finances, and ultimately on our social models. 
So what is the best way to achieve the growth Europe needs? 
Let me turn to this issue now and share with you some reflections on this subject. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Growth and adjustment in the euro area 
Some euro area countries have in the past relied on debt to support growth and fund social 
spending. But this path has led them to a difficult situation today. They have ended up with 
high public debts while growth has steadily fallen. 
In this country, for instance, public debt has risen from around 20% of GDP in 1980 to over 
90% of GDP today. In that time, annual GDP growth averaged 2.3% in the 1980s, 1.9% in 
the 1990s, and 1.8% in the 2000s up to the crisis. 
This suggests that, for all euro area countries, a new approach is needed. An approach that 
can  deliver  growth  and  jobs,  and  sustain  social  models,  without  creating  an  unsustainable 
debt burden for future generations. 
In my view, this requires two complementary responses. 
The first response is to ensure that fiscal consolidation, which is necessary to contain debt 
levels, is made as growth-friendly as possible. 
For instance, relying less on tax increases would help sustain citizens’ disposable income. 
Prioritising capital investment over current spending would do more to lay the foundations for 
future growth. 
Structural  fiscal  reforms,  for  example  to  pension  systems,  would  also  help  support  fiscal 
sustainability without negative effects on the economy today. 
The  second  response  is  to  raise  competitiveness  and  increase  the  underlying  productive 
capacity of our economies. 
Here, the frontier is reforms that target the structure of the economy. These include reducing 
barriers  to  entry  for  new  firms  and  young  people,  and  removing  burdens  on  business  like 
complex tax and labour laws or distortionary regulations. Reforms to the labour market are 
also essential to create the highest possible opportunities for employment. 
We  are  already  seeing  progress  on  rebalancing  in  the  euro  area:  unit  labour  costs  are 
coming  down  in  countries  where  they  had  grown  excessively;  current  account  deficits  are 
narrowing where there had been large imbalances in the past; and export growth is generally 
picking up in countries under strain. 
But in many euro area countries, the gap the between wages and productivity is still out of 
line  with  competitiveness.  To  increase  employment,  this  gap  should  be  closed  and  all  the 
many  policy  levers  that  can  contribute  to  this  should  be  used.  Changes  to  two-tier 
employment systems that protect insiders and harm outsiders are one such lever. 
Let us not forget that those who suffer the most from unreformed labour markets are often 
young people, as evidenced by the very high levels of youth employment today. I therefore 
welcome the joint initiative of the French and German Labour ministers to tackle this issue. 
This  underscores  an  important  point  about  reforms:  by  restoring  competitiveness  and 
creating  opportunities  for  a  wider  range  of  people,  they  benefit  the  many,  not  the  few. 
Reforms are an expression of solidarity between citizens. Solidarity across countries is also 
important, but it would be meaningless without solidarity within countries. 
Building a stronger EMU 
What  role  can  the  euro  area  as  a  whole  play  in  supporting  growth  and  stability  across 
Europe? 
Governments  are  today reflecting  deeply  on  this  question. They  are  considering  what  was 
missing in the original design of Economic and Monetary Union (EMU): what responsibilities 
need to be shared at the European level, and what not, to make EMU function effectively. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
In my view, this debate should be driven by a single question: how can we best protect the 
vital interests of euro area citizens? And where the answer involves transferring sovereignty 
to the European level, we should not hesitate to do so. 
The best example of this is Banking Union. 
Banking  Union  is  essential  to  ensure  that  we  make  permanent  the  progress  made  in 
reintegrating financial markets; that financial conditions in both core and periphery countries 
return to normal; and that our monetary union becomes truly single again. 
It  has  two  indispensable  elements:  a  strong  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM)  and  a 
strong Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM). 
A strong system of common supervision is key to increase confidence in the health of euro 
area  banks,  which  has  been  damaged  due  to  supervisory  failures  in  the  past.  Progress  is 
already  well  underway  here,  and  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  will  take  over 
supervision one year after the legislation is adopted. 
But  to  ensure  that  common  supervision  is  credible,  it  needs  to  be  accompanied  by  a 
mechanism that can wind down failing banks without causing financial instability. This is why 
we need a Single Resolution Mechanism. And it needs to have a strong European dimension 
to be able to deal effectively with large, cross-border banks. 
But Banking Union is not the only example of where closer union is needed. Ultimately, the 
euro area needs to be drawing closer in all fields of economic policy. 
The recent call from the leaders of France and Germany for closer economic union shows 
that  this  message  is  being  understood.  But  it  is  important  that  form  is  fully  aligned  with 
substance. In my view, a true economic union means three things. 
First,  it  means  every  country  ensuring  its  national  economy  functions  properly,  without 
external  imbalances  and  high  unemployment.  We  cannot  have  a  strong  economic  union 
without strong national economies. 
Second, it means transferring some sovereignty over decision-making to the European level 
– accepting decisions that are made for the good of the euro area as a whole, even if, at that 
moment in time, individual countries may disagree with them. 
Third, it means applying the same rules to all members of monetary union. This is not only a 
condition of fairness between countries, but also a pre-condition for deeper integration. Only 
if  there  is  trust  that  each  member  will  play  by  the  rules  can  a  union  of  mutual  solidarity 
become possible. 
For  these  reasons,  moving  towards  closer  economic  union  also  requires  an  equivalent 
deepening  of  political  union.  Greater  authority  at  the  European  level  must  be  matched  by 
greater  democratic  legitimacy.  And  here  both  the  European  Parliament  and  national 
parliaments have a key role to play. 
As  Herman  van  Rompuy  has  reminded  us,  national  parliaments  have  become  EU 
institutions. 
Conclusion 
Let me now conclude. 
The euro area has made much progress in recent years, but it still faces many challenges. 
Solving them requires EU institutions and national governments to work in concert. 
The ECB has done as much as it can to stabilise markets and support the economy. Now 
governments and parliaments need to do all they can to raise growth potential, strengthen 
competitiveness and build a stronger, more stable EMU. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
I was impressed to learn that, back in 1871, Victor Hugo called in this Assembly for a United 
States of Europe. 
France today can be equally ambitious in taking the euro area forward. 
Thank you for your attention.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
