Daniel Mminele: Global liquidity, monetary policy and communication 
Address by Mr Daniel Mminele, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 
2013 Pictet annual global outlook, Johannesburg, 12 August 2013. 
 Introduction  
1. 
Good  evening  ladies  and  gentlemen.  Thank  you  to  Pictet  for  inviting  me  to  speak  at  this 
year’s annual global outlook, which is taking place against the background of an environment 
that continues to be uncertain.  
I  was  requested  to  speak  about  the  “Outlook  for  the  SA  economy”  as  your  programme 
suggests. I have taken a bit of liberty, and hope I will be forgiven, as a lot has already been 
said on this matter in the last couple of weeks by my colleagues in various speeches, and the 
Monetary  Policy  Committee  (MPC)  meeting  took  place  less  than  a month  ago  –  so  I shall 
only  briefly  touch  on  this  towards  the  end  of  my  remarks.  I  thought  that  I  should  discuss 
some topical issues relating to global liquidity, monetary policy and communication.  
The title of the speech we just heard – “The end of cheap dollars” – is certainly a very apt 
description of what the financial markets across the globe have been seized  with over the 
past few months. “Cheap dollars” have become a feature of financial markets since the onset 
of  the  global  financial  crisis.  Although  the  “Greenspan  put”  initially  became  the  “Bernanke 
call” at the start of the global crisis, this was quickly transformed into a “Bernanke put” as 
quantitative easing gained traction. In addition to quantitative easing, the concept of forward 
guidance,  whilst  not  completely  new,  gained  increasing  traction  albeit  in  different  forms. 
Across the developed world, forward guidance was used by policymakers to inject additional 
stimulus as interest rates reached the lower bound. Such actions signalled a change in the 
reaction function of central banks – that is, to keep rates low for longer. Last year, the Fed for 
the first time employed the practice of numerical thresholds as guidance to markets about the 
possible  future  path  of  monetary  policy,  the  issue  having  featured  prominently  in 
deliberations  at  the  annual  Jackson  Hole  conference  a  month  earlier.  BoE  Governor  Mark 
Carney  just  last  week for  the first time  linked  the  monetary  policy  outlook  in  the  UK  to  an 
unemployment threshold and pledged to expand stimulus if needed. ECB President Draghi’s 
pledge  to  “do  whatever  it  takes”  within  the  mandate  of  the  ECB  was  yet  another  form  of 
forward guidance. In Japan, Prime Minister Shinzo Abe introduced an ambitious programme 
to deal with Japans deep-seated macroeconomic problems, which similarly has an element 
of  forward  guidance  and  quantative  easing.  Although  we  may  now  be  close  to  the  period 
when the Fed starts to taper its asset purchases, in the rest of the advanced world, it seems 
that such accommodative monetary policy is likely to stay for a while still.  
Global economic and liquidity developments  
2. 
The question is whether the markets and the global economy can survive without Bernanke’s 
put?  Or  have  markets  become  hooked  on  central  bank  money?  Despite  the  substantial 
stimulus  provided  by  central  banks  and  fiscal  authorities,  the  global  outlook  has  improved 
only  marginally  and  there  are  questions  as  to  its  sustainability.  The  euro  zone  remains  in 
recession, and emerging market economies, which were the engines of growth through the 
crisis, are slowing, particularly China and economies in Latin America. On the upside, there 
are  signs  of  stronger  growth  in  both  Japan  and  the  US,  although  fiscal  issues  in  the  US 
continue to cast a shadow over and could potentially derail the recovery.  
It  is  therefore  disappointing  that  6  years  since  the  start  of  the  crisis,  economic  growth 
prospects  remain  relatively  bleak  and  employment  creation  has  disappointed.  Raghuram 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Rajan1, Professor of Finance at the University of Chicago and soon to be Governor of the 
Reserve  Bank  of  India, posed  the  question,  what  if the  problem  is  the assumption  that  all 
demand is created equal? We know that prior to the crisis, demand was boosted by massive 
amounts  of  borrowing,  and  that  the  increase  in  spending  came  from  poorer  and  younger 
families whose needs are greater than their incomes and are different from those of the rich. 
As  lending  dried  up,  so  did  borrowing,  and  demand  for  particular  goods  changed 
disproportionately. For this reason, Rajan argues that the general stimulus to demand that 
has been provided may not have been the most effective means to restore the economy to 
full  employment,  and  instead,  unlike  the  neo-Keynesian  view,  sees  the  only  sustainable 
solution being to allow the supply side to adjust to more normal and sustainable sources of 
demand.  
Although the growth performance has been disappointing, one cannot say that the fiscal and 
monetary  policies  employed  were fruitless,  because  it  is  impossible  to know  the  economic 
situation in the absence of such policies. It seems reasonable, though, to assume, that the 
Great Recession may have been a little or a lot worse than a recession, and that the period 
of recovery may have been even longer than what is currently being experienced. There is 
no doubt that there was a need for the policies employed, and that authorities had to make 
use of all instruments at their disposal to prevent an even more severe downturn in the global 
economy and to prevent a collapse of the world financial system. There is also no doubt that 
implementing  some  of  these  policies  was  an  experiment  of  sorts,  and  central  banks  have 
always been ready to admit that this is new territory and exits from these non-conventional 
and  non-standard  measures  could  be  complicated,  because  there  is  no  blueprint  to  work 
from when it comes to the extent to which central bank balance sheets were put to use.  
Whether or not policies employed thus far are the correct ones and will have any significant 
impact on growth going forward is a debate for another day. But it does seem clear that we 
have entered a period of structurally lower and more moderate growth and that it will be a 
long time yet before the world can enjoy the kind of growth and demand as seen before the 
crisis.  
In  recent  weeks  we  have  witnessed  significant  volatility  in  financial  markets.  Emerging 
market economies in particular have been rendered somewhat more vulnerable owing to the 
strength  of  capital  inflows  over  the  past  few  years.  Steepening  yield  curves,  sharper  than 
expected  tightening  of  financing  conditions  and  subsequent  sell-off  in  risky  assets  and 
reversals in capital flows are risks that we probably have to contend with in the foreseeable 
future.  
This  volatility  reflects  markets  that  have  become  reliant  on  cheap  dollars,  unnervingly  so, 
because as we witnessed during May and June this year, the very idea or utterance from the 
Fed that asset purchases may soon be tapered, has seen emerging market currencies, debt 
prices and equities tumble. Currencies in Brazil, South Africa, Russia and India depreciated 
by between 7 per cent (in Russia) and 15 per cent since the beginning of May to July. On a 
year-to-date basis, local currency bond yields of Brazil and Turkey are over 220 basis points 
higher, while stock markets are lower.  
Jaime  Caruana2  explains  that  the  market  sensitivity  emanates  from  concerns  that  existing 
imbalances  and  distortions,  particularly  persistently  high  debt  levels,  could  produce  large 
losses once monetary accommodation comes to an end. He notes that indebtedness in G-20 
economies  has  increased  by  more  than  30  per  cent  since  the  beginning  of  the  crisis, 
reflecting a large increase in public indebtedness, particularly in advanced economies, that 
has not been offset by a decline in aggregate private indebtedness.  
                                                
1 
2  Bank for international Settlements, Debt, global liquidity and the challenges of exit, 8 July 2013. 
“Why Stimulus has Failed”, January 2013. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
A withdrawal of global liquidity would equate to a withdrawal in capital inflows to emerging 
markets,  which  would  remove  a  source  of  financing  for  emerging  markets  and  potentially 
lead  to  a  sharp  rise  in  term  premia.  The  Institute  of  International  Finance  (IIF)3,  however, 
projects that while capital flows to emerging market economies may decline, this should not 
be  too  severe.  Capital  flows  to  emerging  market  economies  during  2013  and  2014  are 
projected  to  slow  to  US$1.145  billion  and  US$1.112  billion  respectively.  Such  projections 
may indicate less appetite for emerging market assets, but certainly do not reflect any severe 
aversion either. The IIF notes that south-south flows could potentially offset declining flows 
from mature economies. But, one can only speculate about the impact of the eventual exit 
from unconventional monetary policy, the conflicting forces and which will be stronger. There 
may also be a fair amount of differentiation among emerging economies and some may be 
affected somewhat more than others depending on risk perceptions.  
Global liquidity, its measurement and its impact, under direction from the G20, is receiving 
greater attention from international financial institutions, precisely because of the recognition 
of the role that liquidity played in the global financial crisis, as a potential factor behind the 
pre-crisis accumulation of financial vulnerabilities. Similarly, during the crisis, spillovers from 
the general monetary easing in advanced economies have also created vulnerabilities, while 
there are also global financial-stability implications of prolonged accommodation. The Bank 
for  International  Settlements  and  the  International  Monetary  Fund  are  studying  this  topic 
under the guidance of the G20, looking at both price and quantity based indicators, core and 
non-core  indicators,  with  the  objective  of  developing  a  suite  of  indicators  that  can  be 
monitored and considered for inclusion in surveillance exercises of the IMF.  
Importance of communication  
3. 
In 1981, Karl Brunner wrote, with evident sarcasm:  
“Central Banking… thrives on a pervasive impression that [it]… is an esoteric art. 
Access to this art and its proper execution is confined to the initiated elite. The 
esoteric  nature  of  the  art  is  moreover  revealed  by  an  inherent  impossibility  to 
articulate its insights in explicit and intelligible words and sentences.”  
I can assure you that we have moved on a bit from those days.  
With this uncertain outlook and a volatile environment, communication becomes 
essential, and much has been said recently about central bank communications. 
The  National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research4  highlighted 
increasing 
importance  of  communication  as  a  powerful  tool  that  has  the  ability  to  move 
financial  markets,  enhance  the  predictability  of  monetary  policy  decisions  and 
help  achieve  central  banks  macroeconomic  objectives.  This  is  because  central 
bank communications influence short-term interest rates which in turn influence 
long-term  interest  rates  and  other  asset  prices  which  affect  macroeconomic 
variables such as inflation and output. Having said that, it is also true that poorly 
executed communications can do more harm than good and in these instances 
sometimes “less is more”.  
the 
Janet Yellen5 made reference to a growing body of research and experience around the topic 
of  communication  which  demonstrates  that  clear  communication  is  itself  a  vital  tool  for 
increasing the efficacy and reliability of monetary policy. She pointed out that the challenges 
                                                
3  Capital Flows to Emerging Market Economies, June 26, 2013. 
4  Central Bank Communication and Monetary Policy: A survey of theory and evidence, April 2008. 
5  Communication in Monetary Policy, April 4, 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
facing the US economy in the wake of the financial crisis have made clear communication 
more important than ever before.  
Often, comparisons are made between the 1994 Fed rate hiking cycle and that of 2004 and 
many have contemplated whether we could be headed for a repeat of 1994. In 1994 the Fed 
hiked  interest  rates  from  3  per  cent  to  6  per  cent  in  the  space  of  12  months.  There  was 
significant spillover effects on global financial markets in particular as they related to a sharp 
decline in portfolio inflows into Latin America and the Mexican crisis ensued. In contrast, the 
Fed’s exit in 2004 had a much more muted impact on global markets. Nonetheless, markets 
reacted quite differently in the two episodes….what was the difference? The 1994 exit was 
unanticipated while the 2004 exit was anticipated. Expectations created and communication 
provided played a big role in how markets reacted. Suffice to say, of course, preparing the 
market and clear communication does not in and of its own ensure a smooth transition, but it 
can certainly help limit volatility and uncertainty. This time around, the task at hand is made 
even  more  complicated  by  the  fact  that  monetary  accommodation  provided  is  much  more 
than was provided in the past and much more creative than in previous episodes. It is clear 
that consistent and clear communication will be vital going forward in directing markets and 
ensuring that withdrawal symptoms are kept to a minimum. However, the very volatile and 
uncertain environment itself does present communication challenges.  
The  South  African  Reserve  Bank 
transparent  monetary  policy 
communication.  At the  conclusion  of  every  MPC  meeting,  a  statement  is  issued  through a 
press conference chaired by the Governor, with all MPC members in attendance, to explain 
the monetary policy stance.  
The monetary policy statements, speeches by the Governors and senior officials as well as 
publications  such  as  the  Monetary  Policy  Review  identify  and  discuss the  balance  of  risks 
around our central forecasts in such a way that market participants and other stakeholders 
are  in  a  reasonable  position  to  form  a  view  about  our  possible  reaction  to  changing 
circumstances.  
is  committed 
to 
Economic outlook  
4. 
As  I  draw  to  a  conclusion,  let  me  now  very  briefly  turn  to  the  economic  outlook  for  South 
Africa.  
South  Africa’s  growth  outlook  is  inextricably  linked  to  the  global  outlook.  Although  the 
recovery  is  somewhat  stronger  in  certain  regions,  overall  global  growth  prospects  remain 
broadly on the downside. The extraordinary challenge facing policy makers globally is how to 
roll-out an ambitious programme of ensuring that the global recovery is sustainable and can 
gain momentum, by simultaneously implementing various initiatives while ensuring that they 
don’t conflict with each other. There is a need to support growth in the near-term, while also 
implementing  credible  medium-term  fiscal  policies,  there  is  a  need  to  continue  the  repair 
work to banking systems by pressing ahead with regulatory reform, which in some instances 
requires further deleveraging, but at the same time credit needs to flow to ensure that the 
abundant  liquidity  made  available  by  central  banks  actually  gets  transmitted  into  the  real 
economy. Alongside all these, structural reform needs to be progressed in a growth-friendly 
way to give us a better foundation for the future.  
Against the backdrop of a still difficult international environment affecting our major trading 
partners,  as  well  as  domestic  challenges,  at  the  time  of  the  last  MPC  meeting  the  Bank 
revised  lower  its forecast for  2013 growth from 2.4  per  cent  to  2.0  per cent,  while  that for 
2014 was revised from 3.5 per cent to 3.3 per cent. At the same time the Bank announced an 
adjusted  CPI forecast,  and  expected  inflation  to average  slightly  higher at  5.9  per  cent for 
2013 and 5.5 per cent for 2014, with a temporary breach of the inflation target range during 
this  quarter  (Q3/2013).  As  we  have  indicated  before,  the  challenge  remains  how  best  to 
manage upside inflation risks and downside growth risks.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
inflationary  pressures  arising 
Apart  from  international  factors,  growth  risks  stem  from  relatively  weak  business  and 
consumer  confidence,  which  have  impacted  on  private  sector  real  gross  fixed  capital 
formation,  and  have  also  moderated  household  consumption  expenditure,  the  latter  also 
being constrained by subdued employment growth, and higher costs for electricity and fuel, 
and relatively high debt levels. An additional risk would be possible disruptions from strike 
action as part of the current wage negotiations in various sectors. Recent data releases and 
base effects suggest a better performance in the second quarter of 2013 when compared to 
the  growth  rate  of  0.9%  in  first  quarter,  but  much  will  depend  on  the  performance  in  the 
subsequent quarters to improve an outlook that currently exhibits downside risks.  
Risks  to  the  inflation  outlook  present  themselves  mainly  through  a  more  depreciated 
exchange  rate  of  the  rand,  especially  if  such  depreciation  occurs  very  rapidly  and  is 
sustained,  and  possible 
from  excessively  high  wage 
settlements, and from higher food prices. Demand driven pressures continue to be relatively 
low,  and  the  pass  through  from  the  exchange  rate  depreciation  at  this  stage  appears 
somewhat  weaker  than  observed  previously  during  periods  of  exchange  rate  depreciation. 
As regards the exchange rate, the fact that South Africa has a current account deficit and is 
reliant  on  portfolio  flows  has  meant  that  the  impact  of  global  risk  aversion  has  been 
somewhat more severe on South Africa than other emerging market countries, coupled with 
the fact that our markets tend to be more liquid and deeper than other emerging markets. 
However,  while  depreciation  in  the  rand  exchange  rate  poses  inflationary  threats,  it  could 
also improve South Africa’s outlook if it results in greater competitiveness of South Africa’s 
exports  and  an  improvement  in  the  terms  of  trade  and  current  account  deficit.  This 
presupposes that the benefits arising from and exchange depreciation can be locked-in and 
such weakness does not translate into higher wages not matched by productivity gains, and 
thus higher inflation.  
For now, the Bank deemed it prudent to keep policy unchanged, but depending on unfolding 
events in the global and domestic environment, the Bank stands ready, as always, to act in 
whichever manner is deemed prudent, in line with its mandate, to ensure that inflation does 
not  breach  the  upper  end  of  the  inflation  band  on  a  sustained  basis,  and  results  in  a 
deterioration of inflation expectations.  
Let me finish by wishing you all the very best as you try to navigate these very difficult times. 
These are difficult times not only for you as investors, but also for us as central banks.  
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
