Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Promoting the rule of law in the financial sector 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (the central 
bank of the Philippines), at the launching of the BSP’s book on “Special Banking Laws and 
annotated”, Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, Manila, 13 February 2013. 
 Former  Chief  Justice  Reynato  Puno,  members  of  the  Monetary  Board,  former  BSP 
Governors Laya and Singson, Prime Minister Virata, advocates of the rule of law from the 
government and the private sector, fellow BSPers, distinguished guests, good afternoon.  
We at the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas are deeply honored by your presence, Chief Justice 
Puno, at this simple launching ceremony for the Book on Special Banking Laws Annotated. 
This book covers the laws that govern particular financial institutions such as thrift, rural and 
cooperative banks as well as non-stock savings and loan associations. 
These  financial  institutions  play  a  unique  and  pivotal  role:  they  broaden  the  reach  of  our 
financial system down to the countryside and encourage savings, loans and investments that 
grow the economy, generate employment and promote inclusive growth. 
Equally  important  are  annotations  to  laws  on  the  rights  and  protection  of  consumers, 
borrowers and depositors that are discussed in this book. 
This book completes the three-volume series on Banking Laws of the Philippines published 
by the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas. As mentioned earlier, the first book is The New Central 
Bank  Act  Annotated  while  the  second  is  The  General  Banking  Law  Annotated.  Deputy 
Governor and General Counsel de Zuñiga tells us that this will probably be not the last; his 
team is now looking at the possibility of coming up with another book, possibly on financial 
transaction and products. 
With  this  groundbreaking  undertaking,  we  have  consolidated  in  three  books  the  legal 
framework within which we operate complete with annotations as to its applications including 
its historical and philosophical underpinnings. 
We have been asked: why is the Bangko Sentral publishing these books? Well, we learned it 
was  difficult  for  lawyers,  researchers  and  the  academe  to  access  laws  and  annotations 
relevant to the financial sector in a timely fashion. And since we also subscribe to the legal 
maxim that “Justice delayed is justice denied” the BSP’s Monetary Board decided to take on 
the challenge of publishing these three books.  
It is a source of pride for us that these landmark books represent the collective output of the 
Bangko Sentral’s in-house team of lawyers from the Office of the General Counsel and Legal 
Services  under  the  leadership  of  Deputy  Governor  Juan  de  Zuniga,  Jr.  Without  question, 
they  have  no  equal  in  terms  of  combined  expertise  and  experience  in  the  application  and 
interpretation of banking laws and regulations. But beyond their expertise, it is their passion 
to  serve  our  people  that  gave  them  the  adrenalin  to  work  on  these  legal  books  alongside 
their regular assignments. You can see the portraits of our writers and editors around this 
hall. And they will be happy to autograph your books. 
We also thank the former Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, The Honorable Reynato Puno 
who  graciously  and  generously  accepted  our  request  for  him  to  write  the  foreword  for  the 
Book on Special Banking Laws Annotated and to be our Guest of Honor in this book launch.  
It  is  our  distinct  honor  and  privilege  to  have  with  us  today  the  man  described  by  the 
magistrates at the Supreme Court as a “transformational leader”, “an intellectual aristocrat” 
and “one of the greatest Chief Justices of the Supreme Court of the Philippines.” His book 
entitled “Equal Dignity and Respect the Substance of Equal Protection and Social Justice” 
was launched only last month. In other words, he continues his crusade for a level playing 
field and equality in our country. Maraming salamat Mr. Chief Justice.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
And so today, ladies and gentlemen, we present the complete set of the Bangko Sentral’s 
three  books  on  Banking  Laws  of  the  Philippines  which  we  are  certain  will  help  fortify  the 
foundation for the rule of law to flourish in the Philippine financial sector. This should benefit 
our people, our economy and our country. 
Once  again,  our  congratulations  to  our  lawyers  who  made  these  books  a  reality  and  our 
appreciation  to  Chief  Justice  Puno  and  all  of  you  who  have  joined  us  today  for  this  legal 
milestone. 
Mabuhay po tayong lahat!  
Mabuhay ang ating mahal na bansang Pilipinas!  
Thank you and enjoy the rest of the evening. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
