Patrick Honohan: Central Bank of Ireland’s Strategic Plan –  
re-engineering how we do business 
Opening statement by Mr Patrick Honohan, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, to the 
Oireachtas  (National  Parliament)  Joint  Committee  on  Finance,  Public  Expenditure  and 
Reform, Dublin, 16 January 2013. 
 Thank  you  for  inviting  me  to  appear  before  the  Committee  today.  Your  letter  of  invitation 
proposed a wide range for our discussion today, and I will not attempt to be comprehensive 
in my brief opening statement.  
Perhaps the best way of ordering my introductory comments is by reference to the Central 
Bank’s  three  year  Strategic  Plan  which  we  published  in  November.  Consistent  with  our 
governing legislation, the Central Bank Commission has set as the key elements: 
• 
Restore  financial  stability  and  support  economic  recovery  in  Ireland  through  the 
successful  exit  from  the  EU-IMF  Programme  of  Financial  Support  and  restoring  a 
fully functioning banking system;  
Reform  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  to  ensure  risks  to  stability  and 
consumer protection are identified and effectively mitigated;  
Protect consumers by challenging firms, improving firms’ compliance and promoting 
a better culture to help consumers have more confidence in financial services; and  
Influence  international  policy  making  in  monetary  policy,  financial  stability  and 
regulatory standard setting.  
   Underpinning these activities will be a focus on improved efficiencies and cost effectiveness, 
alongside the continuing development of our staff. 
Delivering on this extensive mandate has, to say the least, been quite a challenge over the 
past few years involving a lot of judgment calls, a huge increase in the volume of activity and 
employment  in  the  Central  Bank  and  a  re-engineering  of  how  we  do  business.  While  the 
condition of the economy and the banking system still leaves much to be desired, I believe 
that things are moving in the right direction.  
As far as the economy overall is concerned it is fair to say that, since the level of economic 
activity collapsed in 2008–9, the elevated level  of personal savings, the need to repair the 
public  finances  and  for  balance  sheet  repair  more  generally  has  meant  that  domestic 
demand has continued to shrink year-on-year. Overall employment and incomes would have 
fallen  even  further  were  it  not for  the  offsetting performance  of  exporting firms  despite the 
much weaker international environment even than was expected two years ago. A reversal of 
some of the loss of competitiveness that was incurred in earlier years has contributed here, 
though  more  is  needed  if  the  return  to  growth  in  private  sector  employment  is  to  be 
accelerated to the point where overall employment is growing again on a sustainable basis – 
which  our  forecasters  believe  could  happen  during  the  course  of  this  year.  Against  this 
background,  the  Government’s  determination  and  achievement  in  making  the  agreed, 
necessary  overall  reduction  since  2008  in  the gap  between  taxation  and  spending  (painful 
though  it  is  for  many)  has  been  a  vital  element  in  restoring  the  confidence  of  official  and 
private  international  lenders  which  is  a  prerequisite  for  sustained  recovery  in  employment 
and economic prosperity. The Government has recovered access to the bond markets and, 
while the cost of borrowing has come down a lot in the past half-year, I am sure that spreads 
would  have  fallen  even  lower  were  it  not  for  the  wider  uncertainties  in  sovereign  debt 
markets. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The  reconstruction  of  a healthy  banking  system has  been  hampered  by  the  scale  of  bank 
losses, and the fact that such a large fraction of their borrowers, both households and firms, 
are under stress. During 2009–2011, the capacity of the public authorities was stretched to 
the  limit  in  sourcing  the  liquidity  and  the  capital  needed  for  the  basic  functioning  of  the 
system.  While  the  rest  of  the  public  finances  also  needed  urgent  adjustment,  it  was  this 
additional pressure that tipped the country into the need for official assistance in the EU-IMF 
Programme. 
Apart from rebuilding their financial buffers, the banks have had to completely overhaul their 
loan  recovery  operations,  and  to  develop  effective  methods  of  loan  underwriting  in  a  new 
environment. It is no secret that the Central Bank has been concerned at the pace of both 
dimensions.  Going  well  beyond  what  has  been  customary,  the  Central  Bank  has  been 
closely  reviewing  the  steps  being  taken  by  banks  to  engage  with  stressed  mortgage  and 
other  borrowers  under  what  we  are  calling  the  Mortgage  Arrears  Resolution  Process. 
Certainly the banks have ramped-up their activity here, but progress towards ensuring that 
unsustainable  debts  are  appropriately  restructured,  while  also  ensuring  (in  a  manner 
consistent  with  the  Code  of  Conduct  on  Mortgage  Arrears)  that  those  currently  in  arrears 
whose  circumstances  should  enable  them  to  service  their  debts  get  back  on  schedule  is 
clearly far from adequate so far. There are risks on both sides here. Too lenient an approach 
to  loan  recovery  will  result  in  an  intolerably  heavy  bill  for  the  Exchequer  and  hence  the 
taxpayer  and  the  user  of  public  services.  Too  much  reluctance  to  face  up  to  reality  about 
unsustainable debts will also delay the economic recovery.  
The  personal  insolvency  bill  provides  a  welcome  new  route  whereby  distressed  mortgage 
borrowers  (especially  those  with  multiple  indebtedness)  can  find  solutions,  but  it  would  be 
better for all if the banks could still get ahead of the curve and resolve the bulk of the cases 
without them having to go through what is still, of course, an untested process. The Central 
Bank will continue its intensive step-by-step engagement with the banks on this matter until 
we are satisfied that they have sufficient policies and procedures in place. 
European banking union and Single Supervisory Mechanism  
The introduction of the European banking union and Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) 
has been agreed since I appeared last before the Committee. The design, development and 
implementation  of  the  framework  for  the  SSM  will  be  a  key  task  at  euro  level  throughout 
2013.  
The move towards a systematic approach to supervision, resolution and deposit protection is 
part of what is needed to place the euro area institutional structure on a more robust basis, 
building  market  and  public  confidence  across  the  union. We  in  Ireland  recognise,  perhaps 
better than others, the value of filling these institutional gaps. But it must be done well. To be 
successful  it  is  important  that  the  new  mechanism  has  a  best  practice  supervisory  toolkit, 
effective and efficient decision making procedures, a top notch risk assessment framework 
and  a  robust,  jointly  shared,  supervisory  culture.  New  resolution  rules  –  and  particularly 
important in Ireland’s case the potential use of ESM direct recapitalisation – need to come 
into full operation and be ready for use by the SSM to ensure the success of the project. To 
all of this, the Central Bank will continue to contribute, not least during this Presidency.  
As far as supervision is concerned, greater distance between supervisors and the banks they 
regulate can help improve the capacity for challenge and ensure a broader, more detached, 
perspective  on  issues.  At  the  same  time,  local  knowledge  is  equally  important.  Balancing 
these two dimensions will be a key part of the new regime.  
While many details remain to be determined it is clear that much of the supervisory work will 
still be delegated in practice to national supervisors, so that the work we have been doing to 
strengthen our national supervisory system will remain equally relevant in the period ahead. 
In addition of course, it should not be forgotten that the current proposals only refer to banks, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
and by far the largest part of our national supervisory and regulatory regime relates to other 
type of financial firm.  
Promissory Notes 
My last attendance at this Committee was in March 2012 and was focused on the issue of 
that month’s instalment payment on IBRC’s Promissory Notes. As you will recall, an interim 
solution  was  applied  to  that  instalment,  which  was  effectively  settled  with  a  long-term 
Government  bond  rather  than  cash.  While  this  was  not  altogether  an  ideal  solution  from 
anyone’s point of view, seeking a non-cash solution for that instalment was a sound tactic for 
the Government, embarking as it was on the larger question of rearranging the duration and 
terms of the overall central bank indebtedness arising out of the failure of Anglo Irish Bank 
and INBS and the payment of their creditors. 
Since  then, there  has  been  a  very  intensive  process  of  discussion  and negotiation  on  this 
matter, which is one of the two main thrusts of the Government’s policy to have a euro area 
review of the indebtedness arising out of the banking crisis. There is considerable goodwill 
from all interlocutors in this process. Nevertheless, it has not been easy to find a generally 
acceptable solution. Taking into account both the statutory position and wider policy stance 
of  the  ECB,  an  initiative  of  this  type  will  be  novel  and  as  such  challenging.  Using  our 
knowledge  of  central  banking  law  and  practice,  we  have  been  working  carefully  to  build 
understanding and confidence around a set of proposed transactions designed to deliver for 
Ireland, while not taking other decision makers too far out of their comfort zone. The ECB is 
an  organisation  that  seeks  to  proceed  as  far  as  possible  by  consensus,  and  it  is  not 
surprising that this work has been taking quite a while. In fact, what we have designed is, I 
believe, largely in the interests of the eurosystem as a whole. 
I have nothing to add today to what has already been said by the Minister for Finance about 
the prospects and timing of the conclusion to these discussions.  
I am happy to take any questions you might have. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
