Stefan Gerlach: Ireland – from crisis to recovery 
Address by Mr Stefan Gerlach, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, at the Berlin 
Finance  Lecture,  a  joint  initiative  of  Deutsche  Bank  Research  and  the  Departments  of 
Mathematics and Economics of Humboldt University, Berlin, 14 January 2013. 
 I  am  grateful  to  John  Flynn,  Carina  Harte,  Rebecca  Stuart  and  Laura  Weymes  for  help  in  preparing  these 
remarks. 
Introduction 
1. 
I am very pleased to be in Berlin today and to speak on economic developments in Ireland in 
recent years in this distinguished lecture series. 
As you know, the Irish economy underwent a disastrous boom-bust cycle in the last decade. 
Following  the  bursting  of  the  bubble  in  2007/8,  the  economy  entered  a  period  of  almost 
free-fall. In response to the crisis, the Irish authorities have been working conscientiously on 
stabilising and returning the economy to growth. That process started immediately after the 
bubble  burst  and  a  number  of  important  policy  measures  were  taken  in  2008  and  2009. 
Initially,  the  focus  was  on  ensuring  that  the  banking  system  continued  to  function  and  on 
restoring fiscal soundness. However, despite significant measures in both the banking and 
fiscal areas, serious concerns persisted about Ireland’s financial balance sheet. In the fall of 
2010, a few weeks after the Deauville statement that suggested that private sector investors 
could experience losses on their holdings of sovereign debt, confidence in the Irish sovereign 
collapsed.1 This forced the Irish Government to seek external financial assistance from the 
ECB, the European Commission and the IMF, the “Troika”. 
Access to official funding under the programme has been very helpful and has enabled the 
Government  to  pursue  the  reform  process  that  had  already  started.  As  readers  of  the 
Troika’s  quarterly  reviews  of  Ireland’s  progress  during  the  programme  will  know,  policy 
implementation has been strong and the authorities have delivered on all the commitments 
they have entered into.2  
Although domestic demand continues to shrink, this is being offset by growth in net external 
demand and as a result overall Irish economic activity has been broadly stable and there are 
a  few  signs  that  a  modest  recovery  could  potentially  take  hold  this  year.  While  real  GDP 
growth  has  been  very  weak,  it  was  positive  in  both  2011  and  2012,  and  is  forecasted  to 
increase to a little over 1 per cent in 2013. Similarly, house prices, which have been falling 
since 2007, were broadly flat in the second half of 2012 although there is no expectation of a 
significant increase. Finally, unemployment has started to fall, but the improvement, from a 
peak of 15 per cent in early 2012 to 14.6 per cent by year end, is small and partially due to 
net emigration. 
For  a  small  and  very  open  economy  such  as  ours,  domestic  economic  conditions  are 
critically  influenced  by  the  external  economic  environment.  Unfortunately,  this  has  been 
extremely challenging in recent years and considerably worse than was forecasted when the 
programme  was  agreed  in  2010.  In  particular,  the  euro  area  has  experienced  serious 
economic and financial tensions with GDP forecasts frequently being revised downwards. A 
shift towards fiscal consolidation, although essential in most countries and urgent in some, 
                                                
1  Events preceding entry into the programme in 2010 are reviewed by  Governor Honohan in the address on 
“Recapitalisation of Failed Banks: Some Lessons from the Irish Experience” given at the 44th Annual Money, 
Macro and Finance Conference, Trinity College Dublin, September 2012. See www.centralbank.ie. 
2  See: www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/scr/2012/cr12336.pdf. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
and  the  necessary  process  of  bank  deleveraging  in  Europe  have  not  helped  recovery  in 
Ireland. While the overall direction of the policy response within Europe to the crisis has been 
appropriate,  the  pace  of  change  has  been  uneven  and  this  has  generated  a  high  level  of 
uncertainty which has not been beneficial. 
The  Government  has  made  a  good  start  in  re-entering  debt  markets,  but  the  market  is 
conscious that economic conditions remain fragile and the stock of public debt is very high at 
120  per  cent  of  GDP  (or  almost  150  per  cent  of  GNP,  which  may  be  a  more  relevant 
measure  in  the  case  of Ireland). There  is  therefore  little,  if  any,  safety  margin  and  even  a 
small  adverse  shock  to market  confidence  in the  Irish  Sovereign  could complicate the  exit 
from  the  programme.  A  successful  exit,  on  the  other  hand,  would  be  a  very  positive 
development not just for Ireland but also for Europe more broadly. Actions that would help 
reduce  the  sovereign-bank  link  and  that  would  improve  debt  sustainability  could  greatly 
enhance Irish prospects of exiting the programme on schedule. 
But I am getting ahead of myself. Given that the assistance programme is scheduled to end 
late  this  year,  this  is  a  good  time  to  take  a  look  at  the  Irish  Government’s  progress  in 
resolving  the  crisis  and  take  stock  of  where  we  stand.  To  organise  the  material,  I  have 
decided  to  structure  the  discussion  in  three  parts.  First,  I  will  discuss  the  crisis  itself,  its 
causes and consequences for the Irish economy. Next I will review the main policy measures 
adopted by the Irish authorities in response to the crisis. Finally, I will review what the most 
pressing challenges are this year. 
The crisis 
2. 
Ireland experienced a massive housing bubble, whether measured in terms of prices, credit 
or the scale of construction activity within the economy. Unfortunately, this appears to have 
been one of the worst boom-bust cycles on record.3 The exceptional size of the shock is of 
course the main reason why it is so difficult to overcome. 
The  bubble  took  the  form  of  a  very  large  increase  in  residential  and  commercial  property 
prices  which  rose  almost  four-fold  between  1997  and  2007.  Like  many  other  bubbles,  it 
started from strong growth, which in Ireland’s case began around 1990 and largely resulted 
from greater economic integration with Europe. During the 1990s, growth was underpinned 
by fundamentals, as exceptional export performance was accompanied by moderate wage 
and  price  inflation  and  healthy  public  finances. The  expansion  was  aided  by  EU  structural 
funds of up to 3 per cent of GDP per annum. Of course, the large fall in Irish interest rates as 
part of the move to Monetary Union also exerted a powerful force. For instance, mortgage 
rates fell from over 11.5 per cent in 1990 to lows of close to 3.5 per cent in 2005. 
In the early 2000s, however, as the economy approached full employment and technological 
constraints  began  to  bind,  the  nature  of  the  boom  changed from  one  that  reflected  strong 
fundamentals to one that was fuelled by excessive credit expansion. Strong economic growth 
and lower interest rates led to an increase in both the demand for and price of housing and 
rapid growth in credit. Both domestic and foreign-owned banks with branches or subsidiaries 
in  Ireland  participated  in  this  expansion,  lending  heavily  to  developers  and  retail mortgage 
borrowers.  As  a  result,  the  fraction  of  non-financial  private-sector  lending  that  went  to  the 
property  sector  –  that  is,  mortgages  and  lending  for  commercial  property  –  rose  from 
60 per cent  in  2000  to  80  per  cent  in  2007.4  The  boom  was  not  just  a  price  bubble,  but 
involved a huge expansion in lending and construction activity. 
                                                
3  A recent IMF working paper by Laeven and Valencia (2012) assesses the size of banking crisis since 1970 in 
a  number  of  countries  and  in  a  number  of  ways  and  concludes  that  the  Irish  crisis  has  been  one  of  the 
costliest. 
4  Figures are exclusive of residential mortgages securitisations. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
We now know that this explosion in lending reflected an astounding neglect of credit risk by 
lenders. Primary responsibility for the soundness of individual institutions rests squarely with 
the  management  of  the  financial  firms  themselves.  However,  it  is  clear  that  ineffective 
regulation  and  supervision  –  both  at  the  level  of  the  individual  firm  and  on  a  system-wide 
basis – also played a role.5 While Ireland’s problems were homemade, it is natural also to 
ask how Irish banks financed this rapid increase in lending. The data show that the bulk of it 
was  financed  by  wholesale  funding  from  abroad.  One  wonders  what  led  to  this  surge  in 
lending. Did foreign lenders to banks not understand how dangerously unbalanced the Irish 
economy  was  becoming  and  that  credit  risks  were  rising?  Or  did  they  assume  that  if  the 
property bubble burst, they would be able to get out in time or that they would be bailed out? 
Whatever  the  explanation,  the  Irish  property  bubble  was  aggravated  by  the  apparent 
willingness of foreign financial institutions to fund reckless lending in Ireland. 
Housing prices peaked already in 2007, but any hope of a soft landing vanished the following 
year. The banks’ heavy reliance on cross-border wholesale funding and concerns about the 
scale  of  their  losses  as a  result  of  the  collapse  in  property  markets  help  explain  why  they 
began  to  find  it  increasingly  difficult  to  attract  longer-term  funding  through  early-2008,  and 
meant that they were particularly affected by increased fears of counterparty risk as markets 
froze following the collapse of Lehman Brothers in September 2008. 
From then the process has followed a familiar pattern: with the economy weakening, market 
sentiment worsening and banks unwilling to lend, demand for property declined and the fall 
in  house  prices  accelerated.  As  a  consequence,  construction,  which  during  the  boom  had 
grown  to  over  one-fifth  of  the  Irish  economy,  collapsed  significantly  weakening  aggregate 
demand and employment. The end result has been a vicious circle of continuous and sharp 
falls  in  property  prices,  bank  lending  and  aggregate  demand,  and  rising  loan  losses  and 
unemployment  which  has  now  lasted  more  than  five  years.  A  few  statistics  tell  the  facts: 
between 2007 and 2012 GNP fell by 11 per cent in real terms and 20 per cent in nominal 
terms,  while  domestic  spending  fell  by  almost  25  per  cent  in  real  terms  and  almost 
30 per cent in nominal terms. 
The  bursting  of  the  bubble  had  devastating  effects  on  public  finances  and  forced  the 
Government  to  ask  for  external  assistance.  Two  factors  account  for  the  sharp  increase  in 
debt. 
First,  the  socialisation  of  banks’  severe  loan  losses  –  in  the  first  instance  through  the 
September 2008 guarantee and later through the unwillingness of our programme partners to 
consider  burden  sharing  with  unguaranteed  senior  bondholders  –  resulted  in  a  very  large 
infusion  of  public  funds  to  restore  their  solvency.6  To  date,  the  Irish  State  has  injected 
€64 billion into the banking system, or approximately 40 per cent of 2012 GDP.7  
The second factor is fiscal policy. A stylised fact of many housing booms is that rapid growth 
of  revenues  makes  the  Government’s  fiscal  position  appear  much  stronger  than  it  is. 
Governments frequently respond by raising spending and reducing their reliance on revenue 
from non-property sources, while rapid nominal GDP growth erodes the debt-to-GDP ratio. 
Ireland  was  no  different;  although  public  spending  was  well  constrained  in  the  1990s, 
eventually  in  the  2000s  spending  surged,  driven  by  pay  rates  and  social  benefits.  At  the 
same time tax rates were reduced, while the debt-to-GDP ratio fell from 100 per cent in 1991 
                                                
5  For a review of the shortcomings of financial regulation and supervision before the crisis, see the report by 
Governor  Honohan  to  the  Minister  for  Finance,  entitled  “The  Irish  Banking  Crisis:  Regulatory  and  Financial 
Stability Policy 2003–2008”, at www.bankinginquiry.gov.ie. 
6  There was burden sharing with subordinated debt holders of about 10 per cent of GDP. 
7  Of the €64 billion injected, €43 billion added to gross debt; the remaining €21 billion came from the National 
Pension Reserve Fund and did not add to gross debt. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
to  about  25  per  cent  in  2007.8  Particularly  unfortunate  was  the  decision  to  permit  strong 
increases in current spending which were dependent on windfall revenues, rather than other, 
more permanent, sources of revenues. Consequently, when tax revenues collapsed as the 
boom turned to bust with a vengeance, a large gap between Government expenditure and 
revenue rapidly developed. 
Policy responses 
3. 
Following  the  burst  of  the  bubble,  the  Irish  Government  has  taken  a  number  of  actions  to 
stabilise the banking system and strengthen public finances in order to support recovery. Let 
me focus on some of the most important. 
Stabilising the banking system 
3.1 
The initial policy response in September 2008 took the form of a general guarantee of the 
liabilities  of  the  banking  system.9  The  initial  guarantee  covered  a  broad  range  of  liabilities 
including  some  existing  subordinated  debt  and  covered  bonds,  and  amounting  to  almost 
2½ times  GDP.10  Following  the  initial  guarantee,  new  debt  and  deposits  continued  to  be 
guaranteed on a second scheme which has been rolled forward on a six-monthly basis. This 
is still in force, but it is probably no longer necessary, and will likely be discontinued in the 
near future. 
As I have noted, during the pre-crisis credit expansion, banks became increasingly reliant on 
shorter-term  wholesale  funding.  The  guarantee  was  introduced  in  the  belief  that  the  main 
problem facing the banks was merely difficulties attracting funding following the collapse of 
Lehman Brothers. That the system faced a solvency problem was not recognised at the time. 
However, as doubts emerged about the solvency of the banks in light of increased property 
losses and the ability of the Sovereign to backstop such a large guarantee, the Irish banking 
system  suffered  a  massive  withdrawal  of  funding.  Over  time,  Irish  banks  were  shut  out  of 
almost  all  debt  markets,  while  a  flight  of  retail  and,  particularly,  corporate  deposits  also 
occurred. To fund the resulting liquidity deficit and ensure the Irish banking system’s ability to 
function, the ECB has provided an unprecedented level of liquidity support. 
As  the  property  market  continued  to  decline  it  became  clearer  that  the  banking  system 
needed  capital  to  remain  solvent.  The  initial  step  to  recapitalise  banks  in  December  2008 
marked the beginning of a series of injections over the following years, as estimates of the 
capital needs were made in a highly uncertain environment characterised by systematic loan 
underwriting  errors,  inadequate  management  information  and  intrinsic  uncertainties  about 
borrowers’ ability to repay loans in negative equity. An initial independent assessment of the 
banks covered by the guarantee was already undertaken in 2008. Based on the results, the 
Government decided to recapitalise the banking system and to nationalise Anglo-Irish Bank 
in early-2009. By June of that year, the Government had injected €10 billion into the three 
major banks. Despite already receiving a 4 billion injection, by the end of 2009, it was clear 
                                                
8 
It is important to note that as judged by the fiscal criteria of the Maastricht treaty, Ireland’s record before the 
crisis was exemplary: it was exceeded the deficit criteria only in 2008 and the debt criteria in 2009. 
9  The  policy  responses  to  the  banking  crisis  are  reviewed  by  Governor  Honohan  in  the  address  on 
“Recapitalisation of Failed Banks: Some Lessons from the Irish Experience” given at the 44th Annual Money, 
Macro and Finance Conference, Trinity College Dublin, September 2012. See www.centralbank.ie. 
10  The initial guarantee scheme covered a broad range of liabilities from 29 September 2008 – 29 September 
2010.  The  scheme  covered  all  existing  and  new  liabilities  within  these  categories  for  a  period  two  years, 
making it difficult for the banks to issue debt beyond the end-date of the guarantee. The second guarantee 
scheme covered a narrower range of liabilities, excluding covered bonds and dated subordinated debt. This 
guarantee also covered new longer-term new debt issued – eligible liabilities with maturity up to 5 years could 
be covered – while banks could also issue unguaranteed debt if they chose. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
that  Anglo-Irish  Bank  would  have  a  further  capital  shortfall;  this  was  met,  following 
discussions and approval by the European Commission, by a “Promissory Note”.11  
In  2009  the  Government  established  the  National  Asset  Management  Agency  with  the 
objective  of  removing  commercial  property  and  development  loans  from  banks’  balance 
sheets.  In  total,  NAMA  purchased  loans  with  a  face  value  of  €73  billion  at  an  average 
discount of 57 per cent. The transfers of loans to NAMA crystallised losses and led to a need 
to  inject  further  capital  into  the  banks.  Estimates  of  losses,  both  NAMA  and  non-NAMA 
related, were conducted in 2010 with further capital being injected, leading to an increase in 
the Promissory Note. 
These  initial  recapitalisations  took  place  as  Government  finances  were  deteriorating 
significantly due to the collapse in economic activity, limiting the capacity to over-capitalise 
the banks. A major objective of the programme, especially of the funders, was to remove this 
constraint.  However,  as  the  programme  did  not  envisage  burden  sharing  with  senior  bank 
creditors  and  the  additional  capital  was  added  to  Government  debt,  issues  of  debt 
sustainability  persisted.  Nonetheless,  the  assistance  provided  by  programme  partners 
allowed  a  more  ambitious  approach  to  be  taken  than  previously,  with  strong  external 
validation and greater transparency built-in as features of the exercise. Using loan-by-loan 
data and a systematic data verification process, BlackRock Solutions conducted a bottom-up 
multi-year  loan-loss  forecasting  exercise,  applying  parameters  estimated  from  emerging 
patterns of loan delinquency. Compared to previous estimates, this exercise involved higher 
percentage  capital  ratios;  higher  three-year  loan  loss  projections;  a  buffer  for  loan-losses 
beyond the three-year horizon; and costs associated with deleveraging non-core assets. The 
result, announced in March 2011, was a further required capital figure of €24 billion.12  
Strengthening public finances 
3.2 
The collapse of the bubble had a disastrous effect on the Government’s finances. With the 
budget deficit spiking to 31 per cent of GDP in 2010 (if banking support costs of 20.2 per cent 
per cent of GDP are included) and public debt rising very rapidly from 2007 onward, the Irish 
Government  has  taken  a  number  of  measures  to  strengthen  public  finances.  Austerity  is 
never  popular  but,  as  evidenced  by  the  pre-programme  actions  of the Government,  it  was 
recognised at an early stage that there was no alternative to this policy. With debt markets in 
the fall of 2010 becoming unwilling to fund the Irish Government, it faced the choice of either 
closing the massive budget deficit literally overnight, or spreading the necessary correction 
over a longer period of time by asking for a financial assistance programme from the Troika. 
Adopting  the  programme  has  allowed  the  fiscal  restructuring  to  be  done  in  a  much  more 
deliberate and targeted way than otherwise would have been possible. This has increased 
the likelihood that the improvement will be both structural and lasting in nature, and that as a 
result the Irish Government will be able to access debt markets on a sustainable basis from 
this year onwards. That said, the sheer size of the necessary correction has meant that both 
revenues and spending levels have had to be adjusted sharply. 
The fiscal consolidation programme adopted by the Irish Government has been front loaded 
and, between 2008 and 2013, has entailed measures equal to almost 18 per cent of GDP.13 
The  size  of  this  adjustment  is  second  only  to  that  of  Greece.  Since  the  total  adjustment 
necessary by 2015 has been estimated at €34 billion (or 21 per cent of GDP), it follows that 
the lion’s share of that, about 85 per cent, has already been done. Broadly, one third of the 
                                                
11  The Promissory Notes, which were issued while Ireland still had an AA credit rating and interest rates spreads 
against Germany were less that 200 bps, can be thought of as a bespoke and non-marketable bond. 
12  Following the 2011 FMP injections, a further €1.3 billion was injected into Irish Life in 2012. 
13  For  a  review  of  fiscal  policy  measures  undertaken  in  Ireland  since  the  crisis  erupted,  see  Chapter  III  of 
“Ireland: Selected Issues”, IMF September 2012, available at www.imf.org. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
adjustment comes from the revenue side and two thirds from the spending side. Among the 
measures taken to increase revenues are an income levy, changes to social insurance, the 
introduction of a health levy, changes to tax credits and bands, increase in excise duties, a 
2 percentage point increase in the VAT and the introduction of a property tax in 2013. On the 
spending  side,  current  savings  achieved  to  date  include  paybill  reductions,  covering  pay 
rates and headcount, a public sector pension levy, and reductions in social welfare rates. 
Despite these significant adjustments, however, the budget deficit remains very large. The 
most recent forecasts suggest that the deficit in 2012 will be somewhat below 8 per cent of 
GDP.  Although  this  is  less  than  the  target  of  8.6  per  cent,  public  debt  is  continuing  to 
accumulate rapidly and is expected to peak in 2013 at 121 per cent of GDP. 
The current situation 
4. 
But while many measures have been taken by the Irish authorities to overcome the crisis and 
to prepare for the exit from the programme, concerns remain. Two are readily apparent. The 
first arises from the high level of mortgage arrears; the second is the risk to sovereign debt 
sustainability arising from the high debt-to-GDP ratio. 
Mortgage arrears 
4.1 
As  a  consequence  of  the  crisis,  mortgage  arrears  have  risen  sharply,  with  some 
15.1 per cent  of  mortgages  now  in  arrears  for  more  than  90  days.  A  key  determinant  of 
mortgage  arrears  is  the  unemployment  rate  which  stands  at  just  under  15  per  cent,  three 
times the level at the start of 2007. Mortgage borrowers who become unemployed may rely 
on  savings  to  meet  debt  repayments  for  some  period  of  time.  However,  the  long-term 
unemployment rate has increased more than six-fold, with the effect that large numbers of 
people  have  experienced  sharply  reduced  incomes  for  more  than  a  year,  raising  arrears 
rates.  For  the  banking  sector,  the  combination  of  mortgage  arrears  and  negative  equity  is 
major determinant of loss rates. While borrowers that become unemployed and therefore are 
unable to service their mortgages but who are not in negative equity can in principle sell their 
houses and repay the loans, those that are in negative equity cannot. 
Moreover, it is difficult for banks to assess the repayment capacity of distressed borrowers. 
Some  borrowers  may  be  experiencing  temporary  financial  difficulties,  from  which  they  will 
recover relatively quickly. These borrowers may need some breathing space until they, for 
instance,  find  a  new  job.  Other  borrowers  may  be  experiencing  a  permanent  decline  in 
income, and require a more extensive modification of their mortgages, while others still may 
never  be  able  to  service  their  debts  and  banks  may  have  to  pursue  the  route  of 
repossession. These difficulties faced by banks in distinguishing between types of borrowers, 
together  with  the fact that  it  is  costly  to modify  mortgages for  borrowers  that  in fact  would 
have  been  able  to  service  them,  have  arguably  caused  banks  to  be  slow  to  tackle  the 
problem of mortgage arrears. 
Unfortunately, the delay in doing so and in resolving the uncertainty faced by households and 
banks alike has had detrimental effects on the economy. Uncertainty about the future makes 
households save more, dampening consumption spending and preventing the economy from 
returning to growth. The prospect of a large number of repossessed properties being placed 
on the market in the near future has made households hesitate to purchase property now. 
For banks, uncertainty about the potential for future mortgage losses has made it difficult to 
attract sufficient deposits and market funding, requiring them to rely on the eurosystem for 
funding. Combined, these factors in turn impact banks’ ability and willingness to lend, with 
further negative knock-on effects on the real economy. 
A further source of uncertainty arises from the new Personal Insolvency Bill, agreed with the 
Troika, that will come into law in 2013. It will reduce the bankruptcy period from 12 years to 
3 years, establish an insolvency service to help people manage their debt and create three 
non-judicial voluntary debt settlement procedures. Although these procedures are untested, 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
they should speed up the resolution of arrears, and will be an important part of the solution 
for managing private-sector indebtedness. 
Fiscal sustainability 
4.2 
Improving  debt  sustainability  by  breaking  the  sovereign-bank  link  would  enhance  the 
prospects  of  a  full  return  to  debt  markets  at  the  end  of  the  programme.  There  are  two 
essential aspects of debt sustainability: first, the level of the debt-to-GDP ratio, and second 
the  rate  at  which  it  is  increasing.  The  level  of  the  debt-to-GDP  ratio  is  high  at  about 
120 per cent. The safety margin is therefore minimal: any unexpected increase in the ratio 
risks triggering worsening market sentiment about the Irish Sovereign. Furthermore, slower 
economic  growth  in  Ireland  would  reduce  tax  revenues  and  have  a  direct  effect  on  the 
evolution of the debt-to-GDP ratio. While the ratio is expected to decline slowly after peaking 
in 2013, forecasts are highly sensitive to nominal GDP growth, which is critically influenced 
by nominal GDP growth in the euro area and other main trading partners. 
Since  debt  dynamics  depend  on  the  difference  between  the  nominal  interest  rate  and 
nominal GDP growth, the debt-to-GDP ratio is also sensitive to the interest rate on the public 
debt, which depends on market confidence. If financial markets believe that the Government 
will not have any problem rolling over its debt in future years, interest rates will be lower and 
it will be easier for the Government to service the debt. Conversely, market concerns about 
debt  sustainability  will  raise  interest  rates,  making  it  more  difficult  for  the  Government  to 
borrow in the markets.14 Hence, expectations are self-fulfilling, permitting both a good and a 
bad equilibrium. 
To facilitate a smooth exit from the programme, it is therefore important that financial market 
concerns about the future debt service burden of the Irish Sovereign are allayed. Continued 
sound implementation of the programme is crucial, while developments at the European level 
can  also  be  helpful.  I  have  already  noted  the  importance  of  economic  developments  in 
Europe  to  Ireland’s  growth.  In  addition,  European  policy  announcements  can  also  have  a 
significant  impact  on  market  confidence  and  the  Irish  Sovereign’s  ability  to  re-enter  the 
markets. 
In this regard, markets responded positively to the 29 June EU Summit statement and the 
announcement of the ECB’s programme of Outright Monetary Transactions.15 Irish Sovereign 
yields declined sharply,  facilitating limited bond issues since then. However, these positive 
developments  depend  crucially  on  market  sentiment,  which  can  change  rapidly.  Any  new 
development leading to a reassessment of euro area risk by financial markets could result in 
an abrupt reversal of the recent declines in yields. 
The 29 June EU Summit announcement of the potential future use of the ESM to recapitalise 
banks following the establishment of banking union could reduce the total nominal level of 
debt.  However,  the  timeframe  for  implementation  of  the  ESM  and  uncertainty  about  the 
amount  of  banking-related  public  debt  that  would  be  eligible,  were  the  ESM  to  be  applied 
retrospectively, are unclear. For Ireland, greater certainty on this issue could provide support 
for successfully exiting the programme in 2013. 
The announcement also included a reference to examining the situation of the Irish financial 
sector.  This  has  raised  expectations  of  a  possible  reprofiling  of  the  Promissory  Notes,  on 
which  the  Government  makes  an  annual  payment  of  €3.1  billion,  or  2  per  cent  of  GDP. 
Agreement  that  results  in  a  more  favourable  time  profile  of  payments  would  improve  the 
                                                
14  See “Rettung für den Musterknaben”, Der Spiegel, January 7, 2013, p. 28. 
15  For  the  29  June  EU  Summit  Statement,  see:  http://www.consilium.europa.eu/uedocs/cms_data/docs/ 
pressdata/en/ec/131359.pdf.  For  information  on  the  Outright  Monetary  Transactions  programme,  see: 
http://www.ecb.int/press/pr/date/2012/html/pr120906_1.en.html. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
Government’s  fiscal  position  and  greatly  enhance  its  ability  to  regain  full  access  to  the 
markets. 
Conclusions 
5. 
Ireland  has  undergone a  disastrous  boom-bust cycle  in  the  last  the  decade.  Following  the 
burst of the bubble, the Irish economy experienced an exceptionally severe contraction and 
massive  bank  losses.  Lower  revenues  and  large  capital  injections  in  the  banking  system 
have led the debt-to-GDP ratio to rise from 25 per cent to about 120 per cent since 2007. 
In  response  to  the  crisis,  the  Irish  Government  has  taken  a  large  number  of  measures  to 
reform the financial sector, strengthen public finances and return the economy to growth. The 
first of these measures were adopted already in 2008. Since 2010 they have been part of an 
assistance programme agreed with our European partners and the IMF. In this period, the 
Irish  authorities  have  delivered  on  all  of  their  commitments  and  made  good  progress  on 
restructuring the economy. 
While the economic freefall has now stopped, economic performance has been weaker than 
anticipated when the programme was agreed, largely because the external environment has 
been much more challenging than expected. Overall, economic conditions are still fragile. 
With the ending of the programme later this year, the Irish Government will be relying again 
on funding from the private debt markets. The stock of public debt is very large, the level of 
mortgage arrears is still high and banks are not yet profitable. The safety margin is therefore 
small. Improving debt sustainability would greatly enhance the prospects of a successful exit.  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
