Már Guðmundsson: Preserving the credit of the sovereign through a 
financial sector meltdown – the case of Iceland 
Speech  by  Mr  Már  Guðmundsson,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland,  at  the 
International  Monetary  Seminar  2013  “Sovereign  risk,  bank  risk  and  central  banking”, 
organised by the Bank of France, Paris, 8 July 2013. 
 I would like to thank Banque de France for inviting me to speak at this interesting seminar.  
This  session  is  on  resolving  sovereign  debt  crises  and  the  relative  roles  of  the  public  and 
private sectors in that process. My comments will obviously be based on my own country’s 
experience  during  the  financial  crisis,  which  is  a  case  of  a  sovereign  debt  crisis  being 
avoided  in  spite  of  the  meltdown  of  a  large  part  of  the  financial  sector  and  the  country’s 
deepest  recession  since  the  interwar  period.  That  result  was  achieved  by  relatively  good 
fiscal position prior to the crisis, by a refusal – based on need rather than stubbornness – to 
rescue private cross-border banks with public money, and by on-going medium-term fiscal 
consolidation  that  was  an  important  part  of  the  economic  programme  developed  in 
cooperation  with  the  IMF.  The  bottom  line  is  that  all  sovereign  obligations  have  been 
honoured; the sovereign has maintained investment-grade credit ratings and market access.  
In order to distinguish between the parts of this story that provide lessons that are applicable 
to  the  rest  of  the  world  and  those  that  do  not,  we  need  to  get  some  of  the  facts  straight, 
because  to  this  day  there  are  still  several  misconceptions  floating  around  about  what  was 
done in Iceland during the crisis.  
The  collapse  of  Iceland’s  three  cross-border  banks  in  early  October  2008  was  the  most 
noticeable event in the unfolding of the financial crisis. The combined balance sheet of these 
banks was 10 times Iceland’s GDP (see Figure 1), and their combined bankruptcy, measured 
in  terms  of  balance  sheets,  ranks  second  in  size  in  the  international  history  of  corporate 
failures, only after Lehman Brothers. And this happened in a country that ranks among the 
smallest in the world! We are still dealing with the complications that this entails, as can be 
seen in our overblown and unbalanced IIP and the controls on capital outflows. 
Figure 1  
Source: Central Bank of Iceland. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Before  the  collapse,  the  banking  system  had  expanded  very  rapidly,  growing  in  just  five 
years  from  a  combined  balance  sheet  of  less  than  2  times  GDP  at  the  end  of  2003  (see 
Figure 1). Most of this expansion was cross-border, and a significant part of it was actually 
off-border, having very little to do with Iceland, as both financing and investment took place 
abroad.  Around  two-thirds  of  the  balance  sheet  of  the  three  cross-border  banks  was 
denominated in foreign currency. As is typical for banks, the FX part of the balance sheet 
had a significant maturity mismatch. However, there was no safety-net of the type that we 
have at the national level to back it up. This turned out to be the fatal flaw in the whole setup.  
Why were these big risks allowed to build up? I do not think we yet have the research and 
the  consensus  to  provide  a  reasonably  undisputed  list  of  the  main  causal  factors  in  this 
process; however, I think four factors will rank highly on that list. The first of them is Iceland’s 
membership  in  the  European  Economic  Area  (EEA)  beginning  in  1994,  which  made  it 
possible  for  the  banks  to  operate  more  or  less  freely  throughout  the  area  on  the  basis  of 
home  licencing  but  with  national  supervision,  safety  net,  and  crisis  management  and 
resolution. The other three causes are the privatisation of the Icelandic banking system in the 
early 2000s in a manner that placed the major banks in the hands of risk-loving investment 
bankers, the global conditions of ample and cheap credit that prevailed in the years prior to 
the international financial crisis, and the tendency in Iceland both to adopt international and 
EU regulations without critical analysis of Iceland-specific risks and to base supervision to a 
significant degree on mechanical checks of adherence to those regulations.  
In  the  panic  that  gripped  global  financial  markets  after  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers, 
these banks were faced with a wholesale run on their foreign currency liabilities and were 
therefore heading towards a default on those liabilities in the absence of LOLR assistance in 
foreign currency. However, given the size of the banks, it was impossible for the Icelandic 
authorities to provide such assistance on their own.  
There was actually a plan to nationalise one of the banks in late September 2008. Fortunately it 
failed, as nationalising the bank would have turned a private bank’s foreign currency refinancing 
problem into a sovereign problem, with the serious risk that the sovereign might have defaulted 
on such foreign currency  payments, thus initiating  a full-scale sovereign debt crisis.  Figure 2 
gives a sense of the potential scale involved in the case of the three banks, by comparing the 
foreign currency liabilities of the banks and the Central Bank’s FX liquidity at the time.  
Figure 2 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 Based  on  published  financial  accounts  and  the  analysis  of  the  supervisor,  the  Icelandic 
authorities  assumed  that  the  banks  were  solvent.  On  that  premise,  the  authorities  tried  to 
build  defences  against  potential  foreign  currency  liquidity  problems  at  the  banks  by 
negotiating  swap  lines  and  tapping  foreign  capital  markets,  in  both  cases  with  limited 
success. Now, however, we know that there were hidden vulnerabilities in the banks’ capital 
positions.  
However, given the lack of international cooperation, the Icelandic authorities were forced to 
consider  radical  solutions.  Although  they  were  not  necessarily  articulated  fully  at  the  time, 
these solutions entailed several goals: preserving a functioning domestic payment  system, 
ring-fencing  the  sovereign  in  the  case  of  bank  failures,  limiting  the  socialisation  of  private 
sector losses, and creating the conditions for rebuilding a domestic banking system.  
In essence, the adopted solution saved the domestic operations of the banking system and 
let  the  international  part  to  go  into  a  resolution  process.  The  new  banks  were  created  by 
carving the domestic assets and liabilities out of the old failing banks. The idea was then that 
the Government would recapitalise the banks and place compensation bonds in the estates 
of the failed banks. However, valuing the assets and liabilities proved a complicated process 
in the middle of an economic and financial crisis, and a solution emerged where the estates 
of the failed banks became majority owners of two of the banks and kept a small equity stake 
in the third, which was otherwise recapitalised by the Government. The new banking system 
amounted to 1.7 times GDP.  
In order to stop an incipient run on domestic deposits, all deposits in Iceland were declared 
safe  and  all  deposits  in  Icelandic-headquartered  banks  were  given  priority  over  other 
unsecured claims, including the deposits of the Icelandic banks in branches abroad.  
As  a  result  of  these  measures,  the  domestic  payment  system  functioned  more  or  less 
seamlessly throughout, and there was uninterrupted access to deposits in Iceland. The run 
on  the  domestic  banks  stopped,  but  at  its  peak,  demand  for  cash  tripled  and  the  Central 
Bank  almost  ran  out  of  banknotes.  International  payment  flows  were  seriously  affected, 
however,  not  least  because  of  the  freezing  order  imposed  by  the  British  authorities  on 
Icelandic banks, but also because of a general distrust among foreign counterparties.  
Why did the Government give a verbal blanket guarantee for domestic deposits only and not 
for deposits in the banks’ foreign branches? After all, this distinction probably added fuel to 
the  fire  of  the  so-called  Icesave  dispute  about  the  settlement  of  deposit  guarantees  in 
Landsbanki’s Dutch and British branches. The short answer is that such a guarantee would 
never have been credible. As a result, it would not have stopped the run on these deposits 
and, if attempted, might have bankrupted the Government. At the time, the Central Bank of 
Iceland’s FX reserves amounted to 2½ billion euros, while the foreign currency deposits in 
Landsbanki’s Dutch and British branches totalled 11½ billion euros and payment of the EU 
minimum  deposit  insurance  would  have  required  4½  billion  euros.  The  sovereign  was 
completely  closed  off  from  foreign  capital  markets  at  that  point.  Furthermore,  in  economic 
terms, given that these deposits were used to a significant degree to finance illiquid assets in 
these same countries, such a payment, if possible, would have amounted to a net transfer of 
resources  from  Iceland  to  these  countries  at  a  time  when  Iceland  was  going  through  its 
deepest financial and economic crisis in the post-war period! That made no sense.  
The only possibility of a speedy pay-out of deposit insurance in order to contain contagion 
was for the authorities in the host countries to pay it and leave the issue of settlement with 
Iceland for a later date. And this was what they did.  
From the beginning, there were legal arguments about the merits of such claims. In spite of 
that legal uncertainty, the Icelandic Government took part in several good-faith attempts to 
reach  a  negotiated  solution.  However,  it  proved  impossible  to  get  ratification  through  the 
Icelandic political process, in two cases involving referenda. In retrospect, it is clear that the 
main reason for this was the Icelandic people’s unwillingness to shoulder financial liabilities 
that  had  not  been  clearly  signed  by  those  mandated  to  do  so  on  behalf  of  the  nation  or 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
proven in a court of law to be sovereign obligations. Instead, these were seen as the debts of 
reckless private bankers.  
Now the EFTA court has ruled that it was indeed not a sovereign liability. In any case, the 
recovery from the estate of Landsbanki will cover 100% of all deposits in foreign branches. 
Without the priority given to deposits in the Emergency Act of October 2008, the recovery to 
be  paid  to  these  depositors  would  be  much  lower.  This  case  provides  important  lessons 
about  the  design  of  deposit  insurance  within  the  EU  and  the  clarity  of  wording,  or  lack 
thereof, in EU directives.  
This case also highlights the link that must exist between deposit insurance and the LOLR 
function. Part of the rationale is to prevent and stop runs. But at the end of the day, that only 
works if bank liabilities are flowing to a central bank that has the mandate, willingness, and 
capacity  to  recycle  them  against  collateral  and  expand  its  balance  sheet  as  needed.  This 
means that, in the absence of arrangements for currency swaps, it must take place mostly in 
the same currency in order to work.  
So  the  bottom  line  is  that  a  sovereign  default  was  avoided  in  spite  of  an  almost 
unprecedented financial collapse and the worst economic recession since the interwar years. 
A key to that result was the attempt to ring-fence the sovereign from the collapse of these 
three cross-border private banks. However, the avoidance  of default during such a severe 
crisis does require the willingness to use the means available to avoid that outcome and the 
ability to endure the temporary hardship that might come with it.  
Even if the Icelandic authorities tried to avoid the socialisation of private sector losses in the 
case of the collapse of the three-cross border banks, the direct fiscal costs of the financial 
crisis were enormous. In this case, it is difficult to distinguish between the cost of the banking 
crisis and the recession that would nevertheless have occurred in Iceland in 2009, as a result 
of  the  unavoidable  macroeconomic  adjustment  following  the  serious  overheating  of  the 
economy  in  2005–2007.  Be  that  as  it  may,  the  direct  fiscal  costs  of  capital  injections  into 
domestic  banks,  losses  on  government  guarantees,  the  blanket  guarantee  of  domestic 
deposits, and the refinancing of the Central Bank are estimated to have amounted to one-
third of year-2010 GDP. The net might turn out to be somewhat lower, however; for instance, 
there will be some recovery on the collateral of CB lending to failed banks.  
Gross government debt went from under a third of GDP before the crisis to a peak of one 
GDP, and net debt rose from around a tenth to two-thirds. As a result, there was no fiscal 
space  to  save  banks  10  times  GDP,  and  attempting  to  do  so  would  have  bankrupted  the 
country. Indeed, Iceland had to embark on a medium-term fiscal consolidation programme 
even  as  output  was  still  contracting,  in  order  to  stop  government  debt  from  reaching  an 
unsustainable level and to rebuild the external confidence needed for the sovereign to regain 
market  access.  The  overall  fiscal  effort  (measured  by  changes  in  the  cyclically  adjusted 
primary  balance  as  a  percentage  of  potential  GDP)  amounted  to  10  percentage  points  
2010–13,  more  than  that  of  Ireland  during  the  same  period  (although  Ireland  will  overtake 
Iceland  if  the  expected  effort  for  2014  and  15  is  added).  This  effort  has  been  sufficient  to 
create a primary surplus and, along with growth in the economy from H2/2010 onwards, to 
put debt on a downward trajectory as a share of GDP, which is predicted to be 85% gross 
and below 60% net in 2015. But this has not come without significant pain, and again, would 
not have been possible if private bank liabilities had been guaranteed more than was needed 
to keep the domestic payment system and basic banking services up and running.  
Let me conclude by summarising some of the potential lessons from this tale:  
1. 
Iceland did not allow its entire banking system to collapse, it did not nationalise its 
banking system, and it did not default on sovereign debt. So, in spite of what one 
sometimes  hears,  the  Icelandic  case  does  not  teach  any  lesson  on  the  pros  and 
cons of such measures.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
2. 
3. 
4. 
Iceland  avoided  sovereign  default  through  a  good  initial  fiscal  position,  the  ring-
fencing of the sovereign as much as possible from collapsing cross-border banks, 
and a medium-term fiscal consolidation programme. The lesson is to practise fiscal 
prudence and avoid the socialisation of private sector losses.  
Iceland protected its domestic payment system and deposits. The lesson might be 
bail-in, separability in resolution between the public utility element of banking from 
the rest, and deposit preference.  
The  EU  system  for  cross-border  banking  is  deeply  flawed.  Existing  official  reform 
proposals  are  a  step  in  the  right  direction  but  do  not  fully  address  the  problems 
revealed by the Icelandic experience.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
