Matthew Elderfield: Central Bank of Ireland’s strategy for the next few 
years to come 
Address by Mr Matthew Elderfield, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, to the 
Institute of Directors in Ireland Spring Lunch, Dublin, 22 February 2013. 
 Introduction 
I’d like to start by thanking the Institute of Directors for giving me this opportunity to speak to 
today.  I  would  like  to  express  my  support  for  the  important  work  that  the  Institute  does  in 
promoting  high  standards  of  corporate  governance  in  Ireland.  Ireland  is  lucky  to  have  a 
number of strong organisations in place which support corporate governance and encourage 
professional  development  at  the  board  level  in  the  financial  services  industry.  I  was  very 
pleased to receive a Christmas present from Maura at the end of last year in the form of a 
copy  of  the  Institute’s  Handbook  for  directors  of  regulated  financial  services  companies.  I 
thought  this  provided  an  accessible  and  helpful  summary  of  the  evolving  Irish  corporate 
governance  framework.  I’m  also  grateful  to  the  Institute  for  its  continuing  training  work  for 
directors  in  the  financial  services  sector,  which  helps  complement  the  activities  of  the 
Insurance  Institute  of  Ireland  and  the  Institute  of  Bankers  (with  its  new  bank  director 
programme) for example. Members of boards of directors of Irish financial companies have a 
strong institutional support framework to assist them undertaking their roles. 
With  the  audience  here,  there  are  of  course  a  wide  range  of  possible  topics  to  discuss.  I 
thought it might be helpful to take this opportunity to provide an overview of the progress and 
future direction of some of the most important components of the Central Bank of Ireland’s 
strategic  plan.  We  have  in  fact  just  finished  a  three-year  cycle  in  strategic  planning  which 
corresponded  to  Patrick  Honohan’s  and  my  tenure  in  post  to  date.  We  are  now  starting  a 
new  three-year  cycle  and  set  out  an  updated  strategic  plan  at  the  end  of  last  year.  This 
covers  a  wide  range  of  issues,  such  as  the  increasingly  international  regulatory  policy 
agenda, our continuing work on consumer protection and some more prosaic but important 
internal organisational challenges around, for example, improved cost efficiency. But I think 
by any measure, our most pressing strategic priority is the continuing process of restoring the 
banking sector so that it can contribute to economic recovery. So, I’ll take a bit of time today 
to discuss progress and what lies ahead. No doubt this will be of some general interest, not 
just to those of you who are directors at banks. Also high on our list of priorities is the again 
continuing process of reforming regulation and supervision in Ireland, to provide an assertive 
risk-based approach underpinned by enforcement. So, let me take this as my second topic in 
order to provide an update on where things stand and are heading. And, as is natural with 
this audience, I would like to conclude by giving you an update of our thinking on continued 
enhancements to the corporate governance framework for financial services firms. In doing 
so, I would like to suggest a few areas of priority interest for financial services directors in the 
year ahead. 
Banking sector strategy 
Let me begin with a brief update on the elements of the Central Bank’s strategy to restore the 
functioning  of  the  banking  sector.  This  strategy  has  had  a  number  of  interconnected 
elements over the past few years. 
One important strand has involved restructuring of both the banks’ individual balance sheets 
and  the  sector  more  generally.  The  first  wave  of  balance  sheet  restructuring  involved  the 
transfer  of  hard  to  value  and  poorly  performing  commercial  property  assets  out  of  the 
banking  system  into  NAMA.  The  second  phase  of  this  exercise,  which  is  now  well 
progressed, has involved identification and disposal of so-called non-core assets. This is less 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
directly to do with improving asset quality but is rather an exercise in reducing the leverage of 
the  banking  system  and  therefore  the  reliance  of  the  banks  on  central  bank  funding.  This 
process of rightsizing the bank’s balance sheets has made good progress with most banks 
hitting or exceeding their targets, but there is still further to go. 
In addition to balance sheet restructuring, there have been some broader steps to restructure 
the banking system as a whole. Action has been taken to support the continuing operation of 
the  three  remaining  principal  domestic  Irish  banks,  namely  AIB,  Bank  of  Ireland  and 
Permanent TSB, while the three other domestic banks that were taken over by government 
have either been absorbed by one of these players (in the case of EBS) or liquidated (in the 
cases of Anglo and INBS forming IBRC). 
Looking  ahead,  our  focus  will  be  on  ensuring  continuing  progress  in  the  deleveraging  of 
non-core assets. It also makes sense to continue assessing the case for the possible transfer 
of  poor  performing  or  hard  to  value  core  assets  out  of  the  banking  system,  although  this 
depends upon providing a solution for an appropriate structure for this, in terms of funding 
and cost more generally. 
In addition to balance sheet and sectoral restructuring, a second key stream of activity has 
involved  assessing  the  embedded  credit  losses  in  the  banks  to  ensure  they  are  robustly 
recapitalised.  Our  principal  regulatory  tool  for  this  has  been  the  use  of  stress  testing,  to 
project forward credit losses that are likely to arise in a stress scenario and require a capital 
injection  to  make  up  the  shortfall  against  a  predefined  hurdle  rate.  In  the  Central  Bank’s 
Prudential Capital Assessment Review of 2011, the stress test was calibrated to ensure a 
high  degree  of  conservatism  by  using  projected  loan  losses  assessed  by  an  independent 
third  party,  Blackrock  Solutions,  rather  than  the  banks  themselves  and  by  having  a  higher 
threshold  target,  a  longer  assessment  period  and  an  additional  capital  buffer  compared  to 
similar international exercises. As a result of the capital injection that followed, current capital 
ratios of the leading domestic banks include a healthy buffer above minimum requirements. 
Towards the end of 2013, the Central Bank is planning to conduct a further stress test on the 
domestic  banks  at  the  same  time  as  a  pan-European  exercise  by  the  European  Banking 
Authority. This will provide an update on the financial resilience and capital adequacy of the 
domestic banks. There are a clearly a wide number of factors at play that will determine the 
outcome of this exercise. The methodology and severity of the stress has yet to be agreed at 
a  European  level,  for  example.  On  the  positive  side,  the  Irish  banks  start  with  a  stronger 
capital position, have suffered fewer losses than projected from the non-core asset disposals 
and  perhaps  will  benefit  from  early  signs  of  stability  in  the  housing  market.  However, 
conversely,  the  macroeconomic  picture  still  remains  in  stress,  mortgage  arrears  levels 
continue to rise (although so far within stress levels and more recently at a slower rate) and 
the introduction of insolvency legislation adds to the picture of uncertainty. In addition, even 
without these factors, new international standards under Basel 3 will require additional capital 
over  time  for  the  Irish  banks.  These  various  factors  will  require  close  and  detailed 
examination  in  a  new  stress  test,  where  we  will  again  be  taking  an  independent  view  of 
projected loan losses in reaching our conclusions. 
A crucial input into the stress test exercise is the treatment of troubled loan portfolios, and 
this is the third key stream of the banking strategy. In the area of mortgage arrears we have 
been  encouraging  the  banks  to  develop  detailed  strategies  to  improve  their  operational 
capacity for handling this portfolio. We’ve also pressed for a case-by-case re-underwriting of 
existing  arrears  cases 
involving,  where  possible,  recovery  and,  when  necessary, 
restructuring  of  troubled  loans.  We  have  also  encouraged  development  of  specialist 
strategies  for  buy-to-let  portfolios.  And  we  have  pressed  the  banks  to  develop  a  broader 
range of techniques to deal with loans in arrears, particularly unsustainable mortgages, such 
as loan modification arrangements like split mortgages. 
Our  assessment  of  the  banks’  operational  capacity  for  arrears  handling  over  a  year  ago 
showed significant weaknesses. As a result, since then, we have had an intense programme 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
of  supervisory  engagement  with  the  banks  involving  multiple  detailed  reviews  of  their 
distressed  credit  operations,  guidance  on  required  improvements  and  suggested  best 
practices, and a continuing work stream on improving metrics around performance. While the 
situation is still short of ideal, this has led to significant improvements from where the system 
was  15  months  ago  and  so  now  is  the  time  to  see  real  delivery.  It  is  important  that  this 
involves a more realistic mix of solutions for borrowers. It is encouraging to hear more than 
one  bank  CEO  acknowledge  that  while  repossessions  will  inevitably  rise  significantly,  for 
cooperating owner occupier borrowers there will also be a step up in the volume of cases of 
long  term  loan  modification  –  carefully  targeted  debt  relief  if  you  like.  Wider  industry 
recognition  of  this  balanced  approach  is  important:  recovery  of  loans  in  full  wherever 
possible, repossession, voluntary surrender or trade down if necessary, but for cooperating 
homeowners who are insolvent and at the threshold of repossession having already cut back 
their living expenses, that there will be more use of long term loan modification where they 
are willing to repay what debt they can but also want to remain in their home. 
For customers the key message is one of full engagement with their bank, meaning being 
available  for  contact,  making  a  full  disclosure  of  your  affairs  and  actively  working  with  the 
bank to discuss possible solutions. This is especially important because customers who do 
not cooperate with their bank are liable to immediate commencement of legal proceedings 
and  rule  themselves  out  of  possible  participation  in  the  new  personal  insolvency 
arrangement. 
We  will  continue  to  have  a  high  level  of  engagement  with  the  banks  on  their  mortgage 
portfolios and further efforts in this area are underway. We are also publishing more detailed 
key performance indicators so that there is transparency around the degree of progress on 
this key issue. It is important that this work on mortgages is matched by the banks’ efforts on 
their  small  business  portfolios.  This  will  be  a  major  area  of  focus  for  the  Central  Bank  in 
2013.  Here  too,  we  will  encourage  a  clear  strategy,  better  specialist  skills  and  operational 
capabilities and a more determined effort to work through the existing stock of troubled loans 
to try to recover or resolve individual cases. 
Broadly  speaking,  these  three  work  streams  –  balance  sheet  and  sectoral  restructuring, 
capital  assessment  and  troubled  loan  workout  –  remain  core  elements  of  the  strategy  to 
improve the functioning of the banking system. A fully functioning and revived banking sector 
is essential to the economic recovery of Ireland in order to provide credit to individuals and 
businesses. It is in Ireland’s interest to see a profitable banking sector returning to full health. 
There  have  been  some  encouraging  signs,  such  as  the  willingness  of  private  investors  to 
take stakes in Bank of Ireland and the ability of the banks to make a limited return to the debt 
capital  markets.  However,  a  key  goal  must  be  sustained  profitability  for  the  sector.  In  this 
respect,  the  outlook  remains  difficult,  with  low  levels  of  domestic  economic  activity  and 
compressed net interest margins. An early exit from the guarantee will help to normalise the 
sector and reduce a drain on profitability. Continuing efforts are also needed on cost control. 
Clearly the path ahead remains a difficult one and progress will inevitably continue to be slow 
given the significant dislocation that has occurred to the banking sector and the economy as 
a whole. 
Supervisory and regulatory reform 
If banking sector recovery is perhaps the Central Bank’s top strategic objective, close behind 
it is the process of continuing to reform regulation and supervision. Significant progress has 
been made on this front since I first set out my thoughts on this subject in March 2010. At 
that  time,  I  drew  the  analogy  that  you  can’t  referee  a  Premier  league  match  with  one 
linesman and no red card in your pocket. In other words, that it’s important that the Central 
Bank has the resources and powers needed to do the job. 
I’m pleased to say the good progress has been made on both fronts. The Central Bank was 
significantly  under-resourced  in  terms  of  front-line  supervisors,  enforcement  professionals 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
the  regulatory 
framework  and  have  now  been 
and  policy  staff.  We  have  now  completed  a  phase  of  significant  growth  and  in  fact  have 
revised downwards our  target staffing numbers from 735 to approximately 685,  with some 
further  reductions  planned  in  future  years  as  a  result  of  efficiency  improvements  and 
completion of some key responsibilities. We also continue to encourage improvement in staff 
quality,  through  rigorous  hiring  and  probation  procedures,  in-house  training  and  various 
quality assurance mechanisms. 
Ireland is also making good progress in developing a set of robust powers. The Central Bank 
Reform Act 2010 provided for the introduction of fitness and probity standards. These are an 
important  strengthening  of 
largely 
implemented. However, the principal legislation to reform and strengthen the regulatory and 
supervisory  framework  is  the  Central  Bank  Supervision  and  Enforcement  Bill  which  is 
nearing  adoption.  This  important  legislation  strengthens  regulation  in  a  number  of  ways, 
providing  better  tools  for  risk  assessment  (such  as  skilled  persons  reports),  increasing 
enforcement  sanctions  against  firms  and  individuals,  setting  clearer  regulatory  and  policy 
making powers, providing a new best practice whistleblowing standard and making various 
other changes. This is a welcome set of improvements and I am grateful to the support which 
successive governments have provided to this legislation. 
While the resourcing and powers available for regulation and supervision are important, our 
reforms have also touched on a number of other essential elements. In particular, it has been 
important to learn the lessons of the financial crisis to reset the supervisory philosophy for 
engagement  with  regulated  firms.  Our  strategy  is  one  of  assertive  risk-based  supervision 
underpinned by the credible threat of enforcement. This is designed to put a few concepts 
front and centre: that we operate a risk-based approach, differentiating based on impact and 
probability; that there are consequences and accountability for non-compliance; and that our 
supervisors are empowered to insist upon actions to mitigate risk where we are not satisfied 
by  the  explanation  from  a  firm’s  management.  To  support  this  approach,  we  have 
significantly geared up our enforcement activities to ensure that an effective deterrent does 
indeed work in practice. 
And in terms of supervision, we have implemented a new Central Bank-wide risk assessment 
framework, which we call PRISM for probability risk and impact system. This framework sets 
out a prescribed level of engagement with different types of institutions based on their impact 
in terms of potential prudential and consumer detriment. For higher impact firms, it requires a 
periodic  systematic  assessment  of  risks  around  a  range  of  criteria,  resulting  in  a  clear 
communication to the firm as to those issues we believe require mitigation – in other words, 
action by the firm to sort out the issue. This framework, which we are still embedding, to my 
mind is already beginning to show strong benefits by prompting a critical assessment of the 
position  in  the  firms  we  assess  and  flushing  out  problems  that  require  action.  As  Board 
Directors, our PRISM assessment provides an insight to you into what we think about your 
institution and what action we think needs to be taken. For well-run firms, with strong internal 
risk management and a strong compliance culture, much of this assessment should hold no 
surprises and should ideally already have been identified and escalated to the Board. Where 
this is not the case, as a Board member I would suggest you should find that revealing in and 
of itself and indicative of an area for Board discussion and challenge of management. 
Looking  ahead,  our  continuing  strategy  is  to  build  on  the  progress  that  has  been  made  in 
these various areas. We are planning the implementation of the new powers that are close to 
adoption and will be engaging stakeholders in close consultation on these. We will continue 
to  strengthen  our  supervisory  capacity,  even  though  our  period  of  significant  growth  is 
concluded, by working to improve supervisory quality through training and quality assurance. 
And we will continue to embed PRISM as we roll out the process of doing assessments for a 
growing  number  of  firms.  We  will  also  take  stock  at  the  end  of  the  year  as  to  PRISM’s 
implementation to allow any necessary fine-tuning. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Corporate governance standards and the role of the director 
One  of  the  important  regulatory  changes  that has  taken  place  in  the past  three  years  has 
been  the  introduction  of  corporate  governance  standards  for  banks  and  insurance 
companies.  These  were  a  domestic  initiative  by  the  Central  Bank  in  response  to  our 
assessment  of  the  need  to  raise  standards  of  corporate  governance  in  financial  services 
companies in Ireland and ensure that boards of directors play a stronger role in challenging 
management  over  strategy,  risk  appetite,  compliance  and  other  important  matters.  Rather 
than a ‘comply or explain’ approach, our corporate governance framework has sharper teeth 
by being enforceable. It also includes restrictions on the number of board directorships that 
could be held simultaneously, with the goal of encouraging more diversity of background and 
robustness of challenge by broadening the gene pool of corporate life. 
We want to take an opportunity to revisit the code during the course of this year to see what 
refinements are needed and to reassess the scope of the framework. For example, we want 
to take the opportunity to assess subsequent European developments in this area. We also 
plan to examine the merits of extending the code to investment firms governed by the MIFID 
Directive, which is itself subject to changes. The diversity of types and sizes of investment 
firm  operating  in  Ireland  is  a  particular  aspect  that  will  need  careful  consideration  when 
reflecting  on  the  structure  and  content  of  a  possible  code  for  the  sector,  as  well  as 
consideration of timing in light of European developments. 
Separately,  we  would  also  like  to  see  how  well  the  funds  sector  is  progressing  with  the 
implementation  of  its  own  voluntary  code  of  corporate  governance.  I’m  pleased  that  IFIA 
showed such leadership in developing this code and I think it will soon be time to assess the 
extent of take up and compliance in the sector. 
More generally, this will be a good opportunity to take stock about what has worked well – 
and  what  has  not  –  with  the  corporate  governance  code  and  regulatory  framework  in  this 
area. Strong corporate governance is such a crucially important foundation for a prudently 
run and compliant financial services sector that it’s essential we get the regulatory framework 
right and be prepared to update it periodically. There will be a lot of interest in this exercise 
and I’m sure that the Institute of Directors will again be a sensible voice in the consultation 
process and a source of useful input. 
In the meantime, however, the current code remains in force as is and those of you in this 
room who are directors at financial services companies continue to have the challenging task 
of  overseeing  your  firms  in  a  period  of  seemingly  never-ending  financial  uncertainty  and 
regulatory change. There are a huge range of issues you will need to stay on top of, but I’m 
sure  you  know  that  already.  As  I  mentioned  earlier,  where  we  provide  a  risk  assessment 
under PRISM, this will hopefully assist you with your work. But taking a step back, let me 
suggest a few areas that all directors in all financial services firms might reasonably take a 
strong interest in during the year ahead. There are obviously some sector-specific issues that 
should be worrying some of you. I hope the boards of the domestic banks are pressing their 
management  teams  to  make  real  progress  in  the  workout  of  those  troubled  mortgage  and 
small business portfolios I mentioned, for example. However, let me draw out three areas of 
broad applicability across all sectors. 
Firstly, I would suggest that boards of directors should take a close interest in ensuring that 
their  financial  services  firm  has  in  place  a  high  quality  risk  appetite  statement  that  is  well 
understood  and  implemented  throughout  the  firm  in  practice.  A  clear  articulation  of  the 
acceptable  level  of  risk  undertaken  by  a  firm,  for  example  in  terms  of  potential  lending, 
investment portfolio or insurance underwriting losses expressed in terms of P&L or balance 
sheet  events  at  different  confidence  intervals,  is  an  important  discipline  and  an  essential 
complement to a well-articulated business strategy. Indeed, our corporate governance code 
requires that such a statement be in place. However, the quality of what we see, in a range 
of sectors, is uneven and even at some of the larger and apparently more sophisticated firms 
we have been surprised by the lack of rigour and quantification in some cases. This applies 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
to  the  international  sector  as  well  as  the  domestic  one.  Directors  of  subsidiaries  of 
international financial services firms still have important regulatory responsibilities and need 
to satisfy themselves as to the risk profile of the legal entity and balance sheet which is under 
their  particular  charge.  Risk  appetite  is  an  area  where  we  would  think  boards  themselves 
would want to set a very high standard. It is certainly an area of increasing interest on our 
part and where we are debating the best approach to encouraging improvements. 
Secondly, I would encourage you as directors to provide broad, challenging scrutiny of your 
firms’  culture  regarding  regulatory  compliance  and  internal  challenge  and  that  you  ensure 
you  are  approaching  this  strategically  and  with  suitable  vigour.  There  are  a  number  of 
elements  to  this,  but  I  will  highlight  a  few  and  give  you  a  very  specific  tip  to  help  you. 
Appropriately  resourced  and  well-qualified  risk  management  and  compliance  functions  are 
an  obvious  starting  point  for  a  board  seeking  to  satisfy  itself  in  this  area.  But  I  would 
challenge you to think more fundamentally and strategically about the culture in the institution 
you oversee and to consider whether a strong approach to compliance, encouraging internal 
challenge,  and  maintaining  high  standards  of  conduct  is  truly  embedded.  This  is a  difficult 
task that merits regular reassessment by a board, with a willingness to get right to the heart 
of  the  incentives  provided  by  the  current  design  of  a  firm’s  remuneration  structure  and  by 
holding business leaders to account for poor compliance records, persistently weak audits, 
suppression of challenging opinions and any actions inconsistent with standards of conduct. 
In  terms  of  the  specific  areas  of  supervisory  interest  by  the  Central  Bank  –  and  potential 
areas of enforcement action – my tip to you as board directors would be to read closely the 
Central  Banks  planned  programme  of  thematic  supervisory  reviews  and  our  announced 
enforcement  priorities  for  2013.  These  have  been  published  recently  and  are  a  very 
transparent  roadmap  of  our  areas  of  particular  interest  in  the  year  ahead  and  where 
regulatory  transgressions  are  more  likely  than  not  to  lead  to  enforcement  action.  They 
provide  a  very  obvious  checklist  for  boards  of  directors  who  want  to  stay  away  from  any 
problems with their regulator. 
Thirdly,  I  would  encourage  you  as  part  of  your  board  assessment  process  to  take  a 
hard-nosed view on board composition with a view to improving performance. Our corporate 
governance code is designed in part to prompt this process of board renewal: adding to the 
gene  pool  through  new  directors  with  new  skills  and  different  backgrounds.  Part  of  this 
process should involve a rigorous assessment of the skill mix of the board as a whole, so 
there is both sufficient technical knowledge of finance, sectoral issues, risk management and 
regulation,  as  well  as  broader  skill  sets.  But  also  important  is  ensuring  that  the  mix  of 
backgrounds and personalities provides a safeguard against group think by self-perpetuation 
of the same “type” of board member. Is your current board composition providing the right 
degree of management challenge and a willingness to ask the awkward questions? Do you 
have the right gender diversity? Do you have the right international experience? If you look 
around the board table and you are all the same sex, ethnicity, nationality and educational 
background, well, the answer is probably no! Board effectiveness reviews with these goals in 
mind are essential and need to be tackled in a structured and determined way, ideally with 
facilitation on these key points, to help offset the inertia that comes from incumbency. 
Conclusion 
I hope these brief remarks have given you a good sense of our strategy at the Central Bank 
for the next few years to come. The challenges facing Ireland and its financial services sector 
are considerable. Returning the banking sector to full health so that it can support economic 
recovery must be the most central of these challenges and therefore, as I’ve explained, is at 
the  forefront  of  our  strategy.  Ensuring  that  our  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  is 
adequately  resourced,  with  robust  powers,  and  able  to  deliver  assertive  risk-based 
supervision  with  a  credible  enforcement  deterrent,  remains  a  key  strategic  priority  where 
good progress has been made but further work remains to be done. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
And  central  to  the  success  of  Ireland  recovering  from  the  financial  crisis  and  its  financial 
sector supporting businesses, consumers and the economy as a whole, will continue to be 
the crucial role of the board director. Supported by the good work of the Institute of Directors, 
I encourage you to challenge your management team, your fellow board directors and indeed 
yourself to not only meet the minimum requirements of our corporate governance framework 
as it continues to evolve, but to set the bar as high as you can in striving for a robust risk 
management  framework  with  a  clear  articulation  of  risk  appetite,  to  be  relentless  about 
embedding a culture which is serious about compliance, challenge and high standards and to 
take  the  tough  decisions  to  rebalance  board  composition  to  improve  diversity,  quality  of 
oversight and performance. 
Thank You. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
