Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Raising the bar for the next phase of growth and 
development – sustaining transformative momentum 
Welcoming address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 
10th  IFSB  (Islamic  Financial  Services  Board)  Summit  2013  “The  future  of  the  Islamic 
financial services industry – resilience, stability and inclusive growth”, Sasana Kijang, Kuala 
Lumpur, 16 May 2013. 
 It is a great pleasure to welcome you to this 10th IFSB Summit, on the “The Future of the 
Islamic Financial Services Industry: Resilience, Stability and Inclusive Growth”. Bank 
Negara Malaysia is most honored to host this year’s summit, which is held in conjunction with 
the  10th  anniversary  of  the  Islamic  Financial  Services  Board  (IFSB).  It  was  here  in  Kuala 
Lumpur 10 years ago that we witnessed the momentous occasion of the IFSB inauguration, 
that was the culmination of international collaboration among the founding member countries 
with  the  support  of  several  key  international  and  multilateral  institutions.  Its  landmark 
establishment  in  2002  as  the  international  prudential  standard  setting  body  for  the  Islamic 
finance marked a major milestone in the effort to strengthen the international infrastructure 
for  the Islamic financial  system,  steering  the  path  for  its  successful  integration  as  a  viable 
component of the global financial system. A decade on, the work of the IFSB in ensuring a 
cohesive  cross-border  regulatory  framework  and  the  international  best  practices  that  are 
attuned  to  the  intrinsic  characteristics  and  peculiarities  of  Islamic  financial  intermediation, 
have  served  to  underpin  the  development  of  a  sound  and  stable  Islamic  financial  system, 
ushering in a phase of rapid growth and greater internationalization of the industry. 
Indeed, 10 years since the founding of the IFSB have been a period of significance, during 
which  the  Islamic  financial  services  industry  has  grown  impressively  with  its  landscape 
dramatically evolved. This growth acceleration has been accompanied by the widening of its 
geographical  reach  transcending  its  traditional  borders  in  Muslim  majority  countries  to  the 
more  established  financial  centres.  In  addition,  Islamic  finance  has  evolved  as  a 
comprehensive  system  of  intermediation  servicing  all  segments  of  society,  including 
governments,  businesses  and  households  regardless  of  scale  of  businesses  and  income 
levels.  In  this  decade,  Islamic  finance  has  also  evolved  from  being  domestic-centric  to 
become increasingly internationalized, intermediating funds across borders and becoming a 
new  vehicle  that  bridges  economies  and  fostering  closer  financial  linkages,  particularly 
among emerging and developing markets. 
As a form of financial intermediation that is well anchored to serve the real economy, Islamic 
finance offers distinct potential to achieve the goals of inclusive growth and financial stability. 
Its foundations have been strengthened with the setting up of the IFSB and before that, the 
Accounting and Auditing Organisation for Islamic Financial Institutions (AAOIFI), have taken 
the lead in setting the prudential and accounting standards for the industry. Combined with 
continuous  capacity  building  initiatives  and  institutional  development,  it  has  resulted  in  the 
opportunity  to  achieve  scale  and  has  allowed  the  Islamic  financial  services  industry  to 
transition into a dynamic, fast growing and competitive form of financial intermediation for the 
global community. 
The IFSB today is celebrating its tenth anniversary in a world which is changing profoundly. 
A  new  growth  and  development  agenda  is  unfolding  before  us.  Given  the  severe  damage 
and devastation caused by the global financial crisis and the ensuing economic downturns, 
the road to an enduring recovery and lasting prosperity demands a global policy response 
that  brings  about  a  new  economic  trajectory  built  on  a  strong,  more  inclusive  and  more 
sustainable growth path. Common challenges that have also come to the forefront, such as 
poverty, increasing inequality and the imperative for greater social cohesion, have also called 
for the construction of policy objectives and strategies that can enhance stability, social well-
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
being  and  environmental  sustainability.  In  the  wake  of  the  global  financial  crisis,  there  is 
consensus on the need for a return to financial systems that serve the real economy, and the 
demands for more responsible financial practices from the financial sector, that also includes 
the commitment to achieve socio-economic goals. 
In  response,  the  international  community  is  prioritizing  financial  stability  by  strengthening 
financial  regulation.  This  includes  financial  reforms  aimed  at  protecting  depositors  from 
excessive risk-taking, over-leveraging and unfettered innovation. The reform initiatives have 
also focused on enhancing capital and liquidity standards, reinforced by moves to strengthen 
the macro-prudential orientation of regulation to complement micro-prudential supervision to 
manage the risks arising from the interdependencies within the financial system. Whilst the 
breadth of regulatory changes being considered collectively endeavor to strengthen financial 
system resilience, the key challenge for policymakers and regulators going forward is also to 
achieve inclusive and more sustainable growth, whilst ensuring financial stability. 
Whilst  Islamic  finance  has  benefited  from  a  well-developed,  more  competitive  and  well 
regulated eco-system, it needs to build on and reinforce the solid foundations that has been 
achieved  in  this  decade.  As  the  industry  transitions  into  a  new  era  of  growth  and 
development in this post-crisis world, the competitive financial landscape is being redrawn by 
the  evolving  international  regulatory  reforms,  changing  operating  models,  rising  consumer 
expectations and increased competition. In this more challenging environment, the success 
of sustaining the momentum of Islamic finance as a transformative agent for the economy, 
will hinge on the ability to keep raising the bar in the pursuit of an effective functioning 
and sound Islamic financial system. 
Post-crisis,  the  increased  emphasis  for  inclusive  and  sustainable  products  as  well  as 
responsible  corporate  behavior  provides  clear  potential  for  Islamic  financial  players  to 
demonstrate  leadership  by  capitalizing  on  core  value  propositions  of  Islamic  financial 
intermediation. There is also scope for greater leverage on the advances of technology and 
new  institutional  arrangements  that  can  enhance  operational  excellence,  particularly 
distribution  channels  for  extending  outreach  to  the  range  of  users  from  households  to 
microenterprises and small and medium scale enterprises. 
In addition, innovations in Islamic financial solutions will need to take into account the higher 
regulatory expectations for more transparency, and the need for the effective management of 
risks and capital. This involves strengthening the resilience of the Islamic financial system in 
alignment  with  the  evolving  international  regulatory  developments  thus  raising  the  bar  of 
industry performance. The IFSB has made significant advancements in leading the efforts to 
review  specific  measures  put  forward  by  the  Basel  Committee  for  possible  adoption  in 
Islamic  finance.  Further  to  this  is  the  imperative  to  cultivate  a  strong  risk  culture  within 
institutions.  Reinforced  by  a  robust  shariah  governance  framework,  it  will  ensure  that 
innovation  for  furthering  the  development  of  Islamic  finance  is  harnessed  within  the 
boundaries  of  the  Shariah,  which  would  avert  overzealous  innovative  activities  that  could 
undermine financial stability. 
Let  me  conclude  my  remarks.  Much  has  been  achieved,  both  in  terms  of  the  role  and 
contribution  of  the  IFSB,  and  the  advancement  made  by  Islamic  finance  in  this  recent 
decade. This has been an outcome of cumulative efforts to strengthen the foundations of the 
Islamic financial system. As the industry gears itself for the next phase of growth in the more 
challenging  environment,  our  commitment  and  strategies  to  keep  raising  the  bar  to  bring 
Islamic finance to a new level will enhance its prospect to contribute to achieving our shared 
vision of inclusive growth in an environment of financial stability. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
