Stefan Ingves: From ideas to implementation 
Remarks  by  Mr  Stefan  Ingves,  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank  and  Chairman  of  the 
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, at the 8th High Level  Meeting organised by the 
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision and the Financial Stability Institute and hosted by 
the South African Reserve Bank, Cape Town, 24 January 2013. 
As prepared for delivery. 
Introduction 
 Let me begin today by thanking Josef Tošovský, Chairman of the Financial Stability Institute, 
for organising the latest in its series of High Level Meetings. The Basel Committee continues 
to view these events as extremely important, as they bring together senior policymakers and 
supervisors in a forum in which we can share thoughts on critical issues of the moment and 
reflect on long term challenges. Let me also extend my thanks to the South African Reserve 
Bank for its superb hospitality as the annual host of this High Level Meeting. 
Change and reform – new ideas and new ways of doing things – can be challenging in good 
times. When all is well, the perceived need is low and the costs – including opportunity costs 
– are difficult to justify. Even small ideas can be difficult to implement. Crises, on the other 
hand, provide a catalyst for fundamentally rethinking past practices. Many banks have learnt 
this  as  a  painful  lesson  in  recent  years:  when  times  were  good,  potential  operational,  risk 
management  and  cultural  deficiencies  were  not  examined  closely  enough.  When  serious 
problems emerge, however, there is a demand for new ideas and new ways of doing things: 
the status quo becomes unacceptable. 
Of  course,  the  same  scenario  has  applied  to  the  regulatory framework more  broadly.  Pre-
crisis,  any  call  for  stronger  capital  and  liquidity  rules  was  generally  howled  down  as 
burdensome and unnecessary. Post-2008, the costs of a weak regulatory framework have 
been all too obvious and painful for the banking sector, and as a result the demand for new 
ideas was immediate and forceful. 
My theme for today is that successful regulatory reform is about ideas and implementation. 
Certainly, we needed to rethink the regulatory framework in light of what we have learnt from 
the past five years – the status quo was not acceptable. But if we want to be successful, the 
Committee also needs to make sure that the ideas we developed into Basel III are truly put 
into practice. 
From ideas …. 
The  Basel  Committee’s  response  to  the  financial  crisis  was  to  recognise  that  policy 
weaknesses  contributed  to  the  excesses  that  built  up  in  the  financial  sector.  A  substantial 
overhaul was necessary: minor adjustments to the framework were not going to be enough. 
We needed some big, new far-reaching ideas. In summary, we decided that it was necessary 
to:  
• 
require  banks  to  maintain  substantially  higher  levels  of  capital,  with  the  minimum 
common equity requirement increasing from 2% to 7% of risk weighted assets; 
require banks to hold higher quality forms of capital, with common equity at the core 
of the requirements, and standards to ensure other types of capital instruments are 
truly loss-absorbing. It is worthwhile emphasising that these reforms also go a long 
way  to  simplifying  banks’  capital  structures,  as  well  as  making  them  more 
transparent and comparable; 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
     introduce  an  additional  capital  buffer  (the  capital  conservation  buffer)  designed  to 
enforce  corrective  action  when  a  bank’s  capital  ratio  deteriorates.  The  capital 
conservation buffer allows banks to dip into their capital reserves, while at the same 
time providing disincentives for banks to do so due to the restrictions it imposes on 
dividend and bonus payments; 
add  a  macroprudential  element  in  the  form  of  the  countercyclical  buffer,  which 
requires  banks  to  hold  more  capital  in  good  times  to  prepare  for  inevitable 
downturns in the economy; 
supplement the risk-based regime with a simple backstop in the form of a (non-risk-
based) leverage ratio; 
impose  additional  capital  requirements  on  systemically  important  banks  –  both 
global and domestic – to take account of the externalities their failure would impose 
on society; and 
introduce the first international standards for bank liquidity and funding, designed to 
promote  the  resilience  of  a  bank’s  liquidity  risk  profile  to  both  short  term  liquidity 
shocks (the Liquidity Coverage Ratio – LCR) and longer-term mismatches in funding 
(the Net Stable Funding Ratio – NSFR). 
Of  course,  there  are  plenty  of  other  big  ideas  being  floated  on  how  the  banking  industry 
should  be  restructured  in  the  aftermath  of  the  crisis,  particularly  those  related  to  varying 
models of structural separation (eg the ideas of Volker, Vickers and Liikanen). But for those 
that fall within the mandate of the Basel Committee, we believe that the ideas produced by 
Basel Committee thinking – translated into the Basel III reforms, and subsequently endorsed 
by  the  G20  and  Financial  Stability  Board  –  provide  a  substantial  foundation  on  which  the 
banking system can be rebuilt to be much more robust and resilient in the future. 
Basel III capital requirements are probably well known to all of you, so I do not propose to 
say much more about them today. What I would instead like to focus on is our thinking in 
relation  to  liquidity,  and  particularly  the  LCR.  As  an  idea,  it  is  simple:  a  bank  should  have 
enough  liquid  assets  to  survive  a  30-day  period  of  stress.  And  perhaps  to  some,  it  might 
seem  underwhelming.  If  you  tell  your  spouse  that  we  have  implemented  a  reform  that 
requires banks to have enough cash to last 30 days, more than likely you will get the same 
response I did when I tried to explain it to my wife: “what do you mean, only 30 days?”  
Yet this idea has been one of the most fundamental reforms of the crisis. It also is a classic 
example  of  an  idea  that  had  been  toyed  with  for  a  long  time,  but  took  a  crisis  to  bring  to 
fruition.  A  study  of  Basel  Committee  history  shows  liquidity  to  have  been  on  the  agenda 
almost  for  the  entire  existence  of  the  Committee,  but  we  have  never  come  close  to  an 
international standard. Basel III has changed that. So even though the LCR is “only 30 days 
of cash”, its significance should not be underestimated.  
As you would be aware, the focus of the Committee over the past two years has been on 
refining  the  formulation  of  the  LCR  announced  in  2010.  Given  this  is  the  first  time  the 
international  community  had  developed  a  global  liquidity  standard,  it  was  agreed  that  it 
should be subject to an observation period, during which it could be adjusted as a result of 
further  analysis  and  assessment.  The  aim  of  the  observation  process  was  not  to  further 
tighten  or  weaken  the  standard:  the  goal  was  purely  to  ensure  the  calibration  was  more 
reflective of empirical evidence and appropriate for implementation as a minimum standard, 
across the Committee’s 27 member countries and more broadly. 
The changes agreed to by the Committee focus on three main areas: 
• 
High quality liquid assets (HQLA): A diverse and sufficiently large stock of HQLA is 
essential  to  help  banks  withstand  liquidity  stress.  The  revised  definition  now 
provides  limited  recognition  of  additional  assets  such  as  a  broader  range  of 
corporate  bonds,  a  selection  of  listed  equities,  and  some  highly-rated  residential 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
mortgage  backed  securities  (RMBS).  Recognising  the  greater  price  volatility 
associated  with  such  assets,  their  inclusion  in  the  stock  of  HQLA  is  subject  to  a 
relatively  low  limit  as  well  as  significant  “haircuts”.  The  Committee  has  tried  to 
balance the benefits of greater diversification of the liquidity pool against the cost of 
including slightly lower quality assets. 
We  have  also  changed  some  of  the  assumed  inflow  and  outflow  rates  that 
determine the size of the pool of liquid assets that a bank is required to hold.  
As in the case of the capital conservation buffer, the standards now make very clear 
that liquidity is to be built up and maintained in good times so that it can be used in 
times of need. In other words, liquidity is not useful if it is frozen.  
  In addition, in light of the considerable stress facing banking systems in some regions of the 
world, the Committee revised the implementation plan of the LCR by introducing a phase-in 
arrangement.  The  LCR  will  come  into  force  as  planned  in  2015,  although  banks  now  will 
have until 1 January 2019 to meet the standard in full. Nevertheless, I expect many banks 
will choose to move to the higher standard more quickly.  
In announcing the revisions to the LCR, many headline writers categorised it as some kind of 
win for the banking industry over the regulators. This is simplistic. We had an observation 
period for good reason: to make sure we got the settings right. There was, I think, legitimate 
concern  that,  as  a  minimum  standard,  the  2010  formulation  of  the  LCR  may  have  been 
calibrated  too  conservatively  overall.  For  example,  the  treatment  of  traditional  retail  and 
commercial  banking  was  probably  too  harsh,  and  this  has  been  adjusted.  Equally  the 
treatment of derivative-related risks was probably too weak, and so that has been adjusted 
too.  Much  has  been  made  of  the  inclusion  of  RMBS  in  the  definition  of  high  quality  liquid 
assets, but the eligibility criteria are tight and the initial perception that the Committee had 
granted carte blanche to the securitisation sector is well wide of the mark. As the Chairman 
of the Basel Committee’s governing body, Governor King of the Bank of England, said when 
announcing  the full  set of  changes,  they  are  designed  to make the  LCR  “more realistic”.  I 
think this sums it up very well. 
Of course, the overall impact of the changes is to improve the reported LCR of the banking 
system.  Based  on  our  most  recent  data  (end  June  2012),  we  estimate  that  the  weighted 
average  LCR  for  a  sample  of  roughly  200  of  the  world’s  largest  banks  is  around  125%, 
compared with a little over 100% for the previous calibration. This does not mean, however, 
that  all  banks  are  ready  and  able  to  meet  the  standard  today.  Even  though  the  industry 
average is well above the minimum, our estimates suggest that roughly one-quarter of our 
sample could still have an LCR below 100% even with the latest policy changes. So there 
remains a significant liquidity shortfall that will need to be addressed by a number of banks. 
One  also  has  to  bear  in  mind  that  favourable  terms  from  central  banks  have  helped  to 
improve  bank  funding.  Central  banks  serve  as  lenders  of  last  resort  and,  as  economic 
conditions improve, banks will need to become more self-reliant. However, the timetable for 
the  gradual  introduction  of  the  ratio  ensures  that  the  new  liquidity  standard  will  in  no  way 
hinder the ability of the global banking system to finance a recovery. 
It  has  taken  a  lot  of  time  and  effort  to  reach  agreement  on  the  LCR.  It  is,  as  I  said,  a 
deceptively simple idea, but its implications are big and far-reaching. Unsurprisingly, there is 
much  in  the  detail  that  required  a  lot  of  careful  analysis  and  thought,  not  to  mention  a 
willingness to find a way through differing national perspectives. It is, however, critical that 
the new ideas such as the LCR (and the other new features of Basel III such as the capital 
conservation buffer, countercyclical buffer, leverage ratio and NSFR) are implemented if their 
benefits are to be realised. Against that background, let me now turn to the work we have 
started to ensure that the Basel III framework is implemented as intended. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
…. to implementation 
Steady  progress  is  being  made.  As  of  January  2013,  11  out  of  19  Basel  Committee 
jurisdictions  have  final  Basel  III  rules  in  place,  including  our  hosts  today,  South  Africa.  A 
number  of  non-member countries  also  implemented  Basel  III  at  the  beginning  of the  year, 
further expanding its coverage. While it would be ideal to have much broader coverage at 
this time (as at today, around one-third of global banking assets are officially subject to the 
Basel III requirements), the delays should not be interpreted as any lack of commitment by 
global  regulators  to  implement  the  agreed  reforms.  At  recent  international  gatherings,  all 
members have been asked to reaffirm their commitment to implementing the agreed reforms 
as  soon  as  possible.  And  they  have  given  that  commitment  (subject,  of  course,  to  the 
vagaries of domestic rule-making processes that each must follow). Nevertheless, let me be 
clear: the question being discussed is when the reforms will be implemented, not if. 
Any setback to implementation is undesirable, since Basel III is a key platform on which to 
rebuild a stronger global banking system. But the delays are not critical at this point, for two 
reasons. First, the Basel III capital rules contain a lengthy phase-in period, meaning that in 
2013 the new requirements should not be particularly burdensome for banks (eg none of the 
new deductions from capital are applied this year). Second, many regulators who have been 
unable to implement the new standards by the beginning of this year are still measuring and 
monitoring their banks’ capacity to meet the new requirements. And, of course, markets are 
applying  similar  pressure.  In  other  words,  the  “force”  of  the  new  capital  regime  is  much 
broader than just those countries that have implemented their domestic regulations. 
Nevertheless, to ensure visibility of the implementation of reforms, the Basel Committee has 
been regularly publishing information about members’ adoption of Basel III. We will continue 
to  do  this  so  as  to  keep  all  stakeholders  and  the  markets  informed,  and  to  maintain  peer 
pressure where necessary. It is especially important that jurisdictions that are home to global 
systemically  important  banks  (G-SIBs)  make  every  effort  to  issue  final  regulations  at  the 
earliest possible opportunity.  
But simply issuing domestic rules is not enough to achieve what the G20 Leaders asked for: 
full,  timely  and  consistent  implementation  of  Basel  III.  In  response  to  this  call,  in  2012  the 
Committee  initiated  what  has  become  known  as  the  Regulatory  Consistency  Assessment 
Programme  (RCAP). The  regular  progress  reports  are  simply  one  part  of this  programme, 
which assesses domestic regulations’ compliance with the Basel standards, and examines 
the  outcomes  at  individual  banks.  The  RCAP  process  will  be  fundamental  to  ensuring 
confidence in regulatory ratios and promoting a level playing field for internationally-operating 
banks.  
It is inevitable that, as the Committee begins to review aspects of the regulatory framework in 
far  more  detail  than  it  (or  anyone  else)  has  ever  done  in  the  past,  we  will  find  aspects  of 
implementation  that  do  not  meet  the  G20’s  aspiration:  full,  timely  and  consistent.  We  are 
going  to  find  parts  of  the  framework  that  have  been  implemented  only  in  part,  or  late,  or 
inconsistently.  The 
themselves, 
implementation of global standards was not as robust as it should have been. 
This could be classed as a failure by global standard setters. To some extent, the criticism 
can be justified – not enough has been done in the past to ensure global agreements have 
been  truly  implemented  by  national  authorities.  However,  just  as  the  Committee  has  been 
determined to revise the Basel framework to fix the problems that emerged from the lessons 
of the crisis, the RCAP should be seen as demonstrating the Committee’s determination to 
also find implementation problems and fix them.  
financial  crisis 
the  standards 
identified 
that, 
like 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
It  would  be  easy  to  continue  to  ignore  any  problems.  A  fascinating1  history  of  the  Basel 
Committee published recently by Professor Charles Goodhart2 notes that the Committee has 
on  more  than  one  occasion  over  the  past  35  years  considered  undertaking  more  detailed 
analysis of domestic implementation of global standards, but shied away from this as being 
“too intrusive”. However, we have now taken that step, since if we are serious about fixing 
the problems of the past, then we need to not just look at the policy settings, but also their 
application. Our efforts on implementation should therefore be seen as an integral part of the 
reform agenda – not just an adjunct to it. 
When  it  comes  to  our  country-by-country  assessments,  thus  far  the  Committee  has 
conducted  detailed  assessments  of  the  final  regulations  adopted  in  Japan,  and  the  draft 
regulations  in  the  European  Union  and  the  United  States.3  Follow-up  assessments  in  the 
European  Union  and  United  States  will  be  conducted  once  final  regulations  are  available. 
Assessments under the RCAP are currently underway for Singapore and Switzerland. Later 
this  year  will  follow  China,  Australia,  Brazil  and  Canada.  As  with  all  of  the  RCAP  work, 
transparency is critical to success – all of these reports will, of course, be published in full 
when complete. 
It  is  important  to  note  that,  in  undertaking  this  work,  the  Basel  Committee  has  no 
enforcement power, so it would be meaningless to think we can force jurisdictions to change 
their local regulations if we find gaps. Our goal is therefore framed more positively: to deepen 
the  implementation  process  and  to  help  jurisdictions  identify  the  gaps  and  address  them. 
Ideally, the assessments provide a roadmap by which identified gaps can be closed. They 
also provide stakeholders and markets with a much higher degree of transparency about the 
extent  of  any  local  divergence  from  agreed  international  standards,  and  the  importance  of 
these.  In  this  way,  we  believe  we  will  establish  the  appropriate  incentives  for  local  rule-
makers  to  apply  the  global  standards,  and  for  markets  and  others  to  apply  appropriate 
pressure where banks may be subject to weaker-then-expected prudential requirements. 
More  consistent  domestic  regulations  will  be  an  improvement.  But  beyond  looking  at  how 
local regulators have transposed Basel agreements into domestic regulations, the Committee 
has  also  begun  examining  whether  the  framework(s)  are  producing  consistent  outcomes. 
Ultimately, what counts is that the capital ratio calculated and reported by individual banks 
provides a meaningful and comparable representation of their capital strength. Differences in 
regulation, or their application, can undermine the regulatory framework by making it more 
difficult for bank depositors, counterparties, investors, shareholders and supervisors to have 
confidence that reported capital ratios serve their intended purpose. 
In this context, some concerns have been recently voiced that banks are not calculating risk 
weighted assets consistently. The Committee has, in fact, been investigating this issue for 
much of the past year. This work has examined the calculation of risk weights in both the 
banking and the trading books. As with our country assessments, we will publish the results 
of both studies.  
The preliminary results of the trading book are most advanced, and will be published very 
shortly.  The  analysis  is  based  on  two  sources  of  data:  public  disclosures  by  banks  and  a 
hypothetical  test  portfolio  exercise  in  which  15  large,  internationally  active  banks  have 
participated from nine Basel Committee jurisdictions. I will not pre-release the detailed results 
today, but the headline messages are that: 
                                                
1   At least, fascinating for regulatory aficionados.  
2   See  C  Goodhart,  The  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  A  History  of  the  Early  Years  1974–1997, 
Cambridge University Press, 2011 
3   The Level 2 reports on the European Union, Japan and the United States can be found at the website of the 
Basel Committee (www.bis.org/bcbs/index.htm).  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   there  is  a  material  variation  in  risk  weights  for  trading  assets  across  banks  (after 
adjusting for accounting differences and for differences in the riskiness of different 
bank portfolios);  
certain modelling choices seem to be major drivers of the variation in risk weights; 
and 
the  quality  of  existing  public  disclosure  is  generally  insufficient  to  allow  users  to 
determine  how  much  of  the  variation  in  reported  risk  weights  is  a  reflection  of 
underlying  risk  taking,  and  how  much  stems  from  other  factors  (eg  modelling 
choices, supervisory discretions). 
In  thinking  about  these  results,  it  needs  to  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  objective  is  not  to 
achieve zero variation. If we wished to achieve that outcome, we could simply force all banks 
onto the standardised approach to capital adequacy and remove any modelling options. But 
the  standardised  approach  –  while  an  ostensibly  consistent  methodology  –  would  not 
necessarily  guarantee  a  meaningful  measure  of  risk  when  applied  to  the  world’s  largest 
banks with the biggest and most complex trading portfolios. Modelling necessarily introduces 
a  degree  of  variability,  since  Basel  standards  deliberately  allow  banks  and  supervisors 
flexibility in order to accommodate for differences in risk appetite and local practices, but with 
the goal of also providing greater accuracy. Further, from a financial stability perspective, it is 
desirable to have some diversity in risk management practices so as to avoid that all banks 
act  in  a  similar  way.  When  banks  would  have  identical  response  functions,  economic 
cyclicality would increase, potentially creating additional instability.  
At the same time, excessive variation in risk measurement is clearly undesirable. Finding the 
right balance is the key. The preliminary work suggests we may not have the balance right in 
the current set-up. But as with all of our work on implementation, it is necessary to identify 
problems before we can set about correcting them. 
The on-going analysis has generated a wealth of information about risk modelling by banks. 
This  is  useful  for  international  policymakers.  The  Committee  has  not  yet  decided  what 
actions  it  might  take  in  response  to  the  analysis,  but  some  of  the  possible  policy  options 
could  comprise  improvements  in  public  disclosure  practices,  limitations  in  the  modelling 
choices for banks, and further harmonisation of supervisory practices. These ideas will also 
feed  into  the  current  fundamental  review  of  the  trading  book.  In  addition,  our  international 
study  provides  national  supervisors  with  a  much  clearer  understanding  of  how  the  risk 
models  of  their  banks  compare  to  those  of  international  peers.  This  means  that  national 
supervisors are much better equipped to discuss the results with their banks and take action 
where needed.  
The Committee will be doing further work on the trading book, in addition to the banking book 
work, to explore the outcomes in more depth. I am confident that it will generate additional 
insights in the modelling of risk-weighted assets and to explain better why modelling results 
differ  across  banks.  It  will  also  allow  building  quantitative  benchmarks  against  which 
supervisors can test their banks.  
The Committee’s work on how banks calculate risk weighted assets also feeds into a broader 
concern  that,  in  pursuit of  risk  sensitivity,  the  Basel  III framework  has grown  too  complex. 
There are many contributory factors to the build-up of complexity, including developments in 
the financial markets and adoption of sophisticated risk management practices by banks. It is 
naïve to think banks utilising complex trading strategies and products, across global markets, 
can  be  supervised  using  simple  rules  (even  if  calibrated  to  penal  settings).  Indeed,  an 
important driver has been the necessity to address perverse incentives that are created by 
simple rules.  
So  while  seeking  appropriate  risk  sensitivity,  care  is  also  being  taken  to  ensure  that 
complexity  does  not  undermine  the  very  benefits  it  offers.  The  Basel  Committee  has  also 
been  working  during  2012  to  review  possible  areas  for  simplification,  aiming  to  strike  a 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
careful balance between risk sensitivity/complexity, comparability and simplicity. In the near 
term, the Committee intends to publish a paper to explain its thinking on the trade-offs that 
need to be made, and identifying potential ways to make the framework simpler and more 
comparable.  
Conclusion 
If  there  is  one  message  I  would  like  to  leave  you  with  it  is  that,  when  it  comes  to  reform, 
ideas and implementation go together. 
Much of the Basel Committee’s work on big “ideas” that respond to the shortcomings in the 
regulatory framework identified by the financial crisis is reaching the end stage. The capital 
rules  are  set  (and,  in  an  increasing  number  of  jurisdictions,  coming  into  force),  and  the 
revisions  to  the  LCR  have  recently  been  agreed.  In  2013,  we  will  seek  to  set  out  the 
specification of the backstop leverage ratio, and the NSFR will be refined between now and 
the  end  of  2014.  Clearly,  we  still  have  work  to  do,  but  increasingly  it  is  about  getting  the 
technical details correct rather than new far-reaching ideas. 
Even when the Committee’s policy response to the crisis is complete, much more work will 
still be needed. Implementation needs to be seen as an integral part of the reform agenda, 
not a sideline activity. As we examine this issue to a depth that it has not previously been 
examined, we will inevitably find things that need improvement. Turning a blind eye to these, 
as may have occurred in the past, is not an option – we need to persevere and find those 
areas where additional modifications to the regulatory framework are needed to ensure it is 
effective. If we do not work to improve implementation, we will not embed the reforms into 
domestic  banking  systems  in  the  full,  timely  and  consistent  manner  that  is  in  everyone’s 
interests. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
