Loi M Bakani: Enhancing financial inclusion in Papua New Guinea 
Opening address by Mr Loi M Bakani, Governor of the Bank of Papua New Guinea, at the 
launch  of  the  Centre  for  Excellence  in  Financial  Inclusion  (CEFI),  Port  Moresby,  24  April 
2013. 
 Acknowledgement  
Hon. Peter O’Neil, Prime Minister  
Hon. Don Polye, Minister for Finance  
Other Ministers of the State and Members of Parliament  
Mr. Marcelo Minc, Director, Asian Development Bank  
Mr. Steward Schaefer Director, Australian Agency for International Development  
Ms. Madhurantika Moulick, Team Lead, Microfinance Expansion Project  
Board members of CEFI  
Chairperson and CEOs of financial institutions and development partners  
Delegates present at the programme.  
Welcome remarks  
I  wish  to  thank  you  Prime  Minister,  Hon.  Peter  O’Neil,  for  making  time  to  officiate  at  this 
occasion  of  the  launch  of  the  Centre  for  Excellence  in  Financial  Inclusion  (CEFI).  This,  I 
suppose  goes  a  long  way  to  show  your  Government’s  recognition  and  support  to  the 
importance  of  issues  such  as  Financial  Inclusion  and  it’s  benefits  to  every  citizen  of  this 
nation and to PNG as a whole.  
It  gives  me  great  pleasure  indeed  to  welcome  you  all  to  the  launch  of  the  Centre  for 
Excellence in Financial Inclusion (CEFI). CEFI is a national entity designed to coordinate the 
financial inclusion initiatives in Papua New Guinea. It envisages creation of a robust financial 
sector  which  will  reach  people  across  the  country  and  enhance  access  to  high-quality 
financial products and services with the combined efforts of all stakeholders.  
Financial inclusion – Define  
For  the  benefit  of  others,  “Financial  inclusion”  is  a  broader  term  which  basically  means  to 
make financial and banking services and products accessible to everyone so that they can 
participate meaningfully to the development of the economy.  
Why Financial Inclusion is important today  
• 
85% of the population lives in a largely non-monetized economy.  
– 
– 
– 
– 
Subsistence farmers  
Generally no assets  
Per capita income is low  
Lack of knowledge of the kinds of financial and banking products and services 
available  in  the  banking  system  which  can  be  accessed  by  grassroots  to 
improve standards of living,  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
    Difficulty  faced  by  people  in  rural  areas  trying  to  access  these  financial  and 
banking products services,  
The  amount  of  paper  work  and  stringent  processes  which  our  grassroots 
people have to go through in order to open up a bank account,  
There is generally negative perception about grassroots people that they are 
too  risky  and  unbankable  to  be  engaged  with  in  banking  business  –  this 
perception turns always many from participating in banking activities;  
And many other factors  
As a result of these and many other contributing factors; the rural economy of PNG, where 
the bulk of the population is, is largely a non-monetized economy. There is no formal and 
continuous access to any form of banking services to the rural areas.  
Financial Inclusion – Recognized as remedial tool for development  
To address this gap in our national economy, the theme: “Financial Inclusion” has taken the 
forefront of all our efforts and activities.  
In the recent past we have seen a diverse range of players playing their parts in promoting 
financial  inclusion,  such  as  microfinance  institutions,  commercial  banks,  savings  and  loan 
societies, 
faith  based 
organisations.  
I now want to briefly mention the establishment of MEP.  
telecom  companies,  community  based  organisations,  and 
Microfinance Expansion Project  
MEP  is  a  project  launched  in  April  2012,  jointly  funded  by  ADB,  Australian  Agency  for 
International  Development  (or  AusAid),  and  GoPNG.  The  Bank  of  PNG  is  the  executive 
agent.  
The  central  theme  of  MEP  is  to  establish  an  Institution  for  Financial  Inclusion,  which  will 
spear-head all key activities and hopefully bring all the efforts of diverse players together to 
achieve our objective of total financial inclusion for all. This is basically the reason why we 
are here today ……. to witness the Launching of CEFI.  
CEFI  
As the Chairman of this nascent institution, let me take you through the vision and mission 
with which CEFI has been constituted. CEFI has been formed with the vision to “Eliminate 
financial  exclusion  for  poverty  eradication  in  Papua  New  Guinea  and  expanding 
activities  in  the  Pacific  region”.  This  entity  aims  to  work  with  the  mission  to  “Promote 
excellence  in  financial  services,  innovate  delivery  channels,  and  facilitate  financial 
education”.  
MEP has an overarching goal of enhancing financial inclusion by extending financial services 
to the bulk of the rural population in PNG. A key deliverable of MEP is to set up the CEFI. 
CEFI  is  the  entity  that  will  take  forward  the  project  initiatives  after  the  completion  of  the 
project. These includes:  
• 
CEFI will partner with strategic stakeholders and will be the implementing agency for 
the National Strategy for Financial Inclusion. CEFI’s efforts will be a major step in 
achieving  the  objectives  of  Vision  2050,  the  Medium  Term  Development  Plan  
2012–2017  and  the  government’s  policy  focus  on  service  delivery  to  the  rural 
population;  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     CEFI  is  expected  to  achieve  three  major  outputs.  These  include  strengthening  of 
financial  institutions  that  implement  financial  inclusion  programmes,  training  on 
financial literacy and business development services to build the capacities of clients 
and  micro  businesses,  and  by  establishing  industry  standards  by  working  with 
network.  Broadly  speaking,  CEFI  will  operate  through  four  major  verticals  – : 
financial inclusion, financial service delivery, information exchange and gender.  
Under  financial  inclusion  initiatives,  CEFI  will  aim  to  promote  financial  inclusion 
agenda  and  innovation,  co-ordinate  and  support  financial  inclusion  activities, 
introduce  best  practices  in  the  financial  sector,  promote  product  and  channel 
innovations  such  as  mobile  and  agent-based  banking,  create  a  talent  pipeline  for 
financial inclusion activities and facilitate financial literacy.  
CEFI will contribute to financial service delivery by working with BPNG to develop 
industry benchmarks, arranging for technical assistance to FIs, acting as a centre of 
excellence and nurturing a network of practitioners and service providers.  
CEFI’s interventions in the direction of information exchange will largely be focussed 
on  building  and  maintaining  a  database  of  technical  assistance  for  regulated  and 
un-regulated  microfinance  institutions  and  act  as  a  repository  of  knowledge  and 
training material.  
CEFI  will  also  lay  special  focus  on  promoting  gender  equality  in  the  areas  of 
financial services delivery.  
Government support  
Prime  Minister,  the  National  Government  support  in  the  establishment  and  out-scaling  of 
micro-financing,  and  thereby  financial  inclusion  nationwide  into  different  parts  of  PNG,  is 
pleasing. 
It  is  also  pleasing  to  see  the  National  Government  subsidising  education  so  that  formal 
education can reach the rural masses.  
However,  what  has  been  lacking  is  the  development  of  financial  education  materials, 
particularly development of Curriculum(s) so that “Financial Education” can be mainstreamed 
to all levels and forms of education and educational institutions in PNG.  
I  urge  the  Department  of  Education  to  come  forward  and  work  with  the  Bank  of  PNG,  to 
actively develop and disseminate important financial education materials to all schools and 
further financial inclusion.  
BPNG initiatives with students accounts  
In  the  meantime,  the  Bank  of  PNG  has  taken  some  initiatives  in  working  with  financial 
institutions  to  developing  banking  products  such  as  student  accounts to  make  available  to 
school-age children. The idea is to enhance savings culture, promote thrift and responsible 
spending, for children and family settings.  
Thank all for a milestone occasion  
There  is  no  better time than  this  present  time to  see  Financial  Inclusion  taken  to  the  next 
level.  
I want to welcome everyone and thank you all for coming to witness this important milestone 
occasion.  
Prime  Minister,  I  want  to  thank  you  very  much  for  taking  time  out  from  your  very  busy 
Schedule to officiate in this important occasion – the Launching of the Centre for Excellence 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
in  Financial  Inclusion  –  “CEFI”.  A  dream  and  hope  for  all  Papua  New  Guineans  to  be 
financially included.  
Wishing everyone and CEFI good success. May God bless you all. 
 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
