Carlos da Silva Costa: The Portuguese economy – structural saving gap 
and policy options 
Address by Mr Carlos da Silva Costa, Governor of the Bank of Portugal, at the inauguration 
of the academic year of the University of Porto School of Economics and Business, Porto, 
31 October 2012. 
 Introduction 
I. 
Good afternoon ladies and gentlemen.  
I  would  like  to  begin  by  thanking  you  for  the  great  honour  of  addressing  you  at  this 
inauguration  of  the  academic  year  of  the  University  of  Porto  School  of  Economics  and 
Business, which this year happens to coincide with World Savings Day.  
There  could  not  be  a  better  occasion  for  an  address  on  the  structural  saving  gap  of  the 
Portuguese economy and the policy options which best ensure the success of the on-going 
adjustment. 
II. 
Structural saving gap and policy options for the Portuguese economy  
Public and private structural saving gap  
1. 
Saving insufficiency is a structural trait of the Portuguese economy.  
This is shown clearly in the external accounts: over the last 60 years, the current and capital 
accounts, which measure the economy’s financing capacity, posted a surplus only twice in 
16  occasions;  meanwhile  over  the  same  period,  the  balance  of  goods  and  services  was 
always negative. 
The chronic external imbalance led to the two adjustment programmes negotiated with the 
International Monetary Fund in 1978 and 1983. 
Over the last 15 years, cheaper and more accessible financing afforded by monetary union 
led to a strong expansion in credit, and to a lesser extent, the contraction of private saving. 
The  increase  in  indebtedness  and  decrease  in  saving  were  mainly  used  to  finance 
consumption and low-return investments, and therefore did not result in the expansion of the 
economy’s  growth  potential.  The  strong  increase  in  private  spending  translated  into  a 
deviation of resources to the non-tradable sector and persistent current account deficits. 
These imbalances were aggravated by unsustainable budgetary policies. Between 1999 and 
2010,  the  annual  budget  balance  was  on  average  –5%  of  GDP,  and  according  to  current 
data, the deficit was never lower than 3% of GDP. This behaviour is not very different from 
that observed since 1977. 
In  the  first  10  years  of  monetary  union,  the  current  and  capital  accounts  had  an  average 
annual  deficit  of  8.3%  of  GDP.  The  cumulative  effect  of  these  deficits  was  a  sharp 
deterioration in the Portuguese economy’s international investment position, which went from 
–10% to –107% of GDP from the mid-1990s to 2010. The behaviour of gross external debt 
over the same period – growing from 64% to 230% of GDP – is even more telling.  
The growth of external indebtedness was intermediated for the most part by the Portuguese 
banking system, which captured resources in the international financial markets. The banking 
system’s loan-to-deposit ratio increased from nearly 65% in 1996 to around 160% in 2010. 
The lack of a macro-prudential policy, coupled with complacency in the international financial 
markets, contributed decisively to the accumulation of macroeconomic imbalances.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The  imbalances  made  the  Portuguese  economy  extremely  vulnerable  to  the  international 
financial crisis and its contagion effects. With potential output growing very slowly, the trend 
of the economy’s external indebtedness increasingly led investors to doubt Portugal’s ability 
to  service  its  debt.  These  doubts  resulted,  as  is  known,  in  the  closure  of  the  international 
financial  market  in  the  first  half  of  2011,  leading  inevitably  to  official  financing  under  the 
financial  assistance  programme  negotiated  with  the  European  Union  and  the  International 
Monetary Fund.  
Around a year and a half after the launch of the programme, the feeling is that we are at a 
crossroads.  Undeniable  progress  has  been  made  in  three  areas:  budget  consolidation, 
financial system stability and the Portuguese economy’s structural transformation agenda.  
The faster than expected adjustment in the external accounts shows important steps have 
already been taken: in 2012, the current and capital accounts should only register a minor 
deficit and the goods and services account will post a surplus for the first time. This trend not 
only  reflects  the  fall  in  imports  following  the  decline  in  domestic  demand  but  also  a  very 
strong exports performance. The improvement in the Portuguese State’s financing conditions 
also points in the same direction. 
The  progress  achieved  benefited  from  broad  social  and  even  political  consensus  over  the 
programme’s  objectives.  However,  signs  of  disbelief  and  erosion  of  social  support  for  the 
programme are beginning to appear. Aside from factors of a political nature, on which I will 
not comment, the unfavourable external environment and the macroeconomic developments, 
in particular increasing unemployment, have contributed decisively to this mindset.  
What policy options are there? 
Counter-cyclical policies are not an option  
2. 
1. 
With  economic  activity,  employment  and  the  public  debt  ratio  performing  worse  than  was 
predicted  when  the  financial  assistance  programme  was  drawn  up,  many  have  advocated 
slowing down the pace of budget consolidation, for fear of a negative spiral between budget 
consolidation and contracting economic activity, which will cause the adjustment to fail.  
This is a debate which goes well beyond the Portuguese situation. In general, the discussion 
has been rather simplistic. The arguments put forward typically suffer from time consistency 
problems  and  rest  on  a  partial  equilibrium  analysis.  Therefore  it  is  worth  being  clear  and 
taking a complete and dynamic perspective. 
Conceptually,  the  counter-cyclical  use  of  budget  policy,  in  particular  by  allowing  the 
automatic  stabilisers  to  work,  finds  broad  consensus.  It  is  also  undeniable  that  budget 
consolidation  always  means  austerity,  insofar  as  it  exerts  a  negative  effect  on  economic 
activity in the short term.  
This  negative  effect  will  be  stronger  if  the  variables  that  generally  dampen  the  recessive 
impact of budget consolidation – I refer to the interest rate, the exchange rate and external 
demand – are constrained in some way. This is the current situation: various countries are 
undertaking budget consolidation simultaneously; interest rate levels in the main advanced 
economies are limited by the “zero bound”; and the countries most affected by the sovereign 
debt crisis do not have an independent monetary policy.  
On the other hand, it is also generally accepted that above a certain threshold, which in the 
case  of  the  advanced  economies  is  estimated  at  around  90%  of  GDP,  public  debt  levels 
negatively affect economic growth in the short, medium and long term. This negative effect is 
explained by three factors: 
• 
Firstly, by the greater uncertainty over macroeconomic developments resulting from 
unsustainable debt paths. Uncertainty leads to postponement of investment projects 
and a bias towards investments with short-term returns, at the expense of projects 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  which  may  potentially  impact  on  economic  growth,  but  whose  returns  tend  to  be 
long-term;  
Secondly, by the increase in risk premia, which increases the economy’s financing 
costs and, in extreme cases, results in the interruption of financing;  
Thirdly, by the fact that high debt levels constrain the counter-cyclical use of budget 
policy,  which  in  the  presence  of  hysteresis,  may  have  lasting  effects  on  the 
economy’s  productive  capacity,  due  to  the  depreciation  of  human  capital  and 
insufficient investment in physical capital.  
Here I would like to take a moment to mention the following: It is odd that the intense public 
debate  on  the  relationship  between  budgetary  policy  and  economic  growth,  recently 
rekindled  following  publication  of  a  box  in  the  latest  edition  of  the  IMF’s  World  Economic 
Outlook, has focused only on the size of the short-term budgetary multipliers, when the wider 
and  more  dynamic  view  of  the  problem,  which  considers  the  negative  effects  of  the 
macroeconomic  uncertainty  and  the  high  indebtedness  levels  on  growth,  is  also  widely 
covered by the IMF in the same report.  
Given  the  high  levels  of  public  sector  indebtedness  in  most  advanced  economies  and  the 
unfavourable dynamics that result from the ageing population, few will contest the idea that 
credible budget consolidation plans are urgent and necessary in these economies to reverse 
public debt’s growth trend. 
Therefore,  the  key  question,  which  has  led  to  great  differences  of  opinion,  is  not  about 
whether there should be budget consolidation, but how large and how fast the adjustment in 
the  public  accounts  should  be.  In  particular,  the  question  is  about  whether  additional 
consolidation  measures  should  be  adopted  where  growth  was  lower  than  expected,  to 
ensure the initial budget goals are reached.  
This  is  a  difficult  question,  since  assessing  the  effects  of  budget  policy  depends  on  the 
judgement  made  on  a  set  of  parameters,  including  the  distinction  between  cyclical 
fluctuations, other temporary factors and structural trends; the size of the budget multipliers; 
the  sustainability  of  the  public  debt  path;  and  the  credibility  of  budget  policy  from  an 
intertemporal perspective. 
The difficulties are aggravated by the fact that these parameters vary over time and depend 
on the starting position of each economy, i.e. on factors such as the degree of openness, the 
size  of  the  automatic  stabilisers,  the  operation  of  the  labour  market  or  the  room  for 
manoeuvre in monetary policy, among other things.  
The difficulties are aggravated by the fact that these parameters vary over time and depend 
on the starting position of each economy, i.e. on factors such as the degree of openness, the 
size  of  the  automatic  stabilisers,  the  operation  of  the  labour  market  or  the  room  for 
manoeuvre in monetary policy, among other things. 
For countries like Portugal, which belong to a supranational monetary area and have lost or 
are at risk of losing access to market financing, the leeway is extremely limited or even non-
existent.  External  financing  is  the  active  constraint  on  economic  policy  and  its  strictness 
depends on the sustainability of public finances. For these countries, the priority must be a 
fast  budget  adjustment,  mainly  based  on  the  reduction  of  structural  spending,  so  as  to 
restore credibility and bring public finances back to a sustainable path.  
Let  us  be  absolutely  clear:  any  postponement  of  the  adjustment  involves  new  financing 
needs  (which  are  not  covered)  and  a  worsening  of  public  debt  unsustainability  with  the 
consequent further loss of credibility. 
It is true that in these countries, and this has also been the case in Portugal, the high starting 
position  of  public  debt,  the  significant  stock-flow  adjustments  and  the  fact  that  the  budget 
multipliers are currently  higher than usual, are leading to a deterioration in the public debt 
ratio in the initial phase of the consolidation process. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
A growth strategy for the Portuguese economy 
This  counterintuitive  and  undesirable  initial  effect  will  only  be  reversed  by  the  cumulative 
adjustment of the primary balance, the reduction of the interest rate (which in turn depends 
on  the  credibility  of  the  adjustment)  and  last  but  not  least  the  increase  in  the  economy’s 
growth potential.  
The importance of economic growth for the trend of the public debt ratio may be illustrated 
with  a  simple  calculation:  starting  with  plausible  values  for  Portugal  in  2015  and  keeping 
other relevant variables constant, a one-percentage-point increase in GDP growth over the 
period 2016–2020 leads to a debt ratio which is around 15 percentage points lower than the 
baseline. 
2. 
Thus we need to refocus the public debate on the Portuguese economy.  
The great challenge we face is to make Portugal a more productive country that creates jobs.  
We all know that adjusting the public and private sector balance sheets is necessary to help 
the Portuguese economy avoid prolonged relative impoverishment.  
It is necessary, but as we also know, it is insufficient.  
Sustained  growth  involves  rebalancing  the  allocation  of  resources  towards  the  tradable 
sector. The infrastructure and support services are available investments in the non-tradable 
sector have been made; these now must be put to work to create capacity in the tradable 
sector. 
On this issue, I would like to touch on three points that I will expand on thereafter.  
• 
First,  the  potential  for  growth  through  exports  is  very  high  and  the  strong  export 
performance over the last two years looks quite promising.  
Second, the private sector will have to be the main driver of the economy’s structural 
transformation.  
Finally, it is up to the State to take a catalysing role in this structural transformation, 
namely by providing an institutional framework and macroeconomic conditions that 
foster high-quality investment and attract highly-skilled labour.  
  I would now like to develop each of these three points very briefly.  
The potential for growth through exports 
I will start with growth potential based on exports.  
Contrary  to  common  opinion,  the  Portuguese  economy  has  a  low  level  of  openness 
considering its relative size. Thus, countries like Sweden, Austria, Switzerland, Denmark or 
Belgium have much higher export market shares than Portugal, adjusted for population size. 
Also,  penetration  of  Portuguese  exports  is  particularly  low  in  the  geographies  expected  to 
grow the most in the next few years.  
This  situation,  along  with  the  high  capacity  available  in  the  manufacturing  sector  and  the 
relative cost adjustments under way, suggest that the potential for economic growth based 
on exports is probably much higher than we tend to believe.  
However, let us not be naive: realising the growth potential from expansion of the tradable 
sector is not automatic. It depends crucially on behaviours adopted by the economic agents. 
The  protagonist  in  the  transformation  of  the  economy  will  have  to  be  the  private 
sector. 
In  the  current  context  of  strong  global  competition,  companies  need  to  be  able  to  adapt 
permanently in order to survive, which involves introducing technological developments, re-
engineering processes and defining renewal and growth strategies.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
It  is  down  to  the  private  sector  to  define  effective  responses  to  the  challenges  of  external 
competition, the market opportunities and the evolution of knowledge and technology. In this 
regard, I would like to outline two aspects that I believe are particularly relevant. 
Firstly,  the  capitalisation  of  Portuguese  companies  needs  to  be  strengthened.  Our 
companies’ high leverage ratios not only reflect the fragility of Portugal’s economic fabric (as 
firms are particularly vulnerable to changes in financing conditions), but also reflect strategic 
weakness (because high indebtedness limits the ability of firms to respond to changes in the 
external environment, jeopardising their growth potential). 
Secondly, we need to tackle the problem of the corporate sector’s fragmentation, particularly 
by  finding  ways  for  companies  to  cooperate  and  form  associations  so  as  to  gain  scale  to 
compete globally.  
The  catalysing  role  of  the  public  sector  in  the  structural  transformation  of  the 
economy 
The role of the public sector is no less important.  
It  is  not  about  calling  for  large  public  investment  projects,  new  subsidies  or  additional  tax 
benefits for companies.  
The public sector is expected to be a regulator and to ensure the level-playing field, allowing 
relative prices to play their signalling role. It is also expected to introduce the reforms needed 
to ensure that the labour and product markets adjust efficiently to an ever-changing world. 
Finally it is expected to provide macroeconomic stability, especially in terms of the medium to 
long-term sustainability of the public finances and the stability of the financial system.  
I would like to end my address by commenting on these two points in particular: sustainability 
of  the  public  finances  and  stability  of  the  financial  system.  Sustainability  of  the  public 
finances necessarily involves improving the primary structural balance, as I have mentioned 
before.  
The sectoral spending programmes will have to be resized, to ensure that Portugal’s public 
spending  level  is  compatible  with  the  productive  capacity  in  the  economy,  demographic 
trends and socially acceptable tax burden.  
In  parallel,  the  institutional  framework  for  the  public  finances  will  have  to  be  changed 
dramatically, to ensure that primary balance adjustments are not reversed. Budget rules and 
procedures  are  required  so  that  (i)  budgetary  goals  are  compatible  with  the  medium  and 
long-term sustainability of the public finances in a context of stable taxes; and (ii) budgets are 
executed without major slippages.  
Deep reflection is needed on the organisational model and management of the public sector, 
to  find  solutions  offering  efficiency  gains  in  producing  public  goods  and  services,  thereby 
minimising  the  impact  on  society  of  the  reduction  of  the  resources  allocated  to  the  main 
spending areas.  
I do not want to take up much more of your time. However, as part of the debate about the 
conditions  for  sustained  growth  in  the  Portuguese  economy,  and  given  that  today  we 
celebrate  World  Savings  Day,  I  have  to  say  a  few  words  on  the  importance  of  financial 
stability and the role performed by Banco de Portugal.  
Financial stability and the role of Banco de Portugal  
3. 
Safeguarding  financial  stability  is  a  key  aspect  of  the  adjustment  programme  alongside 
lasting consolidation of the public accounts and increasing the economy’s growth potential. 
These three aspects are inseparable and have to be seen as linked.  
We  have  seen  how  sustainability  of  the  public  accounts  is  a  necessary  condition  for 
sustained growth and how this is crucial for reversing unsustainable public debt trajectories. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
indebtedness  affects 
the  banking  system’s 
The same kind of “dialectic relationship” exists between financial stability and sustainability of 
the public finances and between financial stability and sustained growth.  
As  the  case  of  Ireland  well  illustrates,  problems  in  the  financial  system  require  the 
intervention  of  the  public  sector,  jeopardising  the  sustainability  of  public  debt.  Conversely, 
unsustainable  public 
financing  capacity, 
jeopardising financial stability.  
An  environment  of  financial  stability  reduces  uncertainty,  protects  investors,  contributes  to 
lower, less volatile interest rates and ensures stable financing flows to the economy. These 
factors  are  decisive  for  promoting  investment  and  an  efficient  allocation  of  capital,  and 
moreover, promote sustained growth in the economy.  
Sustained  growth  is  also  indispensable  for  preserving  financial  stability,  by  ensuring  the 
wealth creation needed for paying down debt to the financial system. A protracted recessive 
environment  leads  to  an  increase  in  bankruptcies  and  unemployment,  creating  significant 
growth in non-performing loans which weakens the banks’ balance sheets and jeopardises 
financial stability.  
In  this  context,  given  its  responsibilities  in  supervising  the  Portuguese  financial  system, 
Banco de Portugal has a key role in the Portuguese economy’s adjustment strategy. Banco 
de Portugal’s strategy for financial stability aims to respond to four key concerns:  
• 
• 
• 
Safeguarding the liquidity of the banking system  
Ensuring capitalisation levels suited to the banks’ risk profiles  
Incentivising the banks’ restructuring, aiming to re-establish adequate profitability in 
the new business context that resulted from the international financial crisis  
Preserving the general public’s confidence in the system  
 Conclusion  
Allow me to conclude.  
The crisis we find ourselves in is also an opportunity – which we cannot afford to miss – to 
define  a  development  strategy  that  sets  the  Portuguese  economy  on  a  sustained  path  of 
convergence with the average per capita income levels of Europe.  
We need a more productive country that creates employment within a stronger economic and 
monetary  union.  The  fact  that  the  ongoing  adjustment  is  proceeding  in  a  context  of 
demographic transition and increased globalisation only adds to the urgency and relevance 
of the challenge. 
is  structural  and  cannot  be  resolved  with  anticyclical  policies.  Any 
The  problem 
postponement of the adjustment involves new financing needs and the deterioration of public 
debt, with the consequent further loss of credibility.  
Therefore it is urgent to refocus the public debate on the Portuguese economy and economic 
policy in Portugal.  
Only a reallocation of resources within the economy based on expanding the tradable sector 
will avoid prolonged relative impoverishment. Growth potential driven by exports is very high 
and the strong performance of exports makes the point.  
We  must  demand  from  the  State  that  it  promotes  the  institutional  and  macroeconomic 
conditions that attract high-quality investment and skilled labour. Simplicity and stability in the 
tax system, effectiveness of the justice system and competition policy, efficient labour market 
institutions and financial stability – understood as sustainable public finances and a solid and 
competitive banking system – are critical success factors.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
But, the challenge of inclusive and sustained growth will only be accomplished if the private 
sector becomes the real driver of structural change in the economy.  
To borrow from the famous quote of President John F Kennedy, now is the time for each of 
us to ask ourselves what we can do for our country.  
Thank you very much. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
