Prasarn Trairatvorakul: Asian and Thai economies in a volatile world 
Speech  by  Dr  Prasarn  Trairatvorakul,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  The  Nation’s 
43rd Anniversary International Conference, Bangkok, 19 July 2013. 
 Distinguished CEO and Chairman, 
Members of Asia News Network, 
Distinguished Guests; Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a delight to address you on this auspicious occasion of The Nation’s 43rd anniversary. 
Let me congratulate you warmly, and wish you many flourishing years ahead. 
We  gather  here  at  an  important  juncture  of  what  seems  to  be  yet  another  shift  in  global 
economic  and  financial  landscape.  The  three-speed  world  economy  appears  to  be  on  a 
convergence course recently as China and some other emerging markets start to show signs 
of  slowdown,  while  the  US  and  Japan  are  gathering  momentum.  These  changing  global 
dynamics coinciding with market’s enthusiastic reactions to Federal Reserve’s signal of so-
called “QE tapering” led to a sell-off of emerging market debt and equities, and reversal of 
foreign capital flows that had rushed into the region earlier this year. 
the  global 
financial  crisis.  The 
Living in a more volatile world 
The financial world has indeed become more volatile. Many factors intertwine to render such 
great  financial  market  volatility  we  observe  today.  These  include  (1)  closer  integration  of 
global  economy  through  stronger  trade  and  financial  linkages,  (2)  increasingly  large  and 
mobile  capital  flows  due  to  lower  costs  on  cross-border  investments,  (3)  rapid  spread  of 
information  made  possible  by  advancement  in  technology,  and  (4)  more  pronounced 
reactions on the part of market participants in times of heightened uncertainties ever since 
interplay  between  market  players’ 
the  onset  of 
expectations, their self-fulfilling nature and spillover effects paves the way for market 
exuberance in response to a trigger event. As a clear case in point, the recent ups and 
downs of financial markets upon new information the market perceives from each round of 
the Fed’s announcements highlight the role of “shifts in beliefs” on market volatility. 
What made the post-2008 period particularly vulnerable to such self-fulfilling global turmoil is 
the current stage of the world economy characterized by lingering structural weaknesses of 
the  crisis  countries  and  limited  policy  space  that  reduce  the  potential  of  macroeconomic 
stabilization  policy.  All  of  these  factors  reinforce  the  role  of  global  shocks  and  contagion 
through  real  linkages  as  well  as  expectation  channel  in  transmitting  volatility  around  the 
world. 
Notwithstanding the turbulence of the global economy, Asian economies had proven 
to  be  resilient  in  the  face  of  negative  external  developments,  with  favourable 
macroeconomic performance and well-maintained stability during the past period, thanks to 
the  region’s 
improved  risk 
management as lessons had been learned from the crisis of 1997. 
financial  system,  and 
framework,  robust 
flexible  policy 
Making headway towards sustainable growth 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
The  success  of  Asian  economies  in  weathering  the  global  financial  crisis  is  certainly 
commendable.  But  it  would  be  a  mistake to  be  lulled  into  complacency by  this  success of 
short-term volatility management. In particular, there remain important long-term challenges 
to the sustainability of growth in Asia. Indeed, latest economic indicators already pointed to a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
less upbeat growth trajectory of the Asian region including China. The apparent slowdown 
in  Asia,  despite  gradual  improvement  of  the  advanced  economies,  lends  support  to 
the idea that Asia also has its own structural bottleneck issues to deal with. The time is 
ripe  for  all  parties  involved  to  look  beyond  short-term  fluctuations  and  give  serious 
consideration to longer-term structural issues that are holding back Asian potential growth. 
This is the second topic of my talk today: what can Asia do to sustain its high pace of growth 
in the post-crisis world? 
Since  the  onset  of  the  global  financial  crisis,  most  policy  responses  in  emerging  markets 
have been focused on demand-side management, through monetary or fiscal policy stimulus. 
But boosting demand alone could only get us thus far. The real lift of potential growth of the 
economy  must  essentially  come  from  supply-side  progress.  This  refers  to  either  the  more 
abundance  or  the  better  use  of  capital  and  labor  inputs  in  the  economy.  Although  Asia’s 
potential growth remains higher than in other regions, recent studies pointed to a possible 
reduction  in  trend  growth  since  the  2008  financial  crisis.1  In  my  reading  of  anecdotal 
evidence  and  through  policy  discussions,  two  common  drags  to  long-term  growth  among 
emerging Asia are the labor shortage and the decline in productivity growth. 
Let  me  explain  the  labor  market  issue  using  the  case  of  Thailand  as  an  example.  The 
problem  of  labor  shortage  has  been  deep  rooted  in  Thailand  for  many  years  but  has  not 
received  much  attention  until  recently.  This  could  be  partly  due  to  favorable  economic 
expansion  during  the  past  years  that  has  masked  this  problem  and  also  because  of  the 
ability  on  the  part  of  firms  to  employ  immigrant  workers.  But  now  with  protracted  external 
demand  slowdown  coinciding  with  recent  weakening  in  domestic  demand,  long-standing 
weakness of the labor market has emerged as an important bottleneck hampering potential 
growth.  Leaving  aside  the  demographic  aging  problem  that  has  yet  to  reach  its  peak, 
pervasive  skills  mismatch  has  been  identified  as  a  main  cause  of  labor  shortage.  In 
particular,  workers  with  vocational  training  needed  by  manufacturing  industry,  is  in  much 
shorter supply relative to university graduates. This has been one of the major holdbacks on 
manufacturing  capacity.  I  would  like  to  urge  that,  in  searching  for  labor  market  solution, 
attention must also be paid to the problems of the wage structure, since at the going wage, 
price mechanism and its signaling function do not work efficiently enough to clear the labor 
market to eliminate this skill mismatch. 
Related issue is that of a long stall in labor productivity as well as overall productivity growth. 
Policy  distortions  and  a  lack  of  clear  policy  directions  can  discourage  firms  from 
accumulating physical capital and investing in innovation, and prevent workers from moving 
to  higher  value-added  sector.  For  example,  agricultural  price  subsidy  measures,  while 
serving  their  redistributive  purposes,  may  inadvertently  channel  workers  away  from  highly 
productive manufacturing to agricultural sector, thus contributing to lower overall productivity 
of the economy. At the same time, low public spending on R&D and insufficient protection of 
intellectual  property 
innovative  entrepreneurship  and  hinder  a 
transformation towards a knowledge-based economy. 
Good news is, the risk of a sustained growth slowdown could be reduced or even avoided, 
as success of some mature economies in Asia have shown in the past. This will depend 
crucially on the quality and the timeliness of public policies across a wide spectrum in 
tackling these long-term issues. To be sure the task is not going to be easy. Reorienting 
the  country’s  growth  strategy  to  focus  more  on  skills  development,  innovation,  and 
productivity involves deliberate planning over relatively long stretch of time. Three principles 
are of the essence: visionary leadership, consistency, and continuity. 
rights  may  deter 
                                                
1   For example, the IMF’s Regional Economic Outlook for Asia and Pacific region (April 2013) highlighted that a 
number of emerging Asian economies could run the risk of a sustained growth slowdown of the so-called the 
“middle-income trap” phenomenon. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Due to the long-term nature of structural readjustments, continuity of policy implementation 
is required for the policy measures to take meaningful effect on the economy. Consistency 
both  over  time  and  across  the  broad  spectrum  of  macroeconomic  policies,  guided  by  the 
overriding  economic  reform  agenda,  is  needed  to  reach  an  optimal  outcome  at  minimum 
cost.  And  precisely  because  of  all  the  challenge  and  difficulty  in  searching  for  the  right 
direction  for  the  economy  and  making  it  happen,  a  visionary  leadership  is  vital  for 
successful structural transformation. Clear and far-sighted vision for the economy, the ability 
to  maintain  coherency  between  strategic  ideas  and  short-term  actions,  and  the  ability  to 
bridge differences and cultivate shared beliefs are but some of the important characteristics 
needed for policymakers to deliver changes. 
These three principles – visionary leadership, consistency, and continuity – should be at the 
root of the national economic policy formulation and implementation to ensure quality public 
policy that can enhance the country’s competitiveness and sustain long-term growth. 
Realizing potentials of regional integration 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Implementing  reform  through  domestic  policy  alone  is  likely  to  be  a  daunting  task,  but 
fortunately Asian economies can leverage on the vast opportunities offered by the regional 
economic  network.  This  brings  me  to  the  final  topic  of  my  talk,  that  of  regional 
economic and financial integration in Asia. Under ASEAN economic community (AEC), 
the  region’s  prospects  will  be  much  enhanced  by  further  integration  efforts  to  foster  freer 
international trade and more mobile movements of factors of production. Four broad facets of 
regional  connectivity  are  expected  to  contribute  to  ASEAN  economic  growth  and  stability. 
First,  with  barriers  to  trade  in  goods  and  services  brought  down,  there  will  likely  be  a 
substantial expansion in intra-regional demand. This increasing role of intra-regional trade in 
final  consumption  goods  should  provide  the  region  with  a  potential  source  of  resiliency 
against global demand shocks. Second, higher mobility of factors of production and cross-
border infrastructure development can help unlock the tremendous potential of the region by 
removing  supply-side  constraints  and  bottlenecks  to  growth  faced  by  individual  countries, 
while also making best use of resources and comparative advantages through regional and 
global supply-chain networks. 
Third, through closer ties of financial and capital markets, ASEAN countries stand to benefit 
from  tapping  the  vast  pool  of  Asian  savings, to  finance  intra-regional  investment  activities. 
This will prove particularly valuable given that many ASEAN countries are currently in much 
need of investment to lift their potential rates of growth after a prolonged period without large-
scale  upgrading.  And  lastly,  the  strengthening  of  regional  financial  safety  net  through 
institutional  mechanism  and  arrangement  such  as  the  development  of  the  Chiang  Mai 
Initiative  Multilateralization  (CMIM)  will  increase  the  region’s  ability  to  respond  to  a  crisis, 
build  confidence  and  hence  lessen  possible  market  turbulence  during  times  of  financial 
stress. 
As I have outlined here, numerous advantages for member countries and for the region as a 
whole can be expected from the launch of the AEC in just a few years from now. However, 
capitalizing on these opportunities will not be automatic. ASEAN leaders will need to step 
up their efforts in their preparatory works to achieve a credible and meaningful start. 
For  one  thing,  boosting  each  member  country’s  competitiveness  and  addressing  key 
structural problems should be priorities that lie primarily with respective nations. Furthermore, 
to  ensure  sustainable  success  of  regional  economic  integration,  growth  must  be  inclusive 
both  within  and  between  member  countries.  To  this  end,  the  equitable  economic 
development pillar of the AEC blueprint calls on member states to narrow the development 
gap within ASEAN through mutual assistance and cooperation. Under this pillar, subregional 
programs such as the Greater Mekong Subregion (GMS) Economic Cooperation have been 
underway to accelerate economic integration of the newer members through various capacity 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
building  and  infrastructure  projects.  This  would  help  spread  the  benefits  of  growth  more 
widely  and  evenly  while  enabling  the  AEC  to  take  advantage  of  the  potential  source  of 
synergies by bringing the capital and know-how of the more mature economies together with 
the competitive costs and abundant resources of the new frontier member countries. 
Another key element for sustainability of this ambitious effort towards a pan-Asian economic 
integration is to bring on board private sector involvement to draw in private expertise as 
well as private capital in funding and operation of intra-regional investment projects. In this 
regard,  greater  efforts  should  be  made  to  raise  awareness  of  AEC  among  the  business 
community in sustaining high levels of collaborative economic dynamism within the region. 
Last but not least, since regional integration relies much on harmonization and coordination 
of  cross-national  policies  with  strong  commitment  by  national  leaders  in  implementing  the 
agreed arrangements, political stability and peaceful relationship among member states will 
prove imperative to the success. This calls for the promotion of peace and stability within 
the  region  with  fair  mechanism  to  arbitrate  disputes  to  ensure  that  progress  on  economic 
integration will not be delayed or discontinued due to conflicts among member nations. 
Concluding remark 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I have spoken at length, from a subject of a volatile world, onto more structural issues facing 
Asian economies, and the regional cooperative forces that provide promising ways forward 
for Asia. Let me now wrap up by leaving you with a final remark on these issues. 
In these uncertain times and with all the increased interconnectedness of the world economy, 
volatility and short-term fickleness of marketplace are unavoidable. The wise thing to do is to 
understand the nature of this global interconnectedness, enhance risk management at both 
the macro and micro levels to mitigate negative impact that it may bring upon, all the while 
maximizing opportunities that it can immensely provide. It is conceivable that, in this highly 
integrated world, information and confidence are very important in influencing actions. Just 
as how “shifts in beliefs” can go a long way to create extreme market reactions and volatility, 
on a positive side I trust that a successful “anchoring of confidence” in our “shared beliefs” of 
ASEAN’s  strength  and  future  will  encourage  actions  and  commitments  that  will  bring 
sustained prosperity for all. 
Thank you. And happy birthday to The Nation. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
