Koji Ishida: Recent economic and financial developments 
Speech by Mr Koji Ishida, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting 
with business leaders, Tochigi, 11 March 2013. 
I. 
Economic activity and prices 
 Recent financial and economic developments 
Overview 
A. 
1. 
I would like to start by looking at recent developments in the global economy. 
The global economy plunged following the Lehman shock in 2008, but moved subsequently 
toward recovery. Since mid-2011 however, it has decelerated following the outbreak of the 
European sovereign debt crisis triggered by the fiscal problem in Greece. 
Thereafter, as the debt problems in major economies such as Spain and Italy also worsened, 
the  euro  area  economy  entered  a  severe  recession  and  the  real  GDP  growth  rate  for  the 
area turned negative in 2012. In addition, the growth rate declined for the Chinese economy, 
which exports a great deal to Europe, and emerging and commodity-exporting economies in 
general  were  seriously  affected.  In  these  circumstances,  Japan’s  economy  has  inevitably 
undergone significant adjustments since summer 2012, such as in the form of a decrease in 
production and curbs on business fixed investment due to a drop in exports. 
The  problems  in  the  euro  area  have  shown  signs  of  stabilizing,  reflecting  progress  made 
since the latter half of 2012 in establishing frameworks to avert a crisis. Examples include the 
introduction of a program called Outright Monetary Transactions (OMTs), through which the 
European Central Bank (ECB) purchases government bonds issued by euro area countries 
facing financial difficulties, and the start of the operation of the European Stability Mechanism 
(ESM). In this situation, markets outside the euro area have begun to factor in the bottoming 
out of respective economies. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) has projected that the 
global economy will recover in 2013 and 2014, having bottomed out in 2012. 
2. 
The  euro  area  economy,  which  is  considered  to  have  triggered  the  global  economic 
slowdown in 2012, remains in a moderate recessionary phase. Private consumption in the 
euro area has been on a downtrend since 2011 against the backdrop of the debt problems. 
Car sales have been particularly weak. Looking at exports and production, exports to outside 
the area had been solid, primarily in Germany with its competitive edge, owing in part to the 
depreciation of the euro to date. However, these exports have more recently shown sluggish 
growth  due  to  the  deceleration  in  the  global  economy.  As  a  result,  production,  which  had 
already  been  stagnant  due  to  weak  consumption  in  the  euro  area,  has  declined  further. 
However,  with  the  pick-up  in  the  global  economy,  there  are  indications  of  a  halt  in  the 
deterioration  of  business  sentiment  –  a  leading  economic  indicator  –  and  some  positive 
developments in other economic indicators. Even so, given that some peripheral European 
countries need to continue to implement fiscal austerity measures, the European economy 
as a whole is highly likely to remain sluggish for the time being. 
The  fundamental  cause  of  the  European  sovereign  debt  crisis  and  the  current  economic 
stagnation presumably lies in the imbalance between individual economies in the euro area. 
National currencies were unified into the single currency of the euro despite disparities in the 
economic strength of the countries involved, but sovereignties over fiscal and other national 
affairs  have  not  been  unified.  In  these  circumstances,  peripheral  European  countries 
experienced an economic boom, as their previously high interest rates converged toward the 
low  level  of  Germany’s  interest  rates  following  the  currency  union  and  their  funding  from 
European economy 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
U.S. economy 
global  capital  markets  became  easier  at  low  cost.  Subsequently,  peripheral  European 
countries  ran  current  account  deficits,  and  their  deficits  were  covered  by  investment  and 
borrowing  from  the  private  sector  mainly  in  the  core  euro  area  countries.  Moreover, 
peripheral countries allowed labor costs to rise, causing a widening gap in competitiveness 
with euro area countries that enjoyed high productivity, such as Germany. 
The funding conditions have deteriorated for financial institutions in the peripheral European 
countries burdened with the debt problems, since the problems have worsened amid a global 
increase in awareness of credit risk arising from interbank funds transactions in the wake of 
the Lehman shock. This implies that it has become difficult for peripheral European countries’ 
current  account  deficits to  continue to  be financed  with  funds from  other  countries’  private 
sectors. From 2011 through the first half of 2012, the debt problems in the euro area not only 
raised tensions in global financial markets but also exerted significant downward pressure on 
the  global  economy  as  a  whole.  Since  the  latter  half  of  2012,  however,  the  situation  has 
shown signs of stabilizing reflecting the implementation of a number of measures to avert a 
crisis, as I mentioned earlier. 
Nevertheless, since the economic imbalance in the euro area that lies at the root of the crisis 
has  not  yet  been  resolved,  due  attention  should  continue  to  be  paid  to  the  possibility  that 
some events might cause a crisis to recur. I see the risks to the outlook for the European 
economy as still tilted sharply to the downside. 
3. 
Next, I will discuss the U.S. economy. Although the Lehman shock originated in the United 
States, the U.S. economy has regained momentum since the plunge and has been growing 
at an average annual rate of around 2 percent. In the October–December quarter of 2012, 
the real GDP growth rate slowed due to negative contributions from inventory investment and 
government spending, but domestic final private demand items, such as private consumption 
and housing investment, maintained their uptrend. 
With regard to business sentiment, the business sentiment index for the nonmanufacturing 
sector has stayed firm. Meanwhile, the index for the manufacturing sector fell temporarily to 
around the breakeven point of 50 reflecting the deceleration of the euro area and Chinese 
economies  together  with  the  “fiscal  cliff”  problem  in  the  United  States,  but  it  has  recently 
been recovering. As for the outlook, assuming that uncertainties arising from fiscal and other 
problems  are  gradually  dispelled,  I  expect  that  business  sentiment  in  the  manufacturing 
sector will gradually pick up, and that, as a result, production and business fixed investment 
will gain momentum. 
As  for  the  employment  situation,  the  unemployment  rate,  which  had  remained  between 
approximately 4 to 6 percent, jumped to around 10 percent after the Lehman shock occurred. 
In the four years thereafter, the unemployment rate fell back only to slightly below 8 percent. 
Compared with the loss of about 9 million jobs, new jobs created totaled only about 6 million 
despite an increase in the working population. However, as the number of employees has 
been steadily rising, the employment situation is improving as a trend. 
With regard to developments in the household sector, car sales have recovered considerably 
and  housing  prices,  which  had  bottomed  out,  are  starting  to  rise,  albeit  moderately.  The 
number  of  housing  starts  is  still  around  half  of  the  level  seen  before  the  bursting  of  the 
housing  bubble  but  is  increasing  moderately.  Viewed  from  another  angle,  the  current  low 
level means that there is still ample room for growth. 
The Lehman shock was caused by the formation and bursting of the U.S. housing bubble, so 
it is expected to take a long time before the excess debt in the household sector that was 
created  during  the  bubble’s  formation  is  resolved.  This  balance-sheet  problem  in  the 
household sector, coupled with downward pressure arising from the fiscal side, has probably 
held down U.S. economic growth to around 2 percent, although the growth rate without these 
negative factors would have been essentially somewhat higher. The ratio of household debt 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
China’s economy, and the NIEs and the ASEAN economies 
to  disposable  income  has  been  declining  after  rising  sharply  during  the  bubble  period. 
Although the ratio remains at a high level, it is converging toward the trend line. If the recent 
rise in housing prices continues, the balance-sheet problem is expected to ease, leading to 
more vigorous household spending activity due to the wealth effects. 
The U.S. economy has been confronted with a very serious problem of the fiscal cliff. The 
fiscal  cliff  refers  to  a  state  in  which  the  expiration  of  various  tax  cuts  –  namely,  those 
introduced by the administration of former President George W. Bush and those carried out 
after  the  Lehman  shock  –  and  the  implementation  of  automatic  spending  reductions 
threatened to occur simultaneously at the start of 2013. Given the extremely large scale of 
the  tax  cuts  and  spending  reductions,  there  were  concerns  that  the  fiscal  cliff  could  exert 
strong downward pressure on the economy, depending on how it was dealt with. Concerning 
the expiration of the tax cuts, a compromise was recently reached to extend some of them. 
However,  a  resolution  was  not  achieved  before  the  new  deadline  of  March  1,  2013  for 
automatic  spending  reductions,  and  spending  reductions  have  begun.  As  a  series  of 
problems lie ahead – such as the expiration of the provisional budget on March 27, 2013 and 
of the suspension of the federal debt ceiling by mid-May – the fiscal issues could still turn out 
to be a major destabilizing factor for the U.S. economy. 
It  is  expected  that  a  compromise  will  eventually  be  reached  over  these  problems.  In  any 
case,  it  is  inevitable  that  U.S.  economic  growth  will  be  restrained  in  the  first  half  of  2013 
given  the  negative  factors  on  the  fiscal  front,  such  as  tax  increases  and  spending  cuts. 
However, economic growth should accelerate gradually in and beyond the middle of 2013, 
when the effects of the problems are likely to subside. In this case, U.S. long-term interest 
rates may rise gradually, which may in turn affect long-term interest rates in Japan and the 
U.S.  dollar-yen  exchange  rate.  Accordingly,  close  monitoring  of  future  developments  is 
required. 
4. 
With  regard  to  the  Chinese  economy,  the  Chinese  authorities  implemented  tightening 
measures, such as those to restrain the increase in real estate transactions and curb public 
investment, due to concerns that the massive economic stimulus measures that had followed 
the  Lehman  shock  could  cause  an  acceleration  in  inflation  and  a  surge  in  asset  prices. 
Because  the  decline  in  China’s  exports  to  Europe  was  combined  with  the  effects  of  the 
tightening  measures,  downward  pressure  on  the  Chinese  economy  grew  as  a  whole. 
However, since summer 2012 the authorities have partly revised their policy stance, and the 
conduct of monetary policy has become rather accommodative. In these circumstances, the 
Chinese  economy  has  recently  been  picking  up,  supported  also  by  expectations  of  a 
recovery in the global economy. 
Private  consumption  has  been  firm  on  the  back  of  a  favorable  employment  and  income 
situation. As for fixed asset investment, the pace of increase has slowed, reflecting excessive 
production capacity of materials and slower growth in exports in the  manufacturing sector, 
but  this  slowdown  in  investment  has  recently  been  coming  to  a  halt  due  to  recoveries  in 
public investment and real estate investment. Business sentiment in the services sector has 
been firm, and that in the manufacturing sector has started improving as business conditions 
have recently turned for the better. 
China’s exports have started to recover after bottoming out in the July–September quarter of 
2012. A drop in exports to Europe, which account for a large share of China’s overall exports, 
has been counterbalanced by increases in exports to other destinations. In 2012, the share 
of  exports  to  the  United  States  surpassed  that  of  exports  to  Europe.  As  for  the  outlook, 
although  some  uncertain  factors  remain,  I  expect  that  the  growth  rate  of  the  Chinese 
economy will gradually rise and succeed in reaching somewhere between 8 and 8.5 percent 
for the year. 
The pace of pick-up in the NIEs and the ASEAN economies remains moderate as business 
fixed investment, particularly in the NIEs, has been sluggish. As for the outlook, however, if 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Current state of Japan’s economy 
the prospects for the global economy brighten – led by the U.S. and Chinese economies – 
the pace of recovery in the NIEs and the ASEAN economies is likely to increase, supported 
by a gradual pick-up in exports and firm domestic demand. 
5. 
Thus  far,  I  have  talked  about  developments  in  overseas  economies.  Let  me  turn  now  to 
Japan’s economy. 
Japan’s economy, which had been recovering steadily from the plunge following the Lehman 
shock in 2008, was significantly affected by the Great East Japan Earthquake of March 11, 
2011. Thereafter, flooding in Thailand temporarily acted to brake Japan’s economic growth, 
but relatively high growth was achieved during the first half of 2012 due partly to a rebound 
from the plunge, inventory restocking, and heightened demand for rebuilding. 
Nevertheless, as the second half of 2012 began exports and production decreased sharply, 
reflecting the deceleration in the global economy due to the worsening of the European debt 
problem  and  the  slowdown  in  the  Chinese  economy.  The  real  GDP  growth  rate  for  the  
July–September quarter of 2012 was minus 0.9 percent on a quarter-on-quarter basis and 
minus 3.7 percent on an annualized basis. However, that for the October–December quarter 
was 0 percent on a quarter-on-quarter basis and 0.2 percent on an annualized basis, and 
Japan’s economy seems to have stopped weakening recently, in a situation where overseas 
economies have shown signs of picking up, as I mentioned earlier. 
However, the pace of improvement in Japan’s exports seems somewhat slow compared with 
developments in overseas economies. This is attributable to a degree to the drop in exports 
to  China,  reflecting  in  part  the  recent  developments  in  the  relations  between  Japan  and 
China, but it is largely attributable to the sluggish exports of capital goods and parts, which 
are  a  major  category  of  Japan’s  exports  along  with  automobiles.  In  this  regard,  the 
sluggishness  in  exports  of  capital  goods  and  parts  is  strongly  affected  by  the  fact  that 
sentiment in the manufacturing sector has deteriorated worldwide amid the current phase of 
global economic deceleration, causing firms to take a cautious stance toward business fixed 
investment. If a recovery trend in overseas economies becomes clear and production starts 
increasing, firms will regain their appetite for business fixed investment, raising the level of 
Japan’s exports. 
I have discussed overseas demand. Now, looking at domestic demand, public investment, in 
terms  of  the  amount  of  public  construction  completed,  has  continued  to  increase  since 
around the end of 2011, primarily in that related to reconstruction following the earthquake 
disaster. Public investment is expected to continue trending upward, supported by the effects 
of  various  economic  measures.  Business  fixed  investment  has  shown  some  weakness  on 
the whole, as that in the manufacturing sector has declined due to the drop in exports and 
production,  although  resilience  has  been  observed  in  investment  in  the  nonmanufacturing 
sector.  On  the  other  hand,  private  consumption  remains  resilient  and  the  effects  of  the 
decline in car sales due to the ending of measures to stimulate demand for automobiles have 
fallen off. Private consumption is expected to remain resilient as a trend. Attention, however, 
needs to be paid to the fact that the income situation cannot necessarily be regarded as firm, 
given that summer and winter bonus payments in 2012 were below the previous year’s levels 
and non-scheduled cash earnings have also declined.  Meanwhile, housing investment has 
generally been picking up, supported in part by reconstruction of disaster-stricken homes. It 
is  expected  to  continue  to  do  so,  as  a  front-loaded  increase  in  demand  prior  to  the 
consumption tax hike is likely to occur. 
Recently,  stock  prices  have  been  rising  and  the  yen  has  been  depreciating.  A  number  of 
factors  have  been  pointed  out  as  the  background  to  these  developments,  including 
(1) abating tensions in the global financial markets due to a settling down of the European 
sovereign  debt  crisis  for  the  time  being  and  the  reduced  threat  of  the  fiscal  cliff; 
(2) expectations for the outlook for the U.S. and Chinese economies; and (3) the widening of 
Japan’s  trade  balance  deficit  and  a  sharp  fall  in  the  current  account  surplus.  Rising 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
expectations in regard to the policy conduct of the government and the Bank of Japan are 
also a large factor. In these circumstances, business and household sentiment has improved 
significantly. 
As overseas economies recover, Japan’s economy is expected to return to a solid recovery 
path  as  well.  In  this  situation,  it  is  particularly  important  that  the  improved  business  and 
household sentiment be maintained to ensure strong momentum for recovery. 
Outlook for Japan’s economic activity and prices 
B. 
Next, I will talk about the outlook for Japan’s economic activity and prices. Semiannually, in 
April and October, the Bank releases the Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices, known as 
the Outlook Report, in which it presents its outlook for economic activity and prices for the 
next two years, carefully assesses upside and downside risks, and summarizes its thinking 
on  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  Then,  in  January  and  July,  the  Bank  makes  interim 
assessments  of  the  outlook  laid  out  in  the  Outlook  Report.  According  to  the  interim 
assessment  made  in  January  2013,  the  Policy  Board  members’  baseline  scenario  for 
Japan’s  economy  is  that  it  is  expected  to  level  off  more  or  less  for  the  time  being,  and 
thereafter it will return to a moderate recovery path as domestic demand remains resilient, 
partly  due  to  the  effects  of  various  economic  measures,  and  as  overseas  economies 
gradually emerge from the deceleration phase. As for prices, the year-on-year rate of change 
in the consumer price index (CPI) is expected to turn negative for the time being, due to the 
reversal of the previous year’s movements in energy-related and durable consumer goods, 
and thereafter it is likely to be around 0 percent again. The year-on-year rate of change in the 
CPI is expected to then start rising moderately as the aggregate supply and demand balance 
improves. 
Specifically, the median of the Policy Board members’ forecasts for Japan’s real GDP growth 
rate  is  2.3  percent  for  fiscal  2013  and  0.8  percent  for  fiscal  2014.  The  median  of  their 
forecasts for the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI is 0.4 percent for fiscal 2013 and 
2.9 percent for fiscal 2014 – or 0.9 percent excluding the direct effects of the consumption 
tax  hike. While  this  outlook  entails  various  risks,  the  Bank  also  presents  the  Risk  Balance 
Charts,  which  show  the  probability  distribution  of  the  forecasts  taking  into  account  such 
upside and downside risks. According to this distribution, the upside and downside risks to 
the outlook are broadly balanced. 
Thus far, developments in Japan’s economic activity and prices have been in line with this 
outlook. 
Monetary policy 
II. 
Now, I will outline the Bank’s current conduct of monetary policy, based on the current state 
of Japan’s economy and the future outlook just described. At the Monetary Policy Meeting 
(MPM) held on January 21 and 22, 2013, the Bank took additional steps to provide monetary 
accommodation  decisively  to  overcome  deflation  early  and  achieve  sustainable  economic 
growth with price stability. It also introduced the “price stability target” of 2 percent in terms of 
the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI. 
Introduction of the “Price Stability Target” 
A. 
In this regard, I would first like to talk about the “price stability target” of 2 percent. 
In  February  2012,  the  Bank  judged  that  the  inflation  rate  consistent  with  price  stability 
sustainable over the medium to long term was in a positive range of 2 percent or lower in 
terms  of  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI,  and  set  the  “price  stability  goal”  at 
1 percent for the time being. With the aim of achieving this goal, the Bank has been pursuing 
monetary easing. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
In January 2013, however, as a replacement for this 1 percent goal, the Bank set the “price 
stability target” of 2 percent. 
As  mentioned  earlier,  the  median  of  the  Policy  Board  members’ forecasts for  the  year-on-
year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  excluding  the  direct  effects  of  the  consumption  tax  hike  is 
0.9 percent for fiscal 2014. This figure is the average for fiscal 2014, and under this forecast 
it is projected that the rate of change will reach 1 percent on a monthly basis at around the 
end  of  fiscal  2014.  Given  this  situation,  with  the  aim  of  better  ensuring  the  overcoming  of 
deflation, the Bank decided to work to achieve the target of 2 percent thereafter. 
Since the 1980s, except for the period immediately after the bursting of the bubble, the year-
on-year rate of change in the CPI in Japan remained consistent, at a level below 2 percent. 
There has been a delay in adjusting Japan’s economy in response to structural change such 
as rapid population aging and increasing globalization, and as a result the potential growth 
rate  as  well  as  firms’  and  households’  medium- to  long-term  expectations for growth  have 
been declining. In these circumstances, a chronic shortage of demand has been observed 
and therefore the negative output gap has had less of a tendency to narrow. In this situation, 
firms have committed to cutting costs to survive competition while maintaining employment, 
and  this  has  also  exerted  continued  downward  pressure  on  wages.  These  overall 
developments have led to the persistent downward pressure on prices. 
To  overcome  deflation,  it  is  necessary  to  reverse  this  vicious  cycle  by  responding 
appropriately to structural change, and raising firms’ and households’ medium- to long-term 
expectations for growth. The price stability target of 2 percent is significantly high considering 
the long-term developments in Japan’s price situation, but if the general public’s expectations 
for growth of the economy heighten – causing the actual inflation rate to rise – the public’s 
expectations for inflation can also be expected to increase. I believe that the achievement of 
the price stability target of 2 percent can be highly expected, if – in parallel with the pursuit of 
aggressive  monetary  easing  by  the  Bank  –  efforts  by  a  wide  range  of  entities  toward 
strengthening the competitiveness and growth potential of Japan’s economy make progress. 
Introduction of the “Open-Ended Asset Purchasing Method” 
B. 
As I have explained, the Bank will pursue aggressive monetary easing, aiming to achieve the 
“price stability target”. Specifically, the Bank decided at the MPM held on January 21 and 22, 
2013 to (1) continue with a virtually zero interest rate policy and purchases of financial assets 
for as long as the Bank judges it appropriate to continue with each respective policy measure 
and (2) introduce the open-ended asset purchasing method for purchases of financial assets 
from January 2014. 
The  Bank  purchases  various  financial  assets  –  such  as  government  securities,  corporate 
bonds,  CP,  exchange-traded  funds  (ETFs),  and  Japan  real  estate  investment  trusts 
(J-REITs) – from the markets through the Asset Purchase Program, and aims to encourage a 
decline in longer-term interest rates and a narrowing of risk premiums. 
The Bank set the size and term of the Asset Purchase Program as about 101 trillion yen by 
the end of 2013. After completing the term for the current purchasing method, from January 
2014,  the  Bank  will  for  some  time  purchase  financial  assets  totaling  about  13  trillion  yen 
every month without setting any termination date. This new method was introduced because 
the Bank judged that it could clearly show its intention to continue purchasing financial assets 
toward achieving the newly introduced “price stability target”. 
Fund-provisioning measure to stimulate bank lending 
C. 
The Bank has been continuing with the virtually zero interest rate policy and providing ample 
funds  to  the  money  market,  and  the  effects  of  its  monetary  policy  will  become  stronger  if 
firms  and  households  make  greater  use  of  the  current  extremely  accommodative  financial 
conditions. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
From this viewpoint, the Bank formally launched the fund-provisioning measure to stimulate 
bank  lending  (the  Stimulating  Bank  Lending  Facility)  in  December  2012  with  the  aim  of 
promoting financial institutions’ aggressive action and helping stimulate the proactive credit 
demand of firms and households. With this facility, the Bank will provide long-term funds at a 
low interest rate to financial institutions that have increased their lending, at their request, up 
to an amount equivalent to the net increase in their lending, with no upper limit to the total 
amount  of  funds  to  be  provided  by  the  Bank  under  this  facility.  In  June  2010,  prior  to  the 
establishment of this facility, the Bank introduced the fund-provisioning measure to support 
strengthening the foundations for economic growth (the Growth-Supporting Funding Facility). 
The Bank has prepared a framework consisting of 5.5 trillion yen in total – including loans in 
U.S. dollars – and nearly 4 trillion yen has already been used. 
that 
for  strengthening 
it  would  not  only 
the  government  announced 
Strengthening policy coordination between the government and the bank 
D. 
On January 22, 2013, in line with the further pursuit of aggressive monetary easing I have 
just described, the government and the Bank released “Joint Statement of the Government 
and  the  Bank  of  Japan  on  Overcoming  Deflation  and  Achieving  Sustainable  Economic 
Growth”. In the statement, the Bank announced that it would pursue monetary easing and 
aim  to  achieve  the  “price  stability  target”  of  2  percent  at  the  earliest  possible  time. 
flexibly  manage 
Concurrently, 
macroeconomic  policy  but  also  strongly  promote  measures 
the 
competitiveness  and  growth  potential  of  Japan’s  economy  as  well  as  steadily  promote 
measures aimed at establishing a sustainable fiscal structure. 
As  mentioned  earlier,  the  growth  strategy  –  which  aims  at  restoring  the  flexibility  and 
adaptability of Japan’s economy and raising its potential – is extremely important for Japan. 
Furthermore, Japan’s fiscal situation is very severe compared with other countries. Although 
yields  on  Japanese  government  bonds  (JGBs) are  stable  at  a  historically  low  level,  this  is 
simply because the credibility of Japan’s fiscal management in financial markets has been 
ensured. If such credibility were to falter, interest rates would rise substantially, undermining 
the effectiveness of monetary policy as well as increasing the loan burden on individuals and 
firms,  and  inflicting  damage  on  the  business  conditions  of  financial  institutions  with  JGB 
holdings.  The  economy  would  naturally  be  affected  adversely.  These  developments  would 
also  increase  interest  payments  on  JGBs  and  subsequently  lead  to  a  worsening  fiscal 
situation.  Such  a  case  must  be  avoided.  This  necessity  is  made  apparent  by  the  recent 
situation  in  the  euro  area.  The  Bank  has  been  purchasing  a  large  amount  of  government 
securities and will continue to do so. In order for the Bank to proceed with massive monetary 
easing,  it  is  extremely  important  to  steadily  promote  measures  aimed  at  establishing  a 
sustainable fiscal structure. 
As I have described, the Bank will work together with the government and do its utmost to 
overcome deflation early and achieve sustainable economic growth with price stability. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
