Vítor Constâncio: Implications of the Single Supervisory Mechanism 
(SSM) on the European System of Financial Supervision (ESFS) 
Speech by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at a Public 
Hearing on Financial Supervision in the EU, Brussels, 24 May 2013. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Thank you very much for inviting me to open this session on the implications of the Single 
Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) on the European System of Financial Supervision (ESFS). 
At present, the only answer that can really be given on this issue is, “it depends”. While the 
SSM will in principle be just another supervisor around the table, its impact on the ESFS will 
clearly depend on how many Member States eventually decide to join. In our view, the more 
Member States take part, the better it will be for the functioning of the ESFS and the single 
market more generally. 
First, having as many as possible countries in the SSM will reduce the scope for coordination 
failures.  This  will  in  turn  facilitate  the  coordination  function  of  the  European  Banking 
Authority. 
Second, a larger SSM is the best way to safeguard the single market in financial services. 
The more membership overlaps between the EU and the SSM, the more consistent will be 
the application of supervisory and regulatory practices. 
Third, broad SSM membership could diminish the distortions to the single financial market 
caused by the divergent fiscal positions of sovereigns, as Member States that are part of the 
SSM will also have access to the Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM). This presupposes, 
however, that the SRM is set up with strong powers, which I consider essential. 
At  this  stage,  we  expect  several  non-euro  area  Member  States  to  join  the  SSM.  The 
negotiations  on  the  SSM  Regulation  have  satisfactorily  addressed  most  of  their  concerns. 
However, some countries seem to require that more clarity on the functioning of the SRM is 
provided before they reach their final decision, in particular on the issue of a common fiscal 
backstop and how “out” Member States could contribute to or benefit from it. In my view, this 
should not be an obstacle to a positive decision because any participant country in the SSM 
will also participate in the SRM and benefit from it. 
From  the  ECB’s  perspective,  it  is  essential  that  the  SRM  comprises  a  Single  Resolution 
Authority and single fund financed by ex-ante and risk-based contributions from the banking 
sector itself. To remove any doubts over resolution financing, the fund should be able to draw 
on a common backstop if needed – possibly a credit line from the ESM. Any credit would be 
repaid via additional levies on banks and thus be fiscally neutral in the medium term. This 
construction raises certain institutional questions which cannot be answered today, not least 
related  to  membership  of  the  ESM.  But  in  our  view,  an  approach  based  solely  on 
coordination between national authorities without a Single Resolution Authority and without a 
common  backstop  would  clearly  not  be  sufficient.  It  would  make  the  Banking  Union 
significantly less attractive for non-euro area Member States, and hence less effective for the 
EU as a whole. 
Ideally, we would like non-euro area Member States to make their intentions clear by July 
2013 when the SSM Regulation is expected to enter into force. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Interactions with the ESFS 
While  we  cannot  say  definitively  how  the  SSM  will  affect  the  ESFS  without  knowing  its 
eventual  composition,  we  can  identify  certain  structural  ways  in  which  the  SSM  and  the 
ESFS will interact.  
European Banking Authority 
Regarding the European Banking Authority (EBA), interactions with the SSM will necessarily 
be very intense, and in three areas in particular. 
First, the single rulebook. EBA will remain responsible for developing regulatory policy and 
technical standards that will form the basis of a single rulebook for banks across Europe. The 
SSM will play a key role here, as I noted, in improving coordination between supervisors. It 
will  therefore  significantly  support  the  accomplishment  of  EBA’s  mandate  to  establish  that 
single rulebook. 
Second, the EBA supervisory handbook. In order to encourage supervisory convergence in 
Europe,  the  EBA  is  currently  developing  a  supervisory  handbook  which  reflects  best 
supervisory practices across the EU. At the same time, the SSM will develop its own more 
detailed supervision manual, which lays down the supervisory approach to be taken by the 
SSM including on off-site and on-site reviews, risk assessments and model validations. The 
ECB  and  the  EBA  are  cooperating  closely  to  ensure  that  these  two  projects  are  fully 
consistent. Here again, the existence of the SSM will greatly facilitate the work of the EBA, 
as all SSM members will naturally converge in their supervisory practices. 
Third,  the conduct  of  stress  tests. The  Council  Regulation  requests  the  SSM  to  conduct  a 
comprehensive assessment of the banks that the ECB will supervise directly. This will have 
two  main  building  blocks.  First,  a  balance  sheet  assessment,  which  is  a  point-in-time 
evaluation of the asset side of banks’ balance sheets. Second, a forward-looking assessment 
of individual banks’ capital positions and provisioning levels in the form of a stress test. This 
stress  test,  and  future  stress  tests  undertaken  as  part  of  the  SSM’s  regular  supervisory 
functions,  will  be  conducted  in  close  cooperation  with  the  EBA,  in  particular  regarding  the 
design and timing of the exercises. 
European Systemic Risk Board 
As regards interactions with the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB), the activities of the 
SSM will have a clear systemic dimension and so cooperation between the SSM and ESRB 
will be essential.  
In particular, while macro-prudential powers will rest also with national authorities, the ECB 
will be able to use macro-prudential instruments, either at the request of national authorities 
or  by  deciding  to  adopt  stricter  measures  than  the  ones  adopted  at  national  level.  This 
implies an increased coordination function in the macro-prudential areas for countries within 
the SSM that will naturally create some overlap with the macro-prudential role of the ESRB 
for the wider EU. 
However, I expect the macro-prudential functions of both institutions to be complementary. 
The  ESRB  will  play  its  role  in  adopting  recommendations  to  help  coordinating  macro-
prudential decisions as provided for in EU Regulation (namely CRR), in particular with the 
countries  that  do  not  join  the  SSM.  In  addition,  while  the  SSM  will  exclusively  focus  on 
banking systems, the ESRB has an additional macro-prudential function regarding the non-
bank parts of the financial sector, and as such will be well placed to address cross-sectoral 
issues.  
Interplay with the other ESAs 
Finally, let me be very brief regarding the SSM’s interaction with ESMA and EIOPA. Although 
the supervision of markets and the insurance sector will remain with the national authorities, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
ESMA and EIOPA will play important roles in the coordination of information sharing between 
the SSM and the national authorities. In particular, cooperation with EIOPA on the bank-led 
conglomerates will have to be very close given that the SSM is expected to take over their 
supplementary  supervision.  Memoranda  of  Understanding  regulating  these  interactions  will 
be prepared in the coming months. 
Conclusion 
To conclude, it is unavoidable that the existence of the SSM will alter the functioning of the 
ESFS.  This  is,  after  all,  the  most  significant  development  in  financial  supervision  in  the 
history  of  the  European  Union.  However,  I  am  confident  that  the  changes  brought  by  the 
SSM  will  strengthen  the  ESFS,  and  will  overall  enhance  the  quality  and  consistency  of 
supervisory  and  regulatory  practices  across  Europe.  The  more  Member  States  that  are 
involved in Banking Union, the greater these positive effects will be. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
