Tharman Shanmugaratnam: Key issues in Asian financial markets 
Keynote address by Mr Tharman Shanmugaratnam, Chairman of the Monetary Authority of 
Singapore, at the ACI (The Financial Markets Association) 52nd World Congress, Singapore, 
15 March 2013. 
Mr. Manfred Wiebogen, ACI Global President  
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen  
 I am delighted to be here today with all of you.  
1. 
2. 
The last time Singapore hosted the ACI Congress was back in 2001. In fact, it was 
just  before  9/11.  The  world  was  in  a  very  different  place.  Asia  too  was  so  different  from 
today. The wounds of the Asian crisis of the late 90s were still fresh. Investor confidence in 
the various countries in the region was uneven. And Asian capital markets were by and large 
in their infancy.  
The new financial landscape 
3. 
We are now in a new phase in global finance. Global finance is deleveraging, after 
the great credit bubble that began more than a decade ago and came to an end in 2007. But 
deleveraging  still  has  some  way  to  go,  and  some  years  to  go,  before  the  overall  level  of 
leverage relative to economic activity gets back to a sustainable level. 
4. 
The pace of deleveraging has been moderated so far by central banks, who have 
taken onto their balance sheets unprecedented levels of both public and private sector debt. 
Their actions have reduced the risks of catastrophe. But it also means we have a long way 
yet to go in reducing debts and returning to sustainable growth.  
5. 
We are also seeing important shifts in the structure of global finance, besides the 
gradual contraction in global liquidity. It is too early to say where we will be five years from 
now, but some of the broad brush-strokes in this new landscape of global finance are already 
with us and likely to stay:  
• 
The  return  on  equity  in  global  banking  has  fallen,  and  will  not  return  to  pre-crisis 
levels, given stricter capital and liquidity rules.  
Deposits have become more important as a source of bank funding.  
Banks  in  certain  major  jurisdictions  have  retreated  from  global  markets,  and 
worryingly, and may stay in retreat for some time.  
The  securitised  debt  markets  should  recover,  but  with  less  leverage  underpinning 
them, and hopefully greater risk transparency.  
In  the  derivative  markets,  there  will  be  greater  standardisation  of  products,  and 
much greater reliance on common market infrastructure – for trading, clearing and 
reporting  of 
in 
competitiveness.  
Wealth  management  will  remain  a  growth  industry,  especially  in  Asia,  where  the 
pool of wealth is growing most rapidly and the need for diversification remains great.  
And  outside  of  intermediated  finance,  companies  will  seek  new  ways  of  raising 
funds, including through private placements. 
6. 
Will  this  mean  a  safer  financial  world?  Maybe.  That  will  depend  on  whether  we 
persist in seeing through the regulatory reforms that began a few years ago. It will depend on 
low-margin  platforms  will 
trades.  High  volume, 
likely  gain 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
whether we keep to a sensible balance in regulation – and that includes not over-doing bank 
regulation and under-doing the oversight of shadow banking. It will also depend on whether 
we all stay intensely alert to the risks of the future, including especially the risks that we do 
not yet see or know, rather than focus only on the last battle or on preventing the last crisis 
from recurring.  
7. 
What of global capital flows? There too we see shifts, as global finance responds to 
a  two-track  world  of  economic  growth.  The  prospect  of  sub-par  growth  in  the  advanced 
economies for a number of years, together with central bank actions to keep interest rates 
very  low,  have  led  to  what  is  becoming  a  furious  search  for  yield.  Pension  funds  and 
insurance funds need better yields badly, and they are putting more monies in the emerging 
markets and other risk assets.  
8. 
This is likely to be more than a cyclical trend. We are seeing a secular shift in assets 
towards  the  emerging  markets.  Advanced  country  funds  in  fact  remain  significantly 
underweighted in emerging market assets, and are gradually correcting for this. At the same 
time,  sovereign  debt  ratings  have  been  raised  in  several  emerging  economies,  in  Asia 
especially1, at the same time that a number of advanced economies2 have seen their ratings 
lowered. Asia is certainly not free from risks, and there is much work ahead to preserve and 
improve  sovereign  ratings.  But  no  one  can  assume  that  the  recent  rebalancing  of  risk 
assessments vis-à-vis the advanced economies is temporary.  
9 
What  this  continuing  shift  in  global  funds  also  means,  however,  is  that  there  is 
critical need to add depth and breadth to Asian financial markets. It will not be possible to 
absorb  a  greater  share  of  global  savings  without  developing  this  depth  and  breadth  in 
markets, and a robust market infrastructure. Otherwise, both global and Asian capital flows 
within  the  region  will  lead  to  recurrent  bubbles,  whether  in  equities,  property  markets  or 
currencies,  rather  than  find  their  way  to  the  most  productive  investments  in  Asia’s 
economies.  
10. 
Asia’s  financial  markets  have  grown  significantly  over  the  past  decade.  But  the 
capital markets, and especially for bonds and securitised debts, remain small in relation to 
Asia’s GDP. Further, the region’s financial markets are still relatively small and fragmented.  
11. 
enable them to play a stronger role in promoting balanced and sustainable growth.  
12. 
We  will  have  to  push  ahead  with  reforms  at  two  levels  to  develop  these  financial 
markets.  Gradual  and  progressive  financial  liberalisation  can  bring  about  more  liquid  and 
broader domestic financial markets. It will also help spur domestic demand by households, 
and  provide  smaller  enterprises  with  better  access  to  capital  in  several  Asian  economies. 
Secondly, at the regional level,  we have to inject greater momentum into improving cross-
border market access and harmonising rules and standards. 
There is by the same virtue, great potential to develop Asian financial markets and 
Let  me  now  touch  on  three  themes  that  will  influence  the  development  of  Asia’s 
Key themes in the development of Asia’s financial markets  
13. 
financial markets in the decade ahead:  
i. 
ii. 
Firstly, the changes in the OTC derivatives markets as a result of global reforms;  
Secondly, the harnessing of technology to transform Asia’s financial infrastructure; 
and 
Thirdly, the increasing international role of the RMB. 
iii. 
                                                
1  For example, South Korea, Indonesia, Thailand and the Philippines. 
2  Namely the US, Japan, France, peripheral Europe. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Regulators  will  need  a  comprehensive  view  of  risks 
Structural shifts in the OTC derivatives markets as a result of global reforms  
I. 
14. 
First, the structural shift in the global OTC derivatives markets. Most of you will be 
familiar with the changes that are coming into place, in steps, as a result of global reforms – 
more  standardised  products,  and  more  robust  market  infrastructure:  central  counterparties 
for  clearing,  trade  repositories  for  reporting,  swap  execution  facilities  for  trading  where 
appropriate. The global reform process is now shifting from rulemaking to implementation.  
15. 
We are already seeing the shift in Asia’s OTC derivative markets. The new market 
infrastructures are expected to provide greater transparency and allow risks to be managed 
more effectively among market participants. Market practices will be redefined, with the need 
to report and clear selected OTC derivative trades within more than one jurisdictions.  
16. 
However, we are also seeing a proliferation of Central Counterparties (CCPs) and 
trade  repositories  being  set  up  in  Asia.  While  this  will  provide  choice  to  Asian  market 
participants, it may also increase risk and lead to higher costs.  
17. 
the  cross-border, 
interconnected market. Having multiple CCPs and trade repositories in the region may risk 
fragmentation, and may hamper monitoring of systemic risks as regulators may see only their 
own segments of the market. Market participants will also face additional costs if CCPs and 
trade repositories lack economies of scale. 
18. 
Asian regulators will therefore need to work closely together to enable infrastructural 
entities to offer their services across different jurisdictions. For example, the infrastructure of 
a  DTCC  global  trade  repository  and  AsiaClear  CCP  in  Singapore  offers  the  prospect  of 
effective  surveillance  by  regional  regulators  and  economies  of  scale.  We  will  continue  to 
ensure that our market infrastructure operates in a transparent and accessible way so that 
the  needs  of  regional  regulators  and  the  industry  can  be  met  under  clear  and  robust 
guidelines.  
19. 
At  the  global  level  too,  there  are  real  benefits  for  regulators  to  ensure  inter-
operability in market infrastructure to allow for more effective risk monitoring. However, inter-
operability  will  require  time  and  effort,  as  risk  management  practices  such  as  margin 
eligibility standards have to be harmonised across CCPs in different jurisdictions.  
20. 
As  Asia’s  infrastructure  is  still  at  an  early  stage  of  development,  we  have  an 
opportunity  to  harmonise  practices  while  making  the  changes  needed  to  respond  to 
emerging global regulatory reforms. It is heartening to note that Asian regulators are working 
closely on OTC derivatives regulations. A good example was the joint letter from Singapore, 
Hong Kong and Australia to the US CFTC, expressing our concerns on the extra-territorial 
application of the US rules.  
in 
II. 
Harnessing technology to transform Asia’s financial infrastructure in a game-
changing fashion  
21. 
Regulators  everywhere  are  confronted  with  highly  connected  global  markets. 
Collecting  and  managing  information  is  now  a  core  competence  in  itself,  for  effective 
surveillance of the financial markets. Similarly, market participants are making greater use of 
technology in risk management – performing complex portfolio valuation and mitigating risks 
such as through intra-day margining at CCPs, and often across global books and in multiple 
time zones and jurisdictions. Moving collateral across markets swiftly and efficiently is also 
now a core competence. 
22. 
Besides risk management, technology can be useful in developing liquidity in Asian 
markets. It can bring greater pricing efficiency and transparency, as we are seeing in the US 
and EU financial markets as trading moves to electronic platforms. 
23. 
In Asia, there is room for our financial markets to embrace greater “electronification” 
of trading, notwithstanding our smaller markets. To illustrate, an estimated 80% of trades are 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
executed  in  electronic  platforms  in  developed  country  FX  markets,  whereas  85%  of 
FX trades in Asia are still executed by voice. A reduction in transaction costs can promote 
greater liquidity for Asian asset classes, and broaden participation from investors including 
retail traders. 
Growing regional and international role of the RMB 
Let  me  go  on  to  the  third  theme  I  wanted  to  talk  about,  which  is  that  of  RMB 
III. 
24. 
internationalisation, and how this will shape Asia’s financial markets development.  
25. 
The status quo will not last. Currently, only 0.6% of global payments are settled in 
RMB, vastly below China’s share of global trade (10%) or investment flows. There is clearly 
room for growth.  
26. 
In  the  long run,  if  we  envisage  China  with  deep  and  liquid  capital markets,  and a 
largely  liberalised  capital  account,  the  RMB  market  will  potentially  play  a  transformational 
role in Asian finance. For now, even with limited convertibility, there is considerable potential 
for greater  use  of  the  RMB.  The  economic fundamentals  are  driving  this.  Besides  China’s 
growing share of global trade, there is a rapidly growing trade between China and the rest of 
the  Asian  region,  and  especially  ASEAN.  Further,  China’s  foreign  direct  investments  are 
expanding strongly, especially into Asian markets. Outbound Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) 
from  China  has  increased  almost  seven-fold  in  the  last  seven  years  (to  US$77  billion  in 
20123), and is expected to expand further in the coming decade. A growing part of this FDI is 
expected to be RMB-denominated, and this too will contribute to greater offshore use of the 
RMB.  
27. 
The  overseas  expansion  of  Chinese  corporates  will  be  reinforced  by  the  growing 
presence of mainland Chinese banks as they grow their regional and international presence. 
In Singapore, we extended Qualifying Full Bank (QFB) privileges to Bank of China and ICBC 
as part of the China-Singapore FTA. Both banks are growing their Singapore operations as 
Southeast Asian hubs. We are also seeing interest from other Chinese financial institutions. 
28. 
The re-denomination of China’s trading flows in RMB will allow Asian corporate and 
financial institutions to more effectively manage their exposures to China. While USD would 
remain an integral global settlement currency, RMB is likely to be increasingly used for trade 
denomination and contract pricing.  
29. 
As we see greater acceptance and use of the RMB as a trade settlement currency, 
there  will  also  be  important  implications  for  the  interactions  between  China  and  Asia’s 
financial markets, and indeed for global financial markets.  
30. 
For one, it will be critical to facilitate the development of a single fungible offshore 
RMB  market,  as  the  market  grows  in  multiple  jurisdictions.  (Currently,  the  industry  has 
designated  different  currency  codes,  such  as  the  CNH  and  CNT,  to  reflect  these  existing 
market  frictions.)  Regulators  and  market  participants  will  have  to  work  together  to  avoid 
fragmenting liquidity across markets, and to promote efficiency in the offshore RMB market. 
In addition, China plans to launch its international payment system, known as CIPS, 
31. 
in 2014. The development of a single centralised cross-border RMB payments infrastructure 
also augurs well for market efficiency and standardised practices for RMB payments across 
the region.  
                                                
3  CNBC, 17 Jan 2013. “China’s outbound investment leaps to record high in December”. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
As an international trading and financial centre, Singapore will seek to support the 
Singapore’s role as an offshore RMB market 
32. 
growth of a resilient offshore RMB market in the Asian region by: 
i. 
Building RMB liquidity; 
ii. 
Enhancing access to RMB for funding and investment purposes; and 
iii. 
Integrating the offshore RMB with existing Asian local currency markets. 
Firstly, Singapore can leverage on its strengths as a key wholesale funding centre 
33. 
to  increase  liquidity  and  circulation  of  the  RMB  in  Asia.  We  are  already  seeing  good 
growth  in  RMB  deposits,  both  non-bank  and  interbank.  We  are  also  one  of  the  largest 
centres  for  RMB  payments  outside  Hong  Kong.  As  a  major  regional  funding  centre, 
Singapore  has  traditionally  supported  the  liquidity  of  the  Asian  markets  and  can  partner 
China in promoting sustainable offshore use of the RMB.  
34. 
In February this year, ICBC Singapore was appointed by the People’s Bank of China 
(PBC) as the RMB clearing bank in Singapore. The RMB clearing bank will be an important 
channel for RMB liquidity to circulate between China to Singapore.  
35. 
In addition, PBC and MAS together announced an expanded Currency Swap Facility 
last Friday. This will see a doubling in the size of the swap facility from RMB150 to RMB300 
billion. The scope of the Currency Swap Facility will also be expanded to allow MAS to provide 
RMB liquidity to banks in Singapore, where needed. This backstop facility will further strengthen 
confidence  in  Singapore’s  offshore  RMB  market,  and  encourage  more  financial  institutions, 
corporates, and investors to step forward and participate in the RMB market via Singapore.  
Secondly,  with  a  strong  RMB  pool,  Singapore  can  provide  enhanced  access  to 
36. 
RMB funding for corporates and investors. Singapore is a major source of FDI to China 
and serves as the Asia-Pacific headquarters for many multinational companies (MNCs) and 
Asian corporates with operations in China. We also serve as the regional treasury centre for 
a large base of Chinese corporates. 
37. 
With  the  new  RMB  clearing  arrangements,  we  can  expect  financial  institutions 
based in Singapore to reach out to local and regional corporate and investors and encourage 
greater participation in the offshore RMB market.  
Thirdly, Singapore can support the integration of offshore RMB with Asian local 
38 
currency  markets  and  act  as  a  test-bed  for  new  RMB  products.  The  development  of  a 
wider  range  of  RMB  products  will  be  healthy.  It  will  create  additional  ways  in  which 
corporates  can  redeploy  their  RMB  funds  in  the  offshore  markets,  and  provide  additional 
products for investment.  
The  financial  industry  in  Singapore  has  good  expertise  in  developing  FX  and 
39. 
derivatives instruments, with several emerging Asian FX teams based here. It is well equipped 
to develop customised offshore RMB capital market instruments, especially for Asian market 
participants. For  instance, banks in  Singapore can explore how to encourage offshore RMB 
bond issuance in Singapore with longer maturity tenors and different issuer profiles.  
Conclusion 
Let me wrap up briefly. Global deleveraging is being accompanied by the continued 
40. 
inflow  of  funds  into  Asia’s  emerging  market  economies.  This  shift  poses  risks  if  not  well-
managed,  but  it  is  also  an  opportunity.  The  next  phase  of  development  in  Asia’s  financial 
markets  is  therefore  critical.  We  have  to  develop  greater  breadth  and  breadth  in  Asian 
markets,  so  that  savings  flows  translate  into  sustainable  economic  growth  rather  than 
recurrent bubbles in asset markets.  
41. 
Thank you and I wish you a successful conference. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
