Mario Draghi: Europe and the euro – a family affair 
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
conference  “Europe  and  the  euro  –  a  family  affair”,  organised  by  the  Bundesverband  der 
Deutschen  Industrie  and  Bundesvereinigung  der  Deutschen  Arbeitgeberverbände,  Berlin, 
16 September 2013. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Thank you for inviting me to speak to you today. It is a great pleasure to be part of an event 
that brings together entrepreneurs and family businesses from across the euro area. 
Such a gathering reflects many of the reasons why Europe established a single currency in 
the first place – to deepen the integration of our economies by making it easier for firms and 
households to exchange across national borders; to encourage the small- and medium-sized 
enterprises  that  are  so  important  for  growth  and  job  creation;  and  to  give  citizens  across 
Europe an impetus to work together. 
Reading the resolution that you plan to adopt at this conference, I am very encouraged by 
the determination that you show to take the euro area forward – and I naturally support your 
central objectives of promoting sustainable growth.  
Today, I would like to share with you some thoughts on how to achieve sustainable growth in 
the euro area from an ECB perspective. There are two main components. 
The first component is stabilising the euro area, as without a stable foundation there can be 
no growth. The second component is strengthening the euro area – by ensuring sustainable 
economic  policies  in  all  member  countries,  by  increasing  the  competitiveness  of  our 
economies and by completing the institutional architecture of economic and monetary union 
(EMU). 
My main message is that we have made significant progress on the first step, stabilising the 
euro area. But there is still work to do to transform this achievement into higher growth and 
employment.  Strengthening 
through  sustainable  policies,  higher 
competitiveness and stronger common institutions is therefore our priority for today. 
the  euro  area 
Stabilising the euro area 
Let me begin by reviewing the measures that have been taken to stabilise the euro area.  
Last  year,  the  euro  area  faced  difficult  circumstances.  Fears  about  extreme  events  were 
leading to severe tensions in financial markets. Borrowing costs for some governments had 
risen to very high levels. And market sources of financing for banks in some countries were 
drying  up:  for  example,  between  April  and  July  36  billion  euro  of  Spanish  bank  bonds 
matured, but no more than half a billion euro could be newly issued during that period. 
These  market  events  were  starting  to  harm  the  real  economy.  Corporates  in  stressed 
countries  were  struggling  to  issue  debt,  and  bank  loans  were  becoming  prohibitively 
expensive.  
But today, the situation is improving. Borrowing costs for most governments have returned to 
more  sustainable  levels.  Funding  for  banks  in  countries  under  stress  has  improved 
significantly, even if this has not yet been fully reflected in the cost of credit. And measures of 
systemic risks have dropped to pre-2011 levels. 
Why has this happened? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The role of governments 
The first reason is that governments are addressing their fiscal policy challenges. Thanks to 
their consolidation efforts so far, the primary fiscal deficit for the euro area has fallen from 
3.5% of GDP in 2009 to around 0.5% in 2012. This is projected to turn into a primary surplus 
from 2014 onwards.  
This improvement in public finances has helped send a signal to investors that government 
debt  levels  will  stabilise  and  then  fall  in  the  future.  This  has  been  crucial  in  reassuring 
markets about debt sustainability. But the average public debt level in the euro area is still 
very  high,  at  around  95%  of  GDP.  This  means  that  consolidation  efforts  need  to  be 
maintained in the years to come.  
The role of the ECB 
The second reason for the improvement in markets is actions by the ECB, notably through 
the announcement of Outright Monetary Transactions (OMT). 
Our  measures  have  countered  investors’  fears  about  the  future  of  the  euro  area  that 
emerged last year. As such, they have helped restore the normal functioning of markets, and 
removed the uncertainty that was paralysing the economies of some countries.  
The  impact  of  the  OMT  announcement  has  naturally  been  largest  in  countries  where  the 
uncertainty was greatest. But its effects have been felt across the euro area. 
Capital  has  started  flowing  back  from  the  core  to  the  periphery,  unwinding  some  of  the 
distortions  in  interest  rates  we  saw  last  year.  In  Germany,  for  example,  long-term  interest 
rates  have  risen  significantly,  despite the  ECB cutting rates  in that  time. Target2  balances 
have fallen by around 30% from their peak.  
More generally, the risk of an extreme event in the euro area has fallen – and therefore the 
risk of an adverse impact on price stability.  
This threat to euro area price stability was the reason we had to act. We had to preserve our 
mandate. But I am encouraged that throughout this period, inflation expectations remained 
firmly  anchored.  This  shows  that  markets  and  citizens  trust  the  ECB  to  maintain  price 
stability. 
Strengthening the euro area 
This  improved  situation  in  financial  markets,  however,  has  not  yet  translated  into  a  broad-
based  economic  recovery.  Let  me  turn  therefore  from  stabilising  the  euro  area  to  the 
measures that are needed to strengthen it. 
It  is  welcome  news  that  the  euro  area  recorded  0.3%  GDP  growth  in  the  second  quarter, 
after  six  straight  quarters  of  negative  growth.  But  the  recovery  is  only  in  its  infancy.  The 
economy remains fragile. And unemployment is still far too high. Given the overall subdued 
outlook for inflation extending into the medium term, the ECB’s Governing Council expects 
the  key  ECB  interest  rates  to  remain  at  present  or  lower  levels  for  an  extended  period  of 
time.  
So what can we do collectively to raise growth and employment? As I mentioned, in my view 
there  are  three  key  elements:  sustainable  policies,  higher  competitiveness  and  a  more 
complete EMU. 
The first element is sustainable policies because this is a prerequisite for the others. Only if 
there  are  sound  fiscal  and  macroeconomic  policies  in  all  countries  can  firms  prosper  and 
compete effectively. And only if all countries can maintain a sustainable position can there be 
closer  euro  area  integration.  EMU  was  not  set  up  for  some  members  to  be  permanent 
creditors and others to be permanent debtors. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Why competitiveness matters 
With  this  basis  in  place,  the  second  element  is  to  improve  competitiveness.  This  can  be 
broadly defined as the ability of firms to remain profitable in an open market economy, and to 
sustain or expand market share.  
Competitiveness can be measured in a number of ways, but its essence is a comparison of 
relative costs and relative productivity. Within the euro area, as countries share an exchange 
rate, a key measure of competitiveness is the relative cost in particular of labour compared 
with relative productivity – in other words, unit labour costs. 
In the first decade of monetary union a focus on unit labour costs and their implications for 
competitiveness was largely missing. This was based on the false presumption that current 
accounts did not matter in a single currency area. As a result, competitiveness imbalances 
emerged. We saw wages and productivity diverging in several euro area countries. For some 
of them a significant competitiveness gap and large current account deficits emerged.  
Why does this matter?  
It  is  not  only  because  persistent  current  account  deficits  create  vulnerabilities,  such  as  a 
dependence on external financing and an over-indebted banking sector. It is because, since 
2008, countries that are more competitive have on average seen higher business margins, 
lower public debt levels, higher growth, and higher employment. 
This  correlation  suggests  that  closing  the  competitiveness  gap  is  a  key  component  of 
improving the current economic situation. 
Closing the competitiveness gap 
One way to regain competitiveness quickly is to address the numerator in unit labour costs – 
nominal wages. Another, longer-term approach is to increase the denominator – to achieve 
higher productivity. In my view, in the euro area today we need both. 
On the first count, there are already some encouraging signs of rebalancing in the euro area 
in  terms  of  cost  competitiveness.  Thanks  in  part  to  the  structural  reforms  introduced  in 
several countries, relative costs are adjusting where they had become misaligned in the past. 
For example, Spanish export volumes grew by more than 20% since 2009. Over time, rising 
mark-ups should allow Spanish firms to expand capacity and increase hiring. 
But  let  me  be  clear  here  that  I  do  not  see  competitiveness  as  a  race  between  euro  area 
countries  with  winners  and  losers.  That  is  why  the  longer-term  challenge  of  raising 
productivity  is  also  key.  While  cost  adjustments  increase  competitiveness  only  relatively, 
productivity gains, by increasing trend growth, can be absolute and benefit all countries. 
So how do we raise productivity? 
In my view the key issue is the connection between three “I’s”: innovation, investment and 
incentives.  As  innovation  and  investment  mostly  take  place  within  the  private  sector,  most 
interesting from a policy perspective are incentives – namely, the role that government can 
play in encouraging these other factors. 
Take  investment  as  an example.  Total  investment  in  the  euro  area  is  currently  17%  lower 
than  in  2007,  while  in  Germany  and  France,  it  is  still  2%  and  6%  below  2007  levels, 
respectively.  Certainly,  this  derives  in  part  from  macroeconomic  uncertainty,  and  in  some 
countries from spare capacity. But there is also a strong microeconomic dimension linked to 
incentives. 
In  many  jurisdictions,  some  regulations  deter  private  investment  and  hinder  cross-border 
projects. This makes a strong case for fully completing the Single Market.  
More  generally,  firms’  incentive  to  invest  is  linked  to  their  optimism  in  the  business 
environment. This is affected by issues such as the burden of administrative procedures, or 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
the speed and quality of the judicial system. These are areas where governments, through 
reforms, are in a position to make a difference. 
Measuring progress in these areas is not straightforward, but in one indicator that measures 
the overall business environment, the euro area is currently ranked 26th in the world. This 
suggests that several countries could make improvements.  
But it is notable that in this same indicator Germany has risen from 6th to 4th place in the last 
year,  while  achieving  full  employment.  This  underscores  once  again  that  competitiveness 
creates jobs. 
The need to strengthen the institutional architecture of EMU 
Let me turn to the third key element in our collective efforts to strengthen the euro area – and 
that  is  to  build  a  stronger  architecture  for  EMU.  There  are  several  areas  in  which  we  can 
make progress, as we outlined in last year’s “Four Presidents’ Report”. For now, I see the 
priorities as banking union and economic union. 
Banking union serves a range of aims, but in the current circumstances restarting lending to 
the  real  economy  is  the  key  priority.  One  barrier  to  bank  lending  at  present  is  lack  of 
transparency  over  bank  balance  sheets.  Having  a  single  European  supervisor  will  help 
address this, as we plan to conduct a comprehensive balance sheet assessment of banks 
we directly supervise. 
Another  barrier  to  bank  lending  is  low  investor  confidence,  which  is  in  part  created  by 
different rules for banks across jurisdictions and a lack of comparability. The future European 
supervisor will also help here, not least by leading to harmonised treatment across the banks 
it supervises – for example, of loan classification, forbearance and provisioning. 
Beyond that, banking union should help speed up the repair of banks – that is if, as I hope, 
we  end  up  with  a  strong  single  resolution  mechanism. We  need  a  mechanism  that  allows 
non-viable banks to be wound down without financial stability risks, as we see in the US. This 
tends to support a quicker recovery from banking crises and more stable credit provision to 
firms and households. 
Economic  union  is  also  intended  to  help  the  real  economy,  as  it  aims  to  help  countries 
reorient their economic policies to benefit more from sharing a single currency. We need to 
ensure that countries can maintain sustainable growth and high levels of employment without 
developing internal and external imbalances. This is a prerequisite for the stability of the euro 
area as a whole.  
One  way  to  achieve  this  would  be  to  develop  better  ways  of  measuring  economic 
performance – for example, more structural indicators of competitiveness. Another possibility 
would be to encourage structural reforms that make economies function more efficiently, and 
in a way that is more inclusive and benefits all groups in society. Here an idea currently being 
contemplated  is  so-called  “reform  contracts”.  Such  concepts  are  still  at  a  relatively  early 
stage, and I look forward to them being developed further in the next few months. 
Conclusion 
Let me now conclude. 
As I have explained, the euro area has taken important steps to restore stability. But we now 
need to build on those foundations to create higher growth and employment. 
The good news is that we understand the challenges we face: to strengthen EMU; to ensure 
sustainable policies; to improve competitiveness. And to meet these challenges, we can look 
to several countries for examples. 
But the key is to persevere on the path of reform – and to take inspiration from others that 
are succeeding. Within the euro area, we all benefit from each other’s prosperity. I hope that 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
the range of businesses from across the euro area here today will join me in spreading this 
message. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
