Yves Mersch: The European banking union – first steps on a long march 
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the Finanzplatztag, Frankfurt am Main, 27 February 2013. 
 Dear Mr Padberg, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I  am  well  aware  that  many  of  you  are  concerned  that  the  European  Central  Bank’s 
assumption  of  the  supervisory  role  might  overburden  monetary  policy.  However,  if  well 
designed,  set-up  and  managed,  the  banking  union  will  eventually  ease  the  burden  on 
monetary policy. This will not happen by itself, though. Numerous stumbling blocks need to 
be cleared in the preparatory phase.  
But let me start without further ado.  
The success of monetary policy rests on integrated financial markets that operate efficiently 
and smoothly. They are: 
1. 
the basis for the equal transmission of monetary policy across member states in a 
monetary union;  
a key channel for the proper transmission of the monetary policy stance to the real 
economy – and hence for the ability of monetary policy to deliver price stability. 
2. 
However,  the  crisis  has  brought  the  flip  side  of  financial  integration  to  the  fore,  namely 
interconnectedness and increased risks to financial stability. Indeed, an integrated financial 
and  economic  system  is  more  prone  to  contagion  from  large  adverse  shocks.  Financial 
turbulence can more easily spread across markets and regions.  
This  is  particularly  true  if  no  institutional  safeguards  –  such  as  euro  area-wide  crisis 
management arrangements – are in place.  
Economic  and  Monetary  Union  (EMU)  architecture  –  unity  in  monetary  policy,  but  national 
plurality in financial policies – was built on the conviction that: 
1. 
2. 
the EMU economies would grow closer together economically and financially; 
financial  market  pressure  would  have  a  disciplinary  effect  on  the  Member  States’ 
national budgetary and economic policies; 
national  political  measures  would  be  fully  sufficient  to  counter  any  economic  or 
financial imbalances. 
3. 
Today,  after  five  years  of  the  biggest  post-war  crisis  in  Europe,  we  know  that  these 
assumptions were not in line with reality. One of the consequences was a banking sector that 
was no longer able to provide sufficient credit to households and enterprises in the euro area 
during the crisis.  
The  pre-crisis  national  safeguards  in  the  EU  have  proven  incompatible  with  the  single 
currency and monetary policy. The planned European Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) 
in  combination  with  a  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  (SRM),  will  make  a  key  contribution 
towards restoring financial stability in the euro area. 
Nonetheless, the primary mandate of the ECB is, and will remain, to maintain price stability in 
the euro area. This objective will not change with the ECB’s new responsibility for banking 
supervision  in  Europe.  However,  bearing  in  mind  the  role  of  financial  markets  for  the 
transmission of monetary policy and the importance of well-integrated financial markets in a 
monetary union, measures to ensure a stable and well-ordered financial system in the euro 
area will be beneficial for the conduct and smooth transmission of monetary policy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The banking union can therefore support our single currency and can relieve monetary policy 
of some of the tasks undertaken during this crisis – notably, the task to repair or, in some 
cases, to bypass a clogged transmission channel. The non-standard measures may then be 
gradually  phased  out,  as  the  changes  introduced  in  the  monetary  policy  framework  during 
the crisis will no longer be necessary. This should not be confused with a change in course 
from the accommodative monetary policy.  
A phasing-out of certain emergency measures is desirable, given that new market distortions 
might otherwise emerge.  
Financial fragmentation affects monetary policy 
The years preceding the financial crisis were very favourable as regards the integration of 
capital  markets  in  Europe,  with  the  integration  of  euro  area money  markets forming  a key 
pre-condition  for  the  proper  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  Our  policy  rate  instantaneously 
transmits to the interbank money market rates and determines the refinancing conditions of 
the  banking  sector.  In  this  regard,  the  money  market  further  transmits  monetary  policy 
impulses  to  other  markets  and  financing  conditions  and  is  key  to  the  homogenous 
transmission of monetary policy across the euro area. 
Moreover, the integration of securities and wholesale markets plays an important role for the 
funding of the banking sector. With the banking sector in the euro area being an essential 
source of financing of the real economy, the integration of these markets plays an important 
role  in  the  pass-through  of  monetary  policy  decisions  to  the  lending  rates  of  the  banking 
sector.  
The financial crisis has challenged the stability and integration of European financial markets 
in an unprecedented way. It has thrown into reverse the steady integration seen since the 
inception of the euro. The causes for this were manifold. 
First, heterogeneous economic developments caused by financial and structural imbalances 
across  euro  area  Member  States  led  to  outflows  of  funds  from  the  countries  that  were 
perceived as more risky – in view of their large cumulated imbalances stemming from ample 
competitiveness gaps, high current account deficits and high private sector leverage – and 
led to inflows into countries with a safe-haven status. 
Second,  imbalances  in  the  banking  sector  arose  from  undue  risk-taking,  investment  in 
opaque  financial  products  and  excessive  leverage.  This  has  caused  some  financial 
institutions  to  be  cut  off  from  wholesale  funding  markets  and  interbank  funding.  The 
seclusion  of  some  financial  institutions  was  also  the  result  of  the  measures  introduced  by 
some  Member  States  to  ring-fence  the  domestic  banking  industry  from  foreign  contagion. 
While this was an understandable response from regulators that had a domestic perspective 
in  their  institutional  mandates,  the  consequence  was  a  further  fragmentation  of  financial 
markets.  
Third, in some countries, fiscal fragilities interacted with banking fragilities. On the one hand, 
high fiscal deficits and debts eroded confidence in the ability of some governments to support 
domestic banks, increasing their counterparty risk vis-à-vis banks located in countries  with 
sounder fiscal positions. On the other hand, bank fragility had severe budgetary implications 
in some countries as public funds were mobilised to recapitalise ailing institutions. In addition 
to the impact of financial instability, fiscal fragility also affected financial integration directly, 
by  creating  an  uneven  playing  field  among  institutions:  banks  in  countries  with  fiscal 
problems  were  consistently  confronted  with  higher  funding  costs,  reflecting  the  higher 
headline  risk  of  the  sovereign.  Moreover,  government  guarantees  on  bank  bonds,  an 
instrument that has been widely used during the crisis, had different values depending on the 
fiscal  situation  of  the  sovereign.  Furthermore,  in  an  environment  of  dried-up  liquidity,  the 
large refinancing needs of some governments led to concerns that the public sector would 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
crowd  out  bank  debt  issuance.  National  banking  systems  with  the  highest  exposures  to 
domestic sovereign markets were hit particularly hard through this channel.  
Inadequate institutional safeguards 
At  a  more  fundamental  level,  however,  this  instability  and  fragmentation  of  euro  area 
financial  markets  was  the  unavoidable  consequence  of  a  structural  inconsistency  in  the 
European monetary and financial architecture, namely the dichotomy between, on the one 
hand,  a  common  currency  and  central  bank  and,  on  the  other,  a  system  of  banking 
regulation, supervision and safety nets that is largely organised along national lines. 
While this dichotomy did not appear problematic before the crisis – indeed, the presence of 
national regulation was often viewed favourably as a component of a more flexible regulatory 
and  supervisory  framework  in  Europe,  which  could  be  more  easily  adapted  to  country-
specific conditions – it led to important deficiencies that were first laid bare by the crisis. 
• 
The  lack  of  a  robust  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  led  to  the  failure  to 
identify and control an unbalanced and unsustainable expansion of credit in some 
countries, during a period characterised by low interest rates, abundant liquidity and 
easy access to credit. 
A  framework  fundamentally  based  on  the  national  perspective  was  also  not 
conducive  to  identifying  cross-country  interdependencies  and  the  potential  for 
spillovers, which therefore went unaddressed. 
When  the  crisis  erupted  and  the  vulnerabilities  materialised,  the  framework  also 
revealed the lack of adequate crisis management mechanisms. National supervision 
proved to be a major obstacle towards a more efficient management of the crisis, 
leading to a serious setback in the process of financial integration. 
  Monetary policy in the crisis 
In this environment of financial refragmentation of euro area financial markets, central banks 
had to step in. If risks to financial stability hamper the proper transmission of monetary policy, 
monetary policy may be rendered ineffective, thereby impeding the ability of central banks to 
safeguard price stability.  
Financial cohesion, in turn, ensures that the monetary policy signals are properly and evenly 
transmitted  to  all  jurisdictions  of  the  monetary  union,  without,  however,  levelling  out  the 
premiums for different credit and liquidity risks. In fact, during the crisis, the divergence of 
bank  funding  conditions  at  national  level  has  led  to  cross-country  differences  in  both  the 
costs  of  financing  and  the  availability  of  loans.  The  retrenchment  of  credit  supply  within 
national borders, coupled with funding pressures, has impaired the transmission of monetary 
policy. The need to counter these adverse developments has been a key rationale behind 
the extraordinary monetary policy actions undertaken by the ECB in the wake of the crisis, 
such as the full allotment, the longer-term refinancing operations (LTROs) or the relaxation of 
the  collateral  framework.  At  the  same  time,  the  emergency  liquidity  assistance  (ELA) 
provided by the national central banks was used more intensively. Although this is carried out 
by  the  national  central  banks  at  their  own  risk  and  for  their  own  account,  it  might  lead  to 
tensions between the national and European levels of monetary policy, which would not be 
sustainable. A renationalisation of the monetary architecture would not be effective.  
Our non-standard measures can and should only provide temporary support for two reasons. 
First, keeping our non-standard measures in place for too long can adversely affect agents’ 
incentives in the economy at large and lead to moral hazard. Various actors in the economy 
may  be  relieved  from  pressures  to  take  up  their  own  responsibilities,  thereby  lowering  the 
incentives  to  correct  imbalances,  unwind  past  excesses  and  redress  the  course  of 
unsustainable economic and financial policies.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Second  –  and  more  fundamentally  –  non-standard  monetary  policy  cannot  solve  the 
underlying structural economic and financial problems.  
The banking union – restoring financial stability and reintegrating financial markets 
The banking union aims at building an integrated financial framework to safeguard financial 
stability.  To  this  end,  it  is  absolutely  imperative  to  have  both  an  EU  framework  for  single 
supervision,  the  SSM,  as  well  as  an  integrated  resolution  framework,  the  SRM.  Stability 
comes from having two pillars.  
The Single Supervisory Mechanism  
One  particular  institutional  shortcoming  of  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  (EMU)  derives 
from  the  inconsistency  between  a  single  monetary  policy  and  national  supervisory 
competences.  A  step  up  of  supervisory  powers  to  the  supranational  level  was  therefore 
needed  to  reverse  financial  fragmentation,  with  a  view  to  breaking  the  link  between 
sovereigns  and  banks,  restoring  the  principle  of  self-responsibility  and  avoid  objectionable 
transfers.  
By  centralising  supervision,  the  SSM  should  ensure  uniform  practices  across  Europe  and 
overcome the home-host cross-border supervisory discussions and the associated national 
bias.  The  establishment  of  a  single  supervisor  marks  a  new  epoch  in  the  EU  financial 
framework, which may be comparable to the creation of monetary union at the end of the last 
century. It can significantly contribute to the prevention of ring-fencing measures conducive 
to  the  fragmentation  of  funding  channels,  which  leave  credit  institutions  and  the  real 
economy  exclusively  reliant  on  domestic  funding.  Additionally,  before  it  can  become 
operational,  the  SSM  will  support  the  European  Banking  Authority’s  development  of  the 
single rulebook for financial services that, together with the single supervisory handbook, will 
contribute to a level playing field in the European financial market.  
The exclusion of banks from the direct supervision of the ECB is not tantamount to exclusion 
from the ECB’s supervisory reach. First, national supervisory authorities will have to abide by 
ECB  regulations,  guidelines  and  general  instructions  and  be  subject  to  the  ECB’s  broad 
oversight power over the functioning of the SSM; second, to ensure consistent application of 
supervisory  standards,  the  ECB  may  decide  at  any  time  to  exercise  direct  supervision  on 
less relevant credit institutions, upon its own initiative after consulting with national authorities 
or at the request of the national supervisory authority.  
Although aimed at revising the institutional arrangements of the euro area, the SSM is not a 
closed system. It is open to those national competent authorities of non-euro area Member 
States that intend to participate by entering into a close cooperation with the ECB. Once a 
Member State enters into a close cooperation, national competent authorities will participate 
on  equal  footing  as  regards  supervisory  decisions,  but  will  equally  have  to  adhere  to  the 
guidelines and instructions issued by the ECB. Enlarged participation in the SSM is a great 
opportunity  for  setting  a  level  playing  field  in  supervisory  practices  across  the  EU.  At  the 
same  time,  a  series  of  conceptual  questions  need  to  be  addressed.  For  one,  it  is  hard  to 
imagine that countries not participating in the European Stability Mechanism (ESM) might act 
as a financial safety net for troubled but solvent banks, in the event that a privately financed 
resolution fund is not yet adequately funded.  
The next steps 
The  establishment  of  the  SSM  represents  a  great  opportunity  for  financial  integration  in 
Europe. Let me now turn to the next steps in the establishment of the SSM.  
First, the swift adoption of the SSM Regulation is essential. Definite plans are crucial in order 
to uphold the current momentum of the stabilisation of the euro. The general expectation is 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
that the SSM will be established early this year, with an effective operational start 12 months 
later.  
Second, the design of a supervisory model, including the allocation of tasks between centre 
and periphery is critical for the success of the SSM. In this regard, work is already under way 
by  the  ECB  in  cooperation  with  national  competent  authorities  –  subject  to  the  final  legal 
wording. 
Third, the SSM will need to carry out a comprehensive review of the banks that fall under the 
direct  supervision  of the  ECB.  As  set forth  by  the  Regulation,  this  exercise  should  include 
elements  of  an  asset  quality  review  as  a  basis  for  a  thorough  solvency  analysis.  This 
analysis should also be instrumental in identifying potential legacy problems. It is important 
that  the financial  clean-up  of these  legacy  problems  will  be  undertaken by  the  responsible 
Member  States  and  not  by  the  ESM  and  certainly  not  by  the  ECB.  Just  like  an  insurance 
policy, the SSM can cover future risks. Past omissions must be resolved by those who are 
accountable for them. This does not rule out interim solutions involving actions by the SRM 
and (privately financed) resolution fund as well as by the ESM.  
Fourth, appropriate safeguards to mitigate reputational risks – for both the supervisor and the 
monetary policy maker – are needed. It is therefore critical to implement an actual internal 
separation between supervisory and monetary functions, that should also be coupled with an 
external  dimension,  reinforcing  the  outside  perception  of  such  clear  operational  and 
accountability separation. The Chair of the Supervisory Board is responsible for discharging 
the  accountability  duties  towards  the  European  authorities  (European  Parliament,  finance 
ministers  of  participating  Member  States,  the  European  Commission).  They  may  also,  on 
occasion, be asked to report to national parliaments. More regularly, the representatives of 
the national competent authorities will perform such a role at the domestic level.  
The Single Resolution Mechanism 
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  establishment  of  a  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  (SRM),  which 
constitutes  the  second  pillar  of  the  banking  union  and  is  a  necessary  complement  to  the 
SSM.  It  is  crucial  that  the  SRM  is  in  place  once  the  SSM  is  operational.  There  would 
otherwise be a danger of creating potential conflicts between supervisory and central bank 
perspectives. It would be a misunderstanding to believe that there will be no more troubles at 
banks  as  soon  as  responsibility  for  banking  supervision  is  conferred  to  the  ECB.  On  the 
contrary, non-viable banks will have to be closed down and resolved in order to prevent the 
“zombification”  of  the  European  banking  sector.  The  viable  parts  of  certain  banks  may 
nevertheless require transitional funding – which should not be mistaken for a bail-out. 
A  single  resolution  mechanism  is  hence  an  essential  condition.  It  will  ensure  timely  and 
impartial decision-making focused on the European dimension and that resolution costs are 
borne by the private sector, thus putting an end to the expectation that taxpayers will foot the 
bill.  The  era  in  which  the  privatisation  of  profits  and  socialisation  of  losses  was  possible 
should belong to the past. 
The SRM should be equipped with a comprehensive set of enforceable tools and powers to 
resolve all banks participating in the SSM. This mechanism should under no circumstances 
be  placed  with  the  ECB,  in  order  to  nip  any  potential  conflicts  of  objectives  in  the  bud. 
However, the flow of information to the SSM must be safeguarded.  
This calls for urgent adoption of the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive that will provide 
a harmonised toolkit across the EU.  
The  SRM  should  have  control  of  and  access  to  a  European  resolution  fund  for  resolution 
financing.  This  fund  should  be  funded  by  ex  ante  risk-based  levies  on  the  industry.  The 
European  resolution  fund  should  have  access  to  a  temporary  emergency  facility  that  is 
fiscally  neutral  in  the  medium  term,  meaning  that  any  temporary  public  support  will  be 
recouped by ex post levies on the industry.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Restoring financial integration will unburden monetary policy 
From a monetary policy standpoint, the banking union will alter neither our policy objective 
nor our policy strategy. The pursuit of price stability as our prime objective is set out in the 
EU Treaty. We have delivered on our mandate.  
However, the banking union will change the environment in which we conduct our policy for 
the better. A banking union has the potential to unburden monetary policy in two important 
dimensions.  
First, the  banking  union  has  important  implications for  the  ECB  as  liquidity  provider  to  the 
banking  system.  Sound  supervisory  assessments  and  access  to  a  powerful  resolution 
framework is paramount for ensuring liquidity provisions to sound and solvent counterparties. 
In its role as supervisor, the ECB will have strong incentives to make sure its supervision is 
rigorous in order to protect our balance sheet and to ensure tight control over the risks we 
assume. This will safeguard our independence and credibility as monetary policy maker and 
will  ensure  that  monetary  policy  is  not  affected  by  considerations  outside  of  the  realm  of 
monetary policy, for example the state of the banking sector. This is particularly important in 
the context of our emergency liquidity assistance (ELA), the provision of which is based on a 
sound and reliable solvency assessment. In the future, we will have these assessments at 
hand  “in  house”.  Moreover,  a  strong  resolution  framework,  with  effective  tools  for  orderly 
resolution, will in turn help to remove the pressure on the central bank to unduly prolong the 
life of banks through liquidity provision. 
Second, the banking union will help to unwind the reliance of the euro area banking sector on 
central bank intermediation. As mentioned, during this crisis we have activated a set of non-
standard  monetary  policy  tools  that  –  by  nature  –  were  intended  to  alleviate  impaired 
monetary  policy  transmission  and  ultimately  serve  our  primary  objective  to  maintain  price 
stability  in  the  euro  area.  By  alleviating  funding  pressures  and  undue  risks  in  securities 
markets,  our  measures  have  provided  temporary  relief  for  the  banking  sector  and 
complemented policy efforts on the financial stability front. However, our measures cannot 
and should not solve the underlying structural problems. This is a task for governments and 
the banking industry.  
In this regard, the banking union with effective supervision and bank resolution can foster the 
necessary  restructuring  in  the  euro  area  banking  sector,  can  further  spur  balance  sheet 
repair and can restore the banking sector’s intermediation function. In particular, a European 
resolution mechanism with adequate powers and tools will be needed for effective resolution 
without  involving  taxpayers’  money.  At  the  same  time,  this  framework  will  ensure  the 
revitalisation of the banking sector and revive financial integration.  
The early repayment by banks of the liquidity received from the first three-year LTROs has 
given  initial  mild  indications  for  improvements  in  banks’  funding  conditions  and  the  overall 
health of the banking sector. But complacency is not warranted. Balance sheet repair in the 
euro  area  banking  sector  has  to  continue  to  fully  restore  wholesale  and  interbank  funding 
markets, which will allow banks to return to their normal sources of funding, releasing them 
from the strong dependence on central bank intermediation, particularly in the case of banks 
receiving ELA. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude.  
The  sovereign  debt  crisis  has  thrown  into  reverse  the  steady  financial  market  integration 
seen  since  the  inception  of  the  euro.  This  trend  was  largely  driven  by  the  link  between 
banking and sovereign risks.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The  crisis  has  hampered  financing  conditions.  By  consequence,  the  monetary  policy 
transmission  channel  has  been  clogged  and  ECB  has  been  compelled 
to  apply 
unconventional measures to repair the distorted flow of credit in the euro area. 
To  overcome  the  damaging  fragmentation,  Europe  needs  to  advance  its  institutional 
framework towards – among other things – a true banking union with single supervisory and 
resolution mechanisms.  
The set-up of euro area wide supervision under the auspices of the ECB is a prerequisite for 
breaking the vicious circle of sovereign and banking risks. Moreover, it will reinforce financial 
integration,  mitigate  macroeconomic  imbalances,  and  –  last  but  not  least  –  unburden 
monetary policy.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
