Mario Draghi: Euro Conference Latvia 
Keynote speech by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at the Euro 
Conference Latvia, Riga, 12 September 2013. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
I  expect  that  many  of  you  are  familiar  with  the  film  Dream  Team  1935.  One  of  the  most 
popular  films  in  Latvia  last  year,  it  tells  the  story  of  the  Latvian  team  that  won  the  first 
European  basketball  championship  in  1935.  The  film  shows  how  the  players  overcame  a 
series of obstacles to win the competition – and the vital contribution of their resolute team 
spirit. 
This story reflects on Latvia and the euro in two ways. 
First,  it  reminds  us  of  Latvia’s  historic  position  as  part  of  Europe.  Since  Riga  became  a 
member  of  the  Hanseatic  League  in  1282,  this  region  has  been  an  essential  part  of 
European integration. I am pleased that by joining the euro next year, Latvia is strengthening 
its place at the heart of Europe. 
Second, the story highlights the determination of Latvians to strive for their goals. The crisis 
in  2008  dealt  this  country  a  severe  blow.  Yet  the  people  here  have  shown  remarkable 
resolve to overcome their difficulties and meet the criteria for euro entry.  
The authorities have protected citizens’ wealth and ensured financial stability by maintaining 
the exchange rate within the agreed band, despite pressure from some outside advisers to 
devalue.  They  have  undertaken  an  effective  fiscal  consolidation.  And  the  nominal  wage 
adjustment that has taken place across the country has, among other factors, helped to close 
the current account deficit by more than 10 percentage points of GDP since 2008. 
It is no wonder that many observers have pointed to Latvia, a country that is outside the euro 
area, as an example to those that are inside. 
I  understand  that  some  people  here  have  questions  about  adopting  the  euro.  Joining  the 
single currency is a decision of great importance for any country. But I would like to reassure 
those  with  concerns  that  there  are  many  good  reasons  to  join  the  euro  area  today.  In 
particular,  new  members  of  the  euro  area  can  benefit  from  the  lessons  we  have  learned 
since 1999. 
There are three lessons that I would like to emphasise here today. 
First, we have learned that the euro as a currency works. Second, we have learned the types 
of policy that lead to prosperity within Monetary Union, and also the ones that do not. And 
third,  we  have  learned  that  we  need  to  complete  the  institutions  of  our  Economic  and 
Monetary Union. 
Let me discuss these lessons in a little more detail. 
The success of the euro 
The euro works – that is, in my view, plain to see. 
Since 1999, the euro area has grown to a community of more than 330 million people. It is 
the world’s second largest economy, accounting for around a quarter of global exports and 
more  than  15%  of  global  investment.  And  the  euro  has  established  itself  as  a  strong  and 
stable reserve currency. 
In that time, the European Central Bank (ECB) has maintained price stability in line with its 
mandate, despite the most severe crisis since the 1930s. We have defended our currency 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
against unfounded fears about a break-up of the euro area. All this means that countries that 
join the euro area today can be confident that its central pillar, its monetary policy, is sound.  
I understand that there are some concerns here about the changeover to the euro potentially 
leading  to  opportunistic  price  rises.  But  the  Latvian  authorities  are  taking  measures  to 
prevent this. These measures build on the experience from 17 previous euro changeovers. I 
call on all those involved to remain attentive to these initiatives.  
For its part, the ECB will be conducting a communication campaign to ensure that the people 
of  Latvia  are  well  informed  about  the  euro  coins  and  banknotes,  in  particular  the  security 
features of the banknotes. 
Ensuring sustainable convergence 
The second lesson we have learned is that to prosper within Monetary Union, countries need 
to ensure sustainable convergence.  
Sustainable  convergence  means  more  than  meeting  a  set  of  nominal  targets  at  a  certain 
point in time. It requires real economic, legal and institutional convergence prior to adopting 
the euro. And crucially, it requires continued efforts once inside monetary union. 
The reason that many countries are making painful adjustments today is that once inside the 
euro area, they allowed themselves to diverge too much.  
I  know  the  authorities  here  are  aware  of  the  key  challenges  of  maintaining  convergence. 
These  include,  first  of  all,  avoiding  a  renewed  boom-bust  cycle  in  Latvia  following  euro 
adoption. This implies that the authorities need to continue with sound fiscal policies, and to 
ensure that labour cost developments remain conducive to competitiveness. 
The  challenges  also  include  strengthening  further  the  efficiency  and  effectiveness  of 
institutions  in  Latvia.  And  finally  they  include  safeguarding  the  long-run  stability  of  the 
banking and wider financial sector.  
I  am  therefore  confident  that  by  keeping  the  right  policy  orientation,  the  ingredients  are 
present for Latvia to thrive within the euro area. 
Completing Economic and Monetary Union 
The third lesson we have learned since 1999 is that we need to complete our economic and 
monetary union.  
We  live  in  a  rapidly  changing  world,  where  the  traditional  role  of  the  nation-state  is  being 
questioned.  In  my  view,  the  key  to  maintaining  sovereignty  in  this  world  is  to  share  more 
sovereignty by integrating more deeply.  
This  point  has  been  understood  for  some  time  in  monetary  policy  –  and  it  is  particularly 
relevant for Latvia. By joining the euro area, this country will no longer have a fixed exchange 
rate, with all the constraints that it entails for monetary policy. It will have a national central 
bank that participates in decision-making for the entire euro area. Governor Rimšēvičs will be 
taking part in monetary policy-making for the world’s second largest economy. 
But the crisis has also strengthened the case for sharing sovereignty in other policy areas. 
National governments have experienced the difficulty of managing cross-border capital flows 
without a common supervisory policy – a problem with which this country is familiar. They 
have  seen  how,  without  a  credible  framework  for  fiscal  policies,  they  can  lose  effective 
sovereignty to financial markets.  
The  solution  is  to  complete  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  –  for  Monetary  Union  to  be 
accompanied by a banking union, a fiscal union, an economic union and ultimately a political 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
union.  This  is  a  vision  for  the  future  and  it  will  require  much  work  to  implement.  But  new 
members can be encouraged that the process is underway, in particular on banking union.  
On this note, I welcome the vote today by the European Parliament on the new European 
supervisor, the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM). The ECB and the Parliament share a 
common  purpose  in  ensuring  proper  accountability  arrangements  for  the  SSM,  and  I  fully 
support the draft agreement we have reached. This agreement is testament to the hard work 
and  commitment  of  the  negotiating  team  from  the  Parliament’s  ECON  Committee.  It  also 
reflects  the  personal  efforts  of  President  Schulz,  to  whom  I  would  like  to  express  my 
particular thanks and appreciation. 
Let me add here that sharing sovereignty, however, does not mean losing national identity. 
There are many smaller countries – such as Malta and Luxembourg – that have not changed 
their  individual  character  within  the  euro  area.  At  the  ECB  we  have  always  placed  a  high 
value  on  Europe’s  cultural  diversity:  this  year,  for  example,  the  ECB’s  Cultural  Days  are 
dedicated to Latvia. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
Joining the euro area is a historic commitment – to the deeper integration of our continent – 
and to the mutual prosperity of the different countries that share the single currency. 
I am confident that Latvia is making this commitment at the right time: when it has done the 
hard work to be ready for membership – when the responsibilities of membership are clear – 
and when the process of building a genuine Economic and Monetary Union has begun. 
I therefore warmly welcome our 18th member. Welcome Latvia!  
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
