Guy Debelle: The Reserve Bank’s operations in financial markets 
Address by Mr Guy Debelle, Assistant Governor (Financial Markets) of the Reserve Bank of 
Australia, 
the  University  of  Adelaide  Business  School,  UniBreakfast,  Adelaide, 
26 February 2013. 
to 
 I'm very pleased to be back in my home town to talk to you today about the Reserve Bank’s 
dealings in financial markets.1 
Why might you be interested in this topic? 
I will talk about how the Reserve Bank actually implements the target interest rate set by the 
Reserve  Bank  Board  at  its  monthly  meetings.  I  will  then  describe  how  this  interest  rate, 
known  as  the  cash  rate,  affects  all  the  other  interest  rates  in  the  economy,  including 
mortgage rates, business borrowing rates and deposit rates. So that affects you one way or 
another. 
I  will  also  talk  about  the  Reserve  Bank’s  transactions  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  and 
finish with some thoughts about the exchange rate more generally. 
Domestic market operations 
As  you  all  know,  on  the  first  Tuesday  of  each  month  (except  January),  the  Board  of  the 
Reserve Bank meets to determine the appropriate stance of monetary policy in Australia. At 
2.30  pm,  just  after  the  conclusion  of  the  meeting,  the  Governor  issues  a  press  release 
announcing  the  Board’s  decision,  along  with  an  explanation  for  the  decision  taken.  The 
decision takes the form of a target for the cash rate. It is the job of part of my area, Financial 
Markets Group, to ensure that the Board’s target for the cash rate is actually achieved. 
So how do we do this? And how does that affect the interest rate on your mortgage, your 
business loan and your deposit? 
The cash rate is the interest rate on overnight unsecured borrowing in the interbank market. 
That is, it is the interest rate banks charge each other to borrow and lend funds overnight. 
(Unsecured means that there is no security, such as a government bond, tied up in the loan 
as collateral.) The Reserve Bank’s ability to affect this interest rate comes from the fact that 
we control the amount of funds or liquidity in this market. 
Banks have deposit accounts with the Reserve Bank called exchange settlement accounts. 
These are the accounts across which the myriad of transactions in the economy are settled 
each  day.  When  you  pay  your  electricity  bill  by  direct  debit,  the  funds  are  effectively 
transferred from your bank account, across the exchange settlement account of your bank to 
that of your electricity company’s bank and into the electricity company’s account. 
These  exchange  settlement  accounts  at  the  Reserve  Bank  must  always  have  positive 
balances. At the end of each day, the balance in these accounts is paid an interest rate of 
25 basis  points  (a  quarter  of  one per cent)  below  the  cash  rate.  If  a  bank  finds  that  its 
projected  balance  is  below  zero,  it  borrows  from  the  Reserve  Bank  at  an  interest  rate  of 
25 basis  points  above  the  cash  rate.  So  banks  have  a  strong  incentive  to  manage  their 
liquidity  so  that  they  have  just  enough funds,  but  not  too much,  in  these  accounts. If they 
think  they  are  likely  to  have  too  much  funds,  they  will  lend  the  excess  funds  overnight  to 
another bank at the cash rate, which earns them 25 basis points more than leaving it in their 
                                                
1   Details of the Bank’s operations in financial markets are described in detail each year in the “Operations in 
Financial Markets” chapter in the Reserve Bank Annual Report. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
account. Conversely, if they think they are not going to have enough funds, they will borrow 
at the cash rate from another bank with excess funds, which saves them 25 basis points from 
not borrowing the funds from the Reserve Bank. 
The control the Reserve Bank has over the cash rate comes from the fact that we determine 
the total amount of funds in this market. We have complete control of the supply. The total 
demand comes from summing the amount all the banks want to hold in their ES accounts 
overnight. The interaction of this supply and demand each day determines the cash rate. If, 
in aggregate, the banking system wants to hold more ES balances, we increase the supply to 
stop the cash rate from moving up as the banks bid more aggressively to borrow from each 
other. If they want to hold less, we would decrease the supply; otherwise banks would start 
trying to lend below the cash rate to offload their excess funds. 
The Reserve Bank controls the supply of funds through our daily open market operations. In 
your textbooks, this was probably described in terms of purchases or sales of government 
securities  by  the  central  bank.  While  we  do  do  a  bit  of  that,  most  of  our  open  market 
operations take the form of what are known as repurchase agreements (repos), where we 
lend cash to a bank in return for a security (generally a government security) for a period of 
time, generally a week or two, at the end of which, they return the cash and we return the 
security. 
These repo  transactions  allow  the  Reserve  Bank to  manage the  day-to-day  fluctuations  in 
liquidity  caused  primarily  by  cash  flows  in  and  out  of  the  Australian  Government’s  deposit 
account with us. These cash flows are the result of government spending and tax payments, 
which inject and withdraw liquidity from the economy every day.2 
Our  daily  market  operations  aim  to  ensure  that  we  offset  these  liquidity  flows  so  that  the 
overall supply of liquidity and the banking system’s total demand for it clear at the cash rate 
target set by the Board. 
The fact that we ourselves deal in the market every day means we get a very good sense of 
developments  in  the  cash  and  repo  markets,  as  well  as  bank  funding  markets  more 
generally. Certainly, this direct market liaison was invaluable at the height of market stress in 
2008 and 2009. 
So now to the question you’re probably more interested in. How does that cash rate affect all 
the other interest rates in the economy? 
The cash rate is effectively the anchor point for all interest rates in the economy. Banks fund 
only a very small part of their operations in the cash market, but ultimately all their funding 
can be arbitraged back to the cash market. Their borrowing at terms longer than overnight is 
the weighted average of the expected future path of the cash rate plus some premia for risk. 
If this were not the case, a bank would be better off funding itself overnight and rolling that 
funding every day. 
A bank will similarly price its deposit rates based on the cash rate for an at call deposit, as 
they are alternative sources of overnight funding. For term deposits, again a bank will price 
them based on the expected future path of the cash rate. In recent times, there has been a 
lot  of  competition  for  deposits,  which  has  seen  interest  rates  paid  on  deposits  rise  quite 
considerably relative to the cash rate. This competition has arisen from a desire by banks to 
increase  the  share  of  deposit funding resulting from  a  number  of factors  including  lessons 
learned  during  the  crisis,  pressure  from  ratings  agencies  and  the  market,  as  well  as 
regulatory  changes.  I  spoke  about  this  at  some  length  here  in  Adelaide  last  year.3  So, 
                                                
2   See  Baker  A  and  D  Jacobs  (2010),  “Domestic  Market  Operations  and  Liquidity  Forecasting”,  RBA Bulletin, 
December, pp 37–43. 
3   Debelle  G  (2012),  “Regulatory  Reforms  and  their  Implications  for  Financial  Markets,  Funding  Costs  and 
Monetary Policy”, Address to the Financial Services Institute of Australia, Adelaide, 18 September. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
fluctuations in these competitive forces mean that deposit rates do not move in lock step with 
the cash rate. 
Where  long-term  interest  rates  are  priced  above  the  expected  path  of  the  cash  rate,  it  is 
usually to compensate the lender for the greater risks they are taking on in lending for longer 
periods  of  time.  For  example,  lenders  demand  more  compensation  for  credit  risk  when 
lending  to  banks  for  longer  periods  than  just  overnight.  This  risk  premium  increased 
significantly during the financial crisis. Today, credit premia are nowhere near as high as they 
were in 2008 and 2009, but the risk premia faced by banks remain significantly higher than 
they were in the years leading up to 2007, when they were extremely small. 
While these risk premia move around independently of the cash rate, it is still the case that 
the  cash  rate  has  a  very  large  influence  on  the  whole  structure  that  underlies  the  interest 
rates faced by banks and others looking to borrow funds. Hence the cash rate is still a very 
large determinant of the banks’ costs of funding. If the cash rate were 3 percentage points 
higher, the whole structure of funding costs for the banking system would shift up by around 
the same amount. 
This effect of the cash rate on the cost of banks’ funding translates into a large effect on the 
structure of lending rates for both households and businesses. The banks base these lending 
rates on their cost of funding, along with a risk premium to compensate them for the riskiness 
of the loan being made; that is, how likely the mortgage will be repaid. In addition, there is a 
mark-up to generate a rate of return for bank shareholders. 
So the cash rate has a large influence on lending rates. But there are other factors such as 
credit risk premia, competitive pressures in the deposit market, as well as changes in the mix 
of funding banks use which mean that the relationship between the cash rate and lending 
rates may not always be one for one. In the years before 2007, these other factors did not 
move around much, so changes in lending rates did tend to move in line with the cash rate. 
But over the past five years, there has been quite a material change in a number of these 
factors,  so  that  while  changes  in  the  cash  rate  are  still  the  predominant  determinant  of 
changes in lending rates, the relationship between them is not one for one. 
The  Reserve  Bank  will  again  be  publishing  a  detailed  analysis  of  developments  in  banks’ 
funding costs and lending rates in the next RBA Bulletin which is released on 21 March.4 
Foreign exchange transactions 
I’ll now talk about the Bank’s transactions in foreign exchange markets. The Bank transacts 
in foreign exchange markets for a number of reasons. The principal one is because we do all 
the  Australian  Government’s  foreign  exchange  transactions.  For  example,  when  the 
Department  of  Foreign  Affairs  needs  to  pay  its  embassy  in Washington  in  US  dollars,  the 
Bank sells the necessary US dollars to the government (in exchange for Australian dollars). 
Generally, the Bank purchases the US dollars in the market prior to settlement, although it 
does have the option of funding its sale of US dollars out of its foreign currency reserves. On 
average, the Bank does around $30 million of these transactions each day.  
One  benefit  of  this  regular  interaction  with  the  market  is  that  we  are  able  to  get  useful 
intelligence about developments in the market. This flow of information helps us to form a 
view about market conditions in real time and can prove invaluable in times of market stress. 
I  use  this  information  to  provide  some  background  colour  to  my  monthly  briefings  of  the 
Reserve Bank Board on financial market developments. 
                                                
4   The 2012 analysis of funding costs can be found in Deans C and C Stewart (2012), “Banks’ Funding Costs 
and Lending Rates”, RBA Bulletin, March, pp 37–43. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Most of the other transactions the Bank undertakes in global financial markets result from the 
fact  that  the  Bank  holds  and  manages  the  country’s  foreign  exchange  reserves.  Currently 
these amount to $36 billion. 45 per cent of these are held in US dollars, 45 per cent in euros, 
with  the  remainder  split  between  yen  and  Canadian  dollars.  The  Bank has  a  conservative 
approach to managing the reserves, with the vast bulk of the portfolio invested in government 
securities. 
The  day-to-day  management  of  the  reserves  portfolio  is  undertaken  by  RBA  staff  in  New 
York (for the US and Canadian dollar portfolios) and London (for the euro portfolio) as well as 
in  Sydney.  The  transactions  that  are  conducted  each  day  in  managing  the  portfolio  again 
provide us with very useful market intelligence, particularly in times of market stress. 
Why is it that we hold $36 billion in foreign currency? Why not some other amount?5 
One reason is that some of the reserves are held to fund Australia’s potential commitments 
to global financial institutions such as the IMF. But the primary motivation is to provide the 
capacity for the Bank to intervene in the foreign exchange market when necessary. Over the 
past two decades, we have, on occasion, intervened to facilitate an orderly depreciation of 
the Australian dollar, when conditions in the market warranted.6 
The most recent episode of intervention was in 2008–2009. At that time, there were various 
bouts  of  illiquidity  as  stresses  flared  in  global  markets  particularly  following  the  failure  of 
Lehman Brothers. Many participants stepped back from the market, particularly because of 
concerns about the viability of their counterparty to any transaction. The Bank was able to 
deploy its reserves to inject liquidity into the market in these disorderly conditions. We were 
willing  to  be  the  counterparty  on  the  other  side  of  the  transaction  and  market  participants 
were willing to deal with us when they weren’t with others. We were not trying to prevent the 
depreciation  of  the  currency  in  that  episode.  From  a  macro  policy  perspective,  the 
depreciation was desirable. Rather, we were trying to ensure the depreciation was orderly, 
without  excessive  price  gapping;  that  is,  avoiding  the  exchange  rate  moving  by  large 
amounts  from  one  transaction  to  the  next,  which  only  tends  to  exacerbate  market 
dysfunction. 
In that intervention episode, the Reserve Bank only utilised around A$3.8 billion of reserves, 
with most of our transactions in the market being very small, because no-one was looking to 
trade large amounts. By contrast, in the 2001 episode, when the Australian dollar reached an 
all-time low of US 47c, A$1 billion of reserves was used on one day alone, with some hedge 
funds taking very large positions against the Australian dollar. The 2008–2009 episode, as 
well as the one in 2001, were very profitable for the Bank and hence the Australian taxpayer. 
We bought Australian dollars low and sold them high, generally a good investment strategy. 
Or to put it the other way round, we sold foreign currency at a high price and were able to 
rebuild our reserves later at a cheaper price in Australian dollar terms.   
More recently, in the second half of last year, there was discussion about some of the Bank’s 
transactions  in  the  foreign  exchange  market.  I’ll  take  this  opportunity  to  run  through  the 
details of this with you, which might be of some interest. The Bank offers foreign exchange 
services to all of its official customers, not just the Australian Government. Very occasionally, 
one of the Bank’s foreign customers lets us know that they would like to buy some Australian 
dollars to invest and they ask to purchase them through the Reserve Bank. After we have 
sold them the Australian dollars for foreign currency, we have to decide whether to retain the 
foreign exchange or sell it in the market. 
                                                
5   For more, see Vallence C (2012), “Foreign Exchange Reserves and the Reserve Bank's Balance Sheet”, RBA 
Bulletin, December, pp 57–63. 
6   See  Newman  V,  C  Potter  and  M  Wright  (2011),  “Foreign  Exchange  Market  Intervention”,  RBA Bulletin, 
December, pp 67–76. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
With the Australian dollar trading at the high end of our assessment of fair valuation at the 
time (based  on  determinants  such  as  the  terms  of trade,  domestic  economic  and financial 
conditions),  we  decided  on  this  occasion  it  would  be  appropriate  to  retain  the  foreign 
exchange  in  our  reserves  portfolio  rather  than  sell  it.  That  is,  we  thought  the  foreign 
exchange was on the cheap side of fair value. Moreover, if we had sold the foreign exchange 
in  the  market,  we  would  have  been  buying  back  Australian  dollars  putting  further  upward 
pressure  on  the  A$  at  the  margin,  which  we  didn’t  think  was  appropriate  given  our 
assessment was that the currency was already somewhat on the high side.7 
The exchange rate 
So having said that the Australian dollar is somewhat on the high side, let me now talk about 
why that might be. 
The primary explanation, I think, for the currency being higher than the state of the domestic 
economy  and  the  terms  of  trade  would  suggest  is  the  weak  state  of  many  advanced 
economies and the resulting policies being pursued by the central banks in these countries. 
Having lowered interest rates as far as they can, effectively to zero, these central banks have 
embarked on a large expansion of their balance sheets, buying assets, mostly government 
securities,  from  the  private  sector.  One  of  the  main  channels  by  which  this  quantitative 
easing is expected to work is by encouraging the private sector to use the cash they have 
received  from  the  central  bank  for  the  government  securities  to  buy  other  assets,  which 
includes foreign assets. 
Their  actions  are  understandable  and  defensible 
perspectives. However, these policy actions do have an impact on other countries.8 
As  some  of  this  quantitative  easing  generates  capital  outflows  from  the  country  doing  the 
easing,  the  exchange  rate  depreciates,  boosting  local  economic  activity.  But  an  exchange 
rate  is  a  relative  price.  When  one  country’s  exchange  rate  depreciates  another’s  must 
appreciate. The exchange rate movement transfers demand from one country to another. 
There  is  an  income  and  substitution  effect  at  work  here.  Quite  likely,  these  policy  actions 
boost demand in the world as a whole. But if the exchange rate appreciation is large enough 
in a particular country or if a country doesn’t trade all that much with the one doing the QE, 
the effect of that appreciation may outweigh the positive effect of stronger global demand. 
That is, for a given economy, the substitution effect may dominate the income effect. This is 
particularly likely to be the case for a smaller country, where the size of the capital inflows it 
attracts may be large relative to the size of its economy, even if the capital flows are small for 
the  large  country  that  is  easing  its  policy.9  So  while  it  may  be  the  case  that  the monetary 
their  own  domestic  policy 
from 
                                                
7   For  those  who  are  interested,  these  transactions  are  evident  in  a  couple  of  statistical  tables  on  the  RBA 
website.  In  table  A4,  the  RBA’s  transactions  in  foreign  exchange  markets  are  recorded.  The  first  column 
shows the Bank’s dealings with the market, the second, our transactions with the government, and the third, 
our dealings with other customers, as well as the interest earned on the reserves. The net of all these three 
columns are the Bank’s additions to its outright foreign reserve holdings. Most of the time, the number is a low 
positive one, reflecting the monthly earnings on the reserves. (Columns one and two tend to offset reflecting 
the way in which sales of foreign currency to the government are funded in the market.) But in the second half 
of 2012, the number is a larger positive number which reflects the transactions I am referring to here. The 
RBA’s balance sheet is published weekly, and you can also see the effect of the transaction in temporarily 
boosting customer deposits through this time. 
8   The Governor covered some of these issues in “Challenges for Central Banking” (2012), Address to the Bank 
of Thailand 70th Anniversary and 3rd Policy Forum, Bangkok, 12 December. 
9   The starkest case of this recently is the experience of Switzerland, where the size of the capital flows they 
received from Europe, when concerns about euro a break-up were at their height, was huge relative to the 
size of the Swiss economy. This was reflected in the accumulation of foreign reserves by the Swiss central 
bank, which amount to more than 80 per cent of GDP now. To put that in context for an Australian audience, if 
the RBA accumulated a similar amount of reserves, they would amount to over A$1 trillion! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
policy settings we see at the moment might be good for the global economy as a whole, they 
may not be beneficial for every country. 
This can leave the countries that are receiving these inflows with a difficult choice. They can 
decide  to  offset  the  effects  of  the  higher  exchange  rate  with  expansionary  policy  too.  A 
number of commentators say this is clearly a good thing for the global economy,10 and is in 
stark contrast to the 1930s, where countries responded with tighter policy.11 The argument is 
that  given  a  deficiency  in  global  demand,  further  expansionary  policy  elsewhere  helps  to 
redress the fact that there is no scope in the major economies for lower rates, given they are 
already at zero. 
But  lowering  rates  to  such  low  levels  can  cause  some  problems.  It  can  generate  excess 
credit  expansion  or  asset  price  inflation  or  imbalances  elsewhere  in  the  economy.  The 
current experience of Canada, Hong Kong and Switzerland is salient in this respect. The next 
line of argument is that such concerns can be alleviated by the appropriate deployment of 
“macroprudential”  policy  tools.  But  there  are  large  uncertainties  about  how  effective  such 
tools really are. 
To date in Australia, we have been able to counter the effects of the higher Australian dollar 
with lower interest rates, as my colleague Phil Lowe described recently.12 We still obviously 
retain  scope 
further,  should 
to 
counterbalance the pressures of an elevated exchange rate. 
So, I hope that has given you a sense of how the Reserve Bank sets the cash rate and how 
that affects the structure of interest rates in the economy. The cash rate still has the largest 
influence  over  lending  and  deposit  rates,  even  if  the  relationship  is  not  exact.  I’ve  also 
described how the Reserve Bank operates in the foreign exchange rate and discussed some 
of the forces affecting the exchange rate at the moment. 
the  need  arise, 
interest  rates 
including 
lower 
to 
                                                
10   See  Krugman  P  (2013),  “Currency  War  Confusions”,  The  New  York  Times,  15  February.  Available  at 
<http://krugman.blogs.nytimes.com/2013/02/15/currency-war-confusions/>. 
11   This was the archetypal “beggar thy neighbour” scenario, with competitive devaluations. See Eichengreen B 
(1992), Golden Fetters: The Gold Standard and the Great Depression, 1919–1939, Oxford University Press, 
New York. 
12   Lowe P (2012), “What is Normal?”, Address to the Australian Business Economists Annual Dinner, Sydney, 
5 December. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
