Yaseen Anwar: Promoting an inclusive financial sector in Pakistan 
Speech  by  Mr  Yaseen  Anwar,  Governor  of  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan,  at  the  Closure 
Ceremony of Term Sarmaya Certificate (TFC) issued by Tameer Microfinance Bank, Karachi, 
24 January 2013. 
 Mr. Nadeem Hussain, President/CEO of Tameer Microfinance Bank 
Ladies and Gentlemen – Good afternoon! 
It  is  a  pleasure  for  me  to  witness  the  successful  closure  of  the  first  ever  Term  Finance 
Certificate (TFC) issued by any microfinance bank in Pakistan. This is indeed a significant 
achievement for the microfinance industry and capital markets that has been made possible 
by collaborative efforts of the diverse stakeholders involved in such a complex transaction. 
As someone once said: 
“Coming  together  is  a  beginning,  staying  together  is  progress,  and  working 
together is success.” 
it  promotes  entrepreneurship,  generates  employment, 
Therefore, I would like to congratulate Tameer Microfinance Bank, Standard Chartered Bank, 
IGI Investment Bank, JCR VIS, Karachi Stock Exchange, SECP, and my colleagues at SBP, 
for  collaborating  together  to  make  this  TFC  issuance  a  success  under  the  SBP’s 
Microfinance Credit Guarantee Facility. 
I sincerely hope that this first issuance of TFC by Tameer Bank would open up new funding 
avenues for microfinance providers and would give further impetus to our efforts in promoting 
an inclusive financial sector in the country, thereby enhancing the financial sector’s stability 
and viability in the long-run. 
The  importance  of  financial  services  in  the  development  of  any  economy  cannot  be 
overemphasized. There is no denial of the fact that access to finance has positive impact on 
economic  growth  as 
fosters 
innovation, reduces poverty levels and enhances social equality. 
The financial sector in Pakistan remains restricted in its outreach both in terms of its depth 
and  breadth.  According  to  the  Access  to  Finance  Study  of  2008,  hardly  12%  of  the 
population  has  access  to  formal  banking  services  and  another  32%  is  informally  served 
whereas 56% of the adult population is totally excluded. Similarly in Pakistan, the estimated 
size of the microfinance market is in the range of 25–30 million clients which indicates that 
the  current  level  of  microfinance  access  at  2.4  million  clients  is  only  10%  of  the  potential 
market. 
Financial  Inclusion  has  progressively  assumed  greater  priority  in  SBP’s  financial  sector 
development strategy. SBP is pursuing a multi-pronged approach to tackle the challenge of 
high financial exclusion in our country. In particular, SBP is aiming to develop an efficient and 
sustainable market-based financial structure meeting the financial needs of the marginalized 
population including women and young people. 
Let  me  be  clear  that  the  estimated  microfinance  market  of  25–30  million  clients  may  not 
necessarily just need credit services. It is of utmost importance that the industry should aim 
to provide holistic and appropriate financial services, including deposit, credit, insurance and 
remittance services. SBP is well aware of the fact that the industry is beset with a number of 
challenges  in  the  way  of  achieving  this  high  objective.  SBP  is  actively  engaged  with  all 
stakeholders to address the sector specific challenges in a sustainable manner. 
One  of  the  fundamental  challenges  faced  by  microfinance  providers  is  how  to  match  the 
massive  scarcity  of  funding  to  scale  up  microcredit  services  to  the  majority  of  the 
microfinance market. SBP had launched the Microfinance Credit Guarantee Facility (MCGF) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
to achieve this very objective through a sustainable market based mechanism. Prior to the 
MCGF  launch  in  Dec  2008  and  apart  from  one-off  funding  deals  between  the  few  MF 
providers  and  Commercial  Banks,  the  commercial  funding  market  was  non-existent  for 
microfinance providers. Therefore, the microfinance industry was severely handicapped and 
highly donor dependent for its funding needs. 
The  MCGF  was  initially  started  with  the  help  of  the  UK  Department  of  International 
Development (DFID) grant amount of GBP 10 million which has been recently increased to 
GBP 15 million. The MCGF is a credit enhancement facility to attract long term commercial 
funding for microfinance providers. The objective of the facility is to incentivize commercial 
banks through a risk sharing mechanism to provide wholesale funds to microfinance banks 
and institutions for on-lending to the poor and marginalized groups. Recently, the scope of 
the  facility  has  been  enhanced  to  allow  microfinance  providers  to  mobilize  non-bank 
financing from capital markets, further diversifying sources of financing for micro borrowers. It 
is heartening to see that a number of microfinance providers, including Tameer microfinance 
bank, while benefitting from the MCGF, has helped the facility to attain this objective. 
Let  me  briefly  share  with  you  that  the  facility  has  been  instrumental  in  relaxing  funding 
constraints of the microfinance sector in Pakistan: 
• 
So far, 25 guarantees have been issued under MCGF, mobilizing over Rs. 7 billion 
for  5  leading  MF  providers,  enabling  microcredit  access  to  around  350,000  new 
micro borrowers. 
The  facility,  due  to  its  risk  sharing  structure  has  achieved  a  leverage  of  3  times, 
mobilizing an additional Rs. 5 billion from private capital markets, establishing that 
microfinance may not be that risky as a business proposition, and 
Most  of  all,  the  facility  has  engaged  16  commercial  banks  and  recently  retail 
investors in funding the microfinance providers. 
  In  doing  so,  the  facility  has  accomplished  the  following  key  long-term  development 
objectives: 
First, the Guarantee has helped build links between micro borrowers and Banks/DFIs. The 
familiarization  of  the  Banks/DFIs  with  the  client  will  eventually  lead  to  mainstreaming  and 
graduation of the micro borrower; 
Second, the facility has introduced microfinance business to Banks/DFIs as Banks have to 
evaluate the microfinance providers which must have helped them develop their own sense 
of  the  risks  involved  in  microfinance.  As  a  result,  banks  are  now  more  willing  to  invest  in 
micro banking; and 
Finally,  and  more  importantly,  the  facility  has  helped  microfinance  providers  to  offer  small 
ticket sizes for retail investors. This has offered small retail investors an alternate channel for 
investing  their  savings  and  earning  relatively  higher  returns,  encouraging  the  concept  of 
micro-savings. 
I  would  like  to  conclude  by  saying  that  the  MCGF  has  attained  most  of  its  developmental 
objectives. Moreover, I firmly believe that this TFC issuance will go a long way in diversifying 
funding for the microfinance sector. I strongly encourage all the financial market players to 
develop a long term vision for making the financial sector in Pakistan more inclusive. 
Thank you!  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
