Peter Pang: Strategies for the development of Islamic capital markets 
Welcoming remarks by Mr Peter Pang, Deputy Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary 
Authority, at the IFSB seminar on “Strategies for the development of Islamic capital markets”, 
Hong Kong, 27 June 2013. 
 Secretary-General Jaseem Ahmed, Your Excellency Abdullah Salem Al-Turifi, distinguished 
speakers and delegates, ladies and gentlemen, 
Good morning. 
1. 
The Hong Kong Monetary Authority (HKMA) is very honoured to host this seminar 
organised by the Islamic Financial Services Board (IFSB) with the support of the Treasury 
Markets Association (TMA). It is a great pleasure to welcome you all and a special thanks to 
the  speakers  and  delegates  who  have  travelled  a  long  way  from  overseas  to  attend  this 
event. 
This  year  marks  the  10th  anniversary  of  the  IFSB.  Let  me  take  this  opportunity  to 
2. 
congratulate  the  Board  for  the  invaluable  contributions  it  has  made  in  the  last  decade  to 
develop  the  Islamic  financial  services  industry,  particularly  in  bringing  Islamic  financial 
products  to  the  mainstream  by  issuing  prudential  standards  that  are  in  compliance  with 
Shariah  principles  while  being  consistent  with  international  standards,  and  organising 
international events to promote market awareness of the opportunities offered by the Islamic 
capital markets. 
3. 
The theme of today’s seminar – “Strategies for the Development of Islamic Capital 
Markets”  –  is  most  timely  and  relevant  to  Hong  Kong  as  we  are  about  to  introduce  an 
enhanced legal framework as a first step to promote the sustainable development of Islamic 
finance and we are eager to learn the other key components to form a coherent strategy. We 
very  much  look  forward  to  the  insightful  views  of  the  distinguished  speakers  on  the  latest 
developments of the global Islamic capital markets, the prospects and opportunities that lie 
ahead, and further ideas to bring Islamic capital markets to the mainstream. 
Growing importance of Islamic finance in the global financial scene 
4. 
Being  an  international  financial  centre,  it  is  important  for  Hong  Kong  to  embrace 
Islamic  finance  given  its  rising  prominence  in  the  global  financial  arena.  The  size  of  the 
global  Islamic  capital  markets  has  expanded  more  than  10-fold  since  its  early  phase  of 
development in the 1980s, reaching an estimated US$1.6 trillion at the end of 2012.1 With 
this critical mass, Islamic finance has become an integral part of the global financial system 
not  only  catering  for  the  needs  of  Muslims,  but  also  attracting  other  investors  and  fund 
raisers,  regardless  of  race  and  religion.  Reflecting  the  deepening  sophistication  of  this 
market, we are seeing an increasing variety of products and services, ranging from Islamic 
banking products and sukuk, to Islamic equities, Islamic funds and takaful. 
5. 
This  remarkable  market  deepening  process  has  not  been  retarded  by  the 
challenging financial landscape. Despite the global financial crisis and European sovereign 
debt problems, the Islamic capital markets have shown unparalleled resilience over the past 
few years. In particular, the sukuk market climbed to new heights for the fourth year in a row, 
with global sukuk issuance exceeding US$130 billion in 2012, three times higher than that 
before the global financial crisis.2  
                                                
1   Source: KFH Research. 
2   Source: KFH Research. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Strengths of Hong Kong in developing Islamic finance 
6. 
Hong  Kong  is  well  positioned  to  add  momentum  to  the  globalisation  of  Islamic 
finance. As a free and open economy and major international financial centre, Hong Kong 
has developed a highly liquid and deep capital market with a strong presence of international 
financial  intermediaries  and  a  diverse  base  of  borrowers  and  investors,  a  well-established 
financial  infrastructure,  a  sound  legal  system,  a  transparent  regulatory  framework  and  a 
simple tax regime. 
7. 
In addition to these general capabilities in financial intermediation, Hong Kong can 
play a unique and pivotal role in bridging the investment needs from the Middle East and the 
funding needs in Mainland China. 
8. 
Many  Middle  East  investors  are  now  actively  looking  for  investment  opportunities 
beyond  their  domestic  borders to  diversify  their investment  portfolios. This  trend  has  been 
supported  by  the  huge  pool  of  oil-driven  liquidity  in  the  Middle  East.  Last  year  alone,  oil 
revenues 
to  be  about 
US$700 billion.3  Mainland  China  has  been  one  of  their  favourite  investment  destinations 
given its strong economic growth and emerging market opportunities. 
9. 
On  the  other  side,  Mainland  China  is  facing  huge funding needs for  infrastructure 
development projects. As China’s global financial centre, Hong Kong is an important conduit 
for  Mainland  companies  to  access  the  international  markets  and  the  preferred  offshore 
capital raising centre for Mainland issuers over the past decade. This is apparent from the 
fact that  over  half  of  our  stock market  capitalisation  is  Mainland-related  and  from  the  high 
participation of Mainland entities in our dim sum bond market. 
10. 
Against  this  backdrop,  we  believe  Hong  Kong  is  well-placed  to  meet  the  strong 
investment demand from the Middle East and other parts of the world for Mainland-related 
Islamic financial products. At the same time, Hong Kong can also provide an ideal platform 
for issuers from the Mainland and other parts of Asia to issue Islamic financial instruments for 
satisfying their funding needs. 
the  Gulf  Cooperation  Council  countries  were  estimated 
in 
Bringing Islamic capital markets to the mainstream 
11. 
Addressing one of the key issues to be discussed today, Hong Kong’s involvement 
in  Islamic  finance  will  also  help  to  bring  Islamic  capital  markets  to  the  mainstream  in  two 
ways: provide a level playing field and encourage market participation in Islamic finance. 
12. 
To bring Islamic financial products to the mainstream, a key task would be to level 
the playing field with their conventional counterparts. On this front, a study conducted by the 
Hong Kong Government in conjunction with TMA earlier concluded that there are no major 
legal or regulatory obstacles to transactions involving wholesale Islamic financial instruments 
in Hong Kong. 
13. 
However, there is a need to refine the tax regime in Hong Kong in order to provide a 
level playing field between sukuk and conventional bonds. Owing to Shariah requirements, 
structuring  sukuk  often  involves  the  originator  setting  up  a  special  purpose  vehicle  for  the 
purposes  of  issuing  sukuk  to  sukuk  holders,  and  multiple  transfers  of  underlying  assets 
between  the  originator  and  the  sukuk  issuer  in  order  to  generate  profits.  These  complex 
structures, which are not required for conventional bonds, may incur additional tax and stamp 
duty expenses for the sukuk issuers. 
14. 
I  am  pleased  to  see  that  an  amendment  bill  to  address  this  issue  has  been 
introduced into Hong Kong’s Legislative Council and is now in the final stages of enactment. 
                                                
3   Source: Institute for International Finance. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The  bill,  once  passed,  will  enable  sukuk  to  enjoy  tax  treatments  similar  to  those  currently 
afforded to conventional bonds. This would be a significant milestone in the development of a 
sukuk market in Hong Kong. 
15. 
Apart from providing a level playing field, equally important is the active participation 
of  market  players,  including  non-Islamic  arrangers,  issuers  and  investors  in  the  Islamic 
capital markets, as they will be the ones who lead market development in the future. Hong 
Kong is fortunate to have a strong presence of international financial intermediaries who can 
leverage on their global network of expertise to develop and structure a variety of Shariah-
compliant products here. 
16. 
It is also crucial for fund raisers and investors to be aware of the benefits of Islamic 
capital  market  instruments  and  understand  their  structures  and  operations.  So,  we  have 
been  working  very  closely  with  the  TMA  and  international  bodies  like  the  IFSB  in  bringing 
Islamic finance seminars and workshops to Hong Kong market participants, like the seminar 
today,  in  an  effort  to  raise  the  awareness  and  deepen  the  knowledge  of  Islamic  finance 
among  the  financial  community.  With  the  gathering  of  such  a  distinguished  group  of 
speakers, I am sure that we shall obtain useful insights and get a clearer picture on how to 
prepare ourselves for the exciting developments in the years to come. 
17. 
Hong Kong. Thank you. 
I wish this seminar every success, and to our overseas friends, an enjoyable stay in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
