Simon M Potter: The implementation of current asset purchases 
Remarks  by  Mr  Simon  M  Potter,  Executive  Vice  President  of  the  Markets  Group  of  the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, at the Annual Meeting with Primary Dealers, New York 
City, 1 March 2013. 
 Thank you all for attending today’s annual primary dealer meeting. Primary dealers play an 
important  role  in  financial  markets  and  an  integral  role  as  counterparties  for  operations  to 
implement monetary policy. You are also an important source of market intelligence for the 
Desk,  providing  insight  into  market  developments,  structure,  and  functioning  dynamics.  A 
meeting  like  this  provides  a  valuable  opportunity  to  communicate  our  counterparty 
expectations, as well as strengthen our ongoing relationship. Given your important role in the 
implementation  of  monetary  policy,  I  thought  I  would  take  this  opportunity  to  discuss  the 
Federal Reserve’s ongoing purchases of Treasury and agency mortgage-backed securities 
(MBS). 
As  you  are  well  aware,  at  the  September  2012  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC) 
meeting, the FOMC decided to increase policy accommodation by purchasing $40 billion per 
month  of  agency  MBS  and  continue  the  Maturity  Extension  Program  (MEP).  Then  at  its 
December meeting, the Committee chose to continue buying $45 billion per month in longer-
term Treasury securities following the completion of the MEP. As a result of these decisions, 
the Federal Reserve is currently adding $85 billion in longer-term securities each month to its 
holdings, in addition to reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of agency MBS and 
agency  debt  securities  into  agency  MBS.1  Under  this  program,  we  have  bought  about 
$90 billion in Treasury securities since January and about $220 billion in agency MBS since 
mid-September, bringing the total par value of the Federal Reserve’s SOMA (System Open 
Market Account) portfolio to over $2.8 trillion.2 
In my comments today, I will describe the key differences and similarities between the recent 
policy  action  and  previous  programs  and  discuss  how  the  Desk  implements  these  asset 
purchases. As always, the views expressed here are my own and do not necessarily reflect 
those of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve System.3 
Outcome-based purchases 
The FOMC’s current asset purchase program has some key differences from earlier policy 
initiatives.  When  announcing  previous  programs  to  change  the  size  or  composition  of  its 
balance  sheet,  the  FOMC  communicated  an  expected  total  size  of  each  program  and  an 
anticipated date by when it would be completed. Under the current asset purchase program, 
the FOMC has announced only the monthly pace and composition of purchases and noted 
that  purchases  will  continue  until  there  is  a  substantial  improvement  in  the  outlook  for  the 
labor market in the context of price stability. The Committee has also indicated that it will take 
appropriate account of the likely efficacy and costs of its purchases when adjusting their size, 
pace, and composition. While noting that purchase activity will depend on these factors, the 
                                                
1   The FOMC also directed the Desk to reinstate its previous policy of rolling over maturing Treasury holdings 
into new issues. See the Desk’s Frequently Asked Questions for more information. In practice, the amount of 
maturing proceeds will be quite small, since securities maturing within the next three years were sold as part 
of the MEP 
2   This excludes about $100 billion of MBS trades scheduled to settle in the future. 
3  
I  would  like to  thank members  of  the  Markets  Group  Staff,  including  Katherine  Femia, Lorie  Logan, Linsey 
Molloy, Roman Shimonov, and Nathaniel Wuerffel, who contributed to the preparation of these remarks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Committee  has  not  specified  the  time  at  which  purchases  will  be  complete  or  the  total 
expected  size  of  the  purchases.  Instead,  under  this  conditional,  outcome-based  approach, 
the  Committee  has  enacted  a  policy  that  will  adjust  to  incoming  information  about  labor 
market  conditions  and  the  broader  economy,  as  well  as  its  ongoing  assessment  of  the 
efficacy and costs of purchases. Retaining the flexibility to adjust purchases is an important 
feature  of  the  program, given  our  relatively  limited  experience  with  the  use  of  the  balance 
sheet as a monetary policy tool and the uncertainty about the policy’s effects. 
One  of  the  potential  costs  of  additional  purchases  is  that  they  could  disrupt  functioning  in 
Treasury and MBS markets – a cost that the Desk carefully assesses when it implements the 
FOMC’s  policy  directive.  As  you  know,  there  is  a  finite  supply  of  Treasury  and  agency 
securities available to purchase, in terms of both total amount and amounts available in the 
market at any given time. If the Federal Reserve were to become too dominant a buyer or 
holder, it could reduce the tradable supply of these securities and discourage trading among 
market  participants,  leading  to  diminished  liquidity  and  price  discovery.  A  significant 
deterioration in liquidity could lead investors to demand a premium for transacting in these 
markets,  ultimately  raising  borrowing  costs  and  undermining  the  program’s  policy  goal.4 
However, as discussed later, the purchases have gone smoothly so far, and market liquidity 
seems to be holding up well. 
Although  the  current  program  is  different  in  some  respects  from  prior  balance  sheet 
programs,  its  intended  purpose  and  the  ways  the  Committee  anticipates  it  will  impact  the 
economy are similar. The purchases are conducted to achieve the FOMC’s dual mandate of 
maximum  employment  and  price  stability.  Asset  purchases  help  achieve  this  mandate  by 
putting downward pressure on longer-term interest rates, supporting mortgage markets, and 
helping to make broader financial conditions more accommodative. 
The current purchases reduce interest rates and ease financial conditions through the same 
transmission channels as previous balance sheet programs. As has been widely discussed 
in  the  academic  literature,  one  of  the  most  important  channels  is  the  portfolio  balance 
channel.5 This theory relies on the premise that financial assets are imperfect substitutes in 
investors’  portfolios,  and,  as  a  result,  a  rise  in  the  demand  for  a  particular  financial  asset 
relative  to  its  supply  –  reflecting  the  Federal  Reserve’s  asset  purchase  programs,  for 
example – will increase its price and reduce its yield. After selling that asset to the Federal 
Reserve,  investors  may  rebalance  their  portfolios  by  investing  in  other  assets,  raising  the 
prices of those assets, lowering their yields, and easing overall financial conditions. 
The  Federal  Reserve’s  asset  purchase  programs  were  designed  to  remove  risk  from  the 
portfolios  of  private  investors.  For  example, Treasury  and  agency  MBS  purchases remove 
duration  risk,  thereby  lowering  longer-term  interest  rates  and  reducing  private  sector 
borrowing costs. Furthermore, agency MBS purchases also remove prepayment risk in the 
market.  Since  homeowners  can  prepay  their  mortgage  at  any  time,  MBS  investors  do  not 
know when they will receive their cash flows. Investors generally demand an extra return to 
bear this risk, which is incorporated into MBS yields and in part passed along to borrowers. 
The removal of a considerable amount of this risk by the Fed’s purchases would be expected 
to lower MBS rates by lowering this extra return, thereby reducing primary mortgage rates, 
stimulating demand for housing and prompting increased refinancing activity. 
Even  though  the  Committee  is  communicating  a  monthly  pace  and  composition  of 
purchases, the predominant effect of those purchases on interest rates likely still comes from 
the expectations of the total stock of risk that will be removed from private investors and the 
length of time that the Federal Reserve will hold this risk. One feature of the current program 
                                                
4   For more information about Treasury market liquidity, see Fleming (2002) and Fleming (2000). 
5   For  example,  see  Li  and  Wei  (2012),  Gagnon  et  al  (2010),  Krishnamurthy  and  Vissing-Jørgensen  (2011), 
Wright (2012), and Hancock and Passmore (2011). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
is that market participants’ expectations of the total amount and composition of securities that 
the  Desk  will  purchase  –  and  thus,  the  amount  of  monetary  policy  accommodation  –  will 
evolve  over  time,  along  with  incoming  information  about  the  economy,  as  well  as 
considerations about policy efficacy and costs. 
The  Desk’s  most  recent  Survey  of  Primary  Dealers  indicates  that  the  median  respondent 
expects the FOMC to purchase about $1 trillion in securities, roughly equally split between 
Treasuries  and  agency  MBS,  over  the  course  of  2013  and  early  2014.  However,  the 
uncertainty around this expectation is large – at $500 billion it is almost as large as the entire 
size  of  the  large-scale  asset  purchases  announced  in  November  2010  or  the  Maturity 
Extension  Program  announced  in  September  2011.6  This  likely  reflects  uncertainty  about 
how  the  economy  will  evolve  and  how  the  FOMC  will  adjust  its  purchases  in  response  to 
changes in the economic outlook or the costs and benefits of the policy. 
Implementation of the current asset purchase program 
In implementing the current purchase program, the Desk has operated in a similar manner as 
in  past  programs.  As  always,  outright  purchases  in  Treasuries  and  agency  MBS  are 
conducted  through  operations  that  seek  to  acquire  securities  at  competitive  prices  while 
minimizing any market disruptions. 
There are some key differences between our Treasury and MBS operations that I would like 
to discuss. As counterparties in our operations, you know that outright purchases of Treasury 
securities  are  conducted  through  large-scale,  multiple-security  auctions  via  the  Desk’s 
FedTrade platform, which allows all primary dealers to place multiple offers across all eligible 
securities  simultaneously.  Purchases  of  MBS,  on  the  other  hand,  are  currently  conducted 
using TradeWeb, a commercial trading platform.7 The platform allows buyers to solicit offers 
for  one  security  at  a  time  from  up  to  four  counterparties,  so  the  Desk  includes  dealers  in 
operations on a rotating basis. As a result, the Desk purchases MBS in a series of smaller-
scale, more frequent auctions. We are currently expanding the FedTrade platform, in order to 
have more flexibility in conducting MBS auctions in the future. 
In the Treasury market, purchases are distributed across securities with different maturities, 
with  the  intent  of  removing  a  specified  amount  of  duration  risk  from  the  market  without 
causing significant market disruption. For recent programs, this maturity distribution has been 
announced at the outset, and a schedule of specific operations is released at the beginning 
of each month.8 Such transparency is possible because the composition of Treasury coupon 
securities available for purchase is reasonably predictable. Within this purchase distribution, 
both  newly  issued  (on-the-run)  and  more  seasoned  (off-the-run)  securities  are  often 
purchased. 
Outright purchases of MBS are executed in the TBA (To-Be-Announced) market. The TBA 
market is built around a trading convention that allows market participants to trade thousands 
of different MBS backed by millions of individual mortgages using only a few standardized 
contracts, which are grouped based on key characteristics such as the coupon of the security 
that  will  be  delivered.  These  factors  help  make  the  TBA  market  homogeneous  and  highly 
liquid – useful characteristics given the scale of Desk operations.9 Mortgage originators sell 
                                                
6   Using the individual answers to Question 8 in the January 2013 Survey of Primary Dealers on the probability 
of  the  size  of  the  balance  sheet  at  the  end  of  2013  and  2014,  one  can  calculate  the  average  individual 
uncertainty around each dealers’ point forecast. For the end of 2014, this is around $500 billion. 
7   The Desk also has the ability to execute agency MBS trades by other means. 
8   Of  course,  this  maturity  distribution  could  change  as  part  of  the  Committee’s  ongoing  assessment  of  the 
efficacy and costs of asset purchases. 
9   For more information on the TBA market, see Vickery and Wright (2013). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
MBS  backed  by  new  loans  into  the  TBA  market  because  of  the  market’s  liquidity  and 
because  the  TBA  market  is  a  forward  market,  which  allows  originators  to  hedge  the  risk 
associated with locking in loan rates with new borrowers.10 The Desk concentrates its TBA 
purchases in “production coupons,” since the yields and prices for production coupons are 
directly related to the primary mortgage rate. 
In general, the Desk purchases MBS in the TBA market across different agencies, maturities, 
and  coupons  in  amounts  that  are  roughly  proportional  to  anticipated  issuance  of  those 
securities. Issuance of new TBA securities varies over time, based on the level of refinancing 
and  home  purchase  activity.  Moreover,  because  the  coupon  at  which  new  MBS  are 
originated depends on the overall level of interest rates, the possibility of future fluctuations in 
the primary mortgage rate makes it difficult to determine well in advance which coupons will 
be issued. As a result, the Desk is not able to provide the same detailed guidance about the 
composition  of  its  MBS  purchases  as  is  possible  with  Treasury  purchases.  At  times,  we 
adjust  our  purchases  when  certain  market  functioning  indicators  suggest  that  particular 
securities are less readily available for settlement relative to other securities.11  
As it has always done, the Desk closely monitors how its activities impact financial market 
functioning.  Good  market  functioning  is  integral  for  the  successful  implementation  of  the 
FOMC’s directive and for the effective transmission of monetary policy to the real economy. 
When  evaluating  market  functioning,  we  consider  measures  of  market  activity,  such  as 
trading volumes, bid-ask spreads, trade sizes, quote sizes, financing costs, and settlement 
fails,  as  well  as  other  indicators.  We  also  monitor  the  performance  of  our  operations  (for 
example, the prices at which we can execute in comparison to prevailing market quotes or 
the  total  amount  of  competitively  priced  propositions),  the  concentration  of  market 
participants’ holdings in securities with certain characteristics, the extent and concentration of 
dealer participation in operations, and the pace of settlement of our MBS purchases. Based 
on  these  types  of  measures,  purchases  of  both  Treasury  securities  and  MBS  have  gone 
smoothly so far, and market liquidity seems to be holding up well. 
In  addition  to  this  monitoring,  we  have  developed  active  policies  to  help  prevent  market 
dysfunction as a result of our operations. In the Treasury market, the Desk ceases purchases 
of  a  specific  security  once  SOMA  holdings  of  that  security  reach  70  percent  of  the 
outstanding stock. In addition, when SOMA holdings of a specific issue exceed 30 percent of 
outstanding securities, the Desk limits the rate at which it acquires new holdings of that issue 
based  on  a  predetermined,  graduated  schedule.  The  Desk  also  refrains  from  purchasing 
certain Treasury securities in its operations if investors’ demand for those specific securities 
as collateral in the repurchase market or as deliverables into Treasury futures contracts is 
relatively high. In the event of significant market demand for specific Treasury collateral held 
by  the  SOMA,  investors  can  borrow  these  holdings  through  competitive  securities  lending 
operations. 
In the MBS market, the Desk is supportive of market functioning in two main ways. First, as I 
mentioned earlier, we adjust our purchase allocation as necessary to respond to concerns 
about  relative  scarcity  in  particular  contracts.  Second,  we  use  dollar  roll  transactions  to 
facilitate  the  orderly  settlement  of  our  unsettled  purchases.  Selling  dollar  roll  contracts 
essentially  postpones  the  settlement  of  an  outstanding  purchase,  while  buying  dollar  roll 
contracts brings it forward. The Desk actively monitors implied financing rates on dollar roll 
                                                
10   Since  TBA  transactions  settle  on  a  forward  basis,  the  Desk  is  exposed  to  the  risk  that a  primary  dealer  is 
unable or unwilling to meet its contractual obligations. If a counterparty does not deliver on its obligation, the 
Desk could be forced to replace the transaction at a higher prices. As a result of this risk, the Desk requires 
primary dealers to post collateral, or margin, in response to changes in the market value of the security 
11   For  example,  in  January, the Desk decreased  its  purchases  of  30-year  fixed-rate 3.5 percent  coupon  MBS 
relative  to  projected  issuance  as  a  result  of  concerns  about  the  near-term  availability  of  this  coupon  for 
settlement and increased its purchases of 3 percent coupon MBS. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
contracts for the level of supply of the securities that the Desk expects to be delivered. When 
implied  financing  rates  reach  levels  notably  below  the  general  level  of  short-term  interest 
rates,  thereby  signaling  supply  concerns,  the  Desk  sells  dollar  roll  contracts  to  postpone 
settlement  of  that  outstanding  purchase.12  Our  dollar  roll  activity  is  consistent  with  the 
guidelines  laid  out  by  the  Treasury  Market  Practices  Group  (TMPG),  an  industry  group 
sponsored  by  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York.  TMPG  Best  Practices  encourage 
market  participants  who  have  amassed  a  particularly  large  position  in  the  agency  MBS 
market to manage that position mindful of the need to support market liquidity and to take 
care  that  sudden  changes  in  trading  strategies  do  not  adversely  impact  liquidity  or 
settlement.13 The Desk has consistently transacted in the dollar roll market when purchasing 
MBS  to  facilitate  the  orderly  settlement  of  its  purchases  and  will  continue  to  do  so  as 
necessary to avoid deterioration in the liquidity of these contracts.14  
So far, there seems to be little evidence that the current pace of purchases is straining the 
market’s ability to deliver securities to us. The current monthly pace is within the range seen 
during the Federal Reserve’s previous asset purchase programs, whether measured in par 
terms or when adjusted for duration risk. Treasury purchases make up only about 25 percent 
of monthly gross issuance of coupon securities, and current SOMA holdings are less than 
20 percent  of  coupon  Treasuries  outstanding,  although  in  some  maturity  sectors  these 
percentages are significantly larger. 
The  FOMC’s  capacity  to  purchase  MBS  is  somewhat  more  difficult  to  gauge,  given  the 
uncertainty around future mortgage origination discussed earlier. Since the beginning of the 
current purchase program in 2012, we have purchased nearly $75 billion in MBS on average 
per month, including reinvestments. This translates into about 50 percent of monthly gross 
issuance,  below  the  monthly  purchase  rate  of  roughly  two-thirds  during  the  first  round  of 
large-scale MBS purchases in 2009. If refinancing activity declines, leading to a decrease in 
gross  issuance,  our  purchases  could  exceed  these  levels.  Of  course,  the  pace  of  asset 
purchases  is  not  strictly  limited  by  the  amount  of  new  mortgage  origination,  as  market 
participants  can  also  deliver  older  securities  into  TBA  contracts.  As  the  pace  of  MBS 
issuance  evolves,  the  Desk  will  continue  to  watch  the  market  functioning  indicators 
discussed  above,  with  a  particular  emphasis  on  the  market’s  ability  to  settle  further 
purchases. 
Conclusion 
Overall, I believe the Desk has effectively and efficiently carried out the FOMC’s directive to 
purchase  additional  Treasury  securities  and  agency  MBS  in  a  transparent  fashion  that 
achieves  the  FOMC’s  policy  objectives,  supports  orderly  market  functioning,  and  obtains 
competitive market prices. I also believe that the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet policies 
have  been  effective  in  easing  financial  conditions,  particularly  with  respect  to  making 
historically low borrowing costs available to existing and prospective American homeowners, 
as well as lowering interest rates to spur business investment and household spending. To 
achieve  our  policy  mandate,  we  rely  on  your  continued  ongoing  and  active  participation  in 
our  operations  both  for  your  own  accounts  and  for  the  accounts  of  your  customers, 
consistent  with  your  role  as  primary  dealers.  We  will  continue  to  implement  the  FOMC’s 
                                                
12   The  Desk  also  purchases  dollar  roll  contracts  when  implied  financing  rates  are  sufficiently  positive.  Such 
operations occurred in December 2011. 
13   See TMPG Best Practices. 
14   Selling dollar rolls when concerns arise about the availability of certain TBA contracts is conceptually similar to 
making  SOMA  Treasury  holdings  available  to  the  market  through  our  securities  lending  program.  One  key 
difference  is  that  the  Desk  offers  settled  Treasury  holdings  to  the  market  through  its  securities  lending 
program, whereas the Desk only rolls unsettled MBS holdings. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
directive,  with  the  goal  of  supporting  a  stronger  economic  recovery  in  the  context  of  price 
stability. 
References 
Fleming, Michael (2000). “The Benchmark U.S. Treasury Market: Recent Performance and 
Possible Alternatives.” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy Review, Vol. 6, 
no. 1 (April): 129–45. 
Fleming,  Michael  (2002).  “Are  Larger  Treasury  Issues  More  Liquid?  Evidence  from  Bill 
Reopenings.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, Vol. 34, no. 3 (August): 707–35. 
Gagnon,  Joseph,  Matthew  Raskin,  Julie  Remache,  and  Brian  Sack  (2010).  “Large-Scale 
Asset Purchases by the Federal Reserve: Did They Work?” Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York Staff Reports, no. 441, March. 
Hancock, Diana, and Wayne Passmore (2011). “Did the Federal Reserve's MBS Purchase 
Program  Lower  Mortgage  Rates?”  Journal  of  Monetary  Economics,  Vol.  58  (July):  
498–514. 
Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen (2011). “The Effects of Quantitative 
Easing  on  Interest  Rates:  Channels  and  Implications  for  Policy.”  Brookings  Papers  on 
Economic Activity, no. 2: 215–65. 
Li,  Canlin,  and  Min  Wei  (2012).  “Term  Structure  Modelling  with  Supply  Factors  and  the 
Federal  Reserve’s  Large  Scale  Asset  Purchase  Programs.”  Finance  and  Economics 
Discussion  Series  2012–37.  Washington:  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
System, May. 
Vickery, James and Joshua Wright (2013). “TBA Trading and Liquidity in the Agency MBS 
Market.” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy Review, Forthcoming. 
Wright, Jonathan H. (2012). “What Does Monetary Policy Do to Long-Term Interest Rates at 
the Zero Lower Bound?” NBER Working Paper Series 17154. Cambridge, Mass.: National 
Bureau of Economic Research, June. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
