Njuguna Ndung’u: New Cheque Clearing Cycle 
Remarks  by  Prof  Njuguna  Ndung’u,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya,  during  the 
announcement of the T+1 Cheque Clearing Cycle, Central Bank of Kenya, Nairobi, 31 July 
2013. 
 Mr. Jeremy Awori, Chairman, KBA 
The Deputy Governor, Central Bank of Kenya 
Ladies and Gentlemen; 
It is my great pleasure to welcome you all to the Central bank of Kenya. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Today  marks  another  important  milestone  in  the  enhancement  of  the  Cheque  Clearing 
Process in the Automated Clearing House. 
Since  1998,  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya  has  worked  towards  modernizing  the  National 
Payment Systems. This journey started with the automation of the Clearing House, through 
the  introduction  of  the  Magnetic  Ink  Character  Recognition  (MICR)  technology  and  the 
Electronic  Funds  Transfer  (EFT)  payments.  These  initiatives  resulted  in  the  reduction  of 
clearing  time  from  fourteen  (14)  days  to  the  current  two  (2)  days.  Other  milestones  in  the 
modernization  process  include  the  successful  launch  of  the  Kenya  National  Payments 
System  Framework  and  Strategy  Document  in  September  2004,  the  Kenya  Electronic 
Payments  and  Settlement  System  (KEPSS),  in  July  2005  and  authorization  of  the  mobile 
payments platforms to enhance financial inclusion, in 2007. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
KEPSS  implementation  helped  phase  out  the  previous  paper-based  inter-bank  settlement 
system  and  completely  transformed  the  management  of  liquidity  in  the  banking  industry. 
Currently, KEPPS processes, real time, a daily average of over 7000 transactions valued at 
KES 86 billion. 
In 2008, the Central Bank of Kenya in conjunction with Kenya Bankers Association (KBA), 
initiated  the  modernization  of  the  cheque  clearing  payments  system,  which  was  aimed  at 
mitigating  various  risks as  well  as  enhancing  efficiency,  with  three  key  deliverables  two  of 
which  are  the  Cheque  Truncation  system  and  the  Reduction  of  Cheque  clearing  cycle  to 
T +2. 
The Cheque Truncation System and the T+2 Clearing Cycle were achieved within the agreed 
time, in 2011 and 2012 respectively. These measures have contributed tremendously to the 
significant reduction in cheque-related frauds as well as increasing the efficiency of cheque 
payments. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The  introduction  of  Cheque  Truncation  enabled  the  whole  of  Kenya  to  become  a  “One 
Clearing Zone”. This meant that cheques drawn in Nairobi, upcountry and remote zones e.g. 
Moyale, would be processed within the T+2 clearing cycle, thus saving customers time and 
transport costs. 
Thus,  the  implementation  of  cheque  truncation  system  has  delivered  on  improving  the 
efficiency  of  the  clearing  process,  reducing  the  cost  associated  with  handling  physical 
cheques and reducing the clearing period. 
More recently, we have witnessed additional initiatives to enhance efficiency in the cheque 
clearing  process.  For  example,  with  effect  from  1st  July,  2012,  KBA  waived  commissions 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
charged on cheques cleared from upcountry and remote bank branches thus reducing the 
cost  of  clearing  cheques.  Prior  to  cheque  truncation,  bank  branches  in  the  country  were 
divided into local, upcountry and remote zones. 
On 16th January 2012, (KBA) issued a circular effectively reducing the clearing period to 2 
clearing days (T+2). In so doing the Association passed on the benefits of cheque truncation 
to banking customers and the public in general. In June 2013, the automated clearing house 
processed  1.5  million  cheques  valued  at  Kes  175.1  billion.  Due  to  the  reduced  clearing 
period, beneficiaries received their funds a day earlier to finance their economic activities. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The final deliverable initiative of the cheque truncation project is to reduce the clearing period 
to  1  clearing  day  (T+1).  Today,  I  am  happy  to  announce  that  we  have  achieved  this 
deliverable that is T+1 clearing cycle, which takes effect on 19th August, 2013. This means 
that banks will be moving to the one day cheque clearing cycle, which will shorten the time it 
takes for banks to process cheques. 
By  further  reducing  the  clearing  period,  banking  customers  will  benefit  by  accessing  their 
funds at a much shorter time to conduct economic activities. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The continued systematic modernization of the payments and settlements systems is aimed 
at enabling the country’s payment system to attain international standards and ensure that 
Kenya becomes a financial hub in the region as well as the preferred investment destination. 
Furthermore,  a  fundamental  policy  objective  for  payments  modernization  remains  the 
achievement  of  safety,  efficiency  and  effectiveness  of  the  payment  system  as  well  as 
promoting access and inclusion to financial services. To achieve these objectives, the Bank 
works  in  close  liaison  with  the  Government,  the  Kenya  Bankers  Association  (KBA),  the 
financial sector in general and other stakeholders. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
As we make this important announcement, may I take this opportunity to sincerely thank the 
KBA, who has been an instrumental player and partner in the modernization of the National 
Payment System as a key stakeholder in Kenya’s banking industry. We are thankful for their 
role  in  facilitating  and  supporting  the  success  of  the  automation  and  improvement  of  the 
National  Payment  System.  Indeed,  the  Central  Bank  remains  committed  to  creating, 
nurturing and strengthening partnerships with all stakeholders in the banking industry. 
Finally,  I  would  like  to  assure  you  all  that  the  Central  Bank  will  continue  to  provide  a 
supportive  regulatory  environment for  banks  and  other financial  institutions  to  do  business 
and to improve the payment systems. 
Thank you all for your attention 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
