Amando M Tetangco, Jr: The Philippine economy – primes for a 
sustainable and solid growth 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (the central 
bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  Euromoney  Philippine 
Investment  Forum,  Manila, 
12 March 2013. 
 Secretary Cesar Purisima, other government officials, Mr. Tony Shale, CEO of Euromoney 
Institutional Investor Asia, distinguished leaders and members of the business and investor 
community, honored guests, ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon. 
Over the recent period, there has been a welcome spate of rosy and positive commentaries 
on the Philippine economy. 
We have been described as an emerging Asian tiger. 
The venerable New York Times has labeled the Philippines as the economic bright spot in 
Asia. 
The World  Bank  has  observed  that  macroeconomic  stability  is  now  the  new  normal  in  the 
Philippines. 
The IMF has singled out the Philippines for being the only country whose growth forecast it 
has upgraded. 
The  IMF  2013  growth  forecast  was  set  at  4.7 percent  earlier  on  but  was  revised  twice  to 
reach 6 percent this January.1 
The IMF is not the only multilateral financial institution that has upgraded the growth forecast 
of the Philippine economy. 
The  World  Bank  upgraded  its  outlook  on  the  Philippines’  2013  economic  growth  from 
5 percent (October) to 6.2 percent (December).2 
The  Asian  Development  Bank  likewise  raised  its  earlier  2013  forecast  of  4.8 percent 
(April 2012) to 5.5 percent 6 months later (October).3 
These  assessments  are  consistent  with  the  series  of  sovereign  credit  rating  upgrades 
received  by  the  Philippines  even  as  the  credit  ratings  of  many  other  countries  have  been 
downgraded.  In  fact,  it  could  be  said  that  the  financial  markets  have  already  voted  the 
Philippines as investment grade as evident in the pricing of our credit default risk in the same 
range as investment grade economies. 
All  these  assessments  were  driven  mainly  by  the  solid  performance  of  the  Philippine 
economy across various metrics. These include: 
• 
• 
• 
Robust and broad-based economic growth; 
Low and stable inflation; 
Strong external payments position; 
 
                                                
1 
IMF Statement at the Conclusion of the 2013 Article IV Consultation Mission to the Philippines, Press Release 
No. 13/21, January 23, 2013 
2  The World Bank East Asia and Pacific Economic Update December 2012 
3  Asian Development Outlook 2012 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Sound and stable banking system; and 
Much improved fiscal performance. 
• 
• 
These macroeconomic conditions did not happen by chance. Far from it. In fact, these trends 
are all the more noteworthy in that they are happening against a backdrop of persistent and 
strong headwinds in the global economy. 
The progress in the economic front is the outcome of prudent and disciplined monetary and 
fiscal  policymaking.  And  these  conditions  are  sustainable  because  of  strong  and  well-
grounded policy frameworks in place. These include: 
1. 
is  committed 
to  sound 
fiscal  policy.  The  government 
The  government 
is 
appropriately  focused  on  strengthening  the  quality  of  fiscal  adjustments.  It  has 
increased  spending  for  critical  social  priorities  and  economic  infrastructures  while 
keeping a watchful eye on the medium-term objective of fiscal consolidation. 
The government continues to pursue a reform agenda that is aimed at raising the 
economy’s flexibility and unlocking the country’s growth potential. 
A  forward-looking  monetary  policy  framework  that  has  helped  strengthen  our 
commitment to non-inflationary economic growth. We have met our inflation target 
for  the  past  consecutive  four  years  (2009–2012),  even  as  the  economy’s  engines 
have powered ahead; 
An enhanced policy toolkit that is geared to respond to the challenges brought about 
by strong capital inflows; 
Finally,  supervisory  and  regulatory  practices  that  are  benchmarked  against 
international best practices. This is reflected in well-capitalized and better-governed 
banks  that  are  able  to  efficiently  perform  financial  intermediation  and  risk 
management. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
There are therefore fundamental reasons to believe that continued macroeconomic discipline 
and reforms can push the growth trajectory further to a path that will allow the economy to 
not  only  survive  the  global  headwinds  but  to  adapt  and  to  thrive  in  a  more  challenging 
operating environment. 
As  we  are  aware  of  the  headway  that  has  been  made,  we  are  equally  mindful  of  the 
challenges and the risks to the favorable economic outlook. I can assure you that there are a 
lot of “responsible adults” in the room. These are policymakers who are attentive to the overt 
as well as the underappreciated risks to the Philippine growth story. 
What are the challenges? What are the latent pressure points in the economy? Let me cite 
three major ones, from the BSP’s standpoint: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
In this challenging period of very strong capital flows and expectations of continuing strong 
capital flows, or as one economist has called it the whipsaw of huge capital movements, the 
question is – do monetary authorities still have the firepower and yet be market-friendly in 
their policy responses? 
To this, my response is yes. The BSP has recognized long ago the need to deploy a deep 
toolkit in addressing the contemporary challenges confronting emerging market central banks 
that are at the receiving end of strong capital flows. It has used a variety of instruments to 
achieve  low  and  stable  inflation,  prevent  excessive  volatility  in  the  exchange  rate  and 
maintain broad financial stability. 
Managing capital flow surges – an issue repeatedly mentioned this morning 
Ensuring financial stability 
Going the distance with structural reforms 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
As  a  result  of  BSP’s  signature  circumspection,  the  evidence  suggests  that  the  sizable  FX 
inflows have not led to significant adverse macroeconomic and financial consequences. 
• 
Reserve accumulation in response to the surges in capital inflows does not appear 
to have led to excessive money creation. 
The  limited  impact  of  capital  flows  on  monetary  aggregate  growth  suggests  that 
sterilization policies have been broadly effective. 
Credit  growth  has  not  contributed  to  macroeconomic  imbalances,  as  inflation  has 
remained low. 
  A second – and related – challenge is the need to ensure continued financial stability. 
The recent global financial crisis showed that sole focus on price stability is not sufficient to 
attain macroeconomic stability. Policymakers need to deliver more than stable prices if they 
are  to  achieve  sustained  and  stable  growth.  Price  stability  does  not  guarantee  financial 
stability. The BSP, therefore, is attentive to pressure points that could impact on both price 
stability and financial stability. 
To ensure financial stability we have utilized prudential measures to manage capital inflows 
and moderate, if not prevent, the build-up of excesses in specific sectors and in the banking 
system.  Prudential  policies  are  the  instrument  of  choice  and  employed  as  the  first  line  of 
defense against financial stability risks. 
Given the current regime of low interest rates – driven in large part by the surge of foreign 
capital into domestic financial markets and the limited absorptive capacity of the economy in 
the short term – the BSP is keeping a watchful eye on developments in the asset markets. 
We pay particular attention to what is happening in the equity and property markets, as these 
markets are interest-rate sensitive and could be prone to bubbly behavior. 
We see that while activity in these markets has been buoyant, the key indicators are growing 
broadly within trend, reflecting both cyclical as well as structural or fundamental forces. It is 
also important to note that indebtedness in the Philippines is still quite low. Domestic credit-
to-GDP ratio at 50.4 percent (Q4 2012) still ranks one of the lowest in the region.4 This would 
suggest  that  the  risk  of  excessive  leverage  is  less  and  the  threat  to  financial  stability  is 
likewise lower, should asset prices correct. 
The third challenge involves going the distance in the pursuit of the reform agenda. 
1. 
We are implementing the capital adequacy framework of Basel III in January 2014. 
We  will  also  be  closely  studying  the  other  building  blocks  of  the  Basel  III  reform 
agenda  to  see  how  and  when  we  can  incorporate  these  into  domestic  regulatory 
environment. 
Capital market reform will be a priority. This will include ensuring that an appropriate 
market infrastructure is in place. The infrastructure will not only improve the quality 
of markets, which will help mitigate financial stability risk. But infrastructure will also 
promote the absorption of the inflows, which will ultimately lead to an expansion of 
the economy. By improving financial intermediation in the system, a well-functioning 
capital market will help unlock the economy’s productive potential and strengthen its 
capacity to withstand shocks. 
2. 
Right now, we see an economy that is on an even keel, on surer footing, poised for higher 
growth, riding on a momentum of change that offers the promise of not only stronger growth 
but also one that is more inclusive and more durable. 
                                                
4  Note: Latest available: Indonesia 40.2; Malaysia 133.3; Singapore 151.8; Thailand 129.4; Japan 221.2; China 
153.1; Korea 104.1 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
The challenge is to keep the momentum of positive change strong. The appropriate response 
to  current  favorable  winds  is  not  to  sit  back  and  relax,  not  to  pop  champagne  corks  as 
William  asked  this  morning,  but  to  treat  them  as  an  ideal  opportunity  to  strengthen  the 
underpinnings  of  the  economy’s  foundations.  The  BSP  will  strive  to  have  monetary  policy 
that will provide an environment where credit and liquidity growth will remain supportive of 
economic growth while maintaining price stability. We will also continue to work on reforms 
that will deepen the financial system. We will continue to monitor financial and asset markets 
and  be  responsive  to  emerging  risks.  We  will  continue  to  work  with  the  government  in 
pushing the agenda for reforms to ensure macroeconomic stability.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
