Masaaki Shirakawa: The roles, missions and challenges of the central 
bank 
Speech  by  Mr  Masaaki  Shirakawa,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  Japan  National 
Press Club, Tokyo, 25 January 2013. 
 Introduction 
Today, I am very pleased to appear before the venerable Japan National Press Club. The 
first public speech that I gave as the Governor of the Bank of Japan was at this venue, just 
one month after my appointment. We have experienced many things in the five years since 
then,  and  central  banks  around  the  world,  including  the  Bank  of  Japan,  seem  to be going 
through the most turbulent times. 
Looking  back  on  the  spring  of  2008,  I  still  remember  my  hesitation  to  embrace  a  view 
expressed  during  a  meeting  between  G-7  finance  ministers,  central  bank  governors,  and 
major financial institutions – held on the day after my appointment – that the worst might be 
over. In fact, one of the largest U.S. investment banks, Lehman Brothers, went bankrupt in 
September  of  that  year.  This  led  to  extremely  high  stress  levels  in  international  financial 
markets,  and  global  economic  activity  fell  off  the  cliff.  The  last  months  of  2009  saw  the 
European  debt  crisis,  which  was  to  subsequently  intensify  in  waves,  erupt  in  Greece. The 
financial  crises  that  occurred  around  the  globe  strengthened  the  risk-averse  attitude  of 
investors, leading to heightened demand for the yen as a safe haven. Accordingly, the yen’s 
exchange  rates  staged  a  turnaround  from  a  depreciating  trend  into  2007,  and  the  yen 
appreciated  rapidly.  Furthermore,  in  March  2011,  we  experienced  a  most  tragic  disaster  – 
the Great East Japan Earthquake. Needless to say, these events affected Japan’s economy 
in the most profound manner. Meanwhile, in a slightly different vein but just as important as 
these three events is the rapid aging of the population that Japan’s economy is experiencing, 
and  the  procrastination  relative  to  making  the  necessary  adjustments  to  this  situation  is 
giving  rise  to  various  vexing  issues,  including  the  decline  in  growth  and  deterioration  in 
government finances. 
Central banks around the world, including the Bank of Japan, have done everything they can 
in response to these events. When faced with a potential breakdown of market functioning, 
the  time-honored  course  of  action for  central  banks  is to  act  as the  “lender  of  last  resort”. 
Following this principle, central banks made every effort to stabilize financial markets and the 
financial  system,  thereby  averting  a  repeat  of  the  Great  Depression  of  the  1930s. 
Nevertheless, given the enormity of debt incurred during the global credit bubble preceding 
the crisis, global economic recovery remains anemic more than four years after the collapse 
of Lehman Brothers. In metaphorical terms, one could say that, even if the acute symptoms 
of the crisis are cured, we have not been able to put behind us the chronic symptoms arising 
from paying off excessive debt. 
Looking  at  monetary  policy,  short-term  interest  rates  are  effectively  at  zero  in  many 
developed economies, including Japan. Central banks’ liquidity provision and balance sheets 
have also expanded to unprecedented levels. In addition, they are expanding the range of 
assets they would buy. The Bank of Japan is buying not only government securities, but also 
risk  assets  such  as  commercial  paper,  corporate  bonds,  exchange-traded  funds,  and  real 
estate investment trusts. In spite of mobilizing these measures – the so-called non-traditional 
policy  measures  by  central  banks  of  developed  economies  including  the  Bank  of  Japan  – 
economic recovery is far from satisfactory, as I noted a moment ago. Issues differ from one 
economy  to  another.  For  example,  the  United  States  and  Europe  are  suffering  from  high 
unemployment. The unemployment rate in the euro area stands at 11.8 percent, and in the 
United States, despite coming down from its peak, the rate is at 7.8 percent. In the case of 
Japan, the unemployment rate had risen only modestly, and is relatively low compared with 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Europe or the United States, standing at 4.1 percent. On the other hand, inflation in Japan is 
low,  and  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  consumer  price  index  (CPI)  is  around 
0 percent.  Japan  has  not  shaken  off  deflation.  Meanwhile,  in  all  developed  economies  the 
importance  and  long-term  benefits  of  fiscal  consolidation  and  structural  reforms  aimed  at 
enhancing competitiveness are appreciated, but their implementation tends to lag, reflecting 
pains that initially accompany these items. Against this backdrop, demands and expectations 
on central bank policies are more heightened than ever. 
As you know, the debate on monetary policy has never been so lively as that seen in recent 
months. In addition, the Bank of Japan introduced additional steps at this week’s Monetary 
Policy  Meeting  to  provide  monetary  accommodation  in  a  decisive  manner  –  namely,  the 
“price stability target” and the “open-ended asset purchasing method”. The Bank also issued 
a  joint statement  with  the  government on  strengthening  policy  coordination.  Although I  am 
aware  of  the  fact  that  your  interest  in  these  measures  is  running  high,  I  have  already 
explained  them  in  detail  at  the  press  conference  following  the  Meeting  and  elsewhere.  In 
view of this, my speech today carries the title “The Roles, Missions, and Challenges of the 
Central Bank”. I will spend about two thirds of my allotted time talking about what a central 
bank is and the remaining one third on the Bank’s most recent decisions; hopefully, this will 
enhance  the  public’s  understanding  of  the  decisions  in  a  broader  context.  It  would  be  my 
greatest  pleasure  if,  by  describing  the  essence  of  central  banking,  I  could  succeed  in 
providing  any  useful  input  for  people  who  are  contemplating  issues  related  to  monetary 
policy and the Bank. 
Four episodes illustrating the role of the central bank 
I. 
Now, what does a central bank do? In order to answer this question, I would like to start by 
referring  to  three  well-known  quotes  on  central banking. The first  is  by the  U.S.  comedian 
Will Rogers, who enjoyed enormous popularity in the 1920s and 1930s. He compared central 
banking with the fire and the wheel, calling these the three greatest inventions of mankind. It 
may be a bit of an exaggeration to count central banking as one of the three great inventions, 
but the quote conveys how important the central bank is to the lives of people. The second 
quote is from William McChesney Martin, who served as the Chair of the Board of Governors 
of the Federal Reserve System for nearly 20 years in the 1950s and 1960s. He said that the 
role of the central bank is to “[take] away the punch bowl just when the party is getting good”. 
The third quote is from Helmut Kohl, the German Chancellor who oversaw the reunification of 
East and West Germany. “As the Federal Chancellor, I sometimes have a problem with the 
Bundesbank. As a citizen, I’m glad that it exists.” The last two remarks refer to the role of the 
central bank, relating this to its independence. 
Instead of using these figurative remarks, one could approach the question from a systematic 
angle and say that the central bank pursues “price stability” and “financial stability”. Looking 
at  central  bank  laws  around  the world,  the objectives  of the  organization  written  into  them 
reflect the historical influences at the time of their adoption, and tend to be more complex 
and somewhat ambiguous in older laws. Nevertheless, the overwhelmingly prevailing trend 
over  the  last  20  years,  including  the  Bank  of  Japan  Act,  is  to  establish  two  pillars:  “price 
stability”  and  “financial  system  stability”.  I  also  believe  that  the  pursuit  of  these  two  is  the 
fundamental role of the central bank. At the same time, these abstract ideas alone cannot 
give a good idea of what role the central bank is actually playing in the economy. 
Having said this, in the following sections, I will try to illustrate the roles and missions of the 
central bank by looking at specific episodes from the last five years. I will attempt to take up 
as many aspects of a central bank’s operations as possible. The episodes are the Lehman 
shock, the European debt crisis, the Great East Japan Earthquake, and the rapid aging of 
Japan’s economy. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Lehman shock 
Let  me  begin  with  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers  in  September  2008,  which  sent  huge 
shockwaves  throughout the global financial  market. This  event  showed  that real  economic 
activities are significantly affected by impairment of the financial system. The stability of the 
financial  system  is  akin  to  the  air  around  us,  although  its  importance  is  usually  taken  for 
granted. Nonetheless, it is one of the most important factors in the smooth functioning of the 
economy. 
This  episode  demonstrated  the  many  roles  played  by  central  banks.  The  first  and  most 
evident was their role as the “lenders of last resort”. The Bank of Japan also acted promptly 
as the lender of last resort. In Japan, the problem was most acute in the funding market for 
U.S. dollars. In a very short period of time, both financial institutions and non-financial firms 
were finding it difficult to secure dollar funds. Perceiving this problem, the Bank also supplied 
dollar funds in the Japanese market – the dollars being obtained from the Federal Reserve 
through foreign exchange swap arrangements. The yen interbank market, meanwhile,  was 
relatively stable, but as the conditions in the commercial paper and corporate bond markets 
rapidly  deteriorated,  reflecting  concerns  over  credit  risk,  the  Bank  decided  to  purchase 
commercial  paper  and  corporate  bonds  in  the  market.  This  was  an  unusual  action  for  a 
central bank, in that it resulted in the bank incurring credit risk of individual firms. 
The  second  role,  which  may  not  be  glamorous  but  which  I  wish  to  emphasize,  was  the 
central banks’ catalytic role in improving the payment and settlement systems. For example, 
six years before the Lehman shock, in September 2002, a system was introduced that linked 
the two settlement legs of foreign exchange transactions, e.g., the dollar and yen legs in the 
case  of  settling  dollar-yen  trades.  The  disruptions  in  the  financial  markets  caused  by  the 
collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers  would  have  been  much  larger  if  such  a  system  were  not  in 
place before the event. Central banks, including the Bank of Japan, played a leading role in 
the six years leading up to the launch of the system. 
The third role was to prevent bubbles and ensure the stability of the economy and financial 
system. Looking at the economic stagnation after the Lehman shock, one is confronted with 
the  question  of  why  an  extraordinary  credit  bubble  was  allowed  to  form  into  the  middle  of 
2000s, which was the root cause of the global financial crisis. In this regard, it is often said 
that the policy responses of the Federal Reserve after the bursting of the bubble were more 
aggressive  than  those  of  the  Bank  of  Japan.  Nevertheless,  when  one  examines  the 
economic performance of the United States and Japan over the six years after the bursting of 
their respective bubbles, recovery in the United States in terms of real GDP is more sluggish 
than that of Japan in the 1990s. A precise comparison of economic performance is beside 
the  point.  The  important  lesson  from  the  experiences  of  the  two  economies  is  that,  when 
borrowing by firms and households ballooned, resulting in a credit bubble, the consequences 
were quite serious. When a bubble bursts, firms and households are forced to prioritize their 
debt pay-downs. In the case of this particular episode, this resulted in reduced investment 
and  consumption,  depressing  economic  activity  more  generally,  and  brought  about  a 
prolonged  period  of 
the 
overwhelmingly  prevailing  view  overseas,  before  the  collapse  of  the  most  recent  credit 
bubble, especially among the members of academia and policy makers in the United States 
was  that  aggressive  monetary  policy  could  adequately  deal  with  the  consequences  of  the 
collapse of bubbles. In other words, “mopping up” after the fact was regarded as important. 
The  reason  why  monetary  policy  remained  loose  during  the  bubble  was  partly  because 
prices were stable. This was the case both for the United States and Japan. In Japan, prices 
rose  by  only  fractions  of  1  percent  in  1987  and  in  1988. While  it  was  true  that  credit  was 
expanding  and  asset  prices  were  rising  rapidly,  there  was  no  recognition  of  the  risk  that 
economic  stability  in  the  long  term  could  be  compromised  through  such  accumulating 
imbalances.  Of  course,  the  causes  of  bubbles  are  complex,  and  sometimes  can  only  be 
attributed to people jumping on the bandwagon. Bubbles do not result solely from monetary 
easing,  and  they  cannot  be  completely  prevented  through  good  financial  regulation  and 
It  may  seem  unbelievable 
in  hindsight,  but 
low  growth. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
supervision. Having said that, I must also stress that appropriate monetary policy, as well as 
adequate regulation and supervision, do have important roles to play in preventing bubbles 
or  an  excessive  build-up  of  debt.  In  this  regard,  what  I  find  notable  is  that  there  was  a 
remarkable  shift  in  conventional  wisdom  regarding  bubbles  and  monetary  policy  over  the 
course of just five or six years. Furthermore, I feel that we tend to forget the fact that bubbles 
and financial crises have happened repeatedly. One must, therefore, remain humble when 
taking the wheel of policy. 
European debt crisis 
The second event that I wish to take up is the European debt crisis. As we know, this crisis 
emerged  following  the  extensive  revision  of  past  fiscal  balance  statistics  by  the  Greek 
government.  Adding  to  the  three  roles  of  the  central  bank  that  I  have  just  mentioned 
regarding the Lehman shock, there are a few facts and lessons to be learned with respect to 
the European debt crisis regarding the relations and interactions between the central bank 
and markets, governments, and society at large. 
The first is the importance of fiscal prudence. While it was widely viewed that confidence in 
fiscal  sustainability  would  be  essential  to  maintaining  confidence  in  the  currency,  the 
European debt crisis demonstrated that fact in real time. When government finances become 
unsustainable,  the  options  to  correct  this  are,  conceptually,  fiscal  consolidation,  default  of 
government debt, or inflating away the real value of debt. If the government defaults, or if it 
will not pay its debts, financial institutions that hold government debt would see their capital 
eroded,  and  in  the  extreme,  people  would  lose  confidence  in  the  safety  of  bank  deposits, 
which are debts of banks. Even if the situation does not deteriorate that far, banks would cut 
back on lending to the private sector and the real economy would suffer as a result. If the 
central  bank  would  then  buy  government  debt  in  order  to  prevent  such  damage,  the 
consequent excessive issue of money would result in inflation. In all the cases, the value of 
the currency would be impaired. In sum, confidence in the currency hinges on the prudent 
management of government finances over the medium to long term. 
The second is the appropriate distance between the central bank and financial markets. The 
fluctuations  in  government  bond  yields  since  the  introduction  of  the  euro  starkly  illuminate 
this issue. In the euro area, there was an expectation that the economic fundamentals of the 
member  countries  would  converge  through  the  introduction  of  the  single  currency. 
Accordingly, the government bonds of the member countries quickly came to enjoy terms of 
issuance  mirroring  those  of  Germany.  For  over  ten  years,  bond  yields  for  the  peripheral 
economies, including Greece, Ireland, and Portugal, remained at the same level as that of 
Germany. However, when the yields began to rise, they did so significantly. Looking at the 
yield  spread  over  Germany,  while  the  Greek  spread  may  be  a  little  extreme,  the  Spanish 
spread was just 0.7 percent three years ago. At its widest, this reached 6.4 percent in late 
July 2012 and now stands at 3.5 percent. Even if I will have to reserve my judgment on what 
the normal spread is, the experience shows that confidence – the determinant of spread – is 
fragile. 
Third, there is the issue of the interaction between central bank actions and society at large. 
Since the beginning of the crisis, market sentiment repeatedly shifted between optimism and 
pessimism. When tensions arose, the European Central Bank (ECB) supplied funds to the 
market so as to stabilize financial markets. When those actions succeeded in mitigating the 
tensions,  there  was  a  loss  of  momentum  regarding  reforms  that  were  discussed  under 
market duress. As a result, tensions returned and the ECB had to inject more liquidity. This 
was  repeated  over  the  last  three  years.  Liquidity  injection  by  the  ECB  is  a  policy  to  “buy 
time”. Structural reforms in the economy and government finances must be pursued during 
the bought time. This is a difficult balancing act, in which the central bank must maintain the 
stability of the economy and the financial system while keeping enough momentum in society 
for implementing reforms. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
These experiences and lessons from the European debt crisis seem to offer rich material for 
us in Japan to contemplate regarding the role of the central bank. 
Great East Japan Earthquake 
The third event to examine when considering the role of the central bank is the tragic Great 
East Japan Earthquake. The earthquake confirmed the vital role played by the central bank 
in  maintaining  the  essential  physical  integrity  of  the  financial  system  infrastructure. 
Confidence in the central bank faces a severe test when a disaster strikes, and in order to 
pass that test, the bank must succeed in guarding the physical in addition to the functional 
stability  of  the  financial  system  and  the  markets  of  the  economy.  As  we  know,  the  tremor 
struck just before 3PM on a Friday, as financial institutions were winding down the week’s 
business. As a result, there was very little remaining activity in the market, but the Bank took 
steps to ensure that all settlement of yen funds for the day would be completed without any 
disruption. On the following Monday, the Bank cut short its Monetary Policy Meeting to one 
day,  and  with  a  view  to  preventing  negative  effects  on  the  real  economy  from  the 
deterioration  in  business  confidence  and  heightened  risk  aversion  in  financial  markets, 
decided to increase its purchase of financial assets (mostly riskier assets). It also supplied 
ample funds to the market to prevent disruptions in the financial markets. The offer of funds 
amounted to 21.8 trillion yen on that Monday alone. Meanwhile, the BOJ-NET, which is the 
backbone  of  the  Japanese  payments  system,  functioned  without  a  hitch.  Furthermore,  the 
Bank took care to make sure that damaged banknotes and coins – for example, those swept 
away by the tsunami and soaked in water – could be exchanged as quickly as possible by 
setting up temporary exchange desks and sending extra staff to the stricken areas. 
In a country like Japan, which is prone to earthquakes, it is important to maintain the physical 
integrity of infrastructure. The Bank believes that it was able to discharge its responsibilities 
in the wake of the earthquake. The Bank has deployed significant resources to this end. It is 
now in the process of further enhancing its business continuity planning, including responses 
to potentially deadly earthquakes in the South Sea Trough and in the Tokyo area. 
Rapid aging of Japan’s population 
The last theme I’ll use to illustrate the role of central banking is the rapid aging of Japan’s 
population. The reason why I look at aging in relation to the role of central banks is because 
it offers insights into the implications of the potential growth rate, which is a given in the short 
term with respect to the conduct of monetary policy. Economic developments determined by 
the supply side of the economy and other real factors are beyond the direct control of the 
central  bank. While  the  central  bank  hopes  to  positively  influence  the  supply  side  through 
bringing  about  a  stable  financial  and  economic  environment,  monetary  policy  tries  to 
influence prices and economic activity through acting upon the demand side – the spending 
decisions of economic agents. When demand lies below the potential of the economy, there 
is a negative output gap. When demand lies above the potential of the economy, there is a 
positive  output  gap.  Currently,  the  negative  output  gap  in  Japan  is  about  2  percent,  and 
during the process of closing this gap, growth will accelerate. When the gap is closed, growth 
will be in line with the increase in the potential of the economy – in other words, the potential 
rate of growth. The problem faced by Japan’s economy is that this potential growth rate is 
gradually  declining.  To  a  large  part,  this  decline  is  brought  about  by  aging,  which  is 
progressing  at  a  speed  heretofore  unequaled  by  any  other  economy.  The  aggregate 
economic  activity  of  an  economy  is  determined  by  the  number  of  people  working  and  the 
amount of output produced by each working person, i.e., value added per worker. In the case 
of Japan, if one assumes that the present rates of labor participation for gender and age will 
remain stable, the numbers of workers will decline at an annual rate of –0.6 percent during 
the 2010s. In other words, from the perspective of the number of workers, real GDP is going 
to  decline  at  an  annual  rate  of  –0.6  percent.  This  is  a  very  strong  headwind.  Meanwhile, 
looking  at  the  rate  of  increase  in  value  added  per  worker,  the  average for G-7  economies 
over the last 20 years is 1.3 percent. For Japan, the figure is 1.5 percent for the relatively 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
good times between 2000 and 2008. These numbers enable us to make a calculation of the 
potential growth rate, which is below 1 percent. 
I  do  not  wish  to  say  here  that  low  growth  is  inevitable.  Demography  cannot  be  changed 
quickly.  Nevertheless,  it  is  possible  to  raise  the  growth  potential  by  changing  the  many 
elements that can be influenced by deliberate actions. First of all, the number of workers can 
be  increased  by  raising  the  labor  participation  rate  of  women  and  elderly  people.  For 
example,  if  by  2030  the  participation  rate  of  women  increases  to  the  level  now  seen  in 
Sweden, the participation rate of the 60 to 64 age group is raised to the current level of the 
55 to 59 age group, and there is an in-line increase in participation by people aged 65 and 
older,  the  labor  supply  during  the  2010s  will  increase  by  0.2  percent  annually,  not  
–0.6 percent  as  I  mentioned  a  short  while  ago.  Meanwhile,  in  order  to  accelerate  the 
increase in the value added per worker, it is essential to develop goods and services that are 
in  demand  both  domestically  and  abroad,  and  build  successful  businesses  on  them.  For 
example,  in  terms  of  cultivating  domestic  demand,  businesses  must,  in  a  timely  manner, 
provide services that fulfill new potential demand arising from aging. In order to encourage 
businesses  to  take  up  such  a  challenge,  there  is  a  need  to  aggressively  create  a  more 
favorable environment through such means as deregulation, for example. If growth potential 
is  enhanced  through  these  efforts,  the  business  outlook  will  improve  and  inflation  will 
gradually become higher. 
II. 
Overcoming deflation as early as possible and achieving sustainable growth 
with price stability 
Following  these  views  on  the  roles  of  the  central  bank,  let  me  now  turn  to  the  challenges 
faced by central banks. Of the many challenges, the greatest for Japan and hence the Bank 
of Japan is obviously to overcome deflation as early as possible and return to the sustainable 
growth  path  with  price  stability.  The  Bank  realizes  the  utmost  importance  of  meeting  this 
challenge, and thus has pursued aggressive monetary easing. 
There are two elements to the Bank’s decision at the Monetary Policy Meeting held earlier in 
the week. 
“Price stability target” and the “open-ended asset purchasing method” 
The first is the introduction of the “price stability target”, at 2 percent. The Bank recognizes 
that the inflation rate consistent with price stability on a sustainable basis will rise as efforts 
by  a  wide  range  of  entities  toward  strengthening  competitiveness  and  growth  potential  of 
Japan’s economy make progress. Based on this recognition, the Bank sets the price stability 
target at 2 percent in terms of the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI. Under the price 
stability target specified above, the Bank will pursue monetary easing and aim to achieve this 
target  at  the  earliest  possible  time.  Taking  into  consideration  that  it  will  take  considerable 
time  before  the  effects  of  monetary  policy  permeate  the  economy,  the  Bank  will  ascertain 
whether there is any significant risk to the sustainability of economic growth, including from 
the accumulation of financial imbalances. 
The second element is the introduction of the “open-ended asset purchasing method”. The 
Bank will pursue aggressive monetary easing, aiming to achieve the above-mentioned price 
stability target, through a virtually zero interest rate policy and purchases of financial assets, 
as long as the Bank judges it appropriate to continue with each policy measure respectively. 
As the Bank has already announced, the size of the current Asset Purchase Program is set 
to increase by nearly 40 trillion yen over the course of this year. Furthermore, the Bank has 
introduced  from  the  beginning  of  this  year  a  scheme  to  provide  financing  to  financial 
institutions, up to the amount of net increases in lending at each financial institution. More 
than 15 trillion yen would be provided through this scheme by the spring of 2014. Meanwhile, 
with  respect  to  the  Asset  Purchase  Program,  after  completing  the  current  purchasing 
method,  from  January  2014,  the  Bank  will  introduce  a  method  of  purchasing  a  certain 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
amount of financial assets every month without setting any termination date. The outlook just 
published  by  the  Bank  for  the  CPI  inflation  rate  for  the  2014  fiscal  year  is  0.9  percent 
excluding  the  effects  of  the  increase  in  the  Consumption  Tax  rate.  From  the  beginning  of 
2014, for  some time,  the  Bank  will  buy  financial  assets totaling  about  13  trillion  yen  every 
month, including 2 trillion yen in long-term Japanese government bonds. Consequently, the 
size  of  the  Asset  Purchase  Program  alone  will  increase  by  about  10  trillion  yen  over  the 
course of 2014, and the size of the Program is expected to stay at that level from then on. 
The Bank will thus provide strong monetary stimulus without interruption. 
Achieving the target 
A few moments ago, I explained that the Bank recognized that the inflation rate consistent 
with  price  stability  on  a  sustainable  basis  would  rise  as  efforts  by  a  wide  range  of  entities 
toward  strengthening  competitiveness  and  the  growth  potential  of  Japan’s  economy  made 
progress, and, based on this, the Bank decided to set the price stability target at 2 percent in 
terms  of  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI.  Looking  back  at  historical  rates  of 
inflation,  the  average  year-on-year  inflation  rate,  even  during  the  bubble  years  –  the  latter 
half  of  1980s  –  was  1.3  percent.  If  one  takes  the  average  between  1985  and  2011,  the 
average inflation rate was 0.5 percent. In order to bring about sustainable growth with price 
stability, I believe that serious efforts from a wide range of entities are essential. As I noted in 
relation  to  the  rapid  aging  of  the  population,  it  is  not  appropriate  to  become  pessimistic 
regarding  the  possibility  of  raising  the  growth  potential.  Indeed,  quite  often  we  see 
comparisons  of  current  real  GDP  levels  with  that  before  the  Lehman  shock,  and  find  that 
Japan, like many European economies, is still undershooting the level of GDP seen in 2007. 
In contrast, when one looks at the current per capita real GDP, major economies including 
the  United  States  are  still  below  2007  levels,  but  Japan’s  output  loss  is  relatively  small. 
Furthermore,  in  terms  of  the  rates  of  increase  in  GDP  per  worker,  while  the  U.S.  and 
European economies have not regained 2007 levels, Japan has surpassed its 2007 level. In 
other words, Japan realizes low growth as an economy because its workforce is declining, 
but  each  Japanese  worker  is  contributing  more  to  increasing  output  at  a  faster  pace  than 
U.S. or European workers. This shows that not only is it inappropriate to become excessively 
pessimistic,  we  should  actually  be  more  confident  about  our  potential.  If  I  may  add  a  few 
words  on  the  recent  joint  statement  between  the  Japanese  government  and  the  Bank  of 
Japan regarding the strengthening of policy coordination, there is a clear recognition of the 
role  that  each  entity  will  play:  the  Bank  will  pursue  aggressive  monetary  easing  and  the 
government will formulate and promote measures for strengthening competitiveness and the 
growth potential of Japan’s economy. It also states that the government and the Bank will 
work  together  to  overcome  deflation  early  and  achieve  sustainable  economic  growth  with 
price stability. This is very significant. 
The importance of flexibility in monetary policy 
The decision on the “price stability target” by the Bank was both a decision on a “target” and 
a  flexible  inflation  targeting  framework.  As  such,  let  me  also  explain  the  latter  element. 
Obviously, the effects of monetary policy permeating economic activity and thereafter prices 
require  a  considerable  and  variable  time  lag.  The  conduct  of  monetary  policy  has  to  be 
flexible by examining various risk factors, including those related to financial imbalances, in 
addition  to the  assessment  of  current  developments  and  outlook for  economic  activity  and 
prices,  from  the  perspective  of  achieving  sustainable  growth  with  price  stability.  Such 
understanding has been widely shared around the globe; particularly, in the aftermath of the 
global financial crisis, major economies of the world have come to emphasize flexibility in the 
conduct of monetary policy – by, for example, publicly articulating the importance of paying 
due attention to financial system stability. Over the last year, there has been an increasing 
awareness of such understanding in Japan as well. 
In  such  circumstances,  it  is  judged  transparent  and  appropriate  to  use  the  expression, 
“target”, in order to explain the Bank’s thinking on price stability. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
The  purpose  or  principle  of  monetary  policy  by  the  Bank  is  clearly  stated  in  the  Bank  of 
Japan  Act  –  namely,  it  is  “achieving  price  stability,  thereby  contributing  to  the  sound 
development of the national economy”. Obviously, therefore, the Bank will manage monetary 
policy as guided by this aim and pursue the new price stability target set under this aim. With 
a view to achieving sustainable growth with price stability, the Bank will examine the current 
state of the economy and prices and the outlook thereof, and ascertain whether there is any 
significant risk, including financial imbalances. Such a policy framework is the same as those 
currently adopted by many other central banks. In this regard, if one is to call this “flexible 
inflation targeting”, the Bank’s framework may be regarded as such. 
Looking at the practices of overseas central banks, irrespective of the adoption of inflation 
targeting, no specific date has been set for achieving price stability. The Bank’s view on price 
stability is based on a similar understanding in that the Bank aims to achieve price stability 
on a sustainable basis. 
The  Bank  is  implementing  the  easing  measures  that  I  have  just  explained,  and  aims  to 
achieve the target at the earliest possible time. The effects of easing will be amplified and 
brought forward if and when firms and other economic agents aggressively take advantage 
of the accommodative financial conditions. Nevertheless, it is not possible at this juncture to 
accurately predict how and when that would happen. In addition, considering that Japan has 
a  prolonged  experience  of  low  inflation,  it  also  is  not  possible  to  foresee  the  potential 
changes in the behavior of firms and households as the year-on-year rate of increase in the 
CPI  accelerates.  Furthermore,  the  severity  of  the  government’s  fiscal  problems  makes  it 
difficult to gauge the reactions of domestic and overseas financial markets. The Bank is fully 
committed to pursuing achievement of the target as early as possible, under the aim stated in 
the  Bank  of  Japan  Act,  i.e.,  “achieving  price  stability,  thereby  contributing  to  the  sound 
development  of  the  national  economy”.  In  my  view,  this  policy  stance  of  the  Bank’s  is 
consistent  with  the  prevailing  views  of  the  Japanese  people.  For  example,  looking  at  the 
results  of  the  Opinion  Survey  on  the  General  Public’s  Views  and  Behavior,  which  is 
conducted  by  the  Bank  on  a  quarterly  basis,  the  desirable  “price  stability”  for  most  of  the 
population is a state where prices would rise gradually, reflecting the steady improvement of 
the economy in a balanced manner, accompanied by increases in employment and wages 
and improvements in corporate profitability. In other words, Japan must return to a path of 
sustainable growth with price stability. 
The last words: organizational aspects of the central bank 
Today, I have dwelled on the roles of the central bank and the most recent decisions by the 
Bank.  Before  concluding,  let  me  make  a  few  points  on  the  basis  for  the  central  bank  to 
appropriately discharge its responsibilities, referring to some issues that are often outside the 
public’s  awareness.  In  particular,  I  would  like  to  look  at  the  organizational  aspects  of  the 
central  bank.  At  every  firm,  at  every  organization,  business  is  carried  out  by  individual 
people,  and  the  corporate  culture  –  including  the  tacit  knowledge  formed  through  tradition 
and the interactions of members – is most important. There are four aspects that I wish to 
note. 
Firstly,  a  central  bank  is  a  bank.  Accordingly,  the  day-to-day  banking  operations  are  very 
important.  Monetary  policy,  including  the  asset  purchases  that  I  have  explained,  is 
dependent on banking operations such as settlement services, management of haircuts, etc. 
These  banking  operations  are  not  simple  and  mechanical  affairs.  It  is  often  said  that  “the 
devil  is  in  the  details”,  and  the  knowledge  and  feel  for  banking  operations  is  essential  to 
understanding subtle financial developments. This is all the more so in times of crises. 
Secondly,  in  a  point  related  to  the  importance  of  the  banking  operations  that  I  have  just 
mentioned,  the  management  of  policies  –  both  monetary  and  financial  system  stability 
policies  –  must  fully  mobilize  the  information  and  intuition  obtained  from  all  corners  of  the 
broad central banking functions. Unfortunately, the importance of the wide-ranging functions 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
of  the  central  bank  is  not  widely  recognized.  In  fact,  media  attention  on  the  Bank  is 
concentrated on monetary policy. While monetary policy is indeed important, this is only one 
piece of the many functions performed by the central bank for the purpose of maintaining the 
stability  of  the  economy  and  the  financial  system.  Looking  at  the  allocation  of  time  in  my 
day-to-day schedule as governor, and also at the headcount for various functions, I feel that 
these functions as a whole are contributing to maintaining the stability of the economy and 
the  financial  system.  With  the  increasing  emphasis  placed  on  macroprudential  policy 
following  the  Global  Financial  Crisis,  many  central  banks  are  vested  with  macroprudential 
policy by themselves or with other institutions. This reflects not only the fact that the central 
bank  is  connected  to  various  aspects  related  to  finance,  including  the  macroeconomy, 
financial markets, financial institutions, and payments and settlements infrastructure, but also 
the fact that the bank is sensitive to information that is obtained from those connections. 
Thirdly,  the  central  bank  must  stick  to  a  constant  learning  process  in  the  broadest  sense. 
Looking at what happened over the course of the last 25 years, including the formation and 
bursting of the bubble, financial crisis, deflation, and rapid aging, few economies had initially 
correctly realized the significance of these developments. Nevertheless, it eventually became 
evident that such changes in the environment had profound effects on the economy. In this 
regard,  the  central  bank  must  always  be  sensitive  to  the  changes  in  the  economy  and 
financial  markets,  and  be  humble  enough  to  listen  to  people  with  different  viewpoints  and 
opinions. Considering that the central bank must make decisions that affect the lives of many 
people in a world full of uncertainties, the importance of humility cannot be overstated. 
Lastly, a global perspective is essential. While it may sound obvious in a world of globalizing 
economies and finance, I again stress this point here. A global perspective means not only 
that what happens overseas will affect Japan, but also that what happens in Japan will affect 
other economies. In hindsight, Japan has faced many problems ahead of other developed 
economies – for example, the bursting of the bubble and the financial crisis and subsequent 
low  growth  and  rapid  aging.  The  Bank  of  Japan  has  been  trying  to  explain  to  the  outside 
world  its  experiences  and  the  lessons  to  be  garnered  from  them,  but  it  was  not  easy  to 
convince the overseas audience until the bubbles burst in the United States and in Europe, 
and even now, I have a feeling that our points are not fully driven home. Japan and the Bank 
must put more efforts into this, in terms of global intellectual exchanges. 
Last year, the Bank of Japan reached 130 years old. Over its long history, the operations of 
the  Bank  have  changed  and  it  now  faces  new  challenges.  In  any  case,  the  Bank  aims  to 
contribute to the stable and sustainable development of Japan’s economy through achieving 
the stability of prices and the financial system. 
Thank you for your attention.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
