Manuel Sánchez: The impact of monetary policies of advanced countries 
on emerging markets 
Remarks by Mr Manuel Sánchez, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Mexico, at the 55th annual 
meeting of the National Association of Business Economics, San Francisco, 9 September 2013. 
 I  am  honored to  participate  in  the  annual  meeting  of the  National  Association  of  Business 
Economics. Thank you for inviting me to speak on the implications of monetary policies of 
advanced countries for emerging markets. As you know, this topic is at the heart of policy 
making in most central banks today. 
The monetary expansion undertaken in developed countries in recent years has no parallel 
in history, and its repercussions, already significant, are still to unfold in full. Moreover, recent 
indications by the U.S. Federal Reserve that it might soon start unwinding its unconventional 
policies have raised a host of questions regarding the characteristics of this and the following 
stages of its overall exit strategy. 
As  a  consequence,  the  financial  boom  emerging  markets  enjoyed  during  previous  years 
stemming from lax monetary stances in industrialized countries has begun to be displaced by 
tighter financial conditions and increased uncertainty. From the beginning, not all emerging 
economies were affected equally, and this will likely continue to be the case in the future. But 
for  the  sake  of  simplicity,  I  will  try  to  comment  and  conjecture  on  general  trends  in  these 
countries, without neglecting international differences. 
Specifically,  I  will  organize  my  remarks  as  follows.  First,  I  will  examine  the  effects  of 
expansionary  monetary  policies  of  the  main  advanced  economies  on  emerging-market 
countries; second, I will discuss the implications of the recent change in market sentiment; 
and third, I will identify some policy challenges faced by emerging economies in dealing with 
this rapidly changing international environment. 
Previous financial boom 
From the outset of the big financial crisis, the central banks of major industrialized countries 
have implemented a variety of unconventional policies, first, to restore confidence in financial 
markets and, later, to boost economic growth. The leader in these efforts has been the U.S. 
Federal Reserve, which widened its liquidity facilities significantly and, by the end of 2008, 
reduced its policy interest rate to near zero. 
Afterwards,  the  Fed  began  purchasing  financial  assets  from  the  market,  notably  Treasury 
bonds  and  mortgage-backed  securities,  in  successive  programs  referred  to  as  quantitative 
easing (QE). Also, it has provided forward guidance expressing its intention to maintain the 
Fed funds rate near zero for an extended period of time, conditioned on certain parameters 
related  to  unemployment  and  inflation  expectations.  These  policies  seek,  among  other 
objectives, to influence market expectations and thereby reduce long-term real interest rates. 
Other  advanced  economies  have  followed  suit,  employing  similar  features  of  monetary 
accommodation. 
QE  is  widely  seen  to  support  private  spending  and  employment,  while  stable  inflation 
expectations  are  maintained.  The  domestic  transmission  channels  may  encompass  first,  a 
rise in perceived consumer wealth through increases in asset prices; second, the rebalancing 
of investor portfolios toward assets that are imperfect substitutes of those purchased by the 
Fed, typically with higher risk-adjusted returns, thereby making funds cheaper across many 
productive areas; and third, signaling that policy interest rates will remain low for an extended 
period of time, contributing further to the flattening of the yield curve. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
So  far,  the  expansionary  monetary  policies  in  the  United  States  and  other  advanced 
countries  have  been  effective  at  normalizing  the  functioning  of  financial  markets  and,  to  a 
certain extent, still open to debate, firming the pace of the ongoing economic recovery.1 
While these benefits were important, there have been some costs and risks associated with 
the unusually lax monetary policies of advanced countries, among which the following stand 
out.  First,  negative  real  interest  rates  punish  savings  and  reward  investment,  thereby 
implying a transfer of resources from the former activity to the latter. To counter this effect, 
savings  institutions  such  as  mutual  and  pension  funds  may  seek  higher  returns  in  risky 
assets with price implications that may not be fully understood. 
Second,  extraordinarily  benign  financial  conditions  may  have  created  an  environment  of 
over-leveraging  and  excess  lending,  potentially  endangering  the  stability  of  the  financial 
system. Third, the size and composition of the asset purchases may have distorted resource 
allocation,  postponing  balance  sheet  adjustments  and  crowding  out  other  financial-market 
players.  Fourth,  the  independence  of  monetary  policy  from  fiscal  policy  may  have  been 
damaged.  Finally,  central  banks  are  navigating  in  uncharted  waters  and,  hence,  risks  of 
higher inflation may emerge if eventual monetary unwinding is inadequate.2 
To  different  degrees,  these  costs  and  risks  have  impacted  emerging  economies.  In 
particular, ample global liquidity and the search for yield translated into a financial boom for a 
variety  of  asset  classes,  including  local  government  bonds,  currencies,  private-sector 
borrowing, stocks, and real estate. 
Perhaps  the  most  widespread  and  prolonged  effect  in  emerging  economies  was  the 
continuous down-shift in yield curves, in tandem with that of the United States, often more 
significant, pushing domestic interest rates for different maturities to all-time lows. There is 
evidence that the effect on other asset prices, on average, has also been considerable.3 
An important vehicle for the financial boom in emerging-market economies was a surge in 
capital  inflows  by  nonresidents,  observed  since  2010.  Although  annual  flows  were  not 
unprecedented,  this  time  their  persistence,  and  more  importantly,  their  composition, 
characterized by a higher proportion of portfolio funds, were distinctive features. 
Although there is no agreement on the relative importance of the determinants of the capital 
flows, it is generally accepted that they include the prolonged monetary easing of advanced 
countries,  a  reduction  of  global  risk  aversion,  which  may  not  be  independent  from  the 
previous factor, and the idiosyncratic characteristics of recipient countries, such as prospects 
for economic growth and financial stability, as well as the depth and flexibility of their financial 
markets.4 
The  available  information  suggests  that,  as  a  general  rule,  capital  inflows  did  not  result  in 
widespread  financial  imbalances  in  emerging  economies.  For  example,  most  of  them 
maintained relatively stable ratios to GDP in their current accounts, public-sector debt, total 
external  debt,  and  domestic  credit  to  the  private  sector.  Nevertheless,  there  seem  to  be 
 survey”, Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 28(4). 
Long”,  speech  to  the  Economic  Club  of  Canada,  Toronto,  Ontario,  December;  and  Caruana,  J.  (2012), 
“International  monetary  policy  interactions:  challenges  and  prospects”,  speech  given  at  the  conference 
“CEMLA-SEACEN, Punta del Este”, Uruguay, November. 
1  For a review of the effectiveness of QE, see Martin, C. and C. Milas (2013), “Quantitative easing: a sceptical 
2  For an exposition of these and other risks and costs, see, for example, Carney, M. (2010), “Living with Low for 
4  Two empirical analyses of the factors that explain capital flows are Ghosh, A.R., et al. (2012), “Surges”, IMF 
Working Paper, WP/12/22, January; and Fratzscher, M. (2011), “Capital flows, push versus pull factors and 
the global financial crisis”, ECB Working Paper Series, No. 1364, July. 
3  For an estimation of the international impacts of QE, see Chen, et al. (2012), “International spillovers of central 
bank balance sheet policies”, BIS Paper No. 66, October. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
vulnerabilities in some countries, such as significant FX exposure, as well as indications of 
overheating  and  excess  credit,  and  additional  information,  especially  as  monetary  tapering 
proceeds, may uncover further financial imbalances in these or other nations.5 
The beginning of unwinding 
Since last May, there has been a negative change in investor sentiment towards emerging 
markets, expressed in sharp asset-price drops and heightened volatility. Notably, currencies 
have trended weaker, and domestic long-term interest rates have risen to levels not seen in 
more  than  a  year.  Also,  portfolio  capital  inflows  from  nonresidents  have  slowed  and  even 
reversed, while the duration of foreign holdings of local-currency government bonds in some 
countries appears to have fallen. 
The trigger of this shift in sentiment has been the market perception that the Federal Reserve 
will soon start reducing its asset purchases and conclude the program by the first half of the 
following year. Additionally, the estimated time before the first hike in the Fed funds rate has 
been  shortened.  The  revisions  in  expectations  were  fueled  by  the  Fed’s  forward  guidance 
referenced  to  inflation  and  unemployment,  official  statements  suggesting  the  proximity  of 
tapering,  and  incoming  data  revealing  improved  economic  conditions  and  prospects  in  the 
United States. 
As a result, the U.S. yield curve has steepened, reflecting a higher term premium and thus 
probably  the  expectation  of  a  greater  supply  of  long-term  bonds,  as  well  as,  to  a  lesser 
extent,  anticipation  of  increases  in  the  Fed  funds  rate.  Other  industrial  nations  have  also 
seen similar effects.6 
As  was  the  case  during  the  recent  boom,  the  interest-rate  reaction  in  many  emerging 
markets  has  been  more  pronounced  than  in  the  United  States,  revealing  additional  risk 
premiums which may be related to credit and liquidity. Also, increased global risk aversion 
and deteriorated prospects for economic growth in emerging economies could be additional 
negative factors. 
The  possibility  that  the  Fed  may  soon  start  reducing  its  asset  purchases  is  a  welcome 
development.  The  exceptionally  loose  monetary  policy  in  the  United  States  and  other 
advanced countries cannot be indefinitely sustained, as the costs and risks involved may be 
rising  and  surpass  the  intended  benefits.  Additionally,  the  decision  to  taper  will  ultimately 
hinge  on  an  improved  U.S.  economic  outlook,  which  should  benefit  the  rest  of  the  world, 
including emerging markets. Finally, tapering may facilitate the adjustment required in certain 
economies afflicted by financial disequilibria which, at least in part, may have resulted from 
the abundance of foreign funds. 
However,  a  complete  exit  from  the  extraordinary  monetary  accommodation  in  the  United 
States could be complex indeed. There is no precedent from which to derive lessons. It will 
likely  take  several  years.  Implementation  of  the  strategy  should  be  neither  premature  nor 
delayed  relative  to  the  pace  of  economic  recovery.  Since  future  changes  in  the  course  of 
monetary  policy  or  forward  guidance  cannot  be  ruled  out,  maintaining  credibility  could  be 
challenging. To these difficulties, add the peculiarities of the eventual exit strategies of other 
advanced countries. 
Therefore,  the  future  external  scenario  for  emerging  markets  will  necessarily  involve 
considerable  uncertainty.  Successive  stages  of  monetary  unwinding  in  the  United  States 
 and asset prices: Evidence from emerging Asia”, Journal of Banking and Finance, 37. 
5  See IMF (2013), Global Financial Stability Report, chapter 1, IMF; and Tillmann, P. (2013), “Capital inflows 
6  For an explanation of the risk premia decompression effect on U. S. long-term interest rates, see Banco de 
México (2013), Informe sobre la Inflación Abril – Junio 2013, August.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
could  imply  further  downward,  not  necessarily  smooth  adjustments  in  asset  prices.  At  the 
same time, capital flows from abroad may become much scarcer and even exhibit a sudden 
stop. 
Nevertheless, portfolio adjustments may affect emerging economies differently according to 
their  fundamentals.  In  general,  it  is  reasonable  to  expect  that  countries  with  better 
macroeconomic foundations and growth outlooks may suffer less than those characterized 
by  financial  imbalances,  stringent  external  funding  needs,  overheated  economies  or  asset 
price bubbles. 
Policy challenges 
What  can  policymakers  in  emerging  markets  do  in  order  to  deal  with  the  challenges  of 
tapering and the eventual exit from expansionary U.S. monetary policy? Given globalization, 
developments in and measures adopted by large industrial countries have always affected 
the performance and policy options of emerging economies. 
The present situation is no exception. If the era of unusually cheap foreign funding is indeed 
over,  economic  policy  in  emerging  economies  must  accept  that  reality,  not  be  oriented 
towards  trying  to  cancel  it,  any  attempt  at  which  would  inevitably  fail  and  likely  result  in 
financial instability. 
A more reasonable policy objective for emerging economies may be to seek to prevent and 
manage possible problems derived from more restrictive conditions. As each country may be 
affected differently, the importance of specific alternatives will vary internationally. 
During the boom, discussions on the role of economic policy were centered on how to deal 
with  abundant  capital  inflows  from  abroad.  Consistently,  emerging-market  policy  actions 
focused  on  either  discouraging  capital  inflows  or  attempting  to  mitigate  possible  adverse 
effects from those funds. 
Measures within the first category included reducing policy interest rates to levels probably 
inconsistent  with  price  stability  and,  most  notably,  enforcing  a  variety  of  capital  controls. 
Examples  within 
reserves, 
strengthening  the fiscal stance,  and  improving the  supervision  and  prudential  regulation  of 
the financial system.7 
Each measure implied possible benefits and limitations, and many countries adopted actions 
from  both  approaches  to  varying  degrees.  However,  in  general,  even  when  international 
differences are taken into account, the economies that showed more resilience to negative 
effects from the external bonanza seem to have been those that relied more heavily on the 
second approach, thus preserving their economic fundamentals. 
For  the  tightening  period,  countries  can  now  contemplate  and  some  are  already  applying 
analogous  policy  alternatives,  either  by  directly  seeking  to  discourage  capital  outflows  or 
preventing the surge of possible systemic problems. As in the boom years, well-known trade-
offs can resurface. For example, a floating exchange rate regime can serve as a buffer to 
upward  pressures  on  domestic  interest  rates,  and  an  exchange-rate  peg  may  result  in 
sharper steepening of the yield curve. 
As  is  usually  the  case,  there  is  no  unique  recipe  for  successful  economic  policy  for  all 
countries. However, adequate regulation and continuous surveillance of the financial system 
and markets are essential defenses for turbulent times. Also, the pursuit of price stability and 
sound  fiscal  balances  and,  in  extreme  cases  the  provision  of  liquidity  under  appropriate 
involved  accumulating 
the  second  group 
international 
 7  For a discussion of these policy choices during the boom, see Sánchez, M. (2013), “Emerging economies in 
the face of financial bonanza”, speech delivered at CEMLA’s IX Meeting of Monetary Policy Managers, May, 
available at https://www.bis.org/review/r130527g.pdf. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
conditions by central banks, complete the foundation for stability. Finally, structural reforms 
to enhance productivity growth and investment opportunities are an essential complement for 
attracting stable capital flows.8 
Concluding remarks 
To  conclude,  the  unconventional  policies  implemented  by  major  industrialized  countries’ 
central banks during the last five years fueled abundant capital inflows and low funding costs 
in emerging markets. As a result, asset prices rose considerably, and although widespread 
financial imbalances have not been evident, some countries did experience overheating and 
price bubbles. Newly available information may uncover further financial imbalances in these 
or other nations. 
The market perception that the Federal Reserve will soon start tapering asset purchases has 
resulted  in  significant  reductions  and  heightened  volatility  for  asset  prices  in  emerging 
markets.  Given  the  complexity  of  what  could  be  the  overall  exit  strategies  of  the  United 
States and other advanced nations, emerging economies necessarily face a highly uncertain 
external  scenario.  Despite  foreseeable  adverse  financial  conditions,  it  is  reasonable  to 
expect  that  global  portfolio  adjustments  may  affect  countries  less  severely  if  they  enjoy 
stronger economic fundamentals. 
Finally, emerging economies have different policy options at their disposal in the unwinding 
phase,  especially  to  try  to  prevent  and  manage  the  surfacing  of  possible  problems.  The 
strengthening  of  the  foundations  of  domestic  financial  stability  and  the  implementation  of 
structural  reforms  to  enhance  productivity  growth  and  investment,  have  never  been  more 
important.  
                                                
8  For liquidity provision, the sound approach may be to follow Bagehot’s advice: to only loan to solvent banks 
and  against  good  collateral  and  at  penalty  interest  rates.  See  Bagehot,  W.  (1873),  Lombard  Street:  A 
Description of the Money Market, London. H.S. King. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
