Már Guðmundsson: Iceland’s crisis and recovery and current 
challenges 
Speech by Mr Már Guðmundsson, Governor of the Central Bank of Iceland, at 
a  conference,  organised  by  the  French-Icelandic  Chamber  of  Commerce; 
Paris, 28 February 2013. 
 President of Iceland, Ambassadors, Ladies and Gentlemen 
Nearly all of you probably know that almost 90% of Iceland’s banking sector 
failed  in  the  first  week  of  October  2008.  This  fact  is  well  established  in  the 
minds  of  scholars  of  the  international  financial  crisis.  What  is  probably  less 
well known is that at that point, Iceland was already on its way into a recession 
after an unsustainable boom and serious overheating during 2005–2007 and a 
currency  crisis  in  the  first  half  of  2008.  The  banking  collapse  and  the 
associated wealth loss and further currency depreciation made the recession 
worse, of course, but so did the recession that hit the global economy in the 
fourth quarter of 2008. 
That autumn, two separate but interrelated sub-stories of the recent Icelandic 
saga converged in a tragic grand finale. These are: 
1. 
Iceland’s  boom-bust  cycle  and  problems  with  macroeconomic 
management  in  small,  open,  and  financially  integrated  economies. 
This is a story that has played out many times around the globe, and 
many of its elements have been seen before in Iceland. It might have 
been  somewhat  more  extreme  this  time  around,  but  it  wasn’t 
fundamentally different. 
The rise and fall of three cross-border banks operating on the basis of 
EU legislation (the European “passport”). This story was much more 
unique,  as  involved  the  first  banking  crisis  in  Europe  since  the  EU 
single market was formed in the early 1990s. 
2. 
Today I am not going to talk about the build-up to these events, and I will have 
little  to  say  about  the  second  story.  I  have  expanded  on  both  in  various 
publications and speeches that I can refer you to. Instead, I am going to talk 
about what happened to the Icelandic economy afterward – its deep recession 
and its recovery – and then reflect on some of the policy challenges that still 
face us. 
But let us first reflect on the distance that has been travelled since that fateful 
autumn of 2008. Iceland’s financial sector was crumbling, and the authorities 
had to take extraordinary measures to keep basic domestic banking services 
up and running, including letting the international part of the banking system 
go  into  resolution,  wiping  out  all  equity  in  the  banks,  and  removing  their 
managers.  Many  expected  the  sovereign  to  default  on  its  obligations,  which 
would have left Iceland shut out of international capital markets for years. A 
key  aspect  of  crisis  management  was  therefore  to  ring-fence  the  sovereign 
from the failing banks and minimise the socialisation of private sector losses. 
And  Iceland  was  well  on  its  way  into  its  deepest  post-war  recession,  where 
GDP  contracted  by  12.5%  from  its  peak  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  2007  to  its 
trough  nine  quarters  later,  in  the  first  quarter  of  2010.  It  fell  from  an 
unsustainable peak, of course, but the drop was spectacular nonetheless. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Where are we now, almost five years later? 
First,  there  is  hardly  any  talk  of  a  potential  sovereign  default  any  more:  the 
public  sector  has  a  primary  surplus,  the  overall  deficit  is  estimated  to  have 
been around 2% of GDP last year, government debt as a share of GDP is on a 
downward trajectory, and Iceland has investment-grade ratings from all three 
major rating agencies. 
Second,  we  are  far  advanced  in  rebuilding  a  domestically  oriented  financial 
sector. The new domestic banks, which were built on the ashes of the three 
failing cross-border banks, are profitable, well capitalised, liquid, and with non-
performing  loan  ratios  that,  although  still  high  due  the  crisis,  are  falling  to 
normal levels as private sector debt restructuring progresses and the economy 
recovers. 
 
 
Third,  the  economy  has  indeed  recovered,  as  can  been  seen  on  Figure  1a. 
The  economy  has  been  growing  since  the  second  quarter  of  2010,  and 
unemployment  has  fallen  from  a  peak  of  over  9%  to  around  5½%.  And  as 
Figure 1b shows, this year Iceland is projected to be among the world’s five 
fastest-growing  advanced  economies,  with  growth  estimated  at  2.1%, 
although that is due in part to the recent slowdown in many other advanced 
countries. And the prediction is that Iceland will grow even  faster during the 
next two years, or in the range of 3½–4% per annum, causing the slack in the 
economy to disappear and the unemployment rate to fall to around 4%. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
to  remember 
this  question,  we  need 
 
So how did we get here? 
In  answering 
that  subsequent 
developments  were  not  only  a  function  of  the  negative  shocks  hitting  the 
economy  in  2008  but  also  a  function  of  the  policy  responses.  In  addition  to 
crisis management vis-à-vis the failing banks, which I have already mentioned, 
the  economic  programme 
in 
co-operation with the IMF played a key role. It provided financing amounting to 
5.1 billion US dollars, which helped to build FX reserves. The programme had 
three  key  goals:  stabilisation  of  the  exchange  rate,  fiscal  sustainability,  and 
reconstruction of the financial sector. Comprehensive capital controls were a 
key element in the programme. 
Icelandic  authorities  developed 
that 
the 
Fig. 3 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
The  policy  responses  mitigated  the  recession  but  could  not  stop  it  from 
becoming  the  deepest  in  Iceland’s  post-war  history  and  a  severe  one  in 
international comparison as can be seen from Figure 2. Iceland was not the 
hardest  hit,  however,  as  can  be  seen 
this  slide.  Furthermore, 
developments were more or less in line with previous Central Bank of Iceland 
predictions (see Figure 3). The result was that Iceland fell significantly down 
the League of Nations. 
from 
 
The  currency  played  a  significant  role,  both  in  the  build-up  to  the  crisis  and 
during subsequent stabilisation and recovery. The currency crisis materialised 
in an over 50% depreciation of the króna over the course of 2008. It hit highly 
indebted corporate and household sectors, a large share of whose debt was 
either denominated in or linked directly to foreign currency, or linked indirectly 
to it through price indexation at a time of strong and rapid exchange rate pass-
through. The contractionary balance sheet effects of the currency depreciation 
were  therefore  substantial.  Hence  the  need  to  stabilise  the  exchange  rate, 
which was achieved in the middle of 2009. 
But the real depreciation – which took the real exchange rate to around 30% 
below its historical average for a time and left it at the current level of around 
20% below that average – compressed imports and provided some stimulus to 
exports,  thus  helping  to  turn  a  double-digit  current  account  deficit  into  an 
underlying  surplus.  But  the  stimulus  to  exports  is  limited  by  the  fact  that 
Iceland’s major export industries, such as fisheries and energy-intensive metal 
smelters, face capacity constraints that can only be lifted through investments 
that have been rather limited so far. 
 
 
 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
A  very  important  and  somewhat  novel  element  of  the  successful  policy 
response was the interplay of fiscal consolidation, monetary policy, and capital 
controls. The crisis dealt a heavy blow to government finances in Iceland, as 
can  be  seen  from  Figure  5.  The  resulting  deficit  –  10%  of  GDP  in  2009  – 
would have been much more difficult to finance in the absence of the capital 
controls that locked in both foreign financing from before the crisis and new 
domestic  saving.  However,  there  was  no  escaping  the  fiscal  consolidation 
needed to put government finances on a sustainable path, as Iceland lacked 
external  confidence  and  market  access.  It  was  a  big  effort,  as  can  be  seen 
from Figure 6a, and it started in the middle of an economic crisis, which is far 
from optimal. But monetary policy was increasingly able to give support to the 
economy after the exchange rate had been stabilised and inflation came down 
(see  Figure  6b).  And  the  scope  for  monetary  policy  to  support  the  domestic 
economy in spite of the balance of payments crisis was in turn enhanced by 
the capital controls, as can be seen from this slide, which compares short-term 
real interest rates during the recent financial crisis in Iceland with short-term 
real rates in Korea during the Asian financial crisis. 
 
 
Fig. 7 
  
 
Finally, let me say something about Iceland’s current challenges. I will mention 
three. 
The first is to bring inflation back to the 2½% target. It is currently running at 
4.8%  and  is  fuelled  by  the  weak  currency  and  wage  increases  in  excess  of 
productivity growth, which in turn are driven by good conditions in an export 
sector  that  benefits  from  the  low  exchange  rate.  Inflation  is  predicted  to  fall 
back to the target around the middle of next year, although this will depend on 
exchange rate developments. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 
 
The  second  relates  to  deleveraging,  or  reduction  of  debt  levels.  Public  and 
private debt levels are on a declining path, as can be seen from Figure 8. In 
the case of businesses in particular, a significant part of this takes the form of 
debt restructuring and write-downs. That, along with the resolution process of 
the failed banks, will reduce Iceland’s net external debt to a sustainable level 
over time (see Figure 9). This is a good thing, of course, but the deleveraging 
process  has  two  short-  to  medium-term  side  effects  that  must  be  managed. 
The first one relates the negative effect of deleveraging on domestic demand. 
The second relates to its negative effect on the exchange rate, as economic 
entities with foreign debt, little or no foreign-currency income, and no access 
to foreign credit are forced to repay foreign debt faster than is optimal for them 
and the economy. This is part of our balance of payments problem. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
That  brings  me  to  the  third  challenge,  which  is  to  break  out  of  Iceland’s 
balance  of  payments  crisis  and  lift  the  capital  controls.  Through  fiscal 
consolidation and reinforcement of its FX reserves (see Figure 10a), Iceland 
has seen a steep drop in the perceived risk of the sovereign as reflected in 
CDS spreads. Furthermore, the sovereign has been able to tap foreign capital 
markets twice, for a total of 2 billion US dollars, and use part of the proceeds 
to  repay  a  significant  part  of  the  loans  associated  with  the  IMF  programme 
ahead of schedule. FX reserves and other Central Bank FX assets currently 
cover  scheduled  sovereign  foreign  debt  repayments  beyond  2022  (see 
Figure 10b). 
 
  
The balance of payments problem that the current controls on capital outflows 
are intended to address therefore lies elsewhere. It is best demonstrated by 
Figure  11,  which  shows,  on  the  one  hand,  liquid  ISK  assets  held  by  non-
residents, which amount to 22% of GDP, and the old banks’ ISK assets, which 
will, in the absence of other action, accrue mostly to foreign residents and may 
be added to the overhang of potentially liquid offshore krónur. Given that the 
underlying current account surplus is in the region of 3–4% of GDP and that 
there are a lot of other debt repayments laying claims to it, it is clear that if 
these amounts were to be released overnight, we would be at risk of another 
currency crisis, with potentially significant financial stability implications. That 
is why these assets must be released after significantly reduced valuations in 
terms  of  foreign  currency  or  must  flow  out  over  a  much  longer  period.  The 
more  their  value  is  reduced  in  terms  of  foreign  currency,  the  faster  can  the 
controls be lifted. 
 
 
 
 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
The  Icelandic  authorities  have  a  strategy  in  place  to  lift  the  capital  controls 
gradually,  as  conditions  permit,  without  unduly  undermining  exchange  rate 
and financial stability. The strategy is currently under review. It is clear that the 
process will be significantly affected by how the króna problem associated the 
winding up of the old banks is dealt with, as an amicable solution could greatly 
expedite the removal of the controls. 
But the basic thinking will remain the same. The first element is to secure the 
framework conditions for lifting the controls, such as at least balanced public 
sector  finances,  an  underlying  current  account  surplus,  and  adequate  FX 
reserves. All of this is either in place or well on its way. The second element is 
to put in place the economic policy frameworks and prudential rules that will 
make  it  possible  for  Iceland  to  deal  with  the  risks  associated  with  free  and 
volatile  capital  movements.  That  is  also  underway.  The  third  element  is  to 
reduce the overhang of liquid offshore krónur to a safer level, either through 
release  at  a  discount  or  by  tying  the  offshore  krónur  up  in  longer  maturities 
and real investments. That is underway as well, although some are of the view 
that the process is too slow. The fourth element is to open market access and, 
through other means, generate longer-term inflows to replace the capital that 
wants  to  leave.  History  shows  that  those  who  jump  early  on  such  a 
bandwagon have a lot to gain. 
Let  me  conclude  by  saying  that  Iceland  has  made  great  strides  since  the 
autumn of 2008. The next major task is to re-integrate Iceland financially into 
the global economy, but hopefully in a safer way this time. 
Thank you very much. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
