Paul Tucker: Resolution and future of finance 
Speech by Mr Paul Tucker, Deputy Governor for Financial Stability at the Bank of England, 
at the INSOL International World Congress, The Hague, 20 May 2013. 
 Thank you very much for inviting me here today. The Bank of England has a long-standing 
interest  in  insolvency  arrangements,  including  collaboration  with  INSOL.  Drawing  on 
techniques  that  the  Bank  had  used  in  the  1930s  and  then  again  in  the  1970s  and  '80s, 
around twenty years ago we articulated the ‘London Approach’ to creditors collaborating on 
restructuring firms that are financially distressed but could have a viable future. That was the 
background to our previous Governor, Eddie George, putting the Bank's name to the INSOL 
Lenders  Principles  on  global  corporate  workouts.1  Those  principles  focus  on  large 
international non-financial  corporations.  Today  I want to update you on progress with the 
bigger and even more important challenge of ensuring that large global financial groups can 
be resolved in an orderly way without taxpayer solvency support.  
Why resolution is so very important 
I want to begin with why the work on bank resolution is so very very important. 
First, we are not going to solve the deep problem of Too Big to Fail (TBTF) without effective, 
credible resolution regimes. 
To  date  the  international  community  is  addressing  TBTF  via  a  combination  of  capital 
surcharges  for  the  largest  and  most  complex  global  firms,  and  an  overhaul  of  resolution 
regimes.  The  first  is  designed  to  reduce  the  probability  of  failure;  the  second  to  provide 
society with the means to cope with the failure of systemically important financial institutions 
(now known as SIFIs) without taxpayer solvency support. Amongst Financial Stability Board 
members, this has informally been known as the ‘bookends strategy’.2  
Absent  effective  resolution  regimes,  we  would  be  further  from  protecting  society  from  the 
risks  posed  by  the  failure  of  large  and  complex  firms.  To  reduce  the  probability  of  failure, 
capital requirements for SIFIs would end up being considerably higher – supplemented no 
doubt  by  more  radical  restructuring  of  banking  than  planned  to  date  by  any  of  the  major 
countries. 
While measures on capital resources and structure are vital complements to and enablers of 
resolution, personally I doubt that an alternative route without a resolution component would 
work in the end. As the years and decades passed, new types of financial intermediary would 
emerge  operating  outside  of  those  capital  and  structural  restrictions;  or  the  restrictions 
themselves  would  eventually  be  relaxed  or  even  lifted  entirely  as  the  spirit  of  the  times 
evolved, as happened around the world in the past. Sooner or later, society would find itself 
regretting that it had not put in place the necessary resolution regime to cope with the failure 
of systemically important financial institutions.  
In short, there is no alternative to submitting banking and its investors to the disciplines of 
capitalism – failure as well as success. We cannot afford to have banking, so central to the 
allocation of capital in market economies, semi socialised. Moreover, we need to harness the 
energies  of  bond  holders  to  monitoring  and  helping  to  contain  the  tendency  to  excess 
characteristic of bankers, over the generations, in the upswing of the credit cycle. That is not 
                                                 
1   See INSOL International (2000), Statement of Principles for a Global Approach to multi-creditor workouts. 
2   That strategy was initially set out by the Financial Stability Board in 2010, Reducing the moral hazard posed by systemically 
important financial institutions, available at http://www.financialstabilityboard.org/publications/r_101111a.pdf 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
in and of itself a guarantee of stability, but I would rather give asset managers incentives to 
help the objectives of prudential supervisors than incentives to rely on a fiscal backstop. 
Second,  effective  resolution  regimes,  capable  of  operating  across  national  borders,  are 
necessary for a healthy international monetary and financial system (IMFS). As Mervyn King 
has  said,  the  large  financial  groups  have  been  ‘international  in  life,  but  national  in  death’. 
Without effective cross-border resolution arrangements, domestic authorities are left with a 
clear incentive to take steps to cap the contingent exposure of local taxpayers, who are local 
voters. That is surely part of the backdrop to the series of measures taken by national and 
regional authorities to restrict the range of activities or structure of banking. Those measures 
need  to  be  taken  without  the  world  slipping  into  a  hard-to-reverse  balkanisation  of  the 
international financial system. Were that to happen, the breakdown in cooperation between 
sovereign  states  could  all  too  easily  give  encouragement  to  those  around  the  world  who 
would  like  to  use  protectionist  measures  to  shield  their  countries  from  the  winds  of  global 
trade.  If the international monetary and financial system relies, as it has since at least the 
collapse of Bretton Woods forty odd years ago, on the private banking system to supply the 
cross-border liquidity needed to underpin expansion of world trade, then we must ensure that 
the international banking system is safe and sound. That cannot rest solely on prophylactic 
prudential  supervision.  It  must  include  effective  arrangements  for  cross-border  resolution. 
That has been an architectural faultline in the IMFS for decades.3 
Third, across the world the operational independence of prudential supervisors4 from short-
term politics depends on credible and effective resolution regimes. Unless we can handle the 
failure of banks and other financial firms in an orderly way, it is hard for governments to tie 
themselves  to  the  mast  of  eschewing  the  temptations  of  ‘bailout’  using  taxpayer’s  money. 
That would give them an interest in the day-to-day operation of prudential supervision which, 
as experience in some countries shows, all too easily morphs into attempts to promote and 
protect ‘national’ champions; and to operate supervisory policy for short-term gain rather than 
in  the  interests  of  medium-term  stability.  In  any  countries  where  that  persists,  we  should 
expect  higher  government  bond  yields  than  otherwise,  reflecting  the  state’s  contingent 
liability for the banking sector. Unless we deliver effective resolution regimes, public finances 
will be under more pressure. 
So, summing up why the resolution reforms are so important: if you believe in solving Too 
Big To Fail, in an international financial system that is not only free but also safe, in shielding 
taxpayers  from  the  risks  in  banking,  and  in  shielding  banking  from  politics,  you  will  be 
committed to making a success of resolution.  
Thankfully,  the  extent  of  progress  since  the  2008/09  bailouts,  while  still  incomplete  and 
needing continuous political impetus, is good. 
It has involved agreement on a global model for resolution regimes capable of handling the 
largest and most complicated firms; legislation in some, but not yet enough, jurisdictions to 
embed that regime; the development of high-level resolution strategies that can be applied to 
different types of global group; concrete steps towards agreement between countries on how 
to  apply  those  strategies  across  borders  to  specific  institutions;  and  plans  for  top-level 
reviews of the adequacy of the resolution plans for each Global SIFI. If that progress has not 
been faster, which is an understandable concern, it is for the good reason that the required 
reforms  involve  an  agency  of  the  State,  the  resolution  authority,  having  powers  that  affect 
property  rights.  In  democracies,  that  is  rightly  debated  thoroughly  to  ensure  that  it  has 
                                                 
3   This  serious  faultline  in  the  international  financial  system  was  highlighted  to  the  international  community  by  a  2001 
G10/Financial Stability Forum report explaining that officials did not then have the tools to manage the orderly wind down of 
a large and complex global financial institution (LCFI). 
4   The  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision’s  Core  Principles  for  Effective  Banking  Supervision  (2012)  require  ‘the 
operational  independence,  accountability  and  governance  of  the  supervisor  [to  be]  prescribed  in  legislation  and  publicly 
disclosed, [with] no government or industry interference that compromises the operational independence of the supervisor.’ 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
legitimacy and is subject to the right checks and balances.5 The key process is, of course, the 
vetting and passage of legislation. That process is well underway in the key jurisdictions. 
Establishing the statutory regime 
In November 2011, the G20 leaders endorsed the Financial Stability Board’s Key Attributes 
for Resolution as an ‘international standard’. That term of art means that all the jurisdictions 
of the G20 are committed to incorporate the Key Attributes (KAs) regime into their domestic 
legislation.  The  US  has  largely  done  so.  The  EU  is  very  close  to  doing  so,  through  its 
Recovery and Resolution Directive. Switzerland has largely done so. Between them, this will 
account for the home countries of 24 of the 28 globally systemic banks listed by the FSB and 
the Basel Supervisors Committee last year. It is unlikely that in future decades the West will 
account for such a large share of the world’s unequivocally systemic firms. In both Asia and 
Latin America, a number of jurisdictions have made progress with putting the KA regime on 
to a statutory footing. But it is probably fair to say that not a few emerging-market countries 
are  watching  progress  in  the  EU.  Indeed,  it  is  not  an  exaggeration  to  say  that  the  EU’s 
Directive is the keystone to breaking the back of the TBTF problem.  
How?  The  toolkit  for  Resolution  Authorities  established  by  the  KAs  obviously  includes  the 
workhorse  techniques  for  resolving  standard  commercial  banks.  Either:  liquidation  with 
prompt payout to insured depositors by the Deposit Guarantee  Scheme (DGS),  commonly 
known as Liquidation and Payout (L&P). Or: what the US call Purchase & Assumption (P&A) 
– selling to a third party the distressed bank’s deposit book together with some cash injected 
by the DGS and perhaps some other good assets. 
At its simplest, P&A involves splitting the distressed bank into ‘good’ and, let’s say, ‘not so 
good’ bits. The deposit book and cash might for a while be held in a Bridge Bank controlled 
by the Resolution Authority (RA), pending sale to a purchaser. But whether or not a Bridge 
Bank  is  employed  as  a  holding  position,  the  services  to  insured  depositors  are  sustained. 
Meanwhile, the rump goes into administration, with the administrators selling what they can 
and winding down the rest.  
Those techniques are tried and tested in the US, and are the basis for resolutions of regular 
commercial banks in many other countries. They do not involve taxpayer solvency support. 
I  am  doubtful,  however,  whether  those  established  techniques  would  work  for  a  complex 
investment  bank  or  a  global  commercial  bank.  Universal  banks  are  typically  run  on  an 
integrated basis, across functions and regions, so that capital can be reallocated easily as 
opportunities shift around. It would be a nightmare to execute over a weekend a split of any 
of these groups, with multiple entities across scores of countries, into those parts providing 
services that must be sustained at all costs and a remainder that could be wound down as 
part  of  a  resolution.  Moreover,  this  is  not  just  a  matter  of  critical  versus  not-so-critical 
services. Even if, contrary to my doubts, it were possible to execute that separation in the 
midst of a crisis, winding down a complex trading book would be hugely hazardous, with very 
nasty spillovers to the rest of the financial system.  
Quite  separately,  P&A  techniques  might  also  fall  short  in  handling  the  failure  of  medium-
sized commercial banks in highly concentrated banking systems. Crudely, there may be few 
or even no potential buyers of the deposit book in such circumstances.  
That  is  the  background  to  the  so-called  ‘bailin’  technique  which,  within  the  official  sector, 
takes  its  inspiration  from  the  way  insolvency  practitioners  effect  a  capital  restructuring  of 
distressed but viable non-financial firms – for example, Chapter XI in the US. 
                                                 
5  Eg,  public  interest  pre-conditions  for  the  use  of  resolution  tools;  compensation  if  creditors  bear  losses  beyond  what  it  is 
estimated they would incur in insolvency; an independent process for valuing potential compensation, etc. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
The critical difference from a standard corporate reconstruction is that for banks and dealers 
there is not time for a negotiation lasting a month or so under the control of a judge. In the 
wider  public  interest,  swifter  action  is  needed  to  stabilise  banks,  executing  a  resolution 
strategy designed to contain the impact on stability in the financial system as a whole. Bailin 
seeks to deliver that.  
Such bailins do, of course, impose losses on creditors. But all – I repeat, all – resolution tools 
involve  creditors  and  the  Deposit  Guarantee  Scheme,  as  well  as  equity  holders,  taking 
losses. As this audience certainly knows, that is not an exotic proposition. The losses simply 
have to go somewhere. 
There  is,  however,  a  difference  between  ‘bailin’  and  other  resolution  tools.  Under  most 
traditional  bank-resolution  techniques  –  L&P  or  P&A  –  losses  for  uninsured  creditors  , 
including the DGS, are revealed only at the end of the administration of the rump, when all 
assets have been sold or run off. ‘Bailin’ works by making an ex ante, up-front judgment of 
the scale of expected losses, and by reconstructing the capital structure accordingly, without 
the destruction of value  entailed by  winding down all portfolios associated with non-critical 
services. Following the creditor hierarchy that would apply in liquidation, the various layers – 
equity, subordinated debt, senior unsecured debt etc – are written down until the losses are 
covered.  And  then  the  last  surviving  layer(s)  of  debt  are  partially  converted  into  equity  to 
recapitalise the continuing parts of the business, which is thus under new ownership. 
This  has  given  rise  to  nothing  short  of  a  revolution  in  thinking  about  possible  resolution 
strategies for SIFIs. 
Resolution strategies 
Last November the FSB issued draft Guidance on resolution strategies. Big picture, there are 
two basic strategies – Single Point of Entry and Multiple Point of Entry.  
Single-Point-of-Entry Resolution 
Single-point-of-entry resolution involves working downwards from the top company (Topco) 
in the group in an exercise that resolves the group as a whole, wherever its problems began. 
Think of it this way. Losses in subsidiaries are first transferred within the group to the Topco. 
If Topco is bankrupt as a result, the group needs resolving. Bailin can then be applied to the 
Topco’s  capital  structure:  writing  off  the  equity  and,  most  likely,  subordinated  debt;  and 
writing down and partially converting into equity the senior (bonded) debt issued by Topco. 
Those bondholders become the new owners. If Topco is a pure holding company – its assets 
comprising  only  investments  in  its  subsidiaries  –  a  number  of  advantages  follow.  The 
creditors of the operating banks and dealers are left intact; what might be called the group’s 
‘operating  liabilities’  are  protected  relative  to  the  ‘capital  liabilities’  of  Topco.  Cross-border 
problems  in  resolving  different  subsidiaries  or  branches  can  also  be  sidestepped.6    Any 
reorganistion  of  the  operating  companies  to  address  the  underlying  causes  of  the  group’s 
failure can be made in an orderly fashion after the solvency position has been stabilised via 
the bailin. 
Multiple-Point-of-Entry Resolution 
Multiple-point-of-entry resolution is what it says on the tin. Rather than resolving the group as 
a single whole, it would be split up into its parts. That is quite probably appealing for those 
global groups comprising a bundle of regional, on-the-ground commercial and retail banks, 
operated  as  separate  businesses  financially  in  distinct  legal  structures  but  with  shared 
operational and central services. 
                                                 
6   See FDIC and Bank of England (2012), Resolving Globally Active, Systemically Important Financial Institutions. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Of  course,  just  saying  ‘break  up  the  group  along  regional  lines’  does  not  amount  to  a 
resolution strategy. What happens to those regional parts? Healthy parts might be sold or be 
maintained as a residual group shorn of their distressed sister companies. Those distressed 
parts would need to be resolved, either via P&A or via bailin of the local subsidiary (if it had 
issued bonds to the market). I want to stress that last point because ‘bailin’ as a resolution 
tool  should  not  become  synonymous  with  top-down  SPE  resolutions:  an  MPE  resolution 
could involve the bailin resolution-tool being applied to some parts of the group.  
For those groups comprising a series of regional subgroups in a hub-and-spokes structure, 
there may be intermediate holding companies for each region. The preference of some of the 
regional authorities might be for a SPE resolution of ‘their’ subgroup. In other words, a MPE 
resolution  strategy  can  incorporate  SPE  resolution  being  planned  for  some  parts  of  the 
group. 
The precise approach applied to the different regional/local subsidiaries would be a matter 
for the relevant host authorities. But it should not be a mad scramble. Under the FSB KAs, 
the home authority for the group has the important role of ensuring that the operation is well 
co-ordinated and not competitive. 
Preconditions for SPE and MPE resolutions 
There is obviously a lot to be said about how to apply the two headline strategic options for 
resolving  SIFIs.  The  FSB  plans  to  finalise  its  Guidance  on  implementation  before  the 
summer holidays and so decently ahead of the Summit of G20 Leaders in September. I think 
that will need to include in particular: 
• 
groups  having  enough  loss-absorbing  capacity,  and  at  the  right  locations  in  their 
corporate structure; 
resolution  authorities  being  able  to  enforce  a  write-down  or  conversion  of  bonds 
issued in foreign jurisdictions; 
as  much  clarity  as  possible  about  the  relative  treatment  of  different  categories  of 
creditor; 
regulatory  measures  to  guard  against  contagion  in  a  world  where  bank  creditors 
take losses; 
legal,  operational  and  financial  structures  that  are  aligned  with  the  preferred 
resolution  strategy  for  a  group  and  with  sustaining  its  most  essential  financial 
services; 
effective co-ordination between home and host authorities; 
fall  back  plans,  and  frameworks  for  escalating  preparations  for  resolution  as  a 
group’s condition deteriorates. 
     Enabling effective resolution: removing barriers and structuring financial groups for 
resolution 
For  most  if  not  all  SIFIs,  steps  will  need  to  be  taken  in  order  to  ensure  that  the  preferred 
resolution strategy can be implemented. 
Sufficient loss-absorbing capacity, and its terms 
Perhaps  the  most  obvious  prerequisite  is  that  SIFIs  should  have  sufficient  bonded  debt  in 
issue  for  losses  exceeding  their  equity  base  to  be  absorbed  through  the  process  of 
resolution. This is gone-concern loss-absorbing capacity (LAC). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
This gone-concern LAC could be senior unsecured bonds or subordinated bonds.7 
Bonds issued outside the issuing firm’s home jurisdiction are going to need to include legally 
robust clauses under which holders unequivocally accept that the home Resolution Authority 
can  apply  the  bailin  tool  (and  other  resolution  tools)  to  their  investment.  If  that  cannot  be 
achieved,  gone  concern  LAC  is  going  to  have  to  be  issued  from  each  firm’s  country  of 
domicile.  
There should not be cross-default clauses in other liabilities, including elsewhere in the group 
that could be triggered by bailing in these bonds.8  
Beyond  the  terms  of  bond  issues,  the  authorities  are  going  to  need  to  decide  how  much 
loss-absorbing capacity SIFIs need to have in issue. In Europe, the draft resolution directive 
provides a framework for that. But a global discussion is needed.  
My own provisional view is that the minimum for bonded debt might need to be equivalent to 
the sum of the firm’s regulatory equity requirement plus a margin (X) less any surplus equity. 
That would mean that bailin could be used to cover losses beyond a firm’s required equity 
base up to an amount X and then to recapitalise back to the ab initio equity standard. 
In summary, the authorities are going to need to establish minimum standards for the amount 
of bonded debt – or gone-concern LAC – SIFIs have in issue, with a requirement that they 
are  capable  of  being  bailed-in  by  the  RA  of  the  jurisdiction  in  which  the  issuing  entity  is 
domiciled.  
Containing contagion (1): holders of bank bonds 
The purpose of resolution regimes is to contain disorderly disruption of the financial system. 
Equally, in order to avoid taxpayers providing solvency support, losses must fall to creditors. 
It is therefore important to ensure that the imposition of losses on creditors does not itself 
cause  systemic  distress  through  contagion.  That  will  depend  heavily  on  who  within  the 
financial system holds bank bonds.  
It  would  be  impractical  to  identify  individual  holders  of  bonds  on  the  eve  of  resolution, 
applying  case-by-case  discretion.  This  needs  to  be  addressed  through  regulatory  policy. 
Most obviously, regulators need to ensure that banks do not hold each other’s bonds, except 
for example in small amounts as part of market-making. 
Secondly,  regulators  are  going  to  need  to  ensure  that  some  investors,  for  example  life-
insurance companies, do not have concentrated exposures to bonds issued by single banks 
or to banking sectors. 
 
                                                 
7   For  groups  with  a  pure  holding  company,  senior  debt  issued  from  holdco  is  structurally  subordinated  to  claims  on  the 
group’s operating banks and dealers.  
8   The trigger for statutory resolution would be, broadly, that the conditions for the group being authorised as a bank or dealer 
were no longer met and there was no reasonable prospect of repair.  It should be underlined that what is described here is 
nothing to do with so-called ‘contractual bailin’, which has been a source of confusing distraction over the past year or so.  
‘Contractual bailin’ typically refers to bonds that convert into equity or write down under a trigger establishes purely in the 
contract documentation.  But if the trigger is the firm’s capital ratio dipping below a high threshold, the bond is in fact for 
recovery not for handling abject distress.  If, at the other end of the spectrum, the trigger is falling below a low capital ratio, 
there can be no assurance that the firm would survive in the markets long enough for the bond to be triggered before the 
firm had to go into statutory resolution.  And if the suggestion were that the contractual trigger should give the regulators 
discretion, most Resolution Authorities would want to avoid writing down or converting bonds outside the statutory resolution 
process, since that provides protections for creditors, and gives the RA protections and powers for the achievement of a 
clear statutory objective established by the legislature.  Bailin is not about a specific type of bond – a so-called ‘bailin bond’ 
– but about the application of a statutory resolution power to bonds of any kind within a statutory resolution.  ‘Bailin’ is a verb 
not a noun.  Orderly resolution will not be achieved by drafting term sheets. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Looking back on the 2007–2009 part of the crisis, those precepts should have been in place 
anyway.  In  the  UK,  it  was  alarming  that  many  medium-sized  domestic  banks  had  been 
allowed to hold each other’s bonds in what were purportedly ‘liquidity’ portfolios.9 
Contagion (2): the creditor hierarchy and depositor preference 
Preparations  for  bailin,  and  even  more  the  recent  reconstruction  of  Cypriot  banks,  have 
heightened  awareness  of  the  prospect  of  creditors  of  distressed  banks  losing  money, 
prompting  calls  for  clarity  about  the  relative  standing  of  different  types  of  creditor.  Who 
stands where in the creditor hierarchy affects the loss they incur in the event of default, and 
therefore their behaviour before default, including the return they demand to compensate for 
risk and whether they flee at the first signs of the firm weakening. 
Insured depositors are insured, pure and simple – they are covered by the relevant Deposit 
Guarantee  Scheme.  The  details  of  the  resolution  regime  do  not  affect  that.10  Nor  does 
preference  for  insured  deposits  affect  those  depositors  directly.  Rather,  it  affects  the 
exposure to loss of the DGS and thus the share of the losses having to be covered by the 
surviving parts of the industry.11  
Amongst uninsured creditors, the position of bond holders will depend on whether they are 
issued from a (pure) holding company, in which case they have a structurally subordinated 
claim on the underlying business assets, or by operating companies that also have lots of 
other  unsecured  creditors.  The  exposure  to  loss  of  bonds  issued  by  operating  companies 
are, therefore, affected by whether or not they incorporate subordination clauses. For every 
bank group, all of that will be clear. 
The  big  issue,  therefore,  is  about  uninsured  deposits.  Should  they  rank  alongside  senior 
unsecured bonds or should they be preferred?  
In the US, all deposits are preferred. There is now an active debate in the EU about whether 
or not it should introduce depositor preference and, if so, whether that should be for all or 
only some uninsured deposits? Whatever the conclusion reached by the political authorities, 
it is important that the creditor hierarchy is the same under bailin, other resolution tools, and 
liquidation.  Otherwise,  pricing  each  piece  of  debt  would  depend  upon  time-varying 
assessments of the probabilities of the various resolution tools being applied in the event of a 
firm’s bankruptcy. 
On  the  substance  of  the  issue,  I  can  see  a  case  for  both  insured  and  some  uninsured 
depositors being preferred. That would help to provide some protection, beyond the DGS, for 
users of the monetary services that banks provide via overnight and short-term deposits; it 
could provide a small degree of protection against runs; and there could be an element of 
social justice in insulating, say, small firms and charities from the first line of loss. 
But, I say ‘some’ uninsured deposits because I am doubtful whether very large, wholesale 
deposits placed at term maturities (eg billions of pounds for six months or more) should be 
preferred. They are not monetary deposits, in the sense of being transaction balances; and 
they are not placed by households or small firms or charities. Moreover, if they were to be 
preferred,  it  would  be  likely  that  a  chunk  of  bonded  finance  would  over  time  morph  into 
borrowing-instruments that had the legal form of ‘deposits’. That would increase the cost of 
any residual bond issuance. 
                                                 
9   See  Tucker,  P.  M.  W.  (2009),  The  crisis  management  menu,  “Too  little  attention  was  paid  to  core  liquidity  holdings:  a 
treasury portfolio comprising the [Floating Rate Notes] issued by other banks does not leave a distressed bank with many 
options in the face of system-wide stress.” 
 Of course, if the DGS is bankrupt and a country’s government is bankrupt, the DGS may not be able to pay out.  That is 
very serious, but it cannot be solved by the design of bank resolution regime. 
10 
11   See Tucker, P. M. W. (2012), The role of deposit insurance in building a safer financial system. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
Finally, whatever types of deposit end up being preferred, there should be no discrimination 
on grounds of location or nationality. The chosen creditor hierarchy should apply the same 
way  to  all  branches  of  a  bank  throughout  the  world.  The  Financial  Stability  Board  Key 
Attributes are clear about that.12 
I do not need to remind this audience that depositor preference would not be a guarantee 
against the relevant uninsured deposits (or the DGS) ever taking losses. But they would be 
exposed  to  loss  only  after  bonds,  as  well  as  equity,  had  been  wiped  out.  The  greater  the 
gone-concern LAC requirement for bond issuance, the lower the probability of any preferred 
deposits incurring loss. 
itself 
If  Topco 
is  bankrupt  as  a  result, 
Group structure: having LAC in the right place, and operational dependencies 
It will have been apparent from my earlier description of high-level resolution strategies that 
where  and  how  a  group  maintains  its  LAC  will  vary  somewhat  according  to  whether  the 
preferred resolution strategy is SPE or MPE.  
For SPE resolutions, sufficient loss-absorbing capacity must be at the topco. But more than 
that,  there  has  to  be  a  mechanism  for  transferring  losses  from  operating  subsidiaries, 
wherever they are in the world, to the topco. One way of doing that would be for Topco to 
guarantee  the  performance  of  the  obligations  of  its  systemically  significant  and  other  key 
operating subsidiaries. But that could not be a complete solution as it would leave the hosts 
of the group’s foreign subsidiaries with exposure to Topco being unwilling or unable to pay 
when  it  mattered.  For  that  reason,  the  LAC  of  Topco  needs  to  be  passed  down  to  the 
‘systemic’  or  otherwise  key  operating  subsidiaries,  forming  LAC  in  the  subsidiaries 
themselves. This should probably be in the form of subordinated debt issued to the Topco 
with write down triggers that would enable losses exceeding the subsidiary’s equity base to 
be pushed up to the Topco. By transmitting the losses to Topco, the operating company is 
recapitalised. 
in  a  
top-down bailin by the group’s home resolution authority of its own debt. That is the model 
set out in the paper FDIC/Bank of England issued last December.13 
For MPE resolutions, there needs to be sufficient LAC in each of the key subsidiaries that 
are manifestly relevant to global financial stability. Some of the gone-concern LAC should be 
issued  externally,  so  that  bailin  can  effect  a  transfer  of  ownership.  Beyond  that,  the  host 
authorities  of  other  subsidiaries  may  want  to  require  sufficient  externally  issued  gone-
concern  LAC,  in  order  to  be  confident  of  being  able  to  execute  a  local  resolution  if  the 
subsidiary they host is systemic locally, ie a domestic SIFI. 
To  a  greater  extent  than  with  SPE,  a  MPE  resolution  can  be  impeded  by  financial 
connections between different parts of the group, whether  arising from intergroup loans or 
from business lines, such as global payment services, that are integrated but spread across 
different  legal  entities.  In  supporting  MPE  as  a  preferred  strategy,  the  home  and  key  host 
resolution authorities will have to  satisfy themselves robustly that such interlinkages would 
not  impede  resolution  via  splitting  up  the  group.  In  practice,  that  will  mean  reducing 
intragroup exposures. 
Operational dependencies between different parts of the group are another priority where 
MPE is the preferred strategy. For example, some global commercial banking groups seek to 
exploit  economies  of  scale  and  scope  by  drawing  on  centralised  operational  services  (in 
particular related to IT and processing). MPE does not work unless those arrangements can 
survive the breakup of the group. At the very least, that entails service-level agreements and 
it  can  be  resolved 
                                                 
12   FSB Key Attributes paragraph 7.4:  “National laws and regulations should not discriminate against creditors on the basis of 
their nationality, the location of their claim or the jurisdiction where it is payable. The treatment of creditors and ranking in 
insolvency should be transparent and properly disclosed to depositors, insurance policy holders and other creditors.”   
13   See FDIC and Bank of England (2012), Resolving Globally Active, Systemically Important, Financial Institutions. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
transitional  support  arrangements  being  effected  via  enforceable  contracts.  Any  separate 
group-service  companies  need  to  maintain  sufficient  capital  and  liquidity  to  continue  to 
support  the  principal  operating  companies  before  they  are  wound  down  or  sold  to  third 
parties. And it would probably be useful to have governance arrangements that give some 
form  of  control  rights  to  the  operating  companies  over  the  service  companies  during  that 
transition.  
In broad summary, it will be apparent that, even once the statutory resolution regime is in 
place  in  all  key  jurisdictions,  many  financial  groups  are  going  to  need  to  restructure 
themselves in order to achieve resolvability – financially, legally, organisationally. Indeed, a 
group’s choice of financial and operational structure will influence which of a SPE or MPE 
resolution strategy is preferred by the home and key host authorities. These will be bespoke 
restructurings – and will be on top of the plans for systematic structural reforms of banking 
around the world (Vickers, Volcker, Liikanen, and so on). 
Cross-border co-operation 
The  final  precondition  for  success  I  want  to  highlight  is,  of  course,  effective  cross-border 
co-operation. 
For a SPE strategy, successful implementation will depend on the home authority providing 
assurances to the key host authorities so that they refrain from taking independent action. 
Instead the host authorities would rely on the home authority to give effect to a group-wide 
resolution  and,  where  necessary  under  the  law,  would  take  local  action  to  help  the  home 
authority. Host authorities are going to need to be clear about the assurances they need – 
ahead of time and during the execution of the groupwide resolution. 
For a MPE strategy, the successful implementation will require effective coordination of the 
different resolution actions undertaken by home and host authorities. Each key host authority 
needs  to  be  open  about  its  plans.  The  home  authority  needs  to  reciprocate,  ensuring  a 
joined-up, collaborative approach with no surprises.  
For  both  SPE  and  MPE  resolutions,  the  FSB  has  stipulated  that  firm-specific  cooperation 
agreements (COAGs) must be agreed amongst home and host authorities. The FDIC/Bank 
of England joint paper last year is by no means the only example of intensified co-operation 
preparing  the  way  for  those  COAGs.  Over  recent  months  there  has  been  marked 
convergence in how the world’s key authorities plan to approach resolution. This will become 
more  apparent  as  more  jurisdictions,  including  crucially  the  member  states  of  the  EU, 
legislate the KAs into their local statutory regimes.14  
Preferred paths, and fall backs 
My exposition of how the resolution work programme will be taken forward has made it clear 
that,  as  I  at  least  envisage  it,  for  each  SIFI  there  will  be  a  preferred  path.  There  are  two 
points to make about this. 
First, I favour the term ‘preferred path’ over ‘presumptive path’ because I am concerned that 
too  many  people  –  perhaps  particularly  amongst  asset  managers  –  slip  into  thinking,  and 
even demanding, that a ‘presumptive’ path should offer certainty, with no room for the RA to 
exercise any discretion in the public interest. I think that that is unrealistic. Take the case of a 
bank with plenty of bonds in issue, but also tiny amounts owed to each of hundreds of trade 
creditors  or  to  hundreds  or  even  thousands  of  market  counterparties.  In  an  emergency,  it 
would not be remotely sensible operationally for the RA to have to pin down each and every 
tiny trade-credit or wholesale obligation on a Friday evening/Saturday morning so that they 
                                                 
14   See for example the testimony on cross-border resolution to the US Senate of Mike Gibson, Director of Banking Supervision 
at: 
and 
http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/testimony/gibson20130515a.htm. 
15  May. 
Regulation 
Available 
Reserve 
Federal 
Board, 
online 
the 
on 
at 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
could be bailed in, becoming part owners of the bank, alongside the bondholders. Precious 
time would be lost. The RAs need a degree of carefully constrained discretion to ensure that 
complex resolutions can be implemented in the real world.  
But there is a second, bigger point. The preferred path is not guaranteed by Heaven to work. 
For  example,  resolution  of  a  group  (or  sub-group)  by  a  top-down  bailin  would  not  work 
where, in the particular circumstances of its distress, the group’s problems proved to be so 
pervasive,  so  toxic  and  its  business  controls  and  information  systems  so  hopeless,  so 
chaotic that it was impossible to make a reasonable ex ante estimate of expected losses. In 
that absolutely disastrous but not unthinkable circumstance, the RA would need a fall-back 
plan.  
In the UK, the government’s plan for ring-fencing provides the basis for just such a back-up 
strategy.  Under  the  proposals,  essential  payment  services  and  insured  deposits  would  be 
provided by a ring-fenced bank (RFB), capitalised separately and with no direct financial links 
to  the  group’s  other  businesses.  If  that  succeeds  in  making  the  RFB  super-resolvable,  it 
should  be  easier  for  the  UK  authorities  to  retreat  to  maintaining  at  least  the  most  basic 
payments services if a preferred strategy of top-down resolution of a whole group could not 
be executed. The introduction of ring-fenced domestic retail banks is, therefore, consistent 
with the broader international agenda on resolution.  
For each SIFI, the global authorities probably need not only a preferred resolution strategy 
for the group as a whole, but also a fall back. For example, are the clearing services provided 
by broker-dealers so important that they need to be maintained come what may? 
Recovery plans and preparing for resolution 
A final point. 
There  is  great  emphasis  on  recovery  and  resolution  plans,  RRPs.  As  familiarly  used, 
Recovery is a binary process – either it works, the firm survives and, thankfully, there is no 
resolution; or, alternatively, the best-laid and executed recovery plan fails, the firm fails, and 
it enters resolution. 
But this is too crude a way of thinking about Recovery. 
Of course Recovery is primarily about delivering recovery. That is what we all want. But it is 
not all. The period in which recovery is being attempted also provides a window for the firm 
and the resolution authorities to prepare in case recovery cannot in the event be achieved. 
For the firm, there can be time to adjust its balance sheet to make resolution easier.  This 
might  involve  discreet steps  to  reduce  trading, derivative  portfolios  and  counterparty  credit 
exposures.  In  parallel,  Resolution  Authorities  should  ensure  that  they  are  themselves  as 
ready as can be. That might include engaging advisers needed to help determine the firm’s 
losses,  and  so  the  size  of  debt  write-down  and  conversion  that  might  be  needed  to 
recapitalise it; preparing options for winding down or transferring critical functions; and lining 
up  replacement  management  and  directors  to  run  the  firm  following  the  resolution.  This 
should  be  the  bread  and  butter  of  preparing  for  any  resolution.  For  a  Purchase  and 
Assumption transaction, the US FDIC typically start preparations around 90 days out. 
To  make  escalated  preparation  practical,  supervisors  and  resolution  authorities  need  to 
agree a framework for graduated intervention as a firm deteriorates. In the UK, the Prudential 
Regulatory  Authority’s  Proactive  Intervention  Framework  is  intended  to  provide  a  basis  for 
just that.15  
                                                 
15   See  Table  A  on  the  PRA’s  Proactive  Intervention  Framework  in  Bank  of  England  (2013),  The  Prudential  Regulatory 
Authority’s approach to banking supervision.  
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Conclusion 
There  is  absolutely  no  question  that  effective,  credible  resolution  regimes  and  plans  are 
essential to overcoming the biggest problem in the international financial system: ‘Too Big to 
Fail’. 
Only with a credible mechanism to put losses to a failed bank’s creditors can we harness the 
forces of market discipline and take tax payers off the hook. Only with powers and plans to 
resolve  cross-border  banking  groups  can  we  arrest  the  risk  of  national  regulators 
progressively putting up barriers to cross-border finance. 
A lot of progress has been made over the past few years. For most Global SIFIs it is fairly 
apparent whether, at least with their current structures, they are best suited to single-point-of-
entry  or  multiple-point-of-entry  resolution.  Once  home  and  key  host  authorities  have 
determined a preferred resolution strategy, we need to ensure that minimum levels of gone-
concern  loss‑absorbing  capacity  are  maintained  in  the  right  parts  of  each  group;  and  that 
any  necessary  changes  to  group  structure  are  made.  Behind  the  scenes  discussions  on 
individual firms are underway in official-sector Crisis Management Groups or at more senior 
levels.  Those  planning  discussions  will  need  to  intensify  as  more  key  jurisdictions  put  the 
necessary statutory regime in place. 
The crucial next step is for a EU resolution directive compliant with the FSB Key Attributes to 
be  passed.  With  the  stakes  so  high,  it  is  the  moment  to  press  ahead.  This  can  transform 
international finance for the better.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
