Mario Draghi: Hearing before the Plenary of the European Parliament on 
the occasion of the adoption of the Resolution on the ECB Annual Report 
2011 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  a 
hearing before the Plenary of the European Parliament on the occasion of the adoption of the 
Resolution on the ECB Annual Report 2011, Strasbourg, 16 April 2013. 
 President, 
Honourable members of the European Parliament, 
I  am  very  pleased  to  take  part  in  this  debate  today.  It  forms  a  central  part  of  the  ECB’s 
accountability  towards  the  European  Parliament  to  which  the  ECB  attaches  utmost 
importance. 
Since  2011  the  ECB  has  taken  a  number  of  important  measures  to  address  severe 
distortions in the financial markets and to address fragmentation. Although I have had many 
occasions  to  discuss  the  ECB’s  policies  during  my  regular  hearing  before  the  ECON 
Committee, today is an opportunity to take a broad view on recent economic developments 
and monetary policy decisions, as well as to discuss the adjustment in the euro area and the 
outlook for  EMU  governance. This  will  allow  me  to  cover  several  issues  highlighted  in  the 
draft resolution. 
Economic developments and monetary policy decisions 
1. 
Following two years of recovery, the euro area moved into recession in 2012. Unemployment 
has  reached  unprecedented  levels,  especially  among  young  people.  This  economic 
weakness  was  driven  by  declining  private  consumption  and  faltering  investment,  in  an 
environment of weak business and consumer confidence and financial market tensions. 
We expect a gradual recovery in euro area economic activity for the second half of this year. 
But this scenario is subject to downside risks. 
In 2012, headline HICP inflation in the euro area was 2.5%, reflecting elevated energy prices 
and  increases  in  indirect  taxes  and  administered  prices.  Annual  inflation  rates  have  since 
declined to 1.7% in March this year. 
The Governing Council remains firmly committed to its price stability mandate. This is fully 
reflected in long-term inflation expectations which have remained firmly anchored in line with 
our price stability objective of below but close to 2%. 
2011 and 2012 were years in which much of our focus was on the proper transmission of our 
monetary policy. When changes in policy rates are not appropriately transmitted to the real 
economy, this is a matter of concern. 
In  a  context  of  large  refinancing  needs  and  persisting  funding  stress  for  banks,  the  ECB 
launched two long term (i.e three years) refinancing operations in late 2011 and early 2012. 
These operations, in combination with our measures to enhance the availability of collateral, 
were  pivotal  in  preventing  a  disorderly  process  of  lenders’  deleveraging  and  a  large-scale 
credit crunch. This action was instrumental in maintaining price stability. 
Later  in  2012,  a  renewed  confidence  crisis,  in  part  reflecting  unwarranted  investor  fears 
about  the  reversibility  of  the  euro,  caused  a  severe  deterioration  in  financial  markets. 
Sovereign  bond  and  bank  lending  rates  in  some  countries  increased  dramatically,  thereby 
impairing access to financing of the real economy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
To safeguard the singleness of monetary policy and to ensure an effective transmission of 
the  ECB’s  policy  intentions  to  the  broad  economy,  in  August,  the  Governing  Council 
announced  its  readiness  to  undertake Outright Monetary  Transactions  (OMT). OMTs  have 
proven  to  be  an  effective  backstop  against  unfounded  fears  of  reversibility.  Strict 
conditionality  contains  moral  hazard  on  the  side  of  governments.  It  ensures  that  they  will 
adopt  the  reforms  that  are  necessary  to  secure  their  solvency  and  to  foster  conditions  of 
steady growth for their economies. As I said before, the repair of the transmission channel 
cannot  be  done  by  the  central  bank  alone,  governments  need  to  do  their  part.  Let  me 
therefore  turn  to  the  on-going  adjustment  in  Member  States,  and  the  euro  area  more 
generally. 
The adjustment in the euro area 
2. 
During  the  past  five  years,  a  number  of  euro  area  countries  have  seen  a  significant 
correction of their external and domestic imbalances. In Ireland, Greece and Portugal current 
account  balances  improved  by  more  than  7  per  cent  of  GDP  between  2008  and  2012.  A 
large part of this adjustment has been driven by a contraction in domestic demand, triggered 
by  the  unwinding  of  long  accumulated  unsustainable  developments  and  by  the  cyclical 
downturn.  At  the  same  time,  in  Ireland,  Spain  and  Portugal  export  performance  has  been 
very  strong  compared  with  the  pre-crisis  period.  This  is  a  sign  that  a  genuine  structural 
correction is taking place and resources are being moved from the non-tradable sector to the 
production of traded goods. 
We have also seen some improvement in cost competitiveness, which has contributed to the 
external  adjustment.  Between  2008  and  2012,  in  the  three  programme  countries  the 
cumulated  unit  labour  cost  growth  was  about  10pp  below  the  euro  area  average.  The 
adjustment has been mainly driven by an increase in average productivity, largely reflecting 
labour  shedding,  rather  than  by  a  reduction  in  nominal  wages.  The  latter  adjustment  has 
been much more limited so far. 
This has contributed to increasing the real cost of adjustment and the burden borne by the 
more vulnerable members of society. It calls for greater determination in further addressing 
rigidities  in  wage  setting  and  increasing  competition  in  many  segments  of  the  economy. 
Reducing rents is not only a matter of efficiency in the adjustment process: it is also a matter 
of equity in sharing the burden of adjustment. 
The outlook for EMU 
3. 
Prior to the crisis, Member States did not internalise fully what it means to be part of EMU. 
Fiscal and economic policies were not sufficiently geared towards the conditions of being a 
member of a single currency zone. But the lessons of the crisis have been learnt. EU Heads 
of State and Government have taken action and strengthened the governance framework. 
The current deepening of EMU is essential, in  particular as regards banking union. It is of 
utmost  importance  that  the  legislation  on  the  Single  Supervision  Mechanism  (SSM)  is 
finalised before the summer break now that a political agreement has been found. This is an 
absolute  prerequisite  if  we  want  to  embark  upon  our  preparatory  work  in  a  timely  and 
effective fashion, so that the SSM is operational by mid-2014. Equally important is the swift 
set-up of a Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM): it is a necessary complement to the SSM 
and a key element of banking union. The Commission’s intention to put forward a legislative 
proposal  before  summer  is  highly  welcome.  In  the  meantime,  the  Directive  on  Bank 
Recovery and Resolution will hopefully be adopted and provide for a coherent EU-wide set of 
rules. 
Deeper economic union means more than fixing the financial system. We therefore welcome 
the proposal to conduct ex-ante coordination of structural reforms initiatives, which should be 
implemented as a best-practice benchmarking exercise. In the same vein, reform contracts, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
in  which  Member  States  commit  to  concrete  reforms  with  specific  timelines,  would  also 
facilitate the recovery of competitiveness. 
But new rules are only as good as the commitment to actually implement them. It is of key 
importance  that  the  existing  legislation  is  applied  forcefully  during  the  ongoing  European 
Semester: this represents a true test of the credibility of EMU’s governance framework. 
I thank you for your attention and stand at your disposal for questions. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
