Norman T L Chan: HKMA and the protection of bank customers 
Speech by Mr Norman T L Chan, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at 
the KPMG Luncheon Talk, Hong Kong, 11 July 2013. 
 Ayesha (Macpherson Lau), distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, 
First of all, let me thank Ayesha and KPMG for inviting me to this Luncheon Talk. 
When I took up the post of the Chief Executive of the HKMA in 2009, we were faced with the 
aftermath  of  the  Lehman  Brothers  saga.  As  most  of  you  would  remember,  there  was 
immense  public  pressure  on  enhancing  the  protection  of  consumers  and  investors.  My 
colleagues in the HKMA and I have regarded this as one of our priority areas and we have 
put our hearts and souls into strengthening our regime on banking conduct supervision in the 
past  few  years.  In  2010,  I  set  up  two  new  departments,  namely  the  Banking  Conduct 
Department  and  the  Enforcement  Department,  within  the  HKMA.  These  are  important 
milestones  in  the  development  of  the  HKMA,  and  we  have  indeed  turned  a  new  page  in 
protecting  bank  customers,  be  they  consumers  or  investors.  I  would  like  to  take  the 
opportunity of today’s luncheon talk to share my thoughts on this. 
Why should we provide protection to bank customers? 
First, let me pose a question “Why should we provide protection to bank customers?” The 
answer is quite simple. In modern times, most societies would demand proper protection of 
consumers  when  they  purchase  a  wide  variety  of  goods  and  services,  such  as  food, 
electrical appliances, drugs, health care and financial services. Consumers, as compared to 
suppliers  and  their  intermediaries,  are  normally  in  a  disadvantaged  position  in  terms  of 
product  knowledge  and  bargaining  power.  Therefore,  they  need  to  be  protected  from 
unscrupulous  sales  practices  or misrepresentations.  Regardless  of  what  kinds  of goods  or 
services are involved, the basic principle in consumer protection is that consumers should be 
treated fairly. In essence, what it means is that consumers should be able to know what they 
are buying, the costs involved and all other relevant terms and features of the transactions 
and should not be subject to high handed sales tactics. 
In Hong Kong, when a customer walks into a typical retail bank, he or she can undertake a 
wide  variety of financial transactions, ranging from conventional banking services, such as 
deposits, currency conversion, credit cards, remittances and loans, to the purchase of wealth 
management  or  insurance  products.  This  is  what  we  call  “universal  banking”,  a  regime  in 
which banks operate like financial supermarkets. Naturally, banks like the universal banking 
regime  as  it  offers  non-interest  income  such  as  fees  and  commission  as  well  as 
diversification of businesses. At the same time, customers also like universal banking as it 
offers great convenience in the form of a one-stop service instead of having to go through 
different firms for different types of financial transactions or products. 
There is a big difference though between a bank and a supermarket – you don’t entrust a 
supermarket  with  your  hard-earned  money  or  life  savings;  and  if  you  are  enticed  by  a 
supermarket promotion to buy something you don’t need, the loss is unlikely to be huge but 
this  may  not  be  case  for  investment  or  insurance  products.  You  could  lose  your  shirt. 
Therefore bank customers require protection not only on the safety of their deposits, but also 
in the way that they are treated as consumers and as investors. In terms of protecting the 
safety  of  customers’  deposits,  the  HKMA  seeks  to  maintain  prudential  soundness  of 
individual  banks.  We  do  this  through  the  regulation  and  supervision  of  banks  and,  in  the 
unfortunate event of a bank failure, through the activation of the Deposit Protection Scheme 
to  safeguard  customers’  deposits  up  to  half  a  million  Hong  Kong  dollars  per  depositor.  In 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
today’s speech, I propose to focus not on prudential supervision but on the protection of bank 
customers as consumers and investors. 
How do we protect bank customers? 
So the next question is : How do we protect bank customers as consumers and investors? 
The answer is the very same principle: “treat your customers fairly”. Now let me elaborate on 
how this can be achieved. 
First of all, when selling a banking product, such as a loan or a credit card the bank must 
ensure that the key terms and conditions are fair and equitable. The bank should also ensure 
that the key terms and conditions are clearly spelt out and understood by the customer. For 
example,  when  a  customer  wants  to  take  out  a  loan,  the  bank  should  highlight  the  key 
features  about  interest  rates  and  any  applicable  fees,  charges  or  penalty  for  late  or  early 
repayments. 
When  it  comes  to  the  selling  of  investment  products,  the  situation  becomes  more 
complicated.  The  complication  arises  not  only  from  the  risk  inherent  in  the  investment 
products,  some  of  which  can  be  rather  complex,  but  also  from  the  special  relationship 
between banks and their customers. 
Banks serve a special function in modern times. They are different from other financial firms 
in that they are the institutions with which most of our citizens entrust their life savings. There 
is  a  special  trust  between  banks  and  their  customers.  However,  over  the  years  and  for  a 
number of reasons including strong competition, narrowing interest margins and pressure for 
revenue  growth,  banks  have  sought  to  increase  the  share  of  fee-  or  commission-based 
income by expanding their businesses to the sale of financial products to customers. As a 
result, bank depositors have become the main sales targets for different kinds of investment 
or wealth management products. Very often the special customer trust that banks enjoy has 
made it easier for bank staff, as compared to their counterparts in other financial firms, such 
as  securities firms,  brokers,  investment  advisers  and  insurance  agents, to  market  and  sell 
investment  products  to  their  customers.  Moreover,  banks  generally  have  more  extensive 
branch network that makes it easier to reach out to their customers. 
But there is no free lunch. While banks enjoy clear advantages in marketing and distributing 
financial  products,  they  must  also  understand  that  they  shoulder  a  higher  level  of 
responsibility to take care of their customers’ interests. This is why the HKMA has required 
banks to put in place safeguards on top of what is generally required by the SFC, the lead 
regulator in the sales of securities and investment products. For example, banks are required 
to  set  up  the  so-called  “red  zone”  for  the  purpose  of  selling  investment  products  or 
investment-linked insurance products. Another example is that banks need to audio record 
the  conversations  between  their  sales  staff and the  customers  in  conducting  the suitability 
assessment and in the sales process. There are many other examples and I do not propose 
to go down the full list here. 
Some  people  have  argued  that  banks  are facing more  onerous  requirements  when  selling 
financial  products,  hence  being  put  on  an  unlevel  playing  field  when  competing  with 
securities brokers, investment advisers and insurance agents. I don’t agree with this view. As 
I have just explained, banks enjoy a special relationship with their customers. That special 
relationship  is  one  of  the  cornerstones  of  modern  banking  and  should  not  be  abused. 
Additional  safeguards  are  necessary  to  provide  bank  customers  with  protection  that  is 
appropriate  in  the  unique  circumstances  of  a  banking  environment.  This  in  turn  will  help 
boost  customers’  confidence  and  trust  in  their  bankers,  which  in  my  view  would  be 
tremendously  important  to  the  sustainable  development  and  credibility  of  our  banking 
industry. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
What do we expect a bank to do in consumer protection? 
Just  exactly  what  do  we  expect  a  bank  to  do  in  consumer  protection?  Under  the  guiding 
principle of “treating customers fairly”, we expect banks to do three things when they market 
banking or investment products: 
• 
banks should set out and explain clearly the key features and risks of the products 
concerned, including any applicable fees, commissions or charges; 
banks  should  conduct  an  assessment  of  the  financial  capability,  investment 
experience  and  risk  appetite  of  their  customers.  This  is  an  important  tool  that 
enables the banks to have a more objective view of the risk tolerance level of the 
customers; 
banks should assess the needs of their customers, and the suitability of a financial 
product for their customers. If a bank considers that a product is not suitable for a 
customer, it should not solicit or recommend the customer to purchase the product. 
  I  would  like  to  point  out  that  Hong  Kong  adopts  a  disclosure-based  investor  protection 
regime, which means that an intermediary is obliged to disclose and explain to the customers 
the key features and risks of an investment product. Under this regime, it is the investor who 
ultimately decides whether to purchase a product that entails risks higher than the risk profile 
generated through the suitability assessment. But in the process we expect a bank to take 
due  care  and  diligence  in  protecting  its  customers’  interests.  In  this  connection,  it  may  be 
useful for me to refer to a recent disciplinary case handled by the HKMA to demonstrate what 
a bank should not do to its customers. 
This  is  what  happened.  A  bank  staff  managed  to  sell  an  investment  linked  assurance 
scheme, or ILAS, product to a woman who had no prior investment experience. Her monthly 
income  was  less  than  HK$7,000  and  her  total  life  savings  was  HK$380,000.  The  product 
would require her to pay a premium of HK$300,000 per year for a total of five years. In other 
words, the total premium would be HK$1.5 million, which was four times her life savings or 
18 times her annual income. When the customer found out, after the end of the first year, 
that  her  life  savings  had  been  wiped  out  through  the  payment  of  premium  and  that  she 
needed to make the second annual premium payment of HK$300,000, she not unnaturally 
wanted  to  get  out  of  the  investment.  At  that  point  she  found  out  that,  according  to  the 
investment terms, she would have to suffer an early termination penalty amounting to 30% of 
the value of her investment, which is roughly equivalent to her income for one year. 
Clearly in this case the bank staff had little, if any, regard for the financial circumstances and 
the lack of investment experience of the customer; nor did the bank staff adequately explain 
the  risks  and  penalty  of  early  termination. This  is  a  blatant  breach  of  the  customer’s trust. 
The  HKMA  cannot  condone  this  kind  of  practice  and  will  take  necessary  supervisory  and 
disciplinary  actions  to  protect  the  interests  of  bank  customers.  In  this  particular  case,  the 
bank agreed to cancel the policy and refunded the full amount of the first year premium to the 
customer  and  the  bank  staff  concerned  has  been  suspended  by  the  HKMA  from  selling 
investment products for a period of three years. 
What do we expect bank consumers to do to protect their own interests? 
Justice upheld, sounds a happy ending. But there is always the other side of the equation. 
There  is  a  commonly  held  view  that  the  responsibility  for  consumer  protection  rests  with 
banks, the regulators and the Government. I don’t think this is a helpful view if we want to 
promote  consumer  protection.  True  that  banks  owe  their  customers  the  duty  to  look  after 
their  interests  and  to  treat  them  fairly.  True  that  the  Government  should  provide  the  legal 
framework and set the policies for protecting consumers. Equally true that regulators will use 
their  powers  to  enforce  the  consumer/investor  protection  requirements.  But  an  important 
piece  is  missing  from  the  jigsaw.  Bank  customers  also  bear  a  major  responsibility  in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
protecting  their  own  interests  and  rights.  Indeed  I  would  argue  that  it  is  crucial  for  bank 
customers to become “smart and responsible” consumers of banking services. Incidentally, 
at  the  international  level,  the  G20  in  its  High-level  Principles  on  Financial  Consumer 
Protection is also emphasising the need for financial consumer literacy. Let me use a couple 
of examples to illustrate this point. 
Before a customer shops with a new credit card, he should take time and effort to understand 
the  key  terms  of  the  credit  card,  such  as  the  interest  rates  for  cash  advances  and  any 
applicable charges for late payments etc. He should learn how to take good care of his credit 
cards  and  ATM  cards  to  avoid  theft  or  other  kind  of  scams.  When  he  logs  onto  internet 
banking, he should exercise care to avoid bogus bank websites and reduce the risks of being 
hacked. This is also very true when it comes to investment decisions. 
Investing one’s savings with the hope of generating higher returns than bank deposits is a 
natural and legitimate aspiration of most bank customers, but they must also understand the 
inevitable correlation between returns and risks. So they must use their best endeavours to 
understand the likely risks and returns of any investment products that are sold to them. In 
order to become a smart consumer he must try to understand the nature of different kinds of 
banking products and to avoid those products that go beyond his risk appetite or personal 
financial capability. 
This relates to the “smart” part. On the “responsible” part, it is important that when a person 
takes  out  a  loan  from  his  bank,  whether  to  shop  or  buy  a  flat,  he  should  fully  assess  his 
repayment  capability  in  relation  to  his  income  and  expenses.  There  is  not  much  point  in 
blaming  the  bank  in  granting  you  easy  and  cheap  credit  when  you  have  overstretched 
yourself in exuberant spending or in taking excessive risks in properties or stocks. 
In the context of buying investment products from a bank, the customer must realise that he 
is bound by his signature on the agreement, and that he cannot imply obligations which are 
contrary to the express terms of an agreement. Put it simply, a customer may not succeed in 
civil litigation for investment losses on the ground that he did not fully understand the terms 
of  the  investment  contracts.  Recent  court  cases  in  Hong  Kong  have  clearly  demonstrated 
that the existence of mis-selling by the bank would be a relevant factor in determining the 
culpability of the bank, but the customer must not harbour the expectation that mis-selling, 
regardless  of  its  nature  and  severity,  would  necessarily  lead  to  full  compensation  for 
investment  losses.  So  the  message  is:  consumers  of  financial  services  have  to  be 
responsible  for  the  decisions  they  make  and  the  consequences  of  such  decisions.  Think 
twice before you sign on the dotted line. 
Conclusion 
To conclude, the key takeaways are: 
• 
banks  must  treat  customers  fairly  by  looking  after  their  interests  and  not  treating 
them just as target of sales; and 
bank customers must learn to become “smart” as well as “responsible” consumers 
of financial services. 
 Then  how  do  we  go  about  in  achieving  these  two  objectives?  For  banks,  the  HKMA  will 
ensure that there is a set of robust but fair rules governing banking conduct. We will enforce 
these  rules  vigorously  through  on-site  examinations  and  off-site  surveillance.  We  will 
investigate  and,  if  appropriate,  take  enforcement  action  against  breaches  when  they  are 
reported by customers or detected by the HKMA. But we appreciate no external forces can 
be as effective as internal controls and culture in guarding against breaches. We therefore 
consider it important for the boards and senior management of banks to share and cherish 
the same value as  we do in terms of treating customers fairly. In this connection, we also 
believe that it is crucial that banks should review and revamp their incentive systems so as to 
avoid  rewarding  staff  on  the  basis  of  sales  volume  and  commission  earned,  which  would 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
nurture a tendency to push financial products to customers to meet business targets without 
giving sufficient regard to the interests of the customers. This change in the incentive system 
to reduce mis-selling is taking place in the more advanced markets, and Hong Kong must not 
lag  behind  if  we  wish  to  continue  to  pride  ourselves  as  one  of  the  leading  international 
financial centres. 
In  terms  of  helping  the  customers  to  become  smarter  and  more  responsible,  we  need  to 
enhance  the  financial  literacy  of  our  citizens.  Surely  there  is  plenty  of  scope  to  include 
financial literacy education in our school and university curriculum. In addition, the HKMA, in 
collaboration with key stakeholders such as the Consumer Council as well as the Investor 
Education Centre set up by the SFC, is going to launch a new public education programme 
that seeks to help bank customers become “Smart and Responsible”. The first of a series of 
programmes will be rolled out in the next few months. 
Ladies and gentlemen, I am sure all of you are frequent users of banking services. Moreover, 
as many of you here are accounting, financial and business leaders of Hong Kong, I am sure 
you will also share my view that enhancing the financial literacy of our citizens is a difficult 
but worthy task, requiring the collaborations of all sectors of the community to work closely 
together.  You  are  well  positioned  to  help  our  public  education  programme,  and  we  in  the 
HKMA look forward to your continued support and advice. Thank you.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
