William C Dudley: The national and regional economy 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York and Chairman of the Committee on the Global Financial System 
(CGFS), at the Business Council of Fairfield County, Stamford, Connecticut, 2 July 2013. 
 Good afternoon. I am pleased to be here with the Business Council of Fairfield County. I am 
told that your meetings are very inclusive – that you routinely invite education professionals, 
executives  of  local  not-for-profit  agencies  and  community  leaders  as  well  as  business 
leaders. In doing so, you assemble the type of broad Main Street audience that I most enjoy 
addressing. So, thank you for inviting me here today. 
Today I want to talk a bit about the outlook for the nation and the region. As many of you 
know, I was scheduled to speak at this forum on October 29 of last year but that meeting had 
to be postponed because of the arrival of Superstorm Sandy which hit on that very day. The 
region covered by the New York Fed was at the center of the storm, and Fairfield County, as 
well as parts of the Connecticut shoreline suffered extensive damage. 
Immediately  following  the  storm,  our  Regional  and  Community  Outreach  function  worked 
with  all  of  the  affected  areas  as  part  of  a  needs  assessment.  We  asked:  “How  can  the 
New York Fed best leverage our resources to help our community?” We heard that it could 
be  challenging  to  find  key  recovery  information  and  advice  online.  So  we  pulled  key 
resources  under  one  roof  –  or  I  should  say  under  one  URL.  We  developed  our  Sandy 
Information  Center  with  the  best  information  we  could  find  for  residents  and  businesses 
impacted by Sandy – including key deadlines along with expert legal, finance and insurance 
guidance. 
Conditions are not entirely back to normal, and restoration and repair activities continue in a 
number of hard-hit neighborhoods. Connecticut, along with New York, New Jersey, Maryland 
and Rhode Island, have been appropriated federal funding for relief efforts and this should 
help move the area’s recovery forward. I am confident that these areas will recover over the 
course of the year. The legislation also contains funding for helping coastal communities to 
prepare to weather future storms better. 
My meeting with you today is part of our continuing efforts to understand what is going on at 
the grassroots level of our economy. Let me offer a few examples from this trip. Yesterday 
evening  I  met  with  some  of  Stamford’s  business  leaders  to  discuss  the  local  state  of 
economic and business conditions. This morning I met with Mayor Finch and key economic 
development  staff  to  discuss  Bridgeport’s  redevelopment  initiatives.  Local  efforts  such  as 
these  and  your  business  council  are  essential  complements  to  the  Fed’s  support  for 
economic  recovery.  I  applaud  the  efforts  of  state  and  local  governments  and  community 
leaders to bolster the recovery in Bridgeport, Stamford and elsewhere in the district. 
I also met with Joan Carty from the Connecticut Housing Development Fund. We discussed 
innovative  approaches  for  addressing  the  foreclosure  crisis  here  and  across  the  state. 
Housing has been a major impediment to a more rapid economic recovery and we at the Fed 
have  been  working  hard  to  help  homeowners  and  the  overall  housing  market  recover. 
Afterwards, I spoke with small business leaders about the opportunities and challenges they 
are  facing  today.  I  traveled  to  Sikorsky  Aircraft  Corporation  with  several  goals  in  mind.  I 
wanted to learn how sequestration was affecting ground-level operations, to understand the 
local and regional economic impact of Sikorsky, and to view state-of-the-art manufacturing at 
work. 
After this program, I will be meeting with Joseph Carbone of The Workplace to discuss best 
practices  and  emerging  approaches  to  workforce  development,  particularly  his  innovative 
program for the long-term unemployed which I understand he is piloting in five different cities 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
across  the  nation.  At  the  end  of  the  day  I  will  be  meeting  with  University  of  Connecticut 
(UConn) Stamford campus staff, your own executive director Chris Bruhl and other officials 
to  learn  about  the  ecosystem  that  is  being  created  to  spur  further  economic  development 
locally. I’ll end the day with a meeting with Governor Malloy to better understand the complex 
issues and opportunities facing the state. 
The agenda for these visits is always packed, but that’s part of the point – to meet with a 
diverse array of representatives in order to get a comprehensive picture of what’s happening 
on Main Street and its interaction with state and national developments. At the end of my talk 
I  will  be  happy  to  answer  any  questions  you  have  about  the  economic  outlook  from  my 
perspective. 
As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal 
Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee, also known as the FOMC. 
National economic conditions 
I would like to begin by taking stock of where we are at the moment. Then I will address my 
expectations for the performance of the economy over the remainder of 2013 and into 2014. 
Since the end of the Great Recession in mid-2009, we have had 15 consecutive quarters of 
positive growth of real GDP. However, the average annual growth rate over that period has 
been  just  2.1  percent.  Although  the  unemployment  rate  has  declined  by  2.5  percentage 
points from its peak of 10 percent in October of 2009, much of this decline is due to the fact 
that  the  labor  force  participation  rate  has  fallen  by  1.5  percentage  points  over  this  period. 
Recall  that  discouraged  workers  who  do  not  actively  look  for  work  are  regarded  as  not 
participating in the labor force and so are not counted as unemployed even though they are 
without jobs. Using an alternative measure, the employment to population ratio, which is not 
influenced  by  changes  in  the  number  of  discouraged  workers,  there  has  been  limited 
improvement in labor market conditions. Job loss rates have fallen, but hiring rates remain 
depressed  at  low  levels.  Taken  together,  the  labor  market  still  cannot  be  regarded  as 
healthy. Numerous indicators, including the behavior of labor compensation and household 
assessments of labor market conditions, are all consistent with the view that there remains a 
great deal of slack in the economy. 
That being said, I see persuasive evidence of improved underlying fundamentals for much of 
the private sector of the U.S. economy. Key measures of household leverage have declined 
and are now at the lowest levels they have been in well over a decade. Household net worth, 
expressed  as  a  percent  of  disposable  income,  has  increased  back  to  its  average  of  the 
previous decade, reflecting rising equity and home prices and declining liabilities. Banks are 
beginning  to  ease  credit  standards  somewhat  after  a  prolonged  period  of  tightness.  As  a 
result,  we  are  now  experiencing  a fairly  typical  cyclical  recovery  of  consumer  spending  on 
durable  goods.  For  example,  light-weight  motor  vehicles  sold  at  a  seasonally-adjusted 
annual rate of 15.3 million in May, not far from the 16.1 million sales in 2007. 
Similarly, after five years in which housing production was well below what is consistent with 
underlying demographic trends, it now appears that we have worked off the excess supply of 
housing built up during the boom years of the last decade. Housing starts and sales are now 
on  a  clear  upward  trend,  and  a  widely  followed  national  home  price  index  is  up  around 
12 percent over the twelve months ending in April.1 Indeed, anecdotal reports suggest that 
this higher-than-expected increase in home prices is due to a lack of homes for sale. 
Unfortunately, the improvements in consumer spending on durable goods and housing are 
not yet showing through in the overall GDP growth rate due to the significant headwinds that 
we  continue  to  face.  First,  federal  fiscal  policy  has  recently  become  quite  contractionary. 
Estimates from the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) indicate that this fiscal restraint is on 
the  order  of  1.75  percentage  points  of  potential  GDP  this  year.  In  the  period  since  1960, 
there have been only two previous episodes of fiscal contraction of this order of magnitude  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
– 1969 and 1987 – both of which occurred when the economy was on a more solid footing 
than it is today. Second, the euro area is experiencing a protracted recession and growth in 
many  of  the  largest  emerging  economies  has  slowed.  This  has  resulted  in  a  very  sharp 
slowing of U.S. exports, with an associated slowing in production and employment growth in 
the U.S. manufacturing sector. 
Thus,  I  continue  to  see  the  economy  as  being  in  a  tug-of-war  between  fiscal  drag  and 
underlying fundamental improvement, with a great deal of uncertainty over which force will 
prevail  in  the  near-term.  This  tug-of-war  is  clearly  seen  in  the  monthly  employment  data. 
Over April and May, the average monthly gain in employment in the private service-providing 
sector has been well maintained at 175,000. In contrast, employment in the manufacturing 
sector and the federal government declined a combined 20,000 per month. And the resulting 
uncertainty is, I believe, an important contributing factor behind the relatively sluggish pace of 
business investment spending. 
My best guess is that growth for all of 2013, measured on a Q4/Q4 basis, will be about what 
it has been since the end of the recession. But I believe a strong case can be made that the 
pace  of  growth  will  pick  up  notably  in  2014.  The  private  sector  of  the  economy  should 
continue  to  heal,  while  the  amount  of  fiscal  drag  will  begin  to  subside.  I  also  see  some 
indications that growth prospects among our major trading partners have begun to improve; 
for example, the rise in the June euro area composite Purchasing Managers’ Index. And this 
combination  of  events  is  likely  to  create  an  environment  in  which  business  investment 
spending will gather strength. 
Finally, I believe this tug-of-war analogy is useful in explaining the recent inflation dynamics. 
As  is  well  known,  total  inflation,  as  measured  by  the  personal  consumption  expenditures 
(PCE) deflator, has slowed sharply over the past year and is now running below the FOMC’s 
expressed  goal  of  2  percent.  Softness  in  energy  prices,  resulting  from  the  weakening  of 
global growth mentioned earlier combined with increased energy production here in the U.S. 
has contributed to the slowing of total inflation. However, it is also the case that core inflation, 
that  is,  excluding  food  and  energy,  has  slowed  sharply  as  well.  A  decomposition  of  core 
inflation reveals that some of the decline is due to slowing in the rate of increase in prices of 
non-food and non-energy goods. This probably is due in large part to the softening of global 
demand  for  goods  and  the  modest  appreciation  of  the  dollar  that  has  occurred  since 
mid-2011. 
In  the  service  sector,  the  rate  of  increase  in  prices  of  medical  services  and  “non-market” 
services – the latter includes some financial services – also has slowed notably recently. In 
contrast,  the  rate  of  increase  in  prices  for  other  non-energy  services  has  been  relatively 
stable. Comparing this set of conditions to that in 2010, the recent slowing of inflation has 
been less widespread across core goods and core services, and inflation expectations so far 
have declined less appreciably than they did in 2010. Thus, my best guess is that core goods 
prices  will  begin  to  firm  in  the  months  ahead  as  global  demand  begins  to  strengthen  and 
inventories get into better alignment with sales. 
As is always the case, there is substantial uncertainty surrounding this forecast. Moreover, 
there is always the possibility of some unforeseen shock. Thus, we will be monitoring U.S. 
and global economic conditions very carefully and will adjust our views on the likely path for 
growth, inflation and the unemployment rate accordingly in response to new information. 
At  its  recent  meeting,  the  FOMC  decided  to  continue  its  accommodative  policy  stance.  It 
reaffirmed its expectation that the current low range for the federal funds rate target will be 
appropriate at least as long as the unemployment rate remains above 6.5 percent, so long as 
inflation  and  inflation  expectations  remain  well-behaved.  It  is  important  to  remember  that 
these  conditions  are  thresholds,  not  triggers.  The  FOMC  also  maintained  its  purchases  of 
$40 billion per month in agency MBS and $45 billion per month in Treasury securities, with a 
stated goal of promoting a substantial improvement in the labor market outlook in a context 
of price stability. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
In  its  statement,  the  FOMC  said  that  it  may  vary  the  pace  of  purchases  as  economic 
conditions evolve. As Chairman Bernanke stated in his press conference following the FOMC 
meeting, if the economic data over the next year turn out to be broadly consistent with the 
outlooks that the FOMC sees as most likely, which are roughly similar to the outlook I have 
already laid out, the FOMC anticipates that it would be appropriate to begin to moderate the 
pace of purchases later this year. Under such a scenario, subsequent reductions might occur 
in  measured  steps  through  the  first  half  of  next  year,  and  an  end  to  purchases  around 
mid-2014.  Under  this  scenario,  at  the  time  that  asset  purchases  came  to  an  end,  the 
unemployment  rate  likely  would  be  near  7  percent  and  the  economy’s  momentum 
strengthening, supporting further robust job gains in the future. 
As I noted last week in our regional press briefing, a few points deserve emphasis. First, the 
FOMC’s policy depends on the progress we make towards our objectives. This means that 
the policy – including the pace of asset purchases – depends on the outlook rather than the 
calendar.  The  scenario  I  outlined  above  is  only  that  –  one  possible  outcome.  Economic 
circumstances  could  diverge  significantly  from  the  FOMC’s  expectations.  If  labor  market 
conditions  and  the  economy’s  growth  momentum  were  to  be  less  favorable  than  in  the 
FOMC’s outlook – and this is what has happened in recent years – I would expect that the 
asset purchases would continue at a higher pace for longer. 
Second,  even  if  this  scenario  were  to  occur  and  the  pace  of  purchases  were  reduced,  it 
would still be the case that as long as the FOMC continues its asset purchases it is adding 
monetary  policy  accommodation,  not tightening  monetary  policy.  As  the  FOMC  adds  to  its 
stock  of  securities,  this  should  continue  to  put  downward  pressure  on  longer-term  interest 
rates, making monetary policy more accommodative. 
Third, the Federal Reserve is likely to keep most of these assets on its balance sheet for a 
long  time.  As  Chairman  Bernanke  noted  in  his  most  recent  press  conference,  a  strong 
majority  of  FOMC  participants  no  longer  favor  selling  agency  MBS  securities  during  the 
monetary policy normalization process. This implies a bigger balance sheet for longer, which 
provides  additional  accommodation  today  and  continuing  support  for  mortgage  markets 
going forward. 
Fourth, even under this scenario, a rise in short-term rates is very likely to be a long way off. 
Not only will it likely take considerable time to reach the FOMC’s 6.5 percent unemployment 
rate threshold, but also the FOMC could wait considerably longer before raising short-term 
rates.  The  fact  that  inflation  is  coming  in  well  below  the  FOMC’s  2  percent  objective  is 
relevant here. Most FOMC participants currently do not expect short-term rates to begin to 
rise until 2015. 
To reiterate what I said last week, some commentators have interpreted the recent shift in 
the market-implied path of short-term interest rates as indicating that market participants now 
expect  the  first  increases  in  the  federal  funds  rate  target  to  come  much  earlier  than 
previously  thought.  Setting  aside  whether  this  is  the  correct  interpretation  of  recent  price 
moves,  let  me  emphasize  that  such  an  expectation  would  be  quite  out  of  sync  with  both 
FOMC statements and the expectations of most FOMC participants. 
Regional economic conditions 
Turning to the regional economy, my colleagues and I at the New York Fed continually track 
conditions in our District, and we have a number of tools we use for that purpose. 
To promote growth in our local communities, we publish extensive data and analysis on the 
local economy. We provide outreach initiatives, such as our workshops on access to global 
markets  to  help  small  businesses  learn  about  loan  programs  and  sources  of  credit 
enhancements.  We  also  run  an  annual  video  festival  for  college  students  in  the  Second 
District.  In  this  program  student  teams  produce  videos  aimed  to  help  young  adults  make 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
sound  personal  financial  decisions.  A  panel  of  advertising  and  video  professionals  selects 
winning video productions for screening in local movie theaters. 
As you know, even states as wealthy as Connecticut have large pockets of poverty. So, we 
target some of our work specifically to low- and moderate-income groups. 
We have worked hard to help neighborhoods that face high foreclosure rates. This work is 
important obviously because foreclosures are a terrible event for those who lose their homes. 
But beyond that, this work is important because high levels of foreclosures affect neighbors’ 
home  values,  the  local  tax  base  and  economic  vitality  more  broadly.  We  have  provided 
housing  counselors  and  community  groups  with  the  latest  information  on  mortgage 
conditions  via  mortgage  briefs,  roundtables,  presentations  and  an  interactive  web  tool  that 
shows very local monthly delinquency and foreclosure conditions. This past fall we hosted a 
conference  on  distressed  residential  real  estate  to  share  new  expert  analysis  with  senior 
policymakers and practitioners from across the nation. Your new Commissioner of Housing  
– whom I note, formerly worked at the New York Fed – attended that conference. 
We also  conduct  a  periodic  poll  about  the  credit  needs  of small  businesses,  which  are  an 
important source of new jobs in the District. If you represent a small business and would like 
to participate in our next poll, please pass your business card to my colleagues, who are in 
the audience, or see me after the speech. And if your business is somewhat larger, I urge 
you to consider becoming one of our business contacts – just indicate your interest to us on 
your business card. 
So  how  is  the  region  doing?  I  want  to  begin  by  pointing  out  that  Fairfield  County  has  a 
number of strengths, beginning with a highly-educated workforce: Two in five adults in the 
county hold a college degree, nearly twice the nationwide average. It also has an array of 
fine educational institutions, including Fairfield University, UConn Stamford, the University of 
Bridgeport,  Sacred  Heart  University,  Western  Connecticut  State  University,  Housatonic 
Community College and Norwalk Community College. 
The industry mix here is quite diverse, with a good representation of jobs in the high-paying 
finance  sector.  In  fact,  roughly  35,000  jobs  in  the  county,  about  9  percent  of  total 
employment, are in the finance and insurance industry, a share almost twice as large as in 
the nation and even slightly higher than in New York City. Although the sector has shed jobs 
over  the  past  two  years,  it  remains  an  important  and  valuable  component  of  the  local 
economy.  There  are  also  numerous  corporate  headquarters  in  the  county  and  a  notable 
manufacturing  presence,  particularly  in  the  pharmaceuticals,  electrical  equipment  and 
aerospace industries. 
In  addition,  the  whole  tri-state  region  has  benefited  from  its  proximity  to  New  York  City, 
where  the  rebound  in  the  economy  –  and  also  in  employment  –  has  been  much  stronger. 
Fairfield County’s connection to New York City is not quite as strong as Long Island’s or the 
lower  Hudson  Valley:  About  7  percent  of  working  residents  in  the  county  commute  to 
New York City compared to about 20 percent in those areas. Still, the city’s strong pace of 
job creation during the current recovery is supporting incomes in the county. 
Turning to the recent performance of the economy, this area is growing pretty much in line 
with the nation, at least in terms of employment. That’s a bit of an improvement from 2012 
when,  after  solid  gains  in  2010  and  2011,  job  creation  in  both  Fairfield  County  and 
Connecticut  had  stalled.  Some  sectors,  such  as  education,  health,  and  professional  and 
business services were adding jobs; but those were offset by job losses not only in finance, 
but also in the goods-producing and distributing sectors. 
And  at  the  end  of  October,  Superstorm  Sandy  hit  the  region,  causing  major  damage  and 
disruption. While most of the news focused on New York City, Long Island and New Jersey, 
parts  of  Fairfield  and  New  Haven  counties  –  cities  and  towns  like  Bridgeport,  Stamford, 
Milford, and Fairfield – were severely affected as well. Thankfully, Sandy’s disruptive effect 
on the region’s economy seems to have been short-lived. Fairfield County did see some job 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
losses during the winter months, and Sandy likely contributed to that. But, in the spring this 
area saw a strong and broad-based rebound in employment. In fact, in May employment in 
Fairfield County surged to a more than four-year high. 
Even  with  this  recent surge  in  employment,  however,  the  county  has  recouped  only  about 
60 percent of the 36,000 jobs lost during the last downturn, whereas the nation has recouped 
close to three-quarters of its job losses and New York City has more than fully rebounded. 
And, at more than 7 percent, the county’s unemployment rate remains high. 
Another  dimension  of  the  local  economy  where  we  have  seen  modest  improvement  is 
housing.  Homebuilding,  as  measured  by  housing  permits  issued,  languished  from  2008 
through  2011;  but  last  year,  multi-family  construction  picked  up  noticeably,  and  this  year 
single-family construction has begun to move up as well. Home values have also begun to 
recover. After falling about 25 percent between 2006 and early 2012, home prices have risen 
by 5 percent in Fairfield County and 3 percent across Connecticut overall. While this upturn 
in home prices is encouraging, it has been considerably  weaker than in other parts of our 
region and also weaker than nationally. 
The  New  York  Fed’s  measures  of  regional  credit  conditions  suggest  continued  financial 
challenges for families  here.  As  of  the first quarter  of  2013,  average  debt  per  person  was 
about  $60,000  in  Connecticut  and  over  $90,000  in  Fairfield  County  –  little  changed  over 
several years. The county’s delinquency rate on that debt is now 5.7 percent, similar to the 
national average. And the mortgage crisis continues to take a toll on local homeowners. As 
of the first quarter, about 6 percent of mortgage debt in Fairfield County was 90-plus days 
delinquent, slightly higher than the national delinquency rate. 
It is also important to recognize the county’s strengths that will support recovery and the rise 
in  household  income  over  the  longer  term  –  over  and  above  just  being  close  to  a  thriving 
New York City. In particular, the above-average educational attainment of residents and the 
numerous  educational  institutions  position  the  area  well  to  move  into  the  expanding 
knowledge-based economy. Also, its diverse industry mix has a good representation of jobs 
in high-paying sectors and the area maintains its attractiveness as a location for corporate 
headquarters. 
Thank you for your kind attention and I will now be happy to take a few questions.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
