Jörg Asmussen: Is Europe on the right track? 
Speech  by  Mr  Jörg  Asmussen,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European  Central 
Bank, at the Deutsche Bank Women in European Business conference “Competition versus 
Coalition – the quest for growth?”, Frankfurt am Main, 20 March 2013. 
 Dear Ms. Siebert, 
Dear Mr. Leithner, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Thank  you  very  much  for  inviting  me  to  speak  at  the  Women  in  European  Business 
Conference organised by Deutsche Bank. 
The topic of this year’s conference – the quest for growth – could scarcely be more relevant 
for Europe today. 
As  this  audience  knows  better  than  most,  the  low  growth  environment  is  posing  serious 
challenges for businesses. Uncertainty about the future is a drag on confidence and a barrier 
to new investment. It causes banks to cut back on lending, especially to small- and medium-
sized firms, which are critical to help growth rebound. 
And  above  all,  low  growth  is  deeply  affecting the  lives  of  ordinary  people  in  Europe.  As  a 
result, many are frustrated, and some are even desperate. They doubt whether the European 
strategy to deal with the crisis is the right one. They are asking: “Will we ever come out of it, 
with ever more cuts and austerity?” 
And it is right and legitimate that they are asking this. “Power of the masses” is a key theme 
of this conference. We are democratic societies in Europe and these important choices about 
the future of our countries and our monetary union require a proper public debate. 
But this debate also needs to be based on substance. 
Rage alone does not solve our problems. 
Just being angry at politicians or officials, even if justified, does not help citizens understand 
the  crisis.  People  need  to  be  presented  with  the  real  choices  facing  them  –  even  if  that 
means taking hard decisions or making sacrifices. 
Offering  allegedly  easy  solutions,  or  presenting  false  alternatives,  abandons  the  debate  to 
populists and gambles with the long-term prosperity of our societies. 
So today I would like to present my view on the choices that are facing Europe – and in doing 
so,  to  expose  some  of  the  myths  and  misconceptions  about  the  European  approach  to 
managing the crisis. Concretely, I want to answer two questions: 
• 
First,  are  there  alternatives  to  the  current  strategy,  and  if  so,  what  are  their  real 
consequences? 
Second,  are  we  condemned  to  a  “lost  decade”,  or  can  we  find  new  sources  of 
growth to lift us out of the crisis? 
 The reality of the alternatives 
1. 
Policy-makers sometimes speak about certain courses of action as being without alternatives 
– “alternativlos” as we say in German. 
Of course, this is not true. There always are alternatives. The question is whether they are 
superior, especially when assessing their likely impact and longer-term consequences. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
So let me begin by looking at those alternatives. 
As you know, one pillar of the crisis response in Europe has been to consolidate government 
budgets. Progress has so far been good: the European Commission estimates that, by the 
end of this year, the euro area as a whole will have a budget deficit below 3% of GDP. 
But this progress has also had costs in the short term: growth has turned out to be lower than 
forecast and unemployment has risen steeply. Almost 19 million people in the euro area are 
currently without jobs – this includes almost one in every four young people. 
In  the  face  of  this  hardship,  the  strategy  of  reducing  deficits  has  come  under  increasing 
criticism from commentators and politicians. 
Some now urge an “exit from the austerity cage”. 
Others  claim  that,  by  continuing  to  cut  deficits  when  growth  is  so  low,  policy-makers  are 
ignoring  the  evidence,  even  being  ideological.  To  exit  the  crisis,  they  say,  Europe  must 
engage in an urgent change of course: more time, less austerity; more public money, less 
reform. 
Let me be clear: I am also very concerned by the high level of unemployment. I would also 
like to see stronger growth. 
But before proposing to change course, we need to think through the consequences. This is 
what responsible policymaking means. 
And put simply, the consequence of stopping cutting deficits is to increase public debts. Is 
this a feasible or sustainable solution to our problems? 
The real consequences of changing course 
In my view, the answer is “no”. 
First, regardless of its merits, such a strategy would only work if private investors were willing 
to finance higher borrowing at reasonable rates. And that is certainly a big “if”, especially for 
countries whose debts are already very high and rising. 
Second,  it  is  an  illusion  to  think  that  more  debt  is  the  answer  to  this  debt  crisis.  Recent 
research  has  shown  that  high  public  debt  levels  in  the  euro  area  hamper  growth,  with  a 
serious negative effect starting when debt exceeds 90% of GDP. Average euro area public 
debt is already above that level – almost 95% of GDP – so adding more debt will only put us 
further into the danger zone. 
Third, a strategy of increasing debt simply pushes problems in to the future. Any benefits for 
the current generation come at the expense of future generations. Higher borrowing today 
means  higher  interest  payments  tomorrow  –  which  have  to  be  paid  off  with  the  taxes  of 
tomorrow’s citizens. 
Moreover, the more today’s generation consumes, the more future generations will have to 
save to get the debt level back down again. And they will have to do this: as part of the new 
EU  debt  rule,  all  euro  area  countries  are  legally  bound  to  start reducing  their  public  debts 
below 60% of GDP. 
To give a sense of what this means, take the example of Italy. Public debt is almost 130% of 
GDP, so it will have to be more than halved by the next generation to abide by the debt limit. 
Around 80 billion euros a year goes on debt service – this is more than 10% of the annual 
budget, which is not being spent on education or infrastructure. 
On top of this, future generations will face a number of hidden costs that have not yet been 
factored  into  the  debt  figures.  These  include  the  effects  of  an  ageing  society  and  the 
unknown consequences of a changing climate. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
To  take  the  example  of  Germany,  the  European  Commission  projects  in  its  2012  Ageing 
Report that the working age population will fall by more than 30% by 2060. At the same time, 
its age-related spending will continue to increase. This means that, year after year, there will 
be an ever smaller number of workers supporting an ever larger social security system. 
Our obligation to future generations 
In  other  words, future generations  are  already  carrying major  burden.  Is  it fair  to  them,  by 
increasing debt today, to make it heavier still? 
The economist John Maynard Keynes famously dismissed long-term considerations with the 
argument  that  “in  the  long-run  we’re  all  dead”.  This  is  true  –  we  are,  but  our  children  and 
grandchildren are not. By ensuring fiscal soundness today, we represent their  voice in the 
current debate. 
To sum up, I question the benefits of changing course, not because I am satisfied with the 
current situation, but because the alternatives available are worse. They mean placing short-
term expediency over long-term sustainability – which, for me, is the opposite of responsible 
policy-making. 
Citizens have to take decisions of great importance about their future – most directly so when 
they are asked to at the ballot box. By casting their votes, they make choices that will not 
only determine their lives, but also those of the generations to come. They deserve to have 
the full picture of the alternatives they are facing before they do. 
The potential of the European strategy 
2. 
But citizens still rightly ask: where will growth come from? 
This leads me to the second theme of my address today. Is the euro area condemned to a 
“lost decade” of low growth and high unemployment? Or are there new sources of growth we 
can exploit to get out of this crisis? 
Here, the answer depends on governments themselves. The truth is that they are not out of 
options when it comes to growth. There are new sources of growth that can be tapped, even 
while budgets are being cut. 
But to do so, they have to implement the other pillar of the European strategy. They have to 
enact deep-rooted economic reforms that increase the potential of their economies to grow. 
Reforms  to  open  markets,  increase  competition,  and  remove  bureaucracy.  Reforms  to 
advance  innovation,  encourage  entrepreneurship,  and  help  public  administration  actually 
serve the public. 
These  reforms  are  not  easy  to  implement.  They  require  tough  choices,  perseverance  to 
confront vested interests, and patience for the effects to become visible. 
Reforms as the path to growth… 
But their potential is huge. 
To give a sense of what can be achieved, recent research from the IMF1 finds that euro area 
countries  could  boost  their  GDP  by  more  than  3%  over  five  years  by  opening  markets  to 
competition and reforming tax systems. 
And they could also do a lot to support growth by removing the remaining barriers to a Single 
Market in Europe – in particular by completing the Single Market in services. 
                                                
1  Barkbu, B., Rahman, J., Valdés, R., “Fostering Growth in Europe Now”, IMF Staff Discussion Note, June 2012 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
The  European  Commission  estimates  that  implementing  the  Services  Directive  –  which 
covers  activities  that  make  up  around  40%  of  EU  GDP  –  could  reap  additional  gains  of 
330 billion euro, or more than 2.5% of EU GDP, over five to ten years. 
And this only requires implementing legislation that has already been agreed. 
…and fairness 
Higher growth is not the only benefit from reforms: they also contribute to a social fairness. 
As the OECD Going for Growth 2012 report put it, this is the “Double Dividend” of structural 
reforms. 
Commentators who criticise the social consequences of the European strategy often forget 
this element and focus only on the effect of budget cuts – which can sometimes fall hardest 
on vulnerable groups in society. But well-designed reforms can have the opposite effect: they 
can in fact create opportunities for people on the margins of society. 
Let me allude to this: 
In  Spain,  there  is  a  rigid  two-tier  labour  market  which  protects  insiders.  This  means  that 
young people, on flexible contracts, bear the burden of an economic downturn. As a result, 
almost 6 out of 10 are currently unemployed. 
In  another  country,  the  administration  of  tax  collection  is  weak  which  leads  to  enormous 
amounts of tax arrears. As a result, ordinary people who are taxed on their salaries have to 
pay more to make up the difference. 
These  are  both  cases  where  lack  of  reforms  leads  to  unfair  outcomes  –  and  so  where 
structural reforms could help towards a fairer society. Ultimately, with structural reforms, the 
winners outnumber the potential losers. It is time this message gets more attention. 
The never-ending race 
However, we should not fall into the trap of thinking that it is only struggling countries that 
need to take hard decisions. We are all competing today, both within Europe and with the 
rest of the world. There can be no sitting back, for any country. 
Germany  was  a  decade  ago  called  “the  Sick  Man  of  Europe”;  people  were  wondering 
publicly if “Germany can be saved”. Since then, the country has become a showcase of how 
well-designed reforms can turn the situation around. 
But this example also serves as warning – others can just as quickly catch up. If struggling 
countries  continue  to  pursue  ambitious  reforms, and  Germany  rests  on  its  laurels,  it could 
once again be this country left in the slow lane. 
So  it  also  needs  to  tap  new  sources  of  growth,  like  professional  services,  that  remain 
unreformed. 
3. 
Conclusion 
Let me now conclude. 
The challenge avoiding false alternatives, and taking the hard decisions, is not a new one. 
Niccolo Machiavelli observed in the 16th century that, 
“There is nothing more difficult to carry out than to institute a new order of things. Because 
the  reformer  has  for  enemies  all  those  who  have  profited  under  the  old  conditions  and 
lukewarm defenders in those who may do well under the new.”2  
                                                
2  Niccolò Machiavelli, The Prince, 1532 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
We at the ECB are no different: we also have structural problems to address. And since I am 
speaking  at  the  “Women  in  European  Business”  conference,  let  me  focus  on  one  in 
particular:  the  underrepresentation  of  female  staff  in  our  management  positions  and 
governing bodies. 
For a very long time, I was personally not in favour of any kind of affirmative action, because 
I was convinced that qualified women would eventually make their way to the top. But I have 
come to realise that this is not the case – neither in the working environments I am familiar 
with, nor on a wider scale. 
I was struck when I heard that it will take more than 70 years to achieve gender-balance in 
the UK’s largest 100 companies if the current rate of change is maintained.3 
The  ECB’s  Executive  Board  recently  discussed  enhancing  gender  diversity  in  our 
management and decided that, from now on, we will not only talk about diversity – we will 
act. All studies show that the commitment from the top is key to bringing about change. The 
commitment  is  there  –  we  want  new  measures  and  the  board  has  asked  its  Human 
Resources department to provide these to us. Other international financial institutions like the 
IMF  and  the  EIB  as  well  as  the  European  Commission  are  more  advanced  and  have 
introduced gender targets, which define specific quantitative – albeit non-binding – goals for 
employing women at various levels. We think that we can learn from the experience of these 
institutions and that their targets may serve as a benchmark for us. 
This  marks  a  significant  change,  especially  in  the  generally  rather  conservative  world  of 
central  banking.  All  change  implies  a  challenge,  especially  for  those  at  the  top  of  the 
organisation. But leadership must be challenged to keep it relevant – which is another theme 
of this conference. The key issue is how, when challenged, it answers. 
The current concerns about where Europe is heading are a challenge to our leadership. They 
have  to  be  properly  answered.  Not  by  resorting  to  populism  or  false  alternatives  –  but  by 
reaffirming, clearly and honestly, why the path we are taking is the right one. 
Thank you for your attention.  
                                                
3  Equality and Human rights Commission, 2008 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
