Daniel Mminele: Establishing a proper governance framework for central 
bank reserves management 
Address by Mr Daniel Mminele, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 
Institutional Investor, Africa Sovereign Funds Roundtable, Cape Town, 7 March 2013. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Good morning ladies and gentlemen. 
Thank you to Institutional Investor for inviting me to address this roundtable meeting, and for 
choosing to host it in Cape Town. I trust those of you visiting South Africa or Cape Town for 
the first time will have an opportunity to see the exceptional beauty that this part our country 
offers. 
Judging by the agenda, I have no doubt that the discussions will be rich, as the topics being 
covered are all pertinent, and should allow us to exchange views and gain valuable insights 
to  inform  the  work  in  our  respective  institutions  in  strengthening  sovereign  funds 
management operations and their oversight. 
I have been asked to talk on the topic of governance for central bank reserves management. 
With the increase in reserves assets observed in recent years, there has come a higher level 
of scrutiny  with regard to how these assets are managed, in particular heightened interest 
around  proper governance  structures.  As  public investment managers  we  should  welcome 
this  trend,  because  reserves  are  public  assets,  which  should  be  seen  to  be  managed 
prudently and carefully while achieving appropriate returns.  
As  some  of  you  may  be  aware,  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank  (the  Bank)  has  made 
significant progress in recent years in enhancing our governance framework. 
Evolution of reserves management in South Africa 
2. 
Before  I  talk  about  the  governance  aspects  of  foreign  exchange  reserves  management,  I 
would like to first provide a brief history of the build-up of reserves in South Africa, and the 
evolution of reserves management activities. 
In 1998, South Africa had gross reserves of just US$6 billion, but was running an oversold 
forward book and consequently had a negative net open foreign currency position (NOFP) of 
US$25  billion.  This  huge  forward  dollar  commitment  left  the  country  in  a  precariously 
dangerous  and  vulnerable  external  position  and  resulted  in  our  currency  being  deemed  a 
one-way downward bet. The Bank and the National Treasury embarked on a drive to reduce 
the NOFP to zero, and to build up the reserves of the country, with the former being achieved 
in March 2003. Subsequently, there was a rapid build-up of reserves over the years, made 
possible by a combination of purchasing the proceeds of Government’s foreign bond issues; 
taking advantage of large FDI related inflows; and purchasing foreign exchange in the open 
market, when conditions were deemed to be favourable. At the end of February 2013, South 
Africa’s  gross  gold  and  foreign  exchange  reserves  amounted  to  US$50.4  billion  and  the 
international liquidity position of US$47.2 billion. 
While South Africa does not target a specific optimal level of reserves, we do look at various 
measures that inform what could be deemed an acceptable level of reserves for the country, 
taking  into  account  factors  such  as  the  balance  of  payments  position  and  debt  dynamics. 
Much  as  by  international  comparison,  when  looking  at  other  emerging market countries  or 
similarly  rated  countries,  our  reserves  are  still  relatively  low,  the  level  of  foreign  exchange 
reserves exceeds short term foreign exchange commitments of the country, and we broadly 
satisfy commonly accepted reserve adequacy measures. The build-up of foreign exchange 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
reserves  will  continue  when  market  conditions  are  conducive,  and  taking  into  account  a 
careful cost/benefit analysis. A higher reserves cushion will not only make South Africa more 
resilient in crisis situations and in the wake of volatile capital flows, but should also help to 
increase  policy  flexibility,  for  example,  if  exchange  rates  are  perceived  to  have  deviated 
significantly  from  what  is  considered  “fair  value”  as  suggested  by  macro-economic 
fundamentals. 
It  goes  without  saying  then,  that  with  the  increase  in  reserves  their  efficient  management 
became  a  key  focus  area  of  the  Bank.  The  Bank  graduated  from  being  a  pure  liquidity 
manager  to  building  what  by  now  has  become  a  relatively  sophisticated  investment 
management operation. In the process, our investment objectives have not really changed, 
still conforming to the old definition contained in the 2001 IMF guidelines, and guided by the 
classical  trilogy  of  objectives,  placing  emphasis  on  capital  preservation,  such  that 
investments are undertaken in a manner that seeks to preserve the capital of portfolios over 
the investment horizon; liquidity to enable the Bank to meet its day-to-day foreign-exchange 
commitments as well as for unforeseen circumstances, without incurring significant penalties 
when liquidating the investments; and return having a lesser emphasis, but the objective of 
which  is  to  enhance  the  returns  on  the  Bank’s  official  reserves  within  an  acceptable 
risk-return framework and to help defray the costs of acquiring and holding reserves. 
The  reserves  are  separated  into  various  tranches,  around  which  specific  portfolios  have 
been  constructed,  with  the  abovementioned  objectives  in  mind,  to  ensure  an  appropriate 
balance  between  them. Each  portfolio’s  objectives  have  specific  liquidity  requirements  and 
investment horizons. In determining the size, liquidity requirements and investment horizons 
of these tranches, foreign exchange liquidity needs of the Bank and the National Treasury 
are taken into account. While return has always been a lesser objective, it has received more 
prominence  in  recent  years,  given  the  increase  in  reserves  globally  and  the  low  yielding 
environment in which the reserves are invested in. 
The  Bank,  like  many  other  central  banks,  complements  its  internal  reserves  management 
activities with a carefully structured external fund management programme. The first group 
of  external  fund  managers  were  employed  in  1999.  We  have  refined  the  external  fund 
management  programme  as  we  went  along,  with  the  most recent review  initiated  in  2012, 
with  a  view  to  completing  this  process  by  September  2013.  Apart  from  delivering  excess 
returns against set benchmarks, this programme also has at its core a skills and technology 
transfer component. Our staff members have benefited vastly from the knowledge transfer, 
which  now  allows  them  to  manage  more  complex  portfolios.  But,  over  time  our  initial 
objective  changed  and  we  now  also  look  at  external  fund  managers  with  diversification  in 
mind, allowing them, given their higher level of professional expertise, to do things that we 
can’t do. In this respect, they get more leeway in terms of risk taking and asset classes they 
can invest in. 
The Bank established its first formal Reserves Management Investment Policy (IP) in 2007, 
to provide the strategic and operational framework and to define the investment criteria for 
the management of reserves. The aim of the process was to set investment objectives and 
related  parameters  for  the  reserves  portfolios.  In  this,  relevant  target  durations  and 
benchmarks  which  are  consistent  with  the  Bank’s  risk  tolerance  were  established.  The 
evolution  of  the  Bank’s  reserves  management  activities  has  necessitated  the  review  and 
enhancement  of  the  IP.  The  first  such  review  took  place  in  2010,  and  apart  from  being  a 
governance related review, provided an opportunity to not only take into account some of our 
own lessons learnt from the crisis, but also to align the policy with emerging best practices. 
The  2010  IP  review  led  to  the  strengthening  of  the  governance  structure  for  reserves 
management  and  a  reconfiguration  and  strengthening  of  the  Reserves  Management 
Committee  (Resmanco).  Other  initiatives  currently  under  way  involve  improving  our  IT 
infrastructure,  and  upgrading  our  risk  management  tools,  monitoring,  compliance  and 
reporting systems. The IP has been reviewed again in 2012/2013, during which time we also 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
undertook  a  benchmarking  exercise,  the  results  of  which  revealed  some  further  areas  of 
improvement, which we are taking on board where appropriate. 
To  align  the  investment  of  reserves  with  the  objectives  of  holding  the  reserves,  the  Bank 
employs a Strategic Asset Allocation (SAA). The first SAA programme was developed in 
2007, the purpose of which was firstly to calculate/agree on a tracking error consistent with 
the  Bank’s  risk  tolerance,  and  secondly,  to  establish  strategic  benchmarks  against  which 
reserves would be managed. The SAA for the various tranches is meant to ensure that the 
tranches maintain sufficient liquidity while maximizing returns, subject to a low probability of 
capital loss over a given investment horizon. We are currently in the process of reviewing our 
SAA  to  be  in  line  with  the  IP  and  to  take  into  account  the  changing  financial  markets 
environment, with a view to greater diversification in terms of investment destinations, so as 
to improve the risk-return profile of the reserves. It will be rolled out later in the year following 
the approval of the IP and to coincide with any changes deemed necessary emanating from 
our external fund management review. 
risk  management  guidelines,  placing  greater  emphasis  on 
Governance, accountability and oversight of investment management 
3. 
Sound governance and oversight around the management and investment of foreign assets 
has become a critical discussion point in central banks and governments globally, especially 
so following the financial crisis. The ability of central banks to make decisions and respond to 
specific  market  developments  within  a  sound  risk  management  framework  were  tested 
during the 2008 financial crisis, when capital markets malfunctioned and liquidity became a 
major  constraint.  At  the  time,  potential  systemic  risks  in  the  banking  sector  required  a 
tightening  of 
liquidity 
considerations in terms of the asset classes in which reserves portfolios are invested. Central 
banks  generally  have  a  large  proportion  of  reserves  invested  in  highly  liquid  fixed  income 
assets which include short-term bank deposits. At the peak of the financial crisis, default risk 
was high and central banks withdrew their investments in the banking sector, which was in 
desperate need of funding.1 Although these actions were plausible from an individual reserve 
manager’s  perspective,  the  collective  withdrawal  exacerbated  the  already  tight  funding 
situation  of  commercial  banks.  This  pro-cyclical  behaviour  of  reserves  managers  during 
crises may conflict with central bank’s objective of maintaining financial stability, which again 
highlights the need for sound governance and oversight in the investment of reserves. Clarity 
of mandates and objectives is an important part of the governance framework, especially in 
more recent times when a balance has to be struck between not taking too much risk, and 
the expectation of higher returns. 
The Bank’s reaction to the global financial crisis centred on a risk-averse philosophy and we 
responded to the deterioration in liquidity by tightening investment guidelines to reduce credit 
risk  by  limiting  counterparty  exposures.  When  a  second  wave  of  the  crisis  emerged  in 
Europe through potential sovereign defaults, the Bank decided to rebalance its portfolios in 
order to manage exposures to affected peripheral euro area countries. 
Foreign exchange reserves make up a significant component of total assets of central bank 
balance  sheets.  Due  to  this  concentration,  central  banks  are  subject  to  stringent  reporting 
requirements from the general public, and more specifically, governments and shareholders. 
To  this  end,  central  banks  have  been  developing  sound  governance  structures,  improving 
accountability through more transparency and introducing a culture of higher risk awareness 
across all their operational activities. Efficient management of foreign exchange reserves has 
become  vital  for  maintaining  sound  perceptions  of  central  bank  credibility.  Undoubtedly,  a 
                                                
1  Jukka Pihlman and Han van der Hoorn (2010), Procyclicality in Central Bank Reserve Management: Evidence 
from the Crisis, IMF Working Paper 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
loss of reputation through bad governance could undermine the ability of a central bank to 
perform its primary tasks of ensuring price and financial stability. 
Good governance and sound functional organisational structures are therefore necessary for 
the efficient management of reserves. In establishing these structures, clear decision-making 
processes;  appropriate  delineation  of  roles  and  responsibilities,  clear  execution  guidelines, 
and accountability through adequately transparent regular reporting, should be well defined, 
documented, adopted and institutionalised. It goes without saying that there is no one correct 
way  of  establishing  a  governance  framework,  and  that  country-  and  institution-specific 
circumstance must be taken into account, while not compromising on the principles. 
Borio  et  al  note  that  there  are  two  dimensions  to  consider  in  governance  –  vertical  and 
horizontal  governance.2  Vertical  governance  ensures  that  decisions  are  taken  at  the  right 
level  (senior  executives),  that  is,  where  the  strategic  direction  of  the  organisation  is 
established.  Senior  management  of  the  institution  should  carry  out  the  responsibility  of 
oversight  on  the  investment  process  and  management  of  reserves.  Horizontal  governance 
ensures that business areas and reporting lines are organised in a way that minimises the 
potential for conflicts of interest. The senior governing body needs to provide overall strategic 
direction through an investment management policy, which encapsulates the risk tolerance 
for  the  institution,  while  an  investment  committee  should  be  responsible  for  the  tactical 
position  and  for  establishing  the  investment  guidelines,  and  whereas  day-to-day  trading 
activities  and  taking  active  positions  should  be  the  responsibilities  of  portfolio  managers 
within a control environment which separates them from middle office functions of risk and 
reporting, as well as accounting and settlement functions. 
What  is  of  critical  importance  is  to  insure  that  investment  committee  members  are 
competent,  have  relevant  skills,  and  bring  the  right  level  of  commitment.  This  can  be  a 
challenge  for  central  banks  that  are  busy  building  professional  investment  management 
operations,  and  when  the  traditional  skills-set  in  a  central  bank  has  been  around 
macroeconomics, monetary  and  exchange rate policies.  A  structured  programme  needs  to 
be  developed 
to 
continuously enhance their expertise as part of making the governance structure more solid. 
We have found that the external fund management programme provides a good opportunity 
and can be used very effectively for skilling up investment committee members. 
The  Bank  has  a  three-tier  governance  structure  where  the  responsibilities  for  executive 
authority,  strategic  management  and 
the  actual  portfolio  management  are  clearly 
segregated.  This  comprises  of  the  Governors’  Executive  Committee  (GEC),  the  Reserves 
Management  Committee  (Resmanco)  and  the  Financial  Markets  Department  (FMD).  The 
GEC is responsible for making decisions such as the risk tolerance of the organisation and 
policies  on  reserves  accumulation  and  management.  The  Resmanco  is  the  investment 
committee  which  functions  within  the  parameters  set-out  by  the  GEC,  and  provides 
guidelines  on  the  framework  of  reserves  management  and  approves  the  SAA.  In  other 
words,  Resmanco  designs  the  investment  policy  and  guidelines  for  the  portfolio  and  risk 
management functions, and submits them for approval by the GEC. Portfolio management 
activities are carried out in the Financial Markets Department. In line with principles of sound 
internal governance, the Bank has separated portfolio management activities from those of 
performance measurement, risk control and compliance, accounting and settlement. 
investment  committee  members,  and  which  seeks 
to  capacitate 
                                                
2  Claudio  Borio,  Jannecke  Ebbesen,  Gabriele  Galati  and  Alexandra  Heath  (2008),  FX  reserve  management: 
elements of a framework, Bank for International Settlements Working Paper No. 38 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Figure 1 
SARB Structure and responsibilities in governance structure 
Review and approve Investment Policy 
Approve the Terms of Reference of RESMANCO 
Approves the appointment and removal of external fund managers 
Approves the appointment of custodians & SLAs 
Approves benchmarks and guidelines and risk management limits and procedures 
Approves target tranche sizes and currency composition of tranches within IP 
parameters 
Approves the SAA 
Approves the investment guidelines 
Approves deviations from benchmarks within approved risk budget and asset 
classes 
Evaluates performance and future strategies 
 
Portfolio and risk management activities 
GEC 
  Resmanco 
FMD 
 
On  an  annual  basis, the  Internal  Audit  Department  provides  the  GEC  with  a  report  on the 
adequacy  of  internal  policies,  procedures  and  processes  around  reserves  management, 
while  at  the  same  time  a  report  is  prepared  for  the  Board  of  Directors.  The  latter  report 
focusses on the current investment of the reserves including matters such as duration, credit 
risk,  asset  class  and  currency  composition,  as  well  as  the  results  of  the  investment 
management activity over the year. 
As I mentioned earlier, some very useful contributions were received from the benchmarking 
exercise undertaken, which may result in some adjustments to the governance structure. 
Current challenges in reserves management 
4. 
As I come to the end of my remarks, let me leave you with what could be the challenges that 
reserves managers will have to deal with going forward, and I am sure some of these issues 
will feature in the discussions over the next two days of your programme: 
(i) 
Do central banks need to redefine what an acceptable risk-return balance for official 
reserves is and think differently about risk tolerance? 
As  we  are  central  banks,  what  is  an  acceptable  level  of  trade-off  between  risk 
management and financial stability? A recent IMF paper dealt with this and I alluded 
to it earlier, pointing to the pro-cyclical behaviour of central banks when withdrawing 
deposits from commercial banks during the crisis. Do there need to be rules around 
how central bank reserves managers need to behave in a crisis so as not to make 
matters worse? 
Should  there  be  a  greater  segregation  between  reserves  that  are  held  for  policy 
purposes  (i.e.  monetary  policy,  intervention,  etc.)  and  those  that  are  purely  for 
investments  and  who  is  best  placed  to  manage  those,  central  banks  or  other 
dedicated public entities? 
(ii) 
(iii) 
The low return environment has exacerbated the opportunity costs of holding reserves and 
induced a debate amongst central banks about ways of enhancing returns by moving higher 
on  the  risk-return  frontier.  Considerations  of  seeking  excess  returns  (or  alpha)  carry  with 
them challenges of balancing central banks trilogy of objectives and the related financial risk 
management issues which will arise with the inclusion of riskier asset classes in the portfolio. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Added to this is also the potential for global monetary policy normalisation which may cause 
bond yields to rise and hurt the return on fixed income investments. 
Furthermore, there are large carry costs (the interest rate differential between the domestic 
and foreign economy multiplied by the change in reserves) associated with foreign currency 
accumulation.  Whenever  foreign  currency  is  purchased  in  the  domestic  foreign  exchange 
market,  local  currency  liquidity  is  injected  into  the  domestic  money  market  and  due  to  the 
related  potential  inflationary  impact,  in  most  cases  central  banks  have  to  sterilise  these 
purchases.  Indeed,  sterilised  purchases  of  foreign  exchange  can  be  expensive  when  the 
central bank earns a lower interest rate on the foreign currency reserves than it pays on the 
instruments that are issued in the sterilisation process.  
Finally, the complex and changing regulatory framework in financial markets could make the 
investment landscape for reserves even more challenging given all the uncertainties related 
to new requirements and potential impact on asset prices. 
What does this all mean? Could the outcome be that the pendulum swings all the way back 
to the other extreme? Are central banks going to become overly risk-averse? Are we going to 
find it difficult to retain staff members that were attracted to central banks, because of the 
increased level of sophistication, which they may feel is going to go into reverse? 
Conclusion 
5. 
The pressing need for good governance and oversight in reserves management has been 
emphasised during this financial crisis. The crisis impacted portfolio performance and as a 
result  tighter  risk  management  frameworks  had  to  be  implemented.  Given  the  rising 
challenges  faced  by  reserves  portfolios  in  this  low  global  interest  rate  environment,  the 
investment  processes  must  remain  guided  by  sound  investment  principles  and  solid  risk 
management policies which are supported by effective information technology platforms. 
I trust that you will glean useful information over the next two days and that you will assist 
your  respective  institutions  in  overcoming  some  of  these  challenges  which  are  faced  by 
central banks in reserves management. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
