Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Promoting suitable and cost-effective 
financial services in Uganda 
Speech  by  Mr  Emmanuel  Tumusiime-Mutebile,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda,  at  the 
official opening of Crane Bank’s new branch at Entebbe airport, Entebbe, 16 May 2013. 
 The Chairman Board of Directors, Crane Bank Ltd. and all Directors present 
The Managing Director, Senior Management and all Staff of Crane Bank Ltd 
All invited Guests in your respective capacities 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
It gives me great pleasure this morning to preside over the official opening of a new branch 
for Crane Bank Ltd at Entebbe Airport. 
Let me start by congratulating the Shareholders, Board of Directors, Management and Staff 
of  Crane  Bank  Ltd  for  the  commendable  job  of  instituting  and  implementing  an  expansion 
programme designed to increase the bank’s outreach. This programme will ensure delivery 
of financial services nearer to the people which is a fulfillment of the bank’s philosophy. 
The opening of this branch brings the total number of Crane Bank branches to twenty eight 
(28).  This  constitutes  an  important  step  towards  the  bank’s  strategic  target  to  open 
50 branches by 2014. During its eighteen (18) years of existence, Crane Bank has been able 
to extend its footprint to key towns of Uganda. The branches are consistently branded which 
conveys the bank’s corporate image as a local Ugandan Bank. 
I am pleased to announce that Crane Bank Ltd has been granted permission to open a fully 
owned  subsidiary  in  Rwanda  and  there  are  plans  to  expand  business  to  the  Democratic 
Republic  of  Congo  and  South  Sudan.  This  is  a  clear  demonstration  that  the  Board  of 
Directors  and  Senior  Management  of  Crane  Bank  Ltd  are  committed  to  providing  savings 
delivery  outlets  within  the  great  lakes  region  to  spur  growth  and  support  the  integration 
process. Moreover, the presence and sound operation of a Ugandan bank abroad will boost 
Uganda’s reputation in the region. 
Entebbe Airport is strategically located as the gateway to the country and a home for many 
Government Departments, NGOs and regional organizations. This branch therefore provides 
an  excellent  business  opportunity  for  the  bank  and  a  convenient  service  to  its  potential 
customers. 
Bank of Uganda will continue to support financial institutions in mobilizing savings to grow 
the  economy  but  this  can  only  be  achieved  when  customers  have  access  to  suitable  and 
cost-effective financial services. Bank of Uganda is also committed to increasing the level of 
financial  inclusion  in  the  country  through  the  expansion  of  service  outlets.  Indeed,  the 
promotion  of  financial  literacy,  consumer  protection  and  financial  innovations  like  Mobile 
Money  Financial  Services  and  Agent  Banking  constitute  critical  elements  of  expanding 
financial  access.  In  addition,  I  would  like  to  highlight  to  the  Crane  Bank  management  that 
being  located  at  Entebbe  airport  brings  additional  responsibility  in  the  area  of  customer 
service standards and national image. For a new  visitor to Uganda, often this branch may 
just be the first port of interaction with our country 
The  banking  sector  today  is  characterized  by  heightened  competition  and  increased  risks. 
This  requires  financial  institutions  to  continuously  innovate  to  keep  pace  with  the  evolving 
risks. I am happy to note that Crane Bank (U) Ltd has steadily improved its service delivery 
and rolled out new products to meet the changing needs of the clientele. I urge Crane Bank 
(U)  Ltd.  to  design  robust  risk  management  processes  and  internal  controls  to  mitigate 
increased risks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
In  addition  to  proximity  of financial  services,  another key factor  which  drives  growth  in  the 
lending business of banks and therefore, financial access in Uganda is that of affordability of 
credit. Bank of Uganda has for the fifth time kept the Central Bank Rate (CBR) unchanged at 
12 present having contained the inflation momentum as reflected in the drop of the headline 
inflation to  3.4  present  in  April  from  4.0  present  in  March  2013.  A  neutral  monetary  policy 
stance was maintained by the central bank in order to boost economic activity further. Going 
forward,  the  core  inflation  rate  is  projected  to  stabilize  around  the  5  present  medium  term 
target. In view of this, let me take this opportunity to once again urge banks to align lending 
rates  with  the  CBR  and  facilitate  the  stimulating  effects  that  are  intended  from  BOU’s 
monetary policy stance to be channelled to the economy. 
With these remarks, I commend the Board of Directors and Management of Crane Bank Ltd. 
for their demonstrated commitment to serving the people of Uganda and beyond. 
It is now my honour and pleasure to declare Crane Bank Ltd Entebbe Airport branch officially 
open for banking business. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
