Kerstin af Jochnick: Monetary policy and macroprudential policy 
Speech  by  Ms  Kerstin  af  Jochnick,  First  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  a 
meeting at Länsförsäkringar AB, Stockholm, 25 January 2013. 
 Today I intend to talk about monetary policy and the new policy area, macroprudential policy, 
and how these two areas are interlinked. My  message today can be summed up in a few 
points. First: in the absence of a clear framework for macroprudential policy, we have taken 
into  account  in  our  monetary  policy  the  risks  linked  to  the  high  level  of  household  debt  in 
Sweden.  This  is  because  we  have  wanted  to  avoid  the  consequences  that  many  other 
countries  have  experienced  as  a  result  of  high  indebtedness  and  falls  in  house  prices. 
Second: I believe that macroprudential policy, once it is up and running, will be in a better 
position than monetary policy to manage these risks, as it offers tools that are more effective 
than the repo rate for these purposes. Third: The Riksbank has an important role to play in 
macroprudential policy in Sweden, partly because we have long conducted analyses in this 
field,  and  partly  because  there  are  strong  points  of  contact  between  monetary  policy  and 
macroprudential policy.  
The Riksbank has two main tasks: price stability and financial stability. I think that a clear and 
efficient  framework  for  macroprudential  policy  –  where  the  Riksbank  plays  an  important  
role – would give us better conditions to carry out these tasks. Monetary policy would then be 
able to focus fully on the inflation target, while more precise tools could be used to counteract 
the build-up of financial imbalances. 
Household debt and housing prices have been taken into account in the repo-rate 
decisions… 
Monetary policy in Sweden in recent years can be summarised roughly as follows. The debt 
crisis in Europe has hampered the conditions for Swedish exports. The Swedish economy 
has developed relatively well, but there was a clear slowdown towards the end of last year 
(see Figure 1). Domestic demand showed good resilience for a long time, but has now also 
begun to weaken. Low cost increases for companies and a stronger krona have also meant 
that  inflationary  pressures  have  declined  (see  Figure  2).  Given  this,  monetary  policy  has 
gradually become more expansionary over the past year, and in December we cut the repo 
rate even further (see Figure 3). Over the past year, we have also lowered the forecast path 
for the repo rate. This has been necessary to meet the inflation target and support economic 
activity. 
But in our monetary policy we have also given some consideration to household debt and 
housing prices – and for good reason, in my opinion. Let me explain this in more detail. 
…as there are considerable risks  
The financial crisis has made the risks linked to the housing market and high household debt 
crystal clear. The most well-known examples are the United States, Ireland and Spain. But 
Denmark, too, has experienced problems in its housing market (see Figure 4). 
In  Sweden,  house  prices  have  risen  substantially  since  the  middle  of  the  1990s,  even 
compared with the countries where prices have since plummeted (see Figure 4). As house 
purchases are to a great extent funded by borrowed money, it is hardly surprising that this 
has also entailed a large increase in household debt (see Figure 5). 
I think that it is important in this context to try to clarify the actual risks for Sweden here. It is 
not very likely that a fall in house prices would lead to extensive loan losses from mortgages 
for banks and mortgage institutions. Both the experiences from the 1990s and the analyses 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
for 
we have made ourselves point to this not being the case.1 However, a fall in house prices 
can give rise to other effects, direct and indirect, on both the macro economy and financial 
stability. 
The  most  direct  effects 
the  macro  economy  concern  household  consumption. 
Experiences show that the countries hit by severe falls in house prices usually experience 
long periods of very weak consumption. This is because households then tend to increase 
their  savings  to  restore  their  wealth.  Figure  6  shows  developments  in  household 
consumption and real house prices in different countries. We can see that Sweden has had a 
much  stronger  growth  in  consumption  than  the  countries  affected  by  severe  falls  in  house 
prices.  Weaker  consumption  demand  has  direct  effects  on  growth,  and  thus  also  on 
unemployment (see Figure 7). This in turn has indirect effects on financial stability in that the 
banks’ loan losses in the corporate sector may increase as a result of the poorer economic 
activity. 
Another  aspect  that  can  affect  financial  stability  is  that  an  increasingly  large  share  of  the 
banks’  funding  is  through  foreign  investors  (see  Figure  8).  Confidence  among  foreign 
investors  may  be  affected  substantially  by  a  fall  in  house  prices.  This  could  have  direct 
effects  on  financial  stability  in  that  the  banks  have  greater  difficulty  obtaining  funding  
– historically, foreign investors have proved to be “volatile”. Indirect effects may then arise on 
the macro economy in that the banks’ lending declines, which subdues demand. 
A combination of all of these effects may mean that the consequences for the economy are 
serious,  if  there  is  a  decline  in  the  housing  market.  So  how  much  should  we  worry  about 
this? 
The Riksbank’s inquiry into the risks in the Swedish housing market, which was published in 
spring 2011, showed that the high house prices in Sweden can largely be explained by high 
incomes, low real interest rates and a low rate of construction. The low rate of construction, 
particularly in metropolitan regions, is something I consider to be a growing problem. At the 
same  time,  our  inquiry  noted  that  the  fact  that  there  are  explanations  for  the  high  house 
prices  in  Sweden  does  not  offer  a  guarantee  against  future  price  falls.  The  trend  of 
increasing  debt  among  households,  combined  with  a  large  share  of  mortgages  at  variable 
rates, may also have meant that households’ sensitivity to fluctuations in house prices and 
interest rates has increased over time. Several international studies imply that a high level of 
debt in itself can aggravate the negative effects of a fall in house prices on consumption.2 
Since we published the inquiry into the risks in the Swedish housing market, house prices 
have  levelled  off,  and  household  debt  has  increased  at  a  slower  rate.  It  is  important  to 
remember  that  this  development  is  probably  partly  explained  by  the  monetary  policy 
conducted; for instance, the repo rate was raised in connection with the strong recovery after 
the  financial  crisis,  and  as  I  mentioned,  we  have  taken  into  account  the  risks  linked  to 
household debt in our repo-rate decisions over the past year. Another possible reason for the 
slower developments is the mortgage cap, to which I will return later. As household debt in 
Sweden  is  still  high,  and  higher  than  in  many  of  the  countries  that  have  suffered  major 
problems, I still consider the risks to be substantial (see Figure 5).  
                                                 
1  See, for instance, Sveriges Riksbank (2011), The Riksbank’s inquiry into risks in the Swedish housing market.  
2  See,  for  instance,  IMF  (2012),  World  Economic  Outlook,  April,  and  also  R.  Glick  and  K.J.  Lancing  (2010), 
“Global  Household  Leverage,  House  Prices,  and  Consumption”,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  San  Francisco 
Economic  Letter  1.  For  an  interesting  comparison  of  different  geographical  areas  in  the  United  States,  see 
A. Mian, K. Rao and A. Sufi  (2011), “Household Balance Sheets, Consumption, and the Economic Slump”, 
Chicago Booth Working Paper, November. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The repo rate is a blunt instrument for dealing with financial imbalances 
We have seen that there are risks in Sweden linked to household debt, but is the repo rate 
really the best tool to deal with them? 
It  is  obvious  that  the  repo  rate  affects  the  supply  of  credit  in  the  economy.  When  one 
discusses the effects of the repo rate on the economy, one usually talks about the interest 
rate channel, the credit channel and the exchange rate channel. The interest rate channel 
means,  to  put  it  simply,  that  it  becomes  more  attractive  to  borrow  than  to  save  when  the 
interest rate is cut, and vice versa. The credit channel has an impact through asset prices, for 
instance, house prices, rising when the interest rate is cut. This means that the value of the 
collateral  for  the  loan  increases,  which  pushes  up  the  banks’  lending.  The  exchange  rate 
channel means that a lower interest rate tends to weaken the exchange rate and contribute 
to higher import prices. To the extent that the real exchange rate also weakens, it contributes 
to an increase in net exports, as the relationship between export and import prices changes.3 
Two of the three channels for monetary policy thus have an impact by affecting demand and 
supply  with  regard  to  credit  in  the  economy.  One  sometimes  also  talks  about  a  fourth 
channel;  the  risk-taking  channel,  which  means  that  a  lower  interest  rate  contributes  to  the 
banks increasing their risk-taking when lending.4 All in all, it is clear that monetary policy has 
an effect on household debt and asset prices, although it can be difficult to determine exactly 
how large and how lasting this effect is. We have limited experience of low interest rates over 
longer periods of time. There is a clear risk that the current low interest rates will encourage 
greater indebtedness than is reasonable in a long-run perspective. 
But, at the same time, the interest rate is a blunt instrument to manage the risks linked to 
household debt and house prices. One reason for this is that an adjustment in the interest 
rate also affects the economy through the exchange rate channel, which has further effects 
on inflation and the real economy. But the impact of the interest rate can also be too broad in 
other ways, such as when one wishes to slow down household borrowing but not corporate 
investment. A higher interest rate aimed at limiting financial imbalances therefore entails a 
balance, where short-term losses in the form of lower inflation and growth, must be weighed 
against long-term gains in the form of lower risks linked to a high level of household debt.  
As  I  am  sure  you  are  aware,  I  think  that  the  recent  monetary  policy  decisions  entail  a 
reasonable balance between these factors under the prevailing circumstances. However, this 
does  not  mean  that  there  is  no  room  for  improvement  in  the  future.  A  new  policy  
area  –  macroprudential  policy  –  could  offer  better  honed  tools  than  the  interest  rate  for 
dealing with financial imbalances. 
Macroprudential policy is better suited to managing financial imbalances than 
monetary policy… 
The  experiences  of  the  global  financial  crisis  have  led  to  extensive  international  work  on 
regulation, and to many countries now establishing new organisational structures and tools in 
what  is  known  as  macroprudential  policy.5  Unlike  the  traditional  financial  supervision  
–  microprudential  supervision  –  which  focuses  on  the  risks  in  an  individual  institution,  the 
                                                 
3  The real exchange rate is defined as the nominal exchange rate adjusted by prices in Sweden in relation to 
prices abroad. An alternative definition is that the real exchange rate compares prices in Sweden and abroad, 
measured in the same currency. 
4  See,  for  instance,  M.  Apel  and  C.A.  Claussen  (2012),  “Monetary  policy,  interest  rates  and  risk  taking”, 
Sveriges Riksbank Economic Review no. 2. 
5  For a more detailed description of macroprudential policy, see for instance C. Nordh-Berntsson and J. Molin 
(2012), “A Swedish framework for macroprudential policy”, Economic Review, no. 1, Sveriges Riksbank, and 
my  colleague  Karolina  Ekholm’s  speech  “Macroprudential  policy  and  clear  communication  contribute  to 
financial stability,” published on 30 March 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
focus for macroprudential policy is the risks in the financial system as a whole (see Figure 9). 
The  supervision  of  individual  institutions  is,  of  course,  also important  to  the  stability  of  the 
financial system, not least as financial institutions are regarded as “systemically important”. 
But  to  capture  the  build-up  of  risks  that  could  threaten  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  
–  what  are  known  as  systemic  risks  –  it  is  not  enough  to  keep  an  eye  on  individual 
institutions. One needs to supplement this with a systemic, or macro, perspective. 
Macroprudential  policy  also  requires  appropriate  tools.  Let  me  discuss  some  of  the 
macroprudential tools that could be useful to specifically manage the risks linked to house 
prices and household debt.6 
Countercyclical  capital  buffers  are  one  of  the  most  discussed  tools,  and  are  a  part  of  the 
Basel  III  international  regulatory  framework.7  The  idea  is  to  vary  the  capital  requirements 
made of the banks; when there is strong credit growth, the requirements will be increased, 
while they will be reduced during financial stress, when there is otherwise a risk of a credit 
crunch. The reason for this is simple: the banks will build up capital during the good times, 
which  can  then  be  used  during  the  bad  times.  The  main  aim  is  to  increase  the  banks’ 
resilience  in  that  more  capital  can be  used  to absorb  losses  during  tougher  times,  so  that 
they avoid becoming insolvent. Moreover, higher capital requirements during the good times 
will contribute to slowing down the credit cycle by reducing the banks’ lending. However, it is 
important to remember that countercyclical capital buffers are a broad tool, which affects all 
bank lending. 
Other  macroprudential  instruments  are  even  more  specifically  aimed  at  limiting  the  risks 
linked to household mortgages, for instance.  
One means of more specifically limiting the risks in the banks’ mortgage lending is to apply 
sector-specific risk weights. Put simply, this means that the banks must hold more capital for 
certain parts of their lending, in this case mortgage lending. Finansinspektionen (the Swedish 
financial supervisory authority) has recently announced a proposal for a minimum level for 
risk weights on mortgages. We at the Riksbank have also been arguing for a long time that 
the risk weights on mortgages in Sweden need to be increased. But a general increase in 
risk weights is of a more structural nature.8 On the other hand, if the risk weights are allowed 
to vary over time, they can be used as a specific macroprudential instrument with the aim of 
counteracting  risks  in  the  mortgage  market:  the  banks  must  hold  more  capital  during  the 
good  times  for  their  mortgage  lending,  but  not  for  all  forms  of  lending;  rather  like  a 
countercyclical capital buffer, but just for mortgage lending.  
A further example of more specific macroprudential instruments are the different limits as to 
how  much  households  may  borrow.  This  can  be  done  by  setting  a  limit  for  how  large  a 
mortgage can be in relation to the collateral, also known as a mortgage cap or LTV (loan-to-
value)  requirement.  This  was  introduced  in  Sweden  as  a  general  recommendation  from 
Finansinspektionen in the autumn of 2010. In simple terms, it imposes a maximum loan-to-
                                                 
6  Of  course,  there  are  also  macroprudential  tools  with  other  purposes  than  to  reduce  the  risks  linked  to 
household  debt  and  the  housing  market,  for  instance,  limiting  the  risks  arising  from  the  links  between  the 
banks,  what  are  known  as  structural  risks.  See,  for  instance,  C.  Nordh-Berntsson  and  J.  Molin  (2012), 
“Creating  a  Swedish  toolbox  for  macroprudential  policy,”  Riksbank  study,  Sveriges  Riksbank,  and  my 
colleague  Karolina  Ekholm’s  speech  “How  can  financial  crises  be  avoided  in  Sweden?”,  published  on 
27 September  2012.  For  a  general  discussion  of  possible  tools  to  manage  the  risks  linked  to  the  housing 
market  and  household  debt,  see  T.  Andersson,  C.A.  Claussen,  B.  Lagerwall  and  P.  Torstensson  (2011), 
“Tools  and  institutions  for  influencing  house  prices  and  household  debt”,  in  The  Riksbank’s  inquiry  into  the 
risks in the Swedish housing market, Sveriges Riksbank. 
7  See also R. Juks and O. Melander (2012), “Countercyclical capital buffers as a macroprudential instrument”, 
Riksbank study, December, Sveriges Riksbank. 
8  See the article “Higher risk weights for Swedish mortgages promote financial stability”, in Financial Stability 
Report 2012:2, Sveriges Riksbank. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
value ratio of 85 per cent when purchasing a house. One alternative is to limit borrowing in 
relation to income, what is known as an LTI (loan-to-income) requirement. A further means of 
limiting  household  debt  is  the  amortisation  requirement  for  mortgages.  A  mathematical 
example  is  used  in  our  most  recent  Financial  Stability  Report  to  show  that  amortisation 
requirements can have substantial effects on household debt.9 
…but there is no framework for macroprudential policy in Sweden, and one needs to 
be implemented as soon as possible 
There are thus a number of tools that can be used instead of the repo rate to reduce the risks 
related to household debt, and which in many cases would probably be more effective. 
But one condition for macroprudential policy to work as intended is that there is a framework 
in place, with a clear division of responsibility and which clarifies how the various instruments 
should  be  used.  One  reason  why  monetary  policy  in  Sweden  has  needed  to  give 
consideration  to  financial  imbalances  is  because  there  has  been  no  framework  for 
macroprudential policy.  
While  awaiting  a  permanent  framework  in  Sweden,  the  Riksbank  and  Finansinspektionen 
started a joint council for cooperation on macroprudential policy at the beginning of 2012. But 
even if this council offers an important forum for analysis and discussion, it has no powers of 
decision-making and no tools of its own at its disposal. Two days ago, however, the Financial 
Crisis Committee produced a proposal for macroprudential policy in Sweden – which I will 
return to later on. 
Central banks should play an important role in macroprudential policy 
When drawing up a framework for macroprudential policy in Sweden, I think there are good 
reasons for giving the Riksbank a central role.  
One important reason is that the Riksbank has long been conducting extensive analysis of 
macroprudential  policy  issues.  Ever  since  the  Swedish  bank  crisis  in  the  early  1990s,  the 
Riksbank has gradually built up substantial knowledge and experience of analysing the risks 
that can threaten the stability of the financial system. The basis for this was the Bank’s task 
of promoting a safe and efficient payment system – what we in practice define as financial 
stability.10  In  1997  the  Riksbank  began  publishing  its  assessment  of  the  stability  of  the 
financial system, in the form of the Financial Stability Report, published twice a year. It was 
one  of  the  first  central  banks  in  the  world  to  do  this.  The  special  Macroprudential  Policy 
Division at the Riksbank’s Financial Stability Department has as one of its tasks to assess 
the  need  for  specific  macroprudential  policy  measures.  The  Riksbank’s  Monetary  Policy 
Department  has  long  conducted  macroeconomic  analysis  to  provide  a  good  guidance  for 
interest-rate  decisions,  which  are  based  on  macroeconomic  analyses  and  forecasts.  The 
analysis  of  financial  stability,  combined  with  the  monetary  policy  analysis,  provides  good 
grounds for understanding the repercussions between the financial and real economy, which 
is essential for successful macroprudential policy. In recent years the cooperation between 
the Financial Stability and Monetary Policy Departments at the Riksbank has intensified.  
There are also clear links between monetary policy and macroprudential policy. Both policy 
areas ultimately aim for a stable macroeconomic development – macroprudential policy by 
limiting systemic risk and monetary policy by keeping inflation low and stable and stabilising 
the  real  economy.  But  they  also  affect  the  conditions  for  one  another  (see  Figure  10). 
                                                 
9  Sveriges Riksbank (2012), Financial Stability Report 2012:2. 
10  The Riksbank shares the responsibility for financial stability in Sweden with Finansinspektionen, the Swedish 
National  Debt  Office  and  the  Swedish  government,  through  the  Ministry  of  Finance.  However,  these 
authorities all play slightly different roles in the work. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Macroprudential instruments affect the amount of credit in different ways, and thus also have 
an effect on the macro economy. Monetary policy needs to relate to these effects. Monetary 
policy  can  also,  as  I  mentioned,  affect  household  debt  and  asset  prices  through  various 
channels,  and  thereby  the  conditions  for  macroprudential  policy.  Both  the  monetary  policy 
transmission  mechanism  and  the  monetary  policy  objectives  –  price  stability  and  real 
economic  stability  –  are  dependent  on  the  financial  system  being  stable  and  thereby  on 
macroprudential policy being able to manage systemic risk. As I see it, there is a need for a 
close cooperation between those responsible for monetary policy and those responsible for 
macroprudential  policy,  to  ensure  that  one  does  not  make  decisions  that  counteract  one 
another. 
Like monetary policy, macroprudential policy is linked to uncomfortable decisions that have a 
beneficial  outcome  in  the  long  run,  but  where  it  may  be  difficult  to  see  the  benefits  in  the 
short run. It is therefore necessary to have a substantial degree of independence, from both 
the political system and sector interests, for macroprudential policy to function properly. As 
the Riksbank already has a statutory independence, this also indicates that it should play a 
major role in macroprudential policy. 
The financial supervisory authority in Sweden, Finansinspektionen, also promotes stability in 
the financial system, but with a greater focus on individual institutions – what we usually call 
microprudential  supervision.  As  knowledge  of  the  risks  in  individual  financial  institutions  is 
extremely 
that 
Finansinspektionen  also  participates  in  macroprudential  policy  (see  Figure 9).  This  is 
particularly  important  in  a  country  like  Sweden  with  four  dominant  major  banks.  Thus,  the 
competence  and  experience  of  both  the  Riksbank  and  Finansinspektionen  will  need  to  be 
utilised if macroprudential policy is to be effective in Sweden. What other requirements can 
one  reasonably  make  of  a  framework  for  macroprudential  policy  so  that  it  will  function 
efficiently? 
for  successful  macroprudential  policy, 
is  essential 
important 
it 
The framework for macroprudential policy in Sweden should entail a clear mandate 
and effective tools… 
The  Riksbank  has  earlier  highlighted  a  number  of  general  criteria  that  should  be  met  for 
macroprudential policy to function successfully, and which I certainly agree with. There are 
four main criteria.11  
Firstly,  it  is  necessary  to  have  a  good  power  for  decision  making,  in  the  form  of  a  clear 
mandate and well-defined tools. Secondly, a strong independence from political and sector-
specific  considerations  is  needed,  as  I  mentioned  earlier.  Independence  assumes,  thirdly, 
that there are forms for clearly holding the authorities accountable, for instance, through far-
reaching  requirements  for  transparency  and  reporting.  Fourthly,  a  substantial  and  lasting 
capacity for analysis is required. 
These criteria – combined with an important role for the central bank, which I have argued in 
favour of today – are also largely reflected in a recommendation from the European Systemic 
Risk Board (ESRB). The European macroprudential supervisory body ESRB was created in 
response to the financial crisis and began operating in 2011.12 The purpose is to contribute to 
preventing or reducing systemic risks in the EU. The primary instrument for doing this is the 
ability  to  issue  warnings  or  recommendations  if  significant  risks  are  identified.  The  ESRB 
                                                 
11  See,  for  instance,  the  Executive  Board’s  consultation  response  to  the  report  Evaluation  of  the  Riksbank’s 
monetary policy and work on financial stability 2005–2010 (2010/11:RFR5), published on 30 November 2011. 
In  addition  to  the  four  criteria,  it  is  also  emphasises  there  that  the  Riksbank  should  play  a  central  role  in 
macroprudential policy, which I have argued in favour of today. 
12  It is headed by ECB Chairman Mario Draghi and consists mainly of the central banks and financial supervisory 
authorities within the EU, with the first-mentioned having the right to vote. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
does not have any binding instruments of its own at its disposal; instead it assumes that the 
EU member states themselves will establish systems for this. Thus, an important part of the 
discussion  on  how  macroprudential  policy  should  be  organised 
the  ESRB’s 
recommendation to the EU member states’ governments in this field, which was published in 
January 2012. 
The ESRB recommends that macroprudential responsibility should lie with one institution or 
one council and that this body should have control over suitable tools to attain its objectives. 
This is to establish a clear responsibility. Moreover, they recommend that the central banks 
should play a leading role in macroprudential policy and that the macroprudential supervisory 
body should have operational independence. 
It  is  now  time  for  me  to  return  to  the  Financial  Crisis  Committee’s  proposal,  and  how  this 
relates 
for 
macroprudential policy – demands that are also expressed in the ESRB’s recommendation. 
I  consider  should  be  made  regarding  a 
the  demands 
framework 
to 
is 
…but the Financial Crisis Committee’s proposal does not go very far…  
Two days ago, 23 January, the Financial Crisis Committee published its proposal as to how 
we should organise macroprudential policy in Sweden.13 In principle, the proposal is that the 
current  council  for  cooperation  on  macroprudential  policy  between  the  Riksbank  and 
Finansinspektionen is confirmed by law and supplemented with independent experts and an 
observer from the Ministry of Finance. The council shall work to promote greater knowledge 
of systemic risks and to develop macroprudential tools. Moreover, it shall analyse risks and 
discuss suitable measures. A secretariat for the council will be established at the Riksbank. 
However, the council will not have any powers of authority; its work will consist of exchanging 
information and discussion. Decisions on the application of macroprudential tools will lie with 
Finansinspektionen or the Riksbank, with both being given responsibility for macroprudential 
policy.  They  are  also  to  consult  with  one  another  prior  to  decisions  on  applying 
macroprudential  tools.  The  committee  does  not  offer  any  suggestions  as  to  which 
macroprudential tools are needed or how they should be divided between the authorities.  
My assessment is therefore that the Financial Crisis Committee’s proposal, which means that 
both  the  Riksbank  and  Finansinspektionen  will  become  macroprudential  bodies,  does  not 
fulfil 
independence  and 
accountability.  And  nor  does  the  proposal  appear  to  be  in  line  with  the  ESRB’s 
recommendation. 
regarding  decision-making  powers, 
important  criteria 
the 
…and differs from the practice that is emerging in Europe 
Moreover, the Financial Crisis Committee’s proposals differ from the structures emerging in 
other EU countries. Two models are predominant in this context, and both of them are in line 
with the ESRB’s recommendation. Either the responsibility for macroprudential policy is given 
to the central bank, as in the United Kingdom, or it is given to a number of authorities, with 
the  central  bank  playing  the  leading  role,  expressed  for  instance  in  the  form  of  a 
chairmanship or right of veto, as in the case of Germany. If the council’s solution is chosen, 
the  council  normally  also  confers  the  right  of  making  recommendations  regarding 
macroprudential measures. 
I think it would be good if we introduced a structure for macroprudential policy that does not 
differ too much from those being introduced in other EU countries, as the financial markets 
are strongly integrated and a similar structure for macroprudential policy within the EU would 
                                                 
13  Here I am giving my personal views on the Financial Crisis Committee’s proposal. The Riksbank will present a 
consultation response later in the spring containing more detailed views and comments.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
facilitate  international  cooperation.  The  need  for  international  cooperation  is  based  on  the 
fact  that  measures  introduced,  or  not  introduced,  on  one  country  can  often  have 
consequences for the financial stability of other countries.  
As I mentioned earlier, it is extremely important to create a clear mandate and efficient tools 
for  macroprudential  policy  in  Sweden.  I  would  like  to  have  seen  the  Financial  Crisis 
Committee present a proposal that provided a more active structure, and which was closer to 
the  ESRB’s  recommendation.14  For  instance,  it  will  probably  often  be  unclear  who  should 
react  to  a  risk  that  has  arisen,  and  it  will  therefore  also  be  difficult  to  hold  an  authority 
accountable for what it has done or failed to do. 
However, I am glad that the Financial Crisis Committee has now presented its proposal, as it 
provides an important contribution to the discussion on how macroprudential policy should be 
developed and organised in Sweden. 
Efficient macroprudential policy increases the Riksbank’s possibilities to carry out its 
main tasks  
Let me summarise by emphasising my most important message today. Monetary policy has 
to some extent also given consideration to the risks arising from household debt, in addition 
to inflation and resource utilisation. We are eager to avoid the unpleasant developments in a 
number  of  countries  in  recent  years.  At  the  same  time,  I  believe  that  there  are  several 
macroprudential  policy  tools  that  could  be  more  efficient  than  the  repo  rate  in  preventing 
financial imbalances. 
So  far,  there  is  no  framework  for  macroprudential  policy  in  Sweden,  and  this  needs  to  be 
remedied  as  soon  as  possible.  In  my  opinion,  there  are  good  reasons  why  the  Riksbank 
should  play  a  major  role  in  macroprudential  policy.  We  have  long  conducted  analysis  of 
macroprudential policy issues; moreover, there are clear points of contact between monetary 
policy and macroprudential policy, for instance, the fact that they affect the conditions for one 
another. The Financial Crisis Committee’s proposal does not provide a clear framework for 
macroprudential  policy  in  Sweden,  and  the  proposal  also  differs  from  the  ESRB’s 
recommendation and from the practice in other EU countries.  
In the future, it is desirable that the Riksbank should be able to use the policy rate to an even 
greater  extent  to  stabilise  inflation  and  the  real  economy  in  the  future,  and  that  more 
appropriate tools than the repo rate can be used to reduce the risks of financial imbalances. 
A functioning framework for macroprudential policy can improve the conditions for ensuring 
that the Riksbank attains its two main objectives: price stability and financial stability.  
 
                                                  
14  An on-going inquiry into capital adequacy rules is to present its report by 15 May. Its task includes appointing 
an authority to be responsible for countercyclical capital buffers in Sweden. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  9
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  11
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  13
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 