Kikuo Iwata: Quantitative and qualitative monetary easing and its 
transmission mechanism – logic behind the first arrow 
Speech by Mr Kikuo Iwata, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting held by the 
Kyoto Chamber of Commerce and Industry (KCCI), Tokyo, 28 August 2013. 
 Introduction 
It  is  a  great  honor  to  appear  in  front  of  distinguished  members  and  guests  of  the  Kyoto 
Chamber of Commerce and Industry, and to have this opportunity to address you today. 
I  have  been  told  that  this  chamber  was  founded  in  1882,  and  thus  celebrated  its  130th 
anniversary  last year. Incidentally, the Bank of Japan  was also founded in the same year. 
This means that our organizations have followed the same history over the years. 
In the old days, I understand that the business community in Kyoto made efforts to start new 
businesses, such as electricity generation, host an exposition, and establish this chamber, in 
an  attempt  to  regenerate  the  vigor  that  had  been  lost  in  the  aftermath  of  the  capital’s 
relocation to Tokyo. At that time, Japan as a nation faced a need to found a central bank in 
order  to  collect  the  large  amount  of  banknotes  issued  by  the  Meiji  Government  after  the 
Seinan War in 1877. The fact that this chamber and the Bank were founded in the same year 
may not be a matter of coincidence, as these organizations respectively played crucial roles 
in  helping  with  the  initial  footsteps  for  Kyoto  toward  becoming  a  modern  city  and  Japan 
toward evolving into a modern nation. 
Kyoto  is  a  city  that  enjoys  more  than  1,200  years  of  history.  It  is  also  called  the  city  of 
innovation,  where  creative  ideas  have  flourished  for  many  years.  Most  recently,  we  have 
been  reminded  of  this  attractive  quality  of  Kyoto  in  the  person  of  Professor  Yamanaka  of 
Kyoto  University,  who  received  the  Nobel  Prize.  In  my  view,  the  reason  Kyoto  excels  in 
creating  innovation  owes  much  to  the  accumulation  of  knowledge  over  the  years  and  the 
city’s culture of freedom and creativity being respected. 
Indeed, looking at the number of university students per population in each prefecture, Kyoto 
is ranked first, ahead of Tokyo, suggesting that it is the city of academics in Japan. For my 
part,  as  I  had  been  in  academia  for  a  number  of  years  before  joining  the  Bank,  I  am 
particularly interested in how the interaction between the university – a place for education 
and  research  –  and  the  industry  –  a  place  for  businesses  –  can  contribute  to  the 
development of Kyoto. I will keep my attention on this interaction with great interest. 
Three arrows 
I.  
Today, I would like to explain the monetary easing that the Bank has been conducting. 
As  you  know,  the  Japanese  government  has  already  fired  “three  arrows”;  namely,  bold 
monetary  easing,  flexible  fiscal  policy,  and  a  growth  strategy  to  encourage  private 
investment.  By  combining  these  arrows,  it  aims  to  overcome  deflation  and  address  the 
challenges faced by Japan’s economy. Before discussing the main theme of my talk, let me 
elaborate on the respective roles that these play (Slide 1). 
The  first  arrow  is  bold  monetary  easing,  with  which  the  Bank  is  making  progress.  In  a 
nutshell, the Bank conducts aggressive monetary easing with a view to achieving the price 
stability target of 2 percent. The intention is to close the negative output gap and put Japan’s 
economy back on track to a sustainable growth path, or potential growth path. I will explain 
my own thinking about the first arrow’s transmission mechanism and its effects on economy 
activity as plainly as possible. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The second arrow is flexible fiscal policy. While the first arrow is an extremely powerful policy 
measure, it takes some time until favorable effects from this permeate the economy. It is for 
this reason that flexible fiscal stimulus by the government is necessary at an initial stage of 
the policy package in order to underpin economic activity from the demand side. At present, 
public  investment  has  been  increasing  mainly  on  the  back  of  the  emergency  economic 
measures that were based on the supplementary budget for fiscal 2012 enacted in February 
2013. 
The third arrow is a growth strategy to encourage private investment. This is aimed at raising 
the  sustainable  growth  path  itself  and  enhancing  the  room  for  Japan’s  economy  to  grow, 
whereas  both  the  first  arrow  of  monetary  policy  and  the  second  arrow  of  fiscal  policy  are 
aimed at returning Japan’s economy to the sustainable growth path by expanding the size of 
the aggregate demand. While I will not go into the details of the third arrow today, we expect 
that the government will steadily implement various measures including those of the “Japan 
Revitalization Strategy,” released in June, under the leadership of Prime Minister Abe. 
The respective roles of the three arrows that I just explained can be summarized as in my 
presentation  slide  (Slide  2).  The  real  GDP  growth  rate  –  which  represents  the  vigor  in 
economic  activity  –  is  plotted  on  the  vertical  axis,  while  the  horizontal  axis  represents  the 
time horizon and the bold line shows the growth trajectory of Japan’s economy. At present, 
the economy is below the dotted line that represents the potential growth path it is supposed 
to follow. This owes to the fact that it is in a vicious cycle under which a decline in aggregate 
demand on the back of a continued fall in prices – that is, a state of deflation – leads to a 
further fall in prices. 
In order to revitalize the economy, which has fallen into this vicious cycle of deflation and a 
decline  in  aggregate  demand,  bold  monetary  easing  –  the  first  arrow  –  is  effective  and 
imperative as a means of stopping the continued fall in prices and bringing economic activity 
to the level that should have been achieved. This represents the thinking behind the Bank’s 
current monetary easing policy. It is exactly what I have been emphasizing as a researcher 
for a number of years. 
As I said before, it will take some time until the effects of the first arrow (monetary policy) 
permeate the economy. It is for this reason that the effects of the second arrow (fiscal policy) 
will first materialize, and as the effects of monetary easing strengthen, the actual economic 
growth path will approach the potential growth path shown as the dotted line in Slide 2. 
In contrast, the third arrow (growth strategy) plays a role of raising the potential growth path 
depicted by the dotted line. In other words, while monetary policy and fiscal policy are the 
policies to restore economic strength from its temporary decline to being in a sound state, the 
growth strategy is meant to raise the capabilities of the economy itself. For Japan’s economy 
to achieve long-term growth, this growth strategy is a key to success. 
II. What is “quantitative and qualitative monetary easing”? 
Now, I would like to focus my speech on today’s main theme: the first arrow, which is the 
monetary easing policy the Bank has been conducting. 
On January 22, 2013, the Bank newly introduced the “price stability target” of 2 percent in 
terms of the year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI). Furthermore, the 
Bank decided on April 4 to enter a new phase of monetary easing both in terms of quantity 
and quality in order to achieve that target at the earliest possible time, with a time horizon of 
about two years. This is the bold monetary easing policy called “quantitative and qualitative 
monetary easing” (hereafter QQE). 
I would now like to explain, as plainly as possible, the key features of the monetary easing 
that the Bank has been conducting. However, given that my speech is on monetary policy, it 
will indeed involve technical terms to some degree, and I would like to ask you to bear with 
me in that regard. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
First,  the  Bank  has  made  a  clear  commitment  to  achieving  the  price  stability  target  of 
2 percent at the earliest possible time, with a time horizon of about two years. As concrete 
measures  toward  achieving  that  commitment,  the  Bank  has  implemented  a  new  phase  of 
monetary easing – the QQE (Slide 3). 
For  the  monetary  easing  measure  to  actually  exert  effects,  it  is  vital  that  the  central  bank 
express  its  strong  intention  –  in  other  words,  a  commitment  –  that  it  is  responsible  for 
achieving  the  price  stability  target  of  2  percent,  and  that  this  is  accompanied  by  concrete 
measures  underpinning  such  a  commitment.  When  the  central  bank  commits  itself  to 
achieving  the  inflation  target  and  implements  bold  monetary  easing  measures  toward 
achieving  the  target,  people’s  expectations  change  from  deflationary  to  inflationary,  their 
behaviors change, and developments in the economy as a whole start to change. This is a 
major key to achieving policy effects. 
The second feature of the QQE is that the Bank’s main operating target for money market 
operations  has  been  changed  from  the  money  market  rates  to  an  indicator  called  the 
monetary  base.  The  monetary  base  is  the  total  of  banknotes  and  coins  in  circulation  –  in 
other words, the total amount of cash – and the amount outstanding of financial institutions’ 
current accounts held at the Bank; or, simply put, the amount equivalent to the money the 
Bank has supplied to the economy. 
We  have  decided  to  conduct  money  market  operations  so  that  the  monetary  base  will 
increase at an annual pace of about 60–70 trillion yen. As a result, the amount outstanding of 
the monetary base is expected to almost double in two years, from 138 trillion yen at end-
2012 to 270 trillion yen at end-2014. This corresponds to the quantitative aspect of the QQE. 
The  third  feature  of  the  QQE  is  that  the  Bank  has  expanded  its  purchases  of  Japanese 
government  bonds  (JGBs)  as  a  measure  to  increase  the  monetary  base  (Slide  4). 
Specifically,  the  Bank  purchases  JGBs  through  financial  markets  so  that  their  amount 
outstanding  will  increase  at  an  annual  pace  of  about  50  trillion  yen.  Consequently,  the 
amount  outstanding  of  the  Bank’s  JGB  holdings  is  expected  to  more  than  double  in  two 
years, from 89 trillion yen at end-2012 to 190 trillion yen at end-2014. 
Furthermore,  maturities  of  government  bonds  range  from  those  with  a  short-term  of  few 
months to those with super-long maturities of 40 years. Upon making JGBs with all maturities 
eligible for purchases, the Bank has decided to extend the average remaining maturity of the 
Bank’s  JGB  purchases  from  slightly  less  than  three  years  to  about  seven  years,  which  is 
roughly  equivalent  to  the  average  maturity  of  the  amount  outstanding  of  JGBs  issued.  In 
general, the longer the period until maturity, the higher the risk of volatility in prices of JGBs. 
Therefore,  by  extending  the  maturity  of  its  JGB  purchases,  the  Bank  is  thus  taking  higher 
risk. This increase in JGB purchases and their maturity extension represent monetary easing 
both in terms of quantity and quality. 
The fourth feature is that, aside from the aforementioned purchases of JGBs, the Bank has 
decided  to  expand  purchases  of  other  assets  with  higher  risk;  namely,  exchange-traded 
funds (ETFs) and Japan real estate investment trusts (J-REITs). ETFs are investment trusts 
that  are  designed  so  that  prices  are  linked  to  stock  indices  such  as  the  Nikkei  225  Stock 
Average and TOPIX, and they are traded in stock exchanges. For example, purchasing stock 
index  ETFs  would  be  the  same  as  indirectly  buying  stocks.  By  contrast,  J-REITs  are 
investment trusts that invest in multiple real estate such as office buildings and commercial 
facilities. In other words, purchasing J-REITs would mean indirectly investing in real estate. 
The  Bank  will  increase  the  amount  outstanding of  its  holdings  of  ETFs and  J-REITs  at  an 
annual pace of about 1 trillion yen and about 30 billion yen, respectively. We expect that the 
Bank’s purchases of such assets with relatively high risk – or put differently, the conduct of 
monetary easing from the qualitative aspect – will encourage risk taking activities in the real 
economy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
The fifth feature of the QQE is that the Bank aims to achieve the 2 percent “price stability 
target” and will continue with the QQE as long as it is necessary for maintaining that target in 
a stable manner (Slide 5). The first feature I mentioned earlier is a commitment to definitely 
achieving the target, while the fifth is a commitment regarding the continuation of the QQE, 
such that the Bank will continue with the QQE for as long as it is necessary to achieve the 
target.  These  two  types  of  commitments  –  accompanied  with  responsibility  –  will  increase 
public confidence in the Bank’s policies and are an important key to ultimately achieving the 
policy effects. 
The  last  feature  I  would  like  to  point  out  is  that  the  Bank  attaches  great  importance  to  its 
communication with market participants. As I have explained, the Bank’s monetary policy is 
conducted mainly through transactions with market participants in the money market; in other 
words, through its money market operations. As the Bank embarks on monetary easing of an 
unprecedented  scale,  its  counterparty  financial  institutions  will  also  face  situations  not 
experienced  before.  Therefore,  we  consider  it  crucial  to  hold  an  enhanced  dialogue  with 
market  participants  pertaining  to  money  market  operations  and  market  transactions  more 
generally, and to seek a reasonable way forward. 
Transmission mechanism of the QQE 
III.  
So far, I have explained the details of the Bank’s monetary easing policy, including those of a 
technical nature. The next question is: How does it affect people’s daily lives? I gather that 
participants today are most interested in this question. I will explain my own thinking on the 
QQE’s transmission mechanism and its effects permeating the economy. 
Slide  6,  while  somewhat  technical,  displays  the  major  components  of  the  transmission 
mechanism  of  the  monetary  easing  policy.  Please  bear  with  me  as  I  explain  this  slide  by 
item. As I have already explained, there are two pillars, listed on the top of the slide, to the 
Bank’s  monetary  easing  policy.  The first  is  the commitment  to  achieving  the  price  stability 
target of 2 percent. In other words, the Bank is committed to its responsibility to achieve “the 
price stability target of 2 percent in terms of the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI at the 
earliest possible time, with a time horizon of about two years.” The second pillar is the QQE 
that  underpins  this  commitment,  and  here  it  is  described  as  an  increase  in  the  monetary 
base. 
These two pillars – the introduction of the price stability target and the accompanying bold 
monetary easing – will lead to a rise in the expected rates of inflation – that is, the course of 
inflation that the public expects to take place in the future. As inflation expectations rise, the 
expected real interest rates — the real burden incorporating the price rises — will fall. 
Let me elaborate on what I mean by this, as it is somewhat difficult to understand. Suppose 
you borrow money at the rate of 3 percent. If inflation goes up by 2 percent per year, the 
value of the money you will pay back will decrease by 2 percent. Thus, even if the nominal 
interest rate is 3 percent, the real interest rate will become 1 percent, subtracting the rate of 
inflation (2  percent) from  the  nominal  interest  rate  (3  percent). In mathematical  terms, this 
can be written as follows: (expected real interest rates) = (nominal interest rates) – (inflation 
expectations).  Therefore,  if  inflation  expectations  rise  while  nominal  interest  rates  remain 
constant,  real  interest  rates  are  expected  to  decline  accordingly.  Alternatively,  even  if 
nominal interest rates rise, real interest rates are still expected to decline as long as nominal 
rates do not go up by as much as the rise in inflation expectations. 
This  may  sound  less  than  convincing,  considering  that  you  have  gone  through  prolonged 
periods of mild deflation. Looking back at the end of the 1990s, the 10-year JGB yields were 
around  6.5  percent  when  inflation  rates  stayed  at  around  3  percent.  While  nominal  rates 
were around 6.5 percent, the expected real rates were around 3.5 percent, if inflation rates 
were expected to stay at around 3 percent. If inflation rates were higher, the real rates could 
have been lower. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
A decline in the expected real interest rates through a rise in inflation expectations will feed 
into the economy by increasing demand through various channels. 
First, a decline in the expected real interest rates will lower the real cost of borrowing, thus 
stimulating business fixed investment and housing investment. In addition, it will become a 
factor  in  raising  the  prices  of  assets  such  as  equities,  homes,  and  land.  Those  who 
experienced a rise in the value of their own assets are likely to spend and consume more 
than before. This is called the wealth effect. Moreover, a rise in equity and land prices will 
improve the financial conditions of households and businesses; hence, it becomes easier for 
them  to  borrow  money,  and  it  is  more  likely  that  businesses  will  increase  business  fixed 
investment and households will increase housing investment. 
Furthermore, if the real interest rates of the yen become lower than those of other currencies, 
exchange rates are likely to move in the direction of the yen’s depreciation. Correction in the 
appreciation  of  the  yen  will  become  a  factor  in  boosting  exports  and  increasing  business 
fixed investment through a rise in corporate profits. Tourist destinations like Kyoto can attract 
more foreign  tourists  who  benefit from  the  yen’s  depreciation.  On  top  of  that, the  value  of 
overseas  assets,  if  revalued  in  yen,  will  rise,  which  could  feed  into  an  increase  in 
consumption due to the wealth effect. 
As stated above, the decline in the expected real interest rates caused by the first arrow will 
lead to an increase in three demand components – consumption, investment, and exports. 
Coupled with an increase in government outlays by the second arrow, the aggregate demand 
of  goods  and  services  will  gradually  increase.  In  Slide  6,  this  is  described  as  closing  the 
negative output gap, as the aggregate demand catches up with the capacity to supply. 
The increase in the aggregate demand of goods and services will ignite production activity 
and increase the labor demand. This will lead to an increase in the workforce and eventually 
a rise in wages per person. As a result, the income of the workforce as a whole will increase 
and invigorate consumption. 
As  consumption  increases,  business  fixed  investment  and  housing  investment  will  rise 
accordingly. An increase in exports on the back of the yen’s depreciation will also lead to a 
pick-up  in  investment  to  increase  production  capacity.  This  vigor  in  consumption  and 
investment  will  contribute  to  a  further  narrowing  of  the  output  gap,  which  will  lead  to  an 
increase in production; hence, the virtuous cycle prevails. 
In  the  initial  stage  of this  whole  process,  the  important key  is  for  the  public  to  expect  that 
prices will go up. Going through this process, demand will increase and prices will start to 
rise  in  reality  toward  the  price  stability  target  of  2  percent.  This  in  turn  will  reinforce  the 
public’s  expectations  that  prices  will  rise  stably  in  the  future,  thus  contributing  to  low  and 
stable expected real interest rates. 
As I have explained, Japan’s economy,  which had fallen into the vicious cycle of deflation 
and shrinking demand, is indeed on the verge of entering the virtuous cycle of moderate and 
stable inflation as well as increasing demand. 
You  may  have  an  impression  that  my  belief  in  the  need  to  exert  an  effect  on  the  public’s 
expectations sounds as though it is taken from a fairy tale. Intrinsically, monetary policy can 
elicit its effects through the public’s expectations. 
In my view, the most important point of our current conduct of monetary easing policy is to 
dispel the deflationary expectations that had been firmly embedded after nearly 15 years of 
deflation, and to generate mild and stable inflationary expectations. 
Economic activity 
IV.  
So  far,  with  the  help  of  the  flow  chart,  I  have  explained  how  the  Bank’s  monetary  easing 
policy  works  on  economic  activity.  In  the  remainder  of  my  speech,  I  would  like  to  briefly 
review how economic activity has been developing, based on statistical evidence. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
First and foremost, there is a need to dispel the deflationary expectations firmly embedded in 
the  public’s  mind  and  to  generate  inflation  expectations  (Slide  7).  In  this  regard,  the  most 
important initial step for the Bank is to set the price stability target of 2 percent in terms of the 
year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  and  make  a  strong  commitment  to  achieving  that 
target at the earliest possible time, with a time horizon of about two years. Once the effects 
of the policy start to materialize and the actual rate of inflation stays stably around the price 
stability  target,  inflation  expectations  will  be  anchored.  The  question  is:  What  do  actual 
inflation expectations look like? 
While it is difficult to gauge how the public formulates inflation expectations, it appears that 
they are gradually picking up as the QQE progresses, as evidenced by inflation expectations 
derived  from  the  yield  spread  between  fixed-rate  coupon-bearing  JGBs  and  inflation-index 
JGBs,  or  from  the  surveys  collected  from  the  bond  market  participants  in  securities  and 
institutional investment companies. 
In addition, according to the most recent result in the Opinion Survey on the General Public’s 
Views  and  Behavior  conducted  by  the  Bank,  the  share  of  respondents  who  expected  that 
prices will go up one year from now – excluding the effects of the consumption tax hike – – 
reached 80 percent. This suggests that the inflation expectations of households are picking 
up. 
As I said at the outset, a rise in inflation expectations will lead to a decline in the expected 
real interest rates, which can be derived by subtracting inflation expectations from nominal 
interest rates. Looking at the actual interest rates observed in financial markets, the inflation 
expectations  of  market  participants  have  been  on  a  rising  trend  and  the  expected  real 
interest rates have been on a declining trend since the beginning of 2013 (Slide 8). 
Next,  let  us  review  the  effects  of  such  a  decline  in  the  expected  real  interest  rates  on 
economic activity, based on historical data. Looking at the relationship between the expected 
real interest rates and business fixed investment, there is a tendency for the latter to expand 
when the expected rates are low (Slide 9). 
Moreover, a decline in the expected real interest rates will bring about a rise in asset prices. 
The movement between the Nikkei stock average and the expected real interest rates shows 
that they are inversely correlated to each other (Slide 10). A rise in asset prices will lead to 
an improvement in the financial positions of businesses and households, thereby generating 
an increase in investment. The movement between the Nikkei stock average and business 
fixed investment shows that investment is likely to increase as a trend when stock prices are 
high (Slide 11). 
How should we assess the effect of the correction in the yen’s appreciation that has resulted 
from monetary easing? The relationship between exchange rates and exports indicates that 
exports  are  likely  to  increase  as  a  trend  when  the  yen  depreciates  (Slide  12).  Recent 
movements  in  exports  ensure  that  exports  are  actually  picking  up  during  the  process  of 
adjusting the yen’s appreciation (Slide 13). 
In addition, consumption is on a rising trend, and an increase in aggregate demand – which 
is comprised of consumption, investment, exports, and government spending – feeds into an 
increase in production (Slides 14 and 15). 
The  increase  in  production  will  generate  a  rise  in  employment.  Recent  indicators  of 
employment, such as a decline in the unemployment rate and an improvement in the active 
job  openings-to-applicants  ratio,  suggest that there  is  a  clear  sign  that the  labor  market  is 
improving (Slide 16). This will further contribute to an increase in total earnings by employees 
(Slide 17). This betterment of the labor market will stimulate consumption, and that will lead 
to an improvement in employment; hence, the virtuous cycle prevails (Slide 18). 
Lastly,  as  for  prices,  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  (all  items  excluding  fresh 
food) turned positive in June 2013, for the first time in 14 months. Looking in detail, though 
the CPI has been pushed up partly due to a rise in energy-related goods such as petroleum 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
products and electricity costs, improvements across a wide range of goods on the back of 
resilient  consumption  have  also  contributed  to  a  rise  in  the  CPI.  The  widespread 
improvement can also be evidenced from the fact that the year-on-year rate of decline has 
slowed in the CPI for all items excluding food and energy. Such a moderate rise in prices will 
change the expectations of the people – who were somewhat sceptical about the feasibility 
of overcoming deflation – and raise inflation expectations further. This is expected to amplify 
the process of buoying the economy, which was triggered by a decline in the expected real 
interest  rates,  and  lead  the  actual  rates  of  inflation  close  to  the  price  stability  target  of  2 
percent (Slide 19). 
Concluding remarks 
In my remarks today, I have explained the transmission mechanism of the QQE and showed 
that economic activity has been moving in line with the developments envisaged under this 
mechanism. Before closing, I wish to point out several issues that require attention. 
First, the QQE is intended to generate a decline in the expected real interest rates by lifting 
the inflation expectations of the public – particularly those of investors in asset markets. This 
decline  in  the  expected  real  interest  rates  is  a  trigger  for  changes  in  asset  prices  of 
government  bonds,  stocks,  and  foreign  exchange.  Such  changes  in  asset  prices  will  take 
place  through  investors’  portfolio  rebalancing  and  are  expected  to  start  shortly  after  the 
QQE’s implementation. 
These  changes  in  asset  prices  will  increase  aggregate  demand  including  consumption, 
investment in fixed assets – that is, business fixed investment and housing investment – and 
exports,  and  this  increase  in  aggregate  demand  will  lead  to  a  pickup  in  production  and 
employment. All these changes in economic activity, however, require some time before they 
gather momentum. 
That  is  because  it  takes  some  time  for  households  as  well  as  domestic  and  overseas 
businesses  to  ascertain  whether  or  not  changes  in  asset  markets  are  merely  a  temporary 
phenomenon.  Once  they  feel  confident  that  these  changes  are  of  a  somewhat  long-term 
nature, businesses will decide whether to expand their fixed investment and households will 
decide  whether 
investment.  Likewise,  overseas 
businesses will determine whether to increase their imports from Japan. 
It has been less than 5 months since the Bank introduced the QQE. It will take some more 
time before we start seeing persistent and steady pickups in prices and wages as a result of 
an increase in demand for goods and services, and of a rise in employment. While it will take 
some time, Japan’s economy will improve, prices and wages will rise, and incomes for many 
households will increase for as long as the Bank strenuously continues with the QQE. 
I would remind everyone that the QQE is a new phase of monetary easing that we have just 
entered. Therefore I hope you will not jump to conclusions by saying that the recent pickup in 
prices  attributes to  a  rise  in  energy  prices  on  the  back  of  the  yen’s  weakening  –  a  typical 
story  associated  with  “bad  inflation”  –  or  by  grumbling  about  stagnant  wages.  Again,  the 
QQE  is  still  in  its  early  stages,  and  I  hope  you  will  be  patient  enough  to  see  its  effects 
permeate the economy. 
Thank you. 
 
increase  spending  and  housing 
to 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  8 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  9 
 10 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  11 
  12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  13 
 14 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
   16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 17 
