Patrick Honohan: Sustainable mortgage modification 
Remarks  by  Mr  Patrick  Honohan,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland,  for  the  FMC2 
Conference (The Financial Mathematics and Computation Cluster), Dublin, 23 May 2013. 
 Introduction  
Though  the  vast  majority  of  mortgages  are  still  being  fully  serviced,  the  persistent  rise  in 
cases of prolonged arrears over the five years of the crisis undoubtedly presents one of the 
biggest economic policy challenges of our day.  
Wait-and-see may have been an appropriate or sufficient initial position to take as the great 
crisis unfolded, but the time for passivity is long past. The longer term welfare of borrowers is 
at stake here, but so is the welfare of taxpayers and users of public services, given that bank 
losses affect the Government because of its ownership of banks.  
As  they  now  recognise,  mortgage  lenders  need  to  address  the  problem  of  non-performing 
mortgage debt more energetically than has been the case in the past. They need (i) to stem 
the  inflow  and  get  those  that  can  be  fully  serviced  back  on  schedule,  and  they  also  need 
(ii) to  find  ways  of  modifying  mortgages  that  involve  unsustainable  levels  of  over-
indebtedness. Identifying those that “can’t pay” from those that are merely “reluctant to pay” 
is a key operational task for the banks.  
No discussion of the problem of mortgage arrears should neglect this dual character: some 
need to brought back on track, others need alternative sustainable solutions.  
Responding to escalating regulatory pressure (including the new Targets regime), banks are 
now working hard to meet specific targets that should bring the payment performance of their 
mortgage books back under control in a sustainable manner. The Central Bank will shortly 
publish a revised Code of Conduct on Mortgage Arrears (CCMA) to help ensure effective and 
appropriate resolution of each arrears case.  
In a parallel response to the crisis of debt distress, and to the ineffectiveness of the existing 
outdated  law,  new  personal  insolvency  legislation  has  been  enacted  which  inter  alia 
streamlines the existing personal bankruptcy regime and introduces a non-judicial procedure 
for  resolving  insolvency  involving  mortgage  debt,  the  Personal  Insolvency  Arrangement 
(PIA).  The  PIA  can  restructure  unsecured  and  secured  debt,  including  mortgage  debt, 
provided there is agreement by a majority of relevant creditor classes. This new legislative 
framework  has  shifted  the  balance  in  favour  of  borrowers,  which  is  welcome  and  needed; 
and this needs to be factored-in to bank decision-making. There will be an interplay with what 
can worked out bilaterally, and the alternatives that might arise in a PIA or in bankruptcy.  
We now enter a phase in which much of the uncertainty should begin to be resolved, with the 
insolvency legislation coming into force, and the shortened timeline for banks restoring the 
arrears situation to sustainability.  
How can the public good be best advanced in this process? What could now be considered 
both attainable and socially ideal in terms of the pattern of resolution of the arrears problem?  
It will help if policy discussion recognises the two sides to the mortgage arrears problem. The 
Central  Bank’s  policy  has  sought,  and  will  continue,  to  navigate  a  balanced  course, 
recognising  both  the  need  to  husband  the  capital  that  has  been  provided  to  the  banks  at 
such crippling cost to the State, and the need for households who are truly unable to support 
the level of debt that they have accumulated to be dealt with in a fair and realistic manner.  
Today  I  would  like  to  speak  about  four  aspects  of  this  complex  issue.  First,  the  economic 
context  in  which  arrears  have  mounted;  second,  the  steps  that  are  needed  to  restore 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
sustainability  to  arrears  cases;  third,  features  of  the  different  types  of  measure  that  are 
employed; and finally, some design aspects of debt modifications, where these are needed.  
Among many important details, three over-arching themes emerge in the discussion.  
 
Despite the anger and disappointment felt by so many who have suffered a financial 
loss from housing investments, permanent debt relief is not something that can be 
offered to all, but has to be limited to those who are truly over-indebted to the point 
of  insolvency.  In  particular,  despite  the  fact  that  households  in  negative  equity  do 
seem  to  be  over-represented  among  the  arrears  cases,  negative  equity  is  not  in 
itself a viable rationale for providing debt relief. The new legislation reflects this: it 
restricts  access  to  insolvent  debtors,  namely  those  who  are  unable  to  pay  their 
debts in full as they fall due. Indeed, it would be unwise for anyone to think that not 
paying one’s debts is a matter of choice; non-cooperative mortgage borrowers really 
are at risk of losing their homes. (Non-cooperative borrowers also lose some of the 
protection of the Code of Conduct on Mortgage Arrears (CCMA), and their eligibility 
for a PIA may be restricted).  
On the other hand, repossession is less likely to be a good solution where the over-
indebtedness is coming from the owner-occupied home than for cases where over-
indebtedness  comes  from  an  investment  property  or  “buy-to-let”  (BTL).  In  current 
Irish conditions, especially given how far property prices have fallen, a well-designed 
debt modification that enables the distressed over-indebted borrower – for example, 
those whose ability to pay has been eroded by unemployment – to keep their home 
if  they  want  will  often  be  the  best  attainable  solution  for  borrower,  lender  and 
society.  
Balancing  the  need  to  remove  unserviceable  debt  overhangs  with  the  need  for 
banks  to  husband  capital  in  such  circumstances  calls  for  contract  innovation. 
Several features of the Irish situation suggest that a split mortgage concept could 
provide  a  sustainable  solution  for  a  significant  number  of  stressed  borrowing 
relationships,  by  both  (a)  removing  the  threat  of  imminent  bankruptcy,  and 
(b) retaining the potential for economic recovery to reduce prospective loan losses 
of the banks (and their impact on the taxpayer). I’ll take a bit of time to explain why 
this is so. 
  A cornerstone  
Let me begin with a proposition which I take to be true and relevant for Ireland. Indeed, few 
in Ireland will dispute the proposition, put well recently by a widely acknowledged expert, that 
“a cornerstone of the European approach to over-indebtedness relief has been and always 
will  remain  that  debtors  should  fulfil  their  obligations  if  at  all  possible,  and  freedom  from 
legitimately  incurred  obligations  is  a  privilege,  potentially  subject  to  abuse,  that  should 
therefore be a carefully guarded last resort”.1 Indeed, it bears repeating that the vast majority 
of Irish borrowers do continue to service their loans. Long-term debt modification involving 
permanent debt relief is only relevant for cases of over-indebtedness involving or bordering 
on insolvency.  
Economic drivers of arrears  
Distinctive  features  of  the  economic  environment  surrounding  the  personal  insolvency 
situation in Ireland include, on the downside, declines in:  
                                                 
1   Kilborn,  Jason  (2011)  “Expert  Recommendations  and  the  Evolution  of  European  Best  Practices  for  the 
Treatment of Overindebtedness, 1984–2010”, (Deventer: Kluwer), p. 11. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
1. 
2. 
3. 
employment rates to levels not seen for many years;  
real after tax income even for those who have retained salaried jobs, as tax rates 
increased 2008–12, and many suffered pay cuts (with the pension levy also eating 
into the pay of public servants);  
residential property prices – now over 50 per cent off their peak levels of about six 
years ago, with the result that a very high percentage both of performing and non-
performing mortgage loans – whether owner-occupier or buy-to-let – are in negative 
equity;  
On the positive side, at present ECB policy interest rates are low, which has helped keep the 
servicing costs of mortgages low, especially tracker mortgages of course, but also standard 
variable rate (SVR) mortgages, even though these have become relatively insensitive to the 
policy  rate2  and  now  embody  higher  spreads  over  the  banks’  marginal  cost  of  funds  than 
used to be the case.  
Each  of  the  three  negative  features  is  associated  with  distinct  consequences  for  both 
borrowers and lenders leading to stress in many cases. Of the three, on the face of it, loss of 
employment  could  be  expected  to  have  the  most  acute  impact  on  a  household’s  ability  to 
pay.  Interestingly,  though,  the  preliminary  findings  of  a  Central  Bank  survey  of  household 
income and indebtedness (details forthcoming)3 suggests that income declines unassociated 
with unemployment, and negative equity, are also strongly associated with arrears in Ireland 
today. 
 
than 
later.4 
Indeed, 
the  survey  suggests 
The  decline  in  employment  rates  means  that  many  households  have  a  reduced 
number  of  income  earners  at  present.  While  this  will  be  a  temporary  situation  for 
some households, for many recovery will not come soon enough. This will result in 
mortgages being unaffordable. If the household has a good chance of getting back 
into full employment, the relief can be temporary, but if the prospects are not good, 
then a more lasting loan modification will be needed, and this should be faced up to 
sooner  rather 
that  having  some 
unemployment  in  the  household  is  econometrically  linked  with  arrears,  but 
interestingly it is far from being the only factor or a decisive one. Indeed, the survey 
data  suggest  that,  while  unemployment  is  much  more  prevalent  among  those  in 
arrears, almost two thirds of those in arrears are employed.  
The  decline  in  after  tax  incomes  for  most  employees  has  been  significant,  but 
aggregate data suggest that in the bulk of cases this decline is not so large as to 
make  the  continued  servicing  of  debts  impossible.  Unless  the  household  was 
already  over-borrowed,  a  relatively  moderate  adjustment  of  spending  patterns  in 
response to lower income would allow the average household to remain on track. 
Nevertheless,  the  new  survey  finds  that  a  somewhat  higher  proportion  of 
households in arrears reported a recent decline in income (79% compared with 70% 
for those not in arrears); furthermore, although median household income is about 
€10,000 less for those in arrears than those who are not, it is still around €45,000. 
Preliminary econometric analysis of the survey data suggests that income declines 
                                                  
2   The cost of funds to the banks is also insensitive to the policy rate. Thus, when the policy rate goes down, the 
Irish banks do not gain a windfall in funding costs that could be passed on to the SVR customer. 
3   Thanks to Yvonne McCarthy for these preliminary results. 
4   Historic  experience  indicates  that  re-employment  prospects  depend  on  borrower  characteristics  such  as 
education  level,  age,  length  of  unemployment  and  specific  skills.  Recent  experience  suggests  an  average 
re-employment  rate  of  30  per  cent  after  2  years  for  newly  unemployed  persons.  In  a  period  of  economic 
recovery, these percentages may be significantly higher. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
 unassociated with unemployment have contributed significantly to the incidence of 
mortgage arrears. 
Households  in  deep  negative  equity  are  somewhat  more  prone  to  be  found  in 
arrears in the survey data, all other things being equal. It’s not as obvious as you 
might (at first sight) think why this should be. After all, negative equity is not in itself 
a proof of inability to service a debt. True, negative equity may be associated with 
high levels of indebtedness and hence with affordability issues if income and other 
assets are not correspondingly high. Furthermore, negative equity can limit access 
to  further  credit,  and  adversely  affect  geographic  mobility,  potentially  creating  a 
demand for a high LTV loan to allow the households to “take some of the negative 
equity with them” when they move. Negative equity in a BTL indicates a leveraged 
investment decision that has worked-out badly, but again is not per se a measure of 
affordability.  
These survey findings highlight that the position of households in arrears varies widely. It is 
unwise  to  generalise  from  isolated  cases.  The  solutions  need  to  reflect  this  on  a  case-by-
case basis.  
Steps to restoring sustainability  
Don’t wait for arrears  
A  long  understood  maxim  in  retail  banking  is  that  early  engagement  with  distressed 
borrowers  is  a  valuable  tool  for  improving  ultimate  recoverability.  In  particular,  emerging 
inability to pay instalments in full can induce a borrower to pay nothing at all, thereby risking 
a  spiral  into  an  unsustainable  level  of  indebtedness.  Identifying  pre-arrears  situations  and 
engaging with them and with early arrears cases can be very cost effective in arresting this 
spiral in the level of indebtedness arising from arrears. Therefore, although what follows is 
about dealing with 90-day plus arrears cases, efforts to address and stem the early cases 
should not be neglected.  
New legislation  
The  new  Personal  Insolvency  Act  offers  new  avenues  of  recourse  for  insolvent  persons, 
including  importantly  the  PIA  which  could  allow  insolvent  debtors  to  earn  a  “fresh  start” 
through a period of being subject to what will likely be a relatively onerous payment plan, but 
without necessarily having to surrender an owner-occupied home. Importantly, this avenue 
by construction is available only to insolvent borrowers, and therefore not to those who “can 
pay”. The terms of the legislation should help anchor some of the expectations of distressed 
borrowers  and  their  lenders  in  arriving  at  bilateral  solutions.  Given  what  international 
experience  shows  of  how  little  is  often  recovered  in  net  terms  by  creditors  from  payment 
plans, a well-designed loan modification bilaterally arranged between borrower and insolvent 
debtor can be better for both than the net outcome of a PIA or bankruptcy.  
The different elements of the cure process  
There  are  several  successive  tasks  for  the  lender  in  the  typical  mortgage  arrears  cure.  It 
begins with the lender engaging with the borrower. The lender needs to assemble updated 
information in order to discover the customer’s current circumstances and how it has differed 
from the position at the original underwriting. Then, taking account of current and prospective 
circumstances, if the contract is, or can be put on a sustainable basis, the lender needs to 
decide what revised schedule of payments (if any) should be offered. (The attempt to cure a 
distressed mortgage may not always avoid repossession or voluntary surrender.) And then 
the lender needs to ensure that the customer complies with the revised schedule.  
In the CCMA, designed to provide appropriate and effective consumer protection measures 
and to ensure that borrowers are treated in a fair and transparent manner, the Central Bank 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
has created and supervised a process, the five-step Mortgage Arrears Resolution Process 
(MARP)5 especially focusing on engagement and information assembly. The CCMA has the 
goal  of  protecting  vulnerable  borrowers  against  aggressive,  unfair  or  opaque  collection 
practices. It has not been intended to hamper the process of getting the borrower back on 
track.  Refinements  to  the  Code  are  now  being  finalised  which  are  equally  designed  to 
maintain  the  intended  level  of  protection  for  the  consumer,  while  ensuring  that  that  the 
framework is facilitating and promoting the effective and timely resolution, by lenders, of each 
borrower’s arrears situation.  
The  final  element  mentioned  above,  ensuring  continued  compliance  with  the  revised 
schedule,  is  conventionally  assumed  to  be  governed  by  repossession  and  insolvency 
procedures. Although the situation here has been rather opaque, while the Dunne judgement 
issue was pending, and with uncertainty about the impact of the insolvency legislation, clarity 
should improve dramatically in these two respects in the coming months.  
Designing the modification  
Here  I  want  to  focus  on  one  element  of  this  multi-step  activity,  namely  the  design  (where 
necessary) of a revised schedule of payments. Though widely discussed, this element still 
remains  unsettled  and  largely  unsatisfactory.  Each  distressed  mortgage  case  must  be 
triaged and mapped into a proposed long-term sustainable solution which is (i) matched to 
the  circumstances  of  the  borrower,  (ii)  offers  a  better  overall  prospect  of  recovery  for  the 
bank, taking a realistic view of the probabilities involved, in particular (iii) taking account of 
the  need  for  the  modified  payment  schedule  to  be  incentive  compatible  for  the  borrower 
given the availability of the PIA and revised bankruptcy rules and other options; and (iv) it 
should minimise moral hazard.  
To be sure, the triage process needs to start with the question: is this a distressed case, or 
one in which the borrower does have the capacity to come back on track? It is evident that a 
significant  proportion  of  current  arrears  cases  fall  into  the  latter  category,  as  seems  to  be 
confirmed by the measured characteristics of households in arrears, as well as the practical 
experience  of  lenders  in  engaging  with  borrowers.  Getting  these  cases  back  on  track  is  a 
crucial part of what is now needed. However, for the rest of what I have to say today, I will 
deal with the unsustainable cases.  
Measures for dealing with unsustainable mortgage debt  
Temporary measures are not enough  
The  banks  have  dealt  with  the  emerging  situation  largely  by  means  of  two  devices: 
capitalisation of arrears, and a temporary move to an interest-only type payment schedule, 
sometimes  accompanied  by  an  explicit  extension  of  the  term  to  maturity.  Such  temporary 
forbearance  measures  do  provide  cash-flow  relief  to  the  borrower  and  have  the  merit  of 
bringing their payments back onto a schedule and avoiding the arrears spiral.6 But they do 
not  deal  with  situations  where  the  actual  and  prospective  circumstances  of  the  borrower 
mean that full recovery of the loan cannot realistically be assumed. 
                                                 
5   The  steps  are:  1.  Communication  with  borrower;  2.  Financial  information;  3.  Assessment;  4.  Resolution; 
5. Appeal. 
It  is  worth  bearing  in  mind  that  the  capitalisation  of  arrears  does  not  result  in  any  reduction  in  the  level  of 
arrears as currently measured in the Central Bank statistics. On the one hand the statistics are thus free of 
distortions  from  the  “evergreening”  through  arrears  capitalisation  of  unsustainable  loans  that  are  not  being 
paid off. On the other hand the statistics somewhat overstate the degree to which payments are falling short of 
what has been agreed in the re-contracted loan agreements. 
6  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Leaving  the  borrower  in  an  unsustainable  situation,  where  fully  servicing  the  loan  would 
leave them unable to maintain a reasonable living standard, or where there is debt overhang, 
i.e. where any improvement in the borrower’s circumstances would go solely to the lender, is 
good  neither  for  the  borrower  nor  the  lender.  Unresolved  debt  overhang  clearly  chills  the 
borrower’s incentive to improve their situation and can have devastating effects on borrower 
wellbeing. If a lender does not deal with such situations, their loan-loss experience is likely to 
be worsened. 
Many Keane options not available at scale 
The  Government’s  Keane  report  (2011)  set  out  a  number  of  options  for  long-term 
restructuring  which  could  be  employed  by  banks.  Several  of  these  involved  Government-
financed subsidies to the banks. In view of the constrained condition of the public finances, 
the  availability  of  these  subsidies  will  be  quantitatively  small,  and  they  are  likely  to  be 
focused (as they should be) on households in low income circumstances. Therefore most of 
the mortgage restructuring (in terms of total value) will have to be done without subsidy. 
Taking account of the unsecured creditors 
Complications  arise  where  there  is  multiple  indebtedness.  Credit  unions  are  unsecured 
creditors of many distressed borrowers; unsecured debt on credit cards is also found to be 
high  for  many  borrowers;  utility  arrears  are  also  commonly  observed.  A  mortgage  loan 
modification which leaves borrowers with insufficient resources to deal with their arrears with 
credit unions, credit cards and on utilities is unlikely to remain fully serviced. This inhibits the 
mortgage lender from making an effective modification proposal. Therefore agreements with 
other creditors are likely to be an essential part of any effective and sustainable mortgage 
modification. 
It  is  for  this  reason  that  the  Central  Bank  has been  facilitating  dialogue  between  the  main 
creditors with a view to enabling them to arrive at an operational framework for dealing in a 
manner that is satisfactory to all with multiple indebtedness situations.  
In  essence,  the  main  creditor  needs  to  take  a  holistic  view  of  the  borrower’s  position 
including  other  indebtedness  and  ensure  that  the  entire  debt  is  sufficiently  restructured  (a 
point  explicitly  made  in  the  CCMA).  To  be  sure,  the  main  secured  mortgage  creditor  can 
enforce their security, but as this is certain to leave a large unsecured amount owing to the 
main  creditor,  the  main  creditor  still  needs  to  have  regard  to  the  position  with  regard  to 
unsecured debts of the borrower.  
One way of seeing the potential here is to recognise that the ultimate alternative that faces all 
parties,  in  the  event  that  no  agreement  (even  PIA)  can  be  reached,  is  the  debtor’s 
bankruptcy.  Bankruptcy  will  inevitably  involve  deadweight  losses  –  procedural  expenses, 
losses  through  foreclosure  sales,  etc.  The  different  creditors  should  therefore  assess  the 
possibilities of any deal relative to the position they would experience in a bankruptcy. Many 
classic analyses of bargaining suggest that participants should generally expect to share the 
gains of any deal broadly proportionately relative to what each creditor would get from the 
bankruptcy. Although this is not exactly the way in which bankers and credit unions frame 
arrangements  that  they  can  envisage  employing  for  such  circumstances,  I  expect  that  the 
restructuring  “waterfalls”  (or  decision  trees)  that  they  have  been  discussing  will  in  the  end 
amount to much the same thing.  
Furthermore,  this  approach  can  be  extended  to  the  PIA.  After  all,  a  Personal  Insolvency 
Practitioner  proposing  a  division  of  the  recoverable  amounts  that  is  consistent  with  this 
framework can expect that the creditors will accept it. Indeed, in cases where the unsecured 
creditors  have  not  signed-up  to  a  cooperative  framework  agreement,  a  pre-packaged  PIA 
consistent with this approach could be given effect through the PIA legislation.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Repossession and voluntary surrender – owner occupier  
What  role  can  repossession  and  voluntary  surrender  be  expected  to  play  in  the  overall 
solution? While most borrowers wish to repay their debts if they can, the ultimate sanction for 
lenders is repossession of the security and obtaining judgement mortgages on other property 
of the borrower. Such actions are considered quite aggressive in Ireland, and the courts have 
tended  to  be  sympathetic  to  debtors,  especially  if  they  seem  to  be  in  straitened 
circumstances.  The  Dunne  Judgement  situation,  shortly  to  be  resolved  through  legislation 
being enacted, has also been an obstacle for lenders seeking to repossess.  
Ultimately, though, repossession is an available option for the lender. It would be unwise to 
imagine it otherwise. If the banks were unable to make repossessions then the incentive for 
the borrower to cooperate would be greatly weakened.  
Some borrowers who are residing in a house whose current market value is very high will 
actually prefer to surrender the property and trade down, if this allows them to make a deal 
that reduces the shortfall, i.e. the unsecured part of the loan. This will be the case if they owe 
far more than they could fully service.  
Nevertheless, the heavy fall that has occurred in Irish house prices increases the number of 
cases in which banks can do better by making deals that leave a cooperating owner-occupier 
in their home.  
Ideally,  in  dealing  with  a  cooperative  borrower  who  wishes  to  continue  to  live  in  the 
mortgaged property but cannot fully service the debt, both parties may find it advantageous 
to make a deal that does not require the property to be surrendered or repossessed. Even if 
the borrower’s long term ability is sufficient only to service a debt equivalent to 75 per cent of 
the property’s estimated current market value, the lender should be able to make a proposal 
that both protects the lender’s capital and leaves the borrower in the home.  
Repossession and voluntary surrender – BTL  
As far as buy-to-let (investment) properties are concerned, voluntary surrender at a current 
valuation can make sense for a stressed borrower having difficulty in servicing the loan – for 
example if the rental income is nil or smaller than the interest outlay on that part of the loan 
corresponding to the current market value of the property. By surrendering, the borrower’s 
monthly  outlays  will  be  reduced,  though  not  necessarily  eliminated,  to  the  extent  that  the 
borrower remains liable for the remaining (negative equity) part of the loan. Of course, the 
borrower will also lose the possibility of benefiting from any future upside to the value of the 
property. In considering whether to make an offer involving voluntary surrender, the bank will 
want to decide if the BTL borrower might be more likely to continue to service the de facto 
unsecured part of the loan if he were left with all or part of the ownership.7  
Where  BTLs  are  actually  being  let,  this  whole  process  can  introduce  uncertainty  for  the 
tenant  also  –  as  indeed  does  the  appointment  of  rent  receivers  by  mortgage  creditors  of 
delinquent loans where even the rental income has not been passed on in debt servicing.  
Different types of long-term loan modification 
The three ways of doing loan modification 
Any long-term modifications of unsustainable mortgages can be thought of as a combination 
of three transformations of the time-structure stream of promised payments. Thus, the overall 
                                                 
7   But,  if  one  thinks  of  the  decision  to  service  a  BTL  loan  as  purchasing  an  option  on  the  future  price  of  the 
property, the incentive to do so may not be large, given how far “out of the money” most BTL loans are. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
duration  of  the  stream  can  be  lengthened;  the  payments  can  be  back-loaded;  the  overall 
level of payments, measured for example by net present value (NPV), can be lowered.  
Duration and back-loading help with distress that is perceived as temporary. An increased 
duration is used in combination with a lower annual payment: this can suit a borrower whose 
income-expenditure situation has deteriorated but has enough working lifetime left to pay off 
the full outstanding debt with interest over a longer period. Back-loading is suitable where the 
income position of the borrower has deteriorated but there is a reasonable chance of future 
recovery.  
Most  loan  modifications  in  Ireland,  such  as  temporary  moves  to  interest  only,  term 
extensions, or arrears capitalisation can be assessed as combinations of these two. 
A lot of discussion of the options for modifying mortgages can be couched in terms of one or 
other  of  these  three  changes  in  the  time-path  of  contractual  payments.8  But  limiting  the 
options to these is missing some important opportunities for borrower and lender. That’s why 
conditional payment schedules need to be kept in mind. These envisage a different sharing 
of risk between borrower and lender, and as such can improve prospects for both, albeit at 
the cost of greater complexity and management requirements.  
Conditional easing (e.g. in a split mortgage) 
Conditional easing of the repayment schedule of an otherwise unsustainable mortgage can 
be explicitly built in, whereby an easing lasts as long – but only as long – as some objective 
condition such as low income or unemployment prevails.  
Conditionality  can  help  where  the  distress  could  be  righted  if  objective  circumstances 
improve.  
An example of conditionality is in the split mortgage concept mentioned in the Keane Report. 
A split mortgage with the level of servicing payments conditional on borrower circumstances 
is  intended  to  provide  protection  and  certainty  for  a  borrower,  whose  chances  of  fully 
servicing the loan are in doubt, while enabling the lender to recover an additional portion of 
the  loan  should  the  borrower’s  circumstances  improve.  In  the  classic  split  mortgage,  a 
modification  to  the  regular  payment  is  put  in  place  by  means  of  applying  a  standard 
amortisation  schedule  to  only  a  part  of  the  principal.  The  remainder  of  the  principal  is 
notionally  warehoused  and  not  treated  as  requiring  servicing  unless  and  until  there  is  a 
material and objective improvement in the borrower’s situation. A split mortgage thus divides 
the sum owed into a base loan (A) and a warehoused loan (B).  
The advantage to the lender of the split mortgage, over a permanent and unconditional NPV 
reduction sufficient to make the initial payment schedule clearly affordable for the borrower, 
is  that  it  gives  the  lender  some  chance  to  share  in  an  improvement  in  the  borrower’s 
circumstances. A major issue for lenders in assessing whether to offer a split mortgage is 
their  capacity  to  monitor  improvements  in  the  capacity  of  the  borrower  to  make  service 
payments.  Indeed,  the  difficulty  in  tracking  those  improvements  is  the  main  reason  why 
income sharing repayment schedules are rare enough in banking around the world. 
The advantage to the borrower of a split mortgage is that it can (a) bring the borrower back 
on track by setting the unconditional servicing payments at a level which allows reasonable 
living standards to be protected and (b) remove debt overhang (as defined above).  
Lenders have been experimenting with a variety of split mortgage type solutions for cases 
which  seem  otherwise  likely  to  be  unsustainable.  The  differences  in  design  are  not 
                                                 
8   For example, government-led approaches to mortgage debt restructuring models that have been applied or 
discussed in the US and in Iceland, following the crisis use all of these three methods. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
immaterial  and  can  have  an  impact  on  whether  or  not  the  modification  can  really  be 
considered to have made the loan sustainable.  
In considering whether a particular type of split mortgage could be considered as sustainable 
one  would  have  to  look  at  both  the  affordability  of  the  initial  payment  schedule  and  the 
treatment of the warehoused loan at maturity. Sustainability must apply for the lifetime of the 
arrangement  and  not  just  at  the  outset.  Transparency  to  a  borrower  of  the  terms  and 
conditions  of  a  split  mortgage  at  the  outset  of  such  an  arrangement  is  essential  to 
sustainability of this solution, in particular how the bank will treat future increases in income 
and other economic circumstances, and the treatment of the warehoused loan (B) (including 
interest charged, where applicable), and the security, at maturity.  
Treatment of the base loan of a split mortgage: To be considered sustainable, the new term 
and interest rate on the base loan (A) would have to result in a newly contracted payment 
schedule  which  leaves  the  borrower  with  sufficient  funds  at  least  equal  to  the  Insolvency 
Service  of  Ireland  (ISI)  minimum  Reasonable  Living  Expenses.  In  order  to  reduce  the 
incentive for a borrower to reject a particular offer in the hope of receiving something better 
through the PIA process, lenders will want to consider how much more the schedule should 
allow to the borrower.  
More generally, for a split mortgage to be considered sustainable, the lender should be able 
to  demonstrate  that,  given  their  current  and  prospective  economic  circumstances,  the 
borrower will be able to service Part A fully throughout the term or, failing that, will be able to 
cover any servicing shortfall of Part A from the borrower’s other resources at the end of such 
term.9  
Treatment  of  future  increase  of  income:  A  conditional  payment  schedule  would  link  future 
payments  to  a  review  or  to  some  indicator  of  changing  ability  to  pay.  For  this  to  be 
considered  sustainable,  though,  the  claw-back  mechanism  should  be  sufficiently  moderate 
that the borrower is not too much disincentivised from improving their income. Put another 
way, the claw-back mechanism should not entail too high a “tax rate” on additional income; 
50% is often mentioned, including in the new Insolvency Act. Consistent with the need for a 
sustainable solution to be affordable in the long run as well as in the short run, a claw back 
arrangement  should  not  put  the  long  term  financial  sustainability  and  wider  economic 
prospects of the borrower at risk. 
Treatment at term of warehoused part of split mortgage: I can’t see how a modification could 
be  considered  sustainable  if,  after  paying  all  the  newly  contracted  payments  (including 
conditional amounts), the borrower could end the term still in debt. Accordingly, at the very 
least,  recourse  at  term  should  be  limited  to  the  collateral  value.  In  other  words,  the 
modification  agreement  should  specify  that,  at  the  end  of  the  term,  any  shortfall  in  the 
warehouse after sale of the property would no longer be owed.  
But, consistent with the idea in the new insolvency legislation (Insolvency Act, S. 104(1)) that 
a  PIA  should  not  require  the  debtor  to  cease  to  occupy  their  home,  a  sustainable 
arrangement should typically provide for lifetime security of tenure, in other words that, at the 
end of the term of the new arrangement, the borrower may remain in the property until death 
in exchange for reasonable rent payments.  
Lenders may do well to go further by providing that, where the modified payments are fully 
paid,  their  recourse  at  term  is  limited  to  a  fixed  proportion  of  the  property  value.  If  this 
proportion is, say 30–50 per cent, it could leave the borrower with enough equity to purchase 
step-down accommodation. Such an arrangement serves to enhance the borrower’s stake in 
                                                 
9  
Inasmuch as the split is designed to help the borrower stay in the family home, one would expect the terms of 
the modified loan to be renegotiated if the borrower subsequently wishes to sell the home. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
continuing to service the new contractual arrangement and could work out better in the long-
run for both borrower and lender. 
A  split  mortgage  that  requires  the  borrower  to  stay  at  ISI  minimum  living  expenses  for 
decades, or that fails to make clear in advance what will happen in respect of the unserviced 
warehouse debt at maturity, can hardly be considered sustainable.  
for  cooperating  borrowers,  will  unavoidably 
Concluding remarks  
No discussion of the problem of mortgage arrears should neglect its dual character: some 
cases  need  to  be  brought  back  on  track,  others  need  alternative  sustainable  solutions. 
Furthermore, contrary to what is sometimes thought, the existence of negative equity is not in 
itself a sufficient criterion to warrant a loan modification, unless associated with inability to 
pay.  
Over the coming months, as the systems the banks have been putting in place to get abreast 
of  the  arrears  problem  move  into  full  gear,  they  should  be  able  to  deal  with  this  dual 
character at scale, both (i) stemming the arrears inflow and getting those who can pay back 
on track, and (ii) designing and giving effect to sustainable solutions for mortgages which are 
not  now  sustainable.  It  has  to  be  recognised  that  some  solutions,  especially  for BTLs  and 
even 
involve  voluntary  surrender  or 
repossession.  
In the background, the new insolvency legislation provides enhanced protection for insolvent 
borrowers,  and  underpinning  the  incentive  for  banks  to  negotiate  sustainable  solutions 
thereby avoiding costly fees. Success in this effort will give greater certainty and reduce the 
stress  on  borrowers  who  are  truly  unable  to  meet  their  obligations,  while  removing  any 
ambiguity about the responsibility of those who can pay to get back on track.  
This is a big operational challenge for the banks not least in designing solutions for problem 
cases. Recognising that we have neither the monopoly of wisdom on what solutions can be 
found,  nor  the  detailed  borrower  information  to  design  solutions  for  tens  of  thousands  of 
borrower, the Central Bank will leave a lot of discretion to banks in designing solutions that 
work for both borrower and lender. But the solutions must be sustainable. 
Good  contract  design  will  be  needed  and  can  help  limit  the  number  of  involuntary 
repossessions of owner occupier houses, while protecting the capital so expensively injected 
into the banks by the State (thereby reducing the burden on taxpayers and those depending 
on public services).  
In  some  cases,  imaginative  design  approaches  will  be  needed  to  achieve  sustainability: 
today I have outlined how the split mortgage idea could be fleshed out in a way that would 
increase  the  number  of  insolvent  borrowers  enabled  to  stay  in  their  home  while  both 
removing the worst of the debt overhang on the borrower, and ensuring that the “taxpayer” 
(through bank ownership) can share some of the upside coming from economic recovery. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
