Øystein Olsen: The conduct of monetary policy 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Øystein  Olsen,  Governor  of  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of 
Norway), at the hearing before the Standing Committee on Finance and Economic Affairs of 
the Storting (Norwegian parliament), Oslo, 21 May 2013. 
 in 
Please note that the text below may differ from the actual presentation. 
I  would  like  to  thank the  Chairman  of  the  Committee  and  thank  you for this  opportunity  to 
report on the conduct of monetary policy in connection with the Storting’s deliberations on the 
Government’s  Financial  Markets  Report.  My  statement  here  today  is  based  on  the  Bank’s 
Annual  Report,  but  also  on  the  Executive  Board’s  assessments for  the  period  to  the  most 
recent monetary policy meeting and new information. 
When I was here last year, the key policy rate had been reduced by 0.25 percentage point to 
1.5 percent in March. The key policy rate has since been kept unchanged. The key policy 
rate is low because inflation is low and because external interest rates are at very low levels. 
The  year  2012  was  characterised  by  weak  growth  among  Norway’s  trading  partners  and 
turbulence 
financial  markets.  Uncertainty  about  global  economic  developments, 
particularly in Europe, was high. Key rates in many countries were close to zero, and both 
the European Central Bank (ECB) and the Federal Reserve announced that key rates would 
be kept low for a long period. 
Economic  developments  in  many  advanced  economies  remained  weak  into  2013.  Global 
growth is being driven by rapidly growing emerging economies. In the euro area, activity has 
slowed in several of the largest economies, and there are prospects that the downturn may 
persist for somewhat longer than previously envisaged. Unemployment is high and rising in a 
number  of  countries.  In  Spain  and  Greece,  unemployment  now  exceeds  25  percent,  and 
among young people, more than half are jobless. The economic situation is better in the US, 
but growth is moderate. Oil prices have fallen somewhat in the course of spring, but are still 
at a high level. 
With key rates close to zero, several central banks have adopted unconventional measures 
to stimulate growth and support inflation. Measures that change the composition and size of 
a  central  bank’s  balance  sheet  differ  from  the  usual  monetary  policy  operations  in  that 
instruments  other  than  the  key  rate  are  deployed  to  influence  market  rates  and  economic 
activity.  The  ECB  and  the  central  banks  in  the  US,  the  UK  and  Japan  have  implemented 
such  balance  sheet  policies  to  directly  influence  long-term  interest  rates  and  thus  funding 
costs  for  enterprises  and  households.  The  Japanese  central  bank  also  introduced  new 
measures this spring. The central bank will double the monetary base by the end of 2014, 
mainly by buying more Japanese government bonds, in order to boost inflation, reduce real 
interest rates and promote economic growth. 
The  improvement  in  global  financial  markets  reflected  the  measures  implemented  by  the 
ECB through 2012. Risk premiums in money and bond markets fell in autumn 2012, easing 
access  to  funding  for  debt-laden  European  countries.  The  effect  of  the  improvement  in 
financial markets has not so far fully fed through to credit conditions for the household and 
business  sector.  In  several  southern  European  countries,  banks  are  still  facing  difficult 
funding conditions, keeping bank lending rates high and dampening growth in consumption 
and investment. This is affecting small and medium-sized businesses in particular. 
Although the improvement in money and bond markets also resulted in an improvement in 
funding  conditions  for  Norwegian  banks,  it  had  little  effect  on  bank  lending  rates  for 
households  and  enterprises.  In  the  course  of  spring,  banks  have  raised  lending  rates  for 
households and enterprises as a result of expectations of higher capital requirements. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Growth in the Norwegian economy has remained solid for the past 18 months, supported by 
higher  activity  in  the  petroleum  sector  and  construction  industry, favourable  terms  of  trade 
and  high  population  growth.  At  the  same  time,  some  segments  of  the  export  industry  are 
feeling  the  impact  of  lower  demand  from  Europe  and  a  high  domestic  cost  level. 
Unemployment  has  remained  low  and  there  has  been  a  moderate  rise  in  household 
consumption. 
Household debt is high and is rising faster than incomes. At the same time, households are 
saving more. Debt growth is being driven by a sustained rise in house prices. However, debt 
and assets are unevenly distributed. This increases household vulnerability. 
Inflation  is  low  in  Norway  and  has  recently  edged  downed  further.  Underlying  inflation  is 
estimated  to  be  in  the  interval  1–1½  percent.  Low  external  price  impulses  and  an 
appreciation of the krone in recent years have held the rise in prices for imported goods at a 
low level. 
The  analyses  in  the  March  2013  Monetary  Policy  Report  indicate that costs  in  household-
oriented industries have risen at slower pace than in the mainland economy as a whole in 
recent years. This is partly due to relatively high productivity growth. At the same time, high 
inward labour migration is providing a flexible supply of labour, which is curbing wage growth. 
Wage  growth  in  Norway  is  also  being  influenced  by  low  wage  growth  in  neighbouring 
countries. 
Trade-offs in monetary policy 
Norges Bank’s conduct of monetary policy is oriented towards low and stable inflation. The 
operational  target  of  monetary  policy  is  annual  consumer  price  inflation  of  close  to 
2.5 percent  over  time.  At  the  same  time,  monetary  policy  shall  contribute  to  stabilising 
developments in output and employment. 
Since  the  introduction  of  the  inflation  target  in  2001,  annual  consumer  price  inflation  has 
averaged 1.8 percent, which is somewhat below, but close to, 2.5 percent. In Norges Bank’s 
assessment, consumer price developments since 2001 have been  well  within the flexibility 
provided for under the monetary policy mandate. 
The monetary policy response pattern can be summarised in three criteria for an appropriate 
interest rate path. The first criterion states that the interest rate should be set with a view to 
stabilising inflation at target or bringing it back to target after a deviation has occurred. The 
specific time horizon for stabilising inflation at target will depend on the disturbances to which 
the economy is exposed and their duration. 
The second criterion states that the interest rate path should provide a reasonable balance 
between the path for inflation and the path for overall capacity utilisation in the economy, i.e. 
that  the  inflation  targeting  regime  is  flexible.  Flexible  inflation  targeting  builds  a  bridge 
between  the  long-term  objective  of  monetary  policy,  which  is  to  provide  an  anchor  for 
expectations of low and stable inflation, and the objective of stability in the economy. 
The third criterion states that monetary policy should be robust and should seek to mitigate 
the risk of a build-up of financial imbalances. The criterion is an expression of the lack of a 
complete understanding of how the economy functions or the shocks to which the economy 
may be exposed. The consideration of robustness can therefore be interpreted as a form of 
insurance against adverse outcomes. Norges Bank does not have independent objectives for 
asset price inflation or debt growth. However, by mitigating the risk of financial imbalances, 
we  may  also  achieve  more  stable  developments  in  inflation,  output  and  employment  over 
time. 
In the case of conflicting objectives, the choice of interest rate path will involve a trade-off 
between different considerations. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
If monetary policy only took into account the low level of inflation, the key policy rate would 
be rapidly reduced and kept close to zero for a good while. Inflation might then pick up faster, 
partly as a result of a weaker krone. In the light of the trade-off against other considerations, 
however, the Bank does not want to accelerate the pace of inflation. The result would be a 
pronounced impact on output and employment and increase the risk of a build-up of financial 
imbalances. When weight is also given to robustness and to stabilising developments in the 
real economy, the interest rate path will be higher. 
As a result of ample cross-border labour flows, changes in competitive conditions and new 
trade patterns, consumer price inflation has now been below 2.5 percent for a period. Prices 
for  domestically  produced  goods  have  risen  considerably  more  than  consumer  prices, 
reflecting the improvement in Norway’s terms of trade. Incomes, output and employment are 
growing  at  a  solid  pace  and  capacity  utilisation  is  estimated  to  be  above  a  normal  level. 
Household debt and house prices have increased more than incomes. In today’s situation, it 
is  appropriate  to  use  a  few  years  to  bring  up  inflation.  The  interest  rate  has  therefore  not 
been reduced further. 
A  higher  key  policy  rate  could  have  curbed  debt  growth  and  demand  pressures  in  the 
Norwegian  economy.  But  in  view  of  persistently  low  external  interest  rates,  such  a  policy 
would likely have resulted in a sharp appreciation of the Norwegian krone, and inflation and 
activity in the Norwegian economy would have fallen to too low a level. The weak external 
environment is thereby also contributing to keeping Norwegian interest rates low. 
With firmly anchored inflation expectations, Norges Bank can today give weight to stabilising 
economic developments when setting the interest rate. Inflation targeting has become more 
flexible. We have chosen to take a long-term approach to bringing inflation back up. But we 
will  not  lose  sight  of  the  inflation  target.  Should  the  outlook  for  inflation  or  growth  weaken 
considerably, there will still be room for manoeuvre to counteract such developments through 
monetary policy. 
Monetary policy in the light of new banking sector regulation 
The financial crisis taught us some important lessons. First, the crisis illustrated that low and 
stable inflation is not sufficient to ensure financial stability. Second, the crisis clearly revealed 
shortcomings  in  the  regulatory  framework  for  banks.  As  a  result,  banking  and  financial 
regulation  is  now  undergoing  change  worldwide.  Regulation  and  supervision  are  the 
authorities’ most important instruments to prevent financial instability. 
In  March,  the  Government  presented  a  legislative  proposal  on  new  capital  adequacy 
requirements for banks. The proposal is in line with the EU’s new regulatory framework. A 
key  element  in  the  new  framework  is  capital  buffers  that  banks  will  be  required  to  hold  in 
addition  to  the  minimum  requirement.  This  will  increase  banks’  loss-absorbing  capacity.  A 
countercyclical capital buffer will come on top as a capital requirement that can be increased 
in good times and removed in bad times. The countercyclical buffer is to consist of Common 
Equity  Tier  1  capital  and  will  normally  be  set  between  0  and  2.5  percent  of  a  bank’s  risk-
weighted assets. 
The  countercyclical  buffer  is  intended  to  counteract  the  procyclical  effects  of  substantial 
changes in credit and asset prices. The buffer will help contain the risk of deleveraging in bad 
times. But an increase in the buffer can also dampen rapid credit growth in good times. The 
effect will depend on banks’ reaction when the buffer is increased. 
Norges  Bank  will  have  primary  responsibility  for  elaborating the  basis for  decisions  on  the 
countercyclical  capital  buffer.  In  drawing  up  the  basis,  the  Bank  will  collaborate  and 
exchange  relevant  information  with  Finanstilsynet  (Financial  Supervisory  Authority  of 
Norway). The buffer will be set by the Ministry of Finance. 
Once the regulation is in place, most likely in late summer, Norges Bank will issue concrete 
advice to the Ministry of Finance on the level of the buffer. Thereafter, the Bank will issue 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
advice on the buffer four times a year. The criteria on which the Bank’s advice is based were 
presented in the March Monetary Policy Report. 
Norges Bank will present analyses and issue advice on the size of the countercyclical capital 
buffer in conjunction with the decision basis for monetary policy. The aim is to ensure that the 
analytical basis is consistent with the formulation of monetary policy. 
The objectives of the countercyclical capital buffer and the key policy rate are different. The 
objective of the buffer is to strengthen banks’ resilience to losses in an economic downturn, 
while the objective of monetary policy is low and stable inflation over time. The inflation target 
is weighed against the aim of smoothing fluctuations in output and employment. 
The new instrument will be taken into account in monetary policy. Both the key policy rate 
and  the  buffer  work  through  banks’  responses.  The  buffer  will  be  set  on  the  basis  of  an 
assessment  of  the  risk  that  financial  imbalances  may  trigger  or  amplify  an  economic 
downturn. Capital adequacy requirements, and their effect on bank lending rates, will be one 
of many factors underlying the monetary policy analysis and interest rate setting. 
The countercyclical capital buffer will strengthen the resilience of the banking sector during 
an upturn. It may also, to some extent, counteract the build-up of financial imbalances. But 
the  effect  on  bank  behaviour  is  uncertain.  Thus,  Norges  Bank  cannot  disregard  financial 
imbalances when setting the key policy rate. The criteria for the conduct of monetary policy 
remain firm also after the introduction of a countercyclical capital buffer. 
When  assessing  the  various  considerations,  monetary  policy  must  pursue  its  primary 
objective – low and stable inflation. We cannot overburden monetary policy. Other economic 
objectives  must  be  pursued  using  policy  tools  such  as  financial  regulation,  the  tax  system 
and fiscal policy. 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
