Charles Bean: Polymer banknotes 
Remarks by Mr Charles Bean, Deputy Governor for Monetary Policy of the Bank of England, 
at the Bank of England, London, 10 September 2013. 
 Good morning and welcome. One of the Bank’s most visible responsibilities is the issuance 
of banknotes. It is a long-standing responsibility that dates back to shortly after our founding 
in 1694 and over the past three centuries, our objective has remained the same, namely to 
supply  good-quality,  genuine  banknotes  that  command  the  people’s  trust.  Meeting  that 
objective helps us to achieve one of our core purposes, which is to maintain confidence in 
the currency. 
Following a three-year research programme, we are today announcing the launch of a public 
consultation  regarding  the  possible  introduction  of  polymer  as  the  basis  for  the  next 
generation of banknotes. Polymer banknotes are made from a durable, yet thin and flexible 
plastic film. Design features of the banknote are printed on the film, meaning these notes can 
look  very  similar  to  notes  printed  on  paper.  If  the  public  reception  to  the  proposal  is 
supportive, then the recently announced Sir Winston Churchill £5 and Jane Austen £10 notes 
would be issued on polymer. This change would happen in 2016 and 2017 at the earliest. 
The  Bank’s  research  programme  has  been  wide  ranging,  investigating  the  impact  of  the 
introduction of polymer notes along several dimensions, including: security, durability, cost-
effectiveness, the impact on stakeholders in the cash industry, environmental considerations, 
and the likely impact on noteholders. In undertaking the research, we have worked closely 
with external stakeholders from the cash industry and have already engaged with the public 
through  several  independently-managed  focus  groups.  And  we  have  consulted  other 
countries that have undertaken research into different banknote materials, of which several 
have already switched to the use of polymer, including Australia and Canada. 
Based on this research, we are confident that printing our banknotes on polymer would bring 
several benefits: 
First, polymer notes are more secure. Polymer notes are harder to counterfeit and allow for 
the  inclusion  of  “windows”  or  clear  portions  in  the  design,  which  considerably  enhances 
counterfeit  resilience.  Such  features  also  allow  users  to  check  whether  notes  are  genuine 
quickly and easily. 
Second,  polymer  notes  are  more  durable  and  resistant  to  damage.  As  a  result,  polymer 
banknotes  last  at  least  two-and-a-half  times  longer  than  notes  printed  on  paper.  And 
because  polymer  banknotes  last  longer,  they  don’t  need  to  be  replaced  so  frequently, 
meaning they are cheaper to produce. 
Third, polymer banknotes repel dirt and moisture better than paper banknotes, and so stay 
cleaner for longer, reducing the incidence of ‘tatty’ notes. 
Finally, polymer banknotes are more environmentally friendly than paper notes. 
Given  these  benefits,  we  are  confident  that  a  switch  to  printing  notes  on  polymer  makes 
sense. But we also recognise that the public takes pride in their banknotes, and that changes 
to  the  design  and  format  of  notes  are  consequently  of  great  interest.  Because  of  this,  we 
have decided to consult with the public before making any final decisions. 
Between  now  and  the  15  November,  the  Bank  will  therefore  be  running  a  consultation 
programme that will provide the public with a greater familiarity with polymer banknotes. The 
consultation will, in turn, provide us with a better understanding of the public’s views on the 
proposed change and whether such a change would meet with broad public acceptance. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
We  will  be  holding  around  50  events  across  the  UK  to  enable  the  public  to  see  and  feel 
examples  of  polymer  notes,  and  to  deliver  feedback  to  the  Bank.  We  will  hold  events  in 
13 major shopping centres to allow shoppers to see and handle specimen notes. And we will 
be  running  over  30  discussion  events  with  audiences  including  regional  chambers  of 
commerce and retailers. A market research company will separately be conducting another 
36 focus groups and carrying out a face-to-face survey with 2,000 people to collect further 
feedback. We will also publish a range of useful material on our website including a facility 
for the public to provide feedback directly to us. And there will be a specific display about 
polymer in the Bank’s museum for anyone visiting London who wishes to learn more. 
In parallel with the public consultation we will conduct further outreach with the cash handling 
industry, to confirm our understanding of the impact on industry of a switch to polymer. Once 
these exercises are complete, we will analyse the feedback we have received and use it to 
inform our final decision, which will be announced in December. 
If a final decision is made to move to polymer, we will also use the opportunity to introduce 
notes which are somewhat smaller than the current series. These will be easier for both the 
public and the cash industry to handle and will generate further financial benefits in terms of 
lower  production  and  storage  costs.  In moving  to  smaller  notes,  we  will  retain  the  present 
tiering of denominations by size, which is of particular benefit to the visually impaired. 
I would now like to invite any questions that you may have. I’ll be joined in addressing these 
by the Bank’s Chief Cashier and Executive Director for Banking Services Chris Salmon, and 
the Head of our Notes Division Victoria Cleland. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
