Yandraduth Googoolye: The role of central banks in encouraging 
investment in housing 
Address by  Mr Yandraduth Googoolye, First Deputy Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at 
the annual conference of the African Union for Housing Finance, Flic en Flac, 11 September 
2013. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen 
A very good morning to you all. 
It gives me great pleasure to participate this morning in this Annual Conference of the African 
Union  for  Housing  Finance  (AUHF),  being  organised  in  collaboration  with  the  Mauritius 
Housing Company Ltd (MHC). 
Home ownership is one of the major aspirations of an individual. Today, owning a house not 
only  means  having  a  shelter  for  the  family.  The  house  is  a  real  asset  that  probably 
represents  the  largest  investment  undertaken  by  an  individual  during  his  lifetime.  Such  a 
large  sum  of  money  may  not  initially  be  readily  available  for  the  average  individual.  It  is 
primarily in this context that housing finance has been linked to the grant of credit facilities by 
banks and other mortgage institutions. 
Investment in housing can be seen from different viewpoints. For a Government interested in 
fulfilling its social mandate of facilitating access to decent housing for low- to middle- income 
families,  the  problem  is  finding  the  necessary  resources  to  carry  out  public  housing 
programs.  Let  me  set  an  aside  here  to  dwell  for  a  minute  on  the  experience  of  Mauritius 
where the Government set up as early as 1963 an organism geared towards the provision of 
social housing. This organism evolved into the Mauritius Housing Corporation (MHC), which 
is  today  the  only  finance  institution  –  both  in  Mauritius  and  Rodrigues  –  that  caters 
exclusively for the promotion of home ownership and the provision of housing finance. Since 
July 2001, the MHC has been authorised to conduct deposit-taking business to finance its 
activities and is accordingly under the regulatory purview of the Bank of Mauritius. Over the 
years, the MHC has been innovative. In addition to credit granted for housing projects, the 
company  also  provides  architectural,  technical,  legal,  insurance  services,  and  accept 
deposits  primarily  for  the  purpose  engaging  the  general  public  in  savings  for  home-
ownership. More of this will be provided by the Managing Director of MHC. 
Coming  back  to  my  main  point,  investment  in  housing,  from  the  perspective  of  the 
household, is very often linked to the possibility of obtaining a loan at affordable terms. For 
the  bank  manager  considering  whether  to grant a  loan, the  problem  is  how  to  expand  the 
scope of financial services while managing risks appropriately. Finally, from the viewpoint of 
central banks, the problem is to prevent financial instability and to maintain confidence in the 
financial system. 
Today,  I  should  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  share  with  you  the  viewpoint  of  the  central 
bank and some thoughts on our role in encouraging investment in housing while taking into 
account the risks that such investment may pose to financial stability. Hopefully, I will be able 
to contribute towards a deeper awareness and understanding of these risks and other issues 
linked to housing financing. 
At least two factors make this a highly topical subject. First, the 2008 global financial crisis 
has shed the spotlight directly on the housing market, prompting many questions to be raised 
about practices in housing finance. These questions have challenged traditional assumptions 
that  lending for  housing  purposes  is  generally  a  safe  and  low-risk  activity,  and  highlighted 
potential dangers that central banks and banks need to be concerned about. Secondly, the 
current accommodative stance of monetary policy coupled with the increased competition in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
the housing market calls for greater vigilance by banks in monitoring risks linked with housing 
loans. 
In Mauritius, credit for housing purposes has always constituted a large share of total credit 
to  households.  Currently,  advances  granted  by  banks  for  housing  purposes  account  for 
around 62 per cent of total household credit. As a percentage of GDP, housing loans have 
increased from 7.1 per cent at end-March 2008 to 12.1 per cent in the first quarter of 2013. 
Latest  data  show  that  investment  in  residential  building  posted  a  robust  growth  rate  of 
26.9 per cent in the first quarter of 2013, and it is expected that growth in this segment will 
hover around 10 per cent in 2013. At the end of the first quarter, the volume of residential 
building  permits  increased  to  1,724  compared  to  1,367  a  year  earlier.  Comparatively, 
according to the Housing Survey conducted by Statistics Mauritius in 2011, the housing stock 
grew  by  19.9%  from  297,700  to  356,900  housing  units  over  the  past  decade,  with  the 
number of private households increasing by 14.5% from 297,900 in 2000 to 341,000 in 2011. 
While growth in the housing market is expected to be sustained, there is increasing evidence 
that the rise of investment property has also been important. 
Housing  loans  remain  relatively  sound.  However,  while  house  financing  is  a  profitable 
business  for  most  banks,  competition  has  intensified  considerably.  Today  banks  compete 
aggressively  for  borrowers  by  offering  highly  competitive  home  loan  packages  to  meet 
different  needs  of  borrowers.  Banks  need  to  be  aware  of  the  risks  posed  by  a  rapidly 
expanding housing credit portfolio. The financial crisis of 2008 and its consequences for the 
world economy serve as a useful reminder of this need. 
Part  of  the  central  bank  mandate  is  to  ascertain  that,  notwithstanding competition  and  the 
need to make profits, banks maintain a prudent approach in granting housing loans. At the 
same  time,  the  regulatory  framework  set  up  by  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  is  such  that  it 
encourages investment in housing, particularly with regard to first-time buyers. 
In  line  with  international  standards  prescribed  by  the  Basel  Committee  for  Banking 
Supervision, credit extended for residential purposes is classified in the preferential bucket of 
35 per cent of risk-weighted assets in the computation of capital adequacy ratio requirement. 
Accordingly,  banks  are  implicitly  encouraged  to  increase  the  quantum  of  their  portfolio  for 
housing  credit given  that they  maintain  lower  regulatory  capital for  holding these  assets  in 
their books.  
In 2004, a Commission of Inquiry was set up by the Government on the Sale by Levy system 
in the light of several cases of foreclosures and rising number of lawsuits being filed in court 
against  borrowers  whose 
the 
promulgation of the Borrowers Protection Act in 2007 came to the rescue and clearly set out 
the  obligations  of  lenders  in  providing  clear  information  on  the  terms  and  conditions 
governing the grant of any credit facility, including financing of the acquisition of immovable 
property. Several measures were taken by the Bank of Mauritius: banks were requested to 
abide by the provisions of the said Act for all loans, specifically with respect to facilities below 
the  amount  of  Rs2  million;  in  view  of  a  closer  monitoring  of  cases  being  lodged  in  courts 
against borrowers, banks were requested to provide information on all cases of Sale by Levy 
on a periodical basis to the Bank of Mauritius. 
Presently,  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  is  working  on  several  initiatives  that  aim  at  promoting 
investment by first-home buyers. Macroprudential measures shall shortly become applicable 
to credit extended by the banking sector for residential purposes, and these policy measures 
shall  include  guidelines  towards  demarcating  credit  granted  for  housing  purposes  and 
property investment based on speculation and commercial purposes. There is no doubt that 
making a clear distinction in the terms and conditions applicable for first-house buyers would 
facilitate the granting of loans. 
It is also perceived that buying a first house represents a low-risk investment as the collateral 
for  mortgage  financing  is  usually  secured  by  fixed  charge  on  both  land  and  building. 
However, the Bank of Mauritius has adopted the stance that banks have to maintain sound 
loans  had  become  non-performing.  Subsequently, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
lending standards in granting credit facilities to the housing sector. While having due regard 
to  the  level  of  household  indebtedness  at  the  macro  level,  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  has 
underlined the need for all financial institutions to undertake proper assessment of borrowers’ 
repayment  capacity.  This  would  prevent  households  from  becoming  overleveraged.  The 
Bank  of  Mauritius 
through 
advertisements  issued  by  financial  institutions  to  attract  borrowers.  In  this  regard,  while 
“teaser rates” for home loans can be conspicuously displayed, the Bank of Mauritius requires 
that other information, including the Annual Percentage Rate (APR), be displayed as well so 
that the potential borrower is clearly made aware of the implied interest rate applicable on an 
annual basis. 
further  ensures 
that  accurate 
is  conveyed 
information 
Conclusion 
Housing finance contributes significantly in raising living standards of people, be it either in 
Africa  or  any  part  of  the  world.  Viewed  at  the  macro  level,  housing  finance  generates 
economic growth via job creation, entrepreneurship, and economic linkages to other sectors. 
However,  one  cannot  ignore  the  fact  that  the  recent  financial  crisis  that  rocked  the  global 
economy is closely related to a crash in subprime mortgage lending in the United States, the 
so-called CDS or credit default swap. 
While  taking  lessons  from  the  global  financial  turmoil,  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  remains 
committed  to  its  goal  of  maintaining  the  soundness  and  stability  of  the  financial  system  in 
Mauritius. Stakeholders should therefore aim at ways to improve access to housing finance 
in a sustainable way. 
Ladies and gentlemen, you will concur that affordability remains a major challenge in housing 
markets in Africa. Several constraining factors such as poverty, lack of long-term financing, 
reform in land management system, and the rising cost of building materials are issues that 
remain to be tackled by all delegates present at this conference. However, it is reassuring to 
note that lenders are becoming more proactive and experimenting with  new products, and 
that housing microfinance is complementing conventional financing methods. 
Work being undertaken by the African Union for Housing Finance is laudable while aiming to 
promote housing credit as part of financial inclusion in Africa. I am sure all delegates present 
here from Africa mainland will benefit from the fruitful deliberations over the next three days 
and  will  reach  concrete resolutions  that  shall  foster  sharing  of knowledge  and  cooperation 
among members of the African Union for Housing Finance in mobilising funds for shelter and 
housing on the African continent. 
I thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
