G Padmanabhan: International Seminar on Principles of Financial Market 
Infrastructures and Innovations in Retail Payments 
Valedictory  address  by  Mr  G  Padmanabhan,  Executive  Director  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of 
India,  at  the  International  Seminar  on  Principles  of  Financial  Market  Infrastructures  and 
Innovations  in  Retail  Payment  organised  by  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  New  Delhi, 
15 February 2013. 
 Assistance provided by Shri Saswat Mahapatra and Smt Radha Somakumar is gratefully acknowledged. 
Distinguished speakers, participants, other guests, ladies and gentlemen. It is a pleasure to 
be amidst you and speak to you all as we conclude this International Seminar on “Principles 
of  Financial  Market  Infrastructures  and  Innovations  in  Retail  Payments”  organized  by  the 
Reserve Bank. 
The theme of the seminar, which was chosen after considerable deliberations, is quite apt, 
given  the  markets  around  us.  As  you  know,  the  term  FMI  refers  to  systemically  important 
payment systems, CSDs, SSSs, CCPs, and TRs which facilitate the clearing, settlement, and 
recording  of  monetary  and  other  financial  transactions, such  as,  payments,  securities,  and 
derivatives contracts (including derivatives contracts for commodities). 
The role and importance of FMIs in the global financial system came to fore during the crisis 
which  has  been  succinctly  captured  in  the  IMF  report  “Central  Banking  Lessons  from  the 
Crisis” (May 27, 2010). The report mentions “The crisis would have been much more severe 
had  central  banks  not  taken  efforts  to  introduce  robust  payment  and  settlement  systems, 
including  for  foreign  exchange,  over  the  two  decades  ahead  of  the  crisis.  The  systemic 
impact  of  failure  of  a  financial  institution  depends  critically  on  the  robustness  of  the 
infrastructure underpinning those markets in which it is active”. 
The  FMIs  which  act  as  plumbers  in  the  financial  system  helped  in  maintaining  the  market 
confidence during the crisis for two reasons. First, FMIs like the CCPs shift the counterparty 
risk  from  participants  to  themselves  thereby  ensuring  trust  in  an  environment  where 
participants  distrust  each  other  and  thus  provide  the  market  confidence  to  carry  on 
transacting.  Second,  their  ability  to  settle  when  transactions  are  due  for  settlement  on 
account of their risk management practices helps in retaining the sanity in the market. 
Many studies had been undertaken analyzing the role of FMIs during the crisis. The common 
findings of such studies are that FMIs were successful in ensuring reliability and mitigating 
risks despite unprecedented volatility and shaken market confidence. FMIs like CLS, RTGS 
systems and CCPs helped in containing the materialization of systemic risk by maintaining 
confidence in the interbank trading and settlement of foreign exchange, money markets, etc. 
FMIs were successful in handling the defaults in a non-disruptive manner. 
Lessons  learned  from  earlier  crisis,  such  as,  Herstatt  failure  in  1974,  US  equity  clearing 
house  difficulties  faced  in  1987,  Hong  Kong  Future  Exchange  in  1987,  etc.  helped  the 
regulators 
in  payment,  clearing  and  settlements  systems. 
Implementation  of  RTGS  systems,  adoption  of  PvP  and  DvP  modes  of  payments,  sound 
legal  framework  for  settlement  finality,  setting  up  of  new  market  infrastructures  and  robust 
clearing and settlement infrastructure are the initiatives that helped in curbing recurrence of 
these risks. Establishment of global standards, such as, RCCP, RSSSs, SIPS, etc. helped in 
effective  governance,  oversight  and  supervision  of  systemically  important  financial  market 
infrastructures. 
However,  the  crisis  also  gave  few  important  lessons  to  the  regulators.  Readiness  for  the 
worst case scenario does not guarantee protection against future scenario as the future crisis 
could be much bigger than what has been experienced. There is a need to capture newer 
risks emerging from links, tiering and indirect participation which were hitherto not captured 
in  addressing 
the  risks 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
fully in the existing standards. The recent global crisis revealed that liquidity lines assumed to 
be secured are not so secured in a stressed scenario. Another important lesson that can be 
drawn  from  the  recent  crisis,  especially  in  a  globally  interconnected  financial  market  on 
account  of  links  and  interdependencies,  is  the  need  for  communication  and  co-ordination 
among  regulators.  Finally,  there  is  a  need  to  reduce  regulatory  and  policy  arbitrage  within 
and among the jurisdictions.  
The response of the policy makers to the crisis has been multi-prong and multi-dimensional 
to  ensure  that  a  crisis  on  this  scale  may  never  happen  again.  The  regulatory  reforms 
undertaken  under  the  aegis  of  G-20,  Financial  Stability  Board  and  other  international 
standard  setting  bodies  focus  on  strengthening  the  micro-prudential  and  market-conduct 
regulations supplemented by effective macro-prudential frameworks. 
The  CPSS-IOSCO  Principles  for  Financial  Market  Infrastructure  which  replace  the  earlier 
standards  are  part  of  the  global  initiatives  to  reform  the  financial  markets.  The  principles 
amplify  the  critical  role  the  FMIs  play  in  maintaining  and  promoting  financial  stability  and 
economic  growth  and  also  prescribe  standards  for  strengthening  the  FMIs  to  make  them 
robust  and  resilient  to  handle  future  crisis.  The  standards  when  fully  implemented  would 
ensure  that  FMIs  perform  the  role  they  have  been  designed  for  viz.  shock  absorber  and 
plumber of financial systems rather than being the major channel for transmission of financial 
shocks in form of liquidity dislocations and credit losses. 
Given this background, we thought PFMI would be an apt theme for the conference. I am 
certain the esteemed speakers who have been closely associated with the framing of new 
standards would have demystified the principles and explained the nuances and subtleties of 
the  principles.  You  would  have  noticed  that  the  new  standards  seek  to  introduce  more 
demanding  requirements.  The  new  standards  have  raised  the  bar  in  form  of  financial 
resources  and  risk  management  frameworks.  The  significant  being  the  need  for  Cover  2 
requirements  both  for  liquidity  and  credit  risks  for  systemically  important  CCPs  which  are 
operating  in  multiple  jurisdictions/currencies  and  which  deal  in  asset  classes  with  “jump  to 
default” risk profile in recognition of the increased risk posed by such CCPs. The standards 
also bring forth other important requirements, such as, need for addressing the business risk, 
need  for  a  recovery  and  resolution  plan,  fair  and  open  access,  portability  and  segregation 
which are all critical. 
The new standards when compared to old standards provide additional guidance both to the 
regulators  and  the  FMIs.  The  standards  provide  building  blocks  for  risk  models,  be  it  for 
margin  calculation,  collateral  requirements,  back-testing  and  stress  testing  methodology 
requirements or liquidity and financial resource planning. It must be recognized that the FMIs 
differ  significantly  in  terms  of  their  organization,  functionality  and  design.  Thus,  principles 
have been framed with a functional focus so that they provide flexibility while applying them 
to the FMIs in respective jurisdictions. 
The intended benefits of the standards could be achieved through effective implementation. 
The challenge lies in measuring the effectiveness. The Assessment Methodology provides 
guidance  to  the  regulators  for  determining  the  scope  of  assessment,  gathering  facts, 
developing  conclusions  and  assigning  a  rating  of  observance  for  each  principle.  The 
Assessment  Methodology  helps  in  promoting  objectivity  and  comparability  across  the 
assessments of observance across FMIs and across jurisdictions. I hope the sessions on the 
Assessment  Methodology  would  have  equipped  the  participants  in  undertaking  effective 
assessment of principles in your jurisdictions. 
Another aspect you might have observed would be that unlike the previous standards, the 
new  standards  have  more  enforceability  as  they  are  binding  on  the  members  of  the 
CPSS-IOSCO  on  account  of  their  commitment  to  financial  sector  reforms.  Further, 
compliance to these standards also provides economic incentive in terms of capital benefits 
to banks for their exposure to qualified CCPs. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
No  doubt  the  implementation  of  these  principles  is  going  to  pose  challenges  both  to  the 
authorities and FMIs. I am sure the panel discussion would have provided insights on how to 
meet the implementation challenges. Meeting the liquidity requirements under Principle 7 is 
going to pose challenges for countries where markets are dominated by a few large players 
with limited liquidity support from private sources. In such a scenario, liquidity support from 
central banks assumes significance but it has its own challenges. First, central banks should 
have  mandates  for  providing  liquidity  support.  Second,  even  if  there  are  no  technical 
obstacles, the challenge would be in addressing the moral hazards. 
Similarly,  some  of  the  principles  would  require  changes  in  the  legal  and  regulatory 
framework. Many jurisdictions are likely to face limitations while complying with requirements 
under segregation, portability, recovery and resolution, etc. In some of the jurisdictions, the 
Trade  Repository  (TR)  may  be  a  new  concept.  Without  proper  legal  framework  for  the 
regulation and oversight of TRs including the need for addressing the confidentiality issue, it 
would be a challenge for the regulator to mandate reporting of trades to TRs. 
The FMIs would also find it challenging in meeting the new standards involving credit risk, 
liquidity risk or financial resources. FMIs need to build skills and have adequate resources in 
terms  of  technology,  manpower  to  develop  risk  models,  historical  data  bases,  scenarios 
analysis,  etc.  The  regulators  also  need  to  build  skills  for  evaluation  and  validation  of  risk 
management framework put in place by the FMIs. 
To summarise, the deliberations, the central bank and the market regulators have challenges 
ahead  of  them  with  respect  to  performing  the  responsibilities  envisaged  under  the 
CPSS-IOSCO  principles  of  FMI.  The  regulators  will  be  required  to  set  out  responsibilities, 
objectives and criteria for determining who the standards apply to and the necessity to clarify 
roles in case of multiple authorities. A combination of enforcement tools consisting of formal 
legal instruments (guidelines, regulations, instructions, sanctions, etc.), informal tools (moral 
suasion), cooperation with other authorities, voluntary agreements, etc. have to be worked 
out.  Further,  these  regulatory  and  oversight  policies  have  to  be  transparent,  consist  and 
effective. 
Let me now turn to the other major theme of the seminar – Innovations in Retail Payment 
Systems. 
Retail payment systems 
Although  the  growing  importance  of  FMIs  is  acknowledged,  the  retail  payments  have  their 
own  share  of  recognition.  The  innovations  that  have  taken  place  in  retail  payments  have 
been country specific, within the respective regulatory framework catering to the needs of the 
customers. The impact of innovation in retail payments is directly felt by the end-users and 
reshapes the payment process. Allowing retail payment operations in the country within the 
broad vision of inclusiveness and moving to less-cash society and ensuring its compliance to 
the regulatory stipulations keeps the regulators on their toes. But the uniqueness lies in the 
fact that in most of the countries, the innovations in retail payments are regulator driven. 
While the Report of the Working Group on Innovations in Retail Payments (BIS, May 2012) 
formed under the CPSS identifies five product categories: (i) innovation in the use of card 
payments;  (ii)  internet  payments;  (iii)  mobile  payments;  (iv)  electronic bill  presentment  and 
payments and (v) improvements in infrastructure and security, it is increasingly evident that 
innovations  are  taking  place  with  new  technology  by  intertwining  products  and  processes. 
The  emergence  of  the  NFC  technology  is  an  example  where  the  card  payment  product  is 
intertwined with the mobile technology. The mobile POS is also another example. Hence, to 
my mind, the need of the hour is to think of linkages and integration of technologies. 
Thinking beyond domestic coverage and integrating retail payments worldwide 
As  you  know,  one  of  the  trends  highlighted  in  the  Report  of  the  Working  Group  on 
Innovations in Retail Payments, is the fact that most of the innovations are developed for the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
domestic  market  and  only  a  few  have  international  reach,  although  similar  products  and 
categories have emerged worldwide. The challenge of stretching a retail payment product or 
process beyond domestic boundaries brings about the need for international standards and 
principles. The success of the card payment networks like MasterCard and Visa is a classic 
example  of  the  above.  The  PCI-DSS1  standards  for  the  card  industry  and  the  PA-DSS 
standards  for  the  payment  application  software  developer  are  some  such  internationally 
accepted  standards.  Owing  to  the  network  effects  inherent  in  the  retail  payment  market, 
common standards may help to achieve the necessary critical mass and can create a stable 
ground for new players coming into the market. Economies of scale and scope, pricing and 
cost reduction are advantages of the same. 
Thinking of interoperability while innovating a retail payment system 
While  innovation  has  brought  about  many  products  and  processes,  the  challenge  is  in 
gearing  up  to  allow  interoperability  between  two  retail  payment  operators.  Have  the  risk 
factors, costing, pricing, customer convenience and ease been thought of? Integrating two 
competitive offerings and giving the best product with portability to a customer would lead to 
a  demand  driven  initiative  for  the  retail  payment  system  providers.  For  interoperability  to 
happen, standardization is a pre-requisite. Convergence of any payment instrument into the 
mainstream acceptance infrastructure is the need of the hour. In India, the prepaid payment 
instrument (PPI), popularly known as “e-money”, is also issued by non-banks and accepted 
on  their  own  infrastructure.  If  these  instruments  have  to  be  accepted  on  the  existing  POS 
infrastructure, it presupposes adherence to internationally accepted standards of form factor 
and  connectivity.  Is  the  industry  geared  up  for  this?  Significant  changes  will,  therefore,  be 
required in the technology and business model of non-bank PPI issuers. 
Thinking of financial inclusion while innovating a retail payment system 
We  are  all  aware  that  financial  inclusion  has  served  as  an  important  driving  force  for 
innovations in  many  countries  either  under  a government  mandate  or  because  of  the  new 
business  opportunities  opened  up  by  an  untapped  market.  But  how  many  companies  are 
betting on innovation beyond the Return on Investment (ROI) concept, given the fact that the 
bottom of the pyramid is very sensitive to costs? Moving away from the single economic ROI 
to  an  integrated  economic,  social  and  environmental  approach  would  bring  in  the  desired 
results of financial inclusiveness. 
Non-banks in retail payments – need for a status 
The  role  of  non-banks  in  retail  payments  has  increased  significantly,  owing  in  part  to  the 
growing  use  of  innovative  technology  that  allows  non-banks  to  compete  in  areas  not  yet 
dominated by banks. The Working Group on Non-banks in Retail Payments firmed under the 
aegis  of  CPSS  is  also  attempting  to  understand  the  challenges  and  the  advantages  of 
non-banks  in  the  payments  space.  The  increased  role  of  non-bank  entities  in  payment 
system  is  linked  to  their  potential  to  change  the  payment  system  landscape  as  they  can 
leverage on their product offerings with latest technological features to cater to wide segment 
of the market. 
Regulators’ effectiveness as catalysts, overseers and/or operators of payment systems 
As regulators, you will agree that the most defining moment is to be effective as a catalyst 
without compromising on the regulatory concerns. It is like a parent having to know when to 
be a friend of the child and when to be a parent. Monitoring and assessment of innovative 
retail payments by central banks calls for engaging appropriate skill-sets regularly updating 
with technological developments and having a machinery to gauge the need and efficacy of 
                                                 
1   The Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard (PCI DSS) is a proprietary information security standard 
for organizations that handle cardholder information for the major debit, credit, prepaid cards etc. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
such  a  retail  payment  system  for  the  country.  The  impact  of  innovations  on  cash  and 
monetary policy may be required to be analyzed in the long run once the volumes pick up. 
Retail payment systems – KYC constraint 
that  availability  and  accessibility  of  a  payment 
Although  we  always  propagate 
product/process is the key factor to be considered for financial inclusion the fact remains that 
these customers have to pass the test of proving identity. Innovating a retail payment system 
keeping the biometric identity in mind is the need of the hour. But that calls for nationwide 
initiative.  In India,  however,  integrating  the  Aadhaar  (biometric)  with  payment  systems  has 
started happening with the regulator supporting its acceptance as a valid KYC proof. 
Concluding thoughts 
I hope all of you have had two days of fruitful discussions and debate. I also hope you had a 
pleasant stay in India. I know the best is yet to come when you will be taken to the country’s 
historically  most  important  infrastructure,  the  Taj  Mahal,  tomorrow.  Wish  you  have  a  great 
time exploring India and that you will all return academically and culturally richer back to your 
respective countries. Wish you all the best. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
