Mario Draghi: Post-trade harmonisation and financial market integration 
in Europe 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
conference “Post-trade harmonisation and the integration of financial markets: a joint effort”, 
organised by the European Central Bank and the European Commission, Frankfurt am Main, 
19 March 2013. 
 Ladies and gentlemen,  
I am very pleased to welcome you to Frankfurt today and to open this important conference 
on post-trade harmonisation and financial market integration in Europe. 
This  conference  is  the  result  of  a  joint  effort  between  the  European  Central  Bank  and  the 
European Commission, and I would like to thank the organisers for putting together such an 
excellent programme. 
I  am  very  pleased  to  see  that  so  many  distinguished  speakers  from  both  the  public  and 
private  sectors  have  agreed  to  share  their  views  on  how  post-trade  harmonisation  will 
contribute to financial integration in Europe. 
In times of severe economic challenges, it is particularly important that our commitment to 
achieving  a  truly  single  European  market  is  reaffirmed.  As  we  all  understand,  a  well-
functioning internal market generates many benefits, including lower prices, more freedom of 
choice for individuals and better opportunities for firms.  
What Europe has achieved so far is indisputable – and it is often taken for granted. People 
sometimes focus on perceived difficulties caused by the single market from an individual or 
national  perspective.  But  it  is  important  to  acknowledge  the  huge  benefits  of  European 
integration for our daily lives and day-to-day business.  
Greater financial integration is a key part of building the single market – and something that 
improves  the functioning  of  national financial  systems.  Financial  integration  leads  to  better 
risk-sharing and diversification, it makes markets deeper and more liquid, and it encourages 
competition,  which  in  turn  reduces  the  costs  of  intermediation.  In  addition,  financial 
integration fosters more efficient allocation of capital, higher productivity, and stronger and 
more sustainable non-inflationary economic growth. 
Financial  integration  is  essential  to  making  Europe  stronger,  so  it  is  very  important  to  the 
ECB’s Governing Council. We are fully committed to making it happen, especially at a time 
when the fragmentation of the single financial market has led to fragmentation of the single 
monetary policy.  
As  you  will  be  aware,  the  disruptive  effects  of  severe  fragmentation  in  the  single  financial 
market  have  tangible  consequences,  such  as  diverging  funding  costs  for  banks.  This  has 
resulted in the uneven transmission of our interest rate reductions to firms and households 
across the euro area. For this reason, the ECB has had to identify the most effective policy 
tools for repairing these disruptions, while remaining within its mandate. 
Financial integration is clearly in the interests of the market and it is strongly supported by 
the post-trade harmonisation initiatives that are taking place within the EU at the legislative, 
operational and business levels. These initiatives all aim to remove national barriers and thus 
reduce the fragmentation of the European post-trade landscape. 
The integration of market infrastructure, the harmonisation agenda triggered by T2S and the 
regulatory  framework  are  the  key  elements  of  a  coordinated  harmonisation  effort  that 
complements and supports financial integration.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
It is through this lens that the topic of today’s conference should be analysed. Key questions 
include: how can we contribute to improving post-trade harmonisation? What will this process 
change? And what actions can we take to benefit from it? 
The  speakers  will  give  us  their  answers  and  explore  the  various  harmonisation  initiatives, 
linking them with changes in the regulatory framework and in market infrastructure. 
Last May, I participated, along with some of you, in the signing of the contractual agreements 
between the Eurosystem and those CSDs that had decided to participate in T2S. I stressed 
that  the  fundamental  objective  of  T2S  is  to  contribute  to  making  Europe  a  better  place  to 
invest.  Let  me  say  that  this  objective  is  not  unique  to  T2S.  It  is  the  objective  of  all  the 
harmonisation efforts that are being undertaken in the post-trade field, by all parties. 
It is definitely a joint effort, and what I see is not just the commitment of public authorities at 
the European or national level, but also the commitment of market participants, CSDs and 
CCPs. I am sure that we all share the same goal, namely making Europe stronger and more 
attractive for both domestic and foreign investment, thus stimulating and sustaining growth. 
Through  the  coordinated  action  of  so  many  stakeholders,  financial  markets  will  become 
safer, more transparent and, therefore, more efficient and integrated. Dismantling legal and 
operational  barriers,  which  is  the  aim  of  current  EU  legislative  proposals  and  new 
infrastructure  such  as  T2S,  will  benefit  those  who  adapt  their  business  models  to  a  more 
competitive  landscape.  It  is  important  to  highlight  that  the  benefits  of  T2S  will  be  fully 
achieved if the current harmonisation efforts are successfully implemented at the European 
level and especially at the national level. 
Let me be specific here by giving you a few examples. 
In  terms  of  infrastructure,  T2S  is  the  necessary  platform  for  setting  up  a  single  European 
market for securities services. In terms of benefits for Europe, T2S will make the post-trade 
environment safer and more efficient. It will reduce the cost of settling securities transactions 
and bring about significant collateral savings for market participants. These collateral savings 
are  particularly  valuable  at  a  time  when  demand  for  high-quality  collateral  continues  to 
increase, as a result of both the crisis and new regulatory developments. 
But reaping the full benefits from the launch of T2S requires that it is complemented by the 
provisions laid out in the CSD regulation proposed by the Commission. Both initiatives are 
supported by the harmonisation agenda which has been advanced by the Eurosystem and 
other European fora. 
The  CSD  regulation  is  critical  to  post-trade  harmonisation  efforts  in  Europe.  The  ECB’s 
Governing  Council  has  stated  its  strong  support  for  the  proposed  regulation,  which  will 
enhance the legal and operational conditions for cross-border settlement in the EU in general 
and  in  T2S  in  particular.  In  this  respect,  the  ECB  has  recommended  that  the  proposed 
regulation and the corresponding implementing acts are adopted prior to the launch of T2S. 
Work is also in progress at the Eurosystem level to improve the possibilities for the cross-
border  use  of  collateral  for  Eurosystem  credit  operations,  which  will  increase  efficiency. 
Further  benefits  are  expected  from  market-led  initiatives  to  enhance  the  interoperability  of 
triparty services in Europe. 
I  do  not  want  to  pre-empt  the  interesting  discussions  that  you  will  have  today,  so  let  me 
conclude  by  saying  that  everyone  needs  to  be  involved  in  this  process.  Every  contribution 
matters; and every action is relevant.  
I am confident that today’s conference will further clarify the role that each of us has to play 
in this important phase of European integration, and I look forward to continuing to work on it 
together. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
