Christine M Cumming: Comments at the 10th Anniversary of CLS 
Remarks by Ms Christine M Cumming, First Vice President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York, at the celebration of the 10th Anniversary of CLS, New York City, 17 April 2013. 
 I  am  honored  to  be  here  tonight  to  speak  on  the  occasion  of  the  10th  anniversary  of  the 
founding of CLS. 
Today, it’s hard to recreate the shock created by Bankhaus Herstatt’s failure in 1974 and the 
revelation that even a relatively small, internationally active bank could pose such substantial 
financial risk to participants in the foreign exchange market. 
Herstatt’s failure was just one of several shocks in the early 70s that signaled the end of two 
plus decades of relatively tranquil recovery and growth after World War II. Another notable 
shock of those years, of course, was the breakdown of the Bretton Woods foreign exchange 
arrangements  and  the  introduction  of  substantial  and  unfamiliar  volatility  to  the  foreign 
exchange markets. 
A  saving  grace  was  that  the foreign  exchange community  has  had  the  great good fortune 
over  the  decades  to  be  led  by  participants  who  recognized  the  importance  of  a  healthy, 
resilient  and  change-friendly  marketplace  and  worked  collaboratively  to  achieve  that.  Over 
the  years, the foreign  exchange  community  also forged  bonds  with  central  banks  in  major 
financial centers to promote foreign exchange market health. It has been a great model of 
public-private cooperation made possible by private-sector leadership. 
Despite  all  that,  foreign  exchange  market  participants  and  central  banks  in  1974  found 
Herstatt risk to be an intractable problem. All that was left to banks was to manage it. And so 
it went for 20 years. 
Then,  in  the  mid-1990s,  Bill  McDonough,  president  of  the  New  York  Fed,  identified  the 
continued existence of Herstatt risk as a challenge to be met. As chairman of the Committee 
on Payments and Settlement Systems of the G-10 Central Bank Governors, he spurred the 
central  bank  community  to  take  a  fresh  look.  This  time,  the  combination  of  new  financial 
analysis and the rapidly expanding availability of raw computing power made the difference. 
• 
In  what  today  still  stands  as  a  landmark  in  analysis  of  the  connection  between 
operational  and  financial  risk,  the  1996  Allsopp  report  demonstrated  in  a 
straightforward  manner  just  how  much  financial  risk  existed  in  the  bilateral 
settlement  of  gross  principal  amounts  of  foreign  exchange  –  an  analysis  that 
provided  the  insight  into  how  a  settlement  facility  could  reduce  that  risk,  and  into 
understanding how settlement management could improve in the interim. 
Raw  computing  power  was  essential  for  the  design  and  risk  management  of  any 
proposed  new  settlement  facility.  Through  scenario  analysis  and  stress  testing, 
CLS’s  founders  could  determine  the  necessary capital  and  liquidity  needs,  default 
handling  procedures,  and  the  general  benefits  of  multilateral  vs.  bilateral  netting. 
The  inherently  multicurrency  nature  of  foreign  exchange  settlement  of  course 
enhanced the challenge. 
The published Allsopp analysis included a challenge from the major central banks to 
the major market participants to develop a new settlement mechanism. In short, find 
a solution or we will find one for you! 
  I  recount  this  history  to  highlight  the  magnitude  of  the  achievement  CLS  represents.  The 
establishment  and  growth  of  CLS 
the  most  significant 
accomplishments in global financial markets in the post-war period and a major breakthrough 
in managing settlement risk in an over-the-counter market. 
is  undoubtedly  one  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 The  largest  part  of  the  achievement,  of  course,  is  the  difficult  job  of  making  it 
happen. CLS was actually the third major concept for FX settlement. It succeeded 
because  the  industry  collectively  got  firmly  behind  CLS  and  because  of  the  hard 
work  of the  many  people  in  the  CLS  organization,  whose  commitment and  efforts 
continue to this day. 
Let me highlight three dimensions of CLS’s success. 
First, its growth and its scope. When it went live in 2002, CLS began settling FX transactions 
in just seven currencies with 39 settlement members. Today it settles in 17 currencies with 
63 settlement members and 16,000 third party users. 
Volumes and values of transactions settled via CLS have also expanded significantly. Today 
CLS is settling average daily  values of nearly  U.S.$5 trillion and average daily  volumes of 
1 million transactions. On its peak settlement value day, March 19, 2008, CLS settled over 
10 trillion U.S. dollars equivalent. 
Second, adaptation to a rapidly changing foreign exchange market. 
Today’s FX market is very different in its pace, the composition of its participants and its size 
from  the  mid-1990s  of  the  Allsopp  report.  Today’s  trading  reflects  more  high-frequency, 
algorithmic  trading;  a  wider  range  of  financial  participants,  like  hedge  funds;  and  higher 
overall volumes. 
In  response  to  those  changes,  CLS  worked  diligently  with  industry  and  the  regulatory 
community to launch the CLS Aggregation Service (CLSAS), a joint venture between CLS 
and Traiana, in 2010. 
• 
The  service  aggregates  spot  FX  trades  to  support  high-volume,  low-value 
transactions, one of the fastest growing segments of the FX market. 
And in light of volume growth, CLS has also engaged its stakeholders to help them better 
understand  their  own  capacity  needs  and  to  ensure  that  both  its  members  and  the  CLS 
settlement service are able to manage even further growth as the FX market continues to 
evolve. 
Third, resilience in difficult times. 
Following  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers  in  September  2008,  while  market  sentiment 
deteriorated rapidly and money and capital markets were brought to a virtual standstill, the 
foreign exchange market continued to function effectively. Many have attributed this to the 
role played by CLS. 
And more recently, CLS remained a reliable market infrastructure during and in the wake of 
Superstorm  Sandy.  As  you  know,  the  Superstorm  disrupted  this  celebration,  and  my 
colleague, Sandy Krieger (no relation), who was to deliver these remarks could not make it 
this evening, but sends her warm regards. 
In recognition of the crucial role that CLS serves in the foreign exchange market, CLS was 
designated as a systemically important financial market utility by the U.S. Financial Stability 
Oversight  Council  on  July  18,  2012.  In  my  words,  we  can’t  imagine  the  foreign  exchange 
market without CLS. 
Let me turn to the future and what it holds for CLS and for us. As is true for all us, the path of 
the  future  is  determined  in  part  by  the  momentum  of  our  history  and  in  part  by  the 
unknowable that lies ahead. Let me talk to the history. 
First, it seems clear that CLS has much more runway ahead in furthering its core mission  
–  the  reduction  of  FX  settlement  risk  –  by  expanding  its  settlement  service  to  include 
additional currencies and settlement sessions, and to increase participation in the system. 
• 
Today, CLS settles 17 currencies. But there are many more currencies to go, some 
in regions that are just coming fully onstream in the global financial system. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Today,  “same  day”  foreign  exchange  activity  is  not  settled  in  CLS.  Can  CLS  find 
solutions to help reduce settlement risk in this segment of the market? 
Today, CLS has one discrete settlement session that occurs at a defined time during 
the day. Is it feasible to imagine a world where CLS is truly Continuous in Linking 
Settlements on a payment-versus-payment basis at most, if not all times during the 
global business day? 
And looking ahead, if foreign exchange transactions become centrally cleared, what 
role can and should CLS play to facilitate the safe settlement of those transactions? 
I’d note, CLS has plenty of strategic choices there, always a good sign. 
• 
Second, CLS was created by private sector leadership and financial institutional commitment 
and industry collaboration is a key part of a successful future. 
• 
CLS cannot do its work alone. What makes CLS successful are members who are 
proactive in identifying and working with CLS on opportunities to further strengthen 
the CLS ecosystem, particularly in a market that is rapidly changing. 
That will require not just member support but also member investment. 
• 
Third,  the  birth  of  CLS  and  its  development  exemplifies  the  productivity  of  public  sector-
private  sector  collaboration.  We  have  different  roles,  but  a  common  interest  in  the 
performance and resiliency of the foreign exchange market. As we play our respective roles, 
we can make each other more insightful and better performing. We have done that here in 
foreign exchange settlement – and speaking personally, I would like to see private sector and 
public sector tackle more opportunities across the financial markets. 
Let me end by congratulating CLS and all who are part of it on these first 10 very successful 
years,  thank  the  wider  group  here  for  the  collaboration  you  have  developed  within  the 
industry, and thank you also for the partnerships you have forged with central banks, most 
especially,  with  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York.  We  wish  you  another  equally 
successful decade – and look forward to another decade of working successfully together. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
