Brian Wynter: The role of monetary and exchange rate policy in Jamaica 
Remarks  by  Mr  Brian  Wynter,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Jamaica,  to  the  Government  of 
Jamaica, National Debt Exchange, Kingston, 12 February 2013. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I  propose  to  focus  my  remarks  on  the  role  of  monetary  and  exchange  rate  policy  in  the 
context  of  the  transaction  as  well  as  over  the  life  of  the  Extended  Fund  Facility  that  is 
currently being negotiated with the IMF. 
The  core  objective  of  Bank  of  Jamaica  is  to  maintain  price  stability.  Over  the  life  of  the 
programme,  therefore,  monetary  policy  will  aim  at  maintaining  single  digit  inflation  which 
eventually will be brought into line with our major trading partners. 
We will conduct monetary policy within the framework of a flexible exchange rate regime in 
which the rate is allowed to adjust so as to facilitate the preservation and enhancement of 
price competitiveness within the Jamaican economy. We expect that this policy, along with 
the raft of structural reforms in the programme, will induce medium-term improvements in the 
current account of the balance of payments. The programme, when endorsed by the IMF, will 
also  unlock  access  to  bilateral  and  multilateral  financing  that,  together  with  an  expected 
normalisation  in  confidence  and  private  capital  inflows,  will  support  much  needed  reserve 
accumulation. In this context, the programme will contain clear targets that will safeguard the 
adequacy of our gross international reserves. 
To further enhance the operation of the foreign exchange market, the Bank will develop and 
introduce measures aimed at enabling the market to intermediate lumpy flows and efficiently 
deal  with  volatility.  This  process  will  commence  with  initiatives  to  facilitate  a  better 
information and price discovery process. 
I will now turn to some of the things the Bank will be doing in the context of this transaction. 
First, it bears mentioning that the Bank, as a major holder of GOJ bonds, will be participating 
in the exchange with 100% of its holdings. 
For the rest of the financial system, the Bank considers the preservation of financial system 
stability to be of extreme importance. Our technical team has reviewed the debt exchange 
offer in detail and has run various stress tests that assure us that the temporary impact on 
financial institutions’ profitability and capital adequacy  will be manageable. Nonetheless, in 
order to ensure financial stability, the Government has revived the Financial System Support 
Fund (“FSSF”), which will be administered by the Financial Regulatory Council on behalf of 
the Minister of Finance. The form of support that the FSSF will provide will be repo-based 
funding. Unlike the Bank’s normal liquidity support provided in accordance with the Bank of 
Jamaica  Act,  no  haircuts  will  apply  so  that  eligible  entities  can  borrow  up  to  100%  of  the 
pledged nominal amount relating to the new GOJ bonds. Financial institutions regulated by 
the Bank as well as those not regulated by the Bank will be able to participate in the facility 
as long as they participated in the NDX. 
Conclusion 
Thank  you  for  attention  to  this  section  of  the  presentation.  I  assure  you  that  the  Bank  is 
unwavering  in  its  commitment  to  fostering  and  maintaining  macroeconomic  and  financial 
stability.  Our  technical  teams  are  at  hand  to  assist  with  any  matters  that  may  arise  and  I, 
personally, will be available to discuss this matter with any of you wishing to do so. In the 
final  analysis,  Bank  of  Jamaica  will  be  depending  on  your  support  for  this  very  important 
element of the medium-term programme that is designed to move Jamaica forward. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
