Rundheersing Bheenick: Ticking the right boxes – financial market 
development in Mauritius 
Keynote  address  Mr  Rundheersing  Bheenick,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius,  at  a 
function to mark the successful issue of the second tranche of Notes under the Omnicane 
Multicurrency Medium Term Note Programme, with Standard Bank (Mauritius) as the Lead 
Arranger, Ebène, 21 January 2013. 
 the  Lead  Arranger,  Standard  Bank  (Mauritius),  with 
What  a  pleasure  it  is  to  be  here  this  evening  to  mark  the  continued  success  of  both  the 
issuer,  Omnicane,  and 
their 
Multicurrency Medium Term Note Programme. And just in case anyone thought that this is 
not  reason  enough  to  celebrate,  we  are  also  marking  the  entry  of  OMNICANE  as  a  25% 
equity partner in a US$200 million sugar complex in Kenya, after closure of a US$120 million 
loan, again arranged by Standard Bank but, this time, jointly with the PTA Bank.  
What  a  wonderful  way  to  start  the  New  Year  –  on  a  such  strong  note  of  confidence, 
especially  after  the  pessimistic  mood  that  had  been  dogging  us  in  the  second  half  of  last 
year! Well done, Omnicane. Well done, Standard Bank. I hope that as the year progresses, 
we shall be celebrating more similar successes.  
This financing and investment package ticks so many of the right boxes that it’s difficult not to 
get excited about it.  
• 
• 
It scores very high marks on banking and financial market development.  
It confirms the return to health and renewed vigor of the domestic sugar sector in its 
latest avatar as a cane industry.  
It attests to the growing regional interest in Mauritian savoir faire.  
And it illustrates the dynamism of our offshore banks operating in our international 
financial centre.  
 Let me say a few words on each of these points in turn.  
First, banking and financial market development  
Bank-of-Mauritius-watchers – at least those who go beyond the widespread fixation with our 
monetary policy – know that financial market deepening has been a major focus of central 
bank action in recent years. Progress has been frustratingly slow and all of us, not just the 
Bank, need to step up our efforts considerably, if we are to have a financial market which is 
more  aligned  with  our  financing  needs  as  a  middle-income  country.  Some  of  the  building 
blocks are already in place. We now issue single-maturity instruments at our regular auctions 
of  Government  paper.  We  have  introduced  benchmark  bonds  of  3-year  and  5-year 
maturities. We have been working closely with the Stock Exchange authorities to start trading 
of Government securities on the stock market. This can be expected to result in a reference 
yield  curve,  a  key  element  in  the  development  of  a  corporate  bond  market.  Our  financial 
sector is dominated by bank lending. 
A recent IMF study on bond markets in Africa1  1 finds that these markets are at a nascent 
stage, with corporate bond market capitalization accounting for just 1.12% of GDP in the last 
decade. For us Mauritians who are used to see our country in the top rung of African league 
                                                
1   Yibin  Mu,  Peter  Phelps  &  Janet  G.  Stotsky,  “Bond  Markets  in  Africa”,  IMF  Working  Paper  No.  WP/13/12 
(Washington: International Monetary Fund). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
tables, it may come as a jolt to learn that this is one area where we do not have bragging 
rights. Quite the opposite, in fact. Out of 28 Sub-Saharan countries analysed, we trail in as 
Number 13 just behind the Central African Republic, at one-fifth of one percent of GDP. We 
must do better, much better. 
The  Medium  Term  Note  Programme,  whose  second  issue  within  one  year  we  are 
celebrating, does take us in the right direction. This Rs2 billion Multicurrency Medium Term 
Note (MTN) Programme is a serious contender for the record book. It is the very first such 
instrument issued by a listed entity in Mauritius. Also, the amount raised under a single issue 
is a record for the Mauritian market. Although not a bond, the MTN is an alternative source of 
financing to bank lending. The participation of banks in the MTN illustrates that alternative 
debt instruments and bank financing are clearly complementary. Our well-capitalised banking 
system, our creditable inflation record, and our exchange rate stability augur well for faster 
growth of the corporate bond market. This will in turn have a favourable impact on financial 
and economic stability.  
So, this is one box that I tick enthusiastically, with a well-deserved pat on the back to both 
the  issuer  and  the  lead-arranger,  while  also  renewing  my  call  for  greater  diligence  to  the 
other  partners  with  a  crucial  role  in  domestic  bond  market  and  secondary  market 
development to catch up on the 12 Sub-Saharan countries that have trounced us in this field. 
Second, the transformation of the erstwhile Sugar industry into a cane industry.  
Government  embarked  last  year  on  an  Economic  Transformation  Programme.  It  can  draw 
some  inspiration  from  the  example  of  the  sugar  industry  which  has  undergone  a  total 
transformation on the back of some Schumpeterian “creative destruction”. As is well-known, 
the local sugar sector found itself with its back to the wall when faced with a drastic 36 per 
cent  cut  in  sugar  export  prices  following  the  reform  of  the  EU  Sugar  Protocol  to  make  it 
WTO-compatible.  There  were  dire  predictions  that  the  industry  was  going  the  way  of  the 
dodo. It had to shed excess fat and had literally reinvent itself to survive.  
With  public/private  collaboration  of  a  kind  rarely  seen  before,  an  industry  that  was  widely 
seen as being on its last legs successfully transformed itself into a modern cane cluster. This 
cane  cluster  has  emerged  from  an  industry  that  until  recently,  owed  its  survival  to  the 
continued  generosity  of  the  EU  taxpayer  and  was  content  to  export  raw  sugar  in  bulk  for 
refining in Europe. It now produces several types of sugar such as raw sugar, special sugars, 
industrial  sugar  and  white  sugar;  it  also  supplies  firm  power  to  the  national  grid  from 
bagasse/coal  co-generation  using  state-of-the-art  technology;  and  it  will  soon  produce 
ethanol  using  molasses.  Today,  Mauritius  is  a  successful  and  reliable  exporter  of  refined 
sugar to Europe.  
With its flexi-factory, Omnicane is the very emblem of this transformation. There are useful 
lessons in this transformation for others operating in other sectors of the economy: Adapt or 
Perish. I had the pleasure of visiting Omnicane last year. I was quite impressed by what I 
saw  there,  particularly  by  the  spirit  of  innovation  and  efficiency  that  permeates  the  whole 
organization.  I  am  trying  not  to  sound  like  a  publicist  for  Omnicane  –  but  it  is  quite  an 
operation, believe me. 
I  congratulate  all  those  who  played  a  role  in  transforming  an  industry,  doomed  to  a  slow 
death  in  the  view  of  many,  into  an  avant-garde  cane  industry  with  impeccable  green 
credentials.  Sugar  may  not  be  King  anymore,  but  it  certainly  does  not  show  any  sign  of 
becoming plain common Citizen cane anytime soon. There’s life in the old dog yet. After its 
important  contribution  to  the  integration  of  the  sugar  sector  in  Mauritius,  I  am  delighted  to 
note that the company has consolidated its position on export markets by acquiring a 20% 
equity  stake  in  a  large  UK-based  non-refining  distributor  of  sugar  in  Europe.  Omnicane 
clearly  has  the  wind  in  its  sails.  It  is  hardly  surprising  that  investors  and  lenders  are 
rewarding it by subscribing to this second issue of Notes of Rs920 million, bringing the total 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
issue to-date to Rs2 billion – and doing so with a fixed rate coupon which is 145 basis points 
lower than the first issue. This brings me neatly to my next point.  
Third, growing regional interest  
Part  of  the  proceeds  of  this  second  Notes  issue  will  finance  OMNICANE’s  domestic 
investment  in  the  next  stage  of  the  flexi-factory.  The  remainder  will  support  their  ventures 
overseas, especially in the region. And this is where the US$120-million loan package comes 
in. Omnicane has a 25% equity stake in Kwale International Sugar Company Limited near 
Mombasa  in  Kenya,  with  an  option  to  increase  its  participation  to  50%.  Omnicane  will 
operate and manage the complex which will produce ethanol, electricity and cane sugar, on 
the  lines  of  what  it  does  in  Mauritius.  This  is  the  latest  chapter  in  successful  Mauritian 
involvement in the sugar industry in Africa, which has a long and respectable history.  
In a previous capacity, I was involved in a Lenders’ meeting to mount a financing package for 
the first major investment from Mauritius into Mozambique – the MARROMEU Sugar Project. 
This followed in the wake of the SUCRIVORE Project in the Ivory Coast, to be followed later 
by  the  TPC  project  in  Tanzania.  Let  me  salute  the  boldness  of  the  different  sugar  groups 
concerned which did not hesitate to invest in Africa at a time of negative perception about the 
Continent and its prospects.  
Besides  the  co-arrangers,  Standard  Bank  and  the  East  and  Southern  African  Trade  and 
Development Bank, known as the PTA Bank, five other banks have participated in this loan, 
including  two  Kenyan  banks,  Kenya  Commercial  Bank  and  Cooperative  Bank  of  Kenya.  I 
note that three Mauritian banks are also participating in the financing, namely State Bank of 
Mauritius, Mauritius Commercial Bank and AfrAsia Bank. Which gives me an extra reason for 
satisfaction.  Our  banks  are  increasingly  playing  an  important  role  by  extending  their 
footprints  in  the  region  and  accompanying  our  investors  in  their  overseas  ventures.  The 
latest ranking of the African Banker shows that seven Mauritian banks now figure among the 
top  100  African  banks.  Our  banks  are  robust  and  have  undoubtedly  contributed  to  the 
resilience of our economy during the global financial crisis. Far be it for me to trumpet this, 
but let us never forget that this happy state of affairs is the result of the strong regulatory and 
supervisory framework put in place by the Bank of Mauritius.  
Let  me  say  a  word  about  our  relations  with  Kenya.  Last  year,  I  was  in  Nairobi  to  sign  a 
Memorandum  of  Understanding  with  Governor  Ndung’u  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya  to 
enhance mutual co-operation in the supervision of our financial institutions.  
It is a little-known fact that our relations with Kenya in the financial sphere go back to pre-
independence  days.  The  Kenya-based  Jubilee  Insurance  invested  then  in  an  operation  in 
Mauritius, which is still present today. More recently, I & M Bank of Kenya joined forces with 
a  Mauritian  conglomerate,  with  diversified  interests  in  agriculture,  hotels,  tourism  and 
manufacturing to take over a local bank.  
In the other direction, another large Mauritian multinational conglomerate, involved in diverse 
activities  ranging  from  insurance  and  leasing  to  banking  and  distribution,  invested  as  a 
minority  partner  in  one  of  the  rapidly-growing  Kenyan  banks,  Equity  Bank.  The  same 
conglomerate ended the year with another joint venture in Kenya, this time in the furniture 
retail  business.  So  Kenya  and  Mauritius  are  living  examples  of  increased  South-South 
cooperation and South-South investment, which mean more FDI flows among the Southern 
countries. It seems that the wish I had expressed at the signing ceremony with my Kenyan 
counterpart  that  the  relations  between  Mauritius  and  Kenya  tighten  further,  is  fast  being 
fulfilled.  
Conclusion  
Let me  now  conclude. This financing  and  investment  package that  we  are  celebrating  this 
evening has allowed us to tick so many boxes on the long to-do list on our financial sector 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
development  agenda.  We  are  slowly  but  surely  moving  forward.  The  road  ahead  is  long, 
bumpy, and certainly not risk-free. But I have no doubt that the Notes issue by Omnicane will 
prove to be a milestone in this long journey.  
It would be remiss of me to conclude without giving some good marks to Standard Bank for 
taking the lead in this initiative. Since the bank set up shop here in 2001, its business has 
expanded  significantly.  During  the  last  five  years,  the  bank’s  total  assets  have  increased 
three-fold. It now ranks 6th in terms of total assets of the banking sector. The bank’s previous 
CEO, Chris Clarkson, was constantly fighting for financial deepening and the development of 
the  domestic  debt  market.  It  became  something  of  a  hobby  horse  of  his  –  one  that  I  was 
quite  happy  to  share  with  him.  His  successor,  Lakshman  Bheenick,  has  continued  the 
struggle. The bank is now reaping its just reward. We invite the bank to continue to include 
Mauritius  in  their  growth  plans  for  the  region  and  to  make  greater  use  of  the  Mauritian 
jurisdiction  for  their  regional  operations.  We  can  give  a  terrific  boost  by  overcoming  the 
resistance we see in some quarters to the introduction of new financing instruments such as 
sukuks and inflation-protected paper of different maturities. These would work wonders for 
the  financial  market,  attract  new  business,  and  ease  intermediation  between  savers  and 
investors. So, I say to Standard Bank: Keep pushing.  
Let me reiterate my congratulations to the promoters of Omnicane who had the foresight to 
take the right decisions at the right time, contributing to convert a sector that was heading for 
the  rocks,  into  a  model  of  how  an  industry  can  reinvent  itself  in  the  face  of  daunting 
challenges.  
Thank you and the very best of luck in your future endeavours. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
