Yoshihisa Morimoto: Economic activity and prices in Japan and 
monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Yoshihisa Morimoto, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at a 
meeting with business leaders, Kochi, 20 February 2013. 
I. 
Recent financial and economic developments 
 Overseas developments 
Global financial markets 
A. 
1. 
I would like to start with developments in global financial markets and overseas economies, 
which affect Japan’s economy. 
Against  the  backdrop  of  the  European  debt  problem,  some  nervousness  continued  to  be 
seen  in  global  financial  markets  through  summer  2012,  but  the  tail  risk  of  a  potential 
disintegration  of  the  euro,  which  some  had  feared  at  one  time,  has  receded  since  the 
autumn. This is because gradual progress has been made in discussions and measures for 
further strengthening and restructuring the euro area to form an economic and financial union 
with  greater  stability.  Steps  include  (1)  the  introduction  of  the  modalities  for  undertaking 
Outright Monetary Transactions (OMTs) by the European Central Bank (ECB), which have 
created a safety valve in government bond markets, especially in peripheral countries such 
as  Spain  and  Italy;  and  (2)  an  agreement  to  establish  a  single  banking  supervisory 
mechanism in Europe to ensure the stability of the European financial system. More recently, 
it  emerged  that  the  amount  of  early  repayments  under  the  ECB’s  36-month  longer-term 
refinancing operations (LTROs), implemented in early 2012 in response to the crisis, turned 
out  to  be  larger  than  markets  expected,  suggesting  that  the  financial  system  is  regaining 
stability. Meanwhile, in the United States the “fiscal cliff” has been avoided and investors’ risk 
aversion  has  been  abating.  Nevertheless,  as  these  factors  contain  numerous  inherent 
uncertainties, market developments require continued attention. 
2. 
Under these circumstances, the extent of deceleration in many overseas economies became 
more pronounced through summer 2012 due in part to the anxiety in global financial markets 
reflecting  concern  over  the  European  debt  problem.  Overseas  economies  remained  in  a 
deceleration  phase  thereafter,  but  at  present,  while  the  euro  area  economy  remains 
stagnant,  the  U.S.  and  Chinese  economies  show  some  positive  developments.  As  for  the 
outlook,  assuming  that  global  financial  markets  remain  stable  on  the  whole,  overseas 
economies  are  expected  to  gradually  emerge  from  the  deceleration  phase  and  turn  to  a 
moderate recovery. 
3. 
By region, economic activity in the euro area has been receding slowly. Given the continued 
adverse  feedback  loop  in  peripheral  countries  among  the  fiscal  situation,  the  financial 
system,  and  economic  activity,  business  and  household  sentiment  has  become  cautious. 
Because  fiscal  austerity  measures  will  continue,  economic  activity  is  expected  to  continue 
receding slowly for the time being. However, while tensions in financial markets have been 
easing,  business  sentiment  has  shown  signs  of  improvement  in  core  countries  such  as 
Germany.  Regarding  the  outlook,  as  economies  outside  the  euro  area  pick  up,  economic 
activity  in  the  euro  area  –  particularly  in  the  core  countries  –  is  likely  to  gradually  emerge 
from the deceleration phase, led by exports. 
Overseas economies 
Euro area economy 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
U.S. economy 
4. 
The  U.S.  economy  continued  to recover  at  a  moderate  pace,  particularly  in  the  household 
sector, supported by accommodative financial conditions. Although some weakness can be 
seen in household sentiment due to the effects of the expiration of the payroll tax cut at the 
beginning  of  2013,  the  employment  situation  has  been  improving,  albeit  modestly,  and 
private  consumption  has  been  firm,  as  evidenced  by  continued  brisk  car  sales.  Housing-
related  investment  has  also  continued  to  show  signs  of  picking  up,  albeit  at  a  depressed 
level.  Because  the  fiscal  cliff  was  avoided,  reducing  the  risk  of  a  sharp  fiscal  tightening, 
business  sentiment  has  been  improving,  and  consequently,  the  deceleration  in  business 
fixed  investment  is  coming  to  a  halt.  The  U.S.  economy  is  likely  to  continue  recovering, 
supported  by  accommodative  financial  conditions.  Nevertheless,  the  pace  of  recovery  is 
likely to remain only moderate for the time being, reflecting the lack of momentum in external 
demand as well as continued downward pressure from the fiscal side. 
5. 
China’s economy, and the NIEs and the ASEAN economies 
With regard to emerging countries, the Chinese economy has been regaining stability on the 
back of firm domestic demand. Domestic demand as a whole has been firm, as evidenced by 
the uptrend in infrastructure investment and retail sales. There are also signs of a bottoming 
out in exports and imports. Reflecting these developments in demand at home and abroad, 
industrial  production  has  also  been  stabilizing.  As  for  the  outlook,  domestic  demand  is 
expected to remain firm, partly due to the effects of policies taken since mid-2012 such as 
monetary easing and the front-loading of public works projects. Under these circumstances, 
as inventory adjustments make progress and exports gradually pick up, the recovery of the 
Chinese  economy  is  likely  to  become  more  pronounced.  However,  since  China’s  new 
administration  has  launched  a  policy  emphasizing  “quality-based”  growth  and  targeting 
well-balanced  growth,  the  pace  of  economic  growth  in  China  is  expected  to  be  restrained 
relative  to  the  high  growth  in  the  mid-2000s.  The  NIEs  and  the  ASEAN  economies  are 
picking up only moderately, led by the corporate sector, but are expected to gradually regain 
momentum underpinned by firm private consumption. 
Japan’s economy and prices 
Economic activity 
B. 
1. 
I will now explain the current state of, and outlook for, Japan’s economy given the overseas 
economic  developments  I  have  just  outlined.  Japan’s  economy  picked  up  rapidly  following 
the plunge caused by the Great East Japan Earthquake, which struck just as the economy 
was recovering from the Lehman shock, and it posted relatively high growth in the first half of 
2012. In the second half of 2012, however, the economy as a whole was relatively weak as 
exports  and  industrial  production  dropped  sharply  due  to  the  effects  of  the  deceleration  in 
overseas economies. However, this downward momentum has recently been coming to an 
end. Specifically, the pace of decrease in exports has been moderating in a situation where 
some  signs  of  picking  up  have  been  observed  in  overseas  economies,  particularly  in  the 
United States and China. In addition, private consumption has been resilient, and the effects 
of the decline in car sales due to the ending of subsidies for purchasers of environmentally 
friendly  cars  have  fallen  off.  Meanwhile,  public  investment  has  continued  to  increase,  and 
housing investment has generally been picking up. 
With regard to the outlook, as the effects of various economic measures underpin domestic 
demand  and  overseas  economies  emerge  from  the  deceleration  phase,  exports  and 
industrial production are likely to start picking up, and these improvements are likely to feed 
through  into  business  fixed  investment  and  private  consumption.  In  addition,  recent 
movements in foreign exchange rates are likely to contribute to the underpinning of exports 
and corporate profits. Under these circumstances, Japan’s economy is likely to more or less 
level  off  for  the  time  being  and  subsequently  return  to  a  moderate  recovery  path  toward 
mid-year. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Prices 
The economic growth rate in fiscal 2013 is expected to be relatively high, mainly owing to the 
effects of various economic measures and foreign exchange rate movements. Although the 
economic growth rate is likely to decrease mainly due to a decline in demand following the 
front-loading of consumption prior to the consumption tax hike, growth is expected to remain 
above potential in fiscal 2014. In the Bank of Japan’s interim assessment in January 2013, 
the  median  of  the  Policy  Board  members’  forecasts  for  Japan’s  real  GDP  growth  rate  is 
2.3 percent for fiscal 2013 and 0.8 percent for fiscal 2014. 
2. 
Next, I will talk about price developments. The year-on-year rate of change in the consumer 
price index (CPI) for all items less fresh food is around 0 percent. For the time being, it is 
expected to turn negative due to the reversal of the previous year’s rise in energy prices and 
of  the  movements  in  durable  consumer  goods,  and  thereafter,  it  is  likely  to  be  around 
0 percent again. However, in the somewhat longer term, the rate of change is likely to turn 
positive  as  the  aggregate  supply  and  demand  balance  improves  due  to  the  recovery  of 
Japan’s  economy,  and  is  expected  to  gradually  rise  in  fiscal  2014.  In  the  Bank’s  interim 
assessment  in  January  2013,  the  median  of  the  Policy  Board  members’  forecasts  for  the 
year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (all items less fresh food; excluding the direct effects 
of the consumption tax hike) is 0.4 percent for fiscal 2013 and 0.9 percent for fiscal 2014. 
Uncertainty surrounding the outlook 
C. 
The baseline scenario for Japan’s economy described thus far is subject to both upside and 
downside  risks.  Risk  factors  that  particularly  warrant  close  attention  are  developments  in 
overseas  economies  and  uncertainty  with  regard  to  firms’  and  households’  medium-  to 
long-term  growth  expectations.  With  regard  to  overseas  economies,  remaining  uncertainty 
over  the  European  debt  problem  and  future  developments  in  the  relations  between  Japan 
and  China  require  due  attention.  As  for  the  Chinese  economy,  whether  it  will  succeed  in 
making  a  smooth  transition  to  stable  growth  is  a  key  issue.  The  economy  is  likely  to  face 
various  structural  changes,  including  in  labor  supply  and  demand  conditions  following  the 
reduction of excess capacity in the manufacturing sector and surplus labor in rural areas, as 
well as in the supply and demand conditions for resources. Attention therefore needs to be 
paid to the risk that these changes will impose constraints on the Chinese economy. On the 
other  hand,  the  so-called  shale  revolution  in  the  United  States  may  buoy  up  the  U.S. 
economy  through  declines  in  energy  and  materials  prices.  With  regard  to  the  Japanese 
economy, various economic measures will likely boost its growth rate for the time being; in 
the meantime, however, there is uncertainty over the extent to which the economic measures 
can promote a virtuous circle in which firms’ and households’ medium- to long-term growth 
expectations rise as a result of progress in regulatory reforms. As for prices, attention needs 
to  be  paid  to  the  possibility  that  materialization  of  the  aforementioned  risks  to  economic 
activity could exert considerable effects on developments in prices, including the supply and 
demand balance. 
Monetary policy under the “price stability target” 
II. 
Next,  I  would  like  to  turn  to  the  Bank’s  conduct  of  monetary  policy  under  the  current 
economic and price situation. 
In  order  for  Japan’s  economy  to  overcome  deflation  as  early  as  possible  and  return  to  a 
sustainable  growth  with  price  stability,  the  Bank  has  been  pursuing  aggressive  monetary 
easing.  At  the  Monetary  Policy  Meeting  held  on  January  21  and  22,  2013,  the  Bank  took 
decisive additional steps to provide monetary accommodation. Specifically, the Bank decided 
to introduce (1) the “price stability target” in place of the “price stability goal in the medium to 
long  term”,  and  (2)  the  “open-ended  asset  purchasing  method”  under  the  Asset  Purchase 
Program. Furthermore, the Bank released “Joint Statement of the Government and the Bank 
of  Japan  on  Overcoming  Deflation  and  Achieving  Sustainable  Economic  Growth”  with  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
government. In addition, by providing strong support to lending by financial institutions, the 
Bank is making efforts to ensure that firms and households make use of the accommodative 
financial conditions. 
In what follows, I will explain the aim of, and thinking behind, the Bank’s policy measures. 
Introduction of the “Price Stability Target” of 2 percent 
What is “price stability”? 
A. 
1. 
I  would  now  like  to  explain  the  details  of  the  “price  stability  target”.  The  Bank  conducts 
monetary  policy  based  on  the  principle  that  monetary  policy  shall  be  aimed  at  “achieving 
price stability, thereby contributing to the sound development of the national economy”. On 
this  basis,  I  would  like  to  explain  the  price  developments  under  which  the  Bank  perceives 
“price stability” and the reasons for setting the target at 2 percent in terms of the year-on-year 
rate of change in the CPI. 
“Price stability” is defined conceptually as a state where various economic agents may make 
decisions regarding such economic activities as consumption and investments without being 
concerned about the fluctuations in the general price level, and this must be achieved on a 
sustainable basis. The Bank considers “price stability” to be a situation in which the economy 
improves in a balanced and sustainable manner, accompanied by increases in employment, 
wages, and corporate profits, and prices rise moderately as a result. To put it simply, what 
the Bank is aiming to achieve with the “price stability target” is to create an environment in 
which  corporate  profits  and  wages  rise  in  a  sustainable  manner  that  primarily  reflects 
increases in productivity. For example, when import prices rise, this may push up the inflation 
rate, but such an increase in inflation is not accompanied by an improvement in the economy 
because the terms of trade will deteriorate and real income of households and firms will fall. 
This is not the type of inflation the Bank aims to achieve. 
In Japan, given that inflation has been hovering at a low level of close to 0 percent year on 
year for a prolonged period, low inflation expectations have become entrenched in firms’ and 
households’ decision making. Given this, the “price stability target” of 2 percent may be seen 
as somewhat high. However, as I explained earlier, the year-on-year rate of change in the 
CPI is projected to move closer to 1 percent through fiscal 2014 supported by a recovery in 
the  economy.  If,  in  this  situation,  efforts  by  a  wide  range  of  entities  to  raise  the 
competitiveness  and  growth  potential  of  Japan’s  economy  bear  fruit  and  firms’  and 
households’  inflation  expectations  rise  as  a  result,  the  inflation  rate  consistent  with  price 
stability  on  sustainable  basis  will  rise  as  well  after  fiscal  2014.  The  Bank  will  continue  to 
provide  support  from  the  financial  side  through  measures  to  pursue  aggressive  monetary 
easing and support strengthening the foundations for economic growth in order to underpin 
the  signs  of  recovery  currently  seen.  The  Bank  will  do  its  utmost  so  that  the  CPI  will  rise 
steadily to the target of 2 percent and that the target will be achieved at the earliest possible 
time. 
2. 
Now,  I  would  like  to  briefly  explain  the  mechanism  through  which  the  inflation  rate  rises. 
From a somewhat long-term perspective, there is a mild positive correlation between the rate 
of increase in the CPI and the aggregate supply and demand balance. If, as a result of an 
improvement  in  the  economy,  aggregate  demand  in  the  economy  as  a  whole  increases 
relative  to  production  capacity  and,  therefore,  the  balance  between  aggregate  supply  and 
demand improves, the rate of increase in the CPI will rise with a time lag of several quarters. 
Since the mid-1990s, Japan’s economy has tended to face a shortage of aggregate demand 
and  the  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  (all  items  less  fresh  food)  has  been  on  a  moderate 
declining trend since the latter half of the 1990s, with the exception of 2007 and 2008. The 
aggregate  supply  and  demand  balance  reached  nearly  minus  8  percent  after  the  Lehman 
shock,  and  although  it  has  recently  narrowed  to  about  minus  2  to  3  percent,  upward 
Inflation mechanism 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Importance of strengthening the growth potential 
momentum on prices has not been sufficiently strong. This shortage of demand reflects not 
only cyclical factors but also structural ones. As a result of globalization and the unparalleled 
decline  in  the  birth  rate and  aging  of  the  population,  the  environment  surrounding  Japan’s 
economy has changed dramatically but economic structures have been slow to adapt. As a 
consequence,  economic  growth  has  declined  as  a  trend,  lowering  growth  expectations, 
which in turn has led to a chronic shortage of demand. Due to this shortage, many firms have 
cut costs, mainly by reducing wages. Despite these efforts, however, corporate profits have 
not  increased  because  fierce  price  competition  has  prevented  firms  from  raising  prices  on 
their  goods.  Consequently,  unable  to  foresee  a  clear  improvement  in  profits,  firms  have 
inevitably turned cautious about increasing fixed investment, employment, and wages. 
3. 
In  order to  overcome this  situation,  it  is  essential  to  strengthen the growth  potential  of  the 
economy to raise firms’ and households’ medium- to long-term growth expectations and to 
resolve the chronic shortage of demand. Because it is impossible to halt the decline in the 
birth rate and the aging of the population in the short run, a prerequisite for strengthening the 
growth potential of the economy is to secure the labor force and raise the value added per 
worker (value-added productivity). 
In order to secure the labor force, it is important to (1) make the labor market more flexible, 
and (2) make it easier for labor to move from one industry to another and for women and the 
elderly to participate in the labor market. If the situation remains unaddressed and the labor 
force continues to decline, this will push down Japan’s annual economic growth rate in the 
2010s by approximately 0.6 percentage point. This population issue is not unique to Japan. 
China’s labor force also started to decline in 2012, giving rise to a sense of crisis. A shrinking 
labor force is a problem that many other advanced and emerging countries will face in the 
near future. In Japan, it is estimated that if the labor force participation rate of women were to 
rise to the level of Sweden by 2030 and that of the elderly (those aged 60 and over) were 
also to rise, the Japanese labor force would increase at an annual rate of 0.2 percent in the 
2010s. As for the employment of the elderly, in view of the gradual rise in the pensionable 
age  of  the  national  pension  to  65,  starting  in  April  2013  it  will  be  mandatory  for  firms  to 
provide  employment  to  elderly  workers  who  wish  to  keep  working.  Given  that  Japan 
succeeded  in  shifting  from  a  retirement  age  of  55  to  60  toward  the  1980s,  it  should  be 
possible to create a society in which it is normal to work until the age of 65 or beyond through 
institutional reforms and changes in the way people work. 
To raise value-added productivity, it is necessary to build an economic environment where 
innovations in a broad sense – including the development of new business models – can be 
achieved  more  easily.  Recently,  firms  have  been  making  active  efforts  in  a  wide  range  of 
areas  to  capitalize  on  social  changes,  including  business  focusing  on  the  elderly,  the 
environment and energy, and information and telecommunications. If firms accelerate efforts 
on  these  fronts  and  reorient  their  strategies  from  concentrating  on  price  competition  to 
competition based on new goods and services, and if this is accompanied by increases in the 
labor  force  and  value-added  productivity,  firms’  and  households’  medium-  to  long-term 
growth expectations should rise amid vigorous economic activity. 
B. 
Fostering more accommodative financial conditions: maintaining a virtually 
zero interest rate policy and increasing asset purchases 
I  will  now  explain  the  Bank’s  powerful  monetary  easing  measures  to  achieve  the  “price 
stability target” of 2 percent. The Bank is pursuing aggressive monetary easing through its 
commitment to continue with a virtually zero interest rate policy and purchases of financial 
assets  for  as  long  as  the  Bank  judges  appropriate.  Through  the  Asset  Purchase  Program 
established  on  its  balance  sheet,  the  Bank  purchases  various  financial  assets  –  such  as 
Japanese  government  securities  (JGSs),  CP,  corporate  bonds,  exchange-traded  funds 
(ETFs),  and  Japan  real  estate  investment  trusts  (J-REITs)  –  and  conducts  the  fixed-rate 
funds-supplying  operation  against  pooled  collateral.  The  program  is  aimed  at  encouraging 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
in 
to 
longer-term 
interest  rates  and  various  risk  premiums 
declines 
foster  more 
accommodative financial conditions for firms and households to raise sufficient funds at low 
interest rates. 
The size of the Asset Purchase Program, which was set at about 35 trillion yen at the time of 
its  establishment  in  October  2010,  has  successively  been  increased,  and  the  amount 
outstanding of the program was about 65 trillion yen at the end of December 2012. The Bank 
will continue to significantly increase the amount outstanding of the program until it reaches 
about  101  trillion  yen  by  the  end  of  December  2013.  In  addition,  the  Bank  decided  at  the 
Monetary Policy Meeting held on January 21 and 22, 2013 to introduce, after completing the 
current purchasing method, a method of purchasing a given amount of financial assets every 
month  without  setting  any  termination  date.  Specifically,  from  January  2014,  the  Bank  will 
conduct purchases of financial assets totaling about 13 trillion yen each month for some time. 
As a result, the amount outstanding of the Asset Purchase Program will be increased further 
by about 10 trillion yen in 2014 – to about 111 trillion yen – and is expected to be maintained 
thereafter. 
Strengthening policy coordination between the government and the bank 
C. 
On January 22, 2013, the Bank released “Joint Statement of the Government and the Bank 
of Japan on Overcoming Deflation and Achieving Sustainable Economic Growth”. The Bank 
announced that it was setting the “price stability target” at 2 percent in terms of the year-on-
year rate of change in the CPI, and that, under this target, it would pursue monetary easing 
and  aim  to  achieve  this  target  at  the  earliest  possible  time.  The  Bank  stated  that  it  would 
ascertain  whether  there  was  any  significant  risk  to  the  sustainability  of  economic  growth, 
including from the accumulation of financial imbalances. The government, on the other hand, 
announced  that  it  would  formulate  and  strongly  promote  measures  for  strengthening  the 
competitiveness and growth potential of Japan’s economy, and steadily promote measures 
aimed at establishing a sustainable fiscal structure with a view to ensuring the credibility of 
fiscal management. 
The government plays a crucial part in strengthening the growth potential of the economy. 
Specifically, strengthening the growth potential hinges on the cumulative efforts of firms and 
financial  institutions  to  create  and  expand  new  business.  In  this  context,  the  government 
plays a pivotal role in fostering, through regulatory and institutional reforms, an environment 
that encourages the private sector to take on new challenges. 
While the Bank continues to pursue aggressive monetary easing through measures such as 
large-scale purchases of JGSs, Japan’s fiscal imbalances – among the most serious in the 
world  –  could  hamper  the  effects  of  monetary  easing.  If  the  credibility  of  Japan’s  fiscal 
management  were  to  falter,  interest  rates  would  likely  rise,  thereby  making  fiscal 
management more difficult and undermining the effects of monetary easing. In order to fully 
ensure  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  easing,  it  is  important  for  the  government  to  ensure 
market  credibility  of  fiscal  consolidation.  In  this  regard,  the  joint  statement  has  profound 
significance in showing that the government and the Bank have clearly acknowledged each 
other’s roles and that they will work together to overcome deflation and achieve sustainable 
economic growth. 
D. 
Making use of accommodative financial conditions: providing a boost through 
the loan support program 
Given  the  Bank’s  aggressive  monetary  easing  I  described  earlier,  financial  conditions  in 
Japan are extremely accommodative both in historical and international comparison. To be 
specific, in terms of firms’ funding costs, both short- and long-term average interest rates on 
new  loan  contracts  have  hit  1  percent  –  an  unprecedented  level.  In  terms  of  households’ 
borrowing  costs,  variable  mortgage  rates  are  below  1  percent  and  even  35-year  fixed 
mortgage  rates  are  around  2  percent.  Moreover,  financial  institutions’  lending  attitude 
remains accommodative, issuing conditions for CP and corporate bonds remain favorable on 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The growth-supporting funding facility 
the whole, and an environment has been maintained in which households and firms can feel 
secure  that  they  can  gain  access  to  funds.  Meanwhile,  even  at  a  time  when  there  were 
strong  headwinds  generated  by  the  Great  East  Japan  Earthquake  and  the  European  debt 
problem, extremely accommodative financial conditions have been firmly maintained. 
In order for Japan’s economy to achieve sustainable growth with price stability, it is important 
that firms and households actually make use of the accommodative financial conditions for 
funding and increase investment and spending, which in turn will lead to an improvement in 
the  aggregate  supply  and  demand  balance.  As for  recent  developments in  credit  demand, 
although firms have shown signs of increasing their demand mainly for working capital and 
funds related to mergers and acquisitions, business fixed investment has been financed from 
cash  flows,  indicating  that  accommodative  financial  conditions  have  not  been  used  to  the 
fullest  possible  extent.  To  promote  full  use  of  the  accommodative  financial  conditions,  the 
Bank  has  established  the  Loan  Support  Program,  consisting  of  the  fund-provisioning 
measure  to  support  strengthening  the  foundations  for  economic  growth  (hereafter  the 
Growth-Supporting  Funding  Facility)  and  the  fund-provisioning  measure  to  stimulate  bank 
lending (hereafter the Stimulating Bank Lending Facility). These facilities are offered for your 
use. 
1. 
The Growth-Supporting Funding Facility was introduced with the aim of supporting the flow of 
funds to areas with growth potential. With this facility, the Bank provides long-term funds at a 
low  interest  rate  to  financial  institutions  for  their  lending  and  investment  to  areas  that  are 
expected  to  contribute  to  strengthening  Japan’s  growth  potential,  such  as  medical  and 
nursing  care;  environment  and  energy;  agriculture,  forestry,  and  fisheries;  and  tourism.  In 
addition to the lending arrangement under the main rules, the Bank has established special 
rules  for  a  lending  arrangement  through  which  it  extends  loans  to  financial  institutions  for 
their  equity  investments  and  asset-based  lending  (ABL).  In  ABL,  assets  such  as  accounts 
receivable  and  inventories  are  used  as  eligible  collateral.  Moreover,  the  Bank  has 
established special rules for another lending arrangement for small-lot investments and loans 
as  well  as  for  a  U.S.  dollar  lending  arrangement  of  12  billion  U.S.  dollars  –  equivalent  to 
1 trillion yen – using the U.S. dollar reserves already held by the Bank, for foreign currency-
denominated investments and loans. The total size of these lending arrangements making up 
the  Growth-Supporting  Funding  Facility  was  set  at  about  5.5  trillion  yen,  of  which  nearly 
4 trillion yen has already been disbursed by the Bank. The amount of lending and investment 
actually  provided  by  financial  institutions  using  this  facility  greatly  exceeds  the  amount  of 
loans disbursed by the Bank. This indicates that the Bank’s measures have been producing 
positive effects as a catalyst. 
2. 
In October 2012, the Bank introduced the Stimulating Bank Lending Facility with the aim of 
prompting financial institutions to take a more active stance and stimulating greater proactive 
credit  demand  of  firms  and  households.  With  this  facility,  the  Bank  will  provide  long-term 
yen-denominated  funds  at  a  low  cost  to  financial  institutions  that  have  increased  their 
lending, at their request, up to an amount equivalent to the net increase in their lending for a 
period  of  15  months  until  the  end  of  March  2014.  The  lending,  based  on  which  the  net 
increase  is  calculated,  can  be  either  yen-denominated  or  foreign  currency-denominated. 
While  it  may  be  extraordinary  for  a  central  bank  to  support  lending  –  particularly  foreign-
currency denominated lending – to firms located overseas or lending by domestic financial 
institutions’  overseas  offices,  Japanese  firms’  international  operations  as  well  as  financial 
institutions’  activities  to  provide  funds for  such operations  are  essential  in  capturing global 
demand,  so  that  the  Bank’s  measure  to  support  such  lending  contributes  to  strengthening 
Japan’s  growth  potential.  Based  on  recent  lending  data,  the  amount  of  funds  provided 
through the Stimulating Bank Lending Facility is expected to reach more than 15 trillion yen 
by the end of March 2014. 
The stimulating bank lending facility 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
Quantitative aspects of monetary easing 
E. 
The  Bank  will  provide  a  massive  amount  of  funds  exceeding  50  trillion  yen  by  the  end  of 
March  2014  under  the  Asset  Purchase  Program  and  the  Loan  Support  Program,  and  the 
amount outstanding of these programs will exceed 120 trillion yen. Looking at the amount of 
funds disbursed by the Bank in terms of the monetary base, the ratio relative to nominal GDP 
in  Japan  is  currently  about  27  percent,  the  highest  level  among the  advanced  economies. 
When considering the additional funds of more than 50 trillion yen to be provided, the ratio 
will  rise  further  by  more  than  10  percentage  points to  almost  40  percent.  As  these figures 
show, the Bank will proceed with unprecedentedly massive monetary easing this year. On 
this basis, it will continue to closely examine the financial and economic environment, and 
make policy decisions in a timely and appropriate manner. 
If  the  large  amount  of  funds  provided  at  low  cost  on  the  basis  of  these  accommodative 
financial conditions is utilized effectively and invigorates corporate activity, this should bring 
an improvement in firms’ profit prospects and an increase in the expected rate of return on 
new  investment.  Once  such  a  virtuous  circle  has  taken  hold,  the  accommodative  financial 
conditions  will  have  even  stronger  effects,  and  the  virtuous  circle  will  become  more 
sustainable. 
As  mentioned  earlier,  “price  stability”  is  achieved  in  a  situation  in  which  the  economy 
improves in a balanced and sustainable manner, accompanied by increases in employment, 
wages,  and  corporate  profits,  and  prices  rise  moderately  as  a  result.  The  Bank  will  do  its 
utmost to fulfill its responsibility to achieve the “price stability target”. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
