G Padmanabhan: Evolving regulations and emerging market challenges 
– the Indian context 
Keynote address by Mr G Padmanabhan, Executive Director of the Reserve Bank of India, at 
the  8th  Annual  Conference  of  the  Foreign  Exchange  Dealers’  Association  of  India, 
Singapore, 24 May 2013. 
 Assistance  provided  by  S/Shri  G  Mahalingam,  Rakesh  Tripathy,  Anand  Prakash  and  Sirin  Kumar  is  gratefully 
acknowledged. 
1. It is a pleasure to once again address the practitioners of foreign exchange at this Seminar 
organized by the Foreign Exchange Dealers Association of India in the beautiful city state of 
Singapore. Let us hope that the events that follow in the Indian forex market would be largely 
different from the events that followed after my last address in this city. The issues that you 
have flagged for discussion are very topical and therefore I shall comment on each of them. 
between 
activities 
separation 
recommend 
deposit-taking 
Global regulatory changes affecting forex markets 
A. 
2. In the aftermath of the 2007-2008 global financial crisis, the regulatory landscape of the 
financial markets around the world is going through significant changes. The repeal of the 
Glass-Steagall Act that separated investment banking from commercial banking in the USA 
in 1999 is considered by many as a major reason that precipitated the global financial crisis. 
Accordingly,  several  jurisdictions  around  the  world  including  the  US  have  either  already 
taken  or  have  proposed  to  initiate  steps  to  construct  a  firewall  between  consumer  and 
investment banking. The important initiatives in this direction are the Volker Rule under the 
Dodd-Frank  Act  of  the  USA  (Section  619  of  the  Act),  the  Independent  Commission  on 
Banking  (ICB)  in  the  UK,  headed  by  Sir  John  Vickers  and  the  High-level  Expert  Group 
(HLEG) on reforming the structure of the EU banking sector, chaired by Erkki Liikanen. All 
three  models 
and 
trading/investment  bank  functions.  Whilst  each  regime  advocates  a  ring-fence  model,  they 
offer slightly different approaches. Let me amplify. 
3.  Volcker  Rule  restricts  deposit-taking  banks  from  engaging  in  proprietary  trading, 
prohibiting  them  from  engaging  in  more  complex  activities  that  are  prone  to  conflicts  of 
interest, in order to safeguard the core of the banking system, i.e. commercial or traditional 
banking (deposit taking and lending). The rule prohibits any banking entity from engaging as 
principal in short-term  trading  in  securities, derivatives,  or  commodity  futures,  i.e. activities 
that may not be compatible with the risk profile of the banking entities, but allows exemptions 
for market-making, hedging, trading in US government securities, and other activities (Note 
that the US Government securities have been accorded a special status here !). There is a 
concern that it would be a challenging task to separate proprietary trades from permissible 
trades. Under the Volcker Rule the reporting and compliance regime is expected to assume 
greater significance. The rule applies to all US banks and bank-holding companies and all 
foreign  bank-holding  companies  with  US  subsidiaries  or  branches.  The  Volcker  Rule 
prescriptions can affect the operations of the US banks operating in India as they are active 
players  as  market  makers  in  domestic  foreign  exchange  market,  Government  securities 
market and interest rate swap market. Very clearly, this rule if and when operationalised (in 
the  present  form),  will  change  the  entire  depth  and  breadth  of  the  Indian  markets.  An 
important fall-out of this rule could well be the decline in liquidity in these markets and the 
resultant cost escalation for market participants. 
4. The ICB or Vickers report has recommended ring-fencing of retail bank operations of large 
UK banks into separate legal subsidiaries. It suggests that only mandated services (and the 
related  ancillary  services)  of  acceptance  of  deposits  from  and  providing  of  overdraft  to 
individuals and SMEs can be offered by the ring-fenced entity. UK government in response 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
to the Vickers report released a white paper in June 2012 for consultation on how it plans to 
implement  the  recommendations-  in  which  it  has  proposed,  inter  alia,  that  the  ring-fenced 
banks would not be allowed to originate, trade, lend or make markets in derivatives except 
for  managing  their  balance  sheet  risks.  It  has,  however,  also  proposed  that  simple 
derivatives products may be offered by the ring-fenced banks to their customers subject to 
certain  conditions.  It  seems  that  Indian  banks  operating  in  UK  and  UK  banks  having 
branches in India will be impacted. 
5.  Adopting  a  slightly  different  approach,  the  HLEG  (Liikanen  report)  has  advocated 
separating  out  the  trading  activities  beyond  a  threshold  on  a  stand-alone  basis  from  the 
deposit-taking  bank.  It  proposes  to  do  that  by  assigning  proprietary  trading  and  other 
significant  trading  activities  to  a  separate  legal  entity  in  the  same  banking  group  without 
giving  up  the  universal  banking  model  that  has  remained  a  unique  feature  of  European 
banking system. The idea is to prevent the bank deposits that carry some sort of guarantee 
from supporting risky trading activities. 
6. In a nutshell, while Vickers and Liikanen allow for the ring-fenced entities to be separate 
and  independent  parts  of  the  same  group,  the  Volcker  Rule  disallows  proprietary  trading 
anywhere within a group which includes a deposit-taking bank. There are also differences of 
approach in terms of the range of activities that can be undertaken by and between the ring-
fenced entities. 
7.  The  crisis  also  brought  to  the  forefront  some  of  the  issues  associated  with  the  OTC 
derivatives  that  were  hitherto  on  the  backburner.  It  was  believed  that  the  complexity  and 
opacity of the OTC products were the root cause of the crisis since they facilitated excessive 
risk  taking  by  the  market  participants.  Lack  of  adequate  infrastructure  for  clearing  and 
settlement and lack of information on risk concentration residing with counterparties are also 
factors believed to have led to aggravating the crisis. There is a growing consensus amongst 
regulators as well as market participants that there has to be a Central Counterparty (CCP) 
mechanism for clearing and settlement of OTC derivative transactions as well as mandated 
reporting  of  OTC  derivatives  trades  to  designated  trade  repositories.  A  well-regulated, 
supervised and sufficiently capitalised CCP mechanism for clearing and settlement of OTC 
derivatives  can  reduce  interconnectedness  between  financial  entities  to  a  large  extent. 
Moreover,  the  problem  of  excessive  risk-taking  can  be  addressed  through  imposition  of 
appropriate margins and collaterals. G-20 leaders in 2009 had agreed on the reform agenda 
for  OTC  derivative  contracts 
trading  on 
exchanges  or  electronic  trading  platforms,  moving  to  central  clearing,  reporting  to  trade 
repositories  and  higher  capital  requirements  for  non-centrally  cleared  contracts.  However, 
keeping in view that the above steps will cause the risks to become concentrated in the CCP, 
the  Committee  on  Payment  and  Settlement  Systems  (CPSS)  and  the  International 
Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) set out the Principles of Financial market 
infrastructures  (PFMI)  in  April  2012  for  addressing  risks  related  to  systemically  important 
financial infrastructures, including the CCPs. 
8. How has the world moved as regards the implementation of the recommendations of the 
various  Committees?  The  deadline  for  implementing  over  the  counter  (OTC)  Derivatives 
market  reforms  was  December  2012.  Various  jurisdictions  are  in  different  stages  of 
implementation of the reform recommendations. Delays in adopting legislative and regulatory 
frameworks  are  contributing  to  regulatory  uncertainty  which  is  further  compounded  by  the 
potential for conflicts, inconsistencies, duplication and gaps in the application of jurisdictions’ 
rules  to  cross-border  activity.  The  fifth  progress  report  on  implementation  of  the  OTC 
derivatives market reform, published by the Financial Stability Board (FSB) in April 2013, has 
reported  that,  EU,  Japan  and  the  USA,  which  account  for  the  largest  volumes  of  OTC 
derivatives activity, are among the most advanced in implementing legislative and regulatory 
reforms, with several key regulatory measures either already enforced or likely to be in force 
by  mid-2013.  The  recent  guidelines  issued  regarding  reforms  in  the  OTC  derivatives 
segment by the EU include the Markets in Financial Instruments Directive (MiFID-II), Markets 
increasing  standardization,  promoting 
like, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
in Financial Instruments Regulation (MiFIR) and European Market Infrastructure Regulation 
(EMIR). A number of other jurisdictions have reported that they expect regulatory measures 
related  to  trade  reporting  to  come  into  force  over  the  course  of  this  year,  and  a  few 
jurisdictions  expect  clearing  requirements  to  come  into  force  in  2013–2014.  Many 
jurisdictions  have  adopted  rules  to  implement  the  Basel  III  capital  framework  for  banks, 
including higher capital requirements for non-centrally cleared transactions. 
9. The new regulatory requirements may have a substantial impact on the work flow for the 
market  participants  including  the  end  users.  These  regulations  also  have  exceptions  for 
some  category  of  participants  and  products.  The  end  users  must  determine  what  is 
necessary to comply with the regulations from which they are not exempted. They must meet 
certain criteria in order to qualify for available exemptions and will need to be aware of the 
activities that could prevent them from qualifying for the exceptions in the future. Depending 
on the extent to which the end users engage in OTC derivatives, the costs associated with 
preparing  for  the  above  could  be  significant.  Some  of  these  initiatives  have  also  raised 
concerns about the possibilities of extra territorial regulatory jurisdiction leading to regulatory 
clashes and disruptions for market participants. Further, as Annat Admati & Martin Hellwig 
point  out  (“The  Bankers  New  Clothes”  -2013)  and  I  quote,  “these  proposals  presume  that 
concerns about depositors and the payment systems are, or, should be, the major reason for 
governmental  interventions  to  banking.....This  approach  has  two  weaknesses.  First, 
protection  of  depositors  and  the  payment  system  is  not  the  only  reason  that  might  induce 
governments to bail out banks. Second, commercial banking activities can also be a source 
of risks that cause banks to fail unless they are bailed out” (unquote) 
10. In summary, the common theme of all the proposals in the pipeline is one of putting sand 
in the wheels of the market. This is a far cry from the situation of the pre-crisis days, when 
pundits advocated complete freedom for markets in order to improve the resource allocation 
efficiency. It is perhaps very appropriate for all of us to remind ourselves, in foras like these, 
how changes could be swift and far-reaching that we may barely have time to react to! 
Internationalisation of Renminbi and India 
B. 
11.  Now  let  me  turn  to  the  second  issue,  i.e.,  internationalization  of  Chinese  currency 
Renminbi (RMB). India and China are two of the largest and fastest growing economies in 
the  world.  Notwithstanding  the  recent  slowdown  in  these  two  economies,  primarily  on 
account of weak global economic environment, the prospects of both these economies in the 
medium to long-run are still considered bright. 
12. Given a choice, I am sure, most of the countries would like to see their currencies as an 
international currency as the benefits far outweigh the associated risks.1 While the benefits 
could  be  in  terms  of  reduced  transaction  costs,  seigniorage,  macro-economic  flexibility  in 
terms  of  ability  to  finance  external  payment  deficits  in  own  currency,  the  associated 
reputational gain, etc., the costs involved could be in form of sharp appreciation of currency 
as  the  currency  gains  recognition  as  an  international  currency  that  can  also  be  used  as  a 
preferred  reserve  currency  by  the  monetary  authorities,  and  constraints  on  domestic 
monetary policy implementation. 
13. However, internationalisation of currency is easier said than done. Even the US Dollar 
had to wait for almost three decades after the World War II till the collapse of the Bretton-
Woods agreement before attaining the status it enjoys today as the mostly widely accepted 
international currency. There are certain well-accepted pre-requisites for a currency to attain 
the status of an international currency. Chinn and Frankel (2005) developed a list of functions 
of an international currency. According to them, an international currency has to be capable 
                                                 
1   The Benefits and costs of an international currency: Getting the calculus right; Benjamin J. Cohen, June 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
of playing roles of store of value, medium of exchange and unit of account for both residents 
and  non-residents  alike.  More  specifically,  it  should  be  possible  of  being  used  for  private 
purpose for trade and financial transaction invoicing. Moreover, there should be freedom for 
non-residents to hold financial assets/liabilities in that currency and tradable balances in that 
currency  at  offshore  locations  .  From  an  official  /  institutional  perspective,  it  should  be 
possible  to  hold  official  reserves  in  that  currency,  use  it  as  a  vehicle  currency  for  foreign 
exchange intervention and anchor currency for pegging. Therefore, an international currency 
has to be essentially a freely convertible currency with ability to attract significant volumes of 
international  trades  across  regions  by  way  of  invoicing.  In  addition,  the  currency  has  to 
possess a greater degree of stability in its exchange rate determined by the market forces 
and a deep and liquid market with availability of wide range of hedging products. Needless to 
add,  it  would  also  require  to  be  supported  by  an  efficient banking  system  and  world  class 
market  infrastructure.  Going  by  the  above  characteristics  of  an  international  currency,  one 
can argue that perhaps US Dollar and Euro are the only two currencies which can be truly 
considered  as  international  currency  at  present,  notwithstanding  the  recent  debt  related 
problems being faced by some of the major and peripheral Eurozone countries. As compared 
to  the  share  of  US  Dollar  and  Euro  that  together  account  for  almost  three-fourth  of  global 
trade invoicing, the share of other major currencies as well as Chinese and Indian currencies 
is quite small. 
14.  Having  stated  the  above,  it  needs  to  be  recognised  that  in  recent  times,  Chinese 
authorities have taken a number of steps aimed at internationalising RMB. Without going into 
the details of all these measures, I would briefly touch upon some of the major ones. As we 
understand, RMB is being used in trade and other current account transactions with Vietnam, 
Laos, Myanmar, the Central Asian states, Russia, and so forth. The development of offshore 
market and currency internationalization go hand in hand. In this regard, China has taken a 
number of steps towards developing an offshore market for RMB in Hong Kong which is an 
international  financial  centre.  The  active  offshore  deliverable  RMB  market  in  Hong  Kong 
provides  services  such  as 
financing,  RMB 
denominated bond issuance, etc. After the implementation of the pilot programme of cross-
border trade settlement in RMB in 1999, there has been a rapid growth in cross-border RMB 
settlement  volumes  in  Hong  Kong.  China  has  also  undertaken  a  number  of  measures 
pertaining to the development of onshore market. This includes the widening of the RMB’s 
daily trading band against the US dollar from half per cent to one per cent above and below 
the  reference  rate  in  mid  April  2012.  This  was  motivated  by  the  growing  ability  of  the 
domestic  participants  to  manage  exchange  rate  movements  and  reflected  the  desire  to 
accommodate greater flexibility in the exchange rate in the future. The PBOC has entered 
into  a  series  of  bilateral  currency  swap  agreements  whereby  the  PBOC  and  other  central 
banks  (over  20  in  number)  have  agreed  to  exchange  the  RMB  with  the  respective 
counterparty currencies. 
15.  The  size  of  the  Indian  economy  of  around  US$  1.8  trillion  is  one  of  the  largest  in  the 
region and despite some moderation in the growth in the past couple of years, it is still one of 
the  fastest  growing  countries  in  the  world.  The  value  of  the  Indian  rupee  is  market-
determined  without  being  pegged  to  any  currency.  India’s  foreign  exchange  reserves  are 
amongst  the  largest  in  the  region.  All  these  factors  make  the  Indian  rupee  a  natural 
candidate  for  being  considered  for  greater  internationalization,  especially  greater  use  of 
rupee for trade invoicing. Comparisons are bound to be made between Renminbi and Indian 
Rupee on the issue of Internationalisation. 
16. Indian Rupee is not fully convertible at this stage. While the current account has been 
made fully convertible, we have consciously followed a calibrated approach towards capital 
account  convertibility.  Despite  showing  increasing  trends  during  last  few  years,  India  still 
accounts for a very small proportion of the global foreign exchange market turnover. Though 
Rupee  invoicing  is  permitted  under  extant  FEMA  regulations,  almost  the  entire  bulk  of 
international trade in India continues to be denominated in the US dollars (the share of dollar 
trade  settlement 
international 
in  RMB, 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
invoicing in exports and imports during quarter ended December 2012 stood at 90 per cent 
and 83.6 per cent, respectively). We also need to recognise other structural bottlenecks that 
come  in  the  way  of  transforming  Mumbai  as  an  international  financial  centre  similar  to 
Hong Kong. 
17.  It  is  also  important  to  understand  that  unlike  China,  which  runs  large  current  account 
surpluses,  India  has  generally  been  a  current  account  deficit  country.  In  view  of  the  large 
current  account  deficit,  the  exchange  rate  of  the  rupee  is  susceptible  to  the  debilitating 
influence  of  large  capital  movements,  especially  during  crisis  periods.  Our  accumulated 
reserves are in a sense “borrowed” reserves and not “earned” reserves in true sense. The 
sense  of  self  insurance  by  having  enough  reserves  can  often  prove  to  be  misplaced, 
especially,  during  times  of  sudden  reversal  of  capital  flows.  This  does  not  mean  that  we 
should not aspire to see the Rupee as an international currency. The growing importance of 
India in world economic affairs has also led to the talks of Indian Rupee as an international 
currency.  According  to  an  IMF  Staff  Discussion  Note  on  “Internationalisation  of  Emerging 
Market  Currencies:  A  Balance  between  Risks  and  Rewards”  (October  2011),  the  Indian 
rupee, the Brazilian Real, the Chinese RMB, the Russian Rouble and the South African Rand 
have  been  identified  as  the  key  emerging  market  (EM)  currencies  with  potential  for 
internationalisation.  According  to  the  IMF’s  note,  all  these  economies  have  significant 
regional  importance  and  economic  weight  and,  despite  severe  data  limitations,  there  is 
evidence  that  the  use  of  these  EM  currencies  in  international  transactions  has  increased 
markedly in the past few years. 
18. In order to promote Rupee invoicing for trade related transactions, Reserve Bank of India 
has  taken  several  steps  in  recent  times.  Non-resident  importers  and  exporters  have  been 
allowed to hedge their currency risk in respect of exports from and imports to India, invoiced 
in Indian Rupees by availing the facility either directly from authorised dealer banks in India 
or  through  their  banks  located  in  their  country.  But  our  efforts  to  promote  invoicing  in  the 
domestic currency have met with limited success so far. 
19.  Currently,  India  has  a  bilateral  swap  arrangement  with  Japan  which  enables  both 
countries to swap their local currencies (i.e., either Japanese yen or Indian rupee) against 
US  dollar  for  an  amount  up  to  US$  15  billion.  However,  unlike  the  Bilateral  Swap 
Arrangements (BSAs) entered into by China with EMEs, where the use of dollar has been 
precluded,  the  arrangement  between  India  and  Japan  envisages  the  use  of  US  dollar  for 
swap  transactions.  We  are  also  focussing  on  select  low  risk  but  macro-economically 
beneficial  areas,  such  as,  progressive  use  of  Indian  Rupee  in  trades  with  select  trade 
partners. 
20. Reserve Bank of India shall continue its endeavours towards internationalisation of the 
rupee  in  a  careful  and  gradual  manner.  I  would  urge  the  esteemed  panel  and  other 
participants to discuss on China’s progress so far and takeaways from the same from India’s 
point  of  view  as  also  other  measures  that  could  be  initiated  within  the  overall  regulatory 
framework currently in place. At the same time, if there is scope for further relaxation in the 
existing facilities, Reserve Bank of India can certainly consider that as well. Let me now turn 
to the last part of my address, the derivatives market development in the Indian context. 
Market development in India – forex derivative segment 
C. 
21. The economic liberalization that started in the early nineties facilitated the introduction of 
derivative  products  based  on  interest  rates  and  foreign  exchange  in  India.  While  the 
migration  to  a  market-determined  exchange  rate  regime  and  current  account  convertibility 
allowed increased integration between domestic and international markets, it also exposed 
domestic markets and the end-users to a greater degree of volatility. In order to manage the 
currency risk, it was felt necessary to make a menu of derivative products available to the 
end-users.  Accordingly,  Reserve  Bank  of  India  introduced  a  wide  array  of  hedging 
instruments. To begin with, products traded over the counter were introduced followed by the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
exchange  traded  futures  and  options.  Apart  from  the  conventional  hedging  products,  cost 
reduction structures had also been permitted in the Indian market. As far as OTC derivative 
products  are  concerned,  the  fundamental  requirement  of  existence  of  an  underlying 
commercial  transaction  for  entering  into  a  OTC  derivative  contract,  both  on  current  and 
capital account, has been put in place and the banks have been given the responsibility to 
satisfy themselves about the genuineness of the underlying exposure through verification of 
documentary evidence while offering such derivative products. 
22.  Keeping  in  view  the  developments  in  the  domestic  and  international  financial markets, 
the extant guidelines on OTC foreign exchange derivatives were revised in December 2010. 
The revised guidelines laid more emphasis on the suitability and appropriateness aspects of 
the products being offered. As certain instances of miss-selling surfaced, Reserve Bank of 
India  restricted  cost  reduction  structures  to  be  offered  only  to  corporates  who  possessed 
minimum prescribed net worth and followed accounting standards AS 30/32. In addition, the 
corporates buying such products were required to have a well laid down risk management 
policy  that  clearly  included,  inter-alia,  guidelines  on  risk  identification,  management  and 
control,  prudent  accounting  and  disclosure  norms.  The  rationale  for  putting  in  place  such 
restrictions was to limit offering of such products to only those corporates who understood 
the nature of the risks inherent while entering into such transactions. 
23.  Another  issue  of  concern  to  us  is  the  extent  of  unhedged  forex  exposures  in  the 
corporate  balance  sheets.  Though  hedging  is  not  mandatory  for  a  corporate,  however, 
keeping  in  view  the  potential  adverse  impact  of  large  unhedged  exposures  on  financing 
banks’  balance  sheets  and  the  financial  system,  especially  in  times  of  excessive  volatility, 
banks  have  been  advised  to  evaluate  the  risks  arising  out  of  unhedged  foreign  currency 
exposure of the corporates and price them in the credit risk premium while extending fund 
based  and  non-fund  based  credit  facilities  to  them.  Banks  have  also  been  advised  to 
consider  stipulating  a  limit  on  unhedged  position  of  corporates  on  the  basis  of  policy 
approved  by  the  Board  of  the  banks.  The  above  measures  need  to  be  strengthened  by 
requiring the corporates to put in place a risk management policy for their unhedged forex 
exposures. We have observed that despite our repeated efforts to sensitize both banks and 
corporates on the matter, adequate measures have not been put in place. It was therefore 
decided to increase the risk weights and provisioning requirements on banks’ exposures to 
corporates on account of the corporates’ unhedged forex exposure positions. 
24.  Another  related  issue  that  banks  and  corporates  have  discussed  with  us  is  the  non-
availability  of  long-term  hedging  products  to  the  corporates.  While  OTC  forward  market  is 
liquid enough up to one year, the exchange traded market, which I would come back to, is 
liquid  only  in  the  near  month  segment.  If  the  interest  rate  parity  holds  good,  forward  rate 
should reflect the interest rate differentials. Otherwise, it becomes more a function of demand 
and supply. While there has been no regulatory restriction on booking of long-term forwards 
beyond  one  year,  market  participants  generally  prefer  booking  short-term  contracts 
(maximum tenor up to one year) and then roll it over till the maturity of the exposure. This 
strategy partially addresses their long term risk, substituting the exchange rate risk with the 
less volatile forward premium. Inter-bank market also uses MIFOR curve which is the implied 
rupee  curve  for  pricing  long-term  forwards.  A  long-term  forward  contract  requires  taking  a 
view of long-term interest rates in both domestic currency as well as foreign currency. While 
in case of US Dollar, the inter-bank term rates are available through active swap market, the 
term money or the term swap market for tenor beyond one year is not liquid enough in India, 
thus, making it difficult for the market to price the forwards beyond one year. The interest rate 
swap  market,  which  is  quite  active  up  to  five  year,  is  predominantly  an  overnight  indexed 
swap  market  with  floating  leg  linked  to  the  overnight  uncollateralised  inter-bank  call  rates 
rather  than  inter-bank  term  rates.  How  can  this  problem  be  addressed?  An  important 
prerequisite  would  perhaps  be  a  well-developed  term  money  market  and  an  interest  rate 
swap  market  based  thereon.  Further  opening  of  the  capital  account  that  would  facilitate 
capital flows based on interest rate view may also help. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
25.  Let  me  now  briefly  touch  upon  the  currency  futures  market  in  India.  Exchange  traded 
products provide the benefits of transparent pricing and robust risk management by way of 
CCP  mechanism  and  margining  requirement.  Currency  futures  on  exchanges  were 
introduced in India in 2008 with a view to increasing the depth and breadth of the currency 
derivatives  market,  in  turn  helping  to  provide  an  effective  risk  management  framework  to 
users. Subsequently, European style USD-INR options were introduced in 2010. The biggest 
challenge  in  designing a  framework  for  exchange  traded  currency  derivatives  in  India  was 
the  prevailing  regulatory  system  for  the  OTC  products.  While  for  entering  into  an  OTC 
derivative,  the  presence  of  an  underlying  exposure  is  a  regulatory  requirement,  it  was 
considered  not  feasible  to  insist  on  this  requirement  for  the  exchange  traded  derivative 
products.  Currency  futures  market  in  India  has  shown  significant  growth  since  their 
introduction.  The  reason  for  such  growth  could  be  due  to  non-requirement  of  underlying 
exposure,  no  restriction  on  cancellation  and  re-booking  of  contracts  and  cash  settlement. 
Has the exchange traded market indeed helped the real sector in providing an alternative for 
hedging the currency risk or is it being driven by speculative interests? Though the exchange 
traded market volumes have picked up, the OTC market occupies a larger market share. Our 
understanding is that hedgers generally prefer OTC derivatives for these can be customized 
to individual needs and also does not involve cash flows related to daily MTM margining. The 
fact  that  final  delivery  has  to  go  (or  be  made)  through  banking  channel  also  adds  to  the 
attractiveness of the OTC derivatives. Currently, the liquidity in exchange traded market is 
confined  to  very  short-term.  If  such  products  are  to  be  positioned  as  a  credible  hedging 
product then the liquidity has to extend beyond short-term. That brings another related issue 
as to how best can both OTC as well as exchange traded markets co-exist with scope for 
product alignment for greater efficiency. Is there a way, wherein exchanges can arrange for 
the ultimate delivery at the time of settlement if the contract is a physically settled one and 
similarly, can banks offer OTC derivatives upto a suitable cut off amount without insisting on 
any underlying for hedging any economic or likely exposure at a future date? 
26. Banks were initially allowed to participate in both the markets subject to certain position 
limits  on  the  exchanges  and  within  the  overall position  limits  fixed  for individual  banks.  As 
you would recall, Reserve Bank of India had imposed a host of restrictions on both banks as 
well  as  corporates  in  December  2011  and  subsequently  in  2012  that  were  considered 
necessary for curbing their speculative behaviour. As the situation improved, many of these 
restrictions  have  been  either  relaxed  partially  or  removed.  However,  the  restriction  that 
positions undertaken by the banks in the exchanges cannot be netted / offset by undertaking 
positions in the OTC market and vice-versa, and the positions initiated in the exchanges has 
to  be  liquidated/closed  in  the  exchanges  only,  remains.  Reserve  Bank  of  India  has  been 
constantly  monitoring  the  developments  in  both  the  OTC  and  Exchange  traded  markets 
closely  and  we  continue  to  believe  that  there  has  to  be  a  level-playing  field  between  both 
these markets. 
27. As far as reporting of derivative transactions is concerned, a system has already been 
put in place wherein the banks are required to report the aggregate details of transactions in 
forward  contracts,  currency  swaps  and  currency  options  to  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India 
periodically. Though CCIL has put in place guaranteed settlement mechanism for FCY-INR 
forward  transactions  since  December  2009,  not  too  many  banks  are  using  this  facility 
currently,  apparently  due  to  lack  of  clarity  on  the  rules  relating  to  the  credit  valuation 
adjustment  (CVA)  risk  capital  charge  for  over-the-counter  derivatives.  Taking  into  account 
the  concerns  of  the  banks,  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  has  deferred  the  introduction  of 
mandatory forex forward guaranteed settlement through central counter-party and has also 
postponed the implementation of Basel-III regulations for the currency derivatives segment to 
January 2014, pending resolution of norms regarding trade settlement. 
28.  In  2012,  trade  repository  became  operational  in  India  when  Reserve  Bank  of  India 
advised  that  all/selective  trades  in  OTC  foreign  exchange  and  interest  rate  derivatives 
between  the  banks/market  makers  (banks/primary  dealers)  and  their  clients  should  be 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
to 
facilities 
the  exporters  were 
reported on the CCIL platform subject to a mutually agreed upon confidentiality protocol. The 
reporting arrangement covering OTC foreign exchange derivative trades between AD banks 
and  their  clients  has  been  operationalised  with  effect  from  April  2,  2013  in  respect  of 
FCY-INR forwards, FCY-FCY forwards, FCY-INR options and FCY-FCY options. 
29. Now let me conclude. I had picked up three broad issues to share my thoughts. I hope 
these issues would be debated further during the course of the day and issues for resolution 
flagged. I had started my talk hoping that the aftermath of this Conference would be better 
than last time when the RBI had to impose many restrictions to curb volatility. In the recently 
released  Report  of  the  Technical  Committee  on  Services/Facilities  for  the  Exporters,  the 
entire  gamut  of  existing 
reviewed  and  several 
recommendations  made  for  the  improvement  of  services  /facilities  to  the  sector.  In  this 
regard, policy measures were also suggested for risk mitigation for the exporters including 
use of hedging instruments. In the backdrop of the Committee’s Report, I would like to make 
the following announcements. 
30. We have decided in principle to relax a few things that we hope will cheer the market. 
The facility of rebooking of cancelled contracts is being increased from the present limit of 
25 percent  to  50  percent  and  made  symmetrical  for  both  exporters  and  importers.  The 
Committee  had  noted 
tedious 
documentation. The Committee was of the view that the quarterly duration for declaration of 
forward contracts booked by the exporter and certified by Statutory Auditor may be replaced 
with  a  quarterly  self  certified  declaration  by  the  exporter  and  an  annual  Statutory  Auditor 
certified  declaration.  This  recommendation  has  also  been  accepted  for  implementation. 
Further, the documentation for booking of forward contracts upto USD 200,000 is also being 
simplified. Let me hasten to add that these facilitations have nothing whatsoever to do with 
RBI’s  perception  about  the  exchange  rate  as  some  of  practitioners  had  reportedly 
believed/stated when we relaxed the restriction on net open position limits of banks. Reserve 
Bank will continue to manage the exchange rates as hitherto, targeting on curbing excessive 
volatility rather than any specific levels. 
31. Thank you for your attention and wish you all the best as you return to the jobs you best 
know after this Seminar. 
 
that  hedging  process 
the  OTC  market 
involves 
in 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
