Øystein Olsen: The economic outlook 
Speech  by  Mr  Øystein  Olsen,  Governor  of  the  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of  Norway),  to 
invited foreign embassy representatives, Norges Bank, Oslo, 4 April 2013. 
The speech is based on the annual address 2013, Monetary Policy Report 1/13 and previous speeches. Please 
note that the text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation. 
 Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
First of all, I would like to welcome you to Norges Bank. 
Five years after the financial crisis started, growth is weak and unemployment high in many 
countries.  The  economic  situation  in  Norway  stands  in  contrast  to  developments  abroad. 
Norway’s economy is still growing and unemployment remains low. There is a tendency to 
see ourselves as a country apart. 
Truly,  Norway’s  oil  and  gas  resources  provide  an  economic  base  that  few  other  countries 
enjoy. Income levels are among the highest in the world. At the same time, our increasing 
dependence on oil and gas increases the vulnerability of the Norwegian economy. 
The  theme  of  my  presentation  today  is  how  to  enhance  the  resilience  of  the  Norwegian 
economy. 
When  the  financial  crisis  washed  over  the  Norwegian  banking  sector  in  autumn  2008,  we 
were  reminded  of  how  dependent  we  are  on  the  world  around  us.  Nonetheless,  the 
Norwegian economy weathered the crisis well. After about a year, the downturn in Norway 
was over. 
Chart 1 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  1
One  of  the  main  reasons  is  the  strong  demand  for  Norwegian  goods  in  countries  where 
economic growth remains robust. The centre of gravity in the world economy is shifting. In 
the  course  of  the  next  few  decades,  China  will  most  likely  be  the  largest  economy  in  the 
world. Emerging economies – with China at the forefront – are the main driving force behind 
the  increase  in  demand  for  crude  oil  and  other  commodities.  As  a  result,  prices  for 
Norwegian export goods have remained high, even in the context of declining growth among 
our traditional trading partners. 
Chart 2 
 The  emergence  of  newly  industrialised  economies  has  also  led  to  lower  import  prices  in 
Norway. The improvement in Norway’s terms of trade is without parallel in our recent history. 
We have to go back to the boom period at the time of World War I to find anything similar. 
Developments in other countries have been less favourable. What started as a banking crisis 
in  the  US  and  the  UK  has  developed  into  a  sovereign  debt  crisis,  with  Europe  at  the 
epicentre. Austerity measures and economic contraction are now going hand in hand. Social 
unrest is spreading. 
Unemployment  in  many  countries  has  risen  to  alarming  levels.  Economic  growth  is  weak, 
particularly in Europe, constrained by uncertainty and fear of new setbacks. Both the public 
and  private  sectors  are  focusing  on  reducing  debt.  Banks  are  consolidating  their  balance 
sheets and holding back on lending to businesses and households. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Chart 3 
 Total sovereign debt in advanced economies is almost as high as it was after World War II, 
following  a  period  of  soaring,  debt-financed  military  spending.  The  long  post-war  boom 
helped to reduce debt. 
Experience  shows  that  it  is  difficult  to  restore  growth  after  a  financial  crisis.  Necessary 
austerity measures can amplify an economic downturn, with falling tax revenues and rising 
spending  on  benefits,  trapping  both  public  finances  and  economic  activity  in  a  downward 
spiral. This is what we have seen in Europe. 
Today, economic growth is low in virtually the entire OECD area. Many countries are forced 
to  implement  fiscal  consolidation  measures,  while  there  is  also  a  need  to  stimulate  the 
economy and create jobs. That is a difficult balancing act. 
The  European  crisis  was  acute  about  a  year  ago,  at  the  beginning  of  2012.  Spanish  and 
Italian government bond yields had risen markedly. The reason was not only the uncertainty 
related to sovereign debt problems in those countries. Markets also reflected fears that the 
construction  –  European  monetary  union  –  might  crumble.  The  question  of  the  fate  of  the 
euro was on the table. 
Through 2012, the European Central Bank (ECB) intervened with resolute measures to calm 
the  markets.  The  banking  system  was  offered  large  amounts  of  long-term  funding.  In 
summer  2012,  the  ECB  declared  that  it  was  prepared  to  make  unlimited  purchases  of 
government debt which fulfill the conditions for borrowing from the European Stability Fund. 
These measures seem to be working. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Chart 4 
 Borrowing rates for debt-burdened countries have fallen markedly. Other risk premiums have 
also decreased. Fears of a euro-area breakup and the collapse of the European economy no 
longer seem dominant. 
The  European  monetary  union  –  after  being  established  –  cannot  be  dissolved  without 
serious consequences for Europe and the world economy. There is little point in discussing 
whether the original idea was a good one or not. The child was born and is now a teenager. 
As expected, puberty has presented problems. These problems must now be dealt with by 
the European authorities. 
Budget deficits in Europe are being reduced, despite strong headwinds from the slowdown 
that  follows  in  the  footsteps  of  austerity.  Structural  reforms  are  being  implemented  to 
increase growth capacity over time. Business sector costs are falling and competitiveness is 
improving in the countries hardest hit by the crisis. Steps have been taken in the direction of 
closer cooperation and coordination of economic policy. 
However, the path ahead is long. We may have to wait until the next decade before growth 
gains a firm footing in Europe. 
Nonetheless, we have seen a clear shift in financial market sentiment. This shift is reflected 
in the fall in European government bond yields. The clearest indication of optimism can be 
found in equity markets. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Chart 5 
 With  the  upswing  in  equity  markets,  the  value  of  Norway’s  financial  wealth  is  increasing. 
Close  to  60  percent  of  the  capital  in  the  Government  Pension  Fund  Global  –  Norway’s 
sovereign wealth fund – is invested in global equity markets. In times of good growth in the 
global  economy  and  when  optimism  is  on  the  rise,  the  return  on  the  Fund  increases. 
Conversely, turbulence and low risk willingness in the market have a negative effect on the 
Fund’s assets. This is a risk we have to live with to achieve solid returns over time. 
Because of the Fund’s long-term horizon, short-term risk tolerance is high. We can exploit 
this by engaging in countercyclical investment. The Fund’s size also allows us to reduce risk 
by spreading our investments across many countries. Norway has become a global financial 
investor.  Through  the  Fund’s  investments,  Norway  increasingly  takes  part  in  value  added 
generated in other countries. 
Over  the  past  hundred  years,  growing  global  trade  and  cross-border  flows  of  capital  and 
labour have been important factors driving economic progress. At times, the principles of free 
trade  and  capital  movements  have  been  set  out  of  play.  Walls  have  been  raised  between 
countries  in  the  form  of  trade  barriers  and  restrictions  on  capital  flows.  This  has  not  been 
successful.  Countries  that  have  attempted  to  shield  their  economies  from  the  rest  of  the 
world have fallen back into stagnation. 
Growing  signs  of  increased  protectionism  are  again  causing  concern.  If  this  tendency 
intensifies,  international  trade  and  prosperity  will  be  undermined.  With  its  open  economy, 
Norway  would  be  severely  affected.  It  is  in  our  own  interest  to  make  active  efforts  to 
counteract such a development. 
Monetary policy – a nominal anchor 
Against  the  background  of  an  economic  downturn  and  low  interest  rates  among  Norway’s 
trading partners, the conduct of monetary policy in Norway is challenging. A higher key policy 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
rate might have curbed debt growth and demand pressures in the Norwegian economy. But 
in an environment of persistently low external interest rates, such a policy would likely have 
led to a sharp appreciation of the krone, resulting in too low levels of inflation and economic 
activity.  Thus,  the  crisis  in  Europe  and  weak  growth  in  the  US  are  also  contributing  to 
keeping interest rates in Norway at a low level. 
The main objective of monetary policy in Norway is low and stable inflation. This objective 
provides  the  economy  with  a  nominal  anchor.  With  firmly  anchored  inflation  expectations, 
monetary policy can contribute to stable developments in the real economy. 
Chart 6 
 The  operational  target  of  monetary  policy  is  annual  consumer  price  inflation  of  close  to 
2.5 percent over time. Over the past ten years, average inflation has been somewhat below, 
but close to, 2.5 percent. 
A credible and firmly anchored monetary policy can contribute to curb the impacts of external 
shocks. This increases the resilience of the Norwegian economy. 
More resilient banking sector 
The financial crisis provided us with some important insights. First, the crisis illustrated that 
low  and  stable  inflation  is  not  sufficient  to  secure  financial  stability.  Second,  the  crisis 
revealed severe shortcomings in banking regulation. Banking and financial sector regulation 
is now being reformed in many countries. 
Norwegian banks have become more solid in recent years. This is a positive development. 
Banks’ capital, in particular that of the largest banks, should be increased further in order to 
satisfy the new regulations. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The forthcoming regulatory framework for banks in the EEA includes a countercyclical buffer 
– a capital requirement that can be increased in upturns and turned off in downturns. When 
banks  are  required  to  build  up  an  additional  buffer,  they  are  better  equipped  to  cope  with 
periods of rising losses. 
The buffer will strengthen the resilience of the banking sector during an upturn. It may also 
counteract  the  build-up  of  financial  imbalances,  although  the  effect  is  uncertain.  Thus, 
Norges  Bank  cannot  disregard  taking  financial  imbalances  into  consideration  when  setting 
the key policy rate. The criteria for the conduct of monetary policy remain firm, also after the 
introduction of a countercyclical capital buffer. 
Later this year, Norges Bank will provide advice to The Ministry of Finance on the size of the 
countercyclical buffer. An integrated analysis and set of forecasts form a common basis, both 
for this advice, and for the Bank’s monetary policy decisions. 
The Norwegian economy is also vulnerable 
Structural adjustment in the business sector is the key to economic progress. Over the past 
40 years, the oil and gas industry has been an engine of innovation and growth in Norway. In 
the beginning phases of the Norwegian oil age, the impulses to other economic sectors were 
modest. Over the years, we have developed an internationally competitive petroleum supply 
industry of considerable scope. 
While the companies operating on the Norwegian continental shelf had to import virtually all 
their equipment in the 1970s, the import share has now dropped to just below 40 percent. 
The Norwegian engineering industry has flourished. The supply industry has become a major 
export industry. Almost two-thirds of total Norwegian exports are now linked to the petroleum 
industry. 
Chart 7 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  7
Vigorous activity in the oil and gas industry helped Norwegian manufacturing sectors during 
the  financial  crisis.  The  petroleum  industry  is  a  buffer  against  the  current  downturn  in 
advanced economies. In that respect, the Norwegian economy has become more robust. 
The flip side of the coin is that our economic future is becoming increasingly dependent on oil 
and gas activities. The substantial petroleum revenues and the spillover effects from oil and 
gas production are reflected in the labour market and are driving up house prices and debt. 
Thus, the Norwegian economy is also vulnerable. 
In the mid-1980s, the Norwegian economy was shaken by a sharp and long-lasting fall in oil 
prices.  Today’s  situation  is  quite  different.  Oil  prices  are  persistently  high,  reflecting  the 
emergence of newly industrialised countries. But it is risky business to take today’s oil price 
levels for granted. New energy technologies are being developed. Climate challenges will not 
disappear. If oil prices were to fall again, a number of off-shore investment projects would 
become  unprofitable,  with  considerable  spillover  effects  on  other  sectors  of  our  economy. 
Unemployment  in  Norway  would  probably  rise.  We  cannot  eliminate  that  risk.  Curbing  the 
exploitation  of  oil  and  gas  resources  is  not  a  feasible  alternative.  The  abiding  question  is 
rather how to limit the vulnerability associated with increased oil dependence. 
The fiscal rule for petroleum revenue spending is an important buffer. The petroleum fund 
mechanism and moderate and predictable spending of petroleum revenues over the central 
government  budget  contributes  to  enhancing  economic  stability.  Reserves  accumulated  in 
the  Government  Pension  Fund  Global  provide  fiscal  leeway  in  the  event  of  an  economic 
setback, as observed in 2008 and 2009. 
By limiting petroleum revenue spending to the expected real return on the Fund, we ensure 
that  our  petroleum  wealth  will  benefit  future  generations.  A  balanced  approach  to  revenue 
spending  will  allow  future  generations  to  benefit  from  what  is  spent  on  public  investments 
domestically. 
Chart 8 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 The  spending  of  petroleum  revenues  also  has  another  facet.  It  increases  the  cost  of 
Norwegian labour. During upturns Norwegian companies have fared well, in spite of rapidly 
rising costs, thanks to efficiency gains and rising producer prices. Some other countries in 
Europe allowed costs to rise at broadly the same pace over a number of years. Now these 
countries are in a downturn with a high level of spare capacity, and with a need to improve 
competitiveness. 
Should  the outlook  for  the  petroleum  industry  show  a  significant  shift, Norway  will  have  to 
start down the hard path of economic adjustment. The high level of costs in our country may 
become a hindrance in the competition for tenders and market shares. What we need above 
all is a profitable and efficient business sector that can adapt to new times. In that respect, 
there are some aspects of the Norwegian economy that give cause for reflection. 
Chart 9 
 On the surface, developments are positive. Nominal mainland GDP growth at current prices 
has been surprisingly stable. Over the past 20 years, nominal mainland GDP has increased 
by  around  6  percent  annually,  and  growth  is  still  hovering  around  that  trend.  There  were 
some  tendencies  towards  overheating  in  the  years  prior  to  the  financial  crisis.  But  the 
correction that followed during and after the crisis has brought growth back to trend. There is 
little  in  this  chart  to  indicate  that  the  world  economy  has  recently  been  through  the  most 
severe economic downturn in post-war history. 
The picture changes when growth is broken down into price and volume. As mentioned, high 
prices for domestically produced goods have supported our country’s income. Since 2005, 
producer prices have increased considerably faster than trend. This illustrates that mainland 
businesses  have  also  benefited  from  the  substantial  improvement  in  Norway’s  terms  of 
trade. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
Chart 10 
 Economic activity, on the other hand, slumped during the financial crisis. Although economic 
growth has picked up in the past few years, the level is still well below the pre-crisis trend. 
This could indicate that the financial crisis and the debt crisis have had lasting effects on the 
Norwegian economy as well. 
The picture becomes even clearer when population growth is taken into account. Measured 
per capita, we do not generate more value today than we did five years ago. This picture is 
similar to that of other advanced economies. The break from the years prior to the financial 
crisis  is  clear.  Growth  is  being  supported  by  immigration  and  employment  growth,  not  by 
increased productivity. 
There  are  two  factors  that  determine  value  added  and  prosperity  in  a  population.  One  is 
labour input and the other is labour productivity. I will look at some aspects of each of these 
factors. 
The  employment  ratio  is  high  in  Norway.  Labour  force  participation  is  high  and  most  job-
seekers find work. 
Employment  has  increased  rapidly  since  the  mid-1990s.  An  expansionary  monetary  policy 
and  additional  government  expenditure  of  oil  money  stimulated  activity  and  employment 
through the financial crisis. Measured by hours worked, labour input has also risen, albeit not 
to the same extent. On average, the working day is shrinking. 
The employment ratio adjusted for working hours provides an expression of average labour 
input  per  hour  worked  among  the  active  population.  In  this  chart,  hourly  labour  input  is 
measured in relation to usual hours of work per year of 1 750 hours. In 2011, the average  
 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Chart 11 
 
number of hours worked in Norway was about 60 percent of usual hours of work per year. By 
this  measure,  the  employment  ratio  this  year  was  higher  in  Greece  than  in  Norway.  Total 
labour input is considerably higher in Sweden, Finland and the US than in Norway. We work 
less than the OECD average. 
 Chart 12 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  11
When income growth is high, it is natural that some of the increased wealth will be reflected 
in a greater demand for leisure. It is nevertheless telling that the number of hours actually 
worked is considerably lower in Norway than among our main trading partners, despite very 
low unemployment in Norway. Generous transfer schemes and other aspects of our welfare 
system  induce  many  to  exit  the  labour  force  –  completely  or  partially.  In  recent  years,  the 
high level of labour immigration has compensated for this. Nonetheless, this situation does 
not seem sustainable. Reforms that provide stronger work incentives are needed and should 
be  implemented  in  anticipation  of  an  ageing  population.  The  pension  reform  was  an 
important step in the right direction. 
Chart 13 
 What  about  the  other  factor  that  is  crucial  to  growth?  Mainland  productivity  increased 
markedly in the 1990s, partly owing to a number of structural reforms. The banking sector 
was rationalised after the crisis. The tax reform set the stage for profitable investments and 
business  sector  restructuring.  Improved  competitiveness  and  the  development  of  the  oil 
industry  facilitated  the  rapid  integration  of  new  technology  by  firms.  Productivity  growth 
remained relatively high up to around 2005. But since then it has declined. The decline has 
been more pronounced than among our trading partners. 
The phasing-in of a highly profitable oil industry and higher petroleum revenue spending via 
the central government budget has amplified the structural shifts in the Norwegian economy. 
Services production has increased. When the financial crisis hit, industries that do not benefit 
from  oil  sector  demand  or  public  spending  stagnated.  The  differences  in  growth  across 
industries has thus widened since 2008. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Chart 14 
 Labour-intensive sectors with relatively low productivity have accounted for a large share of 
employment  growth  in  recent  years.  Employment  has  shown  only  moderate  growth  in 
industries with a high productivity level, such as manufacturing and engineering. 
Productivity growth has stagnated in most OECD countries. Goods production has declined, 
while  services  production  has  increased,  as  in  Norway.  In  many  countries  this  shift  was 
based on borrowing rather than increased earnings. After the financial crisis, funding sources 
dried up and these countries were faced with a debt crisis. Fundamental structural problems 
with eroded competitiveness came into evidence. These countries must not only reduce their 
debt  levels,  but  also  engage  in  a  painful  process  of  structural  adjustment.  Only  then  can 
these economies find the path to renewed growth. 
The Norwegian economy has experienced virtually 20 consecutive years of growth. We have 
invested  in  a  profitable  oil  industry  and  found  a  balance  between  spending  petroleum 
revenues domestically and saving petroleum revenues. On the other hand, it seems that both 
the  public  and  private  sectors  are  having  difficulties  finding  profitable  mainland  investment 
projects.  Taking  a  longer  view,  this  is  a  source  of  concern.  Should  petroleum  revenues 
shrink, our economy needs more pillars to stand on. Otherwise, we as well would have to 
embark on a path of adjustment towards renewed growth. 
Perhaps Norway is not so much an economy apart after all. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13
