Andreas Dombret: The role of central banks 
Opening statement by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche 
Bundesbank,  to  the  panel  discussion  at  the  AICGS  (American  Institute  for  Contemporary 
German Studies) Panel, Berlin, 12 June 2013. 
 Ladies and gentlemen  
The events of the past five years have called into question many assumptions that were the 
foundations of our monetary and financial system.  
But while it is necessary to draw the right conclusions from the current crisis, we should not 
discard  the  lessons  we  have  learned  from  previous  crises  –  for  they  remain  equally  valid. 
The cautious role of central banks in spurring economic growth is such a lesson – a lesson 
we learned the hard way in the 70s and 80s. Some central banks tried to foster economic 
growth  by  reducing  interest  rates  considerably  –  even  at  the  price  of  significantly  higher 
inflation rates.  
In contrast, inflation rates in countries with independent central banks focused on delivering 
price  stability  were  comparatively  low  in  these  years.  While  average  inflation  in  Germany 
stood at 3.4%, it reached 8.2% in France, 12.5 % in Italy and 12.4% in Spain. The important 
point here is that lower inflation did not come at the expense of lower growth. It turned out 
that quite the opposite is true – the best contribution to sustainable growth a central bank can 
make is to keep prices stable.  
But stable prices are not the only prerequisite for growth. A stable financial system is also 
crucial  –  this  is  the  lesson  of  the financial  crisis.  It  is  of  utmost  importance  to  restore  and 
preserve  confidence  in  the  resilience  of  the  financial  system  as  a  whole.  In  this  process, 
central banks play an important role, especially when it comes to mitigating systemic risks, 
nowadays known as macro-prudential regulation and supervision. 
In keeping prices stable and contributing to a stable financial system, central banks can put 
in place the conditions for sustainable growth. But they cannot deliver this growth on their 
own. All measures the Eurosystem has taken to contain the fallout of the crisis, like the ECB 
Governing  Council  reduced  interest  rates  to  a  mere  50  basis  points,  decided  to  provide 
banks with quasi unlimited liquidity, and to intervene in bond markets only helped to stabilise 
output in the short term. The fundamental problems of the euro area are structural in nature. 
As such, they require a structural solution.  
Precarious public finances and a lack of competitiveness are at the root of the current crisis. 
In some parts of the euro area, these problems are compounded by a very restrictive credit 
supply of banks. These challenges cannot be overcome by monetary policy. All that central 
banks can do is to buy time – time for governments and parliaments to consolidate budgets, 
improve the functioning of product and labour markets and recapitalize banks.  
In safeguarding monetary and financial stability, central banks can pave the way for growth. 
But  to  actually  get  there,  governments  and  parliaments  must  go  down  the  route  of 
implementing the required reforms. 
 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
