Duvvuri Subbarao: The global financial crisis and the Indian financial 
sector – what have we learnt and how have we responded? 
Address  by  Dr  Duvvuri  Subbarao,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
7th International  Banking  &  Finance  Conference  2013,  organized  by  the  Indian  Merchants’ 
Chamber, Mumbai, 5 June 2013. 
 Thank  you  very  much for  inviting  me  to  speak at  this  conference  of the  Indian  Merchants’ 
Chamber on international finance and banking. I attach a lot of value to speaking from this 
platform and to sharing some thoughts on financial and banking sector reforms. 
In a few months from now, we will be marking the fifth anniversary of the collapse of Lehman 
Brothers which will go down in popular perception as the trigger for the biggest financial crisis 
of  our  time.  Five  years  on,  the  crisis  is  still  with  us  –  only  the  geography,  the  immediate 
concerns and pressure points have changed. 
Our world view of the crisis 
Even  as  the  crisis  is  not  yet  over,  it  has  changed  our  view  of  the  financial  sector  in  a 
fundamental way. The world view before the crisis was that the growth of the financial sector, 
in  and  of  itself,  was  desirable;  indeed  that  real  growth  can  be  induced  by  sheer  financial 
engineering. Our faith in the financial sector grew to such an extent that before the crisis, we 
believed that for every real sector problem, no matter how complex, there is a financial sector 
solution. The crisis changed that. We now know that for every real sector problem, no matter 
how complex, there is a financial sector solution, which is wrong. In the pre-crisis euphoria of 
financial alchemy, we forgot that the goal of all development effort is the growth of the real 
economy, and that the financial sector is useful only to the extent it helps deliver stronger 
and more secure long term growth. 
Lessons of the crisis 
The  crisis  has  also  taught  us  to  re-examine  our  understanding  of  the  characteristics  of 
financial  markets  and  financial  institutions.  It  will  be  instructive  to  briefly  review  what  we 
learnt in this regard over the last five years. 
The first thing we learnt is that price stability and macroeconomic stability do not guarantee 
financial stability. Note that the crisis erupted during a period of extraordinary price stability 
and macroeconomic stability. Indeed, some analysts have made an even stronger assertion, 
that an extended period of price and macroeconomic stability can blindside policy makers to 
seeing  the  festering  financial  instability  underneath.  We  also  learnt  that  no  country  is  an 
island. Although the crisis originated in advanced economies, emerging economies too were 
affected, indeed by much more than they had thought possible. The contagion brought home 
a simple message. In a rapidly globalizing world, national and international financial stability 
are interlinked. They are really two sides of the same coin. 
Another important lesson we learnt is that financial markets are not self correcting. Indeed in 
the  pre-crisis  years,  a  consensus  was  building  around  the  view  that  modern  risk 
management has increased the resilience of the financial sector, and that any excess would 
self correct in good time. The crisis proved that to be wrong. As we unlearnt that, we also 
learnt  some  new  insights  –  that  it  is  difficult  to  detect  signs  of  pressure  building  up  in  the 
system in real time, that the financial sector can contain pressure for a longer time than we 
think possible, and as a consequence, when the inevitable implosion takes place, it can be 
quite disastrous, or even catastrophic. We learnt that it is difficult to predict the precise nature 
of  the  implosion.  For  example,  in  the  pre-crisis  years,  even  the  few  who  sensed  stress 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
building up in the system, thought there would be a currency crisis; in the event the implosion 
took the form of a financial sector crisis. 
There  were  other  lessons  too.  That  a  collection  of  rational  financial  institutions  does  not 
necessarily  make  a  rational  financial  sector.  In  other  words,  rational  behaviour  at  the 
individual institutional level does not aggregate to collective rationality because of the fallacy 
of composition. Financial institutions are notoriously prone to herd behaviour. They have a 
strong  collective  tendency  to  over  expose  themselves  to  the  same  type  of  risk  during  an 
upturn, and become overly risk averse during a downturn which can lead the whole system 
on a downward spiral of risk aversion, market seizure and instability. 
Converting lessons into policies 
I  have  so  far  spoken  about  the  broader  lessons  of  the  crisis  that  have  enhanced  our 
understanding of the financial sector, especially of the financial sector in a highly integrated 
world.  A  logical  question  would  be  how  are  we  converting  those  lessons  into  practical 
policies and systemic improvements. This is what I now want to turn to. 
As you all know, the last four years have witnessed a vigorous debate internationally on how 
to foster a strong, stable and sustainable financial sector. There has already been significant 
agreement on some reforms while some important issues are still under debate. 
Emerging economies and global reforms 
There  have  been  some questions  about  why  emerging  economies too should  adopt these 
reforms. Their argument is that it is the advanced economy financial sectors that had gone 
astray  and  it  is  they  which  need  fixing.  Emerging  economy  financial  sectors,  on  the  other 
hand,  have  been  sound  and  resilient,  and  adopting  reforms  designed  for  the  advanced 
economy context would be inappropriate, if also costly. 
I believe such thinking is misguided. We live in a globalizing world with strong and growing 
interconnections  between  our  financial  systems. What  happens  anywhere  in  the  world  will 
have an impact everywhere, as indeed demonstrated by the experience of the last five years. 
As  foreign  banks  come  into  our  country,  and  our  banks  expand  their  global  footprint,  we 
cannot  afford  to  be  offline  on  global  standards and  international  best  practices.  Also,  note 
that, as the former Managing Director of the IMF said, just because this crisis originated in 
advanced  economies,  emerging  economies  cannot  assume  that  they  have  insulated 
themselves from all future crises. Such hubris can be dangerously costly. 
Specific issues 
Having set that context, I now want to turn to specific reform issues and cover each of them 
under  three  questions:  (i)  What  have  we  learnt  at  the  global  level?  (ii)  Reflecting  those 
lessons, how have we responded at the global level? (iii) How have we, in India, responded? 
I will address five specific issues. 
1st issue: migration to Basel III 
What have we learnt? 
By  far  the  most  significant  and  broad  based  reforms  at  the  global  level  has  been  the 
agreement on the Basel III package for bank regulation. This package, which was discussed 
for over two years, is an attempt to reform the capital, leverage and liquidity regulations on 
banks reflecting the lessons of the crisis. 
What  are  those  lessons?  First,  in  the  pre-crisis  period,  common  equity  requirements  for 
banks  were  pegged  too  low  to  provide  for  adequate  loss  absorption  in  a  time  of  distress; 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
second,  there  was  no  explicit  regulation  against  leverage  which  allowed  banks  to  become 
excessively  leveraged  without  breaching  the  capital  requirements;  third,  there  were  no 
explicit safeguards against liquidity risk, and this, in fact, proved to be the final straw for the 
crisis  as  liquidity  shortage  quickly  snowballed  into  a  crisis  of  confidence;  and  fourth, 
regulations demanded only light capital requirements against trading book exposures on the 
logic that trading book assets were low risk as they can be rapidly sold and positions can be 
quickly unwound. 
What has been the global response? 
The  Basel  III  package  addresses these flaws.  Most  importantly,  capital  requirements  have 
been  tightened  by  more  than  doubling  the  minimum  common  equity  requirement  and  also 
imposing, on top of that, a capital conservation buffer of 2.5 per cent of risk weighted assets 
(RWA)  which  can  be  drawn  down  in  periods  of  stress.  Further,  new  measures  have  been 
imposed  to  contain  systemic  risk  in  both  the  time  and  space  dimensions.  In  the  time 
dimension,  the  risk  stems  from  the  procyclical  behaviour  of  financial  institutions.  This  is 
sought to be mitigated through the requirement of a countercyclical capital buffer which will 
be built up during the upswing of the economic cycle to be drawn down if there is a system 
wide risk in the downturn. The risk in the spatial dimension arises from the behaviour and 
business  models  of  large  financial  institutions  which,  because  of  interconnections  among 
financial institutions, can have a disproportionately large systemic impact. The moral hazard 
of  “too  big  to  fail”  is  therefore  sought  to  be  mitigated  by  requiring  systemically  important 
financial institutions (SIFIs) to hold higher loss absorbing capital. 
To  prevent  excess  leverage,  the  Basel  III  package  introduces  a  simple  non-risk  based 
leverage  ratio  to  back-stop  the  risk  based  capital  requirements.  Besides  constraining  the 
build up of excessive leverage in good times, the leverage ratio also serves as a safeguard 
against model risk and against attempts to circumvent the risk based capital requirements. 
Basel III package contains a liquidity standard to ensure that banks carry adequate liquidity 
both for the short-term and the medium term. 
How have we, in India, responded? 
In  India,  the  Reserve  Bank  introduced  the  Basel  III  capital  regulations  for  banks  effective 
April 1  this  year.  The  capital  requirements  will  be  phased  over  a  period  extending  up  to 
March 31,  2018,  nine  months  ahead  of  the  Basel  Committee  phase-in.  In  addition,  the 
Reserve Bank has introduced a minimum Tier I leverage ratio which will be reviewed after 
the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) finalizes the leverage ratio calibration. 
We  have  also  issued  guidelines  on  “Liquidity  Risk  Management”  which  include  enhanced 
guidance  on  liquidity  risk  governance,  measurement,  monitoring  and  reporting  to  the 
Reserve Bank on liquidity positions. We will calibrate the precise parameters after the Basel 
Committee finalizes the entire framework. 
As per our standard practice, we have pegged our minimum capital requirements for banks a 
percentage point higher than the minimum standards under Basel III [See Table below] 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Basel III capital requirements of banks 
 
What  is  the  rationale  for  our  more  “onerous”  capital  standards?  The  higher  prescription  is 
intended  to  address  any  judgemental  error  in  capital  adequacy  viz.  wrong  application  of 
standardised  risk  weights,  misclassification  of  asset  quality  etc.  Also,  while  advanced 
approaches  under  Basel  II  have  been  strengthened,  the  calibration  of  standardised  risk 
weights is yet to be comprehensively effected. And more importantly, Indian banks have not 
so far been subjected to comprehensive pillar 2 capital add-ons under Basel II. The higher 
prescription is therefore intended to address possible undercapitalisation of risky exposures. 
Experience shows that this prudence on our part was helpful and positive on the cost-benefit 
calculus. 
How  will  Basel  III  impact  the  capital  requirements  of  Indian  banks? The Capital  Adequacy 
Ratio  (CAR)  of  the  aggregate  banking  system  as  at  end-December  2012  stood  at 
13.5 per cent  with  a  Tier  1  capital  ratio  of  9.7  per  cent.  Initial  estimates  suggest  that 
additional capital requirements would be of the order of ₹5 trillion, of which non-equity capital 
will be of the order of ₹3.25 trillion, while equity capital will be of the order of ₹1.75 trillion. It 
is  expected  that  the  long  timeframe,  up  to  March  2018,  to  phase  in  Basel  III  capital 
requirements will allow banks to make a smooth and non-disruptive transition. 
2nd issue: shadow banking – extending the perimeter of regulation 
What have we learnt? 
The  crisis  has  demonstrated  how  shadow  banking  can  destabilize  the  financial  system 
reinforcing the need to more effectively regulate it. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
First  a  bit  of  background.  Shadow  banking  is  credit  intermediation  involving  entities  and 
activities  outside  the  regular  banking  system.  The  pre-crisis  regulatory  architecture  and 
regulatory culture provided a fertile ground for a thriving shadow banking sector to emerge. 
Regulators  focussed  on  securing  the  safety  of  banks,  but  it  was  that  exclusive  and 
straitjacketed  focus  on  banks  that  opened  up  opportunities  for  regulatory  arbitrage  in  the 
form  of  shadow  banks  which  mushroomed  and  proliferated  without  the  shackles  of 
regulation. Banks also found out that it was possible to transfer risky businesses and assets 
to the balance sheets of the shadow banks without transgressing any regulations. 
But shadow banks were a crisis waiting to happen because of their low capital base, high 
leverage, interconnection with banks and risky business models. According to an estimate by 
the  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB),  the  global  shadow  banking  system,  as  conservatively 
proxied by “other financial intermediaries”, grew rapidly before the crisis, more than doubling 
from USD 26 trillion in 2002 to USD 62 trillion in 2007. 
What has been the global response? 
At the international level, the post-crisis consensus is that if an entity behaves like a bank, it 
must also be regulated like a bank. To safeguard financial stability, it is necessary to monitor 
shadow banking system (from micro and macroeconomic perspectives) and regulate it, both 
directly as well as by regulating banks’ interactions with shadow banks. 
The Financial Stability Board (FSB) issued a consultative document in November 2012 on 
“Strengthening  Oversight  and  Regulation  of  Shadow  Banking”  focusing  on  areas  where 
policy  intervention  is  warranted  to  mitigate  the  potential  risks  associated  with  shadow 
banking. The FSB, working with the BCBS and the International Organization of Securities 
Commissions (IOSCO), has focused on five specific areas: (i) mitigating the spill-over effect 
between  the  regular  banking  system  and  the  shadow  banking  system;  (ii)  reducing  the 
susceptibility of money market funds to “runs”; (iii) assessing and mitigating systemic risks 
posed  by  other  shadow  banking  entities;  (iv)  assessing  and  aligning  the  incentives 
associated with securitization; and (v) dampening risks and pro-cyclical incentives associated 
with secured financing contracts such as repos, and securities lending that may exacerbate 
funding strains in times of “runs”. 
How have we, in India, responded? 
Do we have shadow banking in India? In a sense yes, in the form of Non-Banking Finance 
Companies (NBFCs) which perform bank like financial intermediation. But what distinguishes 
our NBFCs from shadow banks is that unlike shadow banks which emerged and expanded 
outside  of  regulatory  oversight,  India’s  NBFC  sector  has  always  been  regulated,  although 
less tightly than the banking system. 
It is important in this context to note that our non-bank financial sector is very large, diverse 
and  complex.  Some  of  it  is  in  the  corporate  sector,  but  much  of  it  is  in  unincorporated. 
Different  segments  are  regulated  by  different  regulators.  Some  of  the  deposits  raised  by 
these companies are legal, some are illegal. In the wake of the recent melt down of a few 
finance companies in parts of the country, in the process destroying the entire life savings of 
millions of low income households, there is need to review the regulatory oversight of this 
sector keeping in view the mandatory and relative comparative advantages of the financial 
sector regulators. While tightening regulation is important, it is not sufficient. What is to be 
noted  is  that  much  of  the  fraud  in  the  non-bank  sector  happens  through  unlawful  and 
fraudulent  schemes  which  should  not  be  operating.  This  reinforces  the  importance  of 
surveillance and enforcement, especially by the state governments. 
For  the  record,  I  must  say  that  RBI’s  regulatory  jurisdiction  in  the  non-bank  sector  is 
restricted to NBFCs that are defined as companies in which financial assets comprise more 
than half the total assets and income from those financial assets constitutes more than half 
the gross income. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
The  Reserve  Bank’s  regulation  of  the  NBFC  sector  focuses  on  both  financial  stability  and 
consumer  protection.  The  focus  on  financial  stability  is  important  because  many  of  these 
NBFCs  borrow  from  banks  and  their  failure  will  have  a  negative  impact  on  the  balance 
sheets  of  banks  and  eventually  on  financial  stability.  The  focus  on  consumer  protection  is 
important  because,  as  I  said  earlier,  thousands  of  low  income  households  are  lured  into 
fraudulent financial schemes by the promise of unviably high rates of interest. In the Reserve 
Bank’s  view,  deposit  taking  should  eventually  be  restricted  only  to  banks  which  are  tightly 
regulated. Deposit collection by non-banking companies should be gradually minimized, and 
eventually eliminated. Towards this endeavor, the Reserve Bank has been quite restrictive in 
authorizing  NBFCs  to  collect  deposits.  Indeed  the  number  of  NBFCs  allowed  to  collect 
deposits has come down from 1420 in 1998 to less than a fifth, 257, by 2013. Also deposit 
taking NBFCs comprise only about 2 per cent of the total number of NBFCs registered with 
the Reserve Bank. 
3rd issue: subsidiarization of foreign banks 
What have we learnt? 
The  operation of foreign  banks  attracted  a  lot  of  attention  during  the crisis. One  thing  that 
became clear was that cross border banking transmitted the crisis ferociously across national 
jurisdictions, from the  sub-prime  US markets  to financial  markets  around  the  world.  At  the 
same time,  because  of  the  complex  structures  of  the  large  cross  border  banks,  it  became 
difficult to determine where in the system the risk lay and how it would transmit. There was 
no  information  on  the  organization  structures  of  cross  border  banks  and  their  links  with 
related entities which left national regulators bewildered about how to douse the raging fires. 
The  problem  became  more  pronounced  in  cases  where  foreign  banks  were  operating  as 
branches  rather  than  locally  incorporated  subsidiaries  highlighting  the  importance  of 
countries making an explicit determination of the mode of presence of foreign banks in the 
form of branch or subsidiary. 
Indeed,  even  pre-crisis,  a  number  of 
What has been the global response? 
The  crisis  has  shifted  the  bias  towards  domestic  incorporation  of  foreign  banks  i.e. 
subsidiarisation. 
local 
incorporation of foreign banks. The subsidiary form of presence provides several comforts to 
regulators. First, a subsidiary has its own board of directors, including independent directors, 
which  provides  sufficient  separation  between  the  bank  and  its  owners  to  ensure  that  the 
interests of domestic depositors are not compromised; second, the clear delineation between 
the assets and liabilities of the bank and those of its parent affords greater leverage to the 
host country to ring fence the operations of the bank; third, it is local economic conditions, 
rather  than  global  perspectives,  that  drive  the  managerial  decisions  of  subsidiaries;  and 
finally, it is easier to define the jurisdiction whose laws would apply to the subsidiary, thereby 
affording more effective control to regulators in a crisis situation. 
jurisdictions  mandated 
How have we, in India, responded? 
What is the policy in this regard in India? The road map for the presence of foreign banks in 
India  put  out  by  the  Reserve  Bank  in  2005  allows  foreign  banks  a  choice  –  of  coming  in 
either as a branch or as a subsidiary – but not in both modes at the same time. Even so, all 
foreign banks operating in India, currently 43 in number, have chosen to come in only in the 
branch mode. 
Reflecting the lessons of the crisis, we deliberated in the Reserve Bank on whether in India 
too  we  should  require  mandatory  incorporation  of foreign  banks.  Accordingly,  the  Reserve 
Bank  put  out  a  Discussion  Paper  in  2011  marshalling  the  merits  and  demerits  of  this 
initiative.  The  proposed  framework  leans  towards  the  subsidiarization  model  for  fresh 
entrants while nudging existing foreign banks with a balance sheet size above a threshold to 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
convert  from  a  branch  model  to  a  subsidiary  model.  It  is  expected  that  this  will  level  the 
playing field for foreign banks and make the overall Indian banking system more competitive 
and inclusive. 
In order to reach a final decision on this issue, we needed to clarify some taxation and legal 
issues. Over the last two years, we have worked with the Government to resolve the major 
taxation issues such as exception from stamp duty and capital gains tax on conversion from 
a branch to a subsidiary. We have yet to resolve a few legal issues which we hope can be 
done in the next few months. Thereafter, we expect to issue final guidelines. 
4th issue: OTC derivatives market 
What have we learnt? 
Financial innovation in the pre-crisis years led to a marked expansion of the OTC (over the 
counter)  derivatives.  The  general  sense  was 
the  OTC  derivatives,  being 
tailored/bespoke products, were deepening the financial markets and adding value to the real 
sector. 
The  crisis,  however,  exposed  several  weaknesses:  excessive  bilateral  exposures  with 
insufficient  collateralisation,  the  inability  of  the  market  participants  to  price  and  value  the 
derivatives, insufficient risk assessment, complexity and opacity of the products traded, all of 
which  combined  together  to  brew  the  crisis  to  explosive  proportions  because  of  the 
interconnectedness  of  the  OTC  derivatives  market  participants.  It  was  clear  that  the  OTC 
derivatives market outpaced the regulatory regimes. 
that 
What has been the global response? 
The  G-20  has  taken  leadership  of  the  reform  of  the  OTC  derivatives  with  the  goals  of 
mitigating  systemic  risk,  improving  market  transparency  and  regulatory  oversight  of  OTC 
derivatives.  The  focus  areas  are  standardization,  central  clearing,  shifting  all  trading  to 
exchanges or electronic platforms and reporting of trades to trade repositories. The FSB is 
monitoring  the  implementation  of  these  reforms  to  ensure  consistent  and  time  bound 
implementation across all G-20 countries. 
How have we, in India, responded? 
In  India,  the  OTC  derivative  markets  are  relatively  small  and  have  developed  within  a 
regulated  framework.  As  per  the  RBI  Act,  the  validity  of  any  OTC  derivative  contract  is 
contingent  on  at  least  one  of  the  parties  to  the  transaction  being  a  regulated  entity.  We 
introduced  the  OTC  derivative  products  in  a  phased  manner  consistent  with  the  hedging 
needs of the real sector. Even as the variety and complexity of OTC products in India are 
limited,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  always  been  engaged  in  improving  the  transparency  and 
reducing the counterparty risk in the OTC derivatives markets. As the products diversified, 
we focussed on the development of a robust market infrastructure for trading, settlement and 
reporting of transactions. 
There  have  been  significant  reforms  in  OTC  derivatives.  In  August  2007,  we  instituted  a 
system  for  reporting  the  Rupee  Forward  Rate  Agreement  (FRA)  and  Interest  Rate  Swap 
(IRS) transactions to the CCIL’s reporting platform. A Trade Repository (TR) for OTC foreign 
exchange  derivative  products  was  launched  in  July  2012  and  reporting  of  all  major  OTC 
foreign  exchange  derivatives  to  the  TR  has  commenced.  Taking  note  of  international 
experience, reporting arrangements were put in place for Credit Default Swaps (CDS), right 
from  their  introduction  in  December  2011.  A  Reserve  Bank  Working  Group  on  Enhancing 
Liquidity in the Government Securities and Interest Rate Derivatives Markets recommended 
standardization of IRS contracts in order to improve their tradability and facilitate centralised 
clearing  and  settlement.  To  begin  with,  the  inter-bank  Rupee  Overnight  Index  Swap  (OIS) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
contracts have been standardised. The inter-bank OTC forex derivative contracts are largely 
standardised. 
Infrastructure for the central clearing and guaranteed settlement of US Dollar-Indian Rupee 
(INR) inter-bank forex forward transactions has been in place since December 2009, which 
currently  caters  to  around  30  per  cent  of  the  transactions.  The  Reserve  Bank  is  working 
towards making the guaranteed settlement of the US Dollar-INR mandatory. The FRA and 
IRS trades in the INR are currently being centrally cleared in a non-guaranteed mode. The 
proposal  to  bring  IRS  and  FRA  transactions  in  the  INR  within  the  ambit  of  guaranteed 
settlement is engaging our attention. 
5th issue: safeguarding financial stability 
What have we learnt? 
Some of the most forceful lessons of the crisis are in the area of financial stability. We learnt 
that  financial  stability  is  important,  much  more  so  than  we  thought,  because  the  costs  of 
financial  instability  can  be  very  heavy.  We  learnt  that  financial  stability  is  an  international 
public  good  –  a  disruption  in  the  financial  system  anywhere  can  cause  disruption  in  the 
financial systems everywhere. We learnt that price stability and macroeconomic stability do 
not guarantee financial stability; financial stability has to be guarded as an explicit variable. 
We learnt that signs of financial instability are difficult to detect in real time and that pressure 
can  build  up  in  the  system  for  much  longer  than  we  think  possible  before  an  eventual 
implosion takes place. 
What has been the global response? 
The  post  crisis  reforms effort  has  accordingly focussed  on  three questions:  (i)  How  do  we 
define  financial  instability?  (ii)  What  are  the  policy  instruments  for  safeguarding  financial 
stability? (iii) What should be the institutional arguments for safeguarding financial stability? 
There  are  no  definitive  answers  to  any  of  these  questions;  they  are  still  being  debated. 
Nevertheless, let me give you a flavour of the general approach to answers. 
There seems to be general agreement that financial stability is difficult to define in concrete 
and  quantifiable  terms  to  suit  all  contexts.  The  consensus  is  that  financial  stability  is  a 
condition in which the financial system can withstand shocks thereby reducing the probability 
of  disruption  or  breakdown  of  the  system.  Conversely,  financial  instability  is  a  situation 
characterized by erosion of confidence in the financial system that results in market seizure, 
panic and collapse. 
There is also consensus around the view that the tool kit for safeguarding financial stability is 
macroprudential  policy  which  throws  sand  in  the  wheels  of  financial  exuberance  and 
excessive  credit  build  up.  The  instruments  in  this  regard  include  risk  weights,  provisioning 
norms, and loan to value ratios. The counter cyclical capital buffer too falls in this category. 
While  that  much  is  clear,  there  are  some  intriguing  questions  and  concerns  on  the  way 
forward. What are the relative roles of monetary policy and macroprudential policies? Under 
what  circumstances should  one, rather than the  other,  be  invoked?  How  do  these  policies 
interact with each other? If they are handled by different agencies, is it possible that they can 
work  at  cross  purposes?  Is  there  an  inevitable  political  dimension  to  macroprudential 
policies?  If  yes,  how  does  one  protect  the  autonomy  of  the  institution  responsible  for 
macroprudential policy? 
That is a whole lot of deep and unsettled questions. Even as the search for answers is on, 
some countries, notably advanced economies where the crisis originated, have embarked on 
reforms of their institutional designs and regulatory architectures. These reforms reflect two 
clear  trends:  first,  a  decisive  shift  towards  giving  increased  responsibility  for  both 
macroprudential  oversight  and  microprudential  regulation  to  central  banks;  and  second, 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
institutionalisation of collegial arrangements involving the central bank, other regulators and 
the Government, with the primary responsibility of identifying threats to financial stability. The 
councils can make recommendations for appropriate prudential standards in the interest of 
safety of the financial system, but notably, not for forbearance. 
How have we, in India, responded? 
Historically, the Reserve Bank has played an important role in preserving financial stability – 
drawing from its wide mandate as the regulator of the banking system and of the payment 
and  settlement  systems,  regulator  of  the  money,  forex,  government  securities  and  credit 
markets, as banker to banks, as also the lender-of-the last resort. This unique combination of 
responsibilities 
for  monetary  policy  combined  with  macroprudential  regulation  and 
microprudential supervision with an implicit mandate for systemic oversight has allowed the 
Reserve  Bank  to  exploit  the  synergies  across  various  dimensions.  The  micro-level 
information coming from supervision of individual institutions has been a valuable  input for 
shaping  the  macro  perspective.  On  the  other  hand,  the  broad  understanding  from 
macroprudential regulation has been effective in instituting prudential safeguards at the micro 
institution level. 
Recognizing the importance of an institutional mechanism for coordination among regulators 
and the Government, in December 2010, the Government established the Financial Stability 
and Development Council (FSDC) to be chaired by the Finance Minister. The FSDC is to be 
assisted by a sub-committee to be chaired by the Governor of the Reserve Bank. This sub-
committee  has  replaced  the  erstwhile  High  Level  Coordination  Committee  on  Financial 
Markets (HLCC-FM). The Government has held out a clear assurance that the working of the 
FSDC will not in any way erode the autonomy of the regulators. 
The way forward from here in India is still uncertain. The FSDC has been meeting regularly, 
about  3  or  4  times  a  year,  and  has  been  focussed  so  far  on  stock  taking  and  discussing 
policy issues. The agenda has been set more by immediate concerns, and there has been 
no explicit attempt to define what constitutes a “financial stability” issue that falls within the 
domain of the FSDC. 
Meanwhile,  the  Financial  Sector  Legislative  Reforms  Commission  (FSLRC)  submitted  its 
report to the Government in March this year. In its submission to the Commission during the 
consultative  stage,  the  Reserve  Bank  argued  that  the  financial  stability  mandate  that  the 
Reserve  Bank  has  been  carrying  out  historically  by  virtue  of  its  broad  mandate  should  be 
clearly defined and formalized. 
Nevertheless, the FSLRC has envisaged a different arrangement for safeguarding financial 
stability. Under this arrangement, the FSDC is accorded statutory status. The responsibility 
for  safeguarding  systemic  risk1  is  entrusted  to  the  FSDC  Board  chaired  by  the  Finance 
Minister and comprising all the regulators and agencies of the financial sector “which allows it 
to combine the expertise of the multiple agencies involved in regulation, consumer protection 
and resolution”. 
The FSLRC recommendation that the executive responsibility for safeguarding systemic risk 
should vest with the FSDC Board runs counter to the post-crisis trend around the world of 
giving 
for  making 
recommendations. 
The Reserve Bank has always held that financial stability cannot be its exclusive mandate, 
and  that  all  regulators  and  the  Government  have  to  share  the  responsibility  for  financial 
stability,  that  coordination  is  important  and that the  Government  has  a more  active  role  to 
for  coordination  and 
the  collegial  bodies 
responsibility  only 
                                                
1  The FSLRC has preferred to use the term “systemic risk” in preference to financial stability on the argument 
that “systemic risk” renders clarity in communicating the problem and the risk. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
play in a crisis time than in normal times. The Reserve Bank is also of the view that in a bank 
dominated  financial  sector  like  that  of  India,  the  synergy  between  the  central  bank’s 
monetary  policy  and  its  role  as  a  lender  of  last  resort  on  the  one  hand  and  policies  for 
financial stability on the other is much greater. 
In  his  speech  at  an  ICSS  Seminar  on  the  Indian  Financial  Code  last  month,  the  Finance 
Minister  alluded  to  the  difficulties  of  getting  legislation  passed  in  India,  especially  a  path 
breaking legislation of the type of the Indian Financial Code suggested by the FSLRC. He 
suggested  that  in  the  meanwhile,  we  should  pursue  the  implementation  of  FSLRC 
suggestions within the framework of existing laws. 
Within the task defined by the Finance Minister, on the issue of safeguarding systemic risk, 
we need to think through whether the responsibility of FSDC Board should be extended from 
being  a  coordination  body  to  one  having  authority  for  executive  decisions?  What  will  that 
imply  for  the  speed  of  decision  making?  Can  we  clearly  define  the  boundaries  between 
financial stability issues falling within the purview of the FSDC and regulatory issues falling 
exclusively  within 
this  arrangement  not  mean 
compromising the synergy between monetary policy and policies for financial stability? And 
what will it mean for the autonomy of regulators? 
the  domain  of  the  regulators?  Will 
Conclusion 
Let  me  now  sum  up.  I  started  with  the  broad  lessons  we  learnt  about  the  financial  sector  
– markets  and  institutions  –  as  a  result  of  the  crisis.  I  then  talked  about  the  efforts  at  the 
global level to reach agreements on financial sector reforms and argued why it is important 
for  emerging  economies  to  adopt  international  standards.  I  then  addressed  five  specific 
reform areas, in each case talking about the lessons of the crisis, the response at the global 
level  and  our  response  at  the  national  level.  I  have  concluded  with  the  institutional 
arrangements  for  safeguarding  financial  stability,  within  the  context  of  the  FSLRC 
recommendations in this regard. 
As  someone  said,  this  crisis  is  too  important  to  waste.  It  has  taken  a  devastating  toll  on 
global growth and welfare. All of us in the financial sector have a responsibility to distil the 
lessons of the crisis, reflect them in our policies and enforce those policies effectively so that 
we can minimize the probability of another crisis. What this means is that both the regulators 
and  the  regulated  entities  have  to  build  internal  capacities  and  become  knowledge 
institutions. I hope this conference will be an important step forward in that direction. 
I wish your deliberations all success. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
