Agustín Carstens: The quest for successful policy responses to 
sovereign crises 
Speech by Mr Agustín Carstens, Governor of the Bank of Mexico, at the Monetary Authority 
of Singapore Lecture 2013, Singapore, 5 February 2013. 
 Introduction 
Good  morning.  It  is  a  pleasure  and  an  honor  to  be  in  Singapore,  a  country  that  I  deeply 
admire, to deliver the 2013 Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS) Lecture. I certainly would 
like  to  thank  Managing  Director  Ravi  Menon  for  having  invited  me  to  address  such  a 
distinguished audience. 
As soon as I accepted to deliver this prestigious lecture, I started to think about the topics I 
should cover in my talk. Central banking related issues seemed a logical choice. But what 
novelty can you uncover for a country that has the enviable record of an annual average rate 
of growth of 6.2 percent and an annual average inflation rate of only 1.9 percent during the 
last  twenty  years,  that  is  ranked  as  the  second  most  competitive  country  in  the  globe 
according  to  the  World  Economic  Forum,  and  that  basically  follows  best  practices  in  all 
fronts? A traditional speech about central banking and monetary policy would have been akin 
to lecture Michael Phelps about how to win gold medals in Olympic swimming competitions. 
These considerations made me decide to concentrate on the economic and financial crisis 
that  started  in  2007  in  the  advanced  economies  and  then  spread  to  the  rest  of  the  world. 
Given the magnitude and severity of the crisis and its adverse impact on economic activity, it 
has  been  characterized  as  the  worst  financial  crisis  since  the  Great  Depression. 
Unfortunately, the world economy has not been able to fully pull out of it, and we should be 
prepared to further face an environment where weaknesses and vulnerabilities persist for a 
while – and I am talking here years, not just months. This factor is particularly relevant for 
countries like Singapore and Mexico,  whose economies are very open, and therefore their 
performance in many aspects depend critically on the state of the world economy and the 
international financial markets. 
 Let me start by presenting my view on the world economy, focusing on the epicenter of the 
crisis – the advanced economies. The crisis erupted in full in late 2008, at the time of the 
Lehman Brothers collapse. The virulence of the consequences of this event brought a sense 
of common purpose among the most important countries in the world. In foras like the G20 
and  the  Fund´s  IMFC  a  coordinated  policy  response  was  instrumented,  having  as  main 
objectives  to  stabilize  financial  markets  so  as  to  restart  the  intermediation  of  financial 
resources  across  countries  and  regions,  and  to  implement  countercyclical  fiscal  and 
monetary policies to contain the contractionary forces in economic activity and employment. 
At  the  same  time,  the  process  of  the  dearly  needed  redesign  of  the  international  financial 
architecture was initiated. 
The  signs  in  2009  and  2010  were  relatively  encouraging.  The  forceful  measures 
implemented  in  the  United  States  to  backstop  its  financial  markets  and  institutions  were 
successful;  it  seemed  at  the  time  that  the  contagion  to  European  financial  institutions  and 
economies was under control, and some advanced economies (like Singapore, Australia and 
Canada) and a broad number of emerging economies (like China, India and México) were 
experiencing a very strong rebound in economic activity. As a matter of fact, towards the end 
of  2009,  an  incipient  sense  of  achievement  started  to  appear,  as  it  can  be  exemplified  by 
some  of  the  remarks  by  the  former  IMF´s  Managing  Director,  Dominique  Strauss-Kahn, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
made precisely here in Singapore in November 2009 as he delivered his MAS Lecture. Let 
me quote: 
“While I am hopeful that the global economy has turned the corner, the recovery 
remains  fragile.  Policy  makers  should  therefore  keep  supportive  measures  in 
place  until  a  recovery  is  firmly  established  and  conditions  for  unemployment to 
recede are in place. 
……… 
Regardless of the extent of economic recovery, it makes sense for policy makers 
in all countries to start planning their exit strategies now.” 
But during the second half of 2011 two unprecedented events brought us back to a period of 
heightened  uncertainty  in  financial  markets  and  significantly  deteriorated  global  economic 
prospects: first, the downgrade of the US sovereign debt by one credit rating agency in early 
August, and second, the worsening of the sovereign debt crisis in Europe, followed by the 
increasing  risk  of  contagion  across  markets  and  countries.  These  events,  along  with  the 
respective  authorities´  difficulties  to  implement  immediate  credible  policies  to  address  the 
ongoing fiscal and financial problems, led to a noticeable deterioration in confidence among 
economic agents. 
The  perceived  increase  in  the  probability  of  a  tail  risk  event,  such  as  a  sovereign  default 
episode in some Euro zone member countries and, to a lesser extent, in the United States, 
produced  great  disruptions  in 
international  financial  markets  and  economic  activity 
worldwide.  This  situation  induced  firms  in  the  most  affected  advanced  economies  to 
postpone or even cancel investment projects and households to further reduce consumption 
expenditures. 
In turn, weak economic activity further deteriorated fiscal positions and the health of banking 
institutions, leading to an even worse situation, generating an adverse feedback loop. Given 
tight trade and financial linkages across countries, the decoupling in terms of growth between 
advanced  and  emerging  economies  that  was  apparent  after  the  first  quarter  of  2009, 
disappeared. 
Needless  to  say,  the  situation  required  immediate  policy  response  by  authorities.  In  the 
United  States,  given  that  entrenched  political  positions  made  it  impossible  to  make 
meaningful progress in the fiscal front, the Federal Reserve continued to carry the brunt of 
the adjustment, as it expanded its accommodative monetary policy stance, using extensively 
quantitative  easing  combined  with  prospective  interest  rate  guidance.  All  this  with  the 
objective of taking the pressure off the bond market, flattening the yield curve and by these 
means stimulate aggregate demand and employment. 
The  situation  in  Europe,  at  least  from  my  point  of  view,  was,  and  still  is,  by  far  more 
challenging. The main reason was that the drastic deterioration of the fiscal position and the 
health  of  the  banking  system  in  some  peripheral  countries  in  the  Eurozone  elevated  to 
hazardous levels what has been called fragmentation risk, which in plain English means the 
risk of a breakdown of the European currency union as we know it. This led to sudden stops 
in  the  financing  of  some  sovereigns  and  their  banking  system,  which  in  a  way  triggered 
massive capital outflows. All this in turn fed back into higher fragmentation risks, creating a 
very pervasive vicious cycle. 
The materialization of sudden stops in the Eurozone caught many by surprise. This type of 
phenomenon  was  supposed  to  happen  only  in  weak  emerging  markets,  not  in  mature 
economies  protected  by  a  supposedly  strong  anchor  in  the  form  of  a  credible  exchange 
regime, i.e. the European currency union. But the problem precisely was that the perception 
of  a  strong  external  anchor  made  it  feasible  for  some  countries  to  let  their  guard  down, 
manifested  in  policy  complacency  in  the  good  years  when  huge  and  persistent  net  capital 
inflows were the norm. This situation resulted in: a) unprecedented external indebtedness in 
some countries, and b) banking institutions with bloated balance sheets supported by very 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
fragile  funding.  This  combination  of  factors  made  the  sudden  stops  in  some  European 
countries much more  pronounced  than the  ones  experienced  in  previous  decades  in  Latin 
America or during the Asian crisis in the nineties. 
The  financial  sector  and  sovereign  distress  in  Europe  demonstrates  once  more  that  an 
exchange rate regime per se cannot be a substitute for policy discipline. As a matter of fact, 
the problems faced by Europe since mid-2011 are not different from the ones resulting from 
a  speculative  attack  against  an  exchange  rate  regime  sparked  by  the  loss  of  consistency 
between  the  token  regime  and  the  rest  of  the  macroeconomic  framework.  When  such 
inconsistencies  appear,  the  confidence  in  the  sustainability  of  the  regime  is  lost,  and  the 
attack by market participants is immediately unleashed. 
The sudden stops in capital flows in some European countries provoked steep increases in 
sovereign  and  financial  institutions  borrowing  costs  and  CDS  spreads.  Access  to  the 
interbank  funding  market  for  many  banks  was  abruptly  interrupted,  and  the  government 
securities market of the weakest European countries dried up for practical purposes. As the 
perception of the likelihood of a catastrophic event in Europe increased, major reallocation of 
portfolios took place, as resources were diverted to safe assets. Emerging markets were not 
spared:  their  currencies  depreciated,  borrowing  costs  increased,  as  well  as  CDS  spreads. 
More  importantly,  the  contraction  in  economic  activity  in  the  most  advanced  economies 
reduced  emerging  markets´  exports  and  their  rates  of  growth.  Contagion  in  international 
financial markets reigned. 
Urgent policy response by the Eurozone became unavoidable. But I think it is fair to say that 
the European Union was not prepared to respond to a challenge of this magnitude, basically 
because  by  design  the  problems  that  they  confronted  then,  caused  by  the  surge  in 
fragmentation  risk,  were  not  supposed  to  happen  in  the  first  place.  An  obvious  additional 
complication  was  that  any  solution  would  have  to  be  agreed  by  the  seventeen  Eurozone 
member  countries  through  their  political  instances.  After  many  months  of  hesitation  and 
confusion, a successful two-pronged stabilization strategy was finally implemented: 
First,  through  different  facilities,  the  European  Central  Bank  eventually  guaranteed  the 
provision of sufficient liquidity to backstop the interbank and government debt markets; it is 
worth  mentioning  the  unlimited  financing  through  the  Target  2  mechanism,  the  LTRO 
(Long-Term Refinancing Operation), and the OMT (Outright Monetary Transactions). 
Second  and  more  fundamentally,  structural  reforms  in  the  European  Union  were  credibly 
committed to firmly establish the congruency between the exchange rate regime and the rest 
of  the  macroeconomic  and  institutional  framework  of  the  Eurozone.  Here  I  would  like  to 
highlight the following policy decisions: 
• 
• 
The creation of a strong European Financial Stability Mechanism; 
The reinforcement of fiscal policy governance, falling just short of the establishment 
of a fiscal union; 
A  proposed  banking  union,  supported  by  centralized  supervision  and  a 
Eurozone-wide resolution regime; and 
A major drive to enhance competitiveness in the region, to increase potential growth 
and employment creation. 
  No less important has been the gigantic political drive by the European leadership to stick 
together and ratify their joint commitment to a single currency. 
A cornerstone in all this construct has been the OMT facility, since it bridged the short-term 
emergency  liquidity  provision  and  backstopping  measures  with  the  more  long  term, 
fundamental  reforms that  hopefully  will  anchor  the  credibility  of the  single  currency.  Recall 
that through  the OMT facility  the  ECB  is  willing  to  acquire  unlimited  amounts  of  sovereign 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
 debt,  provided  that  the  issuer  has  basically  accepted  the  conditionality  established  by  the 
European Union and it is acting in accordance. This was a master stroke by the ECB. 
After  all  these  difficulties  and  tribulations,  we  started  2013  with  more  optimism  about  the 
future of the world economy. Key factors to improve market sentiment have been: 
• 
• 
• 
In the United States, the avoidance so far of the fiscal cliff; 
The permanence of Greece in the Eurozone; 
That many countries in the periphery have made sustained progress in their fiscal 
and external sector adjustments, regaining market access; 
The gradual but steady progress in the design and implementation in the structural 
reforms in Europe; and 
The faster growth in China. 
• 
Risk  appetite  among  investors  has returned  and  the  search for  yield  is  in full  force. There 
have  been  substantial  capital  inflows  to  Europe,  together  with  an  internal  redistribution  of 
resources in the Eurozone, which has produced a remarkable improvement in the borrowing 
costs  for  peripheral  economies.  Resources  have  also  poured  into  emerging  markets 
generating a compression of spreads and domestic currencies appreciation. The mood swing 
has been so strong, that some fears have been expressed about financial markets being too 
optimistic, causing mispricing in some asset classes. Concern of asset price bubbles fed by 
credit booms are starting to appear in some economies. 
A  word  of  caution  is  in  order  though.  Substantial  vulnerabilities  and  downside  risks  still 
persist. Let me cite the most significant: 
• 
The  United  States  economy  still  could  be  affected  by  the  fiscal  cliff.  Not  only  the 
potential  fiscal  adjustment  is  a  matter  of  concern,  but  also  investment  and 
expenditure decisions are being postponed due to the related uncertainty; 
Stability in the Eurozone is still fragile, given that it continues to be dependent on 
massive support from authorities, in particular from the ECB; 
Even though progress has been made in delineating the substantive policy actions 
that  are  essential  to  reestablish  the  consistency  of  the  Eurozone  exchange  rate 
regime  with  the  rest  of  the  macroeconomic  and  institutional  framework,  relevant 
details are still in the drawing board, and once they are decided, they need to be 
legislated  and  implemented.  So  some  setbacks  are  still  likely.  Delays  and/or 
incomplete adjustments could trigger the erosion of incipient market confidence. 
The  Eurozone  has  been  in  a  recession  for  quite  some  time  with  very  high 
unemployment. The  expectation  is  that  this  will  continue  to  be  the  case  for  2013. 
Reigniting  growth  has  been  a  challenge  given  the  fiscal  constraints  that  many 
European  countries  face,  the  need  for  households  balance  sheet  repair  and  the 
present  limitations  of  credit  institutions  which  have  been  left  with  no  option  but  to 
massively deleverage. 
In emerging markets economies, even though most of them have structurally sound 
economies,  large  capital  inflows  can  generate  financial  stability  vulnerabilities 
through  credit  booms  and  asset  price  bubbles,  and  the  concomitant  domestic 
currency  appreciation  in  real  terms  could  affect  growth,  in  particular  given  that 
independently  some  important  advanced  economies  are  actively  pursuing  a 
depreciating real exchange rate strategy. 
    All in all, a sobering picture I would say. 
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Now let me transit from the conjunctural to the strategic. 
The international financial community has deployed major efforts to extract the main lessons 
from  the  crisis  that  is  still  in  the  process  of  being  resolved.  Work  has  concentrated  on 
prevention; on strengthening the international financial institutions, in particular their ability to 
perform better multilateral surveillance and incorporate into their analysis the spillover effects 
of policy decisions of major economies; in the case of the IMF, its lending capacity has been 
substantially  increased.  Lastly,  attempts  have  continued  to  forge  a  cooperative  solution  to 
global  imbalances,  and  to  reinvigorate  policy  coordination  among  countries,  which  has 
waned down after 2009 – 2010. But, I ask myself, is this all what we can do to enhance our 
capabilities to face crises? 
From my detailed exposition on the state of current affairs, it is clear that the world was not 
properly prepared to address the major crisis that erupted. This was a significant drawback 
that no doubt was very costly. In principle we should have much better guidelines to assist 
authorities  in  steering  the  process  of  resolving  a  crisis.  And  it  is  not  that  we  do  not  have 
enough  experience  to  draw  lessons  from.  According  to  Reinhart  and  Rogoff  (2011),  since 
1970 we have had 140 financial crises, 42 only in Latin America. 
I can accept the notion that each crisis is different and also that the powers and capabilities 
among  governments  vary  a  lot.  Soon  after  it  gets  going,  a  financial  crisis  becomes  a 
politically  loaded  affair,  a  fact  of  life  that  makes  a  systematic  treatment  of  crises  quite 
challenging.  But  this  does  not  take  away  the  possibility  of  trying  to  identify  some  stylized 
facts that are inherent in each crisis, that would help us in distilling some essential elements 
that  should  be  present  in  every  crisis  resolution.  Let  me  take  a  shot  at  this,  proposing  a 
check list of steps or actions that in my view should be part of every crisis resolution strategy. 
The  first  task  in  the  quest  for  successful  resolution  should  be  to  stabilize  expectations  as 
soon as possible. In other words, the immediate goal should be to move from a vicious to a 
virtuous  cycle  in  expectations  formation.  Let  me  illustrate  the  wisdom  of  this  through  an 
example:  at  some  point  buying  medium  term  debt  issued  by  a  sovereign  at  a  spread  of 
450 basis  points  –  after  it  deteriorated  for  a  while  –  could  be  very  unattractive  but,  it  also 
could  be  just  the  opposite  if  the  destabilizing  expectations  disappear  rapidly,  thereby 
inducing significant reductions in interest rates. Lower interest rates stimulates GDP growth, 
which  in  turn  facilitates  the  stabilization  process  by  increasing  tax  collection  and  payment 
capacity of debtors, and consequently reducing the social and political costs inherent to the 
adjustment.  By  improving  the  fundamentals  of  the  economy,  expectations  keep  improving, 
thus strengthening the virtuous circle. 
Second,  in  order  to  adjust  expectations  the  necessary  measures  must  be  adopted  in  a 
credible  way.  The  perception  of  markets  and  society  must  be  that  the  effort  is  not  only 
serious  but  that  it  will  be  enough  to  reverse  the  situation.  In  order  to  achieve  this  it  is 
essential to: 
• 
• 
Rely on an uninhibited, far reaching diagnosis about the sources of the crisis; 
Respond  quickly  and  decisively,  directing  policy  response 
fundamental causes of the crisis; 
Governments should be aware – as I am sure they are most of the time – that given 
the eruption of the crisis they will be facing a credibility deficit. This makes it of the 
essence for governments to be sure that they will not fall short on the adjustment, as 
it  would  seriously  deteriorate  further  its  credibility  and,  consequently,  the  costs 
would  grow  exponentially.  In  some  cases,  this  type  of  considerations  might  make 
advisable some short-term overshooting in the adjustment process. 
to  address 
the 
 Third,  under  a  crisis  authorities  will  be  facing  an  extremely  volatile  scenario.  Typical 
macroeconomic models brake down, so to an extent it is like navigating without instruments 
in  a  storm.  This  makes  it  essential  for  governments  to  be  flexible  and  agile  in  their  policy 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
response,  developing  at  the  same  time  an  effective  communication  strategy  to  address 
markets and society in general. Flexibility should not be confused by the population with a 
perception of lack of commitment with the adjustment process. Once the course is set, strict 
implementation should follow. 
Fourth,  complacency  should  be  avoided.  At  some  point  in  time,  there  will  be  a  positive 
response  to the  implementation  of  policy  measures,  and  this  will  happen  very  likely  in  the 
midst  of  a  very  painful  adjustment  process  in  the  economy.  Given  that  adjustment  fatigue 
kicks in at a relatively early stage in the process, there will be numerous voices that will call 
for a declaration of victory and the abandonment of the reform process ahead of time. The 
danger of falling in this trap is that the country would be sawing the seed for the next crisis, 
entering  into  a recurrent  crisis  cycle  that  is  very  difficult to  leave,  as  many  Latin-American 
countries can attest to. 
Fifth, it is very important to implement various programs to mitigate, to the extent possible, 
the  social  consequences  of  adjustment.  These  programs  should  seek  to  maintain  a  basic 
support  network,  for  instance  in  health  and  education  for  the  unemployed,  focusing 
specifically on the most vulnerable and poorly equipped population to withstand shocks and 
adjustments. 
Sixth, an adjustment program without subsequent economic growth is ephemeral, especially 
if  the  country  is  not  able  to  do  a  correction  in  the  exchange  rate  regime.  Therefore,  the 
adjustment  program  should  be  accompanied  by  structural  reforms  that  generate  quick 
advances in productivity and foster a more rapid recovery of competitiveness. 
Certainly,  these  general  principles  are  applicable  to  every  country  under  a  financial  crisis. 
They stem from experience, which means that they work even though each case has its own 
singularities and the political and social environment is different in each country. I hope that 
this initial effort to try to identify best practices in establishing a crisis resolution strategy is 
taken up by the international financial community, so as to have a more complete toolbox to 
deal with difficult unexpected circumstances. 
Before I move  to  my  concluding  remarks,  let  me  just make  a quick  point  on  our collective 
efforts to prevent crises. As I already mentioned, this is a very important workstream in the 
reform process of the international financial architecture. Sometimes I have the sense that 
we  are  not  inquisitive  enough  in  actively  asking  ourselves  from  where  the  next  crisis  will 
come  from.  I  say  this  because  more  often  than  not  we  are  caught  by  surprise  as  a  crisis 
erupts from an unsuspected source. Financial crises tend to mimic strokes trigged by high 
blood  pressure.  As  you  now,  high  blood  pressure  is  referred  in  the  medical  jargon  as  the 
“silent  killer”.  I  fear  that  we  are  exposed  to  too  many  “silent  killers”  in  modern  financial 
systems, and it is our duty to enhance our capabilities to uncover them in time. In this sense, 
I feel very keenly that we need to improve our early warning systems, broaden the practice of 
stress testing and dwell further in multilateral surveillance and the identification of spillover 
effects of major economies´ policy decisions. 
Today, my fear is that a perfect storm might be forming as the result of: 
• 
Massive  capital  flows  to  some  emerging  market  economies  and  some  strong 
performing advanced economies; 
This could lead to bubbles, characterized by asset mispricing; and 
Then face a reversal in flows as the major advanced economies start exiting their 
accommodative monetary policy stance. 
 This  very  simplified  outlook  poses  a  major  financial  stability  challenge  for  many  capital 
recipient countries. Given this, I find it fully justified for some countries to adopt thoughtful 
macroprudential policies. Singapore is a leader in this front. 
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Let  me  conclude  my  remarks  with  a  positive  note:  there  is  life  after  crisis,  as  Mexico  can 
testify.  We  experienced  recurrent  crises  in  the  seventies,  eighties  and  nineties,  four 
fully-blown crises in thirty years. But we have been crisis-free for the last eighteen years. We 
broke the spell by following very simple, even common sensical principles. 
First, by reassuring markets and society that fiscal discipline will be maintained. Mexico has 
been  more  than  seven  years  under  a  Fiscal  Responsibility  Law,  which  requires  balanced 
budgets under normal circumstances. As a result Mexico has had very low fiscal deficits in 
recent years, keeping the ratio of public debt to GDP at levels just above 30%, a third of the 
ratio observed now in most advanced countries. 
Second, by maintaining an active and prudent management of the public debt. Together with 
fiscal discipline, public debt must be managed in a way to optimize maturities and costs. In 
particular, it is essential to avoid a concentration of maturities, imbalances between domestic 
and  foreign  debt,  and  to  encourage  that  sovereign  debt  instruments  are  held  in  steady 
hands.  In  this  area,  Mexico  has  adopted  the  best  practices  and  is  leader  among  many 
advanced  and  emerging  countries.  Today  the  average  duration  of  Mexico’s  public  internal 
debt is longer than that of the United States, something unimaginable a decade ago. 
Third, by Having full central bank independence in conducting a monetary policy geared to 
achieving an inflation objective. The autonomy of Banco de México is well established, and 
has allowed us to get inflation close to 3 percent, among the lowest in emerging countries. 
Fourth,  by  establishing  a  flexible  exchange  rate  regime,  with  a  well-developed  foreign 
exchange market. For a very open economy as the Mexican, exchange rate flexibility is very 
important  to  absorb  external  shocks.  The  Mexican  peso  is  one  of  the  three  emerging 
countries’ currencies most traded, and Mexico has the most liquid foreign exchange market 
in Latin America. 
Fifth,  by  maintaining  an  adequate  level  of  international  reserves.  Through  mechanisms 
designed to preserve a consistent floating regime, Banco de México has built up reserves to 
cover  twice  the  external  public  debt  and  the  entire  foreign  debt  of  the  country,  without 
considering the flexible credit line we contracted with the IMF. 
Sixth,  by  avoiding  protectionist  measures,  which  at  best  provide  ephemeral  relief  and 
certainly  produce  perverse  incentives  that  do  not  favor  the  country’s  competitiveness.  In 
recent  years  Mexico  not  only  has  not  adopted  protectionist  measures,  but  has  also 
accelerated the opening of the economy. 
Lastly, by ensuring adequate supervision and financial regulation. Mexico learned its lesson 
after  the  1994–1995  crisis  and  over  the  years  the  authorities  have  implemented  a  strict 
system  of  financial  regulation  and  supervision.  Mexico  is  among  the  first  countries  to  fully 
embrace the new international standards embodied in Basel III. 
In  all  these  years  of  building financial  and  macroeconomic  resilience,  often  we  have  been 
inspired by success stories, such as Singapore. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
