H R Khan: Challenges and concerns of the central bank – opportunities 
and role for the commercial banks 
Address by Mr H R Khan, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Bankers’ 
Club, Thiruvananthapuram, 10 June 2013. 
 The speaker acknowledges the contributions of colleagues in Reserve Bank of India. 
Accompanying slides can be found at the end of the speech. Original presentation is on the 
Bank of India website. 
1. 
It  is  a  pleasure  to  be  in  the  midst  of  so  many  bankers  &  colleagues  in  this  serene 
temple city of Thiruvananthapuram in God’s own country of Kerala. Bankers’ Club, as we all 
know, provides an informal platform for exchange of views and information on the banking 
system  and  about  the  economic  environment  in  which  banks  operate.  This  has  assumed 
added  importance  in  these  challenging  times  for  the  economy  and  the  financial  system. 
Today, I intend to cover ten major challenges confronting the Reserve Bank and focus on the 
opportunities available to the commercial banks in relation to some of those challenges and 
role that the bankers can play to meet the challenges. The 10 challenges & concerns I would 
focus today are: (i) propelling revival of domestic growth; (ii) controlling persistent inflation; 
(iii)  mitigating  external  sector  vulnerabilities;  (iv)  deepening  the  financial  markets;  (v) 
maintaining  a  robust  banking  system;  (vi)  ensuring  integrity  of  the  financial  system;  (vii) 
building  efficient  government  banking  business  models;  (viii)  moving  towards  a  less-cash 
society;  (ix)  better  customer  service  orientation  of  banks  and  (x)  enhancing  the  quality  of 
financial inclusion. 
Propelling revival of domestic growth 
I. 
2. 
Several structural and transient factors, both global and local, have stymied the growth 
drivers in India in recent times. Given the persistence of inflation, challenge for Reserve Bank 
of India has been how to address growth risks without losing control over inflation. As you 
are  aware,  the  global  economic  activity  still  remains  moderated  amidst  signs  of  diverging 
growth paths across major economies. In India, recovery was rather sharp and swift in 2009–
10 (8.6 per cent) and sustained in 2010–11 (9.3 per cent). Thereafter, overall GDP growth 
witnessed  sharp  decline  to  6.2  per  cent  in  2011–12  and  further  to  5  per  cent  in  2012–13 
(provisional).  The  potential  growth,  which  was  around  nine  (9)  per  cent  in  the  pre-crisis 
period, has come down to about seven (7) per cent now. Reserve Bank has been arguing 
that growth cannot be revived without increasing the level of investment or gross domestic 
capital  formation.  In  India,  the  level  of  investment  has  been  mostly  financed  by  domestic 
savings.  As  inflation  rate  in  India  remained  above  the  comfort  level  for  a  long  period,  the 
gross domestic savings as a percentage to GDP has fallen from 33.7 per cent in 2009–10 to 
30.8 per cent in 2011–12. As inflation erodes the value of financial savings, there has been a 
compositional shift in household savings, i.e., from financial savings to physical savings. In 
fact, the financial savings of the households as proportion to GDP which was about 12 per 
cent  in  2009–10,  has  come  down  to  around  8  per  cent  in  2011–12.  Per  contra,  physical 
savings of households as percentage of GDP have increased from 13.2 per cent to 14.3 per 
cent during the same period. This trend is not conducive to growth as physical savings are 
not available for further investment. 
3. 
During  2004–05  to  2008–09,  investments  in  India  were  supplemented  by  external 
savings  only  to  a  limited  extent  as  evident  by  the  current  account  deficit  (CAD)  which 
averaged around 1.2 per cent of the GDP. Thereafter, the CAD widened further and has now 
reached a very high level of about five (5) per cent. This has implication for composition of 
external  debt,  debt  servicing  ratio  and  risks  associated  with  flight  to  safety  in  case  of  any 
adverse international developments. In view of the above, India has to finance higher level of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
investment  through  domestic  savings.  This  could  be  possible  only  through  containing 
inflation so that households can get a positive rate of return on their deposits and do not fall 
prey to unscrupulous offers made by unauthorized entities collecting public deposits under 
varied nomenclatures. 
4.  Given the uncertainties, both in the domestic and external fronts, one cannot be sure 
whether growth slowdown has bottomed out. Gradual recovery will be aided by the concerted 
efforts  made  by  the  Government  for  fiscal  consolidation  and  boosting  private  investments. 
There are number of nascent signs of revival of growth which are likely to be supported by 
expected normal monsoon. Even in these trying economic conditions, there is a plethora of 
opportunities for the banks to provide the much needed fillip to the economy. Structural shift 
from services to manufacturing, greater focus on financial deepening leading to a wider base 
of consumers, particularly in the rural and small towns and more efficient credit markets are 
expected to be the factors in improving the country’s credit-GDP ratio, which is one of the 
lowest amongst the BRICS nations (Chart 1). 
 5. 
Unlike  in  China,  much  of  India’s  growth  performance  in  the  recent  years  has  been 
contributed by the services sector with share of manufacturing sector stagnating at around 
15 to 16 per cent of the GDP. A competitive manufacturing is not only necessary for taking 
advantage  of  the  demographic  surge  that  the  country  is  now  experiencing  but  also  for 
sustaining  growth.  With  the  New  Manufacturing  Policy,  India  is  refocusing  on  positioning 
manufacturing sector as drivers of growth. The policy aims at increasing the manufacturing 
sector growth to 12 – 14 per cent over the medium term, thereby enabling manufacturing to 
contribute at least 25 per cent of GDP over the next one decade and create additional 100 
million jobs. 
6. 
Banks  should  actively  consider  lending  to  the  MSME  sector  as  credit  growth  to  this 
sector  has  decelerated.  14th  Standing  Advisory  Committee  on  MSMEs  was  constituted  a 
Committee (Chairman: Shri K. R. Kamath) to look into the entire gamut of credit flow related 
issues  pertaining  to  the  sector.  It  is  heartening  to  note  that  a  recent  survey  of  the 
Confederation of Indian Industry (CII)1 revealed that bankers expect 20 per cent increase in 
credit for the sector in the financial year 2013–14. Banks should also consider stepping up 
credit  delivery  to  the  agriculture  sector,  particularly  for  small  &  marginal  farmers  under 
different aggregation models and investments, credit for value addition in the sector besides 
now  forgotten  project  based  lending  to  the  allied  sectors. With  expected  normal  monsoon 
and good level of harvests, increasing purchasing power and huge labour shortage for farm 
                                                
1  CII Survey on Health of Indian Banking sector in current regulatory environment. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
activities  demand  for  consumer  goods  and  capital  goods  like  farm  equipments  is  likely  to 
register growth. This opens up new opportunities for bank lending. 
7. 
Recently, over half of economists surveyed by CNN Money have identified recovery in 
the  housing  sector  as  the  primary  driver  of  economic  growth  this  year.  In  2011–12,  the 
housing sector contributed 5.9 per cent in the GDP of the country, five per cent of GDP in 
2010–11 and 9.3 per cent of the GDP in the year 2009–10. In a report of 2012, ICRA has 
observed  that  during  the  period  2007–12,  the  level  of  mortgage  penetration  remained 
stagnant  at  around  7  per  cent  of  the  GDP  and  this  is  significantly  lower  than  developed 
countries. Such low level of mortgage penetration, however, offers immense growth potential 
of the sector. The criticality of the sector further increases due to the fact that housing is the 
second  largest  generator  of  employment,  next  only  to  agriculture,  with  both  forward  and 
backward  linkages  in  nearly  300  sub-sectors,  such  as,  manufacturing  (e.g.,  steel,  cement, 
and builders’ hardware), transport, electricity, financial services, etc. Banks could grasp the 
opportunity of being part of the development of the affordable housing sector and, in turn, 
contribute more actively in the overall inclusive growth of the Indian economy. 
8. 
Another important sector which offers tremendous business opportunity for the bankers 
is  the  infrastructure  sector.  It  is  well-proven  that  infrastructure  development  facilitates 
economic  growth  and  economic  growth 
infrastructure. 
Successful implementation of infrastructure projects is dependent, among others, on efficient 
financial intermediation. Banking services are required for the entire life cycle of the project 
and  spread  across  a  wide  spectrum  of  products  including  advisory,  lending,  transaction 
banking, debt and equity raising. The banks could seize the new opportunities like take-out 
finance,  transfer  of  liabilities  to  the  Infrastructure  Debt  Funds  (IDFs),  etc.  to  manage  their 
Asset Liability Management concerns while financing the infrastructure. 
increases  demand  for  more 
Controlling persistent inflation 
II. 
9. 
Inflation-growth  dynamics  in  India  is  more  complex  than  in  most  other  countries. 
Demand and supply side factors like high fiscal deficit aiding demand pressures, rising food 
prices  due  to  structural factors  like  higher  income  levels  of  people,  change  in their  dietary 
habits with focus on proteins, inefficient supply chain management, acceleration of wages, 
particularly  rural  wages  and  high  commodity  prices  have  contributed  to  the  persistence  of 
inflation.  Recent  trends  are,  however,  comforting  and  show  that  inflation,  at  the  wholesale 
level, is moderating. 
10.  Particularly, the dilemma is to decide about the overriding objective of monetary policy 
when growth is much below the potential and inflation persists. The challenge is to strike a 
balance between the two primary objectives of monetary policy. The Reserve Bank could not 
be more aggressive on monetary policy front as the battle against inflation is not yet over. 
The upside risks to inflation persists and is in fact more pronounced at the retail level. In this 
context, it is crucial to ascertain the threshold level of inflation which provides fillip to growth. 
Recent research studies indicate that the threshold level of inflation in India is about five (5) 
per cent beyond which inflation harms growth by putting sands on the wheels of commerce. 
For example, given the level of disposable income, consumption of the same level of goods 
and  services  by  households  requires  more  spending  and,  therefore,  less  amount  of 
disposable  income  is  left  for  savings.  It  is  not  only  the  household  savings  but  also 
government savings which could be augmented by inflation control. According to the recent 
Report  on  Currency  &  Finance  published  by  Reserve  Bank,  the  elasticity  of  government 
expenditure with respect to one percentage change in WPI inflation is as high as 2.7, while 
such  elasticity  with  respect  to  collection  of  revenues  in  0.9.  Higher  inflation  thus  entails 
higher  net  government  expenditure,  leading  to  higher  gross  fiscal  deficit,  other  things 
remaining  constant.  As  the  Union  Government  is  currently  under  the  fiscal  consolidation 
program,  unless  inflation  is  controlled,  it  may  be  difficult  to  check  revenue  expenditures. 
Inflation  control  will  help  achieve  fiscal  consolidation  without  cutting  capital  expenditure.  In 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
fact,  it  is  the  quality  of  fiscal  consolidation  which  matters  much  as  this  helps  to  improve 
investment climate in the country. 
11.  The challenges emanating from production and productivity constraints, particularly in 
the  manufacturing  sector  and  infrastructural  deficits  can  to  a  large  extent  be  met  by 
sustainable  bank  financing.  Another  challenge  emanating  on  the  inflation  front  is  the  food 
inflation. The price increase in cereals and pulses have been significant during the current 
year.  The  increases  have  been  persistent  despite  existence  of  large  buffer  stocks.  The 
upward pressure has been reinforced with significant increase in the minimum support prices 
of  most  cereals  and  pulses.  Apart from  cereals,  volatility  in  prices  of  vegetables  and fruits 
added  to  domestic  price  pressures.  Also,  inflation  in  protein  rich  food  items  continued  to 
remain elevated due to significant price increase in eggs, fish and meat. The persistence of 
food inflation calls for a relook at the agriculture price policy of the country. Further, there is a 
need to revisit the buffer stock policy as recent evidence reflects the absence of dampening 
of price rise even with availability of large buffer stocks. Another factor that is proving to be a 
major constraint in curbing food inflation is the rise in cost of agriculture largely driven by the 
rise in  wage costs. It is a matter of concern that supply elasticity has not been sufficiently 
matching for the rise in demand for protein-rich food like milk, egg and meat. 
12.  Banks can play an important role in inflation fighting strategy of the country. In respect 
of  food  inflation  the  issues  that  could  be  addressed  with  the  support  of  the  banks  would 
include  banks  focussing  on  supply  and  value  chain  financing,  monitoring  productivity  of 
increasing bank credit disbursed to the agriculture sector, and helping in risk-proofing of the 
agriculture  sector  by  adopting  a  credit  plus  approach.  Timely,  adequate  and  sustainable 
credit flows to various segments of the economy will also remove supply bottlenecks. Wide 
variance  in  the  prices  of  vegetables  and  fruits  the  consumer  level  and  mandi  level  is  a 
common  feature  across  the  country.  One  plausible  reason  for  the  huge  variance  is  the 
dependence  of  vendors  on  informal  sources  of  finance  for  buying  vegetables  from  the 
wholesale market in the cities/towns. Such sources of funds, though easily accessible, are 
usually available at exorbitant rates. Banks can explore creating extremely short-term small 
denomination  credit  products  for  such  vendors  to  provide  them  easy  access  to  funds  at 
relatively cheaper rates under a mobile banking model. Such a move will enable lowering the 
prices of food items and help in curbing the inflation to a large extent. 
Mitigating external sector vulnerabilities 
III. 
13.  Till recently, external sector has been a source of strength for our economy; however, 
in the last few years, the vulnerabilities in the external sector (Table 1) have increased mainly 
due  to  unusually  high  CAD  which  increased  from  4.2  per  cent  to  6.7  per  cent  in  the  third 
quarter  of  2012–13  and  likely  to  be  around  five  (5)  per  cent  for  the  year.  The  sustained 
capital flows to finance large CAD cannot be taken for granted as quantitative easing by the 
advanced  economies  may  not  continue  indefinitely.  A  major  source  of  concern  is  that  a 
significant proportion of capital flows has been in the form of FII & other debt creating flows 
which are more volatile than FDI flows. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 14.  The  positive  trend  in  merchandise  export  growth  since  December  2012  has  been 
encouraging. The global  growth  conditions  are, however,  projected to  remain  subdued  (as 
projected by the IMF, output growth of world economy in 2013 will only be marginally higher 
than that in 2012). Unless the conditions, particularly in the advanced economies, improve 
significantly, a durable pick up in India’s export cannot be taken for granted. On import side, 
oil and gold accounting for 45 per cent of total merchandise imports are also subject to global 
financial  conditions.  Although  recent  drop  in  their  prices  and  restrictions  imposed  on  gold 
imports  and  efforts  made  for  passing  on  the  actual  price  of  fuel  to  the  users  could  act  as 
favourable  triggers  for  India’s  CAD,  there  is  still  uncertainty  regarding  persistence  of 
softening  bias  in  international  commodity  prices  and  consumer  behaviour  regarding  gold 
demand.  Similarly,  deceleration  in  private  transfers,  mainly  the  workers’  remittances,  from 
abroad also to a large extent depend on source countries economic conditions. The World 
Bank, in its April 2013 Report on remittances, made a forecast that remittances received by 
South Asian countries including India, may grow at a lower rate of 6.9 per cent in 2013 as 
compared to 12.3 per cent in 2012. Fortunately, capital flows so far have been adequate to 
finance the current account gap and going forward pressures on CAD in terms of quantum, 
quality  and  safe financing  are  expected to  moderate,  particularly  as  various  measures  are 
being taken to improve pace of investment in the country. 
It  has  been  seen  that  India’s  exports  were  more  severely  impacted  in  recent  period 
15. 
than  many  of  the  peer  group  economies  (e.g.,  China,  Korea,  Malaysia  and  Thailand) 
suggesting  the  need  for  building  up  of  productivity  based  competitiveness  and  robust 
infrastructure to support our exports. The onus of boosting the export sector, however, does 
not  necessarily  fall  only  on  the  exporters  and  the  government,  bankers  have  an  equally 
crucial role to play. Exporters, to maintain their cost effectiveness, need adequate, timely and 
cost  effective  lines  of  funding  for  both  working  capital  and  capacity  creating  expenditures. 
Reserve Bank had introduced a US Dollar – Indian Rupee swap facility for US$ 6.5 billion for 
extending  export  credit  in  foreign  currency  to  exporters.  The  export  credit  refinance  was 
earlier expanded to 50 per cent of the outstanding export credit of the banks from 15 per cent 
and  the  interest  rates  on  export  credit  in  foreign  currency  were  also  deregulated.  Still 
exporters  face  a  lot  of  difficulties  many  of  which  relate  to  availability  of  financial  services, 
including  timely  and  adequate  export  finance  and  other  facilities  extended  by  banks  and 
financial  institutions.  Non-implementation  of  exporter  friendly  guidelines  (e.g.  export  credit 
should constitute 12 per cent of the net bank credit of the banks, extension of hassle-free 
credit  availability  under  the  Gold  Card  Scheme,  transparency  regarding  bank  charges  for 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
various services provided by Authorized Dealer banks, exercise of powers delegated to the 
AD banks in regard to availment of export advance, write-off of outstanding of export dues, 
extension  of  period for realization  of  export  proceeds,  set-off of  export  receivables  against 
import payables, etc. under the FEMA regulations) has been a cause of concern. Keeping 
these  issues  in  view,  a  Technical  Committee  (Chairman:  Shri.  G  Padmanabhan)  was 
constituted  by  the  Reserve  Bank.  The  Committee  has  looked  into  the  entire  gamut  of 
facilities/services  provided  by  banks/financial  institutions  {including  the  Exim  Bank,  Export 
Credit  and  Guarantee  Corporation  (ECGC)  &  Small  Industries  Development  Bank  of  India 
(SIDBI)},  such  as,  export  credit,  in  Indian  Rupee  as  well  as  foreign  currency,  hedging 
instruments,  factoring  services,  insurance  coverage,  etc.  and  suggested  several  important 
recommendations for implementation by the banks. 
16.  As on March 31, 2013, there were 285 overseas offices of Indian banks abroad spread 
across  55  countries.  Such  widespread  network  of  branches  can  be  tapped  for  providing 
useful inputs to the Indian exporters for exploring new markets and creating a niche in the 
untapped economies. Attracting investment into the country, especially in the form of foreign 
direct  investments,  is  crucial  for  enhancing  the  technology-led  production  capacity  and 
managerial  expertise.  Another  area  which  the  banks  need  to  explore  is  tapping the Indian 
diaspora.  As  you  are  aware,  India  is  one  of  the  largest  recipients  of  inward  remittances, 
receiving approximately US$ 69 billion in 2012,2 and this would not have been possible but 
for the connect of the Indian migrants with the country and efforts of Indian banks. I would, 
however, expect banks to be more proactive and innovative in developing new products for 
the  non-resident  Indians  and  ease  the  processes  in  timely  transfer  and  credit  of  remitted 
funds. This is more critical from the point of view of banks in Kerala as the state is one of the 
largest recipients of remittances. 
17. 
In the present context of high CAD, I intend to highlight the concerns of rising import of 
gold. The three sources of demand for gold are consumption, investment and speculative. 
Reserve Bank has observed that while the growth in consumption demand, primarily driven 
by  households,  remained  moderate,  the  demand  for  gold  driven  by  investment  and 
speculative  motive  has  grown  rapidly.  The  rising  demand  for  gold  is  a  cause  of  concern 
because of the management of CAD & financial stability and the larger issue of consumer 
protection. Reserve Bank has also been concerned with the aggressive selling of gold and 
extending loans against gold. Banks should refrain from aggressive selling of gold coins as 
such an activity should not be construed as the core business activity. In order to moderate 
the demand for gold for domestic use, Reserve Bank has issued instructions for restricting 
import of gold on consignment basis. These restrictions are, however, not applicable on the 
genuine  needs  of  exporters  of  gold  jewellery.  Further,  all  nominated  banks/agencies  have 
been instructed to open letters of credit for import of gold only on 100 per cent cash margin 
and  release  documents  against  payment  basis  only.  Banks  also  have  to  ensure  that  the 
weight of the specially minted coin(s) do not exceed 50 grams per customer and the amount 
of loan to any customer against gold ornaments, gold jewellery and gold coins (weighing up 
to  50  grams)  should  be  within  the  Board  approved  limit.  Realizing  the  need  to  provide 
financial  instruments  to  investors  for  protecting  against  inflation,  Reserve  Bank  in 
consultation with the Government of India has recently launched Inflation Index Bonds (IIBs) 
to  provide  an  inflation  protecting  savings  instrument.  The  first  tranche  of  IIBs  with  a  face 
value of ₹ 10 billion was recently auctioned and met with huge success. In the near future, 
IIBs would be made available to retail investors also. Banks should tap their wide network 
and huge customer base to educate and encourage retail participation. 
                                                
2  World Bank's Migration and Development Brief 2012. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Deepening financial markets 
IV. 
18.  Deeper and broader financial markets are desirable for public policy objectives as they 
play a critical role in  improving the efficiency of capital allocation  within the economy. The 
traditional  investor  base  in  Indian  G-sec  market  comprises  banks,  provident  funds,  and 
insurance  companies.  With  the  entry  of  co-operative  banks,  regional  rural  banks,  pension 
funds, mutual funds and non-banking finance companies, the institutional investor base has 
been reasonably diversified. Notwithstanding the predominantly institutional character of the 
market,  Reserve  Bank  has  recognised  merit  in  promoting  retail  participation.  Small  and 
medium  sized  investors  have  been  enabled  to  participate  in  the  primary  auction  of  G-sec 
through  a  “Scheme  of  Non-competitive  Bidding”  and  Primary  Dealers  (PDs)  have  been 
mandated  minimum  retailing  targets.  Web-based  NDS-OM  has  also  been  enabled  by  the 
Reserve Bank to provide direct trading access to G-sec to non-NDS members like retail/mid-
segment/corporate entities having gilt accounts with banks & PDs. Some major banks have 
also  initiated  measures  like  on-line  trading  portal  for  facilitating  the  retail  investors.  Banks 
need to focus on attracting more retail investors in the G-sec market by creating awareness 
and also providing enabling easy-to-use platforms besides sensitizing the retail investors that 
loans against G-sec is permitted. 
19.  While India has a very advanced G-sec market, the corporate bond market is relatively 
under developed. Developing a more vibrant corporate bond market has, therefore, become 
an  important  agenda  among  the  concerned  stakeholders.  Some  of  the  challenges  which 
need  attention  include  taking  measures  to  improve  liquidity,  such  as,  consolidation  of 
particularly the privately placed bonds, setting up a suitable framework for market making in 
corporate  bonds,  providing  tools  to  manage  credit,  market  and  liquidity  risks  {e.g.  CDS, 
Interest Rate Futures (IRF), Repo in corporate bonds, etc.}, developing a smooth yield curve 
for the government securities market for efficient pricing of the corporate bonds, calibrated 
opening of the corporate bond market to the foreign investors, developing safe and sound 
market  infrastructure  and  wider  participation  of retail  investors  in  the market through  stock 
exchanges  and  mutual  funds.  Another  challenge  is  the  lack  of  appetite  for  new  and 
innovative products that are available in the financial markets. The market has not displayed 
any  appetite  for  instruments  with  varied  structure.  A  similar  response  pattern  has  been 
observed in respect of products, such as, interest rate futures (IRFs) and repo in corporate 
bonds.  The  dilemma  is  that  while  participants  do  not  want  to  trade  till  liquidity  improves, 
liquidity  will  not  improve  till  the  participants  trade.  The  bottom-line  is  that  the  market 
participants need to be more active in trading across the yield curve and across products. 
Given  very  low  levels  of  participation  of  the  treasuries  of  the  public  sector  banks  it  is 
imperative that they look at the prevailing operating structure so that they participate actively 
in the market with a supportive risk management framework. 
Maintaining robust banking system 
V. 
20.  Compared to the pre-90’s reforms era, Indian banking has undergone a paradigm shift 
and evolved beyond the traditional role of financial intermediation. Over the last decade and 
a half, the health and resilience of the banking system has improved though there has been 
some deterioration in the recent past. Analysing the various components contributing to the 
recent  concerns  of  the  banking  sector,  the  Financial  Stability  Report  of  the  Reserve  Bank 
(December 2012) found that tight liquidity, deteriorating asset quality and reduced soundness 
of the banking sector are the major contributors to the decline in the stability of the banking 
system.  Indian  banks  currently  meet  the  minimum  capital  requirements  of  Basel  III  at  an 
aggregate level, even though some individual banks may have to top up their capital. Going 
forward,  as  growth  accelerates,  need  for  banking  penetration  becomes  more  pronounced 
and the economy goes through a structural transformation, Indian banks will need to raise 
additional capital both to support the growth process and to meet regulatory requirements. 
21.  The  lure  of  cheaper  foreign  currency  denominated  funds  has  led  to  higher  foreign 
currency borrowings by Indian corporates. While the external debt could help the corporate 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
sector  diversify  the  funding  sources,  excessive  reliance  on  the  same  could  pose  balance 
sheet  risks.  The  risk  is  magnified  when  availability  of  funding  liquidity  is  subject  to  sharp 
volatility  in  the  international  markets.  Reserve  Bank  has  observed  that banks generally  do 
not rigorously evaluate the unhedged forex exposure risks and fail to build it into pricing of 
credit. It is important to appreciate that unhedged forex exposure of corporates is a source of 
risk to the corporates as well as to the financing banks and the financial system. Reserve 
Bank  has,  therefore,  decided  to  increase  the  risk  weight  and  provisioning  requirement  on 
banks’ exposures to corporates on account of their unhedged forex exposure positions. 
22.  Recent  trends  in  the  asset  quality  of  the  banking  system  have  been  somewhat 
disquieting.  In  2012–13,  the  gross  NPAs  of  banks  increased  by  31.8  per  cent  while 
restructured standard advances increased by over 40 per cent. The recent trends in asset 
quality  can  be  largely  attributed  to  the  prevailing  macroeconomic  situation,  domestic  and 
global,  besides  some  underlying  issues  in  credit  assessment  and  NPA  management  of 
banks.  In  the  fourth  quarter  of  2012–13,  the  asset  quality  of  banks  has  shown  some 
improvement  across  different  bank  groups  and  various  industry  segments  though  it  is  too 
early to state with certainty that the trend of deteriorating asset quality has reversed. In view 
of  extraordinary  increase  in  restructuring  of  advances,  a Working  Group  (WG)  (Chairman: 
Shri.  B  Mahapatra)  was  constituted  to  review  the  existing  prudential  guidelines  on 
restructuring  of  advances  by  banks/financial  institutions.  In  the  background  of  many 
inadequacies/shortcomings  on  various  aspects  of  restructuring,  the  WG  came  out  with 
several  recommendations,  such  as,  withdrawal  of  regulatory  forbearance  on  asset 
classification  on  restructuring  after  two  years,  provision  on  standard  restructured  accounts 
which get the asset classification benefit on restructuring be increased from the present two 
(2) per cent to five (5) per cent in a phased manner in case of existing accounts (stock) and 
immediately in case of newly restructured accounts (flow), increasing the promoters’ stake in 
the  restructured  accounts  by  way  of  higher  sacrifice  and  personal  guarantee,  etc.  The 
implementation of these measures has already commenced and overtime will contribute to 
increased resilience of the banking system and more transparent accounting of asset quality. 
23.  Banks will need to gear up to the challenge of improving the health and resilience of 
the  banking  system  even  as  domestic  and  global  macro-financial  conditions  remain 
depressed. As Basel III is implemented, banks will need to re-engineer their internal systems 
and align the same to the forthcoming challenges of higher capital and liquidity. Appropriate 
strategies for meeting the capital adequacy requirements will need to be designed and the 
position  of  liquid  assets  bolstered.  Banks  will  need  to  provide  concerted  attention  to  their 
ALM  policies  and  reduce  reliance  on  short  term  and  volatile  liabilities.  Going  forward, 
Reserve Bank expects that the growth in NPAs would be contained at the current levels due 
to a) likely improvement in GDP growth in 2013–14 and beyond; b) improvement in project 
implementation  due  to  Government’s  efforts  in  clearing  the  bottlenecks;  and  c)  improved 
recovery efforts by banks. Nevertheless, asset quality needs to be closely monitored and the 
credit  appraisal  and  monitoring  system  needs 
to  be  substantially  upgraded.  Risk 
management  systems  also  need 
improved  and  early  warning  mechanisms 
strengthened.  Information  sharing  arrangements  between  banks  needs  to  be  made  more 
effective. It is, therefore, imperative that banks, at the levels of branches, controlling offices 
and head offices, are proactive in facing up to these challenges. 
to  be 
Ensuring integrity of the financial system 
VI. 
24.  High level of trust and integrity in the financial system is an important requirement if the 
financial sector has to serve the real sector in a sustainable manner. In the recent past, there 
have  been  reports  about  non-adherence  to  KYC/AML  norms  and  adoption  of  unethical 
practices  by  officials  of  some  banks.  Reserve  Bank,  during  the  course  of  scrutiny,  has 
noticed  certain  irregularities/deviations/aberrations  in  conduct  of  banking  transactions.  The 
scrutiny  revealed  that  customers,  including  walk-in  customers,  were  undertaking  cash 
transactions  to  buy  third  party  products,  such  as,  insurance,  mutual  funds,  etc.  and  also 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
purchasing massive quantities of gold. No doubt some banks had failed to adhere to the laid 
down  guidelines  pertaining  to  KYC/AML,  viz.,  splitting/structuring  of  cash  transactions,  not 
quoting the PAN number or quoting dummy PAN number, non- reporting of transactions to 
FIU-IND for the latter to take appropriate action, if need be, etc. Though such irregularities 
have been noticed across many banks, the volume is not very high. In effect Reserve Bank 
expects the banks to follow certain drill in the form of implementing and monitoring KYC/AML 
instructions. 
25.  There  is  a  need  to  ensure  better  regulatory  compliance  by  banks,  both  in  letter  and 
spirit,  of  the  national  objectives  underlying  the  AML  regulation.  Such  compliance  is  not 
possible in the absence of commitment of the banks. It is important to note that imposition of 
penalty  for  regulatory  violations  cannot  be  the  only  solution.  Further,  there  is  a  need  to 
address  the  incentive  structure  at  the  operating  levels  by  segregating  marketing  function 
from the approval process. Banks should ensure that its employees do not receive cash/non-
cash incentives directly from third parties, such as, insurance companies and mutual funds. 
Reserve  Bank  is  contemplating  tightening  of  wealth  management  guidelines  to  avoid 
mis-selling  of  bank’s  own  and  third  party  products.  Restructuring  compensation  models 
should be part of an on-going process as this will help to improve the reputation of banks and 
banking industry. Further, it will help ensure that incentive structures are aligned to desired 
behaviours  across  the  organization,  helping  to  overcome  potentially  competing  demands. 
Banks also need to assess strength and robustness of their KYC policies and procedures by 
analysing  whether  KYC  due  diligence  requirements  are  understood  unambiguously  across 
the  bank.  Whether  the  existing  infrastructure  supports  a  risk-based  KYC  due  diligence 
process  with  appropriate  record  keeping  and  documentation  retention  is  the  key  question. 
Banks should also check whether their internal systems are strong enough to identify missing 
or  invalid  KYC  profile  certifications  required  to block transactions.  Negative  effects  of  non-
adherence  include  possible  reputational  risk  and  brand  degradation  through  negative 
publicity  besides  supervisory  action.  In  addition,  financial  institutions  face  exposure  to 
litigation  from  customers,  investors  and  professional  counterparties  in  the  event  that 
fraudulent activities are detected. 
26.  Of course, one has to keep in view the need for hassle-free KYC procedure for general 
customers, particularly those doing small ticket transactions. This is critical in the context of 
our  thrust  to  strike  balance  between  integrity  of  the  financial  system  and  expansion  of 
banking  outreach  for  financial  inclusion.  Reserve  Bank  is  planning  to  come  out  with  a 
detailed  FAQs  on  KYC/AML  requirements  so  that  the  frontline  staff  of  banks  and  the 
customers are fully aware of the requirements for easy access to banking. Banks will have to 
proactively sensitize their staff in this regard. 
Building efficient government banking business models 
VII. 
27.  There  is  a  growing  need  for  electronification  of  Central  and  State  Governments 
transaction processing. The migration of government payments to the e-mode would bring in 
higher  efficiencies  in  operations.  Banks  would  be  spared  of  the  work  relating  to  issue, 
handling, clearing and passing of paper based instruments like cheques which come with the 
attendant risks. Electronic payments can be processed in a “Straight Through” manner with 
the banks effecting the payments/receipts directly using their Core Banking Systems (CBS) 
in a largely automated manner which would be safe and secure. Besides, e-transactions are 
superior to paper instruments in terms of traceability, transparency and efficiency, apart from 
being  a  green  initiative.  The  resultant  available  time  of  the  staff  of  banks  can  be  used  for 
other purposes which would ultimately augur well for banks. Central Government has already 
initiated action by implementing Government e-payment Gateway (GePG) for Civil Ministries. 
Some  State  Governments  have  been  very  proactive  in  this  regard  and Reserve  Bank  has 
been actively involved with the Governments like those of Karnataka, Odisha, West Bengal, 
Uttar  Pradesh  and  Uttarakhand  for  implementation  of  e-receipts.  Reserve  Bank  expects 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
agency  banks  to  play  a  more  pro-active  role  in  enhancing  the  coverage  of  government 
transactions under e-mode. 
28.  Collection of revenue is one of the major functions of an agency bank and in a CBS 
enabled environment, delay in remittance of such collections is inexcusable. Strict adherence 
to the timeline prescribed by the Reserve Bank is expected from the branches. Banks should 
also ensure complete error free reporting under OLTAS and, in particular, with regard to fund 
settlement,  branch  coverage,  data  quality,  etc.  to  ensure  that  tax  collected  are  timely  and 
correctly accounted for without any reconciliation hassles. 
29.  A  recent  initiative  by  the  Reserve  Bank  pertains  to  its  CBS,  named  e-Kuber.  This 
system, implemented a year ago, is one of the foremost central bank oriented Core Banking 
Systems in the world and has now well stabilised. The provision of a single current account 
for  each  bank  across  the  country,  decentralised  access  to  this  account  from  anywhere-
anytime using the portal based services in a safe manner and ease of operations are some 
of the features of the e-Kuber which have been well received by banks. The system also has 
a host of offerings for the Government users as well. Some of the facilities offered include the 
provision  of  portal  based  access  which  allows  Government  departments  to  access  on 
anywhere-anytime basis, view their balances – of all types including the Ways and Means 
Advances, drawings, funds positions and the like – all in a consolidated manner through the 
e-Kuber  so  as  to  help  them  in  better  funds  management.  The  capability  of  consolidating 
revenue collections by banks through the e-Kuber offers the potential for better flexibility for 
the Government  in managing  its finances  apart from moving  over towards  higher  levels  of 
electronic banking. 
30.  The  scheme  of  Direct  Benefit  Transfer  (DBT)  envisages  transfer  of  cash  benefits, 
benefits  and  subsidies  by  lessening  the  tiers  involved  in  flow  of  the  transactions,  accurate 
targeting  of  the  beneficiaries  and  curbing  pilferage  and  duplication.  The  rollout  of  DBT 
presents  a  number of challenges, such  as,  digitization  of  beneficiary  database,  opening  of 
bank accounts opened and enrolment for Aadhar followed by seeding of Aadhar number with 
the bank accounts. Reserve Bank has prepared ground for roll-out of DBT in lieu of product 
subsidies  and  has  advised  lead  banks  of  the  select  districts  to  co-ordinate  for  roll  out  of 
Aadhar  enabled  payments.  The  challenges  are  not  insurmountable  but  require  closer  co-
ordination amongst the stakeholders, such as, the government bodies, UIDAI & banks. DBT 
presents a great business prospect as banks will be paid a transaction fee of one per cent of 
the value for every payment made to the beneficiaries of direct cash transfers, a move aimed 
at providing a boost to the scheme. Banks need to put in place a strategic action plan for 
account opening of all the beneficiaries followed by provision of door-step banking. Given the 
expected magnitude of volumes of DBT, banks need to put in place an effective mechanism 
to  monitor  and  review  progress  in  the  implementation  of  DBT.  Effective  engagement  with 
DBT  should  be  seen  by  banks  as  potential  source  of  building  a  big  market  of  small 
customers and thereby create a stable business base. 
31.  Overall,  banks  should  recognize  the  immense  business  potential  of  conducting 
government  business.  Earlier  business models have  to  be  replaced  and  made  suitable for 
the  latest  technology  led  banking  platforms  and  payment  system  infrastructure.  Greater 
efficiency in handling government business will create a distinct brand-value for the bank and 
will enable greater share of business and widening of customer base by catering to various 
departments  of  the  Government.  Unlike  any  other  business,  government  business  is  also 
remunerative as Reserve Bank pays commission to the agency banks. 
Moving towards a less-cash society 
VIII. 
32.  The  dominance  of  cash  in  our  economy,  informal  financial  system,  organization  of 
economic  activity  (viz.,  dominance  of  retail  vis-à-vis  large-scale  business),  proportion  of 
migrant workers, etc. are some of the factors driving the need for cash in our society. The 
preponderance and wide acceptance of cash can perhaps be explained by the confidence it 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
exudes as it has very high acceptability, it is extremely safe for undertaking and completing a 
financial transaction and it is highly liquid. The importance of currency is prevalent even in 
the advanced economies. In the US, currency-GDP ratio remained stable around 6 per cent 
in the first decade of the 21st century whereas in Eurozone, it went up gradually to over nine 
(9) per cent in 2010. Further, the currency-GDP ratio in the UK remained in a narrow range 
of 2.3–3.1 per cent during 2001–10 whereas Japan registered a rise from 14.7 per cent to 
18.1 per cent over the same period. India, however, has witnessed an increase in currency 
demand in relation to GDP with the average currency-GDP ratio hovering around 10 per cent 
in the 1970s, 1980s and 1990s, before increasing to over 13 per cent in the last decade. 
33. 
Increased usage of currency poses several challenges to the Reserve Bank, such as, 
ensuring  availability  of  adequate  quantity  of  banknotes  and  coins  in  the  system,  ensuring 
good  quality  banknotes,  ascertaining  their  genuineness  besides  incurring  the  high  cost  of 
printing which has increased by approximately 31 per cent from during the period 2008–09 to 
2011–12.  Even  for  individuals,  there  are  associated  risks,  such  as,  fear  of  theft,  idle  cash 
itself does not generate income, time and cost for making payments can be exorbitantly high 
and last but not the least, the danger of forged currency notes in circulation. For banks, the 
cost  of  handling  cash  is  higher  as  compared  to  electronic  modes  as  it  requires  more 
manpower, more transaction time, more expensive to maintain security and segregating re-
issuable  notes  to  maintain  good  quality  notes  in  circulation  requires  additional  resources. 
Keeping these issues in perspective, Reserve Bank in its Payment Systems in India Vision 
2012–15  document  has  envisaged  a  less-cash  society.  Successful  accomplishment  of  the 
objective  is  possible  by  concerted  efforts  of  all  the  stakeholders  and  creation  of  a modern 
well-networked payment system. 
34.   A multi-pronged approach is required to reduce cash usage in the society and requires 
active  support  from  the  banking  system.  Reserve  Bank  has  been  promoting  usage  of 
electronic  payments  like  mobile  payments,  payments  through  internet  banking,  usage  of 
Prepaid Payment Instruments (PPIs), debit/credit card. In order to improve accessibility, the 
payment  infrastructure  is  being  constantly  reviewed.  One  of  the  recent  initiatives  in  this 
regard has been the decision to permit non-bank entities to launch the White Label ATMs 
(WLAs), thereby increasing the ATM penetration across the country. Banks, however, need 
to  further  improve  the  acceptance  infrastructure  like  mobile  POS  and  also  ensure  the 
products are simple to use and has all the critical safety and security features. As you are 
aware, Reserve Bank has created NEFT/RTGS system that is acting as de-facto remittance 
system in the country. Reserve Bank is on the verge of putting in place the Next Gen RTGS 
which will be more secure, safe and efficient than the existing one. To enable remittance for 
walk-in  customers,  Reserve  Bank  has  put  in  place  a  very  user-friendly  Domestic  Money 
Transfer scheme. Unfortunately, despite the business potential, these facilities are either not 
being extended by the banks or the target masses are not aware of the facility. Further, it is 
critical that banks tap technologies to cater to the growing needs of the customers and also 
to  the  growing  number  of  customers.  The  notion  that  customers  are  unable  to  adopt  to 
technology stands defeated with wide success and usage of mobile phones. Mobile banking 
offers a platform for offering a wide range of banking services to the customers anywhere 
and  anytime.  Similarly,  banks  should  also  endeavour  to  promote  card  based  payments 
products, such as, the PPIs, debit cards, credit cards and the recent innovative product like 
mobile KCC/card-based KCC. Needless to stress, technology enabled banking products and 
processes are fraught with risks and the banks have to identify and put in place adequate 
risk mitigants  to  ensure the  safety  and  security  of  the  products. One  such  initiative  by  the 
Reserve  Bank  was  mandating  additional  factor  of  authentication  for  all  card  not  present 
(CNP)  transactions.  Banks  have  been  advised  that  all  new  debit  and  credit  cards  to  be 
issued  only  for  domestic  usage  unless  international  use  is  specifically  sought  by  the 
customer. Such cards enabling international usage will have to be essentially EMV Chip and 
PIN  enabled.  All  the  active  Magstripe  international  cards  issued  by  banks  should  have 
threshold limit for international usage. Banks have also been advised to frame rules based 
on the transaction pattern of the usage of cards by the customers in coordination with the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
authorized  card  payment  networks  for  arresting  fraud.  To  ensure  greater  security  in 
electronic  payments,  banks  have  been  advised  to  provide  options  to  their  customers  for 
fixing a cap on the value/mode of transactions/beneficiaries and also limiting the number of 
beneficiaries  that  may  be  added  in  a  day  per  account  could  be  considered.  Banks  should 
also put in place mechanism for velocity check on the number of transactions effected per 
day/  per  beneficiary  and  any  suspicious  operations  should  be  subjected to  alert  within  the 
bank and to the customer. Given the low level of awareness amongst the frontline staff of the 
banks  and  customers,  Reserve  Bank  has  initiated  a  payment  system  literacy  campaign  – 
e-BAAT  (electronic  Banking  And  Awareness  Training).  Reserve  Bank  is  actively  engaging 
the banks and payment system participants in raising the awareness of the various products 
and processes that our payment systems offer. I would expect that banks in Kerala play an 
active role in popularizing the e-payments. 
35.   Recently  a  Technical  Committee  (Chairman:  Shri.  G.  Padmanabhan)  submitted  a 
report on implementation of GIRO based payment system in India. Bill payment, as you are 
aware, is a major component of the retail payment transactions and GIRO is expected to be 
a game-changer. It is estimated that over 30 billion bills are generated each year in the top 
20  cities  in  the  country.  The  cash  and  cheque  collections  constitute  over  90  per  cent  and 
electronic payments through ECS, etc. continue to be low. GIRO is expected to address the 
needs of a consumer to pay the utility bills, school/university fee etc. The perceived benefits 
include interoperability in the bill payment processes thereby enabling consumers to make 
payments at any third bank/ branch/ATM/BC, a customer can do payment anytime anywhere 
at  her  will  for  any  bill,  customers  can  use  cash,  cheque  or  card  or  any  other  approved 
electronic mode for payment. With establishment of widespread network across the length 
and breadth of the country, GIRO will be a business model which perhaps no bank would like 
to miss. 
36.   Let  me  also  briefly  provide  you  some  insight  on  a  recent  discussion  paper  on 
“Disincentivising  Issuance  and  Usage  of  Cheques”.  Reserve  Bank  has  observed  that  the 
e-payment mode has picked up at a rapid pace and April 2013 recorded higher e-payments 
as  compared  to  cheque  payments.  The  number  of  cheque  payments  are,  however,  still 
significantly high. It is important to realize that the safety and security features available in 
the  electronic  payment  modes  are  not  replicable  on  cheques,  thereby  making  cheque 
payments riskier apart from the associated higher handling costs. Reserve Bank has rolled 
out  the  CTS  2010  features  envisages  higher  security  features  for  the  cheques  and  easier 
detection  of  modifications/alterations.  I  would  like  to  urge  the  banks  to  realize  the  vast 
potential of electronic payments and strive to hand-hold customers for migration away from 
cheques, thereby reap the full potential of electronic banking. 
Better customer service orientation of banks 
IX. 
37.   Given the increasing complexities of the economy and banking, banks need to be wary 
of retaining existing customers while working towards expanding the customer base. The key 
to  an  efficient  and  courteous  customer  service  emanates  from  having  the  right  orientation 
keeping  different  customer  segments  in  mind.  For  example,  one  special  category  of 
customer  –  pensioners –  requires  special  attention  and  assistance. It  is  important  that the 
frontline staff of banks show due respect and courtesy to these senior citizens and be more 
humane  while  dealing  with  pensioners.  Keeping  in  view  the  large  number  of  pensioners, 
Reserve Bank has instructed the banks to disburse pension during the last four working days 
of the month. The instruction aims at avoiding crowding at the counters and facilitating better 
service.  Reserve  Bank  has  also  instructed  banks  to  establish  toll-free  help-lines  for 
pensioners, appoint nodal officers for grievance redressal and acceptance of life certificate at 
any CBS enabled branch. In order to check delay in credit of pension and related payments, 
Reserve  Bank  has  set-up  a  mechanism  for  imposition  of  penalty  at  fixed  rate  of  eight  per 
cent  on  the  erring  banks.  In  an  effort  to  improve  the  overall  customer  service  in  banks, 
Reserve  Bank  had  set-up  a  Committee  (Chairman:  Mr.  Damodaran).  Some  of  the  major 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
recommendations  which  have  been  accepted  by  the  Reserve  Bank  and  guidelines  issued 
include facility of basic savings account, uniform account opening forms, issuance of ATM 
cards at the option of the customers, two-factor authentication for Internet Banking and debit 
card  transactions  at  POS,  SMS  alert  for  all  cheques  returned,  etc.  An  analysis  of  the 
complaints received  by  the  Banking Ombudsmen  reflects  on the  areas of  deficient  service 
(Table 2). Banks have to pay closer attention to eliminate these deficiencies in a sustainable 
manner. 
 
38.   A  recent  survey  by  the  Ernst  &  Young3  revealed  that  for  the  banks  to  remain 
competitive  they  must  give  customers  the  opportunity  to  choose  by  making  service  offers 
more  transparent,  rebalance  fee  structures  to  achieve  transparency  and  sustainability 
required  by  the  regulators  and  the  investors.  The  survey  revealed  that  50  per  cent  of  the 
global sample (37 per cent of the Indian sample) changed banks due to high fees or charges. 
The  next  major  reason  for  change  of  bank  is  poor  bank  experience  which  was  cited  by 
31 per cent  of  the  global  sample  (32  per  cent  of  Indian  sample).  Lack  of  personalized 
contacts,  poor  internet/mobile  experience,  poor  rates  on  accounts,  etc.  were  some  of  the 
other major reasons cited. Banks also need to devise innovative plain vanilla products and 
easy to understand processes for the unbanked populace and also offer a slew of services 
encompassing  conventional  banking  and  more  sophisticated  financial  services  for  the 
advanced  customers.  Banks  have  to  cater  to  technology  savvy  customers  and  also 
customers  who  still  prefer  personal  attention  and  human  interface.  Providing  customer 
service  and  banking  facilities  to  such  a  broad  spectrum  of  customers  poses  several 
challenges to the banks. Banks need to develop business strategies that would amalgamate 
strength  and  immediacy  of  erstwhile  style  of  banking  with  the  capabilities  of  nex-gen 
multi-media  collaborative  technology.  Recent  experiences  by  banks  have  reflected  that 
service expectations are higher than before, product demands are more varied and customer 
loyalty is no longer assured. 
39.   By rough estimates, more than half of India’s population is under the age of 25, with 
65 per cent of the population under 35. According to a study of the IMF, the working-age ratio 
in the country is set to rise from about 64 per cent currently to 69 per cent in 2040, reflecting 
the addition of over 300 million working-age adults. In other words, banks need to gear up to 
                                                
3  http://www.ey.com/GL/en/Industries/Financial-Services/Banking—-Capital-Markets/Global-consumer-banking-
survey-2012—Adapt-business-models 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
provide banking facility to more than 10 million customers every year for the next two and a 
half decade. This translates into re-orientation of customer service beyond applications that 
provide solutions to problems and needs of today. 
Enhancing the quality of financial inclusion 
X. 
40.  
In  the  recent  past,  financial  inclusion  has  emerged  as  the  buzzword  in  the  Indian 
financial  system.  In  the  zeal  to  drive  the  policy  initiative  in  a  mission  mode,  banks  have 
collaborated with Business Correspondents (BCs) to extend the formal banking services to 
regions and people who remained unbanked even after six decades of independence of the 
country. In pursuit of financial inclusion, quantity has, however, become the more important 
factor than the quality. Banks went into an overdrive mode to open more and more accounts 
without  really  looking  into  the  quality  of  associated  services  and  perhaps  and  more  often 
without focusing on the need of raising the awareness levels of the financially excluded. The 
significantly  large  number  of  inoperative  No-Frill  Accounts  proves  this  point.  Last  year, 
Reserve Bank and the Government of Kerala declared the district of Ernakulam as the first 
district to be 100 per cent meaningfully included. Meaningful inclusion envisages deeper and 
sustainable  financial  inclusion  much  beyond  the  basic  objective  of  opening  accounts. 
Meaningful financial inclusion hinges on four critical parameters (a) all adults in each family 
have an operative bank account through which regular credits and withdrawals take place; 
(b)  providing  small  overdraft/credit  facilities  to  the  people  who  need  it;  (c)  providing 
remittance services through the banks and (d) providing micro insurance through the banks. 
41.   Sustaining  momentum  of  financial  inclusion  is  dependent  on  the  broader  efforts  for 
economic inclusion. Providing financial services alone would not suffice till the individual is 
provided  guidance  and  hand-holding  to  pursue  a  sustainable  economic  activity.  Economic 
inclusion  efforts  require  not  only  banking  the  unbanked,  but  also  retaining  and  better 
engaging  current  bank  customers  to  prevent  them  from  becoming  unbanked  or  under-
banked. The success of financial inclusion in the Ernakulam district needs to be replicated 
across all the areas of the State and country. As at end of March 2013, the state of Kerala 
has  more  than  5000  branches  of  banks  of  which  400  plus  are  rural  branches  and  nearly 
400 BCs and other service providers operating in different areas of the State. With this deep 
penetration  and  high  level  of  literacy  in  the  State,  I  am  sure  that  banks  are  aware  of  the 
immense business potential of including more and more financial excluded population, i.e., it 
is  more  of  a  business  proposition  and  less  of  social  obligation.  A  recent  Reserve  Bank 
Research Project Study titled “How the Poor Manage their Finances: A Study of the Portfolio 
Choices  of  Poor  Households  in  Ernakulam  District,  Kerala”  has  observed  that  meaningful 
financial inclusion of the poor by the commercial banks would critically depend on their ability 
to meet the credit gaps of the poor households. Reserve Bank expects the level of banking 
sector  engagement  at  the  grass-root  level  is  increased  and  higher  levels  of  economic  & 
financial  activities  through  the  banking  system  are  facilitated  even  if  it  involves  low-ticket 
business. This may provide more meaning to the spirit of financial inclusion than the statistics 
of  financial  inclusion.  Looking  beyond  the  business  proposition  and  social  obligations,  it  is 
important to appreciate that meaningful financial inclusion provides greater and sustainable 
financial  stability.  Recent global  experience  has  revealed  that  undue  reliance  on  borrowed 
funds  can  be  a  source  of  instability.  In  this  context,  small  value  deposits  from  the  large 
source of customers at the “bottom of the pyramid” can offer more stability and resilience to 
the  deposit  base  of  the  bank.  In  other  words,  financial  inclusion  is  much  beyond  social 
obligation and business proposition rather it is more about providing stability to the bottom 
line of the banks. Hence, banks, both at the corporate and the field levels, have to focus on 
both qualitative and quantitative aspects of financial inclusion. 
Concluding thoughts 
42.  
India faces several macro-economic challenges influenced by both global and domestic 
developments. In this background, I have briefly outlined ten major challenges & concerns 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
the  emerging  models  and 
confronting  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India.  I  have  touched  upon  challenges  pertaining  to 
domestic growth slowdown, persistence of inflation, external sector vulnerability, deepening 
of the financial markets,  robustness  of the Indian  banking  system,  integrity  of the financial 
system,  efficiency  in  government  banking  business  models,  moving  towards  a  less-cash 
society, re-orienting the customer service focus of banks and, finally, qualitative dimensions 
of  financial  inclusion.  Given  the  magnitude  of  challenges,  Reserve  Bank  attaches  a  lot  of 
significance to the role of banks. There is also tremendous scope for the banks to convert 
these challenges into opportunities for their sustainable business growth. Banks will have an 
important  role  in  providing  impetus  to  the  domestic  growth  drivers  and  ease  supply 
constraints, particularly with focus on production and productivity enhancement and supply 
chain management in agriculture so as to promote growth & moderate inflation. By providing 
boost  to  exports  through  hassle-free  financial  and  non-financial  services  to  the  exporters, 
ensuring reduction of gold imports and facilitating FDI flows, they can help in mitigating the 
external sector vulnerability. By expanding the investor base in debt market and increasing 
their participation in the new products launched in the financial markets, banks can deepen 
the  financial  market  for  improving  the  capital  allocation  in  the  economy.  In  the  context  of 
increasing need for financial stability and the tighter capital requirement regime, banks have 
to  improve  their  soundness  through  efficient  management  of  asset  quality,  better  risk 
management practices & augmentation of their liquidity and capital buffers. Banks also need 
to tap each and every opportunity for improving their bottom-line by expanding their business 
including  Government  banking  business  under 
thereby 
augmenting  their  profitability  and  customer  base.  It  is  heartening  to  note  the  findings  of  a 
recent  survey  conducted  by  Gallup  revealed  that  nearly  70  per  cent  of  the  respondents 
reposed  faith  in  the  Indian  banking  system.  Nonetheless,  recent  revelations  on  non-
adherence  to  KYC/AML  norms  and  unethical  practices  of  bankers  in  mis-selling  financial 
products  have  potential  of  denting  the  system’s  respectability  and  integrity  which  banks 
ought to guard zealously. Conscious efforts therefore have to be made to ensure regulatory 
compliance  of  the  KYC/PMLA  guidelines,  both  in  letter  and  spirit.  Further,  banks  should 
strive  to  raise  the  level  of  customer  service  and  enhance  the  awareness  for  electronic 
payment system products for providing easy & efficient access to financial services with the 
aim to move towards a less-cash economy. Qualitative dimensions of financial inclusion also 
should  receive  serious  attention  of  the  banks  so  that  efforts  made  in  this  regard  result  in 
enduring  relationship  with  the  bottom  of  the  pyramid  customers  and  sustainable  business 
proposition for the banks. 
43. 
the  Bankers’  Club, 
Thiruvananthapuram for providing me this platform to enumerate some of the challenges and 
concerns  of  the  Reserve  Bank  and  role  and  opportunities  for  the  commercial  banks  in 
relation to these challenges. I hope that the issues highlighted by me would be recognized in 
the right earnest. 
44.   Thank you for patient listening. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to  convey  my  gratitude 
the  end, 
I  would 
like 
 In 
to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
 16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 17 
18 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 19 
20 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 21 
22 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 23 
24 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 25 
26 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 27 
28 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 29 
30 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 31 
 32 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
