Ravi Menon: Inauguration of Swiss National Bank’s Singapore branch 
Congratulatory remarks by Mr Ravi Menon, Managing Director of the Monetary Authority of 
Singapore,  at  the  inauguration  of  Swiss  National  Bank’s  Singapore  branch,  Singapore, 
11 July 2013. 
 Mr Thomas Jordan, Chairman of the Governing Board, Swiss National Bank 
Ambassador Thomas Kupfer 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Good afternoon. 
I am delighted to be here to celebrate the opening of Swiss National Bank’s first overseas 
branch office, right here in Singapore. 
The opening of SNB’s Singapore branch is significant. It reflects the growing importance of 
Asian markets in the portfolios of many long-term investors such as the SNB. Currently, there 
are  over  500  players  in  the  asset  management  industry  operating  in  Singapore  with  total 
assets under management of around USD 1.1 trillion. 
If Asia is the heart of the global economy, then it is in Singapore that you feel the heartbeat. 
From Singapore, you will get a good feel of not just the well-established markets in Northeast 
Asia,  but  also  the  rapidly  emerging  ones  in  South  and  Southeast  Asia.  This  new  branch 
office will help SNB form closer and stronger ties with partners in this fast-growing part of the 
world. In particular, SNB will have the opportunity to exchange views with the vibrant asset 
management  community 
in  Singapore,  including  many  Asia-focused  managers  and 
investment professionals. 
We  are  doubly  pleased  that  SNB  has  chosen  to  come  to  Singapore,  because  our  two 
countries  are  like  kindred  spirits.  The  popular  media  sometimes  calls  Singapore  the 
“Switzerland  of  Asia”.  We  have  always  taken  the  comparison  as  a  great  compliment. 
Switzerland is known the world over for its stability, prudence, efficiency, and diligence – all 
attributes  that  we  in  Singapore  also  aspire  to.  Both  Switzerland  and  Singapore  are  small 
trading nations with a shared interest in promoting free trade and maintaining an open, rules-
based global economy. 
Switzerland is an important economic partner to Singapore. Many Swiss multinationals have 
a  strong  presence  in  Singapore  and  they  are  a  source  of  high  value-added  investments. 
Similarly,  Singapore  companies  are  actively  making  direct  investments  in  Switzerland. 
Today,  Switzerland  is  our  5th  largest  trading  partner  in  Europe  while  Singapore  is 
Switzerland’s 4th largest trading partner in Asia. 
As central banks, SNB and MAS share some common challenges. Since the financial crisis, 
the openness, financial soundness, and strong fundamentals of our two countries have made 
us  highly  attractive  to  global  capital,  with  implications  for  monetary  and  exchange  rate 
policies, on which we exchange views. Our two institutions also have to manage a growing 
pool of official foreign reserves in a global market that is increasingly uncertain. 
The opening of SNB’s Singapore branch is an important milestone in the strong friendship 
and  good  relations  between  Singapore  and  Switzerland,  and  between  MAS  and  SNB. 
Through this branch, our two institutions will come even closer together and I look forward to 
new areas of cooperation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
We value highly our relationship with SNB. Working with SNB over the last ten months to set 
up this branch has been a real delight for MAS. You are clear in your objectives, methodical 
in your approach, and always gracious and understanding in your dealings. Thomas, you will 
always have the full support of my colleagues and I at the MAS, as SNB grows its presence 
here. 
Once  again,  please  accept  my  congratulations  on  the  opening  of  your  branch.  Have  an 
enjoyable evening ahead! 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
