Peter Praet: Economic recovery in the euro area – the role of monetary 
policy 
Speech by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at 
the Belgian Financial Forum, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, 13 December 2013. 
 I would like to thank Federic Holm-Hadulla for his contribution to the preparation of this speech. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure to speak to you at today’s event. 
I would like to use this opportunity to share my assessment of where we stand in terms of 
economic and monetary developments in the euro area.  
I will start with the economic situation we currently face and give you my take on the future 
outlook, also on the basis of latest Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections, which – as 
you know – play an important role in informing our economic analysis on a quarterly basis. 
We  are  moving  on  a  trajectory  of  modest  growth,  gradually  recovering  from  the  economic 
downturn of the past years. Still headwinds persist and I elaborate in a minute on the most 
important headwinds that we currently seeing.  
I  will  also  discuss  the  signals  coming  from  our  monetary  analysis,  which  assesses  money 
and  credit  developments  to  identify  risks  to  price  stability  over  a  medium-  and  long-term 
horizon.  Here,  particularly  the  credit  side  presents  itself  as  still  sluggish,  thus  pointing  to 
subdued price developments in the medium term future.  
Finally, I will draw together the complementary bits and pieces of our analysis to explain our 
current  monetary  policy  orientation,  which  is  characterised  by  two  features:  first,  that  we 
expect our key interest rates to remain at present or lower levels for an extended period of 
time; and, second, that we stand ready to adopt additional accommodative monetary policy 
measures, if and when necessary to safeguard price stability. 
Our latest economic analysis 
Let me start by briefly summarising how we see the euro area economy evolving, including 
an assessment of the latest Eurosystem staff projections. 
The recovery continues to proceed at a modest and uneven pace across the euro area. In 
fact, real GDP is projected to pick up from the fourth quarter of this year onwards, and the 
recovery is expected to accelerate slightly by the end of next year.  
In the euro area as a whole, real GDP is projected to still contract this year by 0.4%, but then 
to increase by 1.1% in 2014 and 1.5% in 2015.  
According to our staff’s projections, the sustained increase in activity would be mainly driven 
by a gradual recovery in domestic and external demand, with the pickup in domestic demand 
being supported by several factors:  
First, reduced uncertainty is expected to gradually feed through to the real economy.  
Second, our accommodative monetary policy stance will continue to support the recovery, by 
providing for: low monetary policy interest rates; extensive funding reassurance to euro area 
banks, inter alia, by offering liquidity via the fixed rate full allotment mode at least until mid-
2015; and a lasting positive impact of forward guidance on money market conditions.  
Third,  the  euro  area  economy  will  encounter  less  fiscal  drag  as  countries  have  made 
important progress in improving their budgetary positions.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Fourth, real disposable incomes are expected to benefit from a drop in commodity prices.  
And, finally, starting from 2014, the recovery is also expected to benefit from fading credit 
supply constraints.  
Still, the key question to ask is why are we not moving faster out of the crisis?  
The recovery continues to face headwinds, especially in stressed countries and a number of 
factors may hinder a faster recovery. 
First, notwithstanding some progress in rebalancing, in many euro area countries we will still 
see  further  adjustment  of  private  and  public  sector  balance  sheets.  Don’t  forget  in  this 
context  that  past  recoveries  have  been  driven  by  a  pick-up  in  housing  and  construction 
activity  that  then  continued  to  feed  its  way  through  to  overall  economy.  Now,  with  a  lot  of 
household  wealth  lost  in  this  crisis  and  with  the  balance  sheets  of  the  private  and  public 
sectors still retrenching, this traditional source for recovery seems to be hampered and less 
desirable, calling for more structural and balanced growth models.  
Second, and closely related, investment has been declining over the past year and will most 
likely  only  gradually  pick-up,  starting  from  levels  far  below  pre-crisis  averages.  Of  course, 
anaemic  demand  conditions,  corporate  balance  sheet  restructuring  and  high  lending  rates 
particularly for SMEs are in several countries weighing on investment.  
And third, labour market conditions do not provide much comfort. Unemployment is expected 
to  remain  high  and  persistent.  Considering  also  the  somewhat  less  favourable  outlook  in 
labour intensive sectors and the growing structural component in the current unemployment 
figures we may see sluggish labour market conditions for some time in the future, despite 
decreasing labour cost conditions.  
Overall,  a  significant  amount  of  slack  in  the  economy  will  persist  until  the  end  of  the 
projection  horizon.  Moreover,  the  balance  of  risks  around  the  projected  real  GDP  growth 
outlook  is  to  the  downside  in  2014  and  2015.  This  reflects  mainly  three  risk  factors, 
comprising: potentially higher oil prices, lower euro area foreign demand and additional fiscal 
consolidation efforts, in particular in 2015.  
So what does all this imply for price developments? 
In  keeping  with  the  weak  economic  dynamics,  we  continue  to  expect  subdued  inflation 
extending into the medium-term. 
According  to  our  staff  projections,  euro  area  HICP  inflation  is  projected  to  edge  slightly 
upwards from 0.9% in the fourth quarter of 2013 to 1.2–1.3% over the rest of the projection 
horizon. In yearly averages, HICP inflation is projected to reach 1.4% in 2013, 1.1% in 2014 
and 1.3% in 2015.  
When  interpreting  the  subdued  inflation  profile,  it  is  also  important  to  consider  its  main 
drivers.  For  example,  if  we  are  merely  observing  a  one-off  decline  in  more  volatile 
components of HICP inflation, this is less of a policy concern than if low inflation reflects the 
interplay  of  more  durable  economic  factors,  thus  showing  up  also  in  less  volatile 
components. 
However, decomposing euro area inflation over the last two years into more or less volatile 
components does not yield a clear-cut picture in this regard. 
On the one hand, we see that energy and food prices (both of which tend to be relatively 
volatile) play a major role – accounting for about 80% of the 2.1 percentage point decline in 
HICP inflation over that period.  
On the other hand, we also observe a decline in the contributions from non-energy industrial 
goods  and  most  notably  services  prices  –  both  of  which  are  more  closely  related  to 
fundamental factors.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Also, low inflation can be an outcome of policy measures. A case in point is Germany, where 
inflation has remained relatively low, despite a robust recovery from the crisis. 
But wage developments have been moderate in Germany, with compensation per employee 
growing  by  just  1.8%  year  on  year  in  reflection  of  structural  reforms  that  have  been 
undertaken  in  the  past.  And,  Germany  compared  with  other  euro  area  countries  has 
recorded a relatively low contribution from higher indirect taxes and administrative prices to 
inflation.  
At the euro area level, our staff sees the risks to the projected HICP inflation outlook slightly 
on the upside towards the end of the projection horizon. This is because upside risks from 
higher oil prices, a depreciation of the euro and higher indirect taxes are only partly offset by 
downside risks stemming from lower foreign and domestic demand. 
Overall, the staff projections are in line with our assessment of subdued underlying price and 
cost pressures that suggest a period of prolonged low inflation.  
Indeed, pipeline price pressure pressures appear low with producer prices having declined 
for a while, recently declining even further to –1.4% in October from –0.9% in September. 
Also labour cost pressures are very much contained, particularly in the presence of moderate 
wage growth, high unemployment and ample spare capacity. 
External price pressures eased during the first three quarters of 2013, i.a. owing to sluggish 
global demand and declines in oil and non-oil commodity prices. The import deflator is thus 
estimated to have declined in year-on-year terms over this period. While it will continue to fall 
in  the  following  quarters  as  a  result  of  these  factors,  the  import  deflator  is  expected  to 
increase  slightly  from  mid-2014  onwards,  as  the  downward  impact  of  the  previous 
appreciation  of  the  euro  fades  away,  as  non-energy  commodity  prices  increase  and  as 
import demand gains momentum, allowing for stronger mark-ups. 
On that basis, also our recent assessment from the December Governing Council meeting is 
fully consistent with what we have been saying now for some time: inflation is low and we do 
not expect this to change for some time.  
Signals from the monetary pillar 
Let me now turn to the signals we have received from the monetary pillar. 
In a nutshell, these signals confirm the subdued medium-term inflation outlook deriving from 
the economic analysis. 
While monetary dynamics have been weak, essentially since the onset of the crisis, growth in 
broad money moderated further in recent months.  
The annual growth rate of the broad monetary aggregate M3 decreased to 1.4% in October 
2013  (or  1.7  %  adjusting  for  one-off  effects),  which  is  the  latest  available  data  point,  from 
2.0%  in  September  2013.  This  marks  a  continuation  in  the  deceleration  from  previous 
months. After M3 still grew at 2.8% in the second quarter of 2013, the third quarter recorded 
a significant drop in this growth rate to 2.2%.  
A  key  driver  of  these  recent  developments  in  M3  is  that,  in  the  current  environment, 
monetary  assets  only  yield  little  remuneration.  As  a  consequence,  money  holders  are 
incentivised to engage in two types of substitution:  
Either  they  hold  very  liquid  instruments,  such  as  overnight  deposits.  This  shows  up  in  still 
robust growth in the narrow monetary aggregate M1, which stood at 6.6% in October 2013, 
slightly down from 6.7% in September.  
Or they diversify away from short-term deposits and marketable instruments towards better 
remunerated – but riskier and less liquid – instruments. To the extent these instruments are 
outside M3, this dampens the growth in the broader monetary aggregate. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
On a positive note, we are observing some strong net inflows of capital from outside the euro 
area that support monetary dynamics. Since these inflows are directed at both, stressed and 
non-stressed euro area countries, they help mitigate financial fragmentation. 
At the same time, it remains important to reinvigorate sources of money creation also from 
inside the euro area as the recovery takes hold. 
In  this  context,  we  have  to  acknowledge  that  the  provision  of  credit  to  the  real  economy 
continued to contract, even if the pace of that contraction has levelled off recently.  
The annual growth rate of loans to households stood at 0.3% in October, broadly unchanged 
since the turn of the year.1 
At the same time, the annual rate of change of loans to non-financial corporations was –2.9% 
in  October,  compared  with  –2.8%  in  September.  But  on  the  other  for  larger  firms  other 
sources of financing have been more available. 
These  weak  loan  dynamics  for  non-financial  corporations  continue  to  reflect  primarily  their 
lagged  relationship  with  the  business  cycle,  the  overall  heightened  credit  risk  and  the 
ongoing  deleveraging  and  overall  adjustment  of  financial  and  non-financial  sector  balance 
sheets, also related to past excesses.  
The ECB’s comprehensive balance sheet assessment, including Asset Quality Review and 
Stress Test, should lead to greater clarity on the state of the banking sector. Combined with 
appropriate resolution strategies and backstops, this will strengthen banks’ balance sheets 
and ultimately improve the prospects for bank lending in the future.  
Implications for monetary policy 
How should monetary policy act in these conditions? 
Assessed against our price stability objective, the subdued inflation outlook, on the back of 
weak economic and monetary dynamics, clearly warrants an accommodative stance. 
It  is  against  this  background  that  we  lowered  rates  in  November.  And  it  is  against  this 
background that we expect our key interest rates to remain at present or lower levels for an 
extended period of time.  
Taking  stock  of  the  effects  that  our  recent  policy  measures  have  had  on  economic  and 
financial conditions, we see positive signs emerging. 
The  November  rate  cut  has  been  followed  by  a  pronounced  and  persistent  easing  in 
monetary conditions in the euro area – as manifest for instance in a downward shift in term 
money market interest rates and other important market interest rates.  
Moreover, our forward guidance continued to effectively support our policy intentions: first, it 
has mitigated the sensitivity of the money market term structure to surprises from economic 
data releases; and second it has reduced market uncertainty about the path of future short 
term rates. 
But  notwithstanding  this  favourable  track  record  of  our  recent  policy  measures,  we  should 
remain alert to any contingencies that may give rise to downside risks to price stability. 
In particular, we are closely monitoring money market conditions and their potential impact 
on our monetary policy stance. By extending the horizon of the fixed rate full allotment mode 
at least until mid-2015 we have provided additional funding reassurance that will support the 
transmission of monetary policy signals through the banking system. 
                                                 
1  The  number  for  loans  to  households  and  non-financial  corporations  are  adjusted  for  loan  sales  and 
securitisation. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
this 
time 
for  additional 
inflation  outlook  below 
focal  point,  our  reaction 
At  the  same  time,  we  stand  ready  to  adopt  additional  measures  if  we  were  to  observe 
developments in money market conditions that threaten to interfere with our policy intentions. 
Moreover, the subdued inflation outlook provides little safety margin against further adverse 
shocks that may give rise to downside risks to price stability. 
That safety margin is reflected in our focal point of inflation rates just below 2% in the context 
of our price stability. It ensures that steady state inflation provides for a sufficient buffer away 
from zero.  
With  an 
accommodative policy action shortens accordingly. 
In this regard, the debate among observers has focused on the question, which measures 
the ECB were to take under these circumstances. 
As  explained  –  and  demonstrated  –  in  the  past,  the  ECB  is  in  a  position  to  adopt  a  wide 
range  of  instruments  to  ensure  price  stability,  in  line  with  the  extensive  instrument 
independence it has been granted under the Treaties. 
This allows us to tailor our policy response to the specific contingencies that the euro area 
may face at a given point in time. 
We  will  continuously  evaluate  our  policy  options  and  we  will  act  if  the  circumstances  so 
warrant and adopt measures that are most effective in confronting the challenges at hand. 
But we need to be also wary of the limitations of further measures. Let’s not forget that our 
monetary  policy  stance  is  already  accommodative  and  financing  conditions  are  favourable 
overall.  
Indeed,  we  see  sluggish  demand  for  credit  despite  low  lending  rates.  We  see  muted 
investment,  despite  firms  building  up  cash  reserves.  This  cannot  be  solved  by  further 
accommodation, but is a clear cut case for the right structural policies.  
In fact, with structural economic policies directed towards more competitiveness, sustainable 
fiscal  budgets  and  financial  sector  policies  and  governance  that  set  the  stage  for  sound 
banks’ balance sheet and more stable financial market conditions, economic confidence and 
confidence in the euro area as an economic and financial centre will return and unleash the 
willingness for more credit provision, more investment and domestic demand.  
Conclusion 
With this, let me conclude. 
The euro area economy continues to recover, albeit at a slow and uneven pace. Reflecting 
the weak economic and monetary dynamics, underlying price pressures in the euro area are 
expected to remain subdued over the medium term.  
The  ECB’s  monetary  policy  has  successfully  contributed  to  this  outlook.  Our  stance  is 
accommodative in full consistency with our prime task to maintain price stability in the euro 
area. This is vindicated by the consistent anchoring of inflation expectations for the euro area 
over the medium to long term in line with our aim of maintaining inflation rates below, but 
close to, 2%. Yet, there is no doubt that the outlook on inflation remains subdued and we 
expect only a very gradual upward movement towards inflation rates below, but close to, 2% 
later on. 
That’s  why  our  monetary  policy  will  continue  to  provide  an  appropriate  degree  of 
accommodation.  And  just  be  reminded  that  our  forward  guidance  to  keep  interest  rates  at 
present or lower levels for an extended period of time remains in place. Let me also assure 
you that the ECB has and always will respond to downside risks to price stability if they were 
to emerge going forward. Here our policy rate margin still leaves some room for manoeuvre 
and our operational framework provides the necessary tools to react swiftly if warranted.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
But  let’s  be  clear:  by  ensuring  price  stability,  the  ECB  is  making  its  contribution  to  the 
economic  recovery.  Yet,  a  durable  return  to  robust  and  sustainable  growth  requires  that 
governments persevere in their fiscal and structural reform agenda. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
