Ignazio Visco: Italian banks and single European supervision 
Speech by Mr Ignazio Visco, Governor of the Bank of Italy, at the presentation of the Rosselli 
Foundation’s 18th Report on the Italian Financial System, Rome, 7 October 2013. 
 to  macroeconomic 
Six years of financial crisis, first global and then of sovereign debts in the euro area, and two 
recessions have dealt a severe blow to the euro area and Italian economies. In 2012, GDP in 
the euro area was still 1.3 per cent less than in 2007. In Italy, where the recession has been 
more protracted and deeper than in the bulk of the other member countries, it was almost 
7 per cent lower. In the first half of 2013 Italy’s output continued to decline, albeit at a slower 
pace, thanks above all to the stimulus provided by exports. The latest indicators point to a 
gradual recovery, but much uncertainty remains. Any residual doubts must be dispelled as 
regards our ability to continue down the arduous path of reform begun in the last two years, 
to return to stable growth, and to guarantee balanced public accounts. 
The  widening  of  yield  spreads  between  government  bonds  in  the  euro  area,  the  most 
obvious  sign  of  the  sovereign  debt  crisis,  reflects  two  factors:  one  national  and  one 
European.  These  are,  respectively,  the  weaknesses  of  countries’  economies  and  public 
finances  (sustainability  risk)  and  the  incompleteness  of the  European  construction  and  the 
attendant fears of a break-up of the monetary union (redenomination risk). 
The tensions have been tackled on these two fronts. On the one hand, countries in difficulty 
have  pledged  to  adopt  prudent  budgetary  policies  and  structural  reforms  to  support 
competitiveness. On the other, a far-reaching reform of EU economic governance has been 
undertaken  which,  while  taking  shape  in  emergency  conditions  along  lines  that  were  not 
always clear and consistent, has nevertheless made significant progress. The strengthening 
of  the  budgetary  rules,  above  all  as  regards  prevention,  and  the  extension  of  multilateral 
supervision 
the  establishment  of 
mechanisms  for  managing  sovereign  debt  crises  and  paved  the  way  for  launching  the 
banking union, resuming discussions on the budgetary union and, in the future, planning a 
political one. 
The  exceptional  measures  adopted  by  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  prevented  this 
strategy, whose implementation will necessarily  take a long time, from being compromised 
by the malfunctions and distortions which in the meantime have continued to affect financial 
and  credit  markets,  hindering  the  correct  transmission  of  monetary  policy.  The  three-year 
refinancing  operations  approved  at  the  end  of  2011  were  especially  decisive,  as  was  the 
announcement  in  the  summer  of  2012  of  new  methods  of  intervention  on  the  secondary 
market for government securities, Outright Monetary Transactions (OMTs). 
Thanks to the measures taken both at national and European level, financial conditions in the 
euro area today are much less strained than they were at the end of 2011, when the yield 
spread  between  ten-year  BTPs  and the  equivalent German  Bunds  had reached  550  basis 
points,  or  even  with  respect  to  the  summer  of  2012,  when  that  same  differential,  after 
previously narrowing, had regained similarly high levels. However, a full return to normality is 
still  a  long  way  off.  Although  the  segmentation  of financial  markets  along  national  borders 
has  eased,  it  remains  marked.  To  restore  lasting  financial  stability  and  more  favourable 
funding  conditions  in  the  countries  most  exposed  to  the  tensions,  it  is  vital  to  break  the 
vicious  circle  between  the  conditions  of  sovereign  issuers  and  those  of  banks.  Resolute 
progress must be made on the completion of the European Union as set out in the reports 
presented last year by the European Commission and the President of the European Council 
(jointly with the Presidents of the European Commission, the Eurogroup and the ECB). 
imbalances  have  accompanied 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The Banking Union 
Banking  Union  is  a  crucial  milestone.  It  has  three  components:  a  single  supervisory 
mechanism,  a  single  crisis  resolution  mechanism  and,  with  a  view  to  budgetary  union,  a 
single  deposit  insurance  scheme.  Priority  has  been  given  to  the  construction  of  the  first 
component,  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism,  comprising  the  ECB  and  the  national 
supervisory authorities. Its launch is scheduled for autumn 2014, one year after the entry into 
force of the regulation already approved by the European Parliament on 12 September and 
now before the EU Council. 
This is a far-reaching institutional innovation which will require an organizational adaptation 
at least as complex as the one needed to introduce the single currency; work is continuing 
apace.  The  ECB  will  supervise  the  largest  banks,  assisted  by  the  national  supervisory 
authorities,  which  in  turn  will  remain  responsible  for  supervising  the  other  banks  in 
accordance  with  guidelines  set  by  the  ECB.  Building  on  the  technical  experience  of  the 
national  authorities,  the  single  supervisory  mechanism  will  be  charged  with  upholding  a 
supranational vision drawing on the best practices in supervision, analysis and assessment 
of banking risks, enabling easier comparison between the intermediaries and systems of the 
various countries, and facilitating the control and attenuation of systemic risks. The transition 
to a single supervisor will accordingly provide stability to the euro area, helping to improve 
the monetary policy transmission mechanism and curtail the trend towards financial market 
segmentation. 
The  preparations  for  the  launch  of  the  single  resolution  mechanism  and  single  deposit 
insurance  must  now  be  stepped  up.  Both  are  indispensable  for  aligning  the  supervisory 
responsibilities with those for the management and resolution of crises, and for breaking the 
perverse feedback loop between banks and sovereigns. In July the European Commission 
proposed a regulation to introduce a single banking resolution authority, drawing on common 
financial resources. A directive on the constitution of a European network of national deposit 
guarantee schemes has also been under discussion for some time. 
The ECB will soon undertake a comprehensive assessment of banks’ conditions prior to the 
launch of the single supervisory mechanism. This will be followed by an assessment of the 
risk profile of all the intermediaries which will be subject to centralized supervision. There will 
be balance-sheet assessments of all the banks, including an asset quality review and stress 
test.  Other  relevant  aspects  of  banks’  business  will  also  be  examined,  including  leverage, 
governance  and,  more  generally,  organization.  This  is  an  especially  delicate  stage  in  the 
management of the crisis in the euro area and in the process of building a more complete 
Union. 
The exercise is designed to ensure that banks are managed in a sound and prudent manner 
and  to  dispel  any  market  concerns  over  their  financial  soundness.  It  must  be  rigorously 
designed  in  order  to  boost  the  credibility  of  the  single  supervisory  mechanism  and  foster 
mutual trust among the participating countries. To this end it must ensure equal treatment of 
all  the  banks,  which  are  currently  subject  to  supervisory  systems  based  on  very  different 
national accounting and supervisory practices; examples include differences in the definition 
and  measurement  of  impaired  loans,  risk-weighted  assets,  off-balance-sheet  items  and 
“level 3”  assets  (very  illiquid  assets  whose  fair  value  is  estimated  through  internal  bank 
models).  In  all  of  these  areas  at  least  de  facto  harmonization  towards  the  best  and  most 
rigorous practices must be attained before the assessment can begin; the credibility of the 
entire  exercise  depends  on  it.  The  European  Banking  Authority  is  working  on  the 
harmonization of the definition of impaired loans and has recently published a consultation 
document. It is a step in the right direction. 
The  methodologies  employed  must  be  fully  transparent.  The  findings  should  be  published 
together with all the information that the market needs for a comprehensive assessment. The 
contribution of external experts, provided that care is taken to avoid conflicts of interest, will 
improve the credibility of the exercise. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The assessment must embrace all types of risk, bearing in mind the existing prudential rules. 
The markets should be given reassurance that a proper evaluation will also be made of those 
risks which, by virtue of the underlying instruments and the method of computing the related 
capital requirements, are noted for their extreme opacity. In the case of sovereign risk, there 
is no denying that its perception by the markets continues to be influenced today by fears  
– unfounded, in our opinion – concerning the euro’s resilience. It would be a mistake to base 
any assessment of the riskiness of sovereign exposures on this perception, thereby implicitly 
sharing it. Banking union is part of a broader strategy aimed at reassuring the markets about 
the irreversibility of the euro, and the assessment exercise is key to achieving this objective; 
we cannot risk fuelling the very fears we wish to dispel. At the same time there must be full 
transparency regarding the composition of banks’ assets. 
Any capital shortfalls will have to be met by first drawing on banks’ own funds, not distributing 
dividends,  disposing  of  non-strategic  assets,  and  cutting  back  on  all  cost  items,  including 
executive pay. When necessary, additional funds should be raised on the market. National 
plans  should,  in  any  event,  be  drawn  up  to  cope  with  the  eventuality  of  residual 
recapitalization  requirements,  given  the  decision  that  the  European  Stability  Mechanism 
(ESM)  will  only  be  able  to  intervene  directly  when  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism 
becomes fully operational. In the meantime, the ESM’s resources can be used indirectly, in 
the  form  of  loans  to  member  states;  these  would  nonetheless  weigh  on  their  public  debt, 
threatening to rekindle the vicious circle between sovereign risk and bank credit conditions. 
The Italian banking system 
Factors such as the weakness of the economy, uncertainty regarding the depth and strength 
of the recovery, and the still fragile state of the financial markets are forcing Italian banks to 
continue  down  the  road  of  monitoring  liquidity  and  credit  risks,  strengthening  capital  and 
reigning in costs. 
The  increased  availability  of  assets  eligible  as  collateral  in  Eurosystem  refinancing 
operations has improved the banks’ liquidity position, allowing them to cope with the large 
volume  of  bonds  due  to  mature  in  the  coming  months.  However,  these  assets  include 
government-backed own use securities maturing over the next few years. For the future, the 
availability of collateral must be ensured by extending the range of eligible credits, including 
to  new  categories;  special  care  must  be  taken  to  ensure  that  the methods  of granting  the 
loans  comply  with  the  requirements  for  Eurosystem  refinancing.  The  amount  of  collateral 
must also be sufficient to withstand a possible depreciation of the eligible assets caused by a 
sovereign downgrade. In any event, recourse to central bank financing cannot be the only 
answer; efforts to regain access to the markets must continue. 
The banks’ exposure to Italian government securities has increased considerably since the 
beginning of last year. Contributory factors have been the sharp drop in the returns on (risk-
adjusted) investment and the relatively high yields on government securities, set against the 
need  to  temporarily  invest  the  liquid  assets  obtained  from  the  two  three-year  Eurosystem 
refinancing operations. The recovery of the economy and a return to normal conditions on 
the  credit  market  will  allow  banks  to  adopt  asset  allocation  policies  that  enable  them  to 
provide greater lending support to households and businesses. Renewed confidence on the 
part of domestic and foreign investors, along with balanced public accounts and pro-growth 
reforms,  will  pave  the  way,  without  tensions  developing  on  the  market  for  government 
securities. 
Lending  continues  to  perform  poorly  as  a  result  of  the  unfavourable  economic  situation, 
which is dampening demand and conditioning supply because of the adverse selection risks 
stemming from the deterioration in borrowers’ creditworthiness. In the second quarter of this 
year, the ratio of the flow of new bad debts to outstanding loans, on an annual basis, reached 
2.9 per cent; the increase affected only businesses. In June this year, impaired loans (which 
include  not  only  bad  debts,  but  also  non-performing,  restructured  and  past-due  loans) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
amounted to €300 billion gross. Net of the value adjustments already made, this figure drops 
to around €190 billion, of which just over €70 billion are in bad debts, now amply covered at 
system-wide level by collateral and personal guarantees. 
Gross  impaired  loans  represent  14.7  per  cent  of  total  lending,  falling  to  9.6  per  cent  after 
value adjustments. In the first half of the year, losses on loans absorbed three quarters of 
operating income. 
The banking system’s difficulties are unlikely to be overcome soon. There is still pressure to 
reduce  the  size  of  banks’  balance  sheets.  However,  these  developments  may  provide  the 
right incentives to Italian firms to overcome their heavy reliance on bank credit. The business 
sector  needs  to  find  other  means  of  financing  investment.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  in  the 
banks’ interest to keep a balance between loans and deposits, and to share with the markets 
the risks of lending to customers. Helping businesses access the capital markets is not an 
easy  task  for  the  banks,  requiring  the  ability  to  assess  firms’  economic  and  financial 
prospects; care must be taken to avoid potential conflicts of interest. 
Our  supervision,  conducted  both  off-site  and  on-site,  reflects  our  concern for the  trends  in 
lending  and  credit  quality.  Its  purpose  is  to  make  sure,  in  particular,  that  impaired  loan 
coverage ratios are adequate, and are increased whenever necessary. Far from damaging 
the  banks,  it  helps  to  strengthen  them,  reassuring  the  markets  as  to  the  quality  of  their 
assets. 
The findings of the inspections carried out between the end of 2012 and the early months of 
this year are set out in a report published on our website. We are verifying that the corrective 
measures,  including  organizational  ones,  which  the  banks  were  asked  to  take  have  been 
promptly put in place. Meanwhile, work to verify the adequacy of coverage ratios continues, 
in some cases also taking in the whole credit portfolio. 
The  opinion,  voiced  repeatedly  during  the  crisis,  that  Italy’s  banking  system  stands  in  dire 
need of recapitalization is unfounded. Only a few days ago the International Monetary Fund 
published  the  results  of  its  periodic  Financial  Sector  Assessment  Program  for  Italy.  It 
acknowledges that the Italian banking system has managed, overall, to weather the double-
dip  recession  and  the  sovereign  debt  tensions,  extending  its  solid  deposit  base  and 
strengthening  its  capital.  Unlike  other  countries,  it  has  succeeded,  notwithstanding  the 
difficult conditions, in raising additional funds almost entirely on the capital market, without 
burdening public finances and heightening sovereign risk. 
The banking system’s resilience was aided by a model of supervision, regarded by the IMF 
as a pillar of financial stability, which adheres closely to established international standards 
and is based on intense and strict oversight. The IMF also recommended that steps be taken 
to improve the effectiveness of supervision in some specific areas: transactions with related 
parties,  the  requirement  for  shareholders  and  corporate  officers  to  act  honourably  and 
professionally,  and  the  power  to  impose  corrective  measures  such  as  the  removal  of 
company directors and executives. 
The  crisis  management  and  resolution  system  has  been  effective,  making  it  possible  to 
address  the  effects  of  the  crisis  without  affecting  the  stability  of  the  system.  The  IMF’s 
recommendations, aimed at further strengthening the system, are in line with the proposed 
European Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive, to be approved in the coming months. 
We will make sure that the IMF’s recommendations are put into practice. 
To evaluate the banking system’s capacity to withstand adverse macroeconomic scenarios, 
the  IMF  conducted  the  usual  series  of  stress  tests.  These  were  based  on  the  situation  of 
banks’ balance sheets at end-2012, which had already incorporated the results of our own 
supervisory  action  on  the  adequacy  of  impaired  loan  coverage.  The  IMF  evaluated  the 
impact of macroeconomic scenarios over three or five-year time horizons. 
The results, in line with those of similar tests conducted by the Bank of Italy, show, first of all, 
that the system can cope  with a  weak macroeconomic situation over the coming years as 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
hypothesized in the baseline scenario and, at the same time, will be able to accommodate 
the gradual entry into force of the Basel III capital requirements. 
Thanks  in  part  to  the  capital  strengthening  achieved  over  the  last  few  years,  the  overall 
system should now be able to weather a more adverse scenario, one in which GDP growth in 
the  three  years  2013–15  is  cumulatively  more  than  4  percentage  points  lower  than  in  the 
baseline  scenario.  In  this  case,  the  amount  of  additional  capital  which  some  banks  would 
need  to  raise  in  order  to  meet  the  minimum  regulatory  requirement  would  not  be  large. 
Depending on the definition of capital used, the IMF estimates that total capital requirements 
would be between €6 billion and €14 billion and, in any event, less than 1 per cent of GDP. 
It is worth recalling that these are hypothetical capital requirements, which would result from 
a  very  unlikely  scenario,  although  not  an  extreme  one.  In  addition,  they  are  based  on  the 
hypothesis that over the time horizon covered by the tests, the banks do not independently 
strengthen their capital position, which some of them will need to do anyway with a view to 
their balance-sheet assessment. 
The difficulties mainly concern medium-sized and small banks, which are particularly affected 
by  macroeconomic  developments,  including  those  at  a  local  level,  or  whose  governance 
structures  make  it  hard  for  them  to  implement  capital-strengthening  measures.  These  are 
mostly cooperative banks or banks in which a foundation holds at least 20 per cent of the 
capital. Last June the core tier 1 ratio of these two categories of banks was 9.5 and 9.2 per 
cent  respectively,  against  11.4  per  cent  for  the  other  intermediaries  set  up  in  the  form  of 
limited liability companies. 
On several occasions I have underlined the importance of corporate governance profiles in 
ensuring  an  informed  assumption  of  risks,  correctly  allocating  credit  to  the  economy, 
managing  conflicts  of  interest,  and  facilitating  capital  strengthening.  In  the  light  of  the 
forthcoming Banking Union as well, the necessary interventions can no longer be put off. The 
review  of  cooperative  banks’  governance  should  encourage  new  shareholders  to  inject 
capital  and  to  increase  the  control  over  management  through  less  subdivision  of 
shareholdings. For large cooperative banks with many and wide-reaching business activities, 
the  most  suitable  legal  structure  is  that  of  a  limited  liability  company.  Banking foundations 
must  diversify  their  portfolios  to  limit  their  reliance  on  the  performance  of  investee  banks. 
Above all, they must not interfere in the banks’ governance or management decisions. The 
composition of their management bodies, often too numerous, must be streamlined to make 
individual directors responsible, ensure that the collegial bodies function well and eliminate 
unnecessary costs. 
The strengthening of Italy’s banking system must include a return to profitability. Compared 
with the pre-crisis period, when it stood at around 60 per cent, the cost-income ratio has not 
decreased. Last June it averaged 62 per cent for the top five banking groups. This can be 
attributed to a fall in earnings, in turn affected by the lack of diversified sources of income. 
In the present situation it is hard to imagine a significant increase in bank income, in view of 
the performance of lending, reduced margin rates and low demand for asset management 
products. In the short term the recovery of profitability will require incisive action on the cost 
front, including labour costs. This will entail a thorough review of the combination of factors of 
production  and  of  the  structure  of  distribution  channels.  Remote  channels  will  handle  the 
distribution of highly standardized products and products with low added value; the size of 
the  traditional  distribution  network  will  be  reduced,  freeing  up  resources  to  develop  the 
remaining branches, which should concentrate on the more complex products. 
Italian banks, besides issuing loans, often own shares in companies. In some cases these 
links  have  distorted  lending  decisions,  giving  rise  to  collusion  or  attempts  to  delay  the 
emergence  of  difficulties.  On  previous  occasions  I  have  stressed  that  these  risks,  like  all 
those  deriving  from  relationships  with  entities  closely  connected  to  the  banks,  must  be 
properly monitored by the management bodies. The Bank of Italy will continue its supervision 
and will require any shortcomings to be rectified. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Concluding remarks 
Economic activity in the euro area is on the path to recovery, but the pace is slow and differs 
from country to country. In Italy, as in other euro-area economies, conditions remain difficult, 
despite some signs of stabilization. The timing and strength of the recovery will depend not 
only  on  continuous  and  effective  reform  but  also  on  the  availability  of  sufficient  financial 
support for businesses. 
Decisive progress towards the completion of the European Union could halt the downward 
spiral  caused  by  the  strains  on  sovereign  borrowers  and  on  financial  intermediaries, 
encouraging  a  return  to  more  favourable  credit  conditions.  The  Banking  Union  is  the  first 
important step towards a budgetary, and ultimately a political, union through a process that 
should not be taken as purely sequential: on the one hand, the pooling of national resources 
is necessary to complete the Banking Union but, on the other, strong signals of political union 
would  counter  the  perception  of  reversibility  risk  for  the  single  currency.  It  is  a  delicate 
passage, to be undertaken with rigour and responsibility, avoiding errors which could rekindle 
tensions  on  the  financial  markets.  The  Italian  banking  system  is  moving  along  this  path, 
beset by structural problems and weakened by the long recession. But the system can count, 
partly  thanks  to  the  work  of  the  Bank  of  Italy,  on  strengthened  capital  and  prudent 
evaluations of the quality of its assets. 
There is no immediate, simple solution that will allow the banks to fully resume their role of 
supporting economic activity. They must continue to work towards restoring profitability and 
strengthening  capital,  as  well  as  adapting  their  corporate  strategies  to  the  changed 
technological and market conditions. Today, the banks are also being called upon to rapidly 
change pace. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
