Patrick Honohan: Vulnerability of small countries with big banking 
sectors – macroprudential lessons from recent experience 
Address by Mr Patrick Honohan, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, to a conference, 
organised by the Central Bank of Iceland, Reykjavík, 28 November 2013. 
 Related charts are available here. 
It  is  not  only  in  Iceland  and  Ireland  that  the  failure  of  big  banking  sectors  has  had  a 
devastating  effect  on  entire  economies,  though  they  do  provide  the  most  spectacular 
examples.  What  macroprudential  lessons  can  be  learnt  from  recent  experience  about 
vulnerability of small countries with big banking sectors? 
The Issue 
1. 
In the age of cloud computing, the actual location of a bank is less unambiguous than it was 
in  the  past,  but  sufficient  legal  clarity  still  exists  to  determine  the  relevance  of  national 
jurisdiction. Indeed, location decisions of banks as providers of international banking services 
on cross-border banking have been considered a matter for the industrial policy of several 
countries (trying to become financial centres). Especially in such cases, there is a need for 
national  macroprudential  policies  to  ensure  that  the  overall  national  policy  mix  adequately 
copes with the risks presented by banking location. 
To be sure, having an undeveloped or repressed banking system – one that is small relative 
to the size of the economy – is in itself a restraint on growth. Comparing across countries, 
the positive relationship between banking depth and economic growth seems to hold at least 
until the bank-to-GDP ratio gets to about 100 per cent or so. But beyond that, there is little 
evidence of a growth-enhancing function for having a large banking system per se. And rapid 
growth in a banking system’s credit to the domestic economy has been long-known as a risk 
factor for financial instability. 
I would like to propose three perspectives on the macroprudential risks that are presented. 
First: lending and the problem of credit bubbles; second: funding and what I will refer to as 
the  “financial  shield”  phenomenon;  third:  exchange  rate  policy  and  its  complex  interaction 
with banking internationalisation. 
When it was famously observed that large banks, though international in life, are national in 
death, what was meant was that it will be national fiscal authorities and the local customers 
that are the victims in case of a failing international bank. 
But a bank in an international banking centre may not have the same experience. It may not 
lend  much  to  the  domestic  economy,  it  may  not  source  its  funding  from  the  domestic 
economy, it may do all of its business in foreign exchange. In short, it may be a bank whose 
main connection to the economy is the processing and booking of exported banking services. 
All-in-all, chances are that the fiscal authorities in the host country will not be interested in 
providing bail-out to the uninsured creditors of such a bank if it were to fail. In death, as in 
life,  it  will  remain  largely  offshore.  This  is  the  situation  that  characterises  classic  offshore 
banking. 
Nevertheless,  much  of  today’s  international  banking  involves  deeper  interactions  between 
the banks and the national economy, and as such entails macroprudential risks. 
Lending 
Take  lending.  This  is  the  most  familiar  source  of  leakage  of  international  finance  into  the 
domestic  economy.  With  such  easy  access  to  foreign  funding,  internationally  connected 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
banks  have  time  and  again  pumped-up  the  domestic  property  market  or  propped-up  the 
finances  of  an  overspending  fiscal  authority,  creating  extensive  pockets  of  domestic  over-
indebtedness  whose  deleveraging  destabilises  economic  activity.  The  result  is  often  the 
insolvency  not  only  of  those  who  borrowed,  but  of  others  whose  business  model  is 
undermined by the subsequent recession induced by the need for deleveraging. This pattern 
is familiar and it is now uncontroversial to declare that preventing this pattern emerging calls 
for macroprudential policy measures to stifle demonstrably excessively credit growth. 
Funding 
On the funding side, what I have to say may not be quite as standard. What we can notice 
from many highly-banked economies is the fact that the banks cannot be readily partitioned 
into those catering to the domestic market and those operating an exclusively export service 
business. This happens when local banks start to tap foreign funding to meet a local demand 
for  funds,  or  to  get  into  international  lending  themselves.  By  taking  foreign  funding  onto  a 
balance  sheet  already  strongly  funded  by  the  transactions  balances  and  other  core  liquid 
assets  of  the  economy,  a  domestically  significant  bank  implicitly  increases  the  risk  for  the 
domestic fund providers. But the foreign fund providers will feel protected by being pooled 
with domestic depositors. The domestic fund providers can thus be thought of as a sort of 
domestic  financial  shield  potentially  taken  hostage  by  the  foreign  funders.  After  all,  if  the 
bank fails and if the national fiscal authorities then decide that the domestic funders should 
be  bailed-out,  the  national  authorities  will  find  it  difficult  to  discriminate  against  the  foreign 
funders.  They  may  therefore  prefer  to  bail  them  out  also  in  order  to  avoid  damaging  the 
residents. Bear in mind that it is not just the transactions balances of domestic households 
and firms that may be at stake, but also their payments services. (Banking systems are what 
give payment finality to domestic economic transactions). 
Since the banks and their foreign funders are aware of this shielding property, it serves to 
lower  the  bank’s  cost  of  funding  overall.  In  this  way,  the  indirect  access  of  borrowers  to 
foreign  funds  is  increased  by  having  such  funds  routed  through  the  domestic  banking 
system. 
But beyond a certain point – easily reached with the size of modern banking systems – the 
losses of a failing bank will exceed the fiscal capacity of the host economy. The controversial 
re-emergence of capital controls, including exchange controls on inward payments is one of 
the macroprudential tools that have recently been advocated by some as a potential solution 
to this problem. 
Exchange rate policy 
Exchange rate policy also comes into play in a variety of ways (though I will not spend too 
much time  on  that topic  here).  Most  international  banking  works  in just  a  handful  of major 
currencies, with the result that any country with a large banking system is either using one of 
these currencies itself or has to face the challenges of managing exchange rate risk on those 
transactions in which the international banking system interacts with the domestic economy. 
Low  interest  rates  in  the  international  currency  tempt  borrowers  into  assuming  foreign 
exchange risks they may have no capacity to manage or absorb. If the authorities choose to 
peg  their  currency  in  order  to  limit  this  risk,  they  may  simply  be  altering  the  risk  profile: 
increasing  the  probabilities  both  of  no  change  in  the  currency  (in  the  normal  course  of 
affairs),  and  of  a  large  discrete  change  in  the  exchange  rate  should  the  peg  have  to  be 
abandoned. 
Country examples 
2. 
Good examples of these aspects come from several small countries caught up in the present 
crisis. Let’s consider Cyprus, Iceland and Ireland. By the mid-2000s their banking systems 
had grown to a multiple of GDP (Figure 1); each was tested by the current or previous crises. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Iceland 
The Iceland case is one where public sector borrowing was not a major driver of the crisis. 
Instead the banks, while based in Iceland, suddenly (in the period 2003–7) became heavily 
involved in financing non-Icelandic ventures of Icelandic-controlled entities, and other foreign 
borrowers,  as  well  as  fuelling  a  domestic  property  boom.  Claims  on  corporate  borrowers 
jumped to over 300 per cent of GDP by 2007, while claims on households also jumped, but 
to the more moderate level of just over 100 per cent of GDP (Annual growth rate of corporate 
lending reached the startling figure of over 60 per cent at one stage, whereas for household 
debt it was only a bit less dramatic, peaking at about 30 per cent – IMF Staff report August 
2008). The growth in the activity of the Icelandic banks was extraordinary: little more than 
100 per cent of GDP in 2004, the consolidated total assets of the three main banks reached 
about 10 times that by end-2007. 
The Icelandic króna has not been a very stable currency over the years. The Iceland banks 
funded their expansion substantially in foreign currency and much of their domestic lending 
was indexed to FX or to inflation. 
The banks sourced their funding in different ways as the boom progressed and as different 
sources became reluctant to increase their Icelandic exposure. Because of this segmentation 
– bonds, syndicated loans, deposits mobilised in retail markets in the UK and Netherlands – 
the bulk of the funding came in ways which were more easily separable from the domestic 
depositor than in the other countries examined here. 
And  indeed,  separated  they  were.  Icelandic  deposits  (and  assets)  were  carved  out  of  the 
failing  banks  and  moved  to  new  banks,  leaving  the  bulk  of  the  banking  system  to  be 
liquidated (Figure 2). Because some of the deposits were placed in branches of one of the 
Icelandic  banks  (not  a  subsidiary)  the  Icelandic  deposit  guarantee  fund  would  have  been 
liable  to  pay,  but  was  unable  to  do  so.  Following  litigated  disputes,  the  EFTA  court 
adjudicated that, because of the extraordinary circumstances, the Government of Iceland did 
not have to meet this potentially costly charge. Creditor expectations, that non-discrimination 
clauses in the EEA agreement would be effective in protecting the foreign depositors, were 
also dashed in this 2013 court adjudication. 
While  the  Icelandic  customers  of  the  banks  were  far  from  insulated  from  the  collapse, 
suffering as they did from protracted exchange controls and currency depreciation (to speak 
only of the problems of depositors), they did much better than the foreign creditors. After the 
claims of the UK and Netherlands deposit guarantee system are met from the liquidation, it 
seems there may be relatively little left for other creditors. 
 What  the  Iceland  case  exemplifies  is  a  situation  where  the  international  and  domestic 
funders  were  sufficiently  separable  to  disable  the  “financial  shield”  mechanism  (of  which  I 
have  been  speaking)  and  prevent  it  from  protecting  the  foreign  funders  from  bail-in  at  the 
expense  of  the  domestic  economy.  This  separation  somewhat  moderated  the  fiscal  and 
domestic macro-financial impact of the collapse. 
Ireland 
That  Ireland’s  banking  system  had  total  assets  approaching  nine  times  GDP  in  2008  is  a 
headline fact which tends to mislead. Four different categories of bank can be identified in 
this total figure (Figure 3). First – making up about 44 per cent of the total – were the locally 
controlled banks which serviced the domestic economy. Second, a further 12 per cent, were 
subsidiaries and branches of foreign controlled concerns dealing with the domestic economy. 
Third,  accounting  for  a  further  19  per  cent,  were  foreign-owned  concerns  which  provided 
mainly export services (not much connected to the domestic borrowers or funders) and which 
failed as a result of the subprime crisis. Fourth, the remaining foreign-owned concerns also 
using Ireland as an export base and which remain solid. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Although the first three categories all got into trouble and had to be rescued, only the first 
category was implicated in the fiscal cost to the Irish Government, as it did not guarantee the 
other categories. The shareholders of the second category and foreign fiscal authorities of 
the  parent  entities  of  the  third  category  bailed-out  creditors  of  those  entities.  The  financial 
shield  mechanism  insulated  only  those  foreigners  who  were  creditors  of  the  nationally 
controlled banks. Lesson: the presence of strong foreign parents can reduce or eliminate the 
financial shield problem for the national authorities. 
 The  large  Irish  banking  system  was  structured  in  such  a  way  as  to  partially  –  but  only 
partially – ringfence the international part from the domestic. The part that was not ringfenced 
was still big enough to cause great damage. The wider destabilisation of the Irish economy, 
including  the  boom  and  bust  in  property  prices  which  has  left  a  large  section  of  the 
household sector under stress of over-indebtedness, was created by the first two categories 
of bank (and especially their ability to source foreign funding), but not by the third or fourth 
category. 
Cyprus 
Cyprus  (Figure  4)  is  a  case  where  the foreign  depositors  were  embedded  in  the  domestic 
system, but when it failed, the shield I have been speaking of did not in the end protect them. 
Instead  in  each  of  the  two  main  banks,  creditors  suffered  equally,  whether  domestic  or 
foreign. The rate of growth in the scale of the Cyprus banking system was not as rapid as in 
Iceland  or  even  Ireland,  but  total  deposits  had  reached  3½  times  GDP  by  the  end.  As  in 
Ireland,  exchange  rate  movements  were  not  an  issue  insofar  as  the  euro  is  the  national 
currency. 
For Cyprus, the classification “resident” is sometimes challenged, but taking it at face value 
we find that loans to residents in Cyprus at 74% of the total, exceeded residents’ share of 
deposits at 62%. The difference meant that residents borrowed more than €10 billion more 
than  they  deposited  with  the  banks  –  about  60  per  cent  of  GDP.  Thus,  while  the  banking 
system in Cyprus has been considerably exposed to other countries, notably Greece (both 
restructured Government  bonds and  problem  loans  reportedly  associated  in  particular  with 
Laiki Bank), it is neither a situation where foreign funds have been employed in net terms to 
fund the domestic fiscal authorities, nor to fund a domestic property bubble on the scale that 
occurred in Ireland. Instead, the scale of foreign funding enabled the main banks to become 
exposed to Greek official debt and to make loans of doubtful quality to Cypriot, Greek and 
other  borrowers,  which  resulted  in  losses  that  promised  to  demand  recapitalisation  on  a 
scale unaffordable by the Cypriot State. While the mechanism adopted for bailing-in the bank 
creditors  (and  certainly  some  of  the  earlier  proposed  mechanisms)  in  order  to  boost  the 
capital position of the banks can be criticised – and certainly underlines how welcome is the 
European legislation on bank resolution, now in advanced stage of negotiation – there are 
also lessons for macroprudential regulation. 
 The fact that the most affected banks in Cyprus have also been the main retail and payments 
banks  for  the  national  economy  has  resulted  in  broad  economic  disruption,  including  the 
introduction  of  exchange  and  payments  controls,  and  haircuts  on  transactions  balances  of 
companies.  Here  the  “domestic  financial  shield”  mechanism  has  been  ineffective  in 
protecting the foreign depositors, but was itself broken in the collapse. 
Concluding remarks 
3. 
By avoiding the melange of export banking with the domestic banking sector, some of the 
macrostability  risks  of  having  a  large  banking  sector  doing  international  business  can  be 
reduced.  Fiscal  resources  will  not  be  stressed  and  the  domestic  economy  will  not  be 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
in  systems  with 
large  banking  sectors.  One  can  even 
destabilised by an export banking sector if its funding and lending is largely focused on the 
rest of the world. 
Without  such  separation,  extremely  prudent  and  active  management  is  needed  to  avoid 
trouble 
imagine  devising 
macroprudential  policies  to  be  put  in  place to  prevent  expansion  of  banks’  balance  sheets 
beyond a certain scale, putting the onus on authorities to determine what is the optimal size 
and structure of the country’s financial sector – not an enviable task. 
If large banking systems with access to foreign finance become involved in providing credit to 
the  local  economy  they  have  the  capacity  to  rapidly  destabilise  it.  Furthermore,  it  will  be 
difficult or impossible for the national fiscal authorities to deal with the failure of such a bank, 
if  it  is  providing  systemically  important  payment  or  transactions  balance  services  to  the 
domestic economy. 
Of course, these considerations are directed to the situation of a small country with a large 
banking system. More generally, the interpenetration of banking systems has been seen as 
an important contributor to limiting uncompetitive practices in terms of price and improving 
provision  of  services.  The  degree  of  segmentation  of  international  finance  along  national 
borders  that  has  been  seen  in  the  course  of  this  crisis  is  surely  an  over-reaction  which 
should, and will in time, be reversed. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  7 
