Raghuram Rajan: Filtering out the real India 
Text  of  the  Leatherbee Lecture  by  Dr  Raghuram  Rajan, Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank of 
India, on “India – opportunities and challenges ahead”, at Harvard Business School (HBS), 
Boston (USA), 15 October 2013. 
 Indian  cricket  fans  are  manic-depressive  in  their  treatment  of  their  favorite  teams.  They 
elevate  players  to  god-like  status  when  their  team  performs  well,  ignoring  obvious 
weaknesses;  but  when  it  loses,  as  any  team  must,  the  fall  is  equally  steep  and  every 
weakness is dissected. In fact, the team is never as good as fans make it out to be when it 
wins, nor as bad as it is made out to be when it loses. Its weaknesses existed in victory, too, 
but were overlooked. 
Such  bipolar  behavior  seems  to  apply  to  assessments  of  India’s  economy  as  well,  with 
foreign  analysts  joining  Indians  in  similar  swings  between  over-exuberance  and  self-
flagellation.  A few  years  ago,  India  could  do  no  wrong.  Commentators  talked  of “Chindia”, 
elevating India’s performance to that of its northern neighbor. Today, India can do no right. 
India does have its problems. Annual GDP growth slowed significantly in the last quarter to 
4.4%, inflation is high, and the current-account and budget deficits last year were too large. 
Every  commentator  today  highlights  India’s  poor  infrastructure,  excessive  regulation,  small 
manufacturing sector, and a workforce with inadequate education and skills. 
These are indeed deficiencies, and they must be fixed if India is to grow strongly and stably. 
But the same deficiencies existed when India was growing fast. To understand what needs to 
be done in the short run, we must understand what dampened the Indian success story. 
In part, India’s slowdown paradoxically reflects the substantial fiscal and monetary stimulus 
that its policymakers, like those in all major emerging markets, injected into its economy in 
the aftermath of the 2008 financial crisis. The resulting growth spurt led to inflation, especially 
because the world did not slide into a second Great Depression, as was originally feared. So 
monetary  policy  has  had  to  be  tight,  with  high  interest  rates  contributing  to  slowing 
investment and consumption. 
Moreover,  India’s  institutions  for  acquiring  land,  allocating  natural  resources,  and  granting 
clearances were overwhelmed during the period of strong growth. Strong growth increased 
the scarcity and value of resources such as land or mineral wealth. To the extent that these 
were  cheap  in  the  past,  there  was  little  reward  to  misallocating  them.  Growth,  however, 
increased the rents to corruption. 
Similarly, industrial development led to growing encroachment on farmland and forests and 
the  displacement  of  farmers  and  tribals.  India  is  a  developing  country  with  a  civil  society 
possessed  of  first  world  sensibilities.  Protests  organized  by  politicians  and  activists  led  to 
new  environmental  laws  and  land  acquisition  laws  that  aim  to  make  development 
sustainable.  Over  time,  India  will  learn  to  streamline  the  new  laws  to  make  them  more 
functional,  but  in  the  short  run  a  side  effect  has  been  more  bureaucratic  impediments  to 
investment.  So  growth,  as  well  as  the  reaction  to  that  unbridled  growth,  created  a  greater 
possibility of corruption. 
Fortunately,  a  vibrant  democracy  like  India  has  its  own  checks  and  balances.  India’s 
investigative  agencies,  judiciary,  and  press  started  examining  allegations  of  large-scale 
corruption.  The  unfortunate  side  effect  as  the  clean-up  proceeded  was  that  bureaucratic 
decision-making became more risk averse, and many large projects came to a grinding halt. 
Only  now,  as  the  government  creates  new  institutions  to  accelerate  decision-making  and 
implement  transparent  processes,  are  these  projects  being  cleared  to  proceed.  Once 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
restarted, it will take time for these projects to be completed, at which point output growth will 
increase significantly. 
The combination of excessive (with the benefit of hindsight) post-crisis stimulus and stalling 
large projects had other consequences such as high internal and external deficits. The post-
crisis  fiscal-stimulus  packages  sent  the  government  budget  deficit  soaring  from  what  had 
been  a  very  responsible  level  in  2007–2008  of  around  2.5  percent  to  over  6  percent. 
Similarly, as large mining projects stalled, India had to resort to higher imports of coal and 
scrap iron, while its exports of iron ore dwindled. 
An increase in gold imports placed further pressure on the current-account balance. Newly 
rich consumers in rural areas increasingly put their savings in gold, a familiar store of value, 
while wealthy urban consumers, worried about inflation, also turned to buying gold. Ironically, 
had they bought Apple shares, rather than a commodity (no matter how fungible, liquid, and 
investible it is), their purchases would have been treated as a foreign investment rather than 
as adding to the external deficit. 
For the most part, India’s current growth slowdown and its fiscal and current-account deficits 
are not structural problems. They are all fixable by means of modest reforms. This is not to 
say  that  ambitious  reform  is  not  good,  or  is  not  warranted  to  sustain  growth  for  the  next 
decade. But India does not need to become a manufacturing giant overnight to fix its current 
problems. 
The  immediate  tasks  are  more  mundane,  but  also  more  feasible  one:  clearing  projects, 
reducing  poorly  targeted  subsidies,  and  finding  more  ways  to  narrow  the  current-account 
deficit  and  ease  its  financing.  Over  the  last  year,  the  government  has  been  pursuing  this 
agenda,  which  is  already  showing  some  early  results.  For  example,  the  external  deficit  is 
narrowing sharply on the back of higher exports and lower imports. The government and the 
Reserve Bank said it would $ 70 billion this fiscal year, down from $ 88 billion last fiscal year, 
but recent data suggests it could be lower still. 
This leads me to another point. Because analysts keep looking for major structural reforms to 
fix  the  deeper  economic  challenges,  they  ignore  smaller  steps  or  dismiss  them  as  “band 
aids”.  But  strategically  placed  small  steps  –  strategic  incrementalism  for  want  of  a  better  
term – taken together can deal with the immediate problems, thus buying time and economic 
and political space for the major structural reforms. 
Put differently, when the Indian authorities said they would bring the fiscal deficit below 5.3% 
last year, no one believed them. The final outturn was 4.9%. Similarly, while we project the 
CAD to come down to 3.7% this year, I think we could be pleasantly surprised. Not all the 
actions we have taken are pretty, and not all are sustainable, but they have done the job. 
Indeed, despite its shortcomings, India’s GDP will probably grow by 5–5.5% this year – not 
great, but certainly not bad for what is likely to be a low point in economic performance. The 
monsoon  has  been  good  and  will  spur  consumption,  especially  in  rural  areas,  which  are 
already  growing  strongly,  owing  to  improvements  in  road  transport  and  communications 
connectivity. 
The banking sector has undoubtedly experienced an increase in bad loans, often owing to 
investment projects that are not unviable but only delayed. As these projects come onstream, 
they  will  generate  the  revenue  needed  to  repay  loans.  India’s  banks  have  the  capital  to 
absorb losses in the meantime. 
Likewise, India’s finances are stronger than in the typical emerging-market country, let alone 
an  emerging-market  country  in  crisis.  India’s  overall  public  debt/GDP  ratio  has  been  on  a 
declining  trend, from  73.2%  in  2006–07  to  66% in  2012–13  (and  the  central government’s 
debt/GDP  ratio  is  only  46%).  Moreover,  the  debt  is  denominated  in  rupees  and  has  an 
average maturity of more than nine years. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
India’s external debt burden is even more favorable, at only 21.2% of GDP (much of it owed 
by the private sector), while short-term external debt is only 5.2% of GDP. India’s foreign-
exchange reserves stand at $278 billion (about 15% of GDP), enough to finance the entire 
current-account  deficit  for  several  years.  Even  if  you  count  all  of  trade  credit  as  well  as 
maturing  deposits  held  by  overseas  Indians  as  short  term  debt,  India’s  reserves  can  pay 
them all down and still have money left over. 
That said, India can do better – much better. The path to a more open, competitive, efficient, 
and humane economy will surely be bumpy in the years to come. But, in the short term, there 
is much low-hanging fruit to be plucked. 
For instance, we are committed to developing our financial system, and carefully expanding 
access to finance can be a source of tremendous growth in the years to come. We are also 
embarked on large infrastructure projects. For example, the Delhi Mumbai Industrial Corridor, 
a project with Japanese collaboration entailing over $ 90 billion in investment, will link Delhi 
to  Mumbai’s  ports,  covering  an  overall  length  of  1483  km  and  passing through  six  States. 
This  project  will  have  nine  mega  industrial  zones  of  about  200–250  sq.  km.,  high  speed 
freight lines, three ports, six airports, a six-lane intersection-free expressway connecting the 
country’s political and financial capitals, and a 4000 MW power plant. We have already seen 
a significant boost to economic activity as India built out the Golden Quadrilateral highway 
system, the boost from the Delhi Mumbai Industrial Corridor can only be imagined. The best 
of India is yet to come. 
Back to the cricketing analogy, India is an open argumentative society. But we are prone to 
mood swings, perhaps more so than other societies, perhaps in part driven by our excitable 
competitive and very young press. Stripping out both the euphoria and the despair from what 
is said about India – and from what we Indians say about ourselves – will probably bring us 
closer to the truth. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
