Takahide Kiuchi: The economic outlook and monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Takahide  Kiuchi,  Member  of  the  Policy  Board  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the 
Japan Securities and Economics Club, Tokyo, 26 November 2013. 
 Thank  you  for  giving  me  an  opportunity  to  speak  at  the  Japan  Securities  and  Economics 
Club. Today, I would like to talk about the economic outlook at home and abroad and the 
conduct of monetary policy in Japan. 
Economic outlook 
I. 
The Bank of Japan released the latest Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (hereafter 
the  Outlook  Report)  at  the  end  of  October  2013,  and  presented  the  following  outlook. 
Comparing  the  current  projection  with  that  in  the  July  2013  interim  assessment,  overseas 
economies have been somewhat weaker than anticipated, but domestic demand is expected 
to  be  somewhat  stronger,  partly  due  to  the  effects  of  various  economic  measures  by  the 
government. As a result, the projected growth rates as well as the outlook for prices in Japan 
are expected to be more or less unchanged from the July assessment. 
As for Japan’s economy, while exports have been picking up at a somewhat slower pace, 
domestic demand, notably private consumption, has been firm and overseas economies are 
picking up moderately. Looking ahead, while domestic demand is likely to maintain firmness 
as  external  demand  is  expected  to  increase,  albeit  moderately,  a  virtuous  cycle  among 
production, income, and spending is likely to be maintained. 
As for prices, the year-on-year rate of change in Japan’s consumer price index (CPI, for all 
items less fresh food, and the same hereafter) turned positive in June 2013 for the first time 
in 14 months and has recently been accelerating to the range of 0.5–1.0 percent. The year-
on-year rate of increase in the CPI, excluding the direct effects of the consumption tax hikes, 
is likely to follow a rising trend, reflecting factors such as the improvement in the aggregate 
supply  and  demand  balance,  as  well  as  the  rise  in  medium-  to  long-term  inflation 
expectations  resulting  from  economic  recovery.  In  the  October  2013  Outlook  Report,  it  is 
projected  to  reach  1.9  percent  in  fiscal  2015  in  terms  of  the  median  of  the  Bank’s  Policy 
Board members’ forecasts. 
As  the  background  to  this  outlook  for  Japan’s  economy  and  prices,  overseas  economies 
have  been  somewhat  weak,  but  they  are  expected  to  pick  up  gradually,  particularly  the 
advanced economies. Looking at respective major countries and regions, the U.S. economy 
has  been  recovering  moderately  on  the  back  of  firm  private  demand  and  is  expected  to 
gradually  accelerate  its  pace  of  recovery,  as  accommodative  financial  conditions  will  be 
maintained and the fiscal drag will gradually fade. The European economy, which had been 
receding slowly, has finally bottomed out and is expected to gradually pick up. The Chinese 
economy is likely to maintain stable growth at around the current pace. By contrast, growth in 
other emerging and commodity-exporting economies will likely continue to lack momentum 
for the time being. 
Risk factors to the outlook 
II. 
The  Outlook  Report  points  out  upside  and  downside  risks  to  the  Bank’s  aforementioned 
baseline  scenario  regarding  the  economy  and  prices.  I  personally  pay  closer  attention  to 
downside risks. Moreover, I formulated a proposal both in April and October 2013 to change 
the description of the Outlook Report, such as in terms of the outlook for prices. Let me share 
some of my considerations regarding the outlook with you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Overseas economies 
A. 
I  am  paying  particular  attention  to  the  uncertainty  regarding  developments  in  overseas 
economies. 
Looking  at  the  revisions  made  to  the  World  Economic  Outlook  released  recently  by  the 
International Monetary Fund (IMF), the forecast for global economic growth has continued to 
be revised downward. In the latest forecast in October 2013, which updated the July 2013 
forecast,  global  economic  growth  was  revised  downward  in  just  three  months  by 
0.3 percentage  point  for  2013  and  0.2  percentage  point  for  2014,  mainly  due  to  the  lower 
growth outlook for emerging and commodity-exporting economies including China. 
This seems to reflect an adjustment of imbalances that have built up in emerging economies 
since  the  Lehman  shock.  Such  a  buildup  of  imbalances  is  clearly  apparent  in  the  form  of 
significant  accumulation  of  private-sector  debt  against  the  background  of  excessive  fiscal 
and  monetary  policy  measures  since  the  Lehman  shock,  and  of  the  increase  in  capital 
inflows  to  these  economies  based  on  excessive  expectations  for  economic  growth.  If  the 
adjustment  process  is  actually  occurring,  growth  in  these  economies  will  likely  continue  to 
lack momentum for a protracted period. 
Meanwhile,  uncertainty  remains  regarding 
the 
U.S. economy  and  other  advanced  economies.  In  this  situation,  I  am  paying  particular 
attention  to  the  slowdown  in  the  labor  productivity  growth  trend  in  these  economies, 
especially in the United States. With this slowdown, expectations for income increases may 
not  rise  easily  even  in  a  situation  where  employment  continues  to  increase  stably,  and 
private  consumption  –  a  key  determinant  of  the  outlook  for  the  U.S.  economy  –  may  not 
regain momentum soon. Therefore, I am carefully monitoring these developments. 
toward  recovery 
the  momentum 
for 
Domestic demand 
B. 
Economic  recovery  this  time  has  been  led  by  the  nonmanufacturing  sector  so  far,  mainly 
driven  by  private  consumption.  In  order  to  have  continued  firm  domestic  demand,  it  is 
important  to  maintain  a  situation  in  which  improvement  in  the  employment  and  income 
situation  supports  consumption.  Another  important  factor  in  considering  the  future  of 
domestic demand is the increase in firms’ business fixed investment. 
Turning to indexes related to consumption, private consumption remains resilient, but there is 
a sign of slowing in its growth momentum. The household activity-related diffusion indexes 
(DIs)  for  current  and  future  economic  conditions  in  the  Economy  Watchers  Survey,  which 
seem  to  reflect  consumer  confidence,  dropped  for  the  fifth  consecutive  month  since  April 
2013. This development is consistent with that of real consumption expenditure in the Family 
Income and Expenditure Survey. The sign of slowing in consumption is also reflected to the 
latest  GDP  statistics.  The  real  GDP  growth  rate  in  the  July–September  quarter  of  2013 
registered  0.5  percent  on  a  quarter-on-quarter  basis.  On  an  annualized  quarter-on-quarter 
basis, it slowed to 1.9 percent from around 4.0 percent in the first half of the year. Private 
consumption also slowed compared to the first half of the year, to 0.1 percent on a quarter-
on-quarter  basis.  Business  fixed  investment  on  the  whole  grew  for  the  third  consecutive 
quarter, reflecting an improvement in corporate profits, to 0.2 percent on a quarter-on-quarter 
basis,  but  the  recovery  in  the  manufacturing  sector  still  shows  a  lackluster  performance. 
Meanwhile, exports – which largely affect investment by manufacturing firms – lack resilience 
and  decreased  for  the  first  time  in  three  quarters,  to  minus  0.6  percent  on  a  quarter-on-
quarter basis. I think the key to the future of domestic demand lies particularly in the extent to 
which business fixed investment will grow under these circumstances, but that a full-fledged 
recovery of such investment will take time. 
Outlook for prices 
C. 
As for the outlook for prices, I formulated a proposal to make the following changes in the 
October  2013  Outlook  Report,  although  it  was  defeated  by  a  majority  vote  during  the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Monetary Policy Meeting (MPM). First, with regard to the outlook for prices toward the latter 
half of the projection period, I proposed to change the current expression that the year-on-
year rate of change in the CPI “is likely to reach around 2 percent – the price stability target” 
to  a  new  expression  that  “the  rate  of  increase  in  the  CPI  is  expected  to  rise  moderately”. 
Second,  with  regard  to  inflation  expectations,  I  proposed  changing  the  current  expression 
that  inflation  expectations  “are  likely  to  continue  on  a  rising  trend  under  quantitative  and 
qualitative monetary easing (QQE), partly supported by a rise in the observed inflation rate, 
gradually converging to around 2 percent – the price stability target” to a new expression that 
they  “are  likely  to  continue  on  a  moderate  rising  trend,  partly  supported  by  a  rise  in  the 
observed inflation rate”. 
In achieving the price stability target, it is important to create a virtuous cycle in which the 
inflation rate gradually rises as the economy as a whole grows in a sustainable manner and 
as people’s standards of living improve. From such a viewpoint, I personally consider that it 
is neither easy nor appropriate to aim at achieving a price stability target of 2 percent in a 
short time frame of about two years. 
The  recent  rise  in  prices  is  partly  attributed  to some  strength  in  demand,  but  so  far  it  has 
largely been attributed to other factors such as increases in energy prices and the effects of 
changes in foreign exchange rates. In order to achieve sustainable price increases together 
with  economic  improvement,  a  rise  in  wages  –  especially  employees’  scheduled  cash 
earnings – is considered to be the key. 
It  is  most  likely  that  some  firms  will  raise  wages  including  base  salaries  in  the  upcoming 
spring wage negotiations and that the average rate of wage increase will rise to some extent. 
However, in order for an increasing number of firms to significantly raise base salaries and 
for prices to be on an uptrend as a result, supply and demand conditions in the labor market 
must improve further through a heightening of growth expectations. Since developments in 
employment and wages tend to lag behind economic growth, my view is that a considerable 
time lag is to be expected until the inflation rate rises together with the wage increase. For 
example, under an assumption that the real wage growth rate equals the labor productivity 
growth rate, if the labor productivity growth rate is about 1 percent, the nominal wage growth 
rate – consistent with the price stability target of 2 percent – should reach about 3 percent, 
and by the same token, if the labor productivity growth rate is about 0.5 percent, the nominal 
wage growth rate should rise to about 2.5 percent. To attain such a level of growth in nominal 
wages will take considerable time. Having said that, what I think is important is to create and 
maintain  a  virtuous  cycle  in  which  the  inflation  rate  rises,  albeit  gradually,  along  with  an 
increase in nominal wages. 
In  this  connection,  I  think  that,  even  in  a  situation  where  wages  and  prices  increase  in  a 
balanced  manner  over  time,  given  that  other  advanced  economies  are  currently  on  a 
disinflationary trend, Japan’s inflation rate may still be susceptible to downward pressure.1 
Monetary policy 
III. 
The Bank introduced QQE in April 2013, with a view to achieving the price stability target of 
2 percent in terms of the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI at the earliest possible time, 
with a time horizon of about two years.  In this policy, the main operating target for money 
market operations was changed from the uncollateralized overnight call rate to the monetary 
base, and it was decided that the Bank would aim to double the monetary base in two years. 
In  doing  so,  it  would  purchase  massive  amounts  of  Japanese  government  bonds  (JGBs), 
                                                 
1  For  historical  developments  in  Japan’s  inflation  rate  and  a  comparison  with  other  major  economies,  see 
“Recent Developments in Economic Activity and Prices, and Future Monetary Policy”, a speech by Takahide 
Kiuchi at a meeting with business leaders in Kanagawa on February 28, 2013, available on the Bank’s web 
site (http://www.boj.or.jp/en/announcements/press/koen_2013/ko130319a.htm/). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
with  all  maturities  made  eligible  for  purchases.  In  addition,  in  aiming  to  achieve  the  price 
stability target of 2 percent, the Bank made a commitment that it would continue with QQE as 
long as it is necessary for maintaining the target in a stable manner. 
So far, QQE has exerted positive effects on Japan’s economy through a positive influence on 
the expectations of financial markets and of firms and households. Since the introduction of 
the  policy  in  April,  however,  while  supporting  the  concrete  measures  of  QQE,  I  have 
continued  to  propose  changing  the  expression  in  the  Statement  on  Monetary  Policy 
regarding the time frame for achieving the 2 percent price stability target and for continuing 
with QQE, although my proposal has been repeatedly defeated by a majority vote during the 
MPMs. Let me explain the intention of my proposal as well as my personal views on some 
points of discussion regarding the conduct of monetary policy. 
Flexibility of the commitment 
A. 
My proposal is to replace the expression in the Statement on Monetary Policy with a new one 
stating that “the Bank will aim to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent in the medium 
to long term. On this basis, it will designate QQE as an intensive measure with a time frame 
of  about  two  years,  and  thereafter  will  review  the  monetary  easing  measures  in  a  flexible 
manner”. This proposal aims to make the current policy commitment more flexible.  First, it 
does not restrict the time frame for achieving the 2 percent price stability target to about two 
years. Second, it clearly states the idea that the time frame for continuing with QQE should 
be about two years, and that when this time frame comes to an end, the Bank will review the 
monetary easing measures in a flexible manner, as necessary. 
As shown in the minutes of the MPM held on April 3 and 4, 2013, the reasons behind this 
proposal were that (1) achieving the price stability target of 2 percent with a time horizon of 
about two years entails high uncertainty; and (2) in such a situation there is concern that, if a 
rise  in  expectations  –  namely,  that  QQE  would  continue  for  a  protracted  period  –  were  to 
occur, this could lead to a buildup of financial imbalances, for example, given that the Bank’s 
purchases  of  financial  assets  would  be  unprecedented  in  scale.  In  the  minutes,  other 
potential risks were also pointed out: the possibility of a rise in speculation that the Bank is 
engaged  in  financing  fiscal  deficits,  the  possibility  that  the  financial  system  would  become 
more vulnerable to risks with financial institutions’ profits being squeezed, and the possibility 
that market functioning would be impaired considerably. 
While  fully  recognizing  these  potential  risks,  I  have  nonetheless  supported  the  concrete 
measures of QQE because I have judged that its positive effects on the economy outweigh, 
albeit slightly, the associated potential risks or side effects. 
However, if the current large-scale monetary easing were to be protracted or strengthened, 
there would be a possibility that the side effects would instead outweigh the positive effects. 
In this regard, one cannot rule out the possibility that, under the current policy commitment, if 
financial markets increasingly view achieving the price stability target in about two years as 
difficult, the Bank will be obliged to extend or strengthen its monetary easing driven by such 
external  factors,  even  in  a  situation  where  it  is  judged  that  side  effects  outweigh  positive 
effects on the economy. Taking this possibility into account, I have proposed not to restrict 
the time frame for achieving the price stability target, and proposed to designate QQE as an 
intensive measure with a time frame of about two years based on the recognition that it is 
appropriate  to  secure  an  opportunity  for  the  Bank  to  thoroughly  examine,  after  a  certain 
period  of  time,  whether  the  side  effects  of  the  large-scale  monetary  easing  are  not 
outweighing  the  positive  effects  and  review  the  easing  measures  in  a  flexible  manner 
depending on economic and financial conditions at the time. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Price stability target and medium- to long-term inflation expectations 
B. 
In my proposal, the price stability target of 2 percent is set as a medium- to long-term goal 
because  I  think  the  2  percent  target  may  become  consistent  with  Japan’s  economic 
fundamentals only in the medium to long term. 
The  Bank’s commitment  to  achieving  the  price stability  target  of  2 percent  does  not  mean 
that  a  temporary  achievement  of  this  rate  is  sufficient.  It  is  important  to  maintain  the 
2 percent target in a stable manner. To this end, it is necessary for not only the observed 
inflation rate but also medium- to long-term inflation expectations to be about 2 percent. If the 
observed inflation rate hovers around 2 percent on average and firms and households act on 
the assumption that prices will increase by about 2 percent, this will lead to price stability in 
the medium to long term. 
So far, the observed inflation rate has been rising, but many indicators suggest that the rise 
in  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations,  such  as  for  five  to  ten  years  ahead,  will 
remain moderate. This implies that the Bank’s decision of setting the 2 percent price stability 
target  alone  is  not  enough  for  achieving  its  aim  to  raise  medium-  to  long-term  inflation 
expectations to the targeted level. 
I think that medium- to long-term inflation expectations are mainly determined by supply side 
factors such as the potential growth rate and the labor productivity growth rate, rather than by 
the supply and demand balances in the goods and labor markets. If QQE induces positive 
movements  by  private  economic  entities  and  the  government’s  economic  growth  strategy 
makes  progress  in  parallel,  the  growth  potential  of  Japan’s  economy  would  gradually 
strengthen and, accordingly, medium- to long-term inflation expectations would likely rise as 
well. However, as shown in my proposal with regard to the outlook for prices in the Outlook 
Report, I take the view that such a process will take considerable time, and therefore think it 
appropriate not to set a specific time frame for achieving the price stability target. Moreover, I 
think there will be room for a future reconsideration of the level of the price stability target 
that  is  currently  set  at  2  percent,  considering  future  changes  in  the  growth  potential  and 
medium- to long-term inflation expectations. 
QQE and fiscal consolidation 
C. 
QQE  itself  is  a  powerful  policy,  but  it  will  exert  maximum  effects  when  combined  with  the 
government’s efforts to secure confidence in fiscal sustainability. 
The  Bank’s  measures,  including  JGB  purchases,  are  solely  conducted  for  the  purpose  of 
achieving the price stability target, but if this is perceived by the markets as financing fiscal 
deficits,  the  effects  of  QQE  could  be  hampered  as  long-term  interest  rates  rise  due  to  an 
expansion in risk premiums. The joint statement by the government and the Bank released in 
January  2013  stated  that  the  government  will  steadily  promote  measures  aimed  at 
establishing  a  sustainable  fiscal  structure  with  a  view  to  ensuring  the  credibility  of  fiscal 
management. The government’s recent decision to raise the consumption tax rate is part of 
such efforts toward fiscal consolidation. 
Apart  from  the  government’s  efforts  toward  fiscal  consolidation,  domestic  private  entities’ 
perception  also  constitutes  an  important  factor  when  examining  the  fiscal  risk.  One  of  the 
reasons why Japan’s financial markets have been stable despite the increase in the amount 
outstanding of government debt lies in the fact that JGBs are mostly held by the domestic 
private  sector,  and  market  participants  seem  to  believe  that  domestic  private  entities  will 
ultimately behave rationally – for example, by accepting tax hikes and expenditure cuts – to 
avoid decreases in the value of their assets caused by realization of the fiscal risk. Market 
participants,  however,  may  change  their  views  if  the  public  starts  thinking  that  fiscal 
consolidation  can  be  achieved  without  revenue  and  expenditure  reforms,  mainly  reflecting 
the  public’s  excessively  optimistic  expectations 
thereby 
significantly impairing the effects of the Bank’s monetary policy. In this respect, as much as it 
future  potential  growth, 
for 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
is  important  to  achieve  fiscal  consolidation,  it  is  also  important  that  the  public  and  the 
markets widely recognize that strengthening growth potential requires considerable time. 
Concluding remarks 
labor  productivity  growth  rate  and  solving 
IV. 
While the Bank has been implementing QQE, other major central banks have also introduced 
unconventional monetary policy measures to deal with the economic and financial crisis that 
materialized in the aftermath of the bursting of the global credit bubble following the Lehman 
shock  in  the  autumn  of  2008.  Such  developments  in  other  economies  and  related 
discussions  will  serve  as  a  useful reference  in  considering  the  future conduct  of monetary 
policy in Japan. In closing, I will touch on two points in particular. 
First, as I mentioned earlier, a slowdown in the labor productivity growth trend is observed in 
advanced  economies,  and  this  suggests  a  decline  in  potential  growth  rates  in  these 
economies. While monetary policy may be able to buy time until necessary adjustments are 
made for such structural changes, it cannot substitute for structural reforms such as raising 
the 
labor  market  mismatch.  Therefore, 
policymakers  have  to  correctly  recognize  structural  changes  and  respond  to  them 
appropriately, while taking into account what monetary policy can and cannot do. If they do 
not  recognize  structural  changes  and  depend  too  much  on  monetary  policy,  excessive 
easing could result in the accumulation of economic and financial imbalances. 
Second,  I  would  like  to  refer  to  the  division  of  roles  between  two  policy  tools;  namely, 
conventional and unconventional monetary policy. Taking the Federal Reserve’s practice of 
these two types of policy tools as an example, my understanding is that the Federal Reserve 
regards the asset purchase policy as a measure to generate upward momentum in economic 
activity  and  prices  and  affect  the  direction  of  such  momentum  under  the  non-negativity 
constraint on nominal interest rates, while regarding the interest rate policy as a measure to 
encourage  economic  activity  and  prices  to  reach  desirable  levels.  Such  division  of  roles 
between  the  two  policy  tools  in  the  United  States  will  likely  serve  as  a  reference  in 
considering  Japan’s  future  monetary  policy.  In  this  regard,  in  calculating  Japan’s  policy 
interest  rate  under  the  Taylor  rule,2  my  estimate  –  which  had  been  in  negative  territory  – 
shifted upward, and it is around 0 percent at present. Although this estimate is subject to a 
considerable  margin  of  error,  as  it  could  change  depending  on  the  specific  assumption 
employed, this suggests that financial conditions are becoming increasingly accommodative 
on  the  back  of  the  rise  in  prices  and  of  the  improvement  in  the  output  gap  following  the 
introduction of QQE, and that, therefore, maintaining the zero interest rate may lead to the 
accumulation  of  economic  stimulus  effects.  Going 
forward,  when  an  expansionary 
momentum  of  economic  activity  and  prices  becomes  sufficiently  strong  as  a  result  of  the 
positive outcome of QQE, it will be important to find the most appropriate balance between 
the two types of policy tools by carefully weighing the associated positive effects and side 
effects that differ between them, while paying due attention to the increased effects on the 
economy of the zero interest rate policy. 
Thank you for your attention.  
                                                 
2  The Taylor rule is a monetary policy rule under which the level of a benchmark policy interest rate is calculated 
based on a particular formula using, for example, the deviation of the observed inflation rate from the targeted 
inflation rate, and the output gap. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
