Seppo Honkapohja: The current economic situation in Finland 
Keynote address by Mr Seppo Honkapohja, Member of the Board of the Bank of Finland, at 
the conference “Reform Capacity and Macroeconomic Performance in the Nordic Countries”, 
Copenhagen, 20 September 2013. 
 Introduction 
I first want to thank the organizers of this conference for inviting me to deliver the key note 
speech this evening. My topic is the current economic situation for Finland.  
Finland is the only euro area country with an AAA sovereign credit rating and stable outlook 
from  all  major  rating  agencies.  Finland  is  known  as  a  country  with  strong  growth,  strong 
competitiveness,  strong  fiscal  balance,  and  strong  banks.  A  common  perception  –  until 
recently, at least – has been that the Finnish economy is a success story, though exports are 
currently suffering from the global financial crisis.  
Among Finns, the humble attitudes following the deep depression of the early 1990s have 
long ago given way to a feeling that we are good in almost everything and that we can even 
teach others how to do things - even how to run an economy. 
Is there a solid basis for such perceptions and attitudes? Perhaps you can already guess that 
the answer is negative. Unfortunately, in some important respects, the Finnish economy is 
not  doing  well.  Developments  during  the  past  5  years  have  revealed  vulnerabilities  in  the 
economy. 
Since  the  autumn  of  2008,  Finnish  growth  performance  has  been  disappointing  –  weaker 
than  the  euro  area  average.  Finnish  GDP  is  now  5%  smaller  than  it  was  in  mid-2008. 
Developments  in  exports  have  been  particularly  poor,  as  exports  are  currently  about 
1/5 smaller than before the financial crisis. 
The  well-being  of  many  Finns  has,  however,  not  been  badly  hurt  by  these  developments. 
Unemployment has remained relatively low, and household real incomes have mostly been 
on an upward trend. Recently the future has become much more uncertain. There are big 
problems that need to be solved, and difficult political decisions than need to be made. 
Current difficulties 
The  economy  is  facing  new  challenges:  exports  have  remained  weak,  and  the  current 
account has turned negative. After 2007 the decline in exports has been the deepest among 
all euro area countries. In addition, there is one challenge which has not come as a surprise: 
the demographic change. 
Three main reasons for the new challenges are (1) weakness in the international economy, 
(2) problems of electronics and paper industries, and (3) losses in cost competitiveness. 
Weakness  in  the  international  economy  has  hurt  Finnish  exports,  which  are  dominated  by 
various  investments  goods.  Investments  have  remained  weak  in  developed  economies  for 
the past 5 years. 
The  problems  in  the  electronics  industry  have  been  related  to  one  large  company,  Nokia, 
which lost its technological advantage in mobile phones. Paper industry, in turn, suffers from 
the longer-term decline in demand for printing paper in Europe. Another major factor behind 
the decline in exports is the weakening of cost competitiveness. Wages and unit labour costs 
have increased about 10% since 1999 compared to the average of all trading partners and 
compared to euro area. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
How did cost competitiveness end up weakening so much? One part is misjudgment and bad 
luck regarding timing. Just before the global financial crises escalated, a round of union-level 
wage  agreements  took  place.  Amid  rapid  growth  and  with  seemingly  benign  outlook, 
generous wage increases were agreed upon, and the contracts mostly extended for about 
two years. Then the financial crisis struck, leading to slowdown in wages in many countries 
while Finnish wages diverged. 
Why was no correction made after the contracts had expired? The reason probably has a lot 
to do with the relatively muted increase in unemployment in Finland. Employment has been 
supported  by  growth  in  domestic  demand,  especially  household  consumption.  Domestic 
demand has also been supported by loose fiscal policies and low ECB interest rates. The low 
interest rates were transmitted to loan costs of the public by the strong and stable banking 
system and the system of variable-rate in most loans.  
The growth in domestic demand in recent years has been financed to an increasing extent by 
debt, as households and the public sector have run financial deficits. This has been possible 
due to the strengths of the economy. Household and public sector indebtedness remained 
relatively low in Finland in the years before the global financial crisis. However, the recent 
increases in debt gradually add to the vulnerabilities in the economy. 
Competitiveness issues 
How much has Finnish cost competitiveness weakened? I already mentioned the increases 
in wages and unit labour costs for the whole economy. Developments in the open sector of 
the  economy  are  obviously  very  significant  as  manufactured  goods  account  for  much  of 
foreign  trade.  Hence  its  cost  competitiveness  is  important  for  the  whole  economy. 
Manufacturing unit labour costs in Finland are currently at about the same level as in 1999. 
However,  manufacturing  ULCs  provide  far  too  rosy  a  picture  of  cost  competitiveness  for 
Finnish manufacturing. 
This  misperception  arises  because  of  price  developments.  The  price  component  of  value 
added declined considerably in Finnish manufacturing since 1999. As prices have fallen, the 
value of production has increased a lot less than its volume. The growth in labour productivity 
has not been accompanied by a corresponding increase in the ability of firms to pay higher 
wages. 
The main reason for the exceptionally weak price developments is the large share that both 
paper  and  electronics  industries  have  had  in  Finnish  manufacturing.  Price  developments 
have  been  exceptional  in  these  two  industries.  Decline  in  paper  demand,  together  with 
overcapacity has depressed paper prices. Prices in electronics, in turn, have declined due to 
the  rapid  technological  advances  leading  to  better  and  better  products.  As  prices  are 
measured  in  quality-adjusted  terms,  measured  prices  are  declining,  which  means  that 
measured  production  volumes  increase  significantly  when  compared  to  current-price 
production in electronics. 
Asymmetric shocks and wage divergence 
The possibility of adverse developments such as the current problems was foreseen in the 
Finnish  discussion  about  the  pros  and  cons  of  membership  in  a  monetary  union.  For 
example,  the  Report  of  the  Expert  group  commissioned  by  the  Finnish  Prime  Minister  in 
19971 raised concerns about the risk of asymmetric negative shocks and about the risk of 
domestic wage developments diverging from those of other EMU countries. 
                                                 
1  Finland and the EMU, Publication 1997/26 of the Prime Minister's Office. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Evidently, the two risks have been realized. The decline of Finland's electronics and paper 
industries are an example of a negative asymmetric shock. Wage developments since 2008 
are a clear case of wage divergence between Finland and other EMU countries. To mitigate 
the impacts of these problems, the Finnish economy must try to create new areas of strength 
in  industrial  and  service  activities.  Simultaneously  there  must  be  corrections  to  the  wage 
divergences. The latter is not going to be easy for a monetary union country.  
Public finance concerns 
Even  though  the  state  of  Finnish  public  finances  is  better  than  in  many  other  European 
countries,  there  has  been  a  clear  deterioration.  General  government  deficit  has  increased 
considerably. The debt level looks likely to exceed the 60% level soon, perhaps next year, 
unless new consolidation measures are imposed. 
As the problems in the economy can be seen as being largely structural by nature and not 
only cyclical, the government deficit cannot be expected to be corrected by a recovery in the 
international economy.  
At the same time, the effect of population ageing on the economy has begun to show. The 
size  of  the  working-age  population  has  started  to  diminish.  Finnish  public  finances  have  a 
long-term sustainability gap of around 5 to 6 percent, by most estimates. 
The Finnish economy is expected to suffer more from the effects of ageing than most other 
European countries. Old-age dependency ratio will be very high by 2030. This is because of 
the specific features of the intense post-war baby boom. 
What economic policies are needed in Finland? 
One element should be low nominal wage growth in order to improve cost competitiveness. 
As  wages  have  increased  significantly  compared  to  trading  partners,  they  should  increase 
less in the coming years. Wage increases in the whole economy should be set according to 
the state of the economy's open sector. 
The social partners recently signed a centralized wage agreement with relatively low wage 
increases.  Provided  that  the  individual  unions  and  employer  organizations  accept  the 
centralized agreement, wage settlements are likely to lead to some improvement in Finnish 
cost competitiveness during the next two years.  
Given that the problems of the Finnish economy are to a large extent structural by nature, 
structural  reforms  are  needed  in  addition  to  improvements  in  cost  competitiveness.  The 
economy needs to make reforms to correct the structural problems. 
It is important to emphasize that the economy has major strengths - education, infrastructure, 
effective government, reliable judicial system, etc. These must be preserved so that there is 
a solid basis for finding new areas of economic activity. However, one must not forget that 
structural  reforms  are  needed;  these  reforms  should  lead  to  permanent  increases  in 
production potential. 
Perhaps most important area of reform concerns the labour supply. Working careers need to 
start earlier and end later. As the population ages, improving the production and productivity 
of publicly funded health and care services are a vital area for reform.  
Let me mention a few other areas of reform. Competition could be increased in services and 
construction, with changes in regulations being one part of the possible reforms. Supply of 
housing  and  especially  of  land  for  housing  development  could  be  supported  by  the 
government policies. This would increase economic welfare by lowering the pace of growth 
in house prices and rents and facilitate efficiency of the labour market in bigger cities.  
The government has recently laid out its program for structural reforms with the purpose of 
improving the long-term sustainability of public finances. The program contains wide-ranging 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
measures, and the goal of the government plans is ambitious. The purpose is to eliminate 
completely the fiscal sustainability gap. 
At  this  point,  the  detailed  contents  of  this  government  program  still  remain  mostly  to  be 
decided. However, the government plans to act relatively quickly and I certainly hope that the 
government will be able to agree on the important details of its program. Success would be a 
very important step forward in solving the current problems of the Finnish economy. 
Final remarks 
Rating agencies seem to have strong confidence in the Finnish political system's ability to 
make difficult decisions. At this point, such ability is badly needed. The difficult decisions can 
still be made with no external pressure. It is important to make the decisions early enough so 
that  Finland  can  avoid  the  situation  where  the  market  pressures  force  the  government  to 
make the decisions. 
The next months will be a major test for the reform capacity of the Finnish political system. 
Finland  will  thus  be  a  case  study  for  the  subject  matter  of  this  conference.  Progress  in 
reforms  is  needed  in  order  for  the  Finnish  economy  to  be  a  success  story  again.  What  is 
certain is that things will change: the Finnish economy will not go back to what it was five 
years ago. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
