DeLisle Worrell: Credit unions have a competitive edge 
Feature  address  by  Dr  DeLisle Worrell,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank of  Barbados,  at  the 
Awards Ceremony of Endeavour Cooperative Credit Union Ltd, Bridgetown, 7 October 2013. 
 I very much welcome this opportunity to address your awards ceremony and to join with you 
in  celebrating  the  Endeavour  Credit  Union’s  growth  and  contribution  to  its  members’ 
wellbeing to date. Over the past four decades or thereabouts, credit unions in Barbados, the 
US and elsewhere have grown in importance relative to other types of financial institutions. 
Credit  unions  have  been  able  to  achieve  this  because  of  their  competitive  edge  vis-à-vis 
banks, in serving the needs of individuals and households. Let me elaborate.  
As you know, Barbados now has no locally owned banks, a situation which is not unfamiliar 
to  us.  For  most  of  our  history  our  banks  have  been  foreign  owned,  an  inevitable 
consequence  of  the  fact  that  Barbados  is  such  a  small  economy.  By  and  large,  very  big 
banks  tend  to  have  a  more  solid  foundation  than  small  banks,  because  they  are  able  to 
spread  the  risks  that  are  inherent  to  banking  over  many  activities,  countries  and  regions. 
That offers a better chance of mitigating the effects of a downturn in any one activity, and the 
impact of loss of profits in one area may be compensated by gains in other areas. Locally 
owned banks in small countries do not have the same range and scope, and they tend to be 
relatively unprofitable, compared with branches of foreign banks.  
As our banks have modernised their systems and controls, and as the international financial 
market  has  become  more  competitive,  banks  have  become  more  impersonal  and  more 
inflexible in their approach to lending. This is not something that is welcomed either by banks 
or  their  customers,  but  it  is  an  inevitable  consequence  of  large  size  and  increasing 
complexity. Building relationships with your customers is the safest way to do banking. The 
most  successful  banker,  in  the  long  run,  is  the  banker  who  has  the  largest  portfolio  of 
dependable  borrowers,  who  are  known  to  have  the  willingness  and  ability  to  service  their 
borrowings  on  time.  The  best  way  to  establish  the  borrower’s  credentials  is  to  build  a 
relationship  with  them,  so  that  they  may  establish  a  track  record  that  speaks  to  their 
competence and prudence. However, big banks with wide networks find it difficult to do this 
in today’s dynamic world. Instead they must rely mainly on rules of thumb, credit limits, credit 
scoring, collateral, and similar tools.  
Credit  unions  have  an  inherent  advantage  in  this  regard,  because  your  institution  is 
structured around the relationships of your members to each other, to the credit union, and, 
most often, to some other institution or location, be that a church, profession, workplace or 
town or village. Your members are known to the union, and are subject to a powerful social 
sanction  that  serves  as  an  incentive  to  service  loans  granted  by  the  credit  union.  Nobody 
wants to endure the humiliation of being known as a defaulter, and feeling that all and sundry 
are  ostracising  you  and  looking  down  on  you  as  a  deadbeat.  As  Mohammed  Younis  from 
Bangladesh, the man who dreamed up microcredit realised, social sanction can be the most 
powerful incentive to pay what you owe. It follows that cooperative institutions such as credit 
unions will have a better track record than banks, so long as they are tolerably well run.  
Credit unions typically are able to offer a better deal to their customers than banks can afford 
to do. They do not have all the overhead costs that a big bank has to pay, and any surpluses 
the  union  realises  are  added  to  members’  bonuses  and  distributed.  Credit  unions  are  not 
under pressure from shareholders to maximise their profits, as banks are. They are therefore 
able to accept deposits at higher rates than would be profitable for banks, and make loans at 
somewhat better rates than banks are able to do.  
Therefore,  as  financial  systems  are  modernised  in  many  countries,  credit  unions  come  to 
play  an  increasing  role  in  the  provision  of  financial  services  to  households.  The  growth  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
credit union membership is a phenomenon that may be observed not only in Barbados but in 
the US, Canada and many other countries.  
The establishment of our Financial Services Commission in 2011 was an important milestone 
in the ongoing strengthening of credit unionism in Barbados. The FSC is the new regulator of 
credit  unions  and  all  financial  institutions  other  than  banks,  finance  companies  and  trust 
companies. The FSC oversees credit unions to ensure that their operations are satisfactory, 
and that they are lending prudently. All credit unions report regularly to the FSC, which also 
carries out physical inspections from time to time. Any credit union that is not operating at 
internationally acceptable standards is required by the FSC to remedy all deficiencies, as a 
condition  of  renewing  its  license.  Credit  union  members  therefore  have  an  assurance  that 
licensed credit unions are well run, and that measures are in train to ensure that all licensed 
institutions are up to par.  
The insurance of credit union deposits would be an additional reassurance for credit union 
members.  A  proposal  for  a  deposit  insurance  fund  for  credit  unions  to  be  opened  at  the 
Barbados Deposit Insurance Corporation is under consideration, and final details are being 
worked out prior to implementation.  
The growing importance of credit unions contributes importantly to increasing the efficiency 
with  which  our  financial  system  serves  the  needs  of  Barbadians.  Credit  unions  provide 
practical,  sustainable  competition  for  banks  because  they  do  not  go  head-to-head  with 
banks, which are so much larger. Instead, the credit union business model permits them to 
be competitive with giant banks and be profitable, in spite of their small size. That provides 
the  average  household  with  a  better financial  service,  at  a good  price. I  expect  that  credit 
unions  will  continue  to  grow  in  importance,  and  be  recognised  as  a  vital  element  in  our 
increasingly sophisticated financial system. The credit union sector is an excellent example 
of the way our financial system is adapting to the Barbadian reality, because it grows out of 
our tradition of thrift, self-reliance and cooperation.  
The development of our financial system needs to be seen in the context of the progress of 
the economy as a whole. Barbados is poised to resume economic growth that is driven by 
the enterprise, vision, determination and persistence of Barbadians in all walks of life. We are 
clear  about  the  way  forward:  it  is  based  on  expanding  our  foreign  exchange  activities: 
tourism, international business, and rum, our main foreign exchange earners, and alternative 
energy, which saves us foreign exchange. Barbadian entrepreneurs must conceptualise the 
products and services that will refresh and enrich our offerings in these areas, and actively 
solicit  the  foreign  participation  that  may  be  needed  to  help  to  bring  them  to  fruition.  Our 
government  has  ongoing  initiatives  designed  to  improve  business  facilitation,  which  is 
recognised as an urgent priority. For our workforce the priority is to improve our productivity, 
build  our  reputation  for  excellence  in  service,  and  to  always  give  our  clients  outstanding 
value for their money.  
Ever since the onset of the global recession in 2008, your economic policy makers have kept 
a  stable  economic  platform  from  which  to  launch  the  push  for  renewed  economic  growth. 
Foreign  exchange  reserves  have  been  kept  well  over  $1  billion  over  the  past  5  years,  by 
always holding the lid on spending, in light of expected foreign currency inflows. That is what 
motivated the August budget. It maintains the stable platform. Growth will come as a result of 
the structure that the private sector builds on that foundation.  
The challenges that face our economy are formidable, but students of history will recognise 
that  they  are  far  less  so  than  the  challenges  Barbadian  society  has  had  to  overcome  to 
achieve  the  highest  living standard  of  any  independent  country  in the  Caribbean. We may 
therefore be confident that we will win our way to a new era of growth and prosperity through 
the exercise of those virtues that have brought us this far. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
