Eddie Yue: The development and future of the offshore Renminbi market 
Welcome  remarks  by  Mr  Eddie  Yue,  Deputy  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary 
Authority,  at  the  Third  Meeting  of  the  Hong  Kong  –  London  RMB  Forum,  Hong  Kong, 
26 September 2013. 
 The Right Honourable Greg Clark MP, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen: 
1. 
I would like to extend a very warm welcome to all of you to this seminar, which is 
organised as part of the Third Meeting of the Hong Kong – London RMB Forum. The Forum 
was launched in January 2012, and it aims to foster cooperation between Hong Kong and 
London on the development of offshore RMB business. By improving linkages between our 
two financial centres, it is hoped that the Forum could help to further deepen and broaden 
the  offshore  RMB  market,  and  to  better  enable  businesses  and  financial  institutions  to 
capture the opportunities arising from the increased channels for transacting with China.  
2. 
Significant progress has been made in the development of the offshore RMB market 
since  our  first  meeting  in  May  2012.  It  is  encouraging  to  see  that  market  practitioners  are 
making  use  of  the  policy  headroom  to  develop  RMB  products  and  services  to  meet  their 
customers’ needs. Opportunities in RMB are also being factored into the decision-making of 
many businesses and financial institutions.  
3. 
Here,  instead  of  focusing  on  recent  developments  in  RMB,  I  would  like  to  take  a 
broader  and  more  forward-looking  view.  In  particular,  China’s  financial  sector  reforms  and 
specifically  the  eventual  opening  up  of  its  capital  account  would  likely  have  profound 
implications  for  the  global  financial  landscape.  It  would  be  interesting  to  view  RMB 
developments from the perspective of these potential changes – what do they mean for the 
global financial landscape and what would be the role of the RMB amid these developments.  
4. 
As we are all aware, China has been moving steadily with financial sector reforms 
and  capital  account  liberalisation,  taking  steps  towards  allowing  market  forces  to  play  a 
greater  role  in  its  financial  system.  Recently,  the  Chinese  authorities  re-affirmed  their 
commitment  to  further  financial  reforms,  including  the  easing  of  market  access,  the 
liberalisation  of  interest  rates,  as  well  as  working  towards  eventually  making  the  RMB 
convertible under the capital account. And this process has reached an interesting juncture. 
The future reform and liberalisation efforts will arguably have a greater impact on the global 
financial landscape than that of measures undertaken so far.  
5. 
As China moves further along the path to open up its capital account, the channels 
for interaction with global financial markets would broaden and become more efficient. Over 
the past decade or so, as China rose to become the second largest economy, we have all 
seen the changes to world economic relationships brought about by China’s integration into 
the global economic system. We are now beginning to see China’s integration into the global 
financial system in a more prominent way. 
6. 
Until  now,  the  channels  for  cross-border  flows  are  only  open  to  current  account 
items  such  as  trade,  and  to  direct  investments  under  the  capital  account.  Portfolio 
investments  under  the  capital  account  into  and  out  of  China  are  mainly  confined  to 
designated  channels  and  are  subject  to  quotas,  for  example,  the  Qualified  Foreign 
Institutional  Investor  (QFII)  scheme  with  quotas  totalling  US$150  billion,  and  the  Qualified 
Domestic  Institutional  Investor  (QDII)  scheme  with  quotas  of  US$87  billion.  It  can  be 
reasonably expected that a further opening of the capital account would entail liberalisation 
of  these  channels  and  the  addition  of  new  avenues.  These  would  result  in  an  increase  in 
cross-border capital flows.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
7. 
Although it may not be easy to provide a precise estimate of the magnitude of the 
flows, given that China’s economy is the second largest in the world, and taking into account 
the size of both its domestic savings and its capital markets, one can probably say that the 
size of capital flows resulting from China’s capital account liberalisation would likely be felt in 
the global financial system.  
8. 
From the perspective of Chinese savers, given their high level of savings and the 
fact  that  their  investment  options  are  mostly  limited  to  domestic  markets  at  present,  there 
would be a desire on their part for investment diversification into international markets. The 
resulting investment flows, as they are liberalised, could be substantial for individual markets 
where these funds flow into.  
9. 
In the other direction, with China being a dynamic and sizable economy, the world’s 
investors would be increasingly keen about participating in China’s capital markets, thereby 
gaining exposure to new investment opportunities. The experience of many other economies 
also suggests that capital-account liberalisation brings along with it a deepening of financial 
markets, making them even more attractive to investors. 
10. 
In all of this, the role of the RMB will be crucial. Notwithstanding the current, only 
partial  convertibility  of  the  RMB,  it  is  already  the  ninth  most  actively  traded  currency 
according to the latest Bank for International Settlements Triennial Survey. And the RMB has 
advanced  to  rank  eleven  as  world  payments  currency  according  to  SWIFT,  a  financial 
messaging  service  provider.  Meanwhile  the  RMB  is  being  added  to  the  foreign  exchange 
reserves of an increasing number of economies. 
11. 
In terms of international transactions where RMB can already play a role, such as in 
trade settlement and foreign direct investment, transactions in RMB have climbed steadily. 
Today, some 13 percent of all of China’s trade transactions are settled in RMB and about 
15 to 20 percent of foreign direct investment into China is conducted in the currency. Bearing 
in mind that the RMB trade-settlement pilot scheme was only introduced in 2009, this is an 
impressive achievement in such a short space of time. And there is plenty of room for further 
expansion of these numbers. 
12. 
The  greater  use  of  RMB  in  international  transactions  will  be  closely  related  to 
China’s financial reforms and liberalisation, with new fund flow channels being opened up in 
RMB. For example, the RMB QFII scheme allows offshore institutions to use RMB funds to 
invest in Chinese capital markets, and it is a new channel in addition to the US dollar-based 
QFII scheme. And further to a recent relaxation, outflows under the QDII scheme can also be 
made in RMB. Such developments, in turn, will bolster the use of the RMB in trade, foreign 
direct investment and international transactions, thereby supporting the further development 
of the offshore RMB market. 
13. 
While recent developments in RMB have been exciting, given the possible scope of 
future  expansion,  we  are  probably  still  only  at  the  early  stage  of  what  could  be  more 
significant changes in the years to come. After all, RMB deposits and bonds outstanding in 
the offshore market only account for about one percent of onshore deposits and outstanding 
debt respectively. The possibility for expansion remains substantial. 
14. 
One of the aims of the Hong Kong-London Forum is to assess what all this means to 
the financial institutions and to corporates — many of whose representatives are gathered 
here today. 
15. 
For  corporates,  especially  those  already  having  business  links  with  China,  it  is 
important  to  get  prepared  for  the  increasing  use  of  RMB  as  a  currency  for  transaction, 
financing  and  investments.  Indeed  some  companies  have  already  begun  to  adapt  their 
internal systems and processes so that they are able to make greater use of RMB, both in 
dealing  with  their  Chinese  counterparts  and  in  their  own  financial  management.  This 
integration of RMB in their business decisions has in many instances served to strengthen 
their trade and investment links with China. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
16. 
For  financial  institutions,  things  are  also  in  motion.  It  can  be  envisaged  that  the 
intermediation  and  servicing  of  capital  flows  into  and  out  of  China  present  fresh  new 
opportunities, not least with the entry of a whole new grouping of investors into international 
capital  markets.  Also,  with  the  institutional  management  of  household  savings  being 
relatively low  in China at present, an increase to levels more commonly observed in other 
economies would signify a great deal of opportunities for the asset management sector. 
17. 
Hong Kong, being the gateway to China, has become the hub for cross-border asset 
management, and it has been a natural base for the managers of QDIIs, QFIIs and RQFIIs. 
As  we  look  ahead,  while  the  investments  funds  are  coming  through  Hong  Kong  as  a  first 
step,  it  does  not  mean  that  the  flows  necessarily  have  to  stop  here.  As  a  global  financial 
centre  and  an  important  base  for  asset  management,  London  makes  a  natural  partner for 
Hong Kong when it comes to serving the growing needs of Chinese investors when they start 
investing  into  a  wider  array  of  markets  and  instruments.  And  similarly,  London  and  Hong 
Kong  could  explore  synergies  when  it  comes  to  sourcing  the  funds  for  investments  into 
China. 
18. 
I hope I have given you a taste of the many possibilities that lay before us as the 
RMB moves into the international financial landscape. This is a very exciting juncture and I 
hope  that  we  –  financial  institutions,  businesses,  policymakers  –  would  work  together  to 
address some of the issues that may inevitably  come up along the process while creating 
values out of this collaboration. To begin with, today’s seminar is a good opportunity for us all 
to share experiences in RMB and to learn from each other. Let me once again extend the 
warmest welcome to all of you.  
19. 
Thank you.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
