Maja Kadievska-Vojnovik: Current trends and future of the financial 
system in the region 
Address  by  Ms  Maja  Kadievska-Vojnovik,  Vice-Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  the 
Republic  of  Macedonia,  at  the  regional  summit  of  governors,  bankers  and  businessmen 
“Financial systems in the region”, Belgrade, 8 November 2013. 
 Dear Mrs. Jorgovanka Tabakovic 
Dear Governors 
Dear guests, 
First of all, I on behalf of the governor of the NBRM, Mr. Bogov, I would like to apologize for 
his non attendance today, on this very important event. He was unable to joint this event due 
to  objective  reasons,  but,  let  me  express  my  truthfully  pleasure  that  I  have  opportunity  to 
express  my  views  and  the  views  of  the  governor  regarding  to  the  latest  development  and 
future challenges for our country and our banking system. 
After the double-dip recession, in the first half of 2013 SEE are on the way of recovery. The 
GDP growth  in the  RM  in  the first  half  of the  year  is  3.4%  and  is  highly  influenced  by  the 
positive contribution of reforms’ agenda. The improved business environment (RM is at the 
list of 10 best reformers according to the Doing Business for 2013), the entrance of FDI's that 
have  lead  to  export  diversification  alongside  with  the  positive  developments  at  the  labor 
market,  are  key  growth  drivers.  The  increased  public  investments  in  the  infrastructure, 
provided by still comfortable fiscal position (the budget deficit was on average 3% of GDP 
during the crisis and the government debt is at 34% of GDP, the forth lowest in the Europe) 
are additional factor for growth. However, although the negative spillover effects of the global 
and Euro zone crisis to the trade, remittances and FDI’s could be diminished as Euro zone 
recover, still, the financial system of our SEE countries, that is broadly based on banks, is 
exposed to the risk of disruptive withdrawal of funds by European banks. 
Thus,  when  we  assess  the  crisis’s  impact  on  the  financial  system  in  our  economies,  we 
should distinguish the two phases. In the first phase of the global crisis, the negative spillover 
effects  were  pronounced  on  the  local  capital  markets,  with  large  portfolio  withdrawals  by 
institutional investors. On the other side, in that time, the Vienna Initiative has prevented a 
systemic banking crisis. However, with the new wave of the Eurozone crisis (extended at the 
end  of  2011),  there  are  many  new  challenges  for  SEE  countries  that  should  be  rightly 
followed by Vienna Initiative 2. 
Concerns with respect to Euro zone banks’ deleveraging, due to new capital requirements 
by the EBA are materialized. The deleveraging by the Euro zone parent banks have affected 
the  SEE  credits’  developments  and  now  there  is  new  concern  regarding  to  the  upcoming 
asset-quality review and stress test of the Euro zone banks that could lengthen this process 
even further. 
In Macedonia, the relatively low share of external funding in total funding (10.8%; Q3 2013) 
shielded  our  banks  from  broader  deleveraging  trends  among  European  banks.  However, 
group strategies by foreign parents, which are asking strengthening the capital ratios at the 
consolidated  level,  impose  limits  for  asset  growth  in  the  largest  banks  in  the  system.  This 
largely has restricted the credits growth in our economy. The subsidiaries of European banks 
account for 56% of the banking system assets and are systemically important for Macedonia, 
but still account for a minor share of the overall group assets (parent banks are from Greece, 
Slovenia, Austria, and France). Local subsidiaries are well capitalized, liquid and have limited 
exposure  to  parents.  Their  funding  structure  is  mostly  based  on  local  deposits.  Thus,  on 
system level, the funding liquidity risks remain low (loan-to-deposit ratio 0.89, high share of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
time deposits 67% in total deposits, liquid assets to total assets ratio 32% which is higher 
than the pre-crisis level). Since the start of the crisis, the balance sheets are expanding (total 
banks’ liabilities as of Q3 2013/Q3 2008 raised by 43% and in Q3 2012/ Q3 2012 for 7%) and 
this trend has continued with the share of external funding remaining relatively stable. The 
capital adequacy ratio has climbed to 17.3 percent (with tier 1 capital at 14.7 percent). Non-
performing loans rose moderately in the second quarter of this year (to 11.9% of total private 
sector credits), but the growth is continuously slowing, and they are fully covered by loan loss 
provisions  (RM  is  within  the  group  of  countries  with  largest  LL  provision  coverage  ratio). 
Profitability  is  lower  but  positive,  and  profits  are  being  used  largely  to  strengthen  capital 
buffers. The euroization of deposits continues to decrease gradually to below pre-crisis levels 
(44% of total deposit are FX deposits or with FX clause). 
Even though the banking sector is in overall sound shape, the credits developments are not 
favorable and supportive to companies. The reasons for deceleration of the credits growth 
are on both sides, but mostly relay on supply side. Banks are likely to remain risk averse in 
an environment of low interest rate margin and the group strategies limit the credits’ growth 
potential. Thus, although the banking system mainly relies on domestic sources of funding, 
the  consolidation  of  the  Euro  zone  banking  system  and  the  EC  pressure  on  troubled 
European  banks  that  have  received  international  bailout  to  sell  their  subsidiaries  in  the 
region,  are  the  potential  source  of  risks.  The  slow  realization  of  this  process  could  cause 
confidence  shocks  in  our  economies,  thus  endangering  financial  stability.  The  latest 
Deleveraging and Credit Monitor well notes this process, it says -while past efforts were 
focused on raising capital on the market, future efforts are expected to emphasize the sales 
of  assets  and  affiliates.  In  such  an  environment,  our  commitment  could  be  to  protect  the 
domestic banking system, to foster banks’ mergers and takeovers process with as much as 
possible, minor negative consequences. 
Another challenge, is the introduction of the new Basel III regulatory framework, with 
more restrictive liquidity and capital requirements that may impact the cost and availability of 
financing  for  SEE.  In  case  of  Macedonia,  the  straightforward  structure  of  banks’  balance 
sheets  as  well  as  the  presence  of  a  high  quality  capital  facilitates  a  relatively  comfortable 
position for the NBRM and the Macedonian banks in their efforts to achieve the new Basel III 
capital requirements. The banks are of universal type with “simple” banking services without 
complex and structured financial instruments (credit risk is the dominant), well capitalized 
(capital ratios range from 9.1 per cent to 38.2 per cent, well-above the regulatory minimum of 
8%) and our current regulatory framework limits the definition of equity and tier one capital 
only to high quality capital instruments. 
However,  there  are  some  challenges  regarding  to  the  implementation  of  the  capital 
buffers,  especially  the  countercyclical  capital  buffer.  In  addition,  capital  market  is  still 
underdeveloped.  In  the  past  several  years  there  are  limited  number  of  private  bond 
issuances.  As  a  result,  banks  have  limited  options  to  fund  themselves  through  local  bond 
markets. This feature could be considered as an advantage for the current quality of capital 
of  the  Macedonian  banks,  but  it  could  present  a  considerable  constraint  in  meeting  the 
liquidity standards established by the Basel III package. 
Implementation of Basel III for liquidity ratios by parent banks may have implications 
for  domestic  banks  and  monetary  policy  implementation  in  our  countries.  The  liquid 
assets of our domestic banks are composed at large portion of domestic CB-bills and T-bills 
and accordingly, they are without investment rating (S&P BB with stable outlook; Fitch BB+ 
with  sable  outlook).  This  could  cause  serious  disruption  of  design  and  effectiveness  of 
monetary policy. Possibly, it could ask for transition from market based instruments to direct 
measures -such as reserve requirement. 
Another  challenge  is  to  straighten  the  coordination  with  the  home-host  supervisory 
authorities. It is extremely important and central to the country’s financial stability. NBRM is 
adequately  included  in  the  operation  of  some  of  the  supervisory  colleges,  but  not  for  all 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Macedonian  subsidiaries  of  foreign  banks.  As  a  result,  NBRM  is  not  always  adequately 
informed, which could harm its ability to effectively determine the necessary capital level of 
these  banks.  In  addition,  there  are  still  some  unresolved  gaps  in  regulatory  coordination 
between home and host countries in the EU Single Supervision Mechanism. 
And last but not least, the future challange will be impact of Single Resolution Mechanism for 
a European banking union to our banks and the prospective scaling-back of unconventional 
monetary policy that could affect the borrowing costs. 
Summing  up,  the  ongoing  international  regulatory  reform,  though  primarily  intended  to 
promote financial stability, may also have some unintended adverse effects on emerging and 
developing economies, with SEE region not being an exemption. Given the similarity of the 
financial  systems,  the  SEE  region  as  a  whole  faces  similar  challenges  also  sharing  the 
common concerns. This raises considerations for stronger regional cooperation as important 
tool  to  effectively  address  future  challenges.  The  recent  Bank  of  Albania’s  initiative  for 
region’s joint participation within Vienna Initiative 2.0, advocated by the Bank of Albania as 
Steering  Committee  member,  can  be  considered  as  a  huge  step  forward  in  building 
consistent cooperation framework. In it’s very first joint initiative, the region focuses on home-
host  coordination  including  the  confidentiality,  cooperation  and  exchange  of  information 
between supervision authorities in the home and host countries, the need for EU banks to 
adequately  adapt  their  strategies  to  local  needs  in  host  countries  as  well  as  some 
coordination  issues  among  non  EU  host  countries  and  ECB/SSM.  The  NBRM  strongly 
welcomes  this  joint  cooperation  initiative  hoping  for  it  to  highly  contribute  toward 
strengthening region’s effectiveness in tackling various future problems that concern as all. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
