William C Dudley: Unconventional monetary policies and central bank 
independence 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  Bank  of  Mexico  international  conference  “Central  bank 
independence – Progress and challenges”, Mexico City, 15 October 2013. 
 It  is  a  pleasure  to  be  here  today.  Does  the  implementation  of  unconventional  monetary 
policies pose a threat to central bank independence? My short answer, which I will elaborate 
on, is that while the threat is low, central bankers need to be cognizant of such risks, and 
clearly explain the motivations for their actions in order to mitigate such risks. 
The best way for central banks to maintain their independence is to use all their available 
monetary policy tools to best achieve their objectives. Because the use of our unconventional 
monetary  policy  tools  has  been  in  pursuit  of  our  dual  mandate  objectives  of  maximum 
sustainable employment in the context of price stability, I do not see the use of these tools as 
creating significant new risks to our independence. 
As always, what I have to say today reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the 
Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve System. 
To start, it is important to be clear on what we mean by unconventional monetary policies. In 
my remarks, I am going to focus only on the set of unconventional monetary policies that are 
relevant today in an environment in which central banks are constrained from lowering their 
policy rate any further due to the zero lower bound. I will not discuss the type of extraordinary 
interventions that occurred at the height of the financial crisis.1  
A  starting  point  is  that  the  independence  of  the  central  bank  with  respect  to  its  budget 
supports  its  overall  independence.  The  Federal  Reserve’s  traditional  monetary  policy 
framework  has  helped  to  assure  this  budgetary  independence.  The  liability  side  of  our 
balance sheet consisted primarily of currency and reserve balances on which we did not pay 
any  interest.  The  asset  side  consisted  primarily  of  Treasury  securities.  There  was  no 
meaningful credit risk and the interest rate risk was limited because assets were generally 
held  to  maturity.  This,  combined  with  the  zero  cost  of  the  Fed’s  liabilities,  resulted  in  the 
Federal  Reserve  turning  over  a  large  amount  of  earnings  to  the  Treasury  each  year  after 
covering all of its operating costs and retaining a small portion of its earnings to maintain a 
level of surplus capital equal to the amount of capital paid-in by member banks. 
Thus, one key question is how this budgetary independence might be threatened through the 
use  of  unconventional  monetary  policies.  After  all,  some  of  these  policies  do  have 
implications  for  the  Federal  Reserve’s  remittances  to  the  Treasury  and,  thus,  could 
conceivably create a potential threat to the Federal Reserve’s budgetary independence. 
To step back, the Federal Reserve’s set of unconventional monetary policies has consisted 
of three major components: 
• 
• 
Forward guidance with respect to the path of the federal funds rate target. 
Large-scale  asset  purchases  of  longer-term  Treasury  securities  and  agency 
mortgage-backed securities (MBS). 
                                                
1   However,  it  is  important  to  note  that  some  of  those  interventions  did  indeed  result  in  tighter  limits  on  the 
central bank’s authority as a lender of last resort. For example, the Fed’s scope to provide liquidity to troubled 
firms in unusual and exigent circumstances – under Section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Ac – was curtailed 
somewhat by the Dodd-Frank Act. This underscores the fact that central bank actions can have consequences 
with respect to independence. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 A maturity extension program in which shorter-dated Treasuries were sold and the 
proceeds used to purchase longer-dated Treasuries. 
With respect  to forward guidance,  it  is  important  to  distinguish  between  two  specific forms 
that this guidance  may  take.  In  the first form  the  central  bank  provides  its forecast for  the 
future path of the policy rate and, possibly, some sense of the degree of uncertainty around 
this path. In the second, the central bank pre-commits to a specific future path for its policy 
rate. 
Providing a forecast for the policy rate by itself does not create any budget or reputational 
risk for the Federal Reserve, so I generally do not see the first form of forward guidance as 
posing much risk to central bank independence.2  
The second form of forward guidance – pre-commitment to a policy rate path – could create 
more risk for  the central  bank. In  particular,  consider  a  scenario  in  which  the  central  bank 
decided  to  increase  monetary  accommodation  by  committing  to  maintain  a  low  short-term 
interest  rate  for  a  long  time  even  if  this  commitment  resulted  in  inflation  overshooting  the 
central bank’s objective in the future. I could see how this could create a potential threat to 
the  central  bank’s  independence.  That  is  because  the  commitment  could  force  the  central 
bank in the future to conduct monetary policy in a way that was inconsistent with the inflation 
portion of its mandate. 
Although this second form of forward guidance could create greater risk for the central bank 
with  respect  to  its  future  independence,  this  is  not  a  policy  that  has  been  adopted  by  the 
Federal Reserve. There are implementation challenges with this approach. In particular, it is 
difficult for a monetary policy committee today to institutionally bind future monetary policy 
committees  to  follow  actions  that  could  conflict  with  their  objectives  in  the  future.  Without 
such  a  credible  forward  commitment,  such  policies  would  likely  be  ineffective  in  affecting 
expectations in the manner needed to provide additional monetary policy accommodation. 
In  contrast, I think  there  are greater  potential  risks  to  central  bank  independence from the 
Fed’s  large-scale  asset  purchase  programs  and  the  Treasury  maturity  extension  program. 
These programs do create some budget risk for the Federal Reserve. The issue here is not 
that the Fed is taking credit risk because the Fed’s purchases are restricted to Treasuries 
and agency MBS. Instead, the budgetary risks stem from the fact that these asset purchase 
and maturity extension programs expose the Federal Reserve to increased interest rate risk 
that  could  affect  the  level  of  net  interest  earnings  and  therefore  the  amount  of  the  Fed’s 
remittances  back  to  the  U.S.  Treasury.  If  the  Federal  Reserve  needed  to  raise  short-term 
rates to attain its objectives, it would do so by raising the interest paid on its reserves. As a 
result, net interest earnings would fall due to the increase in interest cost. If the rise in rates 
were  sufficiently  large,  the  Federal  Reserve’s  net  interest  margin  could  turn  negative, 
resulting in losses for the Federal Reserve. 
The Fed’s earnings could also be adversely affected by asset sales. For example, if the Fed 
determined that it needed to reduce the aggregate level of reserves through asset sales, the 
Fed might incur losses by selling these assets at prices below their amortized costs. 
Although  this  risk  is  real,  I  believe  it  is  not  a  big  threat  to  the  Federal  Reserve’s 
independence for two reasons. First, the potential for this outcome is mitigated by the fact 
that  the  Federal  Reserve  has  considerable  non-interest  bearing  liabilities  on  its  balance 
sheet – namely currency. These liabilities incur no interest expense regardless of the stance 
                                                
2   While I have categorized providing a forecast for the future path of the policy rate as a form of unconventional 
monetary policy, this may be a misnomer in that some central banks use this form of forward guidance as part 
of their standard communication strategy, and the Federal Reserve may choose to continue to provide this 
form of forward guidance even after its policy rate is no longer constrained by the zero lower bound. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
of monetary policy. This means that short-term interest rates have to rise appreciably before 
the Federal Reserve’s net interest margin turns negative. 
Second, even if the Federal Reserve were to incur an operating loss either because of an 
increase  in  interest  expense  or  because  of  realized  losses  on  asset  sales,  the  Federal 
Reserve  can  create  a  deferred  asset  on  its  balance  sheet,  obviating  the  need  for  funding 
from the Treasury to the Federal Reserve. In this sense, the Federal Reserve would retain its 
budgetary independence. 
In the case where the Fed recognizes a deferred asset, its remittances to the Treasury would 
cease until that deferred asset was paid down. Is there a risk to budgetary independence that 
might  emerge  if  the  Federal  Reserve  did  not  remit  any  income  to  the  Treasury  for  a 
considerable  period  of  time?  My  response  here  is  that  we  should  take  a  long-term 
perspective when we assess the potential fiscal costs associated with the Federal Reserve’s 
enlarged balance sheet. The fact is that the Fed’s reimbursements to the U.S. Treasury have 
been around $80 billion per year in recent years, far higher than the $20 to 30 billion range 
that  applied  before  the  financial  crisis.  Under  most  scenarios,  the  Federal  Reserve’s  total 
remittances  to  the  Treasury  will  be  larger  than  they  would  have  otherwise  been  in  the 
absence of the asset purchase and maturity extension programs. 
More  importantly,  the  Fed’s  cumulative  earnings  understate  the  fiscal  implications  of  the 
Federal  Reserve’s  actions. To  the  extent  that  the  asset  purchases  have  resulted  in  easier 
financial  conditions  that  have  promoted  stronger  economic  activity,  this  in  turn  has  had  a 
positive fiscal consequence for the U.S. government. In addition, the Fed’s asset purchase 
programs  have  pushed  longer-term  interest  rates  below  what  they  would  otherwise  have 
been, reducing the overall funding expenses of the U.S. Treasury. Once we take into account 
the broader fiscal consequences of the unconventional monetary policies put in place by the 
Fed, they are quite likely to cumulatively have an overall positive impact on the government 
budget.  As  a  result,  the  use  of  unconventional  monetary  policy  tools  should  pose  no 
significant threat to the Fed’s independence. 
Now some worry that a large balance sheet may cause the Federal Reserve to deviate from 
the  monetary  policy  that  is  consistent  with  its  dual  mandate  goals  with  respect  to 
unemployment and inflation. The argument is made that concerns about the impact of policy 
changes  on  the  level  of  remittances  might  constrain  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  In 
particular, some argue that the Federal Reserve might pull its punches and not raise short-
term  interest  rates  in  as  timely  or  as  aggressive  a  manner  as  needed  to  keep  inflation  in 
check. 
I think that the size and composition of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet actually creates 
incentives  that  reinforce  the  pursuit  of  the  Federal  Reserve’s  objective  with  respect  to 
inflation. Consider what would happen if the Federal Reserve failed to tighten in a timely way. 
Inflation and long-term interest rates would rise, and this would necessitate a larger rise in 
short-term  interest  rates  and  even  greater  pressure  on  the  Federal  Reserve’s  net  interest 
margin and earnings in the future. In contrast, by tightening in a timely way, the Fed would 
prevent inflation pressures from emerging and this would limit the need for a larger rise in 
short-term rates in the future. The current size of the balance sheet would also discourage a 
premature interest rate hike. In the absence of solid improvements in labor market activity, a 
sharp  increase  in  short-term  rates  would  unnecessarily  reduce  the  Federal  Reserve  net 
interest income without any benefits in terms of achieving its dual mandate goals. Thus, the 
current size and composition of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet actually create strong 
incentives to adjust policy in a timely way. 
A  far  more  important  threat  to  central  bank  independence  than  the  use  of  unconventional 
monetary policy is whether the fiscal authorities act in a manner consistent with the central 
bank’s objectives. As recent history has shown, central banks may not  be able to achieve 
their objectives when an inconsistent fiscal regime is in place. That is, monetary and fiscal 
authorities need to share the same objectives. When the objectives differ, fiscal dominance 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
can become a major problem for the central bank. For example, if the budget trajectory were 
clearly unsustainable, then monetary policy may no longer be able to credibly act in a way 
that keeps inflation expectations in check. But I don’t think the issue of fiscal dominance is 
linked back to whether the central bank pursues unconventional monetary policies or not. 
At  the  end  of  the  day,  I  think  that  the  best  way  to  maintain  independence  is  for  central 
bankers to use all their available monetary policy tools, including unconventional monetary 
policy  tools  when  needed,  to  best  achieve  their  objectives.  The  historical  record  is  clear: 
Central  bank  independence  tends  to  lead  to  better  monetary  policy  outcomes.  But,  the 
causality also runs in reverse: Good monetary policy outcomes help ensure monetary policy 
independence. 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
