Jwala Rambarran: From diagnosis to action – advancing the Caribbean 
reform agenda 
Statement by Mr Jwala Rambarran, Governor of the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago, at 
the 2013 Caribbean Breakfast with the IMF Managing Director, Ms Christine Lagarde, Port of 
Spain, 13 October 2013. 
 Salutations: 
The Honorable Denzil Douglas, Prime Minister of St. Kitts & Nevis 
The Honorable Keith Mitchell, Prime Minister of Grenada 
Madame Christine Lagarde, Managing Director, IMF 
On  behalf  of  the  Caribbean  group  of  countries  at  the  IMF,  Trinidad  and  Tobago  is  deeply 
privileged and honored to have the opportunity to deliver the opening remarks at the 2013 
Breakfast Meeting with the IMF Managing Director. 
Madame Lagarde, we thank you for taking the time to continue the dialogue on matters of 
interest  to  Caribbean  nations  –  a  small  but  very  important  segment  of  the  Fund’s 
membership. 
I  assure  you  that  we  highly  value  this  forum.  It  is  indeed  a  unique  opportunity  for  the 
Caribbean to have open, frank and sincere dialogue with the leadership of the Fund. 
Heightened engagement 
We are encouraged by the increasing level of engagement taking place between the Fund 
and Caribbean small states, especially over the past year. 
The  Fund  has  organized  two  High-Level  Caribbean  Forums  –  the  first  in  Trinidad  and 
Tobago in September 2012 and the second, more recently, last month in the Bahamas. A 
seminal  paper  entitled  “Caribbean  Small  States:  Challenges  of  High  Debt  and  Low 
Growth” were among the papers on small states prepared by IMF staff and presented to the 
Executive Board in March of this year. 
These  were  useful  starting  points  for  analysis,  research  and  discussion  on  the  challenges 
facing  small  states,  particularly  those  in  the  Caribbean.  We  stress  the  importance  of  not 
losing traction on these issues by following through with the directives of the Board. 
We look forward to the promised consultation with Caribbean authorities on the small states 
paper  and  to  the  presentation  of  the  guidance  note  on  conducting  surveillance  in  small 
states, which is scheduled for December 2013. 
the  areas  of  macroeconomic  analysis,  debt  management  and  public 
Technical assistance 
We continue to be well-served by high-quality technical assistance, mainly through CARTAC, 
in 
financial 
management. 
In  particular,  we  appreciate  the  Fund’s  willingness  and  flexibility  to  conduct  the  study  on 
regional  financial  interconnectedness,  which  is  almost  similar  to  conducting  a  Caribbean-
wide Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP). The policy recommendations from such 
a  study  would  be  very  useful  to  strengthening  financial  stability  across  the  region  and 
enhancing crisis management frameworks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Small states: debt and financing challenges 
Madame Lagarde, in the coming year, we need to move from diagnosis to action. We need 
to  advance  on  some  of  the  most  pressing  financing  and  debt  challenges  facing  the 
Caribbean  region.  And  we  need  to  identify  areas  in  which  the  Fund  could  possibly  be  of 
assistance. 
As  you  are  aware,  most  of  the  Caribbean  small  states  are  considered  middle  and  high 
income countries, according to the World Bank’s income classification, which is based on a 
GDP  per  capita  criterion.  While  Caribbean  small  states  have  managed  to  attain  relatively 
high  income  levels,  their  GDP  growth  performance  has  been  worsening  since  2009, 
registering the deepest contraction in output among all small states. 
At  the  same  time,  despite  generally  successful  debt  restructuring  operations  in  a  few 
countries, most Caribbean small states continue to face debt burdens that are high or near 
distress levels. 
We must confront head on this high debt-low growth vicious circle. 
We  are,  therefore,  encouraged  that  the  Fund  is  willing  to  consider  additional  ways  to 
strengthen institutional capacity in small states and to better tailor some of its analytical tools 
to meet their needs. 
In  this  context,  we  welcome  the  recent  announcement  by  IMF  Deputy  Managing  Director 
Shafik  that  the  Fund  will  seek  to  include  an  explicit  growth  agenda  in  Fund-supported 
programs in small states. 
Madame  Lagarde,  we  wish  to  draw  your  attention  to  a  recent  Commonwealth  Secretariat 
study entitled “A Time to Act: Addressing Commonwealth Small States’ Financing and 
Debt Challenges” which makes four insightful proposals. In summary, these four proposals 
are as follows: 
1. 
Introduce  debt  swaps  for  climate  change  and  adaptation  and  mitigation.  For 
Caribbean  countries  and  other  small  island  states,  climate  change  is  a  real  and 
escalating threat. The provision of significant debt relief would help them to unlock 
pledged climate funding to finance much needed adaptation and mitigation efforts. 
Explicitly add vulnerability to the criteria for eligibility to access concession 
resources  of  the  Fund  and  other  international  financial  institutions.  Small 
states vulnerability to shocks has been the basis for the IMF’s inclusion of a small 
economy  exception  for  access  to  concessional  funding  through  the  Poverty 
Reduction  and  Growth  Trust  (PRGT).  And  it  has  been  included  as  a  criterion  to 
safeguard against premature graduation from PRGT resources. 
Develop counter cyclical loan instruments to help countries better cope with 
external shocks, without interrupting their growth prospects. Such a counter-
cyclical  lending  instrument  would  allow  debt  servicing  to  automatically  fall  to  or 
become zero in periods when external shocks hit a country. 
Introduce  resilience  building  as  the  main  conditionality  for  Fund  and  Bank 
lending to small states. Small states are vulnerable because of their exposure to 
shocks  and  lack  of  resilience.  This  vulnerability  is  structural.  It  is  not  solely  the 
outcome of poor policy choices. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
The  Prime  Minister  of  St.  Kitts  and  Nevis  chaired  a  Commonwealth  High  Level  Advocacy 
Mission  over  the  past  week  to  discuss  these  proposals  with  the  international  financial 
institutions. The Mission included the Finance Ministers of Jamaica, Seychelles, Samoa and 
Tonga. 
We,  therefore,  encourage  the  Fund  to  work  together  with  the  World  Bank  and  the 
Commonwealth  Secretariat  to  refine  these  proposals  into  concrete  and  specific  policy 
measures that can be applied to all small states. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Diversity at the fund 
To  switch  gears,  we  want  to  address  a  somewhat  softer  but  nonetheless  important  issue, 
that is, diversity at the Fund. We are aware that you have taken a keen interest in this matter. 
So we feel confident that our concerns will receive attention. 
As you may be aware, the number of Caribbean nationals employed at the Fund is dwindling, 
mainly on account of natural attrition. This declining trend also reflects other factors. Perhaps 
the most noteworthy is the perceived weak effort on the part of the Fund to actively recruit in 
the Caribbean region. 
At the same time, there are supply side considerations. The “brain drain”, where our best and 
brightest  migrate  to  advanced  countries,  has  reduced  the  pool  of  available  and  talented 
economic  and  finance  professionals.  While  addressing  the  brain  drain  is  a  long  term 
endeavor  that  requires  a  holistic  approach,  we  encourage  the  Fund  to  re-engage  the 
Caribbean as it did decades ago and to actively recruit economists from the region and to 
further efforts to strengthen their career progression and promotion at the Fund. The region 
has a history of producing economic luminaries such as Sir Arthur Lewis and Lloyd Best. 
Conclusion 
In closing, we encourage you to continue with the changes you have instituted that makes 
the Fund more receptive and responsive to the needs of its members, especially the small 
states.  It  is  regrettable  that  the  deadline  for  entry  into  force  of  the  2010  quota  and 
governance reforms, which sought to enhance the voice and representation of emerging and 
developing  countries  was  missed,  but  this  should  not  prevent  the  Fund  from  operating 
according to the new paradigm which an overwhelming majority of members have already 
endorsed as the way forward. 
We  in  the  Caribbean  remain  resolute  in  our  support  for  initiatives  that  help  improve  the 
Fund’s governance. There is no other path if the Fund wishes to safeguard its reputation as a 
credible, even-handed and trusted global economic policy advisor to its members. Madame 
Lagarde,  I  understand  that  you  are  yet  to  visit  the  Caribbean  in  your  official  capacity  as 
Managing Director. Given the Fund’s heightened engagement with the region, we think it is 
an opportune time for you to visit and obtain a first-hand perspective of our strides towards 
economic  development  and  to  experience  the  warmth  and  hospitality  of  the  Caribbean 
islands.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
