Josef Bonnici: Achieving Malta’s potential growth in challenging times 
Address by Professor Josef Bonnici, Governor of the Central Bank of Malta, at the ifs Malta 
Annual Dinner of the Institute of Financial Services, Saint Julian’s, 29 November 2013. 
 Hon. Minister, Excellences, Members of the Institute, Distinguished Guests 
First of all, I would like to thank you, Mr President, and your Committee for the opportunity to 
share  my  thoughts  once  again  with  such  a  distinguished  audience  at  the  ifs  Malta  Annual 
Dinner of the Institute of Financial Services. 
Before  I  do  so,  however,  I  would  like  to  commend  the  ifs for  its  perseverance  in  adapting 
itself to the changing demands of a dynamic financial sector and its on-going commitment to 
excellence in the provision of financial services education. 
It is pleasing to hear that you had a successful year and that you are active on new initiatives 
to promote even higher professional standards in the financial sector. Your collaboration with 
other  organisations  is  also  noteworthy.  The  presence  of  representatives  from  the  UK’s  ifs 
University College and the European Banking & Financial Services Training Association is 
evidence of the quality of the service provided by ifs Malta. 
Mr  President,  well  done  and  I  wish  you  and  your  Committee  success  in  your  future 
endeavours. 
The ECB plays an important role in averting risks 
As  you  are  all  aware,  many  of  the  Member  States  of  the  euro  area  are  going  through 
fundamental reforms that would over time promote sustainable growth. This only can occur 
with the support of a healthy financial sector, including a banking system that provides the 
needed  volume  of  credit  at  interest  rates  that  reflect  the  European  Central  Bank’s  (ECB) 
provision of ample and low-cost liquidity. 
Over  the  course  of  the crisis  the  ECB  has  launched  various  measures to  avert the  risk  of 
more  severe  ramifications  from  the  financial  crisis.  In  July  the  ECB  introduced  forward 
guidance,  assuring  the  financial  markets  that  its  policy  stance  will  remain  accommodative 
and interest rates low for as long as necessary. As a matter of fact, the recent interest rate 
cut was consistent with this forward guidance. 
Throughout  the  crisis,  the  ECB  has  played  an  important  role  in  ensuring,  within  its  price 
stability  mandate,  the  proper  financing  of  the  euro  area  economy  in  a  context  of  subdued 
credit dynamics. A series of measures were introduced to ensure that banks can pass on low 
policy rates to the real economy, in particular where most needed. These measures include 
providing ample liquidity to euro area banks, reviewing the collateral framework, lengthening 
the  maturity  of  operations  to  three  years,  and  reducing  redenomination  risk  in  financial 
markets through the announcement of Outright Monetary Transactions. 
Over the longer term, further decisive steps are needed for the establishment of a genuine 
banking union, so as to further enhance the resilience of the banking sector, reduce financial 
fragmentation,  and  strengthen  the  institutional  framework  of  the  euro  area.  Certainly,  in 
various euro area countries, these measures need to be complemented by efforts to correct 
past  excesses  in  both  the  public  and  private  sectors.  And  these  reforms  need  to  be 
undertaken against the backdrop of a weak and fragile economic recovery, making the whole 
process more challenging. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The first signs of recovery 
The first signs of recovery are now visible. Chart 1 shows the level of systemic risk across 
the  euro  area,  as  gauged  by  the  Composite  Indicator  of  Systemic  Stress.  This  index  has 
reached the lowest levels since the euro area sovereign debt crisis started. 
From the macroeconomic perspective, following a contraction that spanned over six quarters, 
the euro area’s real GDP rose marginally in the second and third quarters of 2013. Although 
projections still see real GDP shrinking marginally in 2013 as a whole, a modest but positive 
growth  rate  of  around  1%  is  expected  for  2014.  Despite  these  positive  developments,  the 
risks  around  the  outlook  for  the  euro  area  remain  tilted  to  the  downside.  Moreover, 
unemployment  in  the  euro  area  remains  excessively  high,  especially  in  the  stressed 
countries. 
Heterogeneity in the euro area is evident both in terms of economic performance… 
An  underlying  characteristic  that  is  observed  in  the  euro  area  is  the  uneven  performance 
across countries and the emergence of increased heterogeneity. As can be seen in Chart 2, 
the  uneven  pace  of  economic  recovery  is  evident:  countries,  such  as  Greece,  Italy  and 
Portugal, are registering a contraction in their economies, while Germany, Austria and Malta 
are among the countries that have recorded modestly positive growth rates. Chart 3 shows 
that  unemployment  rates  vary  between  less  than  5%  in  the  Netherlands,  Austria  and 
Luxembourg to over 25% in Greece and Spain. 
…and in terms of monetary policy transmission 
Even on the monetary side, the transmission of accommodative monetary policy measures 
across  the  euro  area  remains  weak  and  uneven.  Loans  to  the  private  sector  have  been 
declining and the pace of contraction has actually accelerated in recent quarters, particularly 
in  the  stressed  countries.  Although,  on  the  demand  side,  subdued  loan  dynamics  in  the 
weaker  economies  can  largely  be  explained  by  the  slow  pace  of  economic  activity,  the 
supply  of  credit  is  also  constrained  by  banks’  efforts  to  repair  their  balance  sheets  and 
strengthen  their  capital  position.  For  all  these  reasons,  it  will  perhaps  take  a  while  for  the 
ECB’s monetary policy to be reflected in credit creation in the weaker economies. 
Though Malta is positioned with the stronger economies… 
Various indicators place Malta with the stronger performers. Chart 2 shows a growth rate for 
Malta  that  generally  exceeds  the  corresponding  rates  for  both  categories  of  countries.  A 
similar  conclusion  can  be  drawn  from  Chart  3,  which  deals  with  the  unemployment  rate. 
Similarly, the level of unit labour costs is lower in Malta than in both the weaker and stronger 
groups, as will be discussed later. It is important that the public debate and the formulation of 
policy  focus  more  closely  on  what  is  needed  for  Malta  to  remain  aligned  with  the  better 
performers. 
In the first two quarters of 2013, Malta’s GDP growth rate stood at 2.7%. Net exports have 
been  the  main  source  of  expansion.  The  outlook  is  for  stronger  growth  in  2014  as  Malta 
continues to benefit from its competitiveness. The economy continues to diversify, creating 
high  value  added  job  opportunities.  While  some  sectors  have  had  to  downsize,  there  has 
been a compensating expansion in other sectors, such as financial and other services. This 
is shown in Chart 4. 
An  aspect  that  may go unnoticed  is  the  role  of the financial  sector  in  the  resilience  of the 
Maltese  economy  and  its  alignment  with  the  stronger  group  of  countries.  Financial 
soundness indicators confirm that Malta has a sound and robust banking sector. A three-way 
split of the banking sector distinguishes between the core domestic banks that are closely 
integrated with the domestic economy at one end and the international banks that conduct all 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
their  business  abroad  at  the  other  end,  along  with  a  relatively  small  sector,  the  non-core 
domestic banks, in between, as shown in Chart 5. 
Looking more closely at the external dimension, an important characteristic that distinguishes 
us from other models, such as the one in Cyprus, is the fact that the international banking 
sector  in  Malta  is  only  lightly  linked  to  the  domestic  economy  and  to  the  remainder  of the 
Maltese  banking  system.  Meanwhile,  unlike  the  situation  in  other  countries,  the  core 
domestic  banks  have  very  low  reliance  on  non-resident  deposits.  They  operate  along 
traditional lines, applying a prudent business model and, like the rest of the banking sector, 
carrying  minimal  exposure  to  securities  issued  in  the  distressed  economies.  The  core 
domestic banks are highly capitalised, profitable and liquid, and the other categories of the 
banking sector are similarly robust. 
…in terms of interest rates, Malta needs to further align with its peers. 
Although various indicators place Malta with the stronger performing group, there is room for 
further improvement. Interest rates on loans to businesses are currently around 2% to 3% 
higher  in  Malta  as  compared  with  Germany,  the  Netherlands,  Finland,  Austria,  and 
Luxembourg.  In  contrast,  deposit  rates  offered  by  Maltese  banks  are  broadly  in  line  with 
those  across  the  euro  area,  as  shown  in  Chart 6.  As  a  result,  bank  interest  margins  are 
higher in Malta, as shown in Chart 7. A closer alignment of margins with those of our peers 
appears  to  be  warranted.  The  recently  proposed  Budget  measure  to  conduct  a  review  of 
bank charges to businesses makes sense. The benefits of having a robust banking sector 
would then be passed more fully to the rest of the economy. 
This  would  be  reflected  in  faster  growth  in  the  volume  of  credit,  which  recently  has  been 
trending  downwards,  although  it  should  also  be  pointed  out  that  credit  growth  in  Malta 
continues to outpace that in the euro area, as can be seen in Chart 8. The expected setting-
up of the Development Bank will also contribute to filling a funding gap that currently exists in 
the financial sector in Malta, which could provide relief to the cost and difficulty of access to 
finance, particularly for SMEs, and may serve to compliment the core banks in the funding of 
larger projects. 
Preparations for the banking union are underway…JFSB and BR/09/2008 
We are now entering the first phase of the banking union, where major financial institutions 
will be supervised directly by the ECB under the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM). At a 
second  stage,  all  other  institutions  will  be  adopting  the  single  rulebook.  This  requires 
preparation for the new challenges ahead. 
In the local context, an important step in the preparation for the SSM was the establishment 
of  the  Joint  Financial  Stability  Board  (JFSB),  set  up  jointly  by  the  Central  Bank  and  the 
MFSA, and now part of the Central Bank of Malta Act. 
Amongst the issues that are being discussed by the Joint Financial Stability Board, there is 
the  proposed  revision  of  the  Banking  Rule  BR/09/2008.  This  revision  is  currently  at 
consultation stage in the financial sector. The rule deals with provisioning for non-performing 
loans (NPL), taking into account the duration of the NPLs, and also calls for a specific buffer 
linked to the gap between provisions and NPLs. 
Safeguarding fiscal stability by expanding growth…competitiveness is key 
Economic  and  financial  stability  also  require  fiscal  consolidation,  so  that  the  deficit 
progressively declines towards the Fiscal Compact target. The debt-to-GDP ratio is expected 
to reach a plateau and then start declining, as planned by the Government. Budget figures 
project the debt-to-GDP ratio at 73% in 2013, along with a deficit ratio of 2.7%. An exit from 
the Excessive Deficit Procedure is essential. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Indeed, the Fiscal Compact involves strict budgetary commitments and places limits on the 
Government’s  deficit.  Moreover,  even  in  the  absence  of  the  obligations  under  the  Fiscal 
Compact,  public  debt  cannot  be  allowed  to  accumulate  persistently  as  this  could  lead  to 
unsustainable debt dynamics. 
GDP growth reduces the debt ratio first by automatically raising tax revenues and reducing 
Government  spending.  Second,  it  expands  the  denominator  of  the  debt-to-GDP  ratio. 
Obviously, resolving fiscal excess through an expanding GDP is less painful. 
To  sustain  economic  growth,  the  economy  needs  to  offer  products  and  services  with  high 
value added and at competitive prices. The alignment of wages and productivity is crucial for 
competitiveness,  particularly  at  a  time  when  neighbouring  economies  are  undergoing  an 
internal devaluation. Because of this correction, unit labour costs in the stressed economies 
have plateaued and are now converging with those in the better performing countries (refer 
to  Chart  4).  While  unit  labour  costs  in  Malta  have  been  lower  than  in  other  euro  area 
countries,  it  is  crucial  to  ensure  that  higher  productivity  supports  wage  growth,  thereby 
safeguarding the country’s competitiveness. 
Conclusion – Malta as a regional hub 
In  the  recent  past,  our  economy  was  able  to  attract  sectors  and  niche  markets,  such  as 
financial  and  business  services,  and  the  aviation  maintenance  sector.  Further  investment 
promotion calls for continued efforts to identify new areas of growth, and to develop a labour 
force with the necessary skills and qualifications. 
The financial and other service sectors have been crucial for economic stability and growth. 
Recent  expansion  in  the  financial  services  sector  can  serve  as  a  springboard  for  further 
development in view of new opportunities in the Mediterranean region. Further diversification 
of  the  range  of  financial  and  other  services  will  provide  opportunities  for  Malta  to  develop 
further as a regional hub for various activities. Proficiency in the English language, a sound 
legal system, the high standards of the legal and accounting professions and the mantle of 
EU membership offer fertile ground for those who want to do business here. 
Certainly,  a  growing  financial  sector  needs  to  be  supported  and  protected  by  appropriate 
legislative  and  supervisory  frameworks  to  ensure  that  potential  risks  are  minimized.  Malta 
has managed to host a relatively large financial sector without exposing itself to excessive 
risks. Yet this has not been the case in other countries. We need to be on the lookout for 
potential  threats  to  our  system  so  as  to  reap  the  benefits  of  the  financial  sector  without 
exposure to excessive risk. In the past year we have been under the spotlight and operators 
need to ensure that the appropriate regulations are carefully followed. 
Malta should look optimistically to the future, not only because it has managed to ride the 
downturn quite well, but also because it has the ingredients for further growth and prosperity. 
A concerted and unified effort is essential to achieve our potential growth. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   5 
   6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   7 
    8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 