John Murray: Transitioning to more balanced and sustainable growth 
Remarks  by  Mr  John  Murray,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, California, 5 November 2013. 
 Introduction 
Canada shares many similarities with emerging market economies (EMEs) in Asia. Indeed, 
in some respects, we wish we were even more like them – particularly in regard to growth. 
Like most Asian countries, Canada has a very open economy that is heavily influenced by 
developments  elsewhere,  especially  those  in  its  southern  neighbour.  Despite  Canada’s 
sound  financial  system  and  solid  fiscal  position,  it  was  seriously  affected  by  the  financial 
crisis  and  suffered  proportionately  almost  as  much  as  the  U.S.  economy  did  over  the  
2008–09  period,  owing  to  its  strong  economic  and  financial  links  to  the  United  States 
(Chart 1). 
Chart 1 
Canada’s economy was seriously affected by the crisis  
but has recovered 
 
Although economic activity in Canada has now fully recovered, and moved well beyond its 
pre-crisis peak, our economy is in the midst of a difficult rebalancing process and has yet to 
achieve self-sustaining growth unassisted by exceptionally accommodative monetary policy. 
Unlike  most  Asian  economies,  Canada  hopes  to  shift  away  from  the  excessive  domestic 
demand that it was forced to rely on when its export sector collapsed, and to draw increasing 
support from external demand (Chart 2). 
Unlike many advanced economies and EMEs that suffered from serious excesses before the 
crisis, in Canada’s case, this re-equilibration should involve a return to the sort of balanced 
state that it enjoyed immediately prior to 2007. 
There  are  other  important  ways  in  which  Canada  differs  from  some  of  its  Asian  trading 
partners. Over most of the post-World War II period, we have operated under a system of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
freely flexible exchange rates, absent any currency or capital controls. While we are exposed 
to many of the same external shocks experienced by other open economies, we have always 
believed  that  it  is  better  to  work  with  markets  rather  than  against  them,  allowing  the  price 
system  to  operate.  Yet  “playing  by  the  rules”  has  sometimes  proven  difficult,  owing  to  the 
contagion created by those who are not. Nevertheless, in the long run, our flexible approach 
has served us well. 
Canada must reduce its reliance on domestic demand 
Chart 2 
 Asia’s phenomenal but increasingly unbalanced growth 
Over  the  past  13  years,  the  Asia  region  has  experienced  phenomenal  economic  growth, 
moving from a 7 per cent share of global economic activity as recently as 2000 (measured at 
market prices) to an estimated share of close to 18 per cent as of 2013. Measured in terms 
of purchasing power parity, the latest number would be even more impressive. The process 
has had some occasional set-backs, of course, and is not without precedent – I am thinking 
here of the late 19th and early 20th centuries and the emergence of the United Kingdom and 
the  United  States.  But  such  growth  is  nevertheless  extraordinary.  Emerging  Asia  has 
accounted  for  more  than  40  per  cent  of  the  world’s  growth  over  the  past  10  years,  and 
hundreds of millions of people have been lifted out of extreme poverty. 
Like most episodes of successful development in the post-war period, the Asian miracle has 
been  driven  by  export-led  growth.  In  many  cases  this  was  supported by  a  fixed  exchange 
rate regime, and an extensive system of currency and capital controls designed to achieve 
and preserve international competitiveness. Of course, there has been considerable variation 
across countries with regard to their economic circumstances, institutional arrangements and 
development  strategies.  The  simple  picture  painted  above  does  not  apply  to  all.  Nor  are 
Asian countries the only ones in the global economy to enjoy sustained external surpluses. 
More importantly, for every trade surplus, there must be an equal and offsetting deficit, with 
many advanced countries eager in the past to play this role. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Such imbalances are not unusual, but the extent to which capital was “flowing uphill” during 
the pre-crisis period was. This was clearly unsustainable. It is one thing for relatively small 
countries  to  play  this  game,  but  when  they  grow  too  large,  they  soon  run  out  of  space. 
Foreign  reserve  accumulation  among  the  EMEs  since  2000  has  totalled  more  than 
US$6 trillion (Chart 3). 
Chart 3 
The Asian miracle has generated large surpluses  
and large reserve accumulations 
 The crisis as a catalyst for change 
When the crisis hit, export markets for the emerging Asian economies suddenly imploded. 
Fortunately,  many  of  them  had  the  fiscal  and  monetary  policy  space  to  cushion  the  blow. 
However,  the  crisis  merely  brought  forward  a  process  of  global  rebalancing  that  was 
inevitable.  Advanced  economies  had  exhausted  their  credit  lines,  and  EMEs  were  running 
out  of  foreign  customers.  Advanced  economies  were  going  to  have  to  boost  domestic 
savings to get out of hock, and EMEs were going to have to rely on their own consumers for 
future growth. 
The  coordinated  and  ambitious  economic  recovery  plan  that  G-20  Leaders  outlined  in  the 
early  days  of  the  crisis,  the  G-20  Framework,  was  designed  to  deliver  strong,  sustainable 
and balanced growth. It had four critical and mutually reinforcing parts: (1) meaningful fiscal 
consolidation  in  overly  indebted  countries;  (2)  sweeping  financial  sector  reform;  (3)  wide-
ranging structural reforms to boost future growth prospects; and (4) a necessary rebalancing 
of global demand between deficit and surplus countries, assisted by more flexible, market-
determined,  exchange  rates.  The  first  three  parts  of  the  plan  would  inevitably  have 
contractionary  effects  in  the  short  run,  so  a  domestic-led  expansion  of  demand  in  surplus 
countries was a critical component of the G-20 plan if global deflation was to be avoided. Any 
positive  confidence  effects  that  might  be  associated  with  promises  of  fiscal  rectitude  and 
substantive structural reform were likely to be small and insufficient, on their own, to correct 
the widening output gap. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
So how have we done? 
It  is  safe  to  say  that  global  economic  performance  over  the  past  five  years  has  been 
disappointing.  As  acknowledged  in  various  G-20  communiqués,  growth  has  been  neither 
strong, nor sustainable nor balanced. Shortly after the crisis and the announcement of the 
G-20 Framework, economists at the Bank of Canada decided to use their global model to 
examine  three  very  different  scenarios  for  how  the  global  economy  might  unfold.  The  first 
was the so-called “good” scenario, where every player did what it had promised and all four 
parts  of  the  plan  were  delivered.  It  is  important  to  stress,  however,  that  this  was  not  a 
Goldilocks  scenario  by  any  means,  just  something  that,  in  a  rough  and  ready  way,  would 
satisfy the requirements of the G-20 Framework. The second scenario was a “bad” one, in 
which  no  one  initially  did  what  they  were  supposed  to.  But  it  assumed  that  eventually 
everyone  would  come  around,  after  a  substantial  lag,  and  do  the  right  thing.  Without  this 
assumption  the  model  and,  presumably,  the  global  economy,  would  explode.  The  third 
scenario  was  actually  worse  than  the  bad  one,  at  least  for  the  first  few  years  of  the 
simulation, and our economists called it the  “ugly” scenario. It involved doing only half the 
job. More specifically, only the first three parts of the G-20 Framework, which were inherently 
deflationary, were set in motion. The estimated cumulative costs to the global economy from 
following the bad scenario over 2012–16, as opposed to the good one, were US$16 trillion or 
5.4 per cent of global GDP (Chart 4). The estimated cumulative cost for the ugly scenario 
was even larger, at about US$18 trillion or 5.8 per cent of global GDP. 
The “Good”, the “Bad” and the “Ugly” scenarios 
Chart 4 
 So  where  is  the  real  world  economy  now?  Our  best  estimates  suggest  that  we  are  sitting 
somewhere between the good and the bad scenarios but, in truth, a little closer to the bad. 
Performance with regard to the four key elements of the G-20 Framework has been mixed. 
Significant progress has been made on financial sector reform and fiscal consolidation, with 
sometimes too much of the latter, but much less has been accomplished on structural reform 
and  global  rebalancing.  Had  it  not  been  for  the  support  provided  by  exceptional  monetary 
stimulus, the outcome would have been much worse, somewhere between the bad and the 
ugly scenarios. However, this situation cannot be sustained. Monetary policy provides only a 
temporary bridge; it cannot act as a substitute for more fundamental reform and economic 
adjustment. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Hopeful signs on the horizon 
Happily,  there  are  positive  signs  on  the  horizon.  The  advanced  economies  seem  to  be 
getting their act together. The pre-conditions for a return to stronger growth are present in the 
United States. Europe has emerged from a six-quarter recession and is progressing, albeit 
slowly, with its reforms. Japan has successfully launched the first stage of its “Three Arrows” 
program. Growth has recently faltered in some EMEs in response to past policy tightening, 
accumulated supply bottlenecks, and financial market turbulence. However, China appears 
to have stabilized its economy at a sustainable and solid growth rate of approximately 7.5 per 
cent (conveniently consistent with its target growth rate). 
More importantly perhaps, China and several other Asian countries appear to be liberalizing 
their  economies,  allowing  more  flexibility  in  prices  and  exchange  rates,  and  otherwise 
assisting the adjustment process (Chart 5). 
Asian EMEs are showing more flexibility in their exchange rates 
Chart 5 
 There is a risk, however, that the recent jump in financial market volatility in anticipation of 
tapering by the United States will tempt some countries to impose additional currency and 
capital controls and to intervene more aggressively. Indeed, there is new-found sympathy for 
these tools in the international community, at least when they’re applied in a temporary and 
targeted  manner  as  a  form  of  international  macro-prudential  stabilization.  It  is  important, 
however, that nothing that is done as a possible short-term palliative be allowed to interrupt 
the  rebalancing  and  necessary  process  of  normalization  that  is  underway  in  the  global 
economy. Some may use this more forgiving attitude as cover to continue earlier unhelpful 
practices, but this would only invite a replay of past unpleasant events. 
Exiting from the extraordinary policies that were put in place by several advanced economies 
to  buttress  growth  is  going  to  be  challenging.  As  many  observers  have  noted,  “We  are 
travelling in uncharted territory.” But at least the incentives of the countries that are exiting  
– and those on the receiving end – should be well aligned. No one should want advanced 
economies  to  exit  too  early  or  too  late,  and  no  one  benefits  from  excessive  market 
turbulence. Some episodes of increased volatility will no doubt be experienced, but advanced 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
economies are committed to being as transparent as possible in order to minimize surprises 
and smooth the adjustment process. 
It is important that countries play by the rules and stand by the commitments that many of 
them made as part of the G-20 Framework. Displaced pressures from exchange rates that 
are not allowed to move, from capital flows that are directed elsewhere, and from outsized 
reserves  that  are  looking  for  a  safe  home  often  squeeze  small  open  economies  such  as 
Canada’s and, more critically, frustrate the international adjustment process. 
 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
