Peter Praet: Japan and the EU in the global economy – challenges and 
opportunities 
Speech by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at 
the conference “Japan and the EU in the global economy – challenges and opportunities”, 
organised by Bruegel, the Graduate School of Economics, Kobe University, and Fondation 
France-Japon de l’EHESS, Brussels, 7 October 2013. 
 I would like to thank Stephan Fahr, Georgi Krustev and Ana Lima for their contributions to this speech; all views 
expressed remain mine. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure to be able to share some thoughts on the challenges and opportunities Japan 
and  Europe  are  facing  in  the  global  economy.  Since  the  beginning  of  the  financial  crisis, 
there  has  been  no  shortage  of  challenges  along  the  road  back  to  what  I  would  call  the 
“normal functioning” of our economies.  
One of the biggest challenges I see is still to be addressed: that of how to grow in an era of 
deleveraging. Deleveraging can occur in an orderly fashion or it can be chaotic. It may drag 
our economies down or it can place them on a stronger footing. Which of these will be the 
case depends to a large extent on how we manage the process. 
Today,  I  will  focus  my  comments  on  the  policy  challenges  faced  by  our  two  economies, 
especially as regards how to manage the deleveraging process in the euro area, keeping in 
mind the Japanese experience during the 1990s. 
As witnessed in Japan, protracted and large-scale balance sheet adjustments can weaken 
economic  activity  over  a  protracted  period  of  time.  Repairing  the  financial  sector  was  an 
important  element  in  improving  the  Japanese  economy.  The  lesson  for  the  euro  area 
appears to be clear: the overhaul of the financial architecture – including the establishment of 
a procedure for resolving failing banks – needs to be accomplished in its entirety; selective 
mending will not be enough.  
In  my  view,  we  should  make  use  of  the  momentum  offered  by  the  crisis  to  turn  these 
challenges into opportunities – opportunities to put our economies on a sounder footing. 
To underscore why I think that we need to address today’s challenges in a comprehensive 
manner and why institutions are crucial in achieving this, I will first briefly review the build-up 
and adjustment of financial imbalances both in Japan and in Europe. Then I will elaborate on 
how to manage the deleveraging process and the institutional changes to be implemented, 
before touching upon the role monetary policy has to play. 
Imbalances in Japan and the euro area 
The  Japanese  experience  provides  important  lessons  as  it  demonstrates  the  difficulties  of 
emerging from a “balance sheet recession”.1 With the euro area still battling the impact of the 
financial crisis, an important question is: how does the current euro area economy compare 
with the dynamics in Japan during the 1990s?2  
                                                
1  Termed  by  Richard  Koo  in  Koo,  R.,  The  Holy  Grail  of  Macroeconomics:  Lessons  from  Japan’s  Great 
Recession, Wiley, 2009. 
2  See also “Comparing the recent financial crisis in the United States and the euro area with the experience of 
Japan in the 1990s”, Monthly Bulletin, ECB, May 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Both  episodes  clearly  share  elements  of  a  “balance  sheet  recession”,  where  strong  credit 
expansion  ends  with  a  sharp  correction  in  asset  prices,  thereby  triggering  the  need  for 
significant balance sheet adjustment. 
Yet,  the  scope  of  the  required  adjustment  in  the  euro  area  when  viewed  at  the 
aggregate level differs markedly from that in Japan, even if some euro area countries 
struggle with excessive leverage.  
In Japan, the sharp fall in equity prices from the peak of 1989 led to losses of almost 80% in 
the two decades that followed. Real estate prices also precipitated, with urban land prices 
declining by about 40%. By comparison, at the euro area aggregate level, equity prices fell 
by about 50% and have already rebounded from their post-Lehman trough, while residential 
property prices have fallen by a mere 3% since their peak in 2008. 
Moreover,  the  levels  of  indebtedness  across  sectors  clearly  differ.  As  for  fiscal 
imbalances, the fiscal response in Japan meant an increase in public debt from 67% of GDP 
at the start of the 1990s to about 240% in 2012. For the euro area as a whole, the increase 
was much smaller, with aggregate debt increasing from below 70% in 2008 to 92% in 2012. 
Obviously,  the  euro  area  aggregate  figures  mask  the  large  heterogeneity  among  Member 
States,  where  gross  debt  ranges  from  10%  of  GDP  in  Estonia  to  157%  in  Greece.  This 
notwithstanding, it goes without saying that general debt levels in European countries need 
to decline, also in view of long-term demographic challenges.  
Turning to private sector debt, Japan faced severe adjustment needs in the corporate sector, 
with debt of non-financial corporations declining from 130% to 80% of GDP in the 15 years 
that followed the peak in economic activity. In the euro area, the debt level of the aggregate 
non-financial  sector  never  reached  the  peaks  seen  in  Japan  and  aggregate  household 
indebtedness  is  also  comparatively  lower  in  the  euro  area.  However,  in  those  euro  area 
countries which experienced housing bubbles, the household sectors have been facing much 
stronger  adjustment  problems.  Here,  again,  euro  area  averages  mask  significant 
heterogeneity across Member States.  
In fact, some euro area countries have seen strong capital inflows and unsustainable debt-
financed economic expansion. This has not only brought the risk of reversal, as seen after 
2008 when private capital inflows dried up and domestic demand collapsed, it has also led to 
economic  divergence  within  the  euro  area.  Some  countries  have  lost  heavily  in  terms  of 
competitiveness relative to their peer euro area countries. Regaining this competitiveness will 
indeed be a more gradual and tedious process.3 
The  credit-financed  housing  boom  in  countries  like  Ireland  and  Spain  led  to  residential 
property  prices more than  doubling  in the  seven  years  leading  up  to  their  peak.  Since  the 
peak, adjustments in house prices appear to have been completed in Ireland, while those in 
Spain are correcting more gradually. In both cases, the house price boom has left household 
debt-to-income  ratios  in  these  countries  far  above  their  pre-crisis  levels  with  only  a  slow 
decline.  
To summarise, while euro area aggregate dynamics appear different from those observed in 
Japan at the beginning of the 1990s, some euro area countries do share some features that 
are very similar to the Japanese experience in that a prolonged balance sheet adjustment is 
underway.  
                                                
3  Of course, in a ﬁnancially integrated area comprising several countries, ﬁnancial deﬁcits (or surpluses) of a 
given sector in any country can, in principle, be ﬁnanced (or invested) equally well in any other country within 
the area. Following this line of reasoning, cross-country patterns in sectoral ﬁnancial balances could reflect 
increased  financial  integration  within  the  euro  area.  At  the  same  time,  the  build-up  of  external  deﬁcits  and 
surpluses  across  euro  area  countries  reﬂects  not  only  growth  differentials,  but  also  rising  imbalances  in 
competitiveness, particularly when measured by unit labour costs. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Notwithstanding  this  cross-country  heterogeneity,  a  common  response  was  required  from 
monetary policy in the euro area to counter the initial fallout. The cuts in ECB policy rates 
together with our non-standard measures were crucial to contain the risks to price stability 
and to support the transmission of monetary policy across the currency area. While common 
monetary policy has been successful, the crisis has shown that we need more solid common 
institutions in other policy areas. In particular, a common monetary policy requires a common 
regulatory  framework  for  the  financial  sector  to  be  able  to  adequately  repair  the  financial 
system,  thereby  securing  a  durable  recovery  in  the  euro  area.  The  adverse  impact  of 
“zombie banks” and the evergreening of loans in Japan serve as a stark warning signal. 
Given the challenges ahead, we should not relax our efforts to put the euro area economies 
on track to strong and sustainable growth. That way, we can turn the current challenges into 
opportunities  –  as  the  title  of  today’s  event  suggests.  Further  managing  the  deleveraging 
process will be key, especially balancing the speed of adjustment and reforming euro area 
governance. Let me elaborate on these two aspects in turn. 
Managing the deleveraging process 
To  overcome  debt  overhangs,  we  have  basically  two  options.  We  can  consolidate  or 
restructure debt to address the nominal debt stock; or we can implement growth-enhancing 
structural reforms that make our economies fitter to grow out of the debt burden. Or we could 
opt for a combination of both. A third theoretically possible option allowing for higher inflation 
to reduce the real value of the debt would go against the core mandate of central banks. 
In recent years, we have seen some consolidation in Europe. As regards public finances, 
euro  area  fiscal  deficits  exceeded  6%  at  the  peak  of  the  crisis  in  2009  and  2010,  but  are 
expected  to  fall  below  3%  this  year,  while  primary  budgets  are  even  expected  to  post  a 
surplus of 0.2%.4 This adjustment strategy has brought with it painful cuts in our social models 
and has not been without controversy.  
In  fact,  some  commentators  and  academics  suggest  that  governments  should  continue 
increasing  deficits  to  support  aggregate  demand  while  the  private  sector  is  deleveraging. 
They  argue  that  parts  of  the  private  sector  are  debt-constraint  and  need  to  reduce  their 
leverage, while parts that are unconstrained are not increasing their leverage sufficiently.5 In 
such an environment the role for government spending is to expand demand for funds, and 
especially so when the nominal interest rate is constrained by the zero lower bound.6 I would 
agree to this approach if the fiscal budget allowed for room for manoeuvre. But the recent 
sovereign  debt  crisis  has  shown  that  fiscal  space  is  very  limited  for  many  European 
countries. 
In  Japan,  the  strategy  of  fiscal  expansion  has  led  to  a  situation  in  which  gross 
government debt levels now exceed 200% of GDP. The  continued favourable  financing 
conditions appear to also be owed to the fact that more than 90% of Japanese government 
bonds  are  held  domestically.  This  situation  can  be  seen  as  a  special  privilege  for  the 
government. But the high exposure of banks to their domestic sovereign – in fact, Japanese 
banks  hold  about  20%  of  their  assets  in  domestic  sovereign  bonds  –  is  not  without  risks, 
                                                
4  Fiscal deficits in the euro area reached 6.4% of GDP in 2009 and 6.2% in 2010 (according to Eurostat). The 
European Commission forecasts –2.9% in its Spring 2013 European Economic Forecast. 
5  See  Eggertsson,  G.  and  Krugman,  P.,  “Debt,  Deleveraging,  and  the  Liquidity  Trap:  A  Fisher-Minsky-Koo 
Approach”,  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics,  127  (3),  2012,  pp. 1469–1513,  and  Guerrieri,  V.  and 
Lorenzoni, G.,  “Credit  Crises,  Precautionary  Savings,  and  the  Liquidity  Trap”,  NBER  Working  Papers, 
No 17583, 2011. 
6  See also the series on deleveraging by Martin Wolf in the Financial Times, initiated with the comment “We still 
have that sinking feeling”, Financial Times, 10 July 2012, and the comment “Ways to accelerate private-sector 
deleveraging”, 30 July 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
especially in the event of sudden reversals in market confidence. Maintaining financial and 
economic  stability  therefore  requires  a  clear  and  long-term  fiscal  strategy  to  avoid 
disruptions. This is true for Japan and Europe alike. 
Debt consolidation is not limited to the public sector, however; it also applies to areas 
of the private sector with excess leverage. Let me focus on the euro area financial sector. 
While  the  ratio  of financial  sector  liabilities  to  GDP  has  broadly  stabilised,  euro  area  large 
and complex banking groups have steadily increased the median core Tier 1 ratio from 8.3% 
in 2009 to above 11% in 2013.7 
To  strengthen  their  capital  position  banks  have  issued  equity,  converted  hybrids,  received 
capital  injections  and  raised  the  levels  of  retained  earnings.  The  stronger  capital  positions 
also  mean  that  the  relative  share  of  debt  in  financing  is  reduced  and  substituted  by  more 
equity,  which  should  provide  a  better  buffer  against  economic  shocks.  After  all,  debt  is  a 
relatively inflexible form of financing as it requires repayments on time and in full.  
But the stronger capital positions have also meant that banks have been shedding assets, a 
process  which  depresses  credit  growth  and  puts  a  drag  on  the  economy.  In  addition,  as 
households  and  non-financial  corporations  also  reduce  their  indebtedness,  they  are 
demanding less financing from banks. Taken together, we can expect that bloated balance 
sheets will contract further. 
It  is  important  that  this  deleveraging  process  occurs  in  an  orderly  manner  by 
balancing  the  adjustment  of  assets  and  liabilities.  Most  of  all,  unnecessary  fire  sales 
generating  detrimental  falls  in  asset  prices  and  credit  rationing  for  productive  investments 
need to be avoided. Throughout the crisis, the ECB has demonstrated its ability to actively 
mitigate these effects by ensuring abundant funding to the banking sector through its liquidity 
operations. But more is needed, especially regarding a more solid institutional framework to 
repair  balance  sheets  in  a  way  that  limits  systemic  risk  and  avoids  damage  to  the  real 
economy.  
The  Japanese  experience  has  shown  the  risks  created  when  banks’  balance  sheet 
problems are not recognised and addressed. Weakly capitalised banks initially extended 
loans  to  insolvent  firms  to  limit  the  recognition  of  losses  in  the  short  run.  Indications  of 
evergreening became prominent as the share of loans to the construction sector continued 
rising for years after the bubble had burst, despite the fact that this sector was adjusting and 
needed  to  downsize.  Write-offs  on  non-performing  loans  and  necessary  recapitalisations 
were  delayed  and  the  financial  sector  remained  highly  vulnerable  to  shocks.  But  delayed 
recognition  was  also  facilitated  by  valuation  standards  that  did  not  mark  non-performing 
loans to market, unlike much of the losses from securitised products in the recent crises. In 
addition,  the  refusal  of  banks  to  foreclose  on  borrowers  might  have  reflected  a  different 
resolution culture and code of civility in Japan; namely, one that eschews the large turnover 
of  jobs  and the frequent  discharging  of  workers and  avoids  inducing  a  humiliating  “loss of 
face” for delinquent borrowers.8  
For the real economy, the evergreening of loans implied a weakening of growth prospects.9 
Potentially more efficient enterprises were denied financing, thereby hampering the natural 
entry  and  exit  of  firms  to  the  market  place.  Indeed,  with  the  recession  in  Japan  at  the 
                                                
7  See ECB, Financial Stability Review, May 2013. 
8  On  this  point,  see  Greenspan,  A.,  The  Age  of  Turbulence:  Adventures  in  a  New  World,  Penguin,  2007, 
pp. 289–290. 
9  See, for instance, Caballero, R., Hoshi, T. and Kashyap, A., “Zombie lending and depressed restructuring in 
Japan”, American Economic Review, Vol. 95, 2008, pp. 1943–1977, Peek, J. and Rosengren, E., “Unnatural 
Selection:  Perverse  Incentives  and  the  Misallocation  of  Credit  in  Japan”,  American  Economic  Review,  95, 
2005,  pp. 1144–1166,  and  Nishimura,  K.G.  and  Kawamoto,  Y.,  “Why  does  the  problem  persist?  ‘Rational 
Rigidity’ and the plight of Japanese banks”, The World Economy, Vol. 26, 2003, pp. 301–324. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
beginning of the 1990s, entry rates of firms declined from their pre-crisis peak of above 7% to 
a  range  of  4–5%,  whereas  firm  exit  rates  remained  subdued  at  their  pre-crisis  levels 
throughout the 1990s.10 
The lesson from this experience is to recognise non-performing loans in a timely manner and 
have strong institutions in place to deal with the restructuring. This reduces uncertainty and 
avoids adjustment delays. For the euro area, it is a call to move forward in completing the 
banking union. 
Supervision and resolution 
Up  until  now,  supervisory  and  resolution  authorities  have  operated  at  the  national  level. 
During  the  crisis  this  set-up  has  revealed  pitfalls  on  three  fronts.  First,  differences  in 
supervision  maintain  humps  and  hollows  in  the  euro  area  playing  field,  thereby  distorting 
competition; second, differences in implicit state guarantees affect banks’ funding conditions; 
and third, differences in resolution frameworks – or a lack thereof – distort investor conditions 
across jurisdictions. 
The envisaged European banking union is meant to address these three pitfalls.  
First,  the  single  supervisory  mechanism  (SSM)  will  level  the  playing  field  in 
supervision. Only a month ago, on 12 September, the European Parliament paved the way 
for  this  truly  European  supervisory  body.  I  hope  that  the  Council  will  soon  give  its  final 
consent. The ECB will then take over supervision of euro area banks in the second half of 
2014.  
We  will  ensure  that  euro  area  banks  are  supervised  in  a  consistent  and  stringent 
manner.  This  implies  impartial  supervisory  decisions  across  all  Member  States.  We 
are  already  in  the  midst  of  preparations  to  make  sure  we  reach  this  goal.  The  ECB  is 
currently  working  on  the  methodological  design  for  a  comprehensive  assessment. We  will 
communicate  details  on  the  exercise  in  the  second  half  of  October,  but  I  can  already  say 
today that the exercise will include a risk assessment and a balance sheet assessment. The 
results of this exercise will form the basis for a stress test to be carried out by the European 
Banking Authority in close collaboration with the ECB. In order to achieve its goal, this review 
needs  to  be  rigorous  and  stringent.  For  it  to  be  credible,  we  need  commitment  on  sound 
backstops as a fall-back option for fulfilling capital needs.  
In Japan, such a close inspection of bank balance sheets was carried out in 2002. It proved 
to be an important step to recognising losses and cleaning balance sheets to eventually set 
off a gradual recovery with credit expansion in Japan. 
Second, one of the objectives of a European banking union is to delink banks from 
their sovereigns. That also implies that bank funding costs will depend on the quality 
of  banks’  assets,  and  not  on  the  location  of  their  headquarters.  Achieving  this  would 
mark  a  milestone  in  that  it  would  establish  a  single  capital  market  throughout  Europe  that 
companies  can  tap  into.  A  single  capital  market,  in  turn,  provides  better  financing  for 
companies and eases productive investment, which will revitalise the European economies. 
Ultimately,  it  will  be  decisive  in  ensuring  that  Europe  avoids  a  repeat  of  Japan’s  “lost 
decade”, during which zombie banks poorly allocated financing across firms.  
Third, orderly deleveraging in the euro area also requires that the restructuring and 
resolution  of  individual  banks  will  not  endanger  financial  stability  or  put  public 
finances at risk. For this, the institutional framework needs to be solid. This is the rationale 
                                                
10  Entries of business establishments declined from their peak of 7.4% in 1988 and have not exceeded 5.0% 
since then,  whereas  exit  rates  remained  at  subdued levels  of 2.5–4.0%  between  1988 and 2000  and have 
increased to above 4.0% since then. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
behind the creation of a single system with a single resolution authority and single resolution 
fund,  in  line  with  the  proposal  by  the  European  Commission  for  a  single  resolution 
mechanism. The resolution fund is to be entirely financed ex ante by the financial industry 
itself  so  as  to  protect  the  European  taxpayer.  Still,  until  the  fund  is  fully  built  up  or  for 
exceptional circumstances, it should be able to obtain external funds via a backstop. Here, 
the feasibility of a credit line from the European Stability Mechanism could be explored. Any 
such  backstop  should  be  temporary  in  nature  and  compensated  by  ex  post  levies  on  the 
banking sector ensuring that the fund is fiscally neutral over the medium term. 
A  banking  union  with  these  elements  in  place  has  the  potential  to  delink  banks  and 
sovereigns, not least by following an important principle: bail-in precedes bail-out. This will 
ensure that shareholders and unsecured creditors according to the hierarchy of their claims 
are the first to bear losses, not the taxpayers. 
Monetary policy 
Speaking  in  my  capacity  as  a  central  banker,  let  me  finally  come  to  the  role  of  monetary 
policy in the deleveraging process. 
To counter the risks from disorderly deleveraging, the swift cuts in ECB policy rates 
and  our  non-standard  measures  were  key.  Fixed-rate  full  allotment  and  longer-term 
refinancing operations stabilised financial markets early on and counteracted the risks from 
fire sales by providing liquidity where it was most needed.  
Equally,  the  ECB  did  not  shy  away  from  bold  measures  to  curtail  tail  risks  and  to 
restore  the  monetary  policy  transmission.  Over  the  last  year  euro  area  financial 
fragmentation has fallen significantly, capital flows have reverted to stressed countries and 
financing costs for corporates have converged somewhat across countries.  
These  measures  had  the  overarching  purpose  of  ensuring  price  stability  over  the 
medium term. For the euro area, this is not merely lip service to the primary objective stated 
in the EU Treaty. It is, instead, the yardstick against which to measure the success of the 
ECB policies and to build credibility. In fact, inflation expectations remained firmly anchored 
throughout the crisis. By contrast, policy interest rates in Japan in the early 1990s remained 
at higher levels for longer, which, together with a lack of reforms in other areas, contributed 
to  protracted  economic  weakness  and  falling  prices.  Eventually,  inflation  expectations 
became unanchored and made stabilisation more difficult for monetary policy once it was at 
the zero lower bound. 
Some commentators would go further and argue that central banks should loosen the belt in 
the  deleveraging  process  to  actively  stoke  high  inflation.11  I  disagree  with  this  line  of 
reasoning. Although surprise inflation would reduce the real debt burden in the short run, it 
would sow doubts about the central banks’ ability and willingness to control inflation in the 
longer  run.  Ultimately,  it  would  undermine  efforts  to  implement  structural  changes  and 
prudent policies. 
However, as the Japanese experience has shown, monetary policy alone cannot place 
the  economy  on  a  sustainable  growth  track.  Bold  monetary  policy  measures  may  be 
effective  in  the  short  run,  but  they  also  bear  the  risk  of  reducing  incentives  for  banks  to 
restructure balance sheets. We are aware of these risks. 
Furthermore,  even  if  central  banks  operate  within  their  own  specific  circumstances  and 
mandates,  the  policy  measures  may  lead  to  unintended  spillovers  to  other  countries.  To 
ensure  that  monetary  policy  is  transmitted  adequately  to  the  economy  and  domestic 
                                                
11  See, for example, Blanchard, O., Dell’Ariccia, G. and Mauro, P., “Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy”, Journal 
of Money, Credit and Banking, 42(s1), 2010, pp. 199–215. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
financing  conditions  are  insulated  from  those  prevailing  in  the  global  economy,  sound 
macroeconomic policies and strong domestic institutions are vital.  
In addition, to place the economy back on track to sustainable growth, a medium-term fiscal 
consolidation strategy as well as structural reforms with productive investment are essential; 
these two elements combined with monetary policy form the three arrows identified by Prime 
Minister Abe. Monetary  policy can buy time to implement structural changes and ease the 
deleveraging process, but it cannot cure the root causes of imbalances or be a substitute for 
structural reforms.  
Conclusion 
Allow me to conclude. 
Both our economies face large challenges to counter the risks from deleveraging. Preventing 
disorderly deleveraging will remain key to limiting possible adverse effects on the economic 
performance  in the  most  indebted  euro  area  countries.  At  the same time,  repairing  banks’ 
balance sheets and ensuring their soundness is a pre-condition for re-establishing adequate 
financing of the economy. This is why the SSM, including the comprehensive assessment, 
and  the  single  resolution  mechanism  are  crucial  steps  towards  improving  euro  area 
governance.  The  European  institutional  context  may  sometimes  appear  cumbersome,  but 
the progress made shows that Europe recognises problems and responds to them. 
Nevertheless,  even  with  these  changes,  solving  a  stock  problem  means  addressing  a 
prolonged  adjustment  in  flows  in  the  future. We  are  all  well  aware  that  debt  consolidation 
alone weighs on economic activity just like a diet leaves one with the feeling of fatigue. The 
deleveraging process will require time; we should not lose patience in the process.  
Compared  with  past  episodes,  deleveraging  has,  in  fact,  become  even  more  challenging. 
The  global  dimension  of  deleveraging  makes  burden-shifting  across  countries  impossible 
and  today’s  demographic  trends  are  putting  strain  on  our  growth  prospects.  It  is  therefore 
crucial to balance the consolidation across generations12.  
Nonetheless,  I  reemphasise  the  need  to  complement  the  consolidation  process  with 
structural changes in order to make our economies fitter. This involves reducing red tape to 
ease business creation, streamlining governance of state-owned enterprises and reallocating 
workers more flexibly from stagnating and declining industries to productive and expanding 
ones. Structural reforms are not only required in the countries in the euro area, but have also 
been  recognised  by  Prime  Minister  Abe  in  his  third  arrow  as  essential  to  securing  the 
Japanese recovery over the long term.  
Thank you for your attention. 
                                                
12  See, for example, Tokuoka, K., “Intergenerational Implications of Fiscal Consolidation in Japan”, IMF Working 
Papers, 12/197, 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
