Jörg Asmussen: Changing reality 
Intervention by Mr Jörg Asmussen, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, at the Panel Discussion “Reverse Reality – What If: Lehman Sisters’ or the Sisterhood 
Ran G20 and Big Business?”, Women in Parliament, Global Forum, Brussels, 28 November 
2013. 
 Reversing reality 
1) 
The title of our debate “What if Lehman Sisters…” invites us to a thought experiment: What 
would a reversed reality look like? Would the world be a better place per se? I doubt it. 
There  is  plenty  of  empirical  evidence  on  gender  differences  in  finance  and  risk  aversion. 
Experiments  and  field  studies  on  gambling  and  betting  show  that  women  on  average  are 
more risk averse than men. My anecdotal evidence as a father of two young ladies age 6 and 
5 proofs quite to the contrary that female do behave hazardously on playgrounds. However, 
as an economist, I have no reason to doubt the empirical results. 
But  I  doubt,  indeed,  that  reversing  reality  in  the  sense  of  replacing  “male  dominance”  in 
finance  by  “female  dominance”  would  make  the  world  a  better,  or  the  financial  industry  a 
safer  place.  It  would  merely  create  another  type  of  “unbalanced  reality”  with  the  same 
tendency to herding behaviour. 
Changing reality 
2) 
I am, however, deeply convinced that it is time to change reality and to strive for more gender 
diversity. 
Why is gender diversity important? 
a) 
I see three reasons for this: 
First, gender diversity brings new insights, skills and experiences to an organisation and is 
thus an asset and a competitive advantage. Mixed teams achieve on average better results. 
If  you  allow,  I  would  like  to  use  a  successful  soccer  team  as  an  example:  yes,  you  need 
brave  strikers,  ready  to  take  any  risk  and  not  shying  away,  even  if  it  hurts.  But  to  be 
successful,  you  also  need  the  midfield,  setting  the  scene  for  others  and  willing  to  run  the 
extra mile. And you need the very cautious defence you can rely on. 
Second, gender diversity allows accessing the widest talent pool. 50% of newly graduates 
are  women  and  the  majority  of  graduates  with  top  grades  are  female.  We  simply  cannot 
afford to not make use of these human resources and this argument weighs even heavier in 
ageing societies facing demographic challenges. 
Third,  gender  diversity  is  simply  a  question  of  fairness  and  chances  of  participation  in 
modern society and key to work-life balance for modern families. And in this sense, gender 
diversity is not only about affirmative action for women in the workplace. As I see it, there is 
something  in  it  for  men  as  well  –  it  is  about  gender  balance.  Most  men  I  know  have  a 
reluctant  or  clearly  negative  attitude  towards  gender  diversity  and  enjoy  making  fun  of  it. 
They  are  often  simply  scared  about  their  own  career  prospects. What  is  only  rarely  seen, 
however, is that improving the chances of participation of women in the workplace goes hand 
in hand with opportunities for men to engage more in family life, leaving the stigma and role 
models of the 1950s behind. And I do know many men who would enjoy this. They should 
therefore change their attitude towards gender diversity in the first place. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
How to get there? 
b) 
While I have been convinced of the need for change and more gender balance for a long 
time, I changed my mind on the question how to get there in recent years. When I graduated 
from  university  and  started  my  professional  career  I  thought  that  for  my  female  fellow 
students eventually equal career opportunities would open up as for me and my male fellow 
students. 
My personal experience over the last 20 years and the developments in the professional life 
in general proofed me wrong. The figures speak for themselves and I want to quote just one 
compelling finding: The UK’s Equality and Human Rights Commission found in 2008 that it 
would  take  70  years  to  achieve  gender-balance  in  the  UK’s  largest  100  companies  at  the 
current rate of change. We need to speed things up. 
And we need a critical mass to achieve a breakthrough. McKinsey comes to the conclusion 
that the environment for women in senior roles improves only when about a third of leaders 
on that level are female. 
I would like to share with you how we at the ECB want to achieve the breakthrough: 
The  Executive  Board  decided  this  summer  to  introduce  gender  targets  with  the  aim  of 
doubling the share of women in management within 6 ½ years. By the end of 2019, 35% of 
position in middle and senior management should be held by women. The overall share of 
women  in  management  positions  at  present  is  17%,  while  women  hold  14%  of  senior 
management  positions.  In  order  to  reach  the  gender  targets,  the  ECB  is  currently 
implementing  a  gender  diversity  action  plan.  This  action  plan  covers  such  measures  as 
opening  up  vacancies  for  external  recruitment  campaigns  and  ensuring  that  women  are 
better represented in selection panels. 
The recruitment of staff for the single European banking supervisor will be a litmus test for 
our new strategy. 
Gender diversity is high on the agenda of the ECB and it will stay there until we achieve our 
targets. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
