Joseph S Tracy: Testimony on Housing Finance Reform – essential 
elements of a government guarantee for mortgage-backed securities 
Testimony by Mr Joseph S Tracy, Executive Vice President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New  York,  before  the  U.S.  Senate  Committee  on  Banking,  Housing  and  Urban  Affairs, 
Washington DC, 31 October 2013. 
 Chairman Johnson, Ranking Member Crapo and members of the Committee, thank you for 
the  opportunity  to  appear  before  you  today.  My  name  is  Joe  Tracy.  I  work  at  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York. Today I will be discussing research1 in the area of government 
support for housing finance that colleagues and I at the New York Fed have conducted. It is 
important for me to emphasize that my remarks today, and the conclusions of the research 
that I will share with you, represent my own views and are not official views of the New York 
Fed or any other element of the Federal Reserve System.  
I  commend  the  Committee  for  focusing  on  the  elements  necessary  to  constitute  a  robust 
housing finance system in the United States. By “robust” I mean that such a system must 
provide  for  the  uninterrupted  flow  of  credit  to  housing  markets  even  in  periods  of  market 
stress.  In  the  wake  of  the  financial  crisis,  significant  progress  is  underway  to  improve  the 
resiliency of financial markets. Nevertheless, we must plan ahead for the risk of future market 
stresses.  
My  co-authors  and  I  have  started  with  the  observation  that  in  the  face  of  truly  systemic 
housing  shocks,  governments  always  intervene.  It  is  not  hard  to  imagine  why:  given  the 
importance  of  housing  to  Americans  and  our  economy,  at  some  level  of  housing  market 
stress, the government faces intense pressure to take action. We cannot eliminate the risk 
that  the  government  may  have  to  intervene.  So  we  need  to  acknowledge  that  risk  and 
establish a system to reduce and manage it, or we  will recreate an implicit guarantee that 
puts the taxpayer at unacceptable risk.  
In  my  view,  the  private  sector  (and  the  borrower)  must  absorb  all  losses  up  to  an  agreed 
point, with the government absorbing all further losses. The level at which the government 
steps  in  must  be  well  known  in  advance  and  credible  to  the  market,  meaning  that  there 
should be no speculation as to when and how the government would intervene.  
When  should  the  government  intervene?  If  markets  believe  that  the  government  will 
intervene sooner than it claims, then this will generate uncertainty, and financial markets will 
speculate  on  the  timing  and  nature  of  the  intervention.  This  uncertainty  could  have  a 
destabilizing  effect,  leading  to  higher  losses  that  the  government  would  ultimately  have  to 
absorb.  A  government  guarantee  that  is  unclear  or  not  credible,  even  if  it  is  explicit  and 
priced, will result in greater costs to the government and, ultimately, the taxpayer.  
What should parties pay the government for its willingness to intervene? In my view, 
the government must determine its exposure net of the loss absorption capacity provided by 
the  private  sector.  This  includes  evaluating  the  counterparty  credit  risks  generated  by  any 
risk-sharing  transactions.  Risk-sharing  must  require  a  payment  of  cash  from  the  private 
sector and oversight of the capital and overall risk profile of any participants in risk sharing. 
Of course, the required private capital should be of high quality and should be determined 
relative to the total risk associated with a given set of mortgage underwriting standards. This 
may  sound  complicated,  but  it  is  not  brain  surgery.  The  government  should  bear  only  the 
cost of extraordinary systemic risks and the private sector must bear losses associated with 
                                                
1   The Capital Structure and Governance of a Mortgage Securitization Utility, Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
Staff Report, Number 644, October 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
the  normal  business  cycle.  If  this  can  be  arranged,  then  the  largest  portion  of  the  overall 
guarantee fee will be priced by the market and not by the government.  
An  important  design  decision  for  a  housing  finance  system  is  whether  the  government 
backstop will apply directly to mortgage-backed securities, their issuers, or some other legal 
entity.  An  institution-based  program  could  erode  private  sector  discipline,  while  a  security-
based backstop would pick up the idiosyncratic and cyclical risks that are better left to the 
private  sector.  Seeking  to  balance  these  concerns,  I  have  explored  the  notion  that 
government  support  would  be  triggered  by  the  total  losses  across  an  entire  group  or 
“vintage” of mortgage-backed securities.  
Vintage-based  support  would  likely  only  be  triggered  by  a  true  systemic  shock.  A  vintage 
approach would also provide a transparent and finite maximum loss for the private sector to 
absorb, supporting robustness at the onset, during, and through the aftermath of a crisis. I 
believe that the costs of the recent devastating economic downturn would have been far less 
to the taxpayer, and the housing market would have rebounded far quicker, had a vintage-
based program containing adequate high-quality private capital been in effect.  
Attracting private capital to finance residential real estate is another important consideration. 
It is difficult for institutions that depend on short-term funding to take long-term interest-rate 
risk – for example, the long-term interest-rate risk posed by 30-year fixed-rate mortgages. It 
is  also  difficult  for  investors  who  do  not  do  the  underwriting  themselves  to  take  long-term 
idiosyncratic credit risk. Securitization backed by a predictable level of government support 
has a useful function in facilitating the allocation of these different risks to different sets of 
investors through the To-Be-Announced or “TBA” market. I think the TBA market will be key 
to ensuring Americans’ continued widespread access to the 30-year fixed-rate mortgage.  
The  TBA  market  is  also  important  to  the  role  of  small  banks  and  lending  institutions  in  a 
competitive housing finance system. Ensuring an easy, predictable path to securitization of 
standardized mortgage products is essential to making mortgage credit available throughout 
our  country  –  in  traditionally  underserved  rural  areas  and  urban  areas,  and  to  all  sorts  of 
current  and  potential  homeowners,  provided  by  financial  institutions  of  different  sizes  in 
different locations. A strong regulator whose primary focus is the housing finance system can 
also help ensure fair access to smaller institutions.  
In summary, it is my personal belief that housing finance reform must incorporate an explicit 
government  backstop  accompanied  by  significant  sources  of  high-quality  first-loss  private 
capital.  Thank  you  for  the  opportunity  to  appear  before  you  today.  I  look  forward  to  your 
questions. 
 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
