Jean-Pierre Danthine: A macroprudential progress report 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Pierre  Danthine,  Vice  Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss 
National Bank, at the Society for Financial Econometrics (SoFiE), Lugano, 11 October 2013. 
 I would like to thank Till Ebner, Fabian Gunzinger and Patrick Saner for their very valuable support in drafting this 
speech. 
Introduction 
Five years ago, the failure of Lehman Brothers sent shockwaves through the global financial 
system. The failure of a relatively small but highly interconnected institution pushed the entire 
financial system and, eventually, the global economy to the brink of collapse. This painfully 
highlighted  the  fact  that  policymakers  had  underestimated  systemic  risk.  Five  years  later, 
thanks  to  substantial  efforts,  we  have  a  better  –  but  admittedly  still  incomplete  – 
understanding of what systemic risk is and what we should do about it. 
In  general  terms,  systemic  risk  arises  because  an  optimising  financial  institution  does  not 
fully account for the cost that its behaviour imposes on other financial institutions. Thus, in 
essence, the origin of systemic risk is a negative externality imposed by individual financial 
firms  on  the  system.  For  analytical  and  regulatory  purposes,  it  is  useful  to  differentiate 
between structural and cyclical systemic risk. Structural systemic risk stems from institutions 
that  are  so  large  or  so  interconnected  that  their  failure  would  threaten  the  stability  of  the 
entire  system.  These  are  the  institutions  that  are  “too  big  to  fail”  (TBTF)  or  “too 
interconnected to fail”. The cyclical dimension of systemic risk captures the procyclicality of 
financial  agents’  behaviour  which,  if  left  unchecked,  can  amplify  the  financial  cycle  and 
increase its instability – a classical collective action problem. Historical evidence shows that 
the risk of such instability is particularly elevated in situations that combine rising residential 
prices and dynamic credit growth.1 
Regulators  and  policymakers  around  the  world  have  been  working  hard  on  regulatory 
measures  that  aim  directly  at  containing  these  risks.  The  Lehman  anniversary  and  the 
papers that have been discussed here this afternoon make this conference a good occasion 
to reflect on these efforts. In particular, I want to talk about the progress we have made here 
in Switzerland in devising and implementing regulatory answers to mitigating systemic risk, 
and  also  about  the  work  we  still  have  ahead  of  us  in  this  regard.  I  will  address  these  two 
issues in turn. 
For  a  start,  let  me  give  you  a  quick  overview  of  the  global  reform  agenda.  On  the  global 
scale, 
III)  sets  minimum  capital  adequacy 
requirements  that  are  more  stringent  in  both  quantitative  and  qualitative  terms,  and 
introduces a global minimum standard on liquidity buffers. At the same time, importantly, the 
new framework takes explicit account of systemic risk. First, it imposes a capital surcharge 
for systemically important institutions in order to address the structural TBTF problem. This 
surcharge amounts to additional loss-absorbing capital of between 1.0% and 2.5% of risk-
weighted  assets,  with  the  specific  requirement  depending  on  the  degree  to  which  an 
institution  is  systemically  important.  Second,  it  introduces  a  countercyclical  buffer  ranging 
between 0.0% and 2.5% of total risk-weighted assets, to increase the system’s resilience to 
cyclical systemic risk. This buffer can be temporarily imposed when credit growth is judged 
the  regulatory  reform  approach  (Basel 
                                                 
1   Cf. for instance Borio, C. (2012) or Schularick, M. and Taylor, A. (2012). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
excessive. These new rules are being phased in over several years and will come into full 
effect in 2019.2 
Regulation in Switzerland: Framework and progress so far 
Switzerland is well advanced in the process of introducing a new regulatory approach in line 
with this international framework. There was, and still is, an urgent need to proceed faster 
and to go beyond the global minimum standards. 
First, the size of Switzerland’s two major banks, Credit Suisse and UBS, relative to GDP is 
very large by international standards (8:1 in 2007 and 4:1 today). It is worth recalling that, 
back in October 2008, in order to prevent a breakdown of our financial system, the Swiss 
authorities had to take measures to strengthen UBS, putting a large amount of public funds  
–  up  to  USD  60  billion  –  at  considerable  risk.  Despite  the  favourable  turn  of  events  since 
then, we have to take all means necessary to avoid such a situation in the future. 
Second,  on  the  cyclical  front,  the  sustained  momentum  in  the  Swiss  mortgage  and  real 
estate market over several years has already led to imbalances that pose a risk to financial 
stability and, ultimately, the Swiss economy. 
So, what have we done to address systemic risk in Switzerland up to now?  
With  respect  to  the  structural  dimension  of  systemic  risk  –  the  TBTF  issue  –  Switzerland 
already adopted a package of measures back in 2011. This package aims at reducing both 
the likelihood of crisis at a systemically important bank and the costs to the economy in the 
event of such a crisis. 
The  package  consists  of  four  complementary  measures:  (1)  significantly  more  capital,  and 
capital of better quality, (2) larger liquidity buffers, (3) rules imposing sufficient diversification 
to reduce counterparty risk, and (4) organisational measures. Let me briefly outline some key 
elements of this package. 
The  new  capital  adequacy  regulations  for  systemically  important  banks  apply  to  the  risk-
weighted  capital  ratio  and  the  leverage  ratio.  Furthermore,  they  are  designed  to  be 
progressive. Put simply, the bigger the bank, and the greater its systemic importance for the 
domestic financial system, the higher the requirement. For institutions similar in size to UBS 
and CS at the time the TBTF package was initially defined, the total capital requirement adds 
up to 19% of risk-weighted assets (RWA), of which 10% must be held in common equity and 
9% can be held in convertible capital (cocos), and the leverage ratio requirement amounts to 
about 4.6%.3 
The  organisational  measures  require  banks  to  show  convincingly  –  on  the  basis  of 
“emergency  plans”  –  that  they  are  organised  in  such  a  way  as  to  be  able  to  maintain 
systemically important functions in the event of a crisis, thus reducing the need for a public 
bail-out.  If  they  are  not  able  to  do  so,  the  regulator,  FINMA,  may  impose  organisational 
measures. In March 2012, these new rules came into law and UBS and CS must fully comply 
by the end of 2018. This transitional period was introduced to mitigate potential unintended 
side-effects.  
Implementation  is  under  way.  Specifically,  with  respect  to  increasing  their  risk-weighted 
capital ratios, both banks have already made substantial progress. If they continue according 
to  the  plans  they  have  announced,  they  will  be  in  a  position  to  fulfil  the  new  regulatory 
                                                 
2   For more detail on the Basel III framework, see Bank for International Settlements (2011). 
3   For  the  underlying  assumptions  and  principles,  see  Commission  of  Experts  for  limiting  the  economic  risks 
posed by large companies (2010). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
requirements  by  the  end  of  2014.4  At  the  same  time,  regulators  are  working  on  the 
establishment of resolution and recovery plans. When finalised, these plans should enable 
the regulators to secure the orderly resolution of a global bank in the event of a severe crisis 
and, in doing so, to make sure that systemically important functions can be maintained. As 
an important step towards this goal, FINMA has been authorised, since November 2012, to 
order  a  bail-in  of  creditors  to  generate  the  financial  means  necessary  for  restructuring  a 
bank. 
Turning  to  cyclical  risk,  in  June  2012,  the  Federal  Council  announced  a  set  of  measures 
consisting of three elements: (1) a permanent increase in risk weights for high loan-to-value 
mortgage  loans,5  (2)  a  revision  of  the  banking  industry’s  self-regulation  guidelines  for 
mortgage lending,6 and (3) the legal basis for the activation of a countercyclical capital buffer 
(CCB),  as  proposed  in  the  Basel  III  framework.  This  instrument  allows  for  a  temporary 
increase  in  capital  requirements  when  imbalances  appear  to  be  building  up  in  the  credit 
markets.  It  thus  aims  to  increase  the  resilience  of  the  banking  system,  and  helps  to  lean 
against  excessive  credit  growth.  In  February  2013,  following  a  proposal  by  the  SNB,  the 
Federal Council activated the CCB, requiring banks to hold additional capital amounting to 
1% of risk-weighted residential mortgage loan positions. Banks have been obliged to comply 
with this rule since 30 September 2013. 
With the activation of the CCB, Switzerland is among the first countries to implement a tool 
advocated by the international community as a means for preemptively dealing with cyclical 
risks to financial stability. While our experience with the CCB may thus be of general interest, 
we cannot draw conclusive lessons at this point. The CCB took effect only two weeks ago, 
and was activated while the other two measures I have just outlined were already in place. 
So we are not conducting a controlled experiment here, which makes disentangling the effect 
of any single measure very difficult. 
Where should we go from here? 
Overall, Switzerland has taken significant steps and substantial progress has been made to 
better deal with systemic risk, regarding both its cyclical and its structural dimension. Yet, our 
journey  towards  a  more  resilient  financial  system  is  far  from  over.  The  risk  of  a  systemic 
crisis of either kind remains. The task has yet to be completed. 
Let’s  start  with  structural  systemic  risk.  Despite  the  progress  in  reducing  exposure  and 
strengthening the resilience of the two big banks, the TBTF problem is not fully eliminated as 
of  yet.  On  the  one  hand,  the  capital  cushion  planned  for  2019  is  not  yet  available  and,  in 
particular, the leverage ratios of UBS and CS are still low, with their loss-absorbing capital 
amounting  to  2.4%  of  total  exposure.7  On  the  other  hand,  the  orderly  resolution  of  a 
distressed systemically important bank is not yet secured. As a consequence, and given the 
potentially  huge  cost  of  a  disorderly  collapse  of  such  a  bank  for  financial  stability  and  the 
economy, we cannot yet exclude the need for a public bail-out in a possible future crisis. 
                                                 
4   In this respect, both banks are now very well placed in an international peer comparison. At Credit Suisse, the 
ratio of loss-absorbing capital to risk-weighted assets has more than doubled, from 5.2% in the first quarter of 
2012 to 10.8% in the second quarter of 2013, while at UBS it rose from 7.5% to 11.4% over the same period. 
5   Risk weights increase from 75 to 100% for the loan tranche exceeding the 80% LTV ratio. 
6 
In particular, the revised guidelines require banks to apply tighter rules regarding mortgage lending, as follows. 
First, at least 10% of the value of the collateral must be provided in equity from sources other than borrowers’ 
pension assets. Second, the mortgage debt on residential properties has to be repaid such that it amounts to 
no more than two-thirds of the collateral value after 20 years. A 100% risk-weighting applies for new mortgage 
loans that do not meet these tighter minimum requirements. 
7   As at Q2 2013. Pro memoria: during the crisis, UBS incurred losses of about 2%. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
This state of affairs is still unsatisfactory, and has led to renewed debates on how to further 
regulate  global  banks.  Specifically,  voices  have  been  raised  in  favour  of  a  substantial 
increase  in  the  minimum  non-weighted  capital  requirement,  the  leverage  ratio.  Moreover, 
demands for an outright separation of investment banking from commercial banking, along 
the lines of the Glass-Steagall Act, have gained political clout. 
While these proposals have merits – and, given the difficulty of the task, one should keep an 
open mind – qualifying remarks seem appropriate at the current juncture. We are in the midst 
of  implementing  a  complementary  and  balanced  package  of  measures.  As  we  have  seen, 
tangible  progress  has  already  been  made.  When  it  is  fully  implemented,  this  package  will 
substantially reduce, and possibly eliminate, the TBTF problem. It is unlikely that a sudden 
change in strategy would lead to a faster elimination of the underlying risks. 
Rather than changing the regulation strategy midway, it is imperative that we press on with 
the  full  implementation  of  the  TBTF  package.  We  will  then  be  in  a  position  to  assess  its 
effectiveness  and  decide  whether  further  measures  are  necessary.  Full  implementation 
entails, necessarily, further progress on the following four issues: 
First, the big banks must stay on track, and must fully and consistently implement the tighter 
risk-weighted  capital  and  liquidity  requirements  as  currently  planned.  This  will,  importantly, 
lead to a significant improvement in their leverage ratios. 
Second,  the  quality  of  the  banks’  own  risk  assessment  methods  must  be  improved. 
Increasingly, doubts have been raised on the reliability of the internal models which banks 
use  to  compute  their  risk-weighted  assets  (RWAs).  A  stable  financial  system  cannot  be 
based  on  questionable  and  opaque  risk  assessments.  To  regain  confidence  in  these 
calculations,  banks  should  make  sure  that  their  RWA  calculations  are  transparent  and 
traceable. In particular, they have to ensure that changes in RWAs over time, and differences 
in published RWAs between institutions, can be explained and economically accounted for. 
Third,  the  ongoing  work  on  recovery  and  resolution  plans  should  be  pursued  with  total 
determination.  If  required  for  the  guaranteed  maintenance  of  systemically  important 
functions,  changes  in  the  current  organisational  structure  should  be  explored  and  initiated 
without delay.  
Fourth,  on  the  regulatory  side,  further  progress  in  defining  the  key  elements  of  a  viable 
resolution and recovery strategy for globally active banks is needed. In the absence of global 
bank  insolvency  legislation,  this  necessitates  close  coordination  among  regulators  across 
borders.  Specifically,  further  steps  are  necessary  to  guarantee  that  resolution  measures  – 
such  as  a  bail-in  –  ordered  by  the  home  regulator  are  mutually  recognised  by  foreign 
authorities. In this regard, it is encouraging that the resolution and recovery plans for our big 
banks  are  being  developed  in  close  collaboration  with  the  foreign  regulatory  authorities 
concerned. 
Let me finish with some words regarding the cyclical risks. Mortgage volumes and real estate 
prices  continue  to  grow  at  rates  significantly  above  those  justified  by  fundamental  factors 
such as income and population growth. This means that the imbalances, which are already 
large,  are  increasing  further.  At  the  same  time,  indications  of  a  possible  slowdown  in 
momentum became visible during the course of 2013.8 Taken together, these developments 
make it difficult to judge precisely where we are in the credit cycle or the direction in which 
we  are  heading.  This  situation  is  an  example  of  the  fundamental  identification  difficulty 
                                                 
8   Nominal growth rates for mortgage claims have slowed to about 4.5% from around 5% in the two preceding 
years. At the same time, apartment price growth has slowed from 6.8% (average growth rate in 2012) to 5.2% 
in  Q2  2013  (annual  growth  rates  of  nominal  transactions  prices  based  on  quarterly  data  provided  by 
Wüest&Partner). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
pertaining  to  the  analysis  of  the  financial  cycle.  Further  academic  advances  in  the 
development of new tools to help identify cyclical risks would be highly welcome. 
The  lessons  are  clear,  however.  In  the  current  environment  of  significant  uncertainty  and 
persistent risk, prudent behaviour on the part of all actors is called for. For banks, this means 
applying conservative lending criteria in terms of both loan-to-value ratios and affordability. 
For borrowers, it means bearing in mind that real estate prices are already at elevated levels 
and ensuring that, even if interest rates were to rise sharply, they could afford to service a 
loan. And finally, for regulators, it means continuing to monitor the situation very closely and 
being ready to take further regulatory measures, if the hopes of a soft landing are not fulfilled. 
References 
Bank for International Settlements (2011). Basel III: A global regulatory framework for more 
resilient banks and banking systems. 
Borio,  C.  (2012).  The  financial  cycle  and  macroeconomics:  What  have  we  learnt?  BIS 
Working Paper No 395. 
Commission  of  Experts  for  limiting  the  economic  risks  posed  by  large  companies  (2010). 
Final report. www.sif.admin.ch/dokumentation/00522/00724/00725/index.html?lang=en. 
Schularick  M.,  and  Taylor,  A.  (2012).  Credit  booms  gone  bust:  Monetary  policy,  leverage 
cycles,  and  financial  crises,  1870–2008.  American  Economic  Review,  American  Economic 
Association, Vol. 102(2), pages 1029–61. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
