Geoff Bascand: Communication, understanding, and credibility 
Speech  by  Mr  Geoff  Bascand,  Deputy  Governor  and  Head  of  Operations  of  the  Reserve 
Bank of New Zealand, to the Admirals Breakfast Club, Auckland, 6 December 2013. 
 I’m just a soul whose intentions are good 
Oh Lord, please don’t let me be misunderstood 
The Animals 
Central  bank  communication  is  again  a  renewed  topic  of  interest.  Internationally,  the 
expanded  use  of  and  debate  about  the  efficacy  of  “forward  guidance”  –  i.e.  words  that 
foreshadow  the  future  timing  of  monetary  policy  actions  –  has  attracted  much  attention. 
Locally, the introduction of restrictions on low equity housing loans and the prospect of rising 
interest rates have been widely featured. 
Central  banks’  communication  strategies  and  their  ability  to  communicate  effectively  have 
been challenged enormously by the events and consequences of the Global Financial Crisis 
and  by  the  emergence  of  new  technology  and  social  media.  Complexity  increased, 
audiences  expanded,  and  the  immediacy  and  saturation  of  news  coverage  has turned  the 
volume control on full. But as any parent of growing children knows, greater volume doesn’t 
always mean greater clarity! 
While  arcane  in  some  respects  (some  will  recall  United  States  Federal  Reserve  Governor 
Alan Greenspan terming his communication approach as “constructive ambiguity”1), central 
bank communication is not an abstract topic. Central bank pronouncements, their absence, 
and their tone, have economic and social impact. 
The Reserve Bank is extending its communication with the various groups that our activities 
impact.  “Communicating  on  a  broader  front”  is  one  of  our  strategic  priorities2  –  both  in 
imparting our messages and engaging with and listening to our many stakeholders. This is 
because  communication  is  critical  to  the  Reserve  Bank’s  success,  with  its  actions  and  its 
communications symbiotic. 
In  my  speech  today  I  will  outline  why  clear  communication  of  our  policy  thinking  is  so 
important, and the forces that shape the way we communicate. I will also discuss how our 
approach to communication has evolved, and the tools we use to reach our audiences. And 
finally, I will proffer some thoughts on where to from here. 
Why, when and how should the Reserve Bank communicate? 
Broadly speaking, the Reserve Bank seeks to achieve price and financial stability and protect 
the value of your money. Our communications are ultimately geared to this purpose. These 
are important and sensitive matters, so understanding of, and confidence in our actions and 
messages  –  and  indeed  in  the  institution  itself  –  is  essential.  This  requires  that  our 
communication is seen as objective and credible. 
                                                
1   Greenspan’s  communication  was  also  often  termed  “Fedspeak”  and  “Greenspeak”  in  which  ambiguous 
statements were made to purposefully obscure the statement. 
2   See Statement of Intent 2013-2016, p14. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The why of monetary policy communication 
Much  of  the  literature  regarding  central  bank  communication  pertains  to  the  operation  of 
monetary  policy.  Three  principal  rationales  exist  for  the  transparency  of  monetary  policy 
communication.  First,  is  the  need  for  accountability,  with  accountability  supported  by 
transparency? With central banks often having significant autonomy or independence in how 
they  pursue  their  objectives,  Parliament,  its  agents  (e.g.  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  the 
board of the central bank) and the public must be able to assess whether they are fulfilling 
their responsibilities. 
The  public  debate  sometimes  appears  to  confuse  independence  of  objectives  with 
independence  of  operation.  In  New  Zealand,  the  overriding  objectives  are  set  by  the 
legislature;  the  autonomy  extends  only  to  the  operational  decision-making  necessary  to 
achieve the democratically set objective. 
There are multiple accountability mechanisms, including Reserve Bank Board monitoring of 
the  Bank’s  and  Governor’s  performance,  public  reporting  via  quarterly  Monetary  Policy 
Statements,  six-monthly  Financial  Stability  Reports  and  the  Annual  Report,  appearances 
before the Finance and Expenditure Select Committee, media, financial market, and public 
scrutiny. A recent study by Dincer and Eichengreen (2013) reported the RBNZ as the second 
most transparent central bank in the world, just behind Sweden. 
The  second  rationale  is  promoting  understanding.  The  credibility  and  effectiveness  of 
economic  policy  is  enhanced  by  public  and  financial  market  understanding  of  how  an 
economy is performing, and how the central bank’s operations and policy settings are likely 
to affect it. All economic decisions, such as investment, spending, savings, employment, and 
price-setting decisions are affected by uncertainty and expectations of the path ahead. 
The  Bank  does  not  claim  more  accurate  foresight  than  other  analysts,  but  it  can  educate, 
inform, and explain its own decision-making approach, and thereby minimise one potential 
source of uncertainty. It can help make more predictable what would otherwise be less so. 
Doing  so  also  provides  important  benefits  for  the  Bank. Widespread  understanding  of  the 
goal and operation of monetary policy makes it easier for the Bank to achieve its objective of 
price  stability3,  by  better  anchoring  low  inflation  expectations.  This  means  that  wage  and 
price  setters  are  more  confident  that  the  focus  of  the  Bank  will  be  on  achieving  and 
maintaining  low  and  stable  rates  of  inflation.  This,  in  turn,  means  that  the  Bank  is  able  to 
respond  to  economic  shocks  by  adjusting  interest  rates  less  than  would  otherwise  be  the 
case. 
Several studies find benefits from transparency in terms of reduced volatility of interest rates 
and smaller movements in market rates for a given change in central bank actions (e.g. see 
Blinder,  2008).  Along  similar  lines,  Drew  and  Karagedikli  (2008)  demonstrated  that  New 
Zealand’s short-term interest rates move more predictably and long-term interest rates and 
inflation expectations are more stable in association with greater transparency. 
                                                
3   Thornton (2002) argues this is the most critical reason for, and form of, transparency. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 
2014 marks 25 years since our inflation targeting regime was introduced – and over 20 years 
since  low  inflation  was  accomplished.  Pretty  much  a  whole  generation  of  New  Zealanders 
has not had to experience the distortions and inequities of high inflation that characterised 
the 1970s and 1980s. 
When  seeking  to  build  understanding  of  monetary  policy  goals  and  its  operation,  we  also 
need to communicate the costs and benefits of proposals to change the framework around 
monetary policy. An example is the debate around the exchange rate and its relationship to 
monetary  policy.  The  Bank  has  conducted  research,  published  analysis  and,  together  with 
the  Treasury,  convened  a  conference  towards  understanding  of  monetary  policy  and  the 
exchange rate. Assistant Governor John McDermott recently gave a speech summarising the 
findings of this work (McDermott, 2013). 
The  third  and  most  potent  rationale  for  transparency  is  to  use  communication  as  a 
fundamental  tool  for  signalling  a  monetary  policy  action.  In  this  context,  statements  and 
analysis by the Bank are designed to inform and shape expectations about future monetary 
policy settings. Indeed, when used in this instrumental manner, the words of the central bank 
are themselves monetary policy actions (see Holmes, 2009). 
Achieving this impact requires considerable central bank credibility. The institution needs to 
be perceived as a responsible and credible manager of its designated policy goals in order to 
successfully influence economic behaviour. As Janet Yellen, President Obama’s nominee as 
next Chair of the US Federal Reserve Board of Governors said: if the Fed’s communication 
is “to have its maximum effect, it must be understood and believed” (Yellen, 2012, p.7; my 
emphasis). 
One test in this respect is whether our statements yield the market responses we seek. The 
potency  of  words  is  also  their  danger.  Market  sensitivity  to  language  is  acute,  and  it  is 
important  to  avoid  misinterpretation4.  Prior  to  the  final  sign-off  of  the  Monetary  Policy 
                                                
4   Historically, it was recognition of this sensitivity that led central bankers to limit their communication. Before 
Greenspan, Montague Norman (Governor of the Bank of England from 1921 to 1944) reputedly took as his 
personal  motto: 
(http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech-
/bernanke20071114a.htm). 
“Never  explain,  never  excuse”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Statement or Official Cash Rate (OCR) statement, the draft communication is assessed by 
the  Financial  Markets  Department  of  the  Bank  for  expected  market  impact,  and  we 
subsequently monitor and evaluate its “success” in achieving the desired response. 
Reaching one audience effectively does not guarantee we have reached another. A recent 
foray into the “public audience” via an opinion article explaining the LVR policy, that repeated 
our monetary policy expectations, appeared to reveal substantial public  surprise about our 
interest rate projections. While unintentional, it therefore possibly enhanced the projection’s 
impact. Achieving both accessibility and credibility, while simultaneously communicating with 
both the general public and financial markets, can sometimes create tensions5. 
The why of financial stability communication 
The  arguments  around  transparency  of  central  bank  operations  with  respect  to  financial 
stability  are  less  well  traversed  in  the  literature,  although  studies  are  increasing. 
Accountability  is  again  a  key  reason for  transparency  about  the  regulator’s  conduct,  along 
with economic benefits from reducing asymmetry of information, improving the operation of 
financial markets, and helping people to understand financial risk (e.g. Born et al, 2012)6. 
The  primary  communication  instrument  for  accountability  and  transparency  around  the 
Bank’s financial soundness responsibilities is the Financial Stability Report. Published every 
six months, this report sets out our assessment of trends in system risks, lending growth and 
standards, and policy changes. The report enables the Reserve Bank Board, Parliament and 
other  commentators  to  evaluate  our  system-wide  responsibilities  and  policy  approach  to 
financial soundness. 
Transparency around financial stability is achieved both by the central bank’s own reporting 
and perhaps more importantly by the disclosure requirements it imposes on financial market 
participants, enabling investors and depositors to assess lending risks. 
A  number  of  authors  have  argued  that  the  Asian  banking  crisis  of  the  late  1990s  was 
exacerbated  “by  the  lack  of  transparency  and  disclosure  in  the  banking  system,  making  it 
difficult to gauge the severity of the situation or propose timely solutions” (Rosengren, 1998, 
p2). 
Since  then  there  have  been  moves  by  central  banks  to  impose  greater  disclosure  on 
commercial  banks  and  to  ensure  standardisation  and  definitional  clarity  around  disclosed 
information.  The  Reserve  Bank  has  required  all  banks  to  publish  quarterly  disclosure 
statements since 1 January 1996. Markets function better with transparency of information 
(e.g. Mehran and Mollineux, 2012), causing the cost of funds to financial institutions to better 
reflect their underlying financial strength. 
Transparency  is  especially  important  when  financial  stability  risks  may  be  building,  as 
“communications can serve to align agents’ incentives, to coordinate their expectations, and 
to steer their behaviour in a way that helps to prevent crises” (Born et al (2012, p252). 
There  may  be  occasions  where  complete  transparency  may  work  against  the  interests  of 
financial stability, for example if a problem at a bank precipitated a run before the bank and 
the authorities had a chance to correct or at least clarify the problem. 
There  are  strong grounds,  therefore, for  seeing financial  stability  communication  in  normal 
times  as  different  from  that  applying  during  times  of  crisis.  In  the  event  of  an  institutional 
failure  or  rescue,  our  decisions  can  of  course  be  reviewed  after  the  event.  No  rescue 
                                                
5   See  Jackman  (2002).  Blinder  (2008  p941)  observes  that  studying  central  bank  communications  with  the 
general public – in contrast to financial markets − is so far largely unexplored territory. 
6   However, perhaps reflecting the newness of this literature and of FSRs, Oosterloo et al (2007, p94) states that 
there is little evidence of the impact of financial stability reports on financial sector soundness. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
that,  generally  speaking,  we  cannot  reveal 
operation would be undertaken without wider public sector involvement, since taxpayer funds 
are at stake. Normal public sector accountability mechanisms (annual or ex-post reporting, 
audit, select committee examination, etc) operate in such a case. 
Transparency of the Bank’s financial stability activity is also limited by the requirement on us 
as a supervisor to maintain confidentiality of information that institutions provide to us7. This 
means 
the  nature  of  discussions  or 
correspondence  with  a  supervised  entity,  both  to  protect  commercial  confidentiality  and  to 
ensure entities feel safe in talking with us. 
The  financial  stability  policy  development  process  is  more  open  and  consultative  than  the 
operational,  supervisory  process.  Public  engagement  in  prudential  policy  development  is  a 
cornerstone of our approach –  we consult regularly  with the public and  financial sector on 
major  policy  innovations  before  finalising  our  intended  policy  approach,  which  we  publish. 
For example, we have consulted in recent years on the prudential liquidity framework, Basel 
III,  the  macro-prudential  policy  framework,  insurance  solvency  standards  and  payments 
oversight proposals. 
Our Act requires us to consult with the banks before we impose Conditions of Registration, 
and also requires us to publish Regulatory Impact Assessments of proposed (financial) policy 
changes. The Act identifies these as accountability statements. 
The public (and financial sector) are engaged in decisions about our policy framework before 
they are made, and we can and do modify our approach in response to feedback. 
How do we compare? 
The  Bank  puts  considerable  communication  effort  into  promoting  understanding,  and 
accepting the ensuing challenge and debate. 
This year we have given 17 on-the-record speeches (including this one), up from eight last 
year;  90  off-the-record  addresses  (c.f.  93  in  2012);  on  top  of  many  other  forms  of 
communication, from our formal quarterly Monetary Policy Statements and six-weekly Official 
Cash  Rate  (OCR)  announcements  to  research  reports,  webcasts,  videos,  newspaper 
articles,  parliamentary  committees,  academic  engagement,  business  talks  and  regional 
presentations. 
We make analysis and research accessible to wider audiences through such vehicles as the 
Reserve  Bank  Bulletin,  and  publish  specific  analytical  pieces  of  work  underpinning  our 
decision-making via analytical notes. 
Quarterly monetary policy statements set out our analysis and understanding of the economy 
and  its  expected  future  path,  as  well  as  the  risks  of  variation  from  that  path.  Other 
commentators  may  make  different  judgements  and  come  to  different  views  about  likely 
economic behaviours, but we would be disappointed if they were not able to understand the 
reasoning behind our own monetary policy decisions. 
We have been communicating with increasingly wide audiences via expanding channels; yet 
demand for more engagement continues to grow. The news media and political appetite are 
extensive8. 
                                                
7   However, we require substantial disclosure of information by the institutions themselves. 
8   While we have no long-term time series for comparison, media references to the Reserve Bank have been 
running at over 1000 per month during the introduction of LVRs, compared with 500–700 earlier in the year 
when the Open Bank Resolution initiative was being discussed. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Table 1 compares New Zealand against a number of other countries on a range of measures 
of (monetary policy) information disclosure. There is much similarity in practice, with a few 
notable differences. 
New Zealand, along with Sweden and Norway, is in the small minority of central banks that 
publishes  an  interest  rate  projection.  Many  other  central  bank  economic  forecasts  are 
reported under unchanged monetary policy settings, on the assumption that if achievement 
of the policy target demanded a change in settings within the forecast horizon it would have 
been declared. 
Reflecting  our  institutional  regime,  which  is  essentially  the  same  as  Canada’s,  there  is  no 
voting  result  or  publication  of  policy  committee  minutes9.  Minutes  are  also  withheld  by  the 
ECB,  Switzerland,  Norway  and  Singapore.  The  ECB  has  been  very  explicit  that  it  would 
regard their release as reducing the effectiveness of monetary policy by potentially reducing 
consensus decision-making and placing pressure on voting members to be seen to reflect 
the  interests  of  their  own  country  interests.  It  would  be  akin  to  having  individual  Cabinet 
members’ votes identified in a Cabinet minute. 
The UK and the USA both publish minutes and votes and are notable – especially the USA 
recently – for multiple individual expressions of view about the appropriateness of monetary 
policy, notwithstanding considerable arguments against the noise this generates. 
Australia publishes anonymised and summary minutes that they point out are not verbatim or 
transcript  but  rather  a record  of  decision  and  the  key  contributing factors  (Stevens,  2007). 
There  the  minutes  largely  serve  the  purpose  of  explaining  the  rationale  for  the  monthly 
interest rate decision. 
Worldwide, financial stability reporting has increased considerably over the past 15 years or 
so. According to Oosterloo (2007, p94), 40 countries produced an FSR in 2005, up from only 
one country in 1996. New Zealand commenced its FSR in 2004. While less complete than 
IMF  reporting  recommendations,  New  Zealand’s  FSR  is  in  the  top  half  of  countries’ 
measured by comprehensiveness of indicators. 
The  banking  prudential  regime,  including  its  review  processes  and  its  transparency,  was 
assessed  by  Treasury  in  2010  as  very  good  practice  against  OECD  best  practice 
guidelines10. 
What has changed? 
The arguments for open communication are now well-established. What is new, one might 
ask? I would point to four factors. 
Unconventional monetary policies affect New Zealand 
i. 
First,  post-GFC,  we  are  operating  in  a  world  where  many  advanced  economies  have 
deployed unconventional monetary policy. With policy  interest rates near zero, quantitative 
easing and forward guidance have become instruments of choice. These policies and their 
communication lessons have important spillovers for New Zealand. 
                                                
9   Minutes and papers of the Reserve Bank Board reviewing the Governor’s prior Monetary Policy Statements 
and OCR decisions are commonly released under the Official Information Act, although sensitive material may 
be withheld. 
10   http://www.treasury.govt.nz/economy/regulation/bestpractice/bpregmodel-jul12.pdf. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 
Forward  guidance  seeks  to create greater  certainty for  households  and firms  in  respect  of 
future policy actions by the central bank. It does this by more explicitly linking future policy 
changes to either (or both) economic conditions (state contingent policy) or a specific time 
period (time contingent policy)11. 
In both the USA and the United Kingdom, central banks have foreshadowed policy interest 
rates  remaining  extremely  low  through  2015.  Determining  and  communicating  New 
Zealand’s monetary policy conditions requires us also to understand and communicate the 
impact of international economic and policy settings. With New Zealand further advanced in 
the economic and financial cycle, our short-term interest rate differentials are likely to widen. 
In coming months, the future path of the exchange rate will also be influenced by the Federal 
Reserve’s decisions on tapering of their quantitative monetary expansion. 
The  Reserve  Bank  Act  of  1989  required  us  to  provide  (a  type  of)  forward  guidance  by 
publishing policy statements that set out how the Bank intends to achieve its explicit policy 
target. Since June 1997, we have published interest rate projections that are conditional on 
various assumptions e.g. about the paths for output, employment and prices. 
The  communication  challenge  with  forward  guidance  –  which  equally  applies  to  publishing 
interest rate projections – is how to reduce uncertainty about the likely path of policy while at 
the  same  time  conveying  its  conditionality  and  the  possibility  of  change  in  policy  settings. 
Achieving  this  depends  crucially  on  the  private  sector  believing  the  Bank’s  unwavering 
commitment to the inflation target. 
                                                
11   E.g.  The  Federal  Reserve  Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC)  adopted  the  most  recent  („threshold“  or  state 
contingent) incarnation of its forward guidance policy in September 2012 (with the Bank of England following 
suit in August 2013). See http://www.newyorkfed.org/research/staff_reports/sr652.pdf, 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/monetarypolicy/Pages/forwardguidanceexplained.aspx, 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/inflationreport/2013/ir13augforwardguidance.pdf. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
Forward guidance, therefore, has not transformed the fundamental requirements of effective 
communication.  Recent  experience  has  demonstrated  this  vividly.  Having  established  an 
expectation  of  tapering  in  September  2013,  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  then 
confounded  expectations  by  not  doing  so.  Interest  rate  volatility,  particularly  in  longer-term 
bonds, was exaggerated, along with spillover in exchange rate movements for a number of 
countries. 
In the words of Michael Woodford (2013, p 5), “The use of forward guidance is not some kind 
of magical tool where the mere fact that the central bank says something means that people 
will then think exactly that. A central bank needs to give people a reason to think something 
new or different about what it is going to do”. 
Words  can  lose  potency  and  indeed  result  in  confusion  if  overwhelmed  by  their  own 
frequency and noise (see Buiter, 2013). 
Clarity  is  crucial.  We  have  to  take  particular  care  to  avoid  any  financial  market  confusion 
caused by muddled or partial communications. Speaking with a single voice is essential. We 
take considerable care to ensure the Bank’s policy communications are consistent, are what 
the  Bank  wishes  to  say,  and  avoid  any  sense  of  the  Bank  saying  different  things  through 
different channels or personnel. 
The introduction of macro prudential policies 
ii. 
Secondly,  many  central  banks  have  adopted  new  macro-prudential  policies  in  response  to 
lessons  from  the  financial  cycles  preceding  and  succeeding  the  GFC.  We  have  recently 
introduced new capital requirements against high loan-to-value ratio (LVR) lending and also 
limits  on  the  share  of  new  high  LVR  lending.  These  new  moves  required  a  fresh 
understanding and enhanced communication12. 
New  policy  frameworks  pose  special  challenges  to  build  understanding  of  their  efficacy, 
conditionality,  and  operation.  Faced  with  rising  house  price  inflation  on  top  of  seemingly 
already over-valued house prices, the Bank moved quickly to institute new policy measures. 
We set the scene for these measures in a number of on-the-record speeches in advance, as 
well  as  remarks  at  press  conferences,  and  in  Monetary  Policy  Statements  and  OCR 
statements about our concerns with easier lending standards and house price inflation. We 
published  analyses  of  their  potential  impact,  as well  as  comparisons  with  regimes  in  other 
countries. Following their introduction, we have carried out sustained communications about 
their  operation,  rationale  and  objectives  in  further  speeches,  media  interviews,  and  the 
November Financial Stability Report. 
The introduction of LVR restrictions has attracted significant commentary from many different 
quarters.  Some  analysts  feel  there  has  been  a  blurring  of  financial  stability  and  monetary 
policy  objectives.  Others  have  questioned  the  Bank’s  operational  policy  design,  its 
distributional  impacts,  and  the  legitimacy  or  autonomy  of  its  decision-making.  Some  have 
credited the Bank with policy innovation and the willingness to act before a crisis eventuates. 
We have reiterated that LVRs are targeted at the primary objective of financial stability, but 
that there is also a potential benefit for monetary policy if they reduce the spillover of house 
price  inflation  into  stronger  consumer  demand  and  higher  price  inflation  for  goods  and 
services. 
Explaining important inter-dependencies with other policies – our own or wider government 
ones  –  is  vital.  It  is  well-known  that  monetary  policy  “needs  friends”,  as  the  saying  goes, 
                                                
12   Born  et  al  (2012,  p249)  state  that  macro-prudential  policy  is  resulting  in  financial  stability  communications 
moving  closer  to  the  approach  taken  for  monetary  policy  communications.  He  comments  on  the 
communications of LVRs in Israel, which triggered very similar debates to those in New Zealand. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
particularly supportive fiscal policies. Macro-financial (or macro-prudential) policies can also 
benefit  from  supportive  micro-economic  policies  (e.g.  productivity,  housing,  tax,  regulation, 
etc)  whereby  these  reduce  risks  and  enhance  the  economy’s  growth  capacity  and 
performance.  In  these  circumstances,  we  endeavoured  to  support  policies  that  promoted 
housing supply, as a goal, without commenting on specific policy proposals (Spencer, 2013). 
The expansion in regulatory responsibilities 
iii. 
Thirdly, we have acquired new, expanded regulatory responsibilities, in particular regulating 
nonbank  financial  deposit  takers  (NBDTs)  and  licensing  and  supervising  insurance 
companies13.  The  Bank’s  stakeholder  engagement  has  changed  significantly,  whilst 
expectations  upon  it  and  its  public  persona  as  a  guardian  of  financial  soundness  and 
efficiency have been magnified considerably. 
In terms of expanded regulatory responsibilities, the communication challenges to date have 
been  more  stakeholder  management  related  (understanding  the  regimes’  operation  and 
building trust in our regulatory relationship) rather than widespread public discourse. 
Taking  on  additional  regulatory  responsibility  for  insurers  and  non-bank-deposit  takers 
means we are dealing with everyone from bank chief executives to building societies to small 
mutual insurers. 
These  regulatory  responsibilities  were  assigned  to  the  Bank  out  of  a  concern  to  avoid 
financial failings, such as we saw with finance companies and in the insurance sector. The 
challenge  here  is  that  public  expectations  may  well  be  at  odds  with  regulatory  and 
supervisory responsibilities and realities. 
We have communicated that we do not operate a no-failure regime (see Fiennes 2013), as 
well as explaining our responsibilities vis a vis the Minister of Finance and other institutions 
such as the Financial Markets Authority. 
I suspect we have many communication challenges ahead to reach public understanding that 
the  Reserve  Bank’s  regulatory  and  supervisory  oversight  does  not represent  a  “no failure” 
regime,  and  that  there  are  no  guarantees  that  insolvencies  and  other  forms  of  business 
failure  will  not  occur.  This  extension  in  regulatory  and  supervisory  responsibilities  will 
demand new channels, new audiences and new messages. 
Taking advantage of new technologies 
iv. 
Fourthly,  generational  change,  media  technology  and  the  scale  and  immediacy  of 
communication require new approaches too. 
Living in a hyper-connected world,  with  increasing access to computers, smartphones and 
tablets  means  that  anyone  around  the  world  can  learn  what  we  do,  connect  with  us,  ask 
questions, challenge us or offer critique. 
Mobile  users  make  up  about  10  percent  of  all  visitors  to  our  website.  We’ve  developed  a 
responsively  designed  site  so  it functions  on  any  device,  no  matter  how  small,  and  where 
users  are.  The  24-hour  news  cycle  means  there  is  increasing  demand  for  new  and  easily 
accessible information at all hours of the day. 
                                                
13   Additional regulatory responsibilities have also been assumed for anti-money laundering. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
Where to from here? 
We  are  implementing  changes to  our  communication  strategy. We  are lifting  our  speaking 
engagements  and  our  business  connections14. Our  speeches  convey  our  messages,  while 
we have a strong focus on listening to the business community. For example, the Reserve 
Bank  Board  will  meet  outside  Wellington  five  times  this  coming  year  in  Auckland, 
Christchurch, Dunedin, Rotorua and Palmerston North, holding business functions in each of 
the  five  centres  and  conducting  question/answer  sessions.  We  are  continuing  our  regular 
business  visits  where  we  meet  with  about  50–70  businesses  each  quarter  to  understand 
current business dynamics. Our supervisory staff have extensive interactions with banks and 
insurers. 
We are developing a broader business engagement programme to liaise better with business 
people  and  leaders.  We  have  expanded  the  number  of  on-the-record  speeches,  and  are 
extending  the  80–100  annual  off-the-record  briefings  to  achieve  greater  geographic 
representation and diversity of audience. 
We  maintain  a  strong  programme  of  engagement  with  the  economics  community  through 
academic and public policy links. For example, the biennial monetary policy conference will 
be  held  in  Wellington  in  two  weeks  with  Professor  Barry  Eichengreen  the  distinguished 
visitor. 
Perhaps where we have most to do is in respect of the public audience. Here we are seeking 
to  deploy  new  media  channels,  with  greater  use  of  videos  (e.g.  on  our  website  and  via 
YouTube) explaining what we do and why, and telling stories in pictures (e.g. infographics). 
We  use  Twitter  as  a  messaging  system  but  have  not  adopted  the  new  Bank  of  England 
experiment of interactive discussion. 
We developed with Young Enterprise Trust a board game (“Skint to Mint”), which we rolled 
out across secondary schools in New Zealand to educate the next generation about sensible 
financial  planning,  and  we  sponsor  other  financial  literacy  initiatives  through  Young 
Enterprise Trust. 
Addressing  the  public  directly  requires  us  to  use  plain  English  more  effectively  in  our 
communications. Generally the Bank has relied on business journalists to convey messages 
to  their  audiences  from  the  Bank’s  business  sector  speeches,  and  the  press  conferences 
following the Monetary Policy Statement and Financial Stability Report and the subsequent 
discussions in the Finance and Expenditure Committee of Parliament. However, we are also 
using  the  opportunities  posed  by  media  interviews.  Generally,  the  interview  channel  has 
been used sparingly when sensitive policies have been under development. 
One  of  the  key  steps  in  our  communications  strategy  will  be  the  introduction  of  a  regular 
stakeholder survey. The Swedish central bank (Riksbank) has a long history of conducting a 
two-yearly stakeholder survey and we can benefit from following their practice. The survey 
will help us understand whether we are sufficiently clear in our communications, and the level 
of  credibility  attached  to  them.  It  will  also  help  us  assess  whether  we  prioritise  the  right 
communication channels. A key benefit will be the constructive broadening of our audiences, 
as  stakeholder  analysis  will  require  us  to  gear  our  communications  to  a  multiplicity  of 
stakeholders. 
Conclusion 
Our communications approach is informed by theory, experience and best practice around 
the world. There is much that works well, but we are continually seeking ways to improve. 
                                                
14   This is not a new approach, but an extended one. As far back as 2001, Professor Lars Svensson commended 
the Bank’s extensive efforts to interface and communicate with the business sector. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The refresh of our communications strategy recognises significant questions confronting the 
Bank, in terms of policy settings, policy objectives, tools, and governance. We are expanding 
our regulatory reach into insurance and the wider finance sector, and have introduced a new 
macro-prudential policy regime. 
With  these  changes  afoot,  our  communication  strategy  is  more  than  old  wine  in  new 
wineskins.  Longstanding  policy  frameworks  are  being  scrutinised  more  closely  by  political 
and  economic  commentators.  The  policy 
the 
communications domain. We will maintain our credibility and  interaction with the academic 
and policy communities, continue to lift our business sector engagement, and become more 
engaged with general public audiences, using a range of channels. 
The  Reserve  Bank  is  deeply  committed  to  transparency  –  of  policy  objectives,  policy 
proposals, economic reasoning, and of our understanding of the economy, and of course of 
our  policy  actions  and  intent.  Clear  communication  and  strong  public  understanding  make 
our policy actions more effective. 
We are working to enhance the openness and effectiveness of our communications. I hope 
that this contribution will be seen in that spirit. 
is  changing  and  so 
landscape 
is 
References 
Bernanke, B. S. “Federal Reserve Communications”, address at Cato Institute 25th Annual 
Monetary Conference, Washington, D.C., 2007. 
Bernanke,  B.S.  “Communication  and  Monetary  Policy”,  address  at  Herbert  Stein  Memorial 
Lecture, Washington, D.C., 2013. 
Blinder,  A.,  M.  Ehrmann,  M.  Fratzscher,  J.  de  Haan  and  D.  Jansen,  2008.  “Central  Bank 
Communication  and  Monetary  Policy:  A  Survey  of  Theory  and  Evidence,”Journal  of 
Economic Literature, Vol. XLVI, 4: pp 910–945. 
Born, B. M. Erhmann, M. Fratzscher, 2012, “How Should Central Banks Deal with a Financial 
Stability  Objective?  The  Evolving  Role  of  Communication  as  a  Policy  Instrument”,  
pp  244–267,  in  Handbook  of  Central  Banking,  Financial  Regulation  and  Supervision:  After 
the Financial Crisis, (eds, S. Eijffinger and D. Masciandaro), Edward Elgar Publishing. 
Buiter, W. 2013, “Forward Guidance: More than Old Wine in New Bottles and Cheap Talk?”, 
Global Economics View, 25 September, Citi Research. 
Dincer,  N.  N.  and  B.  Eichengreen,  2013,  “Central  Bank  Transparency  and  Independence: 
Updates and New Measures”, Bank of Korea Working Paper, No. 2013–21, (2013–09). 
Drew, A. and O. Karagedikli, 2008, “Some Benefits of Monetary Policy Transparency in New 
Zealand”, Reserve Bank of New Zealand Discussion Paper Series: DP 2008/01. 
Femia, K. S. Friedmand and B. Sack, 2013 “The Effects of Policy Guidance on Perceptions 
of the Fed’s Reaction Function”, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports, No. 652, 
November. 
Fiennes, T. 2013, “NZ Regulatory Regime Well-adapted to Financial Landscape”, address at 
Law and Economics Association of NZ, June. 
Holmes,  D.  R.  2009,  “Economy  of  Words”,  Cultural  Anthropology,  Vol.  24,  issue  3,  
pp. 381–419 
Jackson, P. 2002, “The Reserve Bank’s External Communications”, Reserve Bank of New 
Zealand: Bulletin Vol. 65 No. 1, pp. 28–33. 
McDermott,  J.  2013,  “Understanding  the  New  Zealand  Exchange  Rate”,  Address  to 
Federated Farmers Meat and Fibre Council, Wellington, November. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
Mehran, H. and L. Mollineux, 2012, “Corporate Governance of Financial Institutions”, Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports, No. 539, February. 
Oosterloo,  S.,  de  Haan,  J.  &  Jong-A-Pin,  R.,  2007,  “Financial  Stability  Reviews:  A  first 
empirical analysis,” Journal of Financial Stability, Elsevier, vol. 2(4), pages 337–355, March. 
Reserve Bank of NZ, 2013, Statement of Intent. 
Rosengren, W. 1998, “Will Greater Disclosure and Transparency Prevent the Next Banking 
Crisis?” Federal Reserve Bank of Boston. 
Spencer, G. 2013, “Housing Market Needs Supply Boost and Demand Restraint”, address at 
the Property Council, Auckland, October. 
Stevens,  G.  2007,  “Central  Bank  Communication”,  Address  to  The  Sydney  Institute, 
December. 
Svensson,  L.  2001,  “Independent  Review  of  the  Operation  of  Monetary  Policy  in  New 
Zealand”, Report to the Minister of Finance, February. 
Thornton,  D.L.  2002,  “Monetary  Policy  Transparency:  Transparent  About  What?”,  Federal 
Reserve Bank of St Louis, Working Paper 2002–028B. 
The Treasury, 2012, “The Best Practice Regulation  Model – Principles  and Assessments”, 
July. 
Woodford,  M.  2013,  “Interview  with  Michael  Woodford”,  Top  of  Mind,  Issue  18,  Goldman 
Sachs Economics, Commodities and Strategy Research, October. 
Yellen, J.L. 2012, “Revolution and Evolution in  Central Bank Communications”, address at 
Hass School of Business, University of California, Berkely, November. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
