Alexandre A Tombini: Global liquidity, capital flows and inflation 
targeting – central banking in the post-crisis global economy 
Keynote address by Mr Alexandre A Tombini, Governor of the Central Bank of Brazil, at the 
5th  Summit  Meeting  of  Central  Banks  on  IT,  Central  Bank  of  Chile,  Santiago  de  Chile, 
15 November 2013. 
 Introduction 
Five years into the crisis, we could perhaps say that while the global economic outlook is still 
complex, we are beginning to see a candle light at the end of the tunnel and  we are also 
better equipped to draw a few analytical and policy lessons from what happened. We are in a 
transition period: the normalization of global financial conditions is already underway, but its 
pace is still unclear. While growth prospects are generally improving in important advanced 
economies,  the  improvement  has  been  uneven.  In  the  US,  recent  indicators  point  to 
moderate  growth.  There  are  promising  signs  from  the  new  policies  being  implemented  in 
Japan, while the Eurozone presents a mixed picture. 
Emerging market economies are facing an interesting albeit not surprising challenge. They 
have at the same time to: (a) continue country-specific structural reforms and growth model 
adaptation  (e.g.,  China,  Brazil,  India,  etc.);  (b)  maintain  financial  and  price  stability;  after 
having policy-engineered their V-shape recoveries, controlled their inflationary consequences 
and managed destabilizing large capital inflows; (c) calibrate their responses to this transition 
period of exiting from unconventional monetary policies, using their uneven policy room for 
maneuver  and  their  preparedness;  and  (d)  make  the  best  possible  use  of  the  foreseeable 
changes  in  relative  prices  including  their  own  asset  prices;  these  changes  are  either 
occurring or in the making, in the light of the expected shifts in global monetary conditions in 
the coming months. 
I will focus my remarks tonight on three issues: 
(1)  
how we prepared ourselves with policies put in place in Brazil and other EMEs over 
the last few years to sail through a period of intense capital inflows and to be well 
positioned for the exit from unconventional monetary policies; 
notwithstanding that preparation, what has been the impact and the response to the 
start of the normalization of monetary conditions; and 
what  are  the  few  analytical  and  policy  lessons  learned  in  the  last  few  years  with 
regards to the inflation-targeting framework for monetary policy in the context of the 
post-crisis challenges. 
(2)  
(3)  
The policy response to large and volatile capital inflows 
Let  me  begin  by  revisiting the  rationale  of  the policies  that  many  emerging  markets  put  in 
place  during  the  most  expansionary  phase  of  advanced  economy  monetary  policies.  We 
have policy space today due to our preventive, cautious and prudent policies that preserved 
macro-financial stability through the adoption of a pragmatic approach towards capital inflows 
over the last few years. 
It  is  now  a  well-understood  and  documented  story:  ample  global  liquidity  due  to  easy 
monetary policies in advanced economies resulted in exceptionally  intense capital flows to 
emerging  market  economies.  And  we  know  that  large  and  volatile  capital  inflows  can 
potentially  lead  to  economic  and  financial  instability.  They  are  associated  with  excessive 
credit  expansion,  lower  quality  of  loan  origination,  increased  financial  system  exposure  to 
exchange rate risk, asset price distortions, including excessive exchange rate appreciation, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
and  inflationary  pressure,  as  excessively  easy  global  monetary  conditions  can  boost 
domestic  demand  independently  from  the  desired  domestic  policy  stance.  In  a  nutshell, 
excessive flows are a fertile terrain to grow excessive financial exuberance. 
The  textbook  policy  response  for  my  country  and  other  EMEs  was  to  use  its  floating 
exchange  rate  regime,  which  helps  to  smooth  economic  and  financial  adjustments,  while 
conducting  sterilized  interventions  and  international  reserves  accumulation,  which  reduces 
exchange rate volatility and builds a foreign currency liquidity buffer to prepare for reversals. 
But  the  intensity  of  this  inflow  episode  was  special  as  were  the  circumstances  and  policy 
responses  in  advanced  economies1.  Therefore,  Brazil  and  other  emerging  markets 
pragmatically complemented their response and other textbook (aggregate demand) policies 
with  the  implementation  of  specific  macroprudential  policy  measures  to  prevent  the 
exuberance deriving from these large inflows to threaten financial stability. The adoption of 
specific measures of this new toolkit obviously depends on how each of us assesses its own 
local credit and asset market potential vulnerabilities. Some EMEs imposed tighter limits on 
financial institution and household leverage. In East Asia, for example, policies included loan-
to-value and debt-to-income ceilings on real estate lending. In Brazil, we increased capital 
requirements  on  riskier  consumer  loans  and  imposed  a  minimum  payment  floor  on  credit 
card balances. And we also imposed taxes on capital inflows and a reserve requirement on 
banks’ foreign exchange spot positions. 
The 
response  worked.  Therefore, 
that 
macroprudential measures, including those that target specific capital flows directly, became 
an  important  part  of  the  policy  framework  to  address  sudden  floods  and  sudden  stops.  In 
complement  to  traditional  macroeconomic  policy  responses,  these  measures  showed  that 
they  can  help  ensure  macro-financial  stability.  There  are  many  quarters,  ranging  from 
academia to the IMF itself2 that are increasingly subscribing to this view. However, there are 
also reputational costs to implementing these policies, which I will address a little later. 
But  what  do  we  mean  by  “it  worked”?  In  Brazil’s  case,  it  means  the  following: 
(a) macroprudential  policies  contributed  to  bringing  down  the  pace  of  credit  expansion  to 
more sustainable levels; (b) they were successful in improving the maturity and composition 
of international financing; and (c) they also reduced foreign exchange volatility. 
Therefore,  the  combination  of  strong  fundamentals  and  our  pragmatic  policy  response  left 
emerging  market  economies  such  as  Brazil  better  prepared  for  the  eventual  exit  from 
unconventional monetary easing. But the question is better prepared for what? 
Let me now turn to the second topic of my remarks which is the… 
important  outcome  was 
this  pragmatic 
Impact of normalization on Brazil and other EMEs 
Let me begin by noting that the process of normalization of monetary conditions underway in 
global financial markets is, overall, a positive development for emerging market economies. 
Despite  market  volatility,  it  reflects  the  gradually  improving  outlook  for  the  world’s  largest 
economy.  As  global  growth  and  global  trade  recover,  emerging  market  economies  will 
benefit. 
We knew that, despite the best efforts to communicate an exit strategy from unconventional 
monetary policies, the beginning of any discussion about “tapering”, i.e. the possibility of a 
reduction of asset purchases such as what occurred in May, would lead to a re-pricing of risk 
and  a  global  sell-off  of  emerging  market  assets.  It  indeed  happened  as  we  anticipated. 
Emerging  market  economies  have  generally  seen  depreciating  exchange  rates,  increasing 
                                                
1   See IMF spill-over reports and in particular, IMF (2013b) and Ostry and alii. (2012). 
2   For example, Rey (2013) and the IMF papers listed in the references. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
sovereign  bond  yields  and  credit  default  swap  spreads,  and  in  many  cases  falling  stock 
market prices. 
In Brazil’s case, the sell-off has manifested itself mostly as a search for protection, more than 
actual  outflows.  Most  of  the  selling  pressure  has  come  from  foreign  real-money  investors 
seeking  to  hedge  their  portfolios  from  currency  devaluation,  Brazilian  companies  hedging 
their  foreign  exchange  liabilities,  and  foreign  companies  hedging  their  exposure  to  local 
assets. There is no foreign currency shortage in the domestic spot market, which the Central 
Bank monitors continually. And therefore, at the Central Bank of Brazil, we responded to the 
change  in  global  financing  conditions  in  a  classical  fashion,  through  policy  tightening, 
exchange rate flexibility and using accumulated buffers to reduce volatility, avoiding abrupt 
changes that potentially threaten financial stability. 
Accordingly,  by  mid-August,  we  announced  a  program  of  daily  FX  interventions  through 
foreign  exchange  swaps  and  dollar  credit 
in  2013  nearly 
USD 100 billion  equivalent  and  scheduled  through  the  end  of  the  year,  providing  currency 
hedge  for  the  private  sector.  Here  the  picture  is  mixed  for  emerging  markets.  Some  are 
certainly  feeling  more  the  volatility  than  others.  It  depends  on  fundamentals,  resilience, 
position  in  the  cycle  with  its  associated  policy  response,  credibility  of  the  buffers  and 
willingness to use them timely and with a clear unambiguous communication. 
In sum, while the prospect of interest rate normalization as economic growth recovers in core 
economies is a net positive, it does create transition risks. The lesson I take from the last few 
months is that emerging market policymakers need to show that they are ready and capable 
of stepping in and providing the public goods of financial and price stability. 
Let me now turn to the third and last topic of my remarks, that is … 
line  auctions, 
totaling 
Inflation targeting in the post-crisis global economy 
As a growing and abundant new literature – together with new practices – is now showing, 
the  2008  crisis  and  its  aftermath  have  called  into  question  the  balance  and  interaction 
between two components of macroeconomic stability: financial and price stability. They are 
both necessary, but taken individually, they are not sufficient to ensure overall macro stability 
that fosters sustainable growth. Therefore, the debate raises the issue of what new contours 
could  take  an  inflation  targeting  framework  for  monetary  policy  that  could  also  address 
financial  stability  when  complemented  by  possibly  the  new  macroprudential  toolkit.  Central 
banks  and  financial  regulators  both  failed  to  counteract  the  buildup  of  systemic  risk  in  the 
financial  system.  Therefore,  this  failure  has  brought  the  inflation  targeting  regime  under 
scrutiny since it has been the monetary regime of choice in many central banks including in 
emerging markets. The first lesson of the crisis was a greater appreciation of the importance 
of financial stability as a component of macroeconomic stability. 
There are many directions in the ongoing debate3. One direction is to consider a division of 
labor along the lines of a separation principle: monetary policy using an IT framework would 
address  price  stability;  and  macroprudential  policy  would  be  used  to  mitigate  financial 
systemic  risk.  Another  direction  is  to  ask  whether  monetary  policy  should  explicitly 
incorporate  a  financial  stability  objective,  and  be  more  proactive  in  response  to  perceived 
risks to financial stability. Therefore, in considering the role of monetary policy in addressing 
financial  stability,  this  direction  would  consider  new  policy-reaction  rules  for  central  banks 
that would be augmented to include a financial or credit gap argument of some sort. 
We  are  certainly  in  Brazil  –  but  also  elsewhere  –  reflecting  about these  analytical  lessons 
from  the  crisis.  Due  to  our  history  of  greater  volatility,  emerging  market  economy  central 
                                                
3   Studies from an emerging market perspective include IMF (2013a) and Agénor and Pereira (2013). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
banks such as Brazil’s never relegated financial stability concerns to a secondary status. Our 
inflation  targeting  framework  had  always  been  complemented  by  strong  financial  sector 
regulation and prudent foreign exchange policies. 
To  be  fair,  very  pragmatically,  in  the  post-crisis  environment  of  unprecedented  global 
liquidity,  emerging  markets  somehow  implicitly  used  this  separation  principle:  we  used 
macroprudential policies in order to counteract the effects of intense and volatile capital flows 
on  credit  and  asset  markets;  and  this  allowed  monetary  policy  under  the  IT  regime  to 
maintain its focus on price stability. 
However,  this  pragmatic  policy  mix  might  be  effective,  but  is  not  without  costs,  especially 
because  we  still  do  not  fully  know  how  some  of  these  macroprudential  tools  work4.  That 
introduces  important  issues  of  credibility  for  central  banks  and  poses  challenges  for  the 
formation of expectations about the yield curve that are critical for monetary policy. 
Therefore macroprudential policy, particularly measures that target capital flows, combined 
with  traditional  monetary  policy  creates  significant  communication  challenges  for  central 
banks.  In  this  respect,  macroprudential  policy  can  easily  be  misconstrued,  obscure  policy 
intentions and distort expectations. 
Concluding remarks 
Allow me to conclude by drawing some general lessons from this quick overview of central 
banking for emerging markets in the post-crisis global economy: 
(a)  
the  judicious  use  of  macroprudential  tools  can  provide  an  additional  degree  of 
freedom  to  conduct  monetary  policy  aiming  at  price  stability  at  home  while 
preserving financial stability; 
the  debate  will  have  to  continue  regarding  the  ways  to  ensure  that  the 
complementarity  between  the  two  instruments  does  not  confuse  and  undermine 
market confidence; and 
the importance of making progress in developing a framework for financial stability 
policy  is  paramount.  This  would  involve  refining  our  macroprudential  policy  tools, 
developing new ones, and improving our understanding of how these tools impact 
the financial system and the economy. 
(b)  
(c)  
References 
Agénor, P.R., and L. A. Pereira da Silva (2013),” Inflation Targeting and Financial Stability: A 
Perspective  from  the  Developing  World”,  an  e-book  by  CEMLA  and  Inter-American 
Development Bank, October 2013. 
International  Monetary  Fund  (2011a)  Recent  Experiences  in  Managing  Capital  Inflows  – 
Cross-Cutting  Themes  and  Possible  Policy  Framework.  Strategy,  Policy  and  Review 
Department (February). 
International  Monetary  Fund  (2011b)  Macroprudential  Policy:  An  Organizing  Framework. 
Monetary and Capital Markets Department (March). 
International Monetary Fund (2012) The Liberalization and Management of Capital Flows: An 
Institutional  View.  Washington  DC: 
International  Monetary  Fund,  November, 
http://www.imf.org/external/np/pp/eng/2012/111412.pdf. 
                                                
4   See IMF (2013a). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
“The 
(2013a), 
International  Monetary  Fund 
Interaction  between  Monetary  and 
Macroprudential  Policies”,  January  29,  2013,  http://www.imf.org/external/np/pp/eng/ 
2013/012913.pdf. 
International  Monetary  Fund  (2013b),  “2013  IMF  Spill-over  Report”  August  1,  2013, 
http://www.imf.org/external/np/pp/eng/2013/070213.pdf. 
Ostry, Jonathan D., Atish R. Ghosh, Marcos Chamon, and Mahvash S. Qureshi. 2012. Tools 
for  Managing  Financial-Stability  Risks  from  Capital  Inflows.  Journal  of  International 
Economics 88 (November): 407–21. 
Rey, Helène (2013), “Dilemma not Trilemma: the Global Financial Cycle and Monetary Policy 
Independence”, paper presented at the Jackson Hole Economic Symposium, August 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
