Fernando Restoy: European reform – challenges for the Spanish banking 
sector 
Presentation by Mr Fernando Restoy, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Spain, of Issue no 137 
of Papeles de Economía Española “Constructing a Banking Union”, Fundación de las Cajas 
de Ahorros (FUNCAS), Madrid, 11 November 2013. 
 Good evening. Thank you, José María, for your introduction. I am delighted to be here on the 
occasion of the publication of Issue no. 137 of Papeles de Economía Española, under the 
title  “Constructing  a  banking  union”.  I  understand  it  contains  articles  of  great  quality  and 
interest, which is no surprise considering the calibre of the contributing authors. 
During  the  seminar  this  evening,  I  imagine  you  will  have  dealt  in  depth  with  the  main 
elements of the Banking Union project. 
Allow me to add my own thoughts on the significance of this process and its consequences 
for the banking industry. 
I  believe  the  history  of  European  integration  categorically  illustrates  how  this  process  has 
been subject to diverse and complex forces that reiteratedly test its ability to move forward. 
These destabilising forces usually arise from the interaction between exogenous shocks and 
internal structural deficiencies. During the most recent bout of instability, this has again been 
the case: the international financial crisis has revealed substantial structural flaws within the 
monetary union, allowing marked imbalances to emerge in national economies and making 
their correction difficult without upsetting the stability of the common monetary area. 
As in the past, in this latest episode the structural deficiencies identified are partly linked to a 
deficit of cohesion among the national economies that can only be remedied through further 
relinquishing of sovereignty. 
Perhaps the relative novelty of the recent crisis in the monetary union is that it shows, with 
particular seriousness, that any delay or lack of resolve in adopting the necessary reforms 
would  not  only  be  harmful  to  European  construction  but  would  generate  very  pronounced 
risks to economic and financial stability in Europe and the rest of the world. 
Admittedly, major reforms to monetary union governance have been made to date. I refer, for 
instance,  to  the  new  requirements  made  of  domestic  policies  to  contain  macroeconomic 
imbalances  in  several  areas,  to  the  surveillance  mechanisms  established  for  these 
requirements  and  to  the  setting  in  place  of  national  crisis-management  systems,  with 
centralised financial support arrangements for those countries most affected. 
However,  such  progress  is  not  sufficient  to  ensure  the  proper  functioning  of  a  common 
monetary area. 
One  of  the  main  manifestations  of  the  shortcomings  observed  is  the  continuing  market 
fragmentation  within  the  euro  area.  This  is,  namely,  the  existence  of  a  country-risk 
component that means that markets assign different valuations to similar financial assets on 
the basis of the issuer’s nationality. 
In particular, the perceived risk of financial institutions’ liabilities depends to some extent on 
their geographical location. 
This  fragmentation  has  quite  considerable  consequences  in  terms  of  differences  in  the 
borrowing  costs  for  households  and  firms  according  to  their  geographical  location,  which 
reflects  the  deficient  functioning  of  the  common  monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism 
and  leads  to  highly  destabilising  imbalances  between  countries.  This  is  why  the  banking 
union  –  whose  aim  is  none  other  than  to  ensure  the  disappearance  of  the  country-risk 
component of banking liabilities – has been seen as essential to ensure the stability of the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
monetary union, radically altering the European authorities’ set of priorities. What is today a 
reasonably well-defined project was but a short time ago a mere concept in the minds only of 
the most visionary pro-Europeans. 
Single supervisory mechanism 
The  first  step  towards  creating  the  banking  union  is  the  start-up  of  a  single  supervisory 
mechanism, the Regulation for which has recently been approved. We cannot overstate the 
importance of this milestone: according to the Regulation, in less than one year the financial 
system of the euro area countries – and of the other EU countries that should decide to join – 
will  come  to  be  supervised  by  the  single  mechanism  set  up  within  the  European  Central 
Bank. In particular, significant banks – which account for 80% of the sector – will be directly 
overseen by the new European supervisory authority. 
The single supervisory mechanism has been defined as an integrated system of surveillance 
of financial institutions under the clear leadership of the ECB, which in turn benefits from the 
supervisory experience of the competent national authorities. Specifically, the ECB assumes 
all the relevant powers in respect of the supervision of credit institutions, and exercises them 
through decision-making arrangements centralised in a Supervisory Board on which both the 
ECB  and  the  national  supervisory  authorities  sit.  The  latter  contribute,  according  to  the 
Regulation, to the preparation and application of the decisions taken in a centralised fashion. 
The work of the national authorities will be channelled through what are known as the Joint 
Supervision Teams. These teams, which will regularly monitor each institution, will be made 
up  of  supervisory  staff  from  the  ECB  and  from  the  national  authorities.  Regular  on-site 
inspections  will,  as  a  general  rule,  be  conducted  by  the  national  authorities,  following 
centrally set mandates and arrangements. 
As you can imagine, the work ahead over the coming months will be very intense. Having to 
assume  supervisory  powers  in  scarcely  one  year  will  make  great  demands  in  terms  of 
organisation.  Specifically,  several  groups  made  up  of  staff  from  the  ECB  and  the  national 
authorities  have  been  set  up  in  Frankfurt  and  are  pushing  ahead  with  the  extensive 
groundwork. Currently, the focus is on defining the scope of conduct which will determine the 
internal organisation of the single mechanism, on developing a supervisory manual and on 
designing  an  exhaustive  analysis  of  the  situation  of  each  of the  banks  that  will  be  directly 
supervised by the single mechanism. 
This  analysis  of  banks’  balance  sheets  is  three-pronged:  i)  an  evaluation  of  the  risks  for 
supervisory purposes, ii) an analysis of asset quality and iii) a stress test to be conducted in 
collaboration  with  the  European  Banking  Authority.  The  aim  is  to  obtain  a  score  for  each 
bank as a joint result of the three parts of the analysis. On this basis, specific supervisory 
actions will ensue, including where appropriate the requirement of additional capital for banks 
that do not meet the solvency requirements set. 
It is still somewhat premature to specify the details of the exercise. I would, however, like to 
stress  the  importance  of  the  asset  quality  review  –  which  focuses  on  substantiating  their 
appropriate  valuation  in  accordance  with  accounting  principles  –  as  a  centrepiece  of  the 
analysis of the banks. The study will comprise a wide-ranging review of the banks’ balance 
sheets as at 31 December 2013, which will include credit and market exposures, on- and off-
balance sheet assets, and domestic and international exposures. All assets are potentially 
subject to review, although on the basis of a risk-based approach, the asset quality analysis 
will  focus  on  those  balance  sheet  items  of  the  various  banks  that  are  considered  most 
important under the objectives of the exercise. 
Demanding capital thresholds have been set for this component of the exhaustive analysis. 
Specifically, the reference value has been set at 8% in respect of top-quality capital (CET1) 
under  the  definition  of  the  Capital  Requirements  Directive  and  Regulation  that  incorporate 
the Basel III Accord into European legislation. This 8% threshold is equivalent to adding, to 
the regulatory minimum of 4.5%, the capital conservation buffer of 2.5% and an additional 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
1% to reflect the systemic importance of the significant institutions that will be overseen by 
the single supervisory mechanism. 
Finally, strict governance arrangements have been set for conducting the analysis, so as to 
provide  for  the  consistency  of  the  work  performed  by  the  national  authorities  in  each 
jurisdiction. In this way, although the exercise will be carried out in a decentralised fashion, a 
significant central structure – with the involvement of external advisers – has been set up to 
ensure the maximum possible degree of uniformity. 
Evidently,  it  is  a  complex  exercise  posing  numerous  organisational  challenges,  and  which 
must be performed with the utmost rigour to meet the objectives set and, above all, to ensure 
the comparability of the results obtained for each bank in each jurisdiction. 
Naturally,  since  the  exercise  aims  primarily  to  strengthen  confidence  in  the  European 
banking sector, it is vital that the European authorities should determine as soon as possible 
the  formula  to  be  used  to  cover  the  potential  capital  needs  arising  from  the  exercise,  for 
those banks that cannot do so through their own means. 
Single resolution mechanism 
Yet if, as I said at the outset, we want to put an end to the current market fragmentation and 
to bank liabilities being valued differently depending on their location, the unified supervision 
of banks is not enough. 
These liabilities also need to be treated similarly – irrespective of the jurisdiction under which 
they fall – if banks experience acute solvency problems. Thus, the banking union requires, as 
indicated by various authors in the issue of Papeles de Economía Española presented today, 
the  adoption  of  a  single  resolution  mechanism  for  non-viable  institutions.  In  the  past, 
supervisory  authorities  responded  to  banks’  solvency  problems  following  the  principle  of 
constructive ambiguity. Hence, except for guaranteed deposits, there was no specific legal 
framework  for  the  treatment  of  banks’  liabilities,  should  a  bank  experience  solvency 
problems, aside from commercial law provisions on insolvency. 
However,  to  prevent  the  undesired  systemic  effects  of  a  disorderly  bankruptcy  of  a  bank, 
public  authorities  have  traditionally  used  discretionary  power  to  protect  holders  of  bank 
liabilities (mainly deposits and debt) through capital injections so as to avoid the winding-up 
of these institutions. 
One of the lessons of recent crises is that the principle of constructive ambiguity has become 
considerably weaker. Public authorities – at least in Europe – have tended to come to the aid 
of  weak  institutions,  thus  confirming  the  existence  of  an  implicit  guarantee  for  banks’ 
liabilities.  This  guarantee  distorts  the  incentive  system  for  the  managers  of  banks  and  for 
their  creditors,  generating  considerable  costs  for  the  public  finances  of  the  countries 
concerned. 
A key factor in encouraging the suitable risk perception of each liability instrument, and thus 
in minimising the cost for taxpayers, is bail-ins. These establish a clear order for the incurring 
of losses by shareholders and creditors, and provision is made for this arrangement to be 
activated prior to any injection of public funds. 
In  Europe,  given  the  political  agreement  reached  on  the  Recovery  and  Resolution 
Directive, a set of common rules will be adopted in the near future establishing a clear and 
homogeneous order of seniority of liabilities in the event of bank resolution, and it will ensure 
the  administrative  power  to  impose  losses  on  the  holders  of  each  instrument.  That  will 
notably minimise the cost to taxpayers of bank bail-outs. 
But  common  rules  are  not  enough.  The  only  way  to  ensure  the  possible  homogeneous 
application of these rules is through the creation of a common resolution authority for all 
countries. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Similarly, it is important to have a common resolution fund in place which ensures, under 
similar  conditions,  that  there  is  the  necessary  financial  support  for  those  institutions  which 
might need it, irrespective of the budgetary situation of the State concerned. 
These ingredients of the single mechanism – a single authority and a common fund – are as 
essential  as  the  existence  of  uniform  rules  and  regulations  to  ensure  that  holders  of  bank 
liabilities in any jurisdiction are treated the same and to severe the link between bank risk 
and sovereign risk. At the same time, the creation of a genuine single resolution mechanism 
is essential so that the single supervisory mechanism can operate effectively. Otherwise, it 
would  have  to  deal  with  complex  interaction  arrangements  with  a  constellation  of  national 
resolution authorities – each managing its own  funds – which  would make its task notably 
more difficult. 
In this context, the legislative proposal submitted last July by the European Commission is a 
good starting point. The EC proposes the creation of a single resolution agency or authority, 
ultimately reporting to the European Commission, which would manage a common fund fed 
by contributions from the industry. 
It  is  common  knowledge  that  the  Commission’s  proposal  is  currently  subject  to  intense 
debate.  In  particular,  apart  from  the  assignment  of  resolution  powers  to  the  European 
Commission,  three  matters  are  prompting  most  discussion.  First,  the  legal  basis  of  the 
proposal – anchored in Article 114 of the Treaty – is being questioned by some countries, 
which even raise the need for a reform of the Treaty. This is despite the favourable opinion 
on the proposed legal basis of the Council’s legal services, the European Commission and 
most Member States. 
Second,  since  the  common fund  would  take  some  time  in  reaching the  required  size,  it  is 
essential to set in place a specific regime to cover, during this transition period, the needs 
arising  from  resolution  processes.  Compared  with  the  alternative  suggested  by  some 
countries  of  using  national  funds,  it  seems  preferable  to  allow  the  ESM  to  finance  the 
common  fund  while  it  is  being  brought  up  to  the  required  size  by  contributions  from  the 
industry. Otherwise, national resolution schemes would remain in place for a relatively long 
period  and  this  would  delay  the  setting  up  of  a  genuine  banking  union  and  thus  the 
remediation of the fragmentation problems besetting us at present. 
Third,  the  distribution  of  powers  between  the  supervisor,  the  resolution  agency  and  the 
resolution  authority  envisaged  in  the  proposal  could  be  refined.  In  particular,  it  should 
perhaps be made slightly clearer – in line with Spanish law – that the supervisor must carry 
out  the  actions  prior  to  determining  the  resolution  of  an  institution  and  be  responsible  for 
commencing the process, all this aside from it maintaining the necessary coordination and 
exchange of information with the resolution authority. At the same time, the preparation and 
approval  of  the  resolution  plan  should  require  the  joint  approval  of  the  supervisor  and  the 
resolution authority. Lastly, the implementation of the plan and the monitoring of its fulfilment 
should  –  as  set  out  by  the  European  Commission’s  proposal  and  provided  for  in  Spanish 
legislation – be the responsibility of the resolution authority. 
And a final question: how is the Spanish banking system dealing with the banking 
union project? 
Unquestionably,  the  banking  union  project  entails  appreciable  challenges  for  the  whole 
European  banking  system.  In  particular,  the  single  supervisory  mechanism  inevitably 
involves  the  need  to  adapt  to  new  rules,  criteria  and  procedures  for  interacting  with 
supervisors. Furthermore, the new resolution regulations, and particularly the burden-sharing 
procedures (along with the changes soon to be made to the solvency regulations), may affect 
the composition and cost of bank liabilities. 
All  in  all,  the  Spanish  banking  system  will  foreseeably  not  face  more  complex  challenges 
than  those  being  posed  in  other  jurisdictions,  thanks  to  the  unprecedented  reform 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
implemented  in  the  past  year  following  the  assessment  commissioned  from  an  external 
consultant within the framework of the financial assistance programme. 
The  significant  reduction  of  the  exposure  to  the  real  estate  sector  through  the  substantial 
increase in provisions and the entry into operation of Sareb made it possible to defuse one of 
the main sources of vulnerability of the Spanish financial system. Also, the quality of assets 
and,  in  particular,  the  accounting  treatment  of  restructured  and  refinanced  loans,  were 
reviewed.  Finally,  banks’  solvency  ratios  were  notably  strengthened.  Currently,  all  banks 
meet  the  capital  requirement  of  9%  according  to  the  EBA  definition,  generally  by  an 
appreciable margin. By the end of the year we expect capital levels to be above 10% for the 
sector as a whole, both under the EBA definition and under the Basel III definition of common 
equity  tier  1  to  be  used from  January  when  the  new  European  solvency  regulations  come 
into force. 
The  improved  situation  of  Spanish  banks  is  also  apparent  in  the  liquidity  indicators  and  in 
market valuations, both in absolute terms and in relation to net book value. 
That  said,  obviously  the  banking  sector  has  to address  the  adverse  impact  on  its  balance 
sheets exerted by the still-weak macroeconomic environment, the necessary process of non-
financial sector deleveraging and the persisting fragmentation of European markets despite 
recent improvements. 
In  order  to  obtain  a  comprehensive  assessment  of  the  outlook  for  the  sector,  we  have 
recently  developed  a  supervisory  tool  to  enable  us  to  regularly  conduct  forward-looking 
analyses  to  evaluate  the  solvency  of  Spanish  banks  under  different  macroeconomic 
scenarios. This tool (FLESB) is not intended to estimate banks’ solvency ratios, but rather to 
evaluate the sensitivity of their solvency to a given set of shocks over a time horizon. 
The initial results, which were published some days ago in the Banco de España’s Financial 
Stability Report, offer some comfort as to the ability of Spanish banks to meet the minimum 
regulatory capital requirements with a sufficient margin, even under adverse scenarios. 
To conclude, monetary union is now unquestionably at a crossroads. Its stability and proper 
functioning  depend  directly  on  the  adoption  of  far-reaching  reforms  to  heighten  the 
integration of the participating national economies. 
We can take hope from the fact that European leaders have understood that banking union is 
key  to  the  reform  process  and  have,  through  the  creation  of  the  single  supervisory 
mechanism, paved the way for its full operationality. 
The challenge now is to complete the project as soon as possible by setting in place a single 
resolution mechanism, in order to optimise the capacity of the single supervisory mechanism 
to contribute effectively to strengthening monetary union. 
In  the  coming  months  we  must  step  up  the  required  preparatory  work.  It  is  not  a  simple 
project.  It  will  undoubtedly  keep  us  busy  –  in  both  the  official  and  the  private  sector  –  for 
some  time.  But  it  is  an  exciting  undertaking  in  view  of  its  importance  for  Europe  and  for 
Spain. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
