Henry A Kofi Wampah: Making Ghana’s financial system more efficient 
Speech by Mr Henry A Kofi Wampah, Governor of the Bank of Ghana, at the launch of the 
Collateral Registry Ghana, Accra, 8 May 2013. 
 Honourable Minister of Finance and Economic Planning, 
Your Lordships (Justices of the Superior Courts), Your Excellency, the Swiss Ambassador, 
Officials  of  the  International  Finance  Corporation  (IFC),  Officials  of  the  Swiss  State 
Secretariat for Economic Affairs (SECO), 
Stakeholders of the Banking and Financial Sector of the Economy, 
Executives of the Ghana Bar Association,  
Government Officials, 
Heads of Department and Staff of the Bank of Ghana 
Invited Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Good morning, 
It is my greatest pleasure to be here at this important occasion for the launch the Collateral 
Registry Ghana. What we are witnessing today is historic because this Registry is the first 
movable  and  immovable  asset  Secured  Transactions  Registry  in  Africa  and  has  been 
established  at  an  opportune  time  to  address  some  fundamental  challenges  in  our  credit 
system and the economy as a whole. 
Mr.  Chairman,  the  Ghanaian  financial  sector  has  gone  through  almost  two  decades  of 
restructuring  and  transformation.  The  Bank  of  Ghana,  together  with  the  appropriate 
Government  Agencies,  has  worked  on  a  number  of  reform  programmes  to  improve  the 
efficiency of the financial system. 
Structural reforms have been undertaken in the capital market, money market, banking and 
non-bank financial institutions and the settlement and payment systems. As a result of these, 
we  now  have  a  robust  and  diversified  financial  system.  There  have  also  been  extensive 
reviews of the regulatory frameworks underpinning the financial sector, alongside enactment 
of new laws to strengthen supervisory powers of financial sector regulators. 
Mr. Chairman, deepening financial intermediation is one of the critical objectives of the Bank 
of  Ghana.  Indeed,  complaints  from  both  borrowers  and  lenders  about  the  lack  of 
transparency in credit access strengthened the resolve of the Central Bank to address the 
issue. On one hand, borrowers complained about high interest rates, hidden charges, non-
disclosure of pertinent information and unfair denial of access to credit. Lenders on the other 
hand, were worried about high default rates, difficulties of foreclosing on collateral through 
the courts and the misapplication of funds by borrowers. 
Thus,  the  passage  of  the  Borrowers  and  Lenders  Act,  2008  (Act773)  paved  the  way  to 
address  some  of  these  challenges.  The  Act,  among  others,  augments  existing  legislation 
governing credit delivery and also seeks to promote a Secured Transactions Regime (STR) 
with defined legal framework for credit, improved standards of disclosure, transparency and 
speedy  enforcement mechanisms.  Mr.  Chairman,  an  important  organ  to be  established  by 
Act 773 to facilitate the achievement of these objectives was the Collateral Registry. 
Soon  after  the  passage  of  the  Act  in  December  2008,  the  Bank,  commenced  activities 
towards  establishing  a  Collateral  Registry.  On  the  1st  of  February  2010,  the  Bank 
established  a  functional  semi-automated  Collateral  Registry.  In  line  with  international  best 
practices, the Registry is to provide services such as: 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Registration of charges and collaterals. 
Provision  of  avenues  for  lending  institutions  and  the  general  public  to  conduct 
searches on registered charges and collaterals. 
Assisting in speeding up realisation of collaterals upon default by a borrower. 
Effecting  discharges  of  registered  charges  and  collaterals  upon  application  by  the 
lender or the registrant and 
Renewal of registration. 
• 
Following  its  establishment,  the  Bank  moved  a  step  further  and  collaborated  with  the 
International  Finance  Corporation  (IFC)  which  also  seeks  to  promote  access  to  credit  in 
Africa,  to  upgrade  Ghana’s  Collateral  Registry  to  an  international  standard  Secured 
Transactions Registry. The Project with IFC involved upgrading of the systems, processes 
and  the  underlying  legal  and  regulatory  framework  of  the  Ghana  Collateral  Registry  to  a 
standard which would be comparable globally. 
The Swiss State Secretariat for Economic Affairs [SECO] provided a grant to enable IFC with 
local support from the Bank of Ghana, implement the project. This included a legal review 
component  which  resulted  in  the  issuance  of  rules  for  effective  implementation  of  Act  773 
and amendments to the Act. Also, a Web-based Registry system has been developed and 
was  rolled  out,  on  25th  June  2012,  ensuring  full-automation  and  global  access  to  the 
services of the Registry. 
In the  area  of  capacity  building  and  public  awareness, the  Project  has undertaken  several 
training  programs  for  financial  institutions  on  the  Web-based  Collateral  Registry  System. 
Also,  seminars  have  been  held  for  Lawyers,  Law  Firms,  Commercial  Court  Judges  and 
respective Associations on the provisions of Act 773, and the operating rules of the Registry. 
Mr. Chairman, let me say that  within three  years of operation, the Registry has performed 
remarkably.  By  the  end  of  March  2013,  a  total  of  49,096  charges  (secured  loans)  with 
104,308  collaterals  had  been  registered.  Of  these,  80.6  per  cent  were  movable  assets, 
13.3 per cent were immovable assets and the rest consisted of both movable and immovable 
types. 
Almost  160  institutions  (both  local  and  foreign)  have  so  far  accessed  the  Registry  for 
registration.  There  have  also  been  14,608  searches  conducted  by  various  lending 
institutions, law firms and the general public. 
Since its inception, the Registry has attracted significant interest from sister Central Banks on 
the continent. Delegations from several African countries have visited the Registry to study 
the processes involved in its establishment and the Redesign Project. 
Mr. Chairman, despite this impressive performance, there  are  a  few  challenges  which  the 
Bank has  to  deal with to ensure that the full benefits of Secure Transactions Regime benefit 
the  economy.  The  most  important  of  these  which  requires  immediate  policy  focus  is  the 
problem of duplication of registration and disjointed records  associated  with  the absence 
of  harmonization  between  the  Collateral  Registry  and  other  registries  such  as 
the 
Company’s  Registry, 
the  Lands  Commission  and  the  Driver  and  Vehicle  Licensing 
Authority (DVLA). 
Mr.  Chairman,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  it  is  appropriate  for  me  at 
to 
acknowledge  the  immense  contributions  of  SECO  and  the  IFC  in  the  redesign  of  the 
Collateral  Registry  and  hope  that  the  collaborative  efforts  will  continue  even  after 
the 
project  has  ended.  I  will express  our  appreciation to  the  lending  institutions, Ghana  Bar 
Association, 
the Judiciary and other state agencies  and  stakeholders  for  their  support  in 
this  effort to  upgrade  Ghana  Collateral  Registry  to  an  International Secured Transactions 
Registry. 
juncture 
this 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
On  its  part  The  Bank  of  Ghana  will  continue  to  pursue policies  aimed  at  achieving  its 
objective  of  price  stability  as  well  as  ensuring  orderliness  in  the  foreign  exchange 
market. 
Our  inflation  target  for  2013  which  is  in  line  with  the broader  macroeconomic 
targets 
(including the budget deficit  of  9.0  per  cent,  real  GDP  growth  of  8.0  per  cent including  oil 
or  6.5  per  cent  excluding  oil  and  a  broadly stable exchange rate) remains at 9.0 per cent. 
Recent trends in inflation 
Inflation  rose  from  8.8  per  cent  at  the  end  of  2012  to 10.4  per  cent  in  March  2013.  This 
is  consistent  with  the  Bank’s  projections  as  the  increases  in  February  and  to  a  lesser 
extent in March reflected the effects of the recent upward  adjustment  in  petroleum  prices 
in  February  as well as seasonality of food prices. We expect the upward trend to work itself 
out by the end of the first half of the year and then decline towards the end year target. 
Exchange rate developments 
Recent trends in the exchange rate also reflect seasonality  in  the  demand  and  supply  of 
forex in  the foreign  exchange  market.  Seasonally,  demand is high around  this  time  of 
the  year  due  to  the settlement  of import bills  after  the festivities (Christmas  and  Easter) 
as well as demand from the corporate sector to meet dividend transfers, which is legal and 
happens every year around  this  time.  On  the  other  hand  however,  supply  is also  low  at 
this  time  of  the  year  as most  of  our  forex receipts  come  during  the  second  half  of  the 
year. These pressures have occurred in the past and they are consistent with past trends. 
The  central  bank  will  continue  to  ensure  stability  on both fronts –  Increase  supply  of 
forex  on  the  market  (as  we  are  currently  comfortable  with  the  level  of  our  reserves  – 
US$  5.2  billion as of end April). The  slight decline in  the reserves from the end-December 
2012  stock  of  US$  5.4  billion  is  in  line  with seasonal  trends. The  country  has  currently 
witnessed  a decline in  the  terms of  trade. This decline may  however be compensated  for 
by  increased  oil  production  this  year  and the onset of gas production towards the end of 
the year. 
On  the  demand  side,  the  Bank  will  continue  with  its  tight  monetary  policy  stance. 
Policies  implemented  in  the  second  quarter  of  last  year  will  not  be  relaxed.  These 
should  be  able  to  restrict  demand  for  forex.  Currently,  cedi  assets  continue  to  be 
more  attractive  in terms  of yields  than  forex  assets  and  we  intend  to  maintain  that going 
forward. 
Meanwhile,  the  Bank  will  continue  to  apply  the  foreign  exchange  Act  and  regulations 
vigorously.  Any  institution  (including  Banks)  that  fall  foul  of  the  laws  will  be  sanctioned 
appropriately.  We  intend  to  ensure  that  the  cedi  remains  the  only  legal  tender  in  this 
country. In this regard  we  need  the  co-operation  of the Banks  (forex dealers), the state 
institutions and all other relevant institutions to achieve this. 
its  next  MPC  meeting  
The  bank  will  assess  the  macroeconomic  situation  during 
(May  20–22).  Based  on  the  outcome  we  will  determine  if  there  is  the  need  for  any 
additional  measures.  As  at  now,  we  believe  the  measures are  sufficient to  deal  with  the 
seasonalities. 
Bond issue 
There  are  initial  discussions  on  the  possibility  of  issuing  a  sovereign  bond  this  year. 
However,  no  firm decision has been taken on its size and purpose. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
time,  we  wish 
to  advise  all  banks  to  strengthen  their  research 
the  comments  of  their  executives  on  key 
In  the  mean 
departments  so  that  their  work  can  inform 
macroeconomic issues. 
Finally, as  we  officially launch the  Collateral Registry,  I wish to assure all stakeholders that 
the Bank will continue to  work  to  improve  credit  access,  which  is  important  for economic 
growth. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen, I  declare  the  Collateral Registry Ghana duly launched.  Thank You 
and God bless you all. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
