Ignazio Visco: Money and monetary institutions after the crisis 
Opening remarks by Mr Ignazio Visco, Governor of the Bank of Italy, at the Conference on 
“Money  and  monetary  institutions  after  the  crisis”,  in  memory  of  Curzio  Giannini,  Bank  of 
Italy, Rome, 10 December 2013. 
 It is my pleasure to welcome you all here today at this conference on Money and monetary 
institutions after the crisis. Key aspects of the evolution of money and monetary institutions 
had  been  identified  more  than  ten  years  ago  by  Curzio  Giannini,  a  brilliant  Banca  d’Italia 
economist who was a dedicated scholar of central banking and died in July 2003 at the age 
of 45, in a book on The age of central banks.1 This conference is held in his memory. In the 
final pages of his contribution he wrote:  
In  the  years  to  come,  the  most  interesting  developments  will  probably  be 
precisely in the sphere of supervision and regulation. […] Whatever its detractors 
may  say,  the  central  bank  has  no  need  to  move  into  new  lines  of  business. 
Capitalism generated the central bank and capitalism will come to it again, even if 
the current infatuation with the financial markets’ self-regulating capacity were to 
endure.  
Indeed, the financial crisis has led to a generalized collapse in the confidence of such self-
regulating  capacity.  Central  banks  have  had  to  profoundly  innovate  their  instruments  of 
intervention by introducing liquidity-providing operations of unlimited quantity, unusually long 
maturity  and  at  exceptionally  low  interest  rates,  also  through  currency  swaps  and  with 
respect  to  non-bank  counterparties;  they  also  engaged  in  large  purchases  of  public  and 
private  securities.  The  domestic  and  supranational  institutional  frameworks  have  been 
greatly  modified.  The  crisis  has  prompted  several  relevant  changes  in  the  IMF  lending 
framework in terms of additional financial resources, new financing facilities and cooperation 
with euro-area institutions; its surveillance is conducted within an enhanced legal framework 
and has become more attentive to international spillovers; ongoing governance reforms are 
further  strengthening  its  legitimacy  and  effectiveness.  In  many  jurisdictions  central  banks 
have been given stronger supervisory powers and new bodies in charge of macro-prudential 
supervision  have  been  created.  The  most  profound  wave  of  institutional  innovation  took 
place in Europe, where the sovereign debt crisis generated a leap forward in the process of 
unification.  
I  am  convinced  that  Curzio  Giannini’s  analyses  can  facilitate  the  interpretation  of  the 
problems that we are facing today and can offer guidance to frame our discussions on the 
institutional  evolution  of  central  banking  in  rigorous  terms.  This  is  indeed  one  of  the  main 
reasons  why  we  decided  to  organize  this  conference.  One  of  Curzio’s  distinctive  qualities 
was the ability to grasp the essence of the issues he dealt with, among which the complex 
relationship  between  the  evolution  of  central  banks  as  institutions  and  as  economic, 
historical, social and political developments. This was the result of his passion for research, 
his  intellectual  brilliance,  the  multidisciplinary  nature  of  his  interests.  During  the  years  he 
worked  at  the  Research  Department  of  Banca  d’Italia,  he  dealt  with  the  reforms  of  Italy’s 
monetary  institutions  in  the  1980s  and  1990s,  European  monetary  integration,  financial 
market  regulation.  He  was  involved  in  a  number  of  initiatives  concerning  payment  system 
issues,  which  helped  him  greatly  to  forge  his  ideas  about  central  banking,  and  paid  great 
attention to international relations, in particular to the role and functioning of the International 
Monetary Fund.  
                                                
1  C.  Giannini,  L’età  delle  banche  centrali,  Bologna,  Il  Mulino,  2004.  English  translation,  The  age  of  central 
banks, Edward Elgar, Cheltenham, UK, 2011, p. 255 and pp. 258–59.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Giannini’s  basic  thesis  is  that  central  banks  are  the  outcome  of  a  gradual  institutional 
evolution, the rationale of which resides in money’s distinctive features compared with other 
goods and services. This evolution is not deterministic but path-dependent, correlated with 
the historical evolution of our political, social and economic systems. It depends largely on 
the  fact  that  if  money  is  to  survive  and  perform  its  functions  in  economic  transactions 
effectively in space and time, it must instil and maintain a sufficient degree of confidence in 
its  acceptability  and future  value. The  role  and  the  powers  of  central  banks  –  indeed their 
very existence – derive from the ultimate purpose of sustaining that confidence. Interestingly, 
Giannini  is  convinced  that  innovation  in  central  banking  is  prompted  more  by  deflationary 
than by inflationary pressures and by the need to cope with financial stability problems.  
This approach allowed him to foresee key issues, strictly related to the themes that will be 
covered  in  the  four  sessions  of  this  conference:  the  relation  between  price  stability  and 
financial  stability  and  the  interaction  between  monetary  policy  and  macro-  and  micro-
prudential  policies;  central  bank 
the  changing  relationship  with 
government, in light of the recent massive expansion of central banks’ balance sheets; the 
evolution of money and payment systems, and whether we are witnessing a new phase of 
changes in the forms and the use of money; supranational money management issues and 
the problems related to the international lender of last resort function.  
For  each  of  these  themes,  Giannini’s  works  provide  a  great  deal  of  evidence  of  his 
extraordinary foresight. For instance in the early 2000s he had already clearly anticipated the 
risk  that  too  narrow  a  focus  on  price  stability  could  deflect  economists’  and  policymakers’ 
attention  from  the  importance  of  the  banking  system  as  the  transmission  belt  of  monetary 
policy.  He  was  also  aware  of  the  difficulty  in  replicating  typical  central  banking  functions, 
such as lending of last resort, at an international level (e.g. the International Monetary Fund) 
and with respect to sovereign borrowers. Or that a monetary union also requires a banking 
union, and this in turn calls for a greater degree of political integration. Or that an area that 
was often neglected, that of an international framework for debt restructurings, would soon 
need to be addressed.  
independence  and 
 Today, discussing the role of central banks, their independence, and their relationships with 
other  economic  and  financial  authorities  has  again  become  an  issue  of  the  utmost 
importance.  The  idea  that  the  central  bank’s  role  must  encompass  a  plurality  of  functions 
related  to  one  another,  at  the  core  of  many  of  Curzio  Giannini’s  analyses,  has  gained 
growing  consent:  not  only  in  the  field  of  monetary  policy  and  the  management  of  the 
payments system, but also for macro- and micro-prudential supervision. This coexistence of 
tasks has historically characterized the Bank of Italy, and since the onset of the crisis it is 
becoming more and more of a feature for many central banks worldwide.  
Central banks conduct monetary policy to achieve the objective of price stability – in most 
cases their primary goal – which in turn fosters broader macroeconomic stability. But central 
banks  also  have  responsibilities  in  the  area  of  financial  stability:  this  is  indeed  a  key 
precondition for price stability. Following the crisis, greater attention is being devoted to the 
interactions  and  possible  conflicts  between  policies  addressed  to  maintain,  respectively, 
price  and  financial  stability.  For  example,  in  the  current  crisis,  “unconventional”  measures 
have been used to address dysfunctional liquidity markets and banks’ reluctance to lend. In 
many cases, central banks had no choice but to move into unchartered waters, so as to limit 
the consequences of inadequate institutional or regulatory frameworks, imprudent behaviour 
in the private sector or national governments’ flawed fiscal policies. Only institutional reforms 
and  fiscal  policy  adjustments  can  avoid  overburdening  central  banks  with  an  excessive 
workload.  
The  sovereign  debt  crisis  in  the  euro  area  is  a  clear  example  of  a  situation  in  which 
disentangling  price  and  financial  stability  issues  became  virtually  impossible,  and  in  which 
the role of the central bank as a guardian of trust was crucial. The unconventional measures 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
adopted  by  the  Governing  Council  of  the  European  Central  Bank  were  actually  aimed  at 
countering distortions in financial markets and self-fulfilling debt runs which threatened the 
correct transmission of the Eurosystem monetary policy and, ultimately, its ability to pursue 
the primary objective of price stability.  
The need for these measures arose, to a large extent, from fundamental weaknesses in the 
European institutional design and from delays or mistakes in the response to the crisis. The 
announcement of the involvement of private investors in the restructuring of the Greek debt 
in  the  summer  of  2011  made  financial  markets  fully  aware  of  the  implications  of  the 
prohibition to intervene to rescue member states under the Treaty on the Functioning of the 
European Union. This triggered a further worsening of sovereign risk assessments and led to 
a very serious crisis of confidence in the ability of the single currency to survive. The crisis 
became systemic; the yield spreads between the government bonds of the countries under 
stress  and  German  bonds  rose  dramatically.  On  this,  again,  Curzio’s  foresight  is  most 
remarkable: ten years before the sovereign debt crisis he had identified several of the key 
features that have characterized the situation as it actually unfolded:2  
The inevitable complexities of political decision making create the possibility of a 
self-fulfilling  debt  run,  while  the  fundamental  information  asymmetry  between 
national authorities, on the one hand, and multilateral organizations and private 
creditors,  on  the  other,  works  against  the  creation  of  a  climate  of  trust  once  a 
crisis emerges, and might even stand in the way of mobilizing public support for 
the government’s program.  
The  European  institutional  weaknesses  were  clearly  reflected  in  financial  markets’  risk 
assessment. The sovereign spreads came to be determined by two factors, one national and 
one  European,  linked  respectively  to  the  flaws  of  certain  countries’  economies  and  public 
finances  (sustainability  risk),  and  to  the  incompleteness  of  European  construction  and  the 
attendant fears of a break-up of the monetary union (redenomination risk). In July 2012 the 
yield  differential  between  the  10-year  Italian  BTPs  and  the  equivalent  German  Bunds  was 
again just over 500 bps, compared with a value of about 200 bps estimated to be consistent 
with Italian and German economic fundamentals.  
The response to the sovereign debt crisis has thus been two-pronged: individual countries 
have  pledged  to  adopt  prudent  budgetary  policies  and  structural  reforms  to  support 
competitiveness;  a far-reaching  reform  of  EU  economic governance  has  been  undertaken, 
backed by political commitment to strengthen the Union. But the time needed to implement 
Europe’s complex strategy to counter the economic crisis will necessarily be long. Distortions 
and fragmentation in financial markets can in the meantime undermine the transmission of 
monetary policy and jeopardize the entire process. This has led to the ECB stepping in with 
emergency unconventional measures, thus providing a “bridge”.  
The ECB Governing Council’s decision to announce the Outright Monetary Transactions in 
the  summer  of  2012  was  a  response  to  these  dangers.  The  announcement,  an 
unmistakeable  signal  of  the  determination  to  preserve  the  euro,  reversed  the  spiral  of 
pessimism at a crucial juncture. By restoring confidence, it produced immediate benefits: as 
a result of a sharp reduction in the redenomination risks, medium and long-term yields in the 
countries under pressure decreased and the fragmentation of markets along national borders 
was attenuated. In the presence of a credible and firm action to restore market confidence, 
there  is  no  need  to  actually  use  the  new  instrument.  But  the  complete  elimination  of  the 
redenomination risk can only be achieved if sustained progress is made in the euro-area’s 
economic  fundamentals  and  in  the  process  towards  a  fully  fledged  European  Union. 
Discussion on budgetary and political union must be followed by concrete action.  
                                                
2  Curzio Giannini, Pitfalls in international crisis lending, in Charles Goodhart and Gerhard Illing (eds.), Financial 
crises, contagion and the lender of last resort: A reader, Oxford University Press, 2002, p. 521.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
justified  by 
the  severity  of 
The recourse to unconventional measures by major central banks and the expansion of their 
balance  sheets  have  been 
the  crisis.  Central  banks’ 
unprecedented  activism  has  raised  new  issues,  giving  rise  to  a  debate  that  not  only 
encompasses  technical  aspects,  notably  how  to  exit  these  measures  and  normalize 
monetary policy, but at times touches upon key institutional aspects such as independence 
of  central  banks.  For  example,  it  has  been  argued  that  central  bank  independence  in  the 
pursuit of price stability may be incompatible with an active use of unconventional measures 
in response to the financial and sovereign debt crisis. It is also feared that an active use of 
central  banks’  balance  sheets  would  blur  the  boundaries  between  monetary  and  fiscal 
policies.  The  new  challenges  to  central  bank  independence  arise  as  a  consequence  of 
prolonged  monetary  policy  accommodation:  at  the  current  juncture  central  banks  could  be 
unduly  constrained  in  their  choices  about  the  timing  and  pace  of  policy  normalization  by 
pressure  arising  both  from  financial  markets  that  have  become  overly  dependent  on  their 
support  and  from  unrealistic  expectations  about  what  central  banks  can  deliver.  On  these 
issues, the jury is still out.  
More  in general, the crisis has raised the question of whether central banks should revise 
their objectives or strategies. In my view there is no need to question the current objectives 
of  monetary  policy;  in  the  case  of the  Eurosystem, that  of  preserving (medium  term)  price 
stability. I do not believe that there is a particular need for financial stability to become an 
explicit objective of monetary policy on a par with price stability. Indeed, the benefits of our 
monetary  framework  have  become  more,  not  less,  evident  during  the  crisis,  with  inflation 
expectations  remaining  well-anchored  throughout.  Also,  assigning  financial  stability  as  an 
explicit additional objective to monetary policy could risk blurring responsibilities and creating 
potential  conflicts.  However,  I  believe  that  there  is  no  question  that  preserving  financial 
stability is a crucial albeit not exclusive responsibility of central banks. Indeed, the crisis has 
not put into question the idea that over longer horizons there is no trade-off between price 
stability and financial stability objectives – rather, there are synergies.  
 The crisis has thus rekindled the long-standing debate on whether central banks should act 
pre-emptively against signs of financial instability that can morph into systemic risks. A broad 
consensus  has  indeed  emerged  on  the  idea  that  macro-prudential  policies  should  be 
adopted to limit these risks. These policies would address both the cross-sectional dimension 
of the financial system, with the aim of strengthening its resilience to adverse real or financial 
shocks, and its temporal dimension, to contain the accumulation of risk over the business or 
financial  cycle.  Furthermore,  countercyclical  macro-prudential  policies  moderating  the 
financial  cycle  would  support  monetary  policy  in  the  stabilisation  of  the  economy  and,  by 
adding a systemic perspective, they would complement micro-prudential policies directed at 
preserving the stability of individual financial intermediaries.  
However, a potential for conflicts, or what economists usually refer to as tradeoffs, may arise 
between  monetary,  macro-  and  micro-prudential  policies.  It  could,  for  instance,  materialise 
during downturns, when the macro-prudential regulator may want to release equity buffers in 
order to avoid a credit crunch, whereas the micro-prudential regulator may be reluctant to let 
that  happen  owing  to  the  need  to  preserve  the  safety  and  soundness  of  individual 
institutions.  
Different institutional settings can be envisaged to solve these conflicts. Some have argued 
that  the  best  way  would  be  to  allocate  different  policies  to  different  authorities.  However, 
given the strict complementarities between monetary, macro- and micro-prudential policies, a 
view is emerging – which I share – that central banks are best positioned to offer effective 
solutions.  Conversely,  there  is  broad  agreement  that  resolution  mechanisms  to  resolve 
financial  intermediaries  must  be  located  outside  central  banks,  most  notably  because 
resolution decisions may involve the use of public money. Even if it would be appropriate for 
resolution and supervision to be separated, close cooperation and information sharing should 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
targeted  by 
the  Eurosystem’s  single  monetary  policy.  However, 
be obviously in place, not the least to better identify proper forms of recovery, as in several 
cases the issue is not just one of outright bank liquidation. In any event, the broadening of 
central banks’ tasks requires that their independence in the pursuing of financial stability is 
ensured to the same extent as for the conduct of monetary policy.  
All this is particularly clear in a currency union, where distinctive challenges come from the 
involvement  of  a  plurality  of  institutions.  In  the  euro  area,  price  stability  is  an  area-wide 
objective 
financial 
imbalances  can  take  on  a  country-specific  dimension,  so  that  macro-and  micro-prudential 
policies can be adopted by national authorities. Tradeoffs may arise and therefore there is a 
need for the coordination of national policies when financial instability gives rise to area-wide 
(systemic) risks. The recognition and understanding of these interactions and tradeoffs help 
in driving decisions about the institutional setting for policy-making.  
The Regulation establishing the Single Supervisory Mechanism, also involving the National 
Competent Authorities, assigns to the ECB not only micro-prudential tasks but also specific 
roles for macro-prudential policy, notably the implementation of macro-prudential measures 
set out in EU legislation. The ECB thus provides a concrete case of an institutional setting 
aimed  at  best  exploiting  the  complementarities  between  monetary,  macro-prudential  and 
micro-prudential  policies  while  addressing  possible  interactions  and  tradeoffs;  at  the  same 
time  care  will  be  taken  to  ensure  a  clear  functional  and  operational  separation  of  these 
policies  within  the  institution  and  the  system.  The  setting  should  also  ensure  the  much-
needed euro area-wide coordination in the application of these policies, so as to adequately 
address potential spill-over effects.  
 In the euro area the institutional changes resulting from the crisis are exerting a major impact 
on both the ECB and the national central banks, whose scope is no less important than the 
one arising from the introduction of the euro. Regardless of the specific innovations in their 
institutional  settings,  operations  and  tools,  ultimately  the  main  task  of  central  banks  is  to 
produce trust. This consideration comes from the heart of Curzio Giannini’s  work, the final 
sentences of which are indeed very telling:  
The  central  bank  produces  an  intangible  but  essential  good  –  trust  –  of  which 
capitalism (based as it is on a pyramid of paper if not mere electronic signals) has 
an  immense  need.  We  must  not  forget  that  trust,  or  its  synonym  “confidence”, 
derives from the Latin fides, meaning faith, which cannot be produced simply by 
contract.  In  fact  the  legitimacy  of  central  banks  does  not  lie  in  their  policy 
activism,  or  the  ability  to  generate  income,  or  even,  save  in  a  highly  indirect 
sense, their efficiency. Rather, […] it derives from competence, moderation, the 
long-term approach, and the refusal to take any tasks beyond their primary role. 
If, as I am sure, there is another phase in the development of central banking, it 
will spring from these values. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
