Norman T L Chan: Black Bear – Blue Ocean – Wanton Noodle 
Speech by Mr Norman T L Chan, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at 
the  Hong  Kong  Management  Association  Fellowship  Award  Dinner,  Hong Kong, 
26 November 2013. 
 Dennis (Sun), Alfred (Chan), Victor (Lee), Ladies and Gentlemen, 
1. 
I feel very honoured to have been invited to speak at the HKMA Fellowship Dinner 
tonight.  This  is  not  only  because  the  Hong  Kong  Management  Association  has  been  a 
forerunner in enhancing the standards of management and governance in Hong Kong, but 
also  because  the  Hong  Kong  Management  Association  and  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary 
Authority share the same initials “HKMA”! Hence, attending the Fellowship Dinner tonight has 
double meanings for me as the Chief Executive of the HKMA. 
2. 
Management is crucial as it embraces knowledge, skills, culture and leadership that 
would  guide  and  shape the future  of  an  organisation,  whether  it  is  public  sector  or  private 
sector body or whether it is profit-seeking or non-profit-making entity. There is no doubt that, 
with increased globalisation and technological innovation, markets in different geographical 
localities have become more interconnected. One author has described the phenomenon as 
the “World has Become Flat”. 
3. 
An important outcome of the interconnectedness of markets is that competition has 
become much more intense and ferocious. Talking about competition, let me share with you 
this story. 
4. 
One day two men went together hiking in the mountain. While happily walking and 
talking,  they  bumped  into  a  giant  black  bear  which  was  apparently  in  a  bad  mood  and  in 
need of some nutritious food. Even though this was their very first encounter of a big bear in 
the wilderness, the ferocity displayed by the bear cast no doubt in their minds that their lives 
were at stake. So the two of them ran as fast as they could downhill and soon they reached 
the flat land at the bottom of the hill. Unfortunately the bear appeared to be quite determined 
to get the catch of the day and was chasing them from 50 yards behind. Suddenly one man 
stopped running and took out his running shoes from his knapsack to put them on. The other 
guy was very puzzled and asked: “What are you doing, you stupid? I don’t think you can run 
faster than the bear even with your running shoes on!” The other guy replied: “Yes, I know 
this. But it would be good enough if I can run faster than you!” 
5. 
What  is  the  moral  of  this  story?  One,  the  world  can  be  very  dangerous  and 
unpredictable  risk  may  crop  up  from  nowhere.  So  be  prepared.  Two,  the  world  is  a  very 
competitive  place.  It  is  not  about  how  fast  you  can  run,  but  whether  you  can  outrun  your 
competitors. The marketplace is a wild jungle in which only the very fit or the fittest can hope 
to survive or succeed. 
6. 
Therefore  it  is  natural  that  in  the  field  of  management  science  a  great  deal  of 
research and study on how one can be successful in a highly competitive marketplace has 
been undertaken. I am no expert in this specialised field and thus not qualified to comment 
on  a  wide  spectrum  of  management  theories  on  the  path  to  success.  However,  I  have 
noticed  that  in  recent  years  the  “Blue  Ocean”  theory  has  gained  a  lot  of  popularity  and 
support. I too have found considerable merit in this theory because, as the world has become 
more globalised and interconnected, capital, information and talent flows within and between 
markets have become much more efficient than ever. A profitable business would attract new 
participants or entrants, which would result in very fierce competition and the squeezing out 
of  profitability.  The  Blue  Ocean  theory  suggests  that  we  should  try  to  avoid  a  crowded 
marketplace by looking for new lines of business, new products and new markets. In taking 
the  lead  in  a  new  market  or  new  horizon,  the  enterprise  can  enjoy  the  first  mover  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
associated advantages, at least for a period of time. That theory encourages managers and 
entrepreneurs to think outside the box, and to innovate and explore new  lines of business 
and products. This is all very well, but there is, in my mind, an important catch. We can all 
see what Bill Gates has done in creating Microsoft and what Steve Jobs did to the success of 
Apple. These are great examples of the success under the Blue Ocean theory. However, not 
all of us can become Bill Gates and Steve Jobs. And there is a limit on how often companies 
can innovate new products or lines of business. So the Blue Ocean theory is good but has its 
own limitations. Most people and companies would find it hard to create blue oceans in the 
day-to-day life. So what is the alternative route to survival and success? In this connection, 
let me share with you another story. It’s the story about a noodle shop in Wanchai. 
7. 
In  the  1970s,  a  young  couple  decided  that  they  should  start  their  own  business. 
They  borrowed  money  from  their  parents  and  relatives  to  set  up  a  small  noodle  shop  in 
Wanchai.  They  worked  very  hard  and  the  noodle  shop’s  business  was  doing  well  after 
several years. In the 1980s the couple used the money they had saved up to buy the shop 
space of their noodle shop. However, the business of the noodle shop began to decline in 
the  1990s.  A  friend  of  the  couple  offered  help  by  giving  the  following  advice:  “The  noodle 
shop is too old-fashioned. People’s eating habit has changed and they prefer a wider variety 
of food in the form of a local cafe (茶餐廳)." This sounded sensible and the couple took the 
advice and converted the noodle shop into a local cafe. The business improved initially but 
worsened  again  several  months  later.  Deeply  disappointed,  the  couple  consulted  another 
friend and sought advice on what went wrong and what could be done. They were told that 
the food variety was still too limited. They should offer hot pot rice (煲仔飯) and hot pot meals 
(火鍋)  as  well  to  attract  a  wider  clientele.  The  couple  thought  it  was  a  good  advice  and 
immediately launched the new products. In the first winter, the business went quite well but in 
the  summer  months  it  was  dreadful.  What  was  more  surprising,  in  the  second  winter,  the 
business fell even further. After two years of struggle, the couple felt that they had run out of 
new  ideas  and  that  there  was  no  point  to  hang  on.  So  they  decided  to  close  down  the 
business  and  sell  the  shop  space.  So  the  couple  went  to  see  the  branch  manager  of  the 
bank to settle the outstanding mortgage payments. The branch manager, who was also an 
old customer of their noodle shop living in the neighbourhood, asked why they had to close 
their shop. The couple complained that the market environment, including people’s taste and 
eating habits had changed but they simply could not cope with these changes fast enough. 
The branch manager was astonished to hear this and said: “I used to like your noodle shop 
very much in the earlier years, but for reasons I don’t understand, the quality of the noodles 
kept  deteriorating.  When  you  introduced  the  cafe,  the  food  was  even  worse.  The  hot  pot 
business is just out of place as there is not even space in the shop to serve this kind of food.” 
8. 
The couple suddenly realised at that very moment they had misunderstood the true 
reasons why their business had kept on falling. When they first set up the noodle shop, they 
were very serious about every minor detail – they scouted the New Territories to source the 
best quality flour to ensure that noodles were chewy. The husband went to the fish market at 
dawn to buy the fresh shrimps for the wonton and the wife woke up at four in the morning to 
make sure the soup base (湯底) was properly prepared. But they both had ceased doing that 
when  the  noodle  shop  business  was  doing  well  and  such  daily  routines  were  no  longer 
practised.  So  the  noodles  were  no  longer  as  chewy  as  before  and  the  wontons  were  no 
longer tasty. As for the cafe and hot pot meals, they had very little idea on how to do them 
well and eventually their customers, one by one, turned away from the shop. 
9. 
The  takeaway  of  this  story  is  that  very  often  that  market  conditions  or  customer 
needs have changed and so we have to adapt. If a company does not or cannot adapt, then 
bad outcomes would ensue. However, it is more often the case that the formula and values 
leading to success in the past have been inadvertently eroded, if not forgotten totally. The 
couple in Wanchai should not have forgotten what drew customers to their noodles in the first 
place. They  had failed  not  because  their  customers  had  decided  to  eat sandwiches  rather 
than  noodles  but  because  they  forgot  that  it  was  quality  that  made  the  noodle  shop 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
successful in the first place. Very often we become complacent and take things for granted 
after we have been successful, just like the Wanchai couple did. Shifting to a new product 
line in which we have no real expertise or niche was a recipe for disaster. The same holds 
true if we look at what made Hong Kong tick twenty or thirty years ago. Many good qualities 
such as can-do spirit, never-say-die, openness and versatility that were cherished by Hong 
Kong people in the past seem to have faded away. Keeping these good qualities, Hong Kong 
can hope to maintain its competitive edge even when the goings get rough. 
10. 
Ladies and gentlemen, the message I have for you is: while an entrepreneur should 
always strive to expand and grow his business, it is equally important that he should resist 
complacency and continue to excel in what he is doing or what he is good at. To venture into 
an unfamiliar universe in  which one has no expertise or advantage is risky. The market is 
fiercely  competitive  and  no  doubt  customers’  preference  may  change,  but  the  market  is 
generally  fair  and  always  rewards  quality  and  consistency  handsomely.  So  if  we  are  not 
hopeful that Hong Kong can produce many Bill Gates or Steve Jobs in the future, don’t be 
disillusioned as it is still within the reach of all of us to uphold the values or formula that has 
transformed  Hong  Kong  into  the  most  vibrant  and  successful  centre  in  trade,  commerce, 
tourism and finance in Asia in the last two to three decades. 
11. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
