Jacqueline Loh: Re-thinking investment strategies for growth 
Keynote address by Ms Jacqueline Loh, Deputy Managing Director of the Monetary Authority 
of Singapore, at the Asia Investment Management Summit, 25 November 2013. 
 Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, a very good morning to all of you. 
1. 
The  global  economic  recovery  remains  uneven  and  fragile,  five  years  after 
Lehman’s collapse. While there have been some encouraging signs over the past year, with 
stronger  jobs  growth  and  the  housing  recovery  in  the  US  and  the  Euro  area  economies 
stepping out of the recession zone, there continues to be heavy reliance on extraordinarily 
loose monetary policy and low interest rates for life support.  
2. 
Lean economic growth since the onset of the Global Financial Crisis, beset by bouts 
of heightened volatility, present a challenging environment for investment managers. For the 
insurance industry, higher payouts following natural disasters pose additional difficulties. Five 
of the ten costliest natural disasters, in terms of money rather than lives, occured in the past 
five years.1  
As a result of economic, financial and environmental systems coming under stress 
3. 
at  the  same  time,  insurance  companies  are  now  operating  in  extremely  trying  conditions. 
Specifically, insurers’ profitability is under pressure simultaneously from all 3 sources:  
Firstly premium income, which is correlated to weak economic growth and excess 
a. 
capacity;  
Secondly investment income, amidst a low yield environment and higher market 
volatility; and  
And  thirdly,  claims  and  expenses,  given 
catastrophes.  
In  light  of  this  unprecedented  mix  of  challenges,  the  insurance  industry  is 
increasing  claims 
for  natural 
b. 
c. 
to 
in  order 
their  underwriting  capabilities, 
Firstly,  focusing  more  on  improving  underwriting  profitability.  Against  a 
backdrop  of  low  yields,  insurers  can  no  longer  rely  on  investment  income  to 
compensate  for  poor  underwriting  results.  Insurers  now  recognize  the  need  to 
strengthen 
improve  underwriting 
profitability. Following the spate of natural catastrophes in Asia-Pacific in 2011 for 
instance, many insurers have imposed more stringent underwriting and risk controls 
such as event limits and policy exclusions. Steps have also been taken to close data 
and risk modelling gaps, which will enable more accurate measurement and in turn, 
better management of risk exposures.  
Second, optimizing investment and product portfolios. For in-force businesses 
for which policy terms cannot be changed, insurers are primarily seeking to optimize 
their  investment  and  hedging  strategies.  For  new  products  and  policy  renewals, 
insurers are also looking to re-price their policies or adjust guarantee levels.  
And third, enhancing operational efficiency. Apart from improving premium and 
investment income, insurance companies are also streamlining processes to lower 
operational and claims expenses.  
b. 
c. 
4. 
responding as follows: 
a. 
                                                
1  Economist,  Jan  14,  2012,  citing  Munich  Re’s  numbers.  Adjusted  for  inflation.  RMD  adjusted  for  Hurricane 
Sandy (Oct 2012) to Munich Re’s numbers. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Going  forward,  there  is  no  doubt  that  a  longer-term  and  more  sustainable 
5. 
approach  is  needed  to  achieve  long-term  profitability.  In  keeping  with  the  conference 
theme of “Seeking Better Returns in the Current Volatile Climate” – I would like to discuss 
the  investment  challenges  facing  insurers,  as  well  as  share  my  observations  on  key 
issues  that  insurance  companies  would  need  to  address  in  this  new  investment 
landscape.  
6. 
This  is  important  because  as  many  of  you  know,  insurers  operate  in  a  multi-
stakeholder  environment.  They  need  to  first  offer  competitive  products  to  policyholders  to 
meet  their  needs,  maintain  adequate  capital  to  meet  regulatory  requirements,  as  well  as 
provide  adequate  shareholder  returns.  The  insurance  industry’s  targeted  return  corridor  to 
policyholders  can  be  at  least  3–5%2  in  order  to  maintain  bonus  payouts  for  participating 
policies;  whilst  the  ROE  to shareholders  have  typically  ranged  between  10%–15%3. In the 
case  of  life  insurers,  in  particular,  for  which  investment  returns  is  a  key  source  of  income 
given their focus on long-term and guaranteed savings products, lower returns will strain the 
ability to meet both policyholders’ and shareholders’ expectations. Some insurers have 
ventured  to  forecast  that  a  10%  ROE  for  the  industry  will  be  a  “best-case  scenario”,  with 
many more calling for the industry to be more realistic about its return expectations from their 
investment portfolios. 
Challenging investment landscape  
7. 
Let me first discuss the investment headwinds facing insurers. Specifically, there are 
3  key  challenges  that  are  driving  insurers  to  undergo  a  fundamental  rethink  of  their 
investment approach:  
a. 
b. 
c. 
One, lower returns in the new normal; 
Two, lack of long duration assets; and  
Three, regulatory reforms. 
Lower returns in the new normal 
8. 
First, lower returns in the new normal. There has been increasing acceptance that 
the  era  of  low  yields  is  not  just  a  cyclical  phenomenon,  but  is  in  fact  the  New  Normal.  In 
advanced  economies,  policymakers  are  faced  with  conflicting  challenges  as  they  seek  to 
maximise economic growth on the one hand; while having to pursue fiscal consolidation and 
financial sector reform on the other. Meanwhile, emerging economies will grapple with tighter 
financial  conditions  and  by  implication,  slowing  growth  when  unconventional  monetary 
policies  are  unwound.  The  outlook  is  highly  uncertain  as  the  normal  cyclical  recovery 
template  cannot  be  applied  to  structural  deleveraging  episodes  such  as  the  one  we  are 
currently in. Although bond yields are expected to rise from their current low levels, it is likely 
that  insurers  will  have  to  settle  for  much  lower  returns  from  fixed  income  investing  in  the 
years ahead than that achieved in the pre-crisis period. Over the next 20 years, the slowing 
demographic outlook for the world will also exert pressure on economic growth and lower the 
expected returns for most asset classes. 
Shortage of long duration assets 
9. 
Next,  a  shortage  of  long  duration  assets.  Asia  has  often  been  singled  out  as  the 
bright  spot  in  the  global  insurance  industry,  as  rising  incomes  and  lower  than  average 
                                                
2  Allianz Global Investors estimates. 
3  OECD Global Insurance Statistics. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
insurance penetration in many markets offer rosy opportunities for growth. However, in terms 
of seeking investment returns, Asian insurers are operating within similar market trends as 
their global counterparts. To illustrate, long-term government bond yields in the US and Euro 
area  have  declined  an  average  of  200  to  300  bps  compared  to  the  10-year  average 
prevailing before the Global Financial Crisis. In Asia, long-term government bond yields are, 
on  average,  50  to  300bps  lower  than  pre-crisis  levels.  Asian  insurers  also  have  to  face 
increasing costs of capital4, compounding the pressure to generate higher returns. 
10. 
Addressing  the  duration  mismatch  between  assets  and  liabilities  has  been  a 
persistent challenge for insurers in Asia, due to a shortage of long-dated instruments as well 
as  restrictions  on  investments  in  some  jurisdictions.  A  number  of  governments  in  Asia, 
including  Korea,  Taiwan,  China  and  Singapore,  have  responded  by  issuing  long-dated 
bonds;  and  easing  restrictions  on  specific  assets  classes  that  insurers  can  hold. 
Notwithstanding  this,  the  supply  of  high  quality  government  and  corporate  bonds  remains 
limited  relative  to  the  strong  demand  from  a  wide  spectrum  of  investors  for  these  “safe 
haven” assets, such that insurers can be crowded out.  
Regulatory reforms 
11. 
Finally, let me touch on the oncoming regulatory reforms, such as Solvency II, which 
will also play a significant role in shaping insurers’ investment strategies. Almost 80% of the 
respondents  to  a  recent  Goldman  Sachs  survey  listed  regulatory  capital  treatment  as  the 
predominant non-market related concern. 
12. 
Insurance  regulatory  reforms  are  converging  towards  a  principles-based  and  fair 
value approach for the total balance sheet. This will enable a more accurate assessment of 
an insurer’s financial and capital strength, even in times of stress. However, this can increase 
volatility  in  an  insurers’  balance  sheet,  and  raise  overall  risk  charges  and  capital 
requirements  on  long-term  assets.  In  order  not  to  disincentivise  insurers  from  investing  in 
longer maturity instruments, it is therefore critical for regulators to continue to calibrate their 
solvency  regimes  carefully.  We  do  note  however,  that  some  regulators  have  or  are 
introducing  into  their  capital  frameworks,  mechanisms  to  smooth  out  the  effects  of  market 
volatility, such as the illiquidity premium in Australia and the matching adjustment & volatility 
balancer  in  Europe.  These  mechanisms  recognize  the  long  term  and  illiquid  nature  of 
insurance liabilities, where insurers are able to hold assets to maturity.  
Increasing Importance of Risk Management  
13. 
So let me now move on to talk about the increasing importance of risk management 
in  these  challenging  times.  The  forces  I  have  mentioned  earlier,  have  triggered  an 
investment  mindset  shift,  particularly  in  the  last  6  to  12  months  amongst  insurers  –  from 
conservative asset allocation strategies and matching of liabilities – to reaching for yield.  
14. 
In their search for returns, many Asian insurers are investing more tactically across 
asset  classes  and  diversifying  their  fixed  income  portfolios.  In  addition,  many  are  thinking 
outside  the  low  yield  box  and  considering  an  extension  of  the  investment  universe 
parameter. This would encompass non-traditional asset classes, such as emerging markets, 
infrastructure,  trade  finance,  structured  credit,  and  alternatives  such  as  hedge  funds,  real 
estate  and  private  equity.  In  the  alternatives  space  alone,  the  average  allocation  by 
insurance  companies,  as  a  percentage  of  their  assets  under  management,  has  in  fact 
already increased from 10% to 15% between 2011 and 20135.  
                                                
4 
“Asian  Insurers:  Adapting  Investment  Strategies  to  a  Changing  World”,  BlackRock  in  conjunction  with  the 
Economist Intelligence Unit, Sep 2013. 
5  Preqin’s 2013 Global Alternatives Report. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
15. 
A recent Goldman Sachs Insurance Asset Management survey reports that nearly 
half  of  Asian  insurers  are  looking  to  raise  their  allocation  to  higher  yielding  assets.  Like 
expected returns, risks – market, credit, liquidity, and legal to name a few – from investing in 
these newer asset classes will also be higher. There is no free lunch. Insurers’ risk profiles 
will be distributed across a wider and more complex spectrum of asset classes. This will call 
for more sophisticated and robust management of individual investment risks, as well as the 
correlation  between  the  range  of  investment  risks  within  a  more  diversified  and  complex 
portfolio.  
16. 
The  risk  management  deficiencies  highlighted  by  the  global  financial  crisis  and 
recent  tail  events,  have  raised  the  bar  in  all  areas  of  risk  management.  As  a  result,  risk 
management has now been elevated from a mere control function under the responsibility of 
the  Chief  Risk  Officer,  to  a  strategic  role  that  comes  under  the  direct  oversight  of  the 
insurer’s Board and senior management.  
17. 
Similarly,  the  investment  decision  is  not  an  isolated  one,  but  one  that  has  to  be 
made  in  view  of  the  firm’s  overall  business  goals,  business  strategies,  capital  needs, 
liabilities  structure  and  risk  appetite.  Insurers  would  gain  from  establishing  a  robust 
Enterprise  Risk  Management  (ERM) framework to  manage  these factors  holistically.  Good 
execution  on  this  front  will  entail  close  coordination  and  communication  between  the 
investment function and other key functions, including actuarial, risk and finance, to ensure 
that  dynamic  trends  on  both  investment  assets  and  insurance  liabilities,  as  well  as  the 
resulting  impact  on  earnings  and  balance  sheet  volatility,  continues  to  be  monitored  and 
managed dynamically.  
Asia driving global insurance growth  
The ability to manage investment risks skillfully is even more essential in the 
18. 
Asian context, due to its rapidly growing share of insurance business and attendant 
risk exposures.  
19. 
Over the next decade, Asia will continue to rise in importance in the global insurance 
arena. Munich Re for example, estimates that Asian premiums can register healthy growth of 
about  8%  per  annum,  and  account  for  almost  40%6  of  global  premiums  by  2020.  This  is 
underpinned  by  positive  structural  factors  such  as  a  growing  middle-class  and  rising 
affluence, aging demographics, and the continued industrialisation, trade and infrastructure 
development in emerging Asia.  
20. 
In particular, I would like to focus now on how insurers can play a long-term role in 
Asian society and economies in two pertinent areas: one, financing Asia’s retirement funding 
gap; and two, financing Asia’s long-term investment needs. 
Financing Asia’s retirement funding gap  
21. 
Firstly, financing Asia’s retirement funding gap. Asia is experiencing declining fertility 
rates, increasing life expectancy, and a rapidly aging population. Between 2011 and 2030, 
Asia’s  share  of  population  aged  60  and  above  will  increase  from  40%  to  almost  50%, 
compared to the global average of 20%7. At the same time, public retirement and pension 
systems remain inadequate, and the retirement funding gap is estimated to be up to 13 years 
of  retirement  savings8.  Insurers  can  play  a  pivotal  role  in  financing  individuals’  retirement 
security through pension, annuity and saving products, complementing public pensions.  
                                                
6  Source: Munich Re Study on Asia-Pacific Insurance Market 2020 (March 2012). 
7 
8  2013 Manulife Investor Sentiment Survey. 
“Financing Social Protection in Developing Asia: Now and In the Future”, NUS, 27 May 2013. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
22. 
Insurers in Asia stand to benefit from robust premium growth on the one hand; but 
will also be subject to greater volatility from fluctuations in the economic and financial market 
cycles on the other. The low-interest rate environment is likely to magnify the present value 
of  future  increases  in  longevity,  which  will  in  turn,  affect  the  solvency  position  of  annuity 
providers and pension funds. While this can have unintended consequences on insurers’ role 
in  supporting  retirement  adequacy,  it  can  provide  the  impetus  for  product  innovation  and 
alignment with the new  investment and regulatory climate. Indeed, insurers have begun to 
redesign  their  products  such  that  interest  rate  risks  remain  manageable;  while  offering 
guarantees that are valuable to policyholders at the same time.  
Financing Asia’s long-term growth 
23. 
Next,  financing  Asia’s  long-term  growth.  Insurers  are  one  of  the  world’s  largest 
institutional  investors,  managing  almost  $25  trillion  or  a  third  of  the  world’s  professionally 
managed assets9. Due to the nature of their liabilities, insurers are an ideal source of long-
term  funding  to  finance  economic  growth.  They  have  the  ability  to  invest  in  long-term  and 
less liquid assets, such as infrastructure investments and clean energy. This role has never 
been more critical; at a time when banking regulatory reforms have crimped banks’ appetite 
and  ability  to  play  a  long-term financing  role. We  are  already  seeing  encouraging  signs  of 
insurers  collaborating  with  banks  to  provide  debt  financing  for  infrastructure  projects 
together.  Allianz,  Ageas  and  Swiss  Re  are  just  a  few  examples  of  insurance  companies 
which  have  explored  such  moves.  Zurich  Insurance  Group  also  recently  made  its  single 
largest investment in green bonds, which fund projects that help mitigate climate change in 
local communities. 
Singapore – a key hub to capture Asian premiums and intermediate global-Asia 
investments 
24. 
Singapore is now recognized as the leading insurance hub in Asia-Pacific. We are 
home to many top global insurance players, and an ecosystem comprising a strong brokers’ 
cluster, the largest captive community in Asia Pacific, a growing cluster of specialty players 
and  the  largest  grouping  of  Lloyd’s  syndicates  outside  of  London.  This  ecosystem  is  self-
reinforcing,  creating  a  strong  “clustering”  effect  that  has  been  a  key  growth  driver  for 
Singapore’s insurance market. 
25. 
As  Singapore  continues  to  develop  itself  as  a  global  insurance  market  with  the 
ability to write not just Asian risks but global risks, many insurers are also making plans to 
set-up  their  fund  management  arms  to  manage  their  growing  investment  portfolios  in  the 
region. In addition to honing investment skills, there is also a general consensus on the need 
to  strengthen  internal  risk  management  expertise,  as  well  as  deepen  data  and  modeling 
capabilities, so as to attain a strong understanding of local market risks. To better manage 
the  risks  of  more  complex  products,  as  well  as  aggregate  portfolio  risks,  many  are  also 
increasingly  leveraging  on  the  external  expertise  of  the  sell-side  bank  and  capital  market 
players, as well as fund managers in Singapore. 
26. 
Singapore  is  also  highly  committed  to  research  and  development,  and  is 
establishing itself as an innovation centre of excellence. To respond to the challenges of an 
ageing Asia, it is imperative for Singapore to be at the forefront and lead the development of 
retirement financing solutions for individuals, businesses and governments in Asia. Research 
is an upstream activity preceding product development. To differentiate yourselves through 
innovation, we would strongly encourage the industry to continue to conduct Asian-focused 
retirement security  research  in  collaboration  with  research  institutes  in Singapore,  such  as 
                                                
9  2009 OECD and IMF estimates. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
the  SMU  Centre  for  Silver  Security  and  EDHEC  Risk  Institute-Asia.  The  SMU  Centre  for 
Silver Security for instance, is conducting applied research on financial products and markets 
for the silver industry, which would allow insurers to develop and commercialise products for 
the at-retirement market. 
Conclusion  
27. 
Let me conclude. The insurance industry will encounter significant headwinds in the 
years ahead. I understand that the conference speakers will be touching on many pertinent 
topics,  including  the  macroeconomic  outlook  and  investment  implications,  asset  allocation 
strategies in a world of low bond yields, and whether there is a right level of asset risks that 
insurers should assume.  
28. 
The inaugural Asia Investment Management Summit for insurers, organized by Asia 
Insurance Review here in Singapore, is very timely. It will be an extremely useful platform for 
all  stakeholders  to  engage  in  constructive  dialogue  on  how  we  can  navigate  the  current 
environment successfully. On this note, I wish all of you a rewarding and fruitful conference. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
