Mark Carney: Polymer banknotes 
Remarks  by  Mr  Mark  Carney,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England  and  Chairman  of  the 
Financial Stability Board, at the Bank of England, London, 18 December 2013. 
 Ensuring  public  trust  and  confidence  in  money  is  at  the  heart  of  what  central  banks  do. 
Money  can  only  play  its  invaluable  role  in  our  economy  if  that  trust  and  confidence  is 
maintained. That motivates the Bank of England’s core objectives of price stability, so that 
people can be confident of the value of their money over time, and financial stability so that 
they will be able to access and use money when they want to.  
It  is  also  why  we  place  such  importance  on  maintaining  confidence  in  our  banknotes,  the 
most tangible form of money. Our job is to ensure that the banknotes people use are high 
quality and genuine. We also recognise that banknotes are an important national symbol and 
a source of national pride.  
Our  banknotes  must  therefore  be  secure  from  counterfeiting,  resistant  to  damage,  and 
designed  in  a  way  that  inspires  broad  public  support  and  fosters  legitimacy.  We  are 
continually working to ensure that our notes meet those requirements.  
That  is  why  I  am  pleased  to  announce  today  that  the  next  Bank  of  England  notes  will  be 
printed  on  polymer,  rather  than  cotton  paper.  The  first  polymer  note  will  be  the  £5  note 
featuring Sir Winston Churchill, and will be issued in 2016. It will be followed around a year 
later  by  a  polymer  £10  note  featuring  Jane  Austen.  The  decision  to  move  to  polymer  for 
these  notes  follows  a  three-year  review  and  a  broad  public  consultation  exercise.  Our 
research has shown a compelling case for polymer notes.  
Polymer notes bring three main benefits:  
• 
They  stay  cleaner  than  paper  banknotes  because  they  are  resistant  to  dirt  and 
moisture;  
They  are  more  secure  because  they  incorporate  advanced  security  features  that 
make them difficult to counterfeit;  
And they are more durable, lasting at least 2½ times as long as paper banknotes, 
ensuring that notes in circulation remain of high quality. Because replacements are 
needed  less  often  they  are  both  cheaper  over  time,  and  more  environmentally 
friendly.  
  These  advantages  mean  that  a  switch  to  polymer  is  a  natural  step  in  the  evolution  of 
banknote design. But you don’t have to take our word for it. Nearly 13000 people have told 
us what they thought, in surveys and at over 40 events up and down the UK, and 87% – the 
vast majority – were in favour of polymer notes, especially once they had a chance to see 
and handle prototype notes.  
After  that  public  consultation,  we’re  confident  that  the  switch  to  polymer  will  have  broad 
public support.  
For  those  who  might  be  concerned  about  the  change,  let  me  reassure  you  that  the  new 
polymer notes will retain the familiar look of Bank of England banknotes, including of course 
the  portrait  of  Her  Majesty  the  Queen,  as  well  as  depictions  of  historical  characters  of 
national  significance.  That  continuity  of  design  helps  explain  why  people  who  have  had  a 
chance to handle specimen notes were even more likely to view polymer favourably.  
The  depiction  of  historical  characters  will  remain  an  integral  feature  of  our  banknotes, 
providing  an  opportunity  to  celebrate  individuals  that  have  shaped  the  United  Kingdom.  In 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
order to ensure public confidence in banknotes, it is essential that the choice of characters 
commands broad public respect and legitimacy.  
That is why in July, at the same time as announcing that Jane Austen would feature on the 
new £10 note, I promised that we would review the way in which the characters featured on 
banknotes  are  selected.  Today  we  are  announcing  a  new  set  of  principles  to  guide  the 
choice of characters and a new process to ensure that those principles are, and are seen to 
be, followed.  
The  new  principles  for  character  selection  state  clearly  and  positively  the  Bank’s  aims  in 
using historic characters on our notes. They put diversity and inclusivity at the heart of the 
selection criteria. And they make clear our intention to portray a diverse range of characters 
over time, with each new decision taking into account previous choices.  
The new process will be open, transparent and inclusive. There will be greater input from the 
public and from external experts in the form of a new Advisory Committee with a majority of 
independent  members.  That  body  will  recommend  a  broad  theme  –  for  example  scientific 
achievement – before the public are invited to nominate characters within that theme. The 
Advisory Committee, with input from public focus groups, will narrow down the field to a final 
shortlist of characters and the Governor will make the final choice from that shortlist.  
These changes will ensure that the characters on our banknotes are fully representative of 
the history and diversity of this great nation, while having the necessary public respect and 
legitimacy.  
Our polymer notes will combine the best of progress and tradition. They will be more secure 
from counterfeiting and more resistant to damage while celebrating the history and tradition 
that is important both to the Bank and the nation as a whole.  
By  consulting  widely  on  the  switch  to  polymer,  and  by  putting  in  place  a  new  process  for 
selecting  banknote  characters  with  much  more  public  input,  we  have  reinforced  the 
commitment to openness and transparency which lies at the heart of the Bank of England’s 
commitment to accountability.  
Together,  these  announcements  ensure  that  our  banknotes  will  remain  both  a  national 
symbol and a source of national pride. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
