Yves Mersch: SMEs, Banking Union, and securitisation –  exploring the 
nexus 
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  Yves  Mersch,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European 
Central  Bank,  at  the  Economics  Conference  2013  “Investment  and  investment  finance: 
putting Europe on a sustainable growth path”, organised by the European Investment Bank 
(EIB), in cooperation with the Reinventing Bretton Woods Committee (RBWC) and the EURO 
50 Group, Luxembourg, 13 November 2013. 
 President Hoyer, 
SMEs are the pillars of the European economy. 99.7% of the firms in the EU are SMEs. The 
vast majority of those are micro firms with less than 9 employees. They are also the major 
drivers of job and wealth creation: the European Commission estimated in 2012 that SMEs 
employed nearly 70% of EU workers and contributed around 60% of value added. In other 
words, the health of smaller businesses and the health of the EU economy are thoroughly 
intertwined. 
Europe should therefore be very concerned by the difficulties that SMEs are currently facing 
–  in  particular  those  in  countries  under  stress.  Of  course,  we  cannot  avoid  that  certain 
business models become outmoded and disappear during downturns. This is the nature of 
the market economy. But the situation facing SMEs in certain jurisdictions goes beyond that. 
Firms  have  been  forced  to  close  not  only  because  business  models  were  flawed,  but 
because they were located in the wrong place and could not get access to finance. 
Two major challenges lie in front of us: 
1. 
Continental Europe remains a bank-based economy, and small businesses mostly 
depend  on  banks  to  finance  themselves.  It  is  therefore  our  responsibility  to  make 
sure that banks do not find undue impediments to lend to sound borrowers.  
At the same time, we should promote other forms of financing to complement the 
banking  channel  with  non-bank  sources  of  finance  through  strengthening  capital 
markets and in particular securitisation.  
2. 
Let  me  begin  my  discussion  on  how  to  achieve  this  by  briefly  reviewing  the  structure  of 
financial intermediation in the euro area and how it is affecting SMEs today. 
Financial intermediation and SMEs 
In  the  euro  area,  banks  have  historically  played  an  important  role  in  financing  the  real 
economy.  Banks  loans  account  for  around  50%  of  firms’  external  financing,  which  is  very 
different  from  the  US  where  around  80%  of  firms’  financing  comes  from  capital  markets 
(equity and debt securities). The importance of bank-based intermediation in the euro area 
explains the relatively large size of the euro area banking sector compared with the US – at 
270% and 72% of GDP, respectively.  
However,  the  crisis  has  hampered  bank  lending.  Indeed,  loans  to  the  private  sector  have 
fallen  for  16  straight months. On  the  supply  side,  heightened funding  costs  and  persistent 
financial  fragmentation  in  the  euro  area  constrain  new  credit.  This  is  in  part  due  to  the 
necessary process of consolidation and deleveraging in the euro area banking sector. The 
sector has decreased in size by about 30 percentage points of GDP since 2008. But it also 
reflects,  on  the  demand  side,  the  weak  economic  environment,  the  need  to  repair  private 
balance sheets and heightened uncertainty. 
The effects of these constraints are not being felt evenly across the euro area.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
First, there is considerable heterogeneity in firms’ access to bank finance, in particular SMEs. 
In the last ECB survey on SMEs access to finance obstacles were reported to be very high in 
Greece,  Ireland  and  Spain  (with  more  than  40%  of  firms  encountering  obstacles),  more 
moderate  in  Belgium,  France  and  Finland  (less  than  20%),  and  lowest  in  Germany  and 
Austria (around 10%). 
Second, as regards non-bank financing, access has largely been limited to larger firms and 
those located in countries with more developed corporate bond markets, such as Germany 
and France. Our data shows that these firms have been able to partly offset reduced access 
to bank finance with bond issuance in the last 12 months. But such substitution has not been 
possible for most SMEs, and for firms located in stressed countries.  
There are more than just stigma effects at play here: SMEs are intrinsically highly-dependent 
on banks for financing. This is because it is often difficult and costly for non-bank financers to 
get enough information to make informed investment decisions. In addition, SMEs, by virtue 
of  their  size  and  activities,  are  often  more  prone  to  fall  into  bankruptcy;  from  a  lender’s 
perspective diversifying this credit risk to an acceptable degree requires issuing many SME 
loans – a role more suited for banks for the time being.  
So all in all, SMEs remain very dependent on bank financing, while access to that financing 
is decreasing. This creates a major barrier to SMEs’ investment and growth opportunities – 
and given their importance to the economy, to euro area growth and job creation. Ensuring 
access  to  finance  for  SMEs  must  therefore  be  a  central  tenet  of  achieving  a  sustainable 
recovery. 
Some  measures  have  already  been  taken  to  support  SME  financing.  In  July  this  year  the 
Eurosystem recognised the lower risks posed by securities backed by SME loans, taking into 
account the introduction of the ECB loan level data transparency initiative. In the context of 
the  regular  review  of  its  collateral  risk  control  framework,  the  Eurosystem  accordingly 
reduced  haircuts  on  SME  ABSs  posted  as  collateral  for  its  regular  monetary  policy 
operations.  Elsewhere, a  number  of  public  initiatives  have  also  been  launched  at  both  the 
national  and  European  levels  to  ease  the  credit  constraints  of  SMEs,  for  instance  through 
use of public guarantees. 
Even  though  at  this  stage  of  the  recovery  the  supply-side  is  not  the  major  cause  of  the 
continued weak lending data but the weak demand, nevertheless, two key priorities ought to 
be addressed on the supply-side.  
The first priority is to support the bank lending channel by strengthening banks – that is, by 
cleaning  up  their  balance  sheets  and  reducing  fragmentation  in  funding  markets.  I  am 
confident  that  banking  union  will  help  achieve  this,  not  least  through  its  comprehensive 
assessment of banks’ balance sheets. 
The second priority is to support the bank lending channel by strengthening capital markets. 
As disintermediation is not an option for most euro area SMEs, a promising middle way is to 
increase possibilities for the securitisation of SME loans. This could build a bridge between 
SMEs and non-bank sources of finance. 
Let me address each in turn. 
Strengthening banks: the role of banking union 
The  euro  area  economy  is  slowly  beginning  to  improve,  indeed  the  latest  Commission 
forecasts  project  1.1%  growth  for  next  year.  In  turn,  the  demand-side  constraints  on  bank 
lending should gradually lessen. But at this point, supply-side obstacles could become more 
of  a  hindrance,  because  the  recovery  will  lose  momentum  if  banks  cannot  fund  it.  A  key 
objective of banking union must therefore be to remove those supply-side obstacles. 
There are currently three main obstacles here.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The first is a rising number of non-performing loans on banks’ balance sheets and their slow 
resolution in several countries. This causes banks to preserve capital  and avoid risky new 
exposures, such as those to SMEs.  
The second obstacle, which is related, is low investor confidence in banks’ asset quality and 
provisioning.  This  lack  of  confidence  raises  funding  costs.  This  then  contributes  to  higher 
lending rates for borrowers.  
The third obstacle is the absence of a unified framework for restructuring banks, leading to 
uncertainty and fears of a feedback loop between bank and sovereign weakness.  
How can banking union help? 
To begin with, the forthcoming ECB assessment of banks’ balance sheets has the potential 
to  be  a  game-changer.  By  shedding  greater  light  into  the  euro  area  banking  sector,  this 
review  will  help  remove  the  uncertainty  about  asset  valuation  and  funding  models.  This  is 
currently distorting the price of funding.  
Moreover, the review will accelerate any necessary loss recognition and corrective actions. 
Improving  the  viability  of  banks  in  this  way  should  help  ensure  there  is  enough  aggregate 
balance sheet capacity in the euro area to extend new loans to SMEs. 
A rigorous and credible exercise is essential to achieve these effects. That is why we have 
designed  it  as  both  a  point-in-time  risk-based  asset  quality  review  and  a  forward-looking 
stress test. And this is also why we are putting in place a strong central governance structure 
that  ensures  the  results  are  fully  comparable.  National  supervisors  and  the  private  firms 
involved in the assessment operate within the terms of a detailed framework defined by the 
ECB. Their final output will be subject to a central review to guarantee consistency across 
banks and countries. 
The  exercise  will  capture  around  85%  of  euro  area  banking  assets  and  hence  most  real 
economy exposures. But I also expect it to have an effect on the smaller banks outside the 
exercise whose major business is lending to SMEs, in particular micro firms.  
The  assessment  will  require  us  to  adopt  more  harmonised  definitions  of  non-performing 
exposures and forbearance, which will later be applied across the SSM. In several countries 
this will lead to stricter loss recognition for smaller banks than at present – and so accelerate 
the process of balance sheet repair even for the banks we do not directly supervise. 
Looking further ahead, a second channel through which banking union should help support 
lending  to  SMEs  is  reducing  financial  fragmentation  in  the  euro  area.  Both  the  Single 
Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) and the Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM) will help here. 
First,  the  SSM  should  help  lessen  fragmentation  caused  by  perceived  differences  in  the 
quality of supervision between euro area countries. We have witnessed the role that this can 
play in a number of stressed economies in the last few years, where differences in definitions 
of items such as non-performing exposures led to uncertainty and heightened risk aversion 
among depositors and investors. The SSM should also lead to less supervisory ring-fencing 
of  liquidity  both  between  banks  and  within  cross-border  banking  groups.  The  fact  that  at 
present liquidity surpluses in some countries cannot be used to fund needs in others creates 
fragmentation. This structural disconnect means there is greater divergence in bank funding 
costs and lending rates than is warranted by the underlying economic fundamentals. 
Second, an effective SRM should help reduce financial fragmentation linked to the differing 
fiscal health of sovereigns. This mechanism will ensure that there is a clear cascade of bail-
in-able liabilities for failing banks and that any discretion in the rules is applied evenly across 
euro  area  countries.  Hence,  the  funding  costs  of  banks  should  better  reflect  their 
idiosyncratic risk, not the credit risk attached to their sovereigns.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Strengthening capital markets: the role of securitisation 
However,  it  will  clearly  take  some  time  for  these  measures  to  repair  the  bank  lending 
channel. At the same time, it is unrealistic to expect that SMEs can widely borrow from non-
bank  investors,  at  least  in  the  short-term.  This  is  why  I  see  strengthening  capital  markets 
through securitisation as an important complement to bank lending. It bridges the financing 
needs of SMEs with the funds of non-bank investors. It also gives those investors access to 
relatively  inaccessible  sectors  of  the  economy  with  the  risk  and  maturity  profile  that  suits 
them.  Indeed,  the  rich  potential  of  ABSs  for  customisation  allows  a  precise  matching  of 
liabilities – an increasingly important issue in particular for life insurers and pension funds. 
The  sums  involved  are  not  trivial:  at  the  end  of  June  2013  insurers,  occupational  pension 
funds, money market funds and investment funds together had assets worth almost 16 trillion 
euros – that is only a trillion euros less than the sum of euro bank deposits. Of course, only a 
small fraction of these funds could be expected to be allocated towards securitisation. Yet, if 
more were tapped successfully they could provide an important boost to SME financing.1  
The problem at present is that the ABS market in Europe is weak: investor-placed issuance 
remains  far  below  the  pre-crisis  levels  and  secondary  market  activity  is  thin  in  many 
segments. If we are to reap the potential gains of securitisation for SMEs, we need to revive 
this market. This implies removing some key impediments to its functioning. 
A  first  impediment  is  misperceptions  about  ABSs  in  general.  Certainly,  ABSs  are  complex 
products, involving many entities, legal frameworks and information asymmetries, which can 
make it difficult for investors to accurately assess the risks involved. We have also seen that 
they  can  create  moral  hazard  in  lending  activity,  for  example  the  “originate  to  distribute” 
model  in  the  US.  And  of  course,  the  asset  class  was  one  of  the  triggers  of  the  financial 
turmoil that began in the US in 2007–08. There, as summarised by Brunnermeier (2009) and 
others2, the rise in poorly-understood and improperly-structured securitised products led to a 
sharp inflow of funding, fuelling a credit bubble amid a reduction in lending standards, and in 
turn further poor-quality securitisation. 
However, we should not over-react: misuse of mortgage-based ABSs in the US for example 
does not mean that all such products are inherently dangerous. Indeed, in the EU securitised 
products by and large far outperformed their US counterparts: by one  estimate the default 
rate of ABSs in the EU was just 1.4% from mid-2007 to the first quarter of 2013, compared 
17.4% in the US.3 For senior tranches of European SME ABS, there have been no defaults.  
Moreover,  the  US  experience  has  provided  us  with  important  lessons  about  how  to  make 
ABS safer also on this side of the pond. Regulations have been put in place in the EU to 
ensure that originators retain an economic interest in the performance of the underlying loans 
and that investors carry out proper due diligence. Significant improvements in transparency 
have also been achieved thanks to the ECB’s loan-level transparency requirements, which 
cover nearly all euro area cash ABSs.  
                                                
1  See for example S&P “Underwriting The Recovery: European Securitization Could Fund More Lending, If The 
Regulatory Stance Softens”, 22 October 2013. 
2  Brunnermeier,  M.  (2009),  “Deciphering  the  Liquidity  and  Credit  Crunch  2007–2008”,  Journal  of  Economic 
Perspectives,  Vol.  23  No.  1,  pp.  77–100.  See  also  Bassett,  W.F.,  Chosak,  M.B.,  Driscoll,  J.C.,  and 
E. Zakrajsek,  (2013),  “Changes  in  Bank  Lending  Standards  and  the  Macroeconomy”,  Journal  of  Monetary 
Economics  (forthcoming);  Gorton,  G.  (2008),  “The  Panic  of  2007”,  in  Maintaining  Stability  in  a  Changing 
Financial System, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, and Hall, R.E. (2011), “The Long Slump”, American 
Economic Review 101 (2), 431–469. 
3  Source:  S&P  “Transition  Study:  Less  Than  1.5%  Of  European  Structured  Finance  Has  Defaulted  Since 
Mid-2007”, 11 June 2013. Similar evidence can be found in, Moody’s Investors Service “Structured Finance 
Rating  Transitions:  1983–2013”,  7  June  2013,  as  well  as  Fitch  Ratings  “The  Credit  Crisis  Four  Years 
On…Structured  Finance  Research  Compendium”,  June  2012,  and  “EMEA  Structured  Finance  Losses”, 
August 2011. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
These changes could go a long way towards reviving investor trust in ABSs. Unfortunately, 
there is also a second impediment: the potentially uneven and disproportionate treatment of 
ABS in forthcoming regulations.  
Let me specifically point to two measures which arguably may have the most influence on 
the future of the ABS market: the revisions to the Basel securitisation capital framework for 
banks and the Solvency II regime for insurers. The Basel III proposals announced at the end 
of  last  year  would  lead  to  sharp  increases  in  capital  requirements  for  securitisation 
exposures,  particularly  for  senior  high-quality  tranches,  despite  the  lack  of  EU  default 
evidence to support such large changes. All ABS were perceived as too risky due to the US 
experience in the subprime mortgage markets. But this regulation is like calibrating the price 
of flood insurance on the experience of New Orleans for a city like Madrid. 
Similarly, if adopted the Solvency II framework would prescribe capital charges for insurers of 
80%  for  ABSs  with  a  AA-rating  and  42%  with  a  AAA-rating.  By  contrast,  the  charges  for 
corporate  bonds  would  be  6%  and  5%,  respectively.  There  is  little  doubt  that  these 
regulations  would  strongly  impact  the  future  decisions  of  banks  and  insurers  to  invest  in 
securitised products. 
In my view, greater coordination on the political and technical level is necessary to ensure 
that  these  regulations  treat  ABSs  in  a  fair  manner  and  do  not  lead  to  overshooting. 
Regulators  need  to  base  their  calibrations  on  data.  But  unfortunately,  there  is  no  single 
database  with  high  quality  and  comprehensive  data  on  the  global  ABS  market’s  historical 
performance.  
Obtaining  information  on  ABS  market  prices  is  also  challenging.  Regulators  often  have  to 
make  do  with  partial  and  incomplete  data,  leading  to  many  conservative  assumptions. 
Therefore, a key “quick-win” here would be to build a common evidence base to ensure that 
the various initiatives are based on a consistent set of price, performance and liquidity data. 
Such a database could help ensure that regulations reflect the real risks of ABSs, taking into 
account the full set of information available on ABS performance across jurisdictions.  
A  second  European  “quick-win”  could  be  reaching  a  regulatory  agreement  to  define 
principles  for  high  quality  ABSs.  As  I  mentioned  above,  ABSs  are  relatively  complex 
instruments,  and  regulators  must  currently  handle  a  very  heterogeneous  ABS  market, 
containing – on the one hand – highly granular asset classes such as credit cards, residential 
mortgages and – on the other hand – large and highly concentrated corporate exposures.  
There are also a number of structures out there, with different ways of transferring credit risk, 
and  heterogeneous  priorities  for  payments  for  investors.  A  one-size  fits  all  regulatory 
approach therefore does not work for the ABS market at the moment. That is why I believe 
the  job  of  regulators  could  be  made  easier  if  a  certain  degree  of  standardisation  was 
explored,  identifying  high  quality  ABS  from  other  types  of  ABS.  This  would  also  provide 
greater confidence for market participants. The ECB through its collateral eligibility criteria for 
monetary  policy  operations  has  been  defining  standards  for  adequate  ABS.  These 
requirements could serve as a starting point for such discussion.  
Both these measures would help ensure that regulation that is designed to protect the real 
economy does not end up suffocating it.  
The impact of regulations is further aggravated by their reference to external credit ratings. 
Structured  finance  ratings  in  Europe  have  been  very  much  negatively  affected  by  the 
application  of  “sovereign  ceilings”.  This  practice  leads  to  a  situation  where  any  sovereign 
rating  downgrade  often  leads  to  at  least  a  one-for-one  reduction  in  the  ratings  of  ABS  in 
those  markets,  which  in  turn  increases  capital  charges  for  investors  and  reduces  the 
information content of ratings.  
I  find  it  questionable  that,  the  state  of  a  sovereign,  with  its  own  idiosyncratic  machinery, 
continues  to  dictate  conditions  for  highly-rated  ABSs  tranches  although  their  structure, 
composition,  and  enhancements  have  carried  extremely  low  default  risk.  Thus  it  appears 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
that,  in  many  cases,  the  “low”  ratings  of  the  ABS  cannot  be  based  on  an  empirical 
justification, but reflect an arbitrary view.  
On a separate note, let me finally add that I fully support the initiatives being undertaken by 
the  European  Commission  and  European  Investment  Bank  to  stimulate  both  further 
securitisation activity and SME lending. These measures should provide a boost to both ABS 
markets and stressed economies. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
We see that the bank lending channel for many small businesses continues to be impaired. 
Yet,  the  euro  area  recovery  cannot  be  sustained  without  well-financed  SMEs.  In  my  view 
therefore, there are few greater priorities than implementing the measures I have discussed 
above. 
First, deepening our capital markets and, second, building a genuine banking union would 
not only serve SMEs today, but also make our economy more resilient to “the next crisis”. Of 
course, both goals will take time to achieve, but it is imperative that we strive towards them 
as soon as possible.  
My vision for the euro area is that a healthy firm that cannot borrow from a bank in its own 
country should be able to borrow from one elsewhere – and on similar terms to firms from 
that  country,  but  therefore  also  banks  need  to  have  access  to  the  necessary  information. 
This is what it means to share a single currency within a single financial market. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
