G Padmanabhan: Retail payments at crossroads – economics, strategies 
and future policies 
A summary of remarks by Mr G Padmanabhan, Executive Director of the Reserve Bank of 
India,  during  the  Panel  discussion  at  the  Joint  European  Central  Bank  /  Bank  of  France 
Conference, Paris, 21 October 2013. 
 I  am  deeply  honored  to  be  here  and  thank  the  European  Central  Bank  and  Banque  de 
France for inviting me as a member of this important panel. I have been asked to specifically 
comment on three aspects of the topic we are discussing and let me attempt that in seriatim. 
I.  
How can financial intermediaries and financial inclusion contribute to the 
economic growth of the country? 
As Global Payments 20131 report points out we are facing a “two speed world” as 
1.  
far  as  payments  activities  are  concerned  –  one  in  mature  economies  and  the  other  in 
emerging or rapidly developing economies. This calls for two different approaches for the two 
types of economies. 
2.  
Developed economies have already reached a level of market maturity in terms of 
retail payments and are looking for the next generation of efficiencies in these systems by re-
discovering their relevance in the society. However, in the case of emerging markets, retail 
payments have been on the policy radar as we try and get away from cash based and paper 
based  payments.  Hence  we  continue  to  “re-dedicate”  on  its  development  rather  than  “re-
discover”  its  importance.  Our  challenge  has  been  to  enable  such  systems  to  “develop”, 
“consolidate” and “converge” with innovation at each stage. 
3.  
So in India we have continued to focus on both paper based and electronic payment 
systems. But realizing the rapid scale of innovations and for focus we decided to encourage 
the formation of a separate organization – a non-profit organization called the NPCI (National 
Payments Corporation of India) as the umbrella organization for retail payment systems in 
India. This entity is now spear-heading the innovations in retail payments in India and has 
introduced  several  products  and  payment  services  such  as  the  inter-operable  inter-bank 
mobile  payments  with  24  x  7  real-time  transfer  of  funds  (IMPS  –  Immediate  Payment 
Systems), payments based on Aadhaar (Unique national id based on biometrics), a domestic 
card  network  –  RuPay  which  is  being  used  for  various  purposes  viz.  enhancing  financial 
inclusion,  food  procurement,  farmer  credit,  etc.  Besides,  NPCI  has  also  enabled  ISO 
compatible National Automated Clearing House (NACH) systems. 
4.  
It  is  a  well-accepted  fact  that  a  well-functioning  payment  system  contributes  to 
monetary  and  financial  stability  and  ensures  economic  efficiency.  How  do  you  define  the 
term “well-functioning”? In the emerging market context, such a system must ensure users’ 
trust in these payment methods similar to the trust they have in cash transactions. There is 
always  the  “fear  of  unknown”.  One  bad  experience  in  the  beginning  can  make  them  rush 
back to cash usage. This is even a bigger challenge particularly when we are reaching out to 
the financially excluded to adopt electronic payments. 
5.  
It  must  be  appreciated  that  financial  inclusion  has  been  accorded  high  priority  in 
policy  hierarchy  in  recent  times  as  the  advent  of  technology  has  enabled  increased  reach 
and  delivery  of  financial  products  in  a  cost  effective  and  viable  manner.  So  more 
appropriately  what 
inclusion.  Business 
is  being  aimed 
technology 
financial 
led 
is 
                                                
1   BCG-SWIFT “Global Payments 2013- Getting Business Models Execution Right”, September 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
correspondents play an important role in this effort since the lack of penetration of brick and 
mortar  bank  branches  could  be  attributed  to  financial  exclusion.  Different  countries  have 
adopted different models but in any model business correspondents are important entities in 
the  chain.  Further,  alternate  payment  models  are  the  hallmark  of  the  FI  efforts  across  the 
countries. 
In  this  regard,  various  studies2  have  shown  that  customers  who  have  quick  and 
6.  
reliable  access  to  payment  points  and  customers  who  use  alternate  non-cash  payment 
methods  tend  to  keep  more  funds  in  their  accounts  for  larger  periods  of  time.  Therefore, 
provision  of  safe,  accessible  and  efficient  alternate  payment  channels  assumes  critical 
importance.  This  is  crucial  for  the  banking  systems  in  India  when  the  savings  and  loan 
spreads are high. So financial inclusion makes huge commercial sense. In fact, the CGAP 
report3   also highlights the beneficial impact of financial inclusion through increased deposit 
and lending to GDP ratios on national income. 
7.  
As I have said earlier, different countries have adopted different models to achieve 
financial inclusion. For example, Pakistan has put in place a mechanism of person-to-person 
funds transfer through the banking system using BCs without the need for opening accounts; 
customer identification being based on national identity as  well as mobile number. In India 
while BCs play an important role, financial inclusion aims not merely at remittances but also 
aims at savings product, a loan/credit product, remittance product as also insurance product. 
Further  the  basis  for  a  remittance  product  outside  banking  systems  pre-supposes  the 
existence of a national identity system in the country. 
8.  
A few words about Indian approach to FI. We have always been alive to the need for 
extending  the  reach  of  the  financial  sector  to  the  under-privileged  sections  of  the  society. 
Financial inclusion for us aims not merely at remittances but also aims at savings product, a 
loan/credit product, remittance product as also insurance product. Thus, in India we believe 
that,  financial  inclusion  has  the  potential  to  bring  in  the  unbanked  masses  into  the  formal 
banking  system,  could  lead  to  increased  savings,  provide  timely  credit  to  the  unbanked 
masses  and  all  these  positive  externalities  would  lead  to  economic  growth.  The  efforts  to 
channelize the government benefits and subsidies through direct benefit transfers programs 
to  beneficiaries’  bank  accounts  directly  would  not  only  be  helpful  in  plugging  the  leaks  in 
distribution but also help in inculcating banking habits. 
9.  
How  has  India  approached  FI?  We  have  adopted  a  structured,  planned  and  an 
integrated approach towards FI by focusing on both the demand and supply side constraints. 
We  have  permitted  non-bank  entities  to  partner  with  banks  for  their  FI  initiatives.  The 
technological advancement has made it possible for us to think of novel and innovative ways 
to  approach  the  objective  of  financial  inclusion.  For  example,  handheld  devices,  used  by 
bank agents to draw people living in remote areas into the banking fold. Mobile technologies 
are  trying  to  reach  out  to  the  populace  starved  of  banking  services  as  well.  Financial 
institutions are also joining forces with network operators in providing access to mobile based 
payment services even to those who do not have bank accounts. 
10.  
Let me give you some statistics on our financial inclusion initiatives:4 
                                                
2   BCG-SWIFT “Global Payments 2013 – Getting Business Models Execution Right”, September 2013; and Bill 
& Milinda Gates Foundation “Fighting poverty profitably – Transforming the economics of payments to build 
sustainable, inclusive financial systems”, September 2013. 
3   CGAP “Financial Access 2012”, July 2013. 
4   Financial  inclusion  in  India  –  journey  so  far  and  way  forward”  –  Speech  by  Dr.  K.  C.  Chakrabarty,  Deputy 
Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Finance Inclusion Conclave, organised by CNBC TV 18, New 
Delhi, 6 September 2013. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     Nearly  268,  000  banking  outlets  have  been  set  up  in  villages  as  on  March  13  as 
against 67,694 banking outlets in villages in March 2010 
About 7400 rural branches opened during this period 
Nearly  109  million  Basic  Savings  Bank  Deposit  Accounts  (BSBDAs)  have  been 
added, taking the total no. of BSBDAs to 182 million. Share of ICT based accounts 
have  increased  substantially  –  Percentage  of  ICT  accounts  to  total  BSBDAs  has 
increased from 25% in March 10 to 45% in March 13 
With the addition of nearly 9.48 million farm sector households during this period, 
33.8 million households have been provided with small entrepreneurial credit as at 
the end of March 2013 
With  the  addition  of  nearly  2.25  million  non-farm  sector  households  during  this 
period, 3.6 million households have been provided with small entrepreneurial credit 
as at the end of March 2013. 
About 490 million transactions have been carried out in ICT based accounts through 
BCs during the three year period. 
II.  
The relevance of international standards and principles for stretching a retail 
payment services beyond domestic boundaries 
11.  
It  is  my  considered  opinion  that  the  international  community  for  too  long  has  not 
accorded adequate importance to the retail payment system. I agree that reasons could be 
many  and  relevant.  For  instance,  retail  payment  systems  are  far  too  heterogeneous. 
However,  the  growing  importance  of  retail  payments,  the  increased  complexities  and 
technology driven payment systems call for a revisit. Further, there are some retail payment 
systems in most countries which are ubiquitous in nature and have system-wide importance. 
At least in a large country like India we are talking about retail payment systems which are 
quite  significant.  Let  me  state  a  few  numbers.  We  clear  on  a  daily  basis  approximately 
4.5 million  cheques,  operate  nearly  2  million  person  to  person  electronic  fund  transfers, 
handle around 1.5 million bulk payments i.e. one-to-many and many-to-one payments. These 
are in addition to the large volume of card payments, internet and mobile transactions. We 
will  be  certainly  better  off  having  some  principles  and  standards  developed  for  the  retail 
payment  systems.  Let me  bring  out  a few  issues  to  support  my  argument for  international 
standards for retail payment systems. 
12.  
payments, international remittances, PayPal etc. 
13.  
In the case of card payments, it is generally the leading global card networks which 
are taking the lead in determining the industry standards for form factor as well as security 
standards (EMV Chip; 2FA), without active regulatory intervention. However, such standards 
have implications for countries – in terms of cost of migration to newer standards, impact on 
domestic  card  networks  (cost  of  certification,  access  to  new  standards  /  technology  etc.). 
Should the regulators be involved in standard setting so that there is a level playing field for 
both international and domestic entities? 
14. 
For  large  value  payment  systems,  regulatory  arbitrage  is  sought  to  be  addressed 
through  international  common  standards  and  principles.  How  can  similar  concerns  be 
addressed for retail systems with system-wide importance as the extant standards are either 
region-specific  or  country-specific?  One  area  where  there  is  ample  scope  for  common 
standards is the areas of security in electronic payments. For instance, taking card payments 
once again, while on the one hand Europe has the EMV standard already implemented, USA 
is still continuing with Magstripe. So where does this leave other emerging countries such as 
India?  We  are  striving  to  move  towards  EMV  but  are  aware  that  Magstripe  cards  will  be 
around  for  some  time.  Though  we  have  strengthened  our  card  transactions  domestically 
There are retail systems that have cross-jurisdictional presence. For instance, card 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
using 2FA with Magstripe cards, there are still jurisdictions where magstripe is still in vogue 
but without 2FA requirements. Hence, such arbitrage opportunities need to be addressed by 
adopting minimum common security standards. 
15.  
Despite several efforts at addressing the issues relating to international remittances 
(for  instance,  the  World  Bank  has  prescribed  certain  guidelines),  challenges  pertaining  to 
reducing the cost of remittance and addressing the AML / FATF issues (lack of standards, 
legal  and  regulatory  requirements  between  remitting  and  receiving  countries  is  being 
exploited) continue to persist. Since it is a recognised fact that international remittances form 
a  significant  channel  for  cross-border  payments,  and  form  major  part  of  GDP  of  few 
countries,  the  need  for  common  standards  and  principles  in  this  area  would  also  be 
welcome. 
16.  
The  lack  of  international  standards  in  retail  payments  could  also  affect  the  inter-
operability between these systems – both at a domestic level as well as at international level. 
At a domestic level, currently in India, we are facing a challenge in promoting interoperability 
amongst the non-bank and bank operated payment systems. While considering the access 
of non-banks to inter-bank payment network, the challenges that need to be addressed are in 
terms  of  lack  of  standardisation  of  form  factors,  message  formats,  non-  adoption  of 
international standards for card security such as PCI-DSS etc. 
At the same time, in India, we have also seen the advantages that standardisation 
17.  
can bring in, for facilitating inter-operability and contributing to the growth of certain payment 
systems. Right at the outset, the mobile banking guidelines issued in India prescribed certain 
standards  for  mobile  banking  message  formats  to  ensure  interoperability  in  transactions. 
Going forward, the NPCI implemented the IMPS for mobile banking facilitating inter-operable 
mobile  banking  transactions  in  the  country. This  has  given  a  very  good  impetus  to  instant 
funds transfer on 24x7 basis using mobile banking. 
18.  
So clearly there is a case for developing international standards and principles for 
cross border payment systems at the minimum. But the issue would be how to enforce such 
standards. 
19.  
Then the issues related to home country and host country regulatory prescriptions 
also need to be addressed, with minimal scope for regulatory arbitrage. The final thought I 
have on this issue is besides international standards and principles, has the time come for 
“co-operative oversight" for internationally pervasive retail payment infrastructures? 
III.  
What are the key considerations to be followed while innovating retail 
payment systems? 
20.  
The  first  thought  that  comes  to  my  mind  when  I  consider  this  question,  the 
remarkable  foresight  of  the  ECB  in  coming  out  with  the  document  on  minimum  safety 
recommendations  to  improve  online  payment  security  to  be  implemented  by  2015.  I  also 
want  to  acknowledge  the  seminal  guidelines  issued  by  the  ECB  on  data  quality.  Both  are 
outstanding documents. 
21.  
To me, the thumb rule for any central bank has to be encouragement of innovations. 
But before innovations become a "product" of system wide importance, standards need to be 
put in place. Otherwise, there would be bigger issues to reckon with. (eg: cloud computing in 
the  financial  sector,  rules  for  payment  gateways,  security  standards  for  mobile  banking  or 
enabling NFC based payment instruments are some of the examples that come to my mind.) 
But  be  conscious  that  what  is  good  for  goose  may  not  be  good  for  the  gander  (mature 
systems vs. emerging systems). 
The  need  and  focus  of  innovations  may  vary  significantly  among  countries  – 
22.  
between  countries  with  developed  /  mature  payment  systems  and  those  where  payment 
systems are evolving. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
23.  
While safety and security are underpinnings of any innovation, in emerging payment 
system jurisdictions, the key consideration for innovations may revolve around accessibility, 
availability, affordability etc. whereas in mature / developed payments market, the focus may 
have shifted towards convergence of payment channels and real-time payments. 
24.  
Another important issue that is emerging in the innovations context, relates to legal 
and  oversight  issues  of  the  innovative  payment  services.  Two  examples  come  to  mind: 
(a) virtual currencies and (b) access to customer accounts by third party service providers. 
25.  
When innovations take place outside the banking domain, i.e., entry of non-banks in 
offering these services – raises certain issues: access to National Payment Systems by non-
banks,  extent  of  regulation,  customer  ownership  and  protection  issues,  data  privacy  and 
security. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
