Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Migration to electronic payments 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Muhammad  bin  Ibrahim,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Malaysia,  at  the  Payment  System  Forum  2013  “Migration  to  electronic  payments”,  Kuala 
Lumpur, 9 December 2013. 
 It is my pleasure to welcome all of you to the Payment System Forum 2013 organized by 
Bank Negara Malaysia in collaboration with the Association of Banks in Malaysia (ABM) and 
the Association of Islamic Banking Institutions Malaysia (AIBIM). 
Overview of the payment system forum 
The objectives of the Payment System Forum are: 
• 
Firstly,  to  build  greater  awareness  amongst  the  business  community  on  the  wide 
range of electronic payment solutions available in the market; and 
Secondly, to showcase experiences by businesses who have successfully migrated 
to, and are reaping the benefits of, electronic payments. 
 Besides  featuring  presentations  by  banks  and  payment  system  professionals,  and  the 
sharing of experiences by businesses, I am pleased to announce that the Payment System 
Forum has also brought together 27 exhibitors. 
The  exhibitors  comprise  representatives  of  banks,  payment  service  providers  and 
government agencies who will showcase their electronic payment solutions. Members of the 
business  community  are  encouraged  to  visit  the  exhibition  booths  located  outside  of  this 
Auditorium and sign-up to the latest offers. 
Enhancing Malaysia’s payment system infrastructure 
An  efficient,  reliable  and  secure  payment  system  is  critical  to  the  stability  of  a  country’s 
financial  system,  besides  contributing  to  a  country’s  economic  growth  and  competitive 
position. In this regard, Bank Negara Malaysia has constantly strived to improve the payment 
system  infrastructure  in  this  country.  Payment  system  efficiency  has  contributed  towards 
making Malaysia a competitive and efficient economy. 
Cheque truncation 
Bank  Negara’s  effort  in  improving  the  payment  infrastructure  has  been  continuous.  A 
significant  milestone  was  achieved  in  2009  when  the  e-SPICK  system,  an  image-based 
cheque-clearing system was introduced. This modernized cheque processing in Malaysia. In 
essence, e-SPICK is a cheque truncation system which converted paper-based processing 
to electronic processing of cheques. Physical cheques are no longer sent to the issuing bank 
and  the  cheque  clearing  center  for  processing.  Instead,  images  of  cheques  are  sent 
electronically. 
Cheques which previously took up to 8 business days to clear (or T+8) can now be cleared 
within  2  business  days  (or  T+2).  This  was  done  at  a  time  when  the  country’s  broadband 
penetration  rate  was  low  at  32%  compared  to  67%  today.  The  move  to  transmit  cheques 
electronically  not  only  shortened  the  clearing  times  for  cheques,  but  also  contributed  to  a 
significant  reduction  in  the  banks’  cheque  processing  cost  from  RM6  to  about  RM3  per 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
cheque1  today.  With  the  lower  cheque  processing  cost,  the  cost  savings  for  the  banking 
industry is estimated at about RM600 million2 per year. 
Migration to chip payment cards 
Another  notable  achievement  in  the  country’s  payment  system  infrastructure  is  in  the 
migration from magnetic stripe payment cards to chip payment cards, where Malaysia was 
the first country in the Asia Pacific region to do so. 
With  the  completion  of  the  industry-wide  migration  to  secure  chip-based  payment  cards  in 
2005, the fraudulent skimming or counterfeiting of payment cards was eradicated. Whilst the 
migration costs the banks about RM200 million, this industry move proved to be a beneficial 
one as the pay-back to the banks in terms of potential fraud avoidance was in 2 and a half 
years.  The  efficiency  and  business  opportunities  to  build  applications  on  the  chips  are 
enormous. 
With  a  safer  payment  card  infrastructure,  tourists  have  increased  their  spending  via  credit 
cards in Malaysia, from RM4.7 billion in 2006 to RM7.7 billion in 2012, recording an average 
annual  growth  of  9%  per  annum.  Malaysia  as  a  tourist  destination  has  benefited  from  the 
greater trust placed in its payment card platform, which allows Malaysian businesses here to 
earn more from  tourists through  their  use  of  payment  cards.  For the tourists,  it  is  not  only 
efficient but safe, without the need to carry large amount of cash. 
Apart from these two (2) key achievements, Bank Negara Malaysia has been planning ahead 
to continuously improve the country’s payment infrastructure in search for greater efficiency 
gains and cost savings for the country to remain competitive. 
Migration to electronic payments and its benefits 
With  the  rapid  technological  advancements  and  increasing  demands  for  more  efficient 
payment  services,  migration  to  electronic  payment  systems  and  channels  has  become 
imperative. Research has suggested that a successful migration to electronic payments has 
the potential to drive further efficiency gains and cost savings of about 1% of GDP annually. 
But to realize these benefits, we require more enhancements in payment infrastructure and a 
change of behaviour from users of payment systems. 
Global trend 
Globally, cheque numbers are falling. Based on the World Payments Report 2013, cheque 
usage  in  the  mature  Asia  Pacific  countries3  has  registered  the  biggest  decline.  Over  the 
period from 2010 to 2012, the average annual rate of decline was 10%. In Australia, cheque 
usage  had  declined  by  60%  in  the  past  decade  and  at  the  current  rate  of  decline,  it  is 
expected to reach near zero by 2018. In some European countries, like Norway and Sweden, 
cheques barely exist. Even in the US, which is sometimes referred to as the “Promised Land 
of  the  Cheque,”  cheque  usage  has  been  declining  at  an  average  annual  rate  of  7%  since 
2003. 
                                                
1   The cost saving is achieved mainly in the transportation cost to send the physical cheques to and from the 
clearing centres. 
2   Refers to the average cost savings per year from 2010 to 2012, calculated based on the difference between 
the total cheque processing costs before and after the introduction of eSPICK. 
3   Japan, Singapore, Australia and South Korea. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Malaysia 
Malaysia however, remains a high user of cheques and cash despite the progress that has 
been achieved in the electronic payment infrastructure and the increasing sophistication of 
the Malaysian economy. Malaysia’s usage of cheques per capita is 6.9 compared to 0.2 in 
advanced countries4. Likewise, Malaysia’s currency in circulation (CIC) over GDP of 6.1% is 
much  higher than  3.8% on  average  in  these  countries. Over  the  past three  years  (2010  – 
2012), cheque volume has declined only marginally at an average rate of 0.2% annually and 
the CIC over GDP remained at 6%. 
Malaysia  has  a  banking  population  of  92%  of  which  about  70%  are  internet  banking 
subscribers. Moreover, the household broadband penetration rate in Malaysia has increased 
significantly from 32% in 2009 when we introduced the electronic processing of cheques, to 
67%  as  at  end-Sept  2013.  With  the  necessary  infrastructure  in  place,  it  is  timely  that  all 
Malaysians  migrate  to  electronic  payments  in  our  quest  to  become  a  high  income,  high 
value-added economy by 2020. 
To nudge the systematic migration to electronic payments, Bank Negara  Malaysia has set 
targets  in  its  Financial  Sector  Blueprint  to  reduce  the  number  of  cheques  processed  per 
annum by half from 204 million in 2012 to 100 million by 2020. At the same time, there are 
also targets to increase the number of Point-of-Sale terminals from 9 in 2012 to 25 unit per 
1,000 inhabitants and to increase electronic payment transactions per capita from 56 in 2012 
to 200 by 2020. Only by migrating from cheques and cash to electronic payments, can the 
country anticipate to achieve further cost savings and efficiency gains. 
Cost of cheques 
Although  significant  improvement  has  been  made  in  the  cheque  processing  infrastructure, 
cheque remains an expensive payment instrument to process at about RM3 per cheque. The 
total cost is even higher when we take into account the cost incurred by the payer and payee 
in delivering and depositing cheques. It is estimated that cheque processing cost Malaysia 
about RM768 million5 per year. This amount is huge and a sheer wastage. 
Correcting distortion between paper-based and electronic payments 
Despite the cost incurred in processing cheques, cheques have not been priced directly to 
reflect its costs except for the stamp duty of 15 sen per cheque. On the contrary, electronic 
payment services such as the Interbank GIRO (IBG) are priced above cost at about RM2 per 
transaction.  Such  price  distortion  does  not  incentivize  the  adoption  of  the  more  efficient 
electronic payments on a mass scale. In advanced countries such as Australia, Norway and 
Sweden,  electronic  payment  services  are  priced  lower  than  cheques  consistent  with  their 
respective cost of production. The correct price signals that reflect the real cost of cheques 
and electronic payments had facilitated a broad shift from the use of cheques to the use of 
electronic payments. 
We need to correct this price distortion between cheques and electronic payment services, 
Bank Negara Malaysia has announced a new pricing strategy for payment services in March 
this year where the price of IBG and cheques are aligned closer to their cost of production. 
With effect from 2 May 2013, the transaction fee for IBG conducted via internet and mobile 
banking was reduced to 10 sen from RM2 previously. In addition, a cheque processing fee of 
50 sen per cheque leaf will be imposed 11 months later on 1 April 2014. 
                                                
4   Norway, Sweden, Denmark, Finland. 
5   RM636 million (banks) + RM19 million (MyClear) + RM113 million (businesses). RM113 million for businesses 
was computed based on the ECB study that businesses incur a cost amounting to 0.012% of GDP. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
The  11-month  grace  period  before  the  implementation  of  the  cheque  processing  fee  is 
intended to afford both the public and the businesses ample time to familiarize with, adjust 
and migrate to using electronic payments such as the IBG for their payment transactions. 
Concern of the security of electronic payments 
Difficulty to perform payment reconciliation 
Low limit of electronic payment transaction 
Lack of familiarity with electronic payments 
Improving accessibility, security and convenience of electronic payments 
Based on a recent survey conducted on businesses, we have identified 4 key hindrances to 
the adoption of electronic payments, namely: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
In  terms  of  security  measures,  banks  have  continued  to  invest  significantly  to  ensure  the 
safety  of  electronic  payment  transactions.  Examples  of  security  enhancements  that  have 
been undertaken include the migration to secure chip-based payment cards to address card 
counterfeiting  fraud,  the  introduction  of  a  second  factor  authentication  to  strengthen 
authorization of online banking transactions and the implementation of SMS alert to mitigate 
credit card fraud. 
To provide ease of reconciliation, banks will facilitate payment references to be keyed in by 
the  sender  for  IBG  payments  by  April  2014  to  enable  reconciliation  of  payments  by  the 
beneficiary.  In  addition, banks  have  also  committed  to  increase the  daily  limit  for  IBG  and 
Instant Bank Fund Transfer (IBFT) transactions to RM10,000 with the necessary security and 
safety features. 
In addition, ongoing initiatives to build awareness, educate and instill confidence in electronic 
payments  are  also  carried  out  nationwide  through  a  series  of  roadshows  and  media 
appearances. 
Timely for businesses to migrate to electronic payments 
Our  country  is  at  a  turning  point  in  the  migration  to  electronic  payments.  Under  the  2014 
budget, RM1.8 billion has been allocated for the implementation of the second phase High-
Speed  Broadband  (HSBB)  project.  This  initiative  will  provide  additional  internet  coverage 
which  will  benefit  2.8  million  households  nationwide.  With  this  initiative,  the  household 
broadband penetration rate is expected to increase to its optimum level6. In addition, Bank 
Negara Malaysia has also called on the banks to widen the access points for the public to 
conduct electronic payments, including via the ATM network. 
While  Malaysia’s  population  stands  at  29.7  million,  there  are  41  million  ATM  cards  which 
have  a  debit  application  that  can  be  used  to  make  purchases  at  merchant  outlets.  This 
provides an opportunity for banks and businesses to leverage on, to improve the coverage of 
Point-of-Sale Terminals to facilitate the use of the debit card as means to reduce the need for 
cash, as well as, to increase tourist spending at more merchant outlets. 
With  higher  broadband  and  debit  card  penetration  rate,  coupled  with  increased  payment 
innovation and strengthened security measures, businesses should consult their banks and 
take  advantage  of  the  various  electronic  payment  solutions  to  reap  the  benefits  of  cost 
savings and productivity gains. 
                                                
6   As at end-Sept 2013 – Total broadband subscriptions = 4.5 mil. With the additional 2.8 million household, total 
broadband subscriptions will increase to 7.3 million. Penetration rate = 7.3/6.7 mil household = 108%. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
I hope you will continue to provide your support in making this national electronic payments 
campaign a success for the benefit of the country. 
Conclusion 
I  hope  that  all  of  you  will  benefit  from  today’s  program.  Please  do  take  time  to  visit  the 
exhibition  booths  to  inquire  about  the  latest  promotional  offers  on  electronic  payment 
services and sign up to experience electronic payments at an affordable cost. 
On this note, it gives me great pleasure to open the Payment System Forum 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
