Klaas Knot: Simplicity in the financial sector 
Speech by Mr Klaas Knot, President of the Netherlands Bank, at the 20th RiskMinds Global 
Risk Regulation Summit, Amsterdam, 2 December 2013. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Thank you for inviting me to speak at the Risk Minds conference today, also as this enables 
me to congratulate you on its 20th edition. 
Twenty years have passed since the first Risk Minds conference, and I’m glad to say that risk 
management  has  made  substantial  progress  during  this  period.  The  past  few  years  have 
certainly underlined the importance of proper risk management. 
As I see it, risk management is a key building block for ensuring sufficient capital and liquidity 
buffers in the financial system. Strong and reliable financial institutions are one of the vital 
elements of financial stability. 
And financial stability in turn is of prime importance to De Nederlandsche Bank as a central 
bank  and  prudential  supervisor.  And  that  is  because  central  banks  have  a  mandate  to 
promote financial stability. And we’ve seen in recent years, that this is not an easy task. In 
hindsight, we can say that the financial sector had become too complex and non-transparent. 
Technological advances had created various new financial products and instruments whose 
risks were often unclear. 
This particularly held for products and instruments involving the packaging and repackaging 
of exposures, the sale of CDOs (Collateralized Debt Obligations) and CDO2s, and the use of 
SIVs (Structured Investment Vehicles). 
The financial sector’s increasing globalization has also made it more difficult to assess risks 
properly. It was because of Lehman Brothers’ global presence that its failure had such an 
impact on the world. In every country where Lehman Brothers had a branch, its bankruptcy 
had to be filed for and resolved. 
The financial environment that we faced in the run-up to the crisis – and, by “we”, I mean the 
public, investors, counterparties, supervisors and regulators – was non-transparent, and the 
risks were getting more and more complex. And then it all went wrong, and many financial 
institutions  had  to  be  bailed  out  by  governments.  It  was  no  wonder  that  the  public’s 
confidence in the financial sector fell sharply. And it still hasn’t recovered. 
How can we regain the public’s trust? For one, by making the financial sector less complex 
and more transparent. The crisis has highlighted various fundamental problems in the design 
of the financial system. The level of complexity, the mutual dependence – where everyone is 
dependent on everyone else – and the rapid speed of transactions – where there is no time 
to resolve problems that may arise – all these factors together make the system more prone 
to failure. 
In  existing  and  new  regulations,  including  the  forthcoming  Basel  III  framework,  regulators 
have focused on the problem of institutions being Too Big To Fail. This is because of the 
pressure that having to rescue financial institutions has put on public finances. 
But,  actually,  we  should  be  more  worried  about  banks  being  Too  Complex  To  Fail.  If 
institutions are too complex, it’s even more difficult and therefore perhaps more expensive to 
resolve them. 
The need for change is obvious. And responsibility for this change lies in your hands, too! I 
see three areas where you can contribute to achieving this change. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
First of all, banks’ business models must not be unduly complex. In the past, we have seen 
financial institutions offering lending services, participating in trading activities, setting up joint 
ventures and combining their activities with insurance companies or businesses outside the 
financial sector. 
The  products they  offered  ranged from traditional  loans  and  lend-to-invest  structures  to  all 
kinds  of  complex  off-balance  sheet  derivatives.  Their  activities  were  spread  all  over  the 
world,  while  the  risks  and  rules  varied  from  one  country  to  another.  The  big  picture  was 
therefore often lost. 
At  the  same  time, the  benefits  of  diversifying  their  activities  in  these  different  ways  and  at 
these  different  locations  have  proved  disappointing.  Experience  has  shown  that  combining 
banking and insurance activities is not as effective in offsetting cash flows and exposures as 
was once thought. Risks run on one side of the world are difficult to monitor from the other 
side of the world. 
And,  this  time  around,  the  crisis  has  not  been  confined  to  one  country  or  region,  but  has 
been felt all over the globe. A clear and simple business strategy and a streamlined business 
model will help reduce complexity. Banks need to focus once again on their traditional roles 
of  maturity  transformation  and  lending  to  the  real  economy.  This  ties  in  closely  with  the 
question  of  how  best  to  structure  the  banking  sector.  This  is  a  relevant  issue  when  we’re 
discussing the activities a bank should engage in. 
Committees all around the world have examined this issue, as the Volcker Rule in the US, 
the Vickers Report in the UK and the European Commission’s Liikanen report show. All of 
them  have  one  thing  in  common.  They  argue  for  a  simpler  banking  sector  focusing  on 
traditional  banking  activities.  These  reports  have  resulted  in  calls  for  traditional  banking 
activities to be separated from trading operations by being held in different entities. This will 
make banks less complex and improve their stability. 
However, complete separation may not be efficient if these trading operations also provide 
services to the bank’s clients, like market-making services. That’s why the Liikanen Report 
suggests that trading activities should be separated from the other parts of the bank only if 
these trading activities exceed certain limits. 
Although this debate is far from over, the direction of the change needed is clear. In other 
words, we need to move towards a less complex sector, with more focused activities. 
A second way to increase simplicity and transparency in the sector is to simplify the internal 
organization of financial institutions. The financial sector in general, and banks in particular, 
can  be  seen  as  one  of  the  most  complex  areas  in  today’s  world.  But  we  all  know  that 
complex organizations are hard to manage. 
Having complex internal structures and many management layers can make it more difficult 
for  organizations  to  respond  to  external  developments.  Complex  organizations  are  like  oil 
tankers:  it  takes  a  long  time  to  turn  them  around.  And  that  may  mean  they  miss  out  on 
business opportunities. 
A  simpler  organization,  by  contrast,  can  take  decisions  more  quickly.  This  enables  it  to 
respond more flexibly to new business opportunities, and also to risks that arise. It can also 
help staff feel more involved in, and committed to, change. 
Thirdly  –  and  this  may  be  the  most  difficult  one  –  people  working  for  financial  institutions 
need a prudent mindset. It’s ironic, isn’t it, that, instead of using sophisticated financial risk 
models  to  identify  risks,  “smart”  people  in  the  financial  sector  used  these  models  to 
circumvent financial regulation. 
Remember  the  trend  towards  moving  exposures  off  balance  sheet?  What  about  the  way 
benchmark  rates  were  manipulated,  and  separate  legal  entities  were  used  in  the  shadow 
banking sector? This behavior was obviously encouraged by the fact that variable benefits 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
were based on achieving short-term results. This is all changing. And I am happy to see this 
happening. 
De  Nederlandsche  Bank,  for  instance,  now  explicitly  includes  “organizational  culture”  as  a 
separate  aspect  in  its  risk  assessment  of  institutions.  In  a  clear,  open  environment, 
employees should have the interests of their clients at heart. And having a prudent mindset 
will  also  make  it  easier  for  them  to  be  transparent.  For  simpler  institutions,  regulation  and 
supervision  can  be  simpler  as  well.  The  more  complex  an  organization  and  its  business 
model are, the more complex its risks will be. The rules that are meant to capture these risks 
will then be at least equally complex. 
The  reverse  is  also  true.  In  other  words,  the  regulatory  rules  for  banks  engaging  only  in 
traditional lending and funding needn’t be as complex as those for banks specializing in more 
sophisticated products. The volume of regulations applying to less complex institutions can 
also  be  more  limited.  Banks  that  don’t  have  investment  operations,  for  example,  can  skip 
many of the trading book regulations. 
Greater  regulatory  simplicity  also  has  other  advantages.  Detailed  rules  may  make  it  more 
difficult  for  supervisors  and  financial  institutions  to  spot  actual  risks.  The  requirements 
applying to risk models, for example, are quite detailed. Institutions spend a lot of time and 
resources on them. You might think that if a model complies with all these requirements, the 
outcomes it produces will also be right. But it is still only a model, and you have to look at 
risks in more depth. 
Overly detailed rules may also make decision-making less effective. For decisions may be 
based on compliance with rules instead of being true risk trade-offs. 
Simple rules, by contrast, could help focus on the major risks. Take, for example, a simple 
rule  that  states  that  all  exposures  must  be  covered  by  some  form  of  capital.  Such  a  rule 
would automatically also apply to any new products or instruments. 
And  it  would  include  exposures  that  now  –  in  my  view,  unjustifiably  so–  have  a  0%  risk 
weighting, such as certain exposures to governments. A leverage ratio used as a backstop to 
these risk models would also achieve this, while still being easy to calculate and understand. 
And  this  is  why  supervisors  are  now  taking  leverage  ratios  into  account  when  assessing 
institutional  risk,  in  addition  to  the  standard  risk-weighted  ratios.  This  allows  for  a  multi-
angled view of institutions’ risk profiles.  
Other rules, such as limits on LTV ratios, may set clear limits on loan portfolios’ risk profiles. 
That way, a smart combination of simple rules can help to highlight risks in an institution’s 
balance sheet. To be sure, risks should obviously be regulated in similar ways, whatever the 
sector. Otherwise, risks will simply shift to less or non-regulated entities. 
Simple rules can also offer guidance for the future. Problems we experience in the future are 
unlikely to be exactly the same as in the recent past. We also cannot foresee exactly where 
new risks will arise. 
Simple  rules  can  form  a  clear  benchmark  in  uncertain  situations,  and  there  is  a  lot  of 
academic  theory  to  back  this  up.  The  economist  Frank  Knight  introduced  the  concept  of 
“Knightian uncertainty” by making a distinction between uncertainty and risk in the sense that 
uncertainty cannot be quantified. 
Indeed, we don’t know where we are heading, or what we will encounter along the way. We 
simply have to learn to live with unknown unknowns. 
Another economist, Hayek, also saw imperfect knowledge as a central issue. Simple, robust 
rules  can  make  a  difference  in  such  an  uncertain  and  imperfect  world.  In  a  complex 
environment, we cannot possibly consider or measure all the conceivable outcomes. As well 
as being too expensive from an information point of view, it is also too complex to weigh up 
all the different options. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Although  we  like  to  assume  our  economic  models  are  rational  and  omniscient,  this  is 
certainly not the case in reality. It would be more accurate to describe our world as having 
bounded rationality and imperfect information. 
Simple rules are a way of reducing a complex problem with many unknowns to simpler trade-
offs, like yes or no, above or below, or left or right. It’s as in traffic: in the vast majority of 
situations, driving on the correct side of the road is good advice. Or reducing your speed in 
misty weather. 
If  we  can  progress  along  the  road  of  simplicity,  I’m  sure  we  can  also  stop  the  pace  of 
regulatory expansion. As Leonardo da Vinci said, “Simplicity is the ultimate sophistication”. 
Simplicity  and  transparency  can  help  restore  the  public’s  trust  in  the  financial  sector. 
Financial  institutions  can  achieve  this  by  switching  to  clear  business  models,  with 
streamlined structures and a prudent mindset. 
If  they  do  so,  the  amount  of  regulations  to  be  complied  with  can  be  reduced  and  the 
remaining regulations can be simplified, if and where applicable. 
In addition, simple rules can help us focus on key risks, as well as forming a guide for the 
future. Greater trust, increased transparency and less complex risks will ultimately make the 
overall financial system more robust. 
And that in turn will make it easier for central banks to promote financial stability. 
Thank you! 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
