Daniel Mminele: Underpinnings of sustainable growth in Africa 
Address by Mr Daniel Mminele, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 
IIF Africa Financial Summit, Sandton, 11 November 2013. 
 Mr Tim Adams, President and CEO, Institute of International Finance (IIF),  
Mike Brown, Chief Executive, Nedbank,  
and honoured guests,  
allow me to express my gratitude for the honour and privilege to present the opening keynote 
address of the 2nd Africa Financial Summit.  
Introduction  
1. 
In May 2000, the Economist magazine labelled Africa the “Hopeless Continent”, claiming that 
natural  disasters,  mass  murders,  a  string  of  wars,  institutional  constraints  and  a  lack  of 
commitment  to  democratic  practices  meant  that  the  new  millennium  had  brought  disaster 
rather than hope to Africa.1 In March 2013, the Economist had a complete change of mind 
declaring that Africa is “a Hopeful Continent” since “African lives have greatly improved over 
the past decade…and the next ten years will be even better”2. It is heartening to note that 
negative perceptions about African economic prospects, which were the norm at the turn of 
the millennium, are less of an issue today. While many challenges persist, Africa has shown 
that there is a high level of commitment and potential to achieving economic success.  
In this address, I would like to take stock of some of the economic successes that African 
countries  have  achieved,  highlight  some  of  the  underpinnings  for  sustainable  growth 
outcomes and prospects in Africa, and then look at some of the challenges facing monetary 
authorities.  
Africa’s economic successes 
2. 
Africa’s average growth rates have exceeded 5 per cent since 2000, double the pace of the 
1980s  and  1990s.  Over  the  past  decade,  six  of  the  world’s  ten  fastest-growing  countries 
were from the African continent. Equatorial Guinea recorded an average growth rate of 17 
per cent while the Angolan economy expanded by 11 per cent per annum between 2000 and 
2009. In addition, seven other countries on the continent recorded in excess of 7 per cent per 
annum growth during this period.3  
With  the  outbreak  of  the  financial  crisis  in  2008,  there  was  justifiable  concern  that  African 
economies  were  under  threat.  For  example,  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  kept 
revising downwards the growth forecasts for sub- Saharan Africa (SSA) for 2009, from 5 per 
cent  in  October  2008,  to  3,5  per  cent  in  January  2009,  to  1,7  per  cent  in  April  2009  and 
1,3 per cent by October. However, SSA recorded a growth rate of 2,6 per cent in 2009 which 
was twice the pace predicted by the IMF. In addition, the pickup in economic activity in the 
post crisis period also exceeded forecasts with growth averaging 5,3 per cent between 2010 
and 2012.  
                                                
1  http://www.economist.com/node/333429. 
2  http://www.economist.com/news/special-report/21572377-african-lives-have-already-greatly-improved-over-
past-decade-says-oliver-august. 
3  These countries included Chad, Mozambique, Ethiopia, Nigeria, Rwanda, Sierra Leone and Tanzania. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Part of the explanation for Africa’s resilience to the financial crisis was related to the rise in 
commodity  prices.  In  fact,  the  boom  in  commodity  prices  during  the  2000s  provided  a 
significant boost to export revenues given that mineral exports account for over half of the 
continent’s  total  exports.  Statistics  from  the  United  Nations  Conference  on  Trade  and 
Development (UNCTAD) show that there was almost a fourfold increase in Africa’s exports 
from USD149 billion in 2000 to USD595 billion in 2011.  
The slowdown in the traditional export markets in the advanced countries as a result of the 
global financial crisis was countered by the rise of emerging countries in the world economy. 
This facilitated the diversification of export markets which served to sustain the demand for 
Africa’s  commodity  exports.  For  example,  the  share  of  exports  destined  to  the  European 
Union (EU) and United States (US) declined from 47 per cent in 2000 to 33 per cent in 2011 
while the share to the BRIC (Brazil, Russia, India and China) nations increased from around 
8 per cent to approximately 23 per cent during the same period.  
However,  there  was  more  to  it  than  just  commodity  prices.  Africa  has  been  increasingly 
better  managed,  with  the  improvements  in  governance  helping  to  promote  an  overall 
conducive  environment  to  growth  and  development.  There  has  been  a  steady  rise  in  the 
contribution of domestic demand to gross domestic product (GDP). Part of the explanation 
here  is  the  fast-growing  middle  class  in  many  African  countries.  Estimates  by  the  African 
Development  Bank  (ADB)  show  that  consumer  spending  by  the  middle  class  reached 
US$680  billion  and  accounted  for  25  per  cent  of  Africa’s  GDP  in  2008.  This  figure  is 
projected to reach US$2,2 trillion by 2030. On the supply side, the rise of the services sector 
has been one of the defining characteristics of the structural change in African economies. 
Telecommunications, banking, and the retail sector have been flourishing in many countries. 
This  has  contributed  to  the  improvement  in  Africa’s  growth  prospects,  which  in  turn,  has 
attracted the attention of foreign investors.  
The  concerted  efforts  of  policymakers  to  address  some  of  the  major  binding  growth 
constraints, which were previously neglected, have also played a significant role in Africa’s 
enhanced  growth  performance  over  the  last  decade.  Research  from  the  McKinsey  Global 
Institute (MGI) show that natural resources and activities directly related to the primary sector 
accounted for only about a third of Africa’s growth.  
The  World  Economic  Forum  estimates  that  more  than  half  of  Africa’s  enhanced  growth 
performance  can  be  attributed  to  improvements  in  infrastructure.4  Policymakers  have 
devoted  significant  attention  to  addressing  the  growth  constraints  on  the  continent,  the 
dividends of which have been reflected in the growth outcomes of the past decade. However, 
having said that, infrastructure bottlenecks still persist and further attention is needed in this 
area to enhance Africa’s growth prospects.  
The 2013 “Doing Business Report” published by the World Bank earlier this year highlights 
that  66  per  cent  of  countries  in  Africa  enacted at  least  one  business-  enhancing reform  in 
2012 – this is double the number of countries in 2005. The report acknowledges that nine 
African  countries  rank  among  the  top  20  most  improved  in  terms  of  business  regulations 
since  2009.  These  include  Benin,  Burundi,  Cote  d’Ivoire,  Ghana,  Guinea-Bissau,  Liberia, 
Rwanda, Sierra Leone, and Togo. These countries are bound to reap the benefits of these 
business-friendly reform measures.  
Foreign  investors  have  taken  note  of  these  changes.  Over  the  past  decade  Africa  has 
increasingly  been  earmarked  as  a  profitable  investment  destination  by  international 
investors.  Foreign  Direct 
from  approximately 
US$10 billion  per  year  in  2000  to  more  than  US$50  billion  in  2012.  While  the  commodity 
price  boom  has  played  some  part,  the  institutional  and  political  changes  coupled  with  the 
Investment  (FDI) 
increased 
to  Africa 
                                                
4  The Africa Competitiveness Report 2013. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
continent’s  enhanced  growth  potential  have  been  the  main  factors  underpinning  investor 
confidence  in  Africa5.  According  to  UNCTAD,  greenfield  investment  into  Africa  constituted 
approximately  10  per  cent  of  global  greenfield  investment  between  2006  and  2012, 
compared to two per cent of global mergers and acquisitions that was directed to Africa. An 
increasing  share  of  the  greenfield  FDI  flows  into  the  continent  were  destined  for  sectors, 
such as metals, renewable energy, automotive equipment and financial services.  
Africa is also seen as an attractive FDI destination by those multinational investor groups that 
are keen to benefit from the intra-Africa trade opportunities that currently exist. In addition, 
other investors that already have operations in Africa are looking to expand their footprint on 
the continent, to ensure that they are well positioned to benefit from the favourable growth 
prospects that prevail in many countries. Investors from developing economies, particularly 
those from China, have significantly increased their ventures into the continent. In the post 
crisis period, China accounted for more than half of the greenfield FDI to Africa.  
It is also worth noting that intra-continent FDI has been growing at a healthy pace. In fact, the 
share of African countries in total FDI in the continent more than doubled between 2003 and 
2012; whereas in 2003 some 8 per cent of FDI into African countries came from other African 
countries and 92 per cent from other continents, by 2012 the intra-African share had risen to 
18 per cent.  
As  expected,  multinationals  from  South  Africa have  seized  the  opportunity  to  expand  their 
production networks across the continent. The number of projects in Africa originating from 
South  Africa  has  increased  by  over  500  per  cent  in  the  past  decade.  Between  2010  and 
2013, South African multinationals made FDI investments into 18 African countries. In 2012, 
South Africa invested in more new FDI projects in Africa than any other country in the world. 
According to Ernst & Young’s 2013 Attractiveness Survey, South African FDI into Africa has 
created almost 46 000 jobs in Africa since 2003.  
The financial crisis has shown that the conventional view of a positive relationship between 
finance and growth cannot be taken for granted. In fact, the shallowness of Africa’s banking 
system  has  helped  to  insulate  many  African  countries  from  the  adverse  effects  of  the 
financial  crisis.  However,  financial  innovation  and  development  over  the  past  decade  has 
helped  to  significantly  increase  the  share  of  the  population  with  access  to  basic  formal 
financial services and technology in many African countries.  
We know that capital markets can be a significant driver of economic growth. While many 
countries in Africa have capital markets that are small and illiquid, some steady progress has 
been made towards developing financial markets in Africa. Increasingly African countries are 
accessing  international  capital  markets,  and  their  ability  and  success  in  doing  so  has 
contributed towards the funding of massive infrastructure projects, which I will touch on later. 
The  ability  to  issue  in  international  markets  has  been  made  possible  by  an  increasing 
number  of  African  countries  obtaining  sovereign  credit  ratings  and  because  of  heightened 
interest by international investors in the so-called frontier markets, in an environment of low 
global  interest  rates.  Many  of  the  debut  dollar  denominated  sovereign  bonds  issued  have 
been  done  so  at  relatively  attractive  yields,  which  have  declined  over  time.  Nigeria  for 
example paid a 7 per cent yield on its debut two years ago with a 10-year dollar-denominated 
note, while the 2013 10-year bond issue was priced to yield 6.375 per cent. Nigeria’s most 
recent  bond  issues  were  four  times  oversubscribed  compared  with  2.5  times  in  2011. 
According to Moody’s6, primary issuance by African sovereigns in 2013 has already reached 
its highest level ever of US$8 billion. Furthermore, Moody’s is positive on sustained investor 
interest in the region, citing a strong macroeconomic growth outlook. Six countries in Sub-
                                                
5  African Development Bank: Annual Development Effectiveness Review 2013. 
6 
International Sovereign Issuance in Africa 2013/2014: A Rating Agency Perspective”, October 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Saharan Africa are expected to issue inaugural bonds in the international markets within the 
next  few  years,  including  Angola,  Cameroon,  Kenya,  Tanzania,  Uganda  and  Mozambique 
and given expectation that the issuance sizes could be in the region of US$500 million, may 
make them eligible to be included in the JP Morgan Emerging Markets Bond Index. This of 
course helps to raise visibility, and provides access to a larger pool of investors, while also 
setting a benchmark for local corporates.  
As  financial  innovation  and  deepening  evolves  on  the  continent,  it  is  imperative  that  the 
regulation of the financial system keeps pace with these developments. Here the emphasis 
should  fall  on  appropriate  regulation  –  that  is,  striking  the  right  balance  between  guiding 
financial markets and protecting financial systems (some of which may still be at a nascent 
stage) on the one side, while not stifling innovation and progress on the other.. Too much 
regulation  would  entail  increased  costs  which  could  hinder  further  development  of  the 
financial  sector.  But  if  due  regulatory  attention  was  not  given  to  financial  innovation  and 
development then countries could be exposed to financial sector vulnerabilities which could 
pose a threat to sustainable economic outcomes.  
Regional integration  
3. 
There  are  concerted  efforts  to  foster  greater  financial  integration  at  the  regional  level.  For 
example,  in  the  area  of  payment  systems,  the  SADC  Integrated  Regional  Electronic 
Settlement System (SIRESS) was launched on 22 July 2013 as a pilot. There are currently 
21 participants (4 CMA central banks and 17 commercial banks). This system enhances and 
harmonises  the  legal  and  regulatory  frameworks  in  the  region  and  provides  an  integrated 
regional cross-border payment settlement infrastructure, allowing inter-country payments to 
be effected quickly, efficiently and safely.  
In fact, the benefits are already starting to manifest themselves. SIRESS processed 1 780 
settlement instructions to the value of R15 billion during August 2013 which was the first full 
month  in  which  the  system  was  in  operation.  The  settlement  amounts  will  increase  quite 
significantly with roll-out to four more countries by April 2014 and eventually more broadly in 
SADC.  Further  developments  are  also  envisaged.  For  example,  the  SADC  Banking 
Association and a work group from the Committee of SADC Stock Exchanges (COSSE) are 
working on the business model and related agreements for the settlement of the cash leg of 
securities trades.  
Rising intra-regional trade has been a defining characteristic of globalisation over the last two 
decades.  However,  it  has  long  been  recognised  that  Africa  is  highly  fragmented  with  poor 
institutional  arrangements  and  insufficient  coordination  at  national  and  sub-regional  levels. 
These factors have undermined the role of intra-regional trade in fostering economic growth 
on  the  continent. While  Africa’s  intra-regional  trade  share  has  doubled  from  6  per  cent  to 
12 per  cent  between  1990  and  2011,  this  remains  remarkably  low  in  a  global  context, 
considering the spatial proximity of African countries to one another.  
The Treaties establishing the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA), 
the East African Community (EAC), and the South African Development Community (SADC) 
provide  for  the  establishment  of  a  Monetary  Union  in  each  bloc.  However,  overlapping 
memberships, the slow ratification and implementation of protocols coupled with the socio-
economic policy divergences have proven to be a serious obstacle to the process of regional 
and continental integration. Significant progress on economic integration has been achieved 
in  some  quarters,  the  most  notable  being  the  long  track  record  of  the  Southern  African 
Customs  Union  (SACU)  and  Common  Monetary  Area  (CMA).  One  needs  to  warn  against 
overly  rapid  monetary  union  formation,  however,  and  emphasise  the  importance  of  the 
context and sequencing of economic integration initiatives. As the European experience has 
demonstrated, a monetary union without significant elements of a fiscal union could amplify 
tension rather than bring harmony.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
In  June  2011,  African  Heads  of  State  and  Government  committed  themselves  to  the 
Tripartite  Free  Trade  Area  (TFTA)  which  aims  to  remove  trade  barriers,  develop  regional 
value  chains  and  create  jobs  in  COMESA,  EAC  and  SADC.  Negotiations  towards  the 
creation  of  the  Tripartite  Grand  Free  Trade  Area  between  COMESA,  EAC  and  SADC 
commenced  in  May  2013,  with  the  objective  to  conclude  these  negotiations  by  December 
2014,  and  the  Agreement  entering  into  force  at  the  beginning  of  2015.  Last  month,  the 
African Development Bank approved a grant of US$7,5 million to finance a capacity building 
programme in support of the TFTA. 
Challenges for policymakers on the African continent  
4. 
Let  me  now  briefly  highlight  some  of  the  current  challenges  confronting  monetary 
policymakers on the continent. Although our continent is diverse with differing experiences 
and challenges, it is possible to make some general comments.  
While Africa’s growth performance has been impressive in a comparative context, this has 
not  translated  into  an  adequate,  widely  spread  improvement  in  living  standards.  This  is 
evident in the continent’s progress in terms of attaining the Millennium Development Goals 
(MDG). Despite 15 of the 20 countries which made the greatest progress on the MDGs in 
2012  being  from  Africa,  according  to  the  “2013  MDG  Report”  Africa’s  rate  of  poverty 
reduction  would  not  be  sufficient  to  reach  the  target  of  halving  extreme  poverty  by  2015. 
Structural  reform  across  a  wide  range  of  areas  has  to  be  intensified  in  order  to  make  the 
progress  which  the  continent  needs.  In this  regard  reference  has  already  been  made  to  a 
number of key areas, such as infrastructure improvement and creation of a more business-
friendly environment.  
According to the 2013 World Economic Forum Africa Competitiveness Report, the quality of 
infrastructure  is  one  of  the  major  impediments  to  developing  trade  and  improving 
competitiveness  in  Africa.  The  World  Bank  estimates  that  the  continent’s  infrastructure 
spending needs amount to approximately US$93 billion per year, half of which is funded by 
the government. There is thus a huge infrastructure funding gap which in effect dictates that 
efficiency gains in the use of the existing infrastructure network are essential.  
An area that stands central to development has not been mentioned yet; namely, education 
and  training,  where  huge  challenges  must  be  faced  and  overcome  if  Africa  is  to  blossom 
further  through  inclusive  growth  and  development.  Labour  markets  in  many  countries  are 
characterised  by  frictions  and  strife.  In  this  regard,  there  are  two  major  challenges 
confronting policymakers. Firstly, over the short-term there is an urgent need for the creation 
of  labour-intensive  jobs  to  absorb  the  large  number  of  people  entering  the  labour  market 
each  year.  Secondly,  over  the  longer  term  there  is  need  to  move  up  the  value  chain  in 
production  in  both  the  manufacturing  and  service  sectors.  This  would  require  significant 
investment  in  education  both  at  the  school  and  higher  education  levels.  Programmes 
directed at entrepreneurship development and other training initiatives that could provide the 
technical  skills  required to  support  infrastructure  development  are  key  to  the  attainment  of 
sustainable growth on the continent.  
Where do central banks fit into the sustainable growth picture? While most of the structural 
reform imperatives fall outside the mandate of central banks, I believe that central banks, by 
keeping  inflation  in  check  and  creating  an  environment  of  financial  stability,  can  make  a 
meaningful  contribution.  Economic  prosperity  is  built  on  stable  foundations  provided  by 
central  banks  taking  their  mandate  seriously.  Thinking  of  the  dozens  of  countries  on  the 
African  continent  that  had  high  double-digit  rates  of  inflation  20  years  ago  and  contrasting 
that with the current situation, much progress has been made.  
In general, while inflation rates have increased marginally over the last couple of years they 
remain entrenched at single-digit levels in many countries. The rise in food and fuel prices 
coupled  with  the  impact  of  currency  depreciations  have  been  important  sources  of 
inflationary  pressures  in  many  countries.  The  current  uncertainties  in  the  global  financial 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
environment and their associated impact on currencies may continue to pose a major threat 
to inflation outcomes in many countries.  
Recently the issue of currency movements and its impact on competitiveness has received 
much attention in the general press as well as in policy and academic circles. While it may be 
difficult to determine the equilibrium exchange rate, it is well recognised that a significantly 
misaligned exchange rate or excessively  volatile exchange rate leads to a misallocation of 
resources which eventually thwarts sustainable growth. In some countries like South Africa 
for  example,  a  special  effort  has  been  made  to  build  up  the  level  of  foreign  exchange 
reserves  –  to  some  US$50  billion  at  present,  from  US$8  billion  a  decade  ago  –  since 
adequate  reserves  contribute  to  investor  confidence  and  moderation  in  exchange  rate 
volatility. In some other countries the nature of the foreign exchange market and risk appetite 
of the authorities does, at times, allow for central bank intervention in an attempt to moderate 
episodes of abnormal depreciation or appreciation.  
The  shorter-term  challenge  to macroeconomic policymakers  on  the  continent  is  to  strike  a 
balance between controlling inflation and supporting economic growth. As pointed out earlier, 
growth is driven from the supply side over the long-term. The trade-off between growth and 
inflation can only be avoided with increases in potential output. Monetary policy can only play 
a facilitating role in enhancing the productive capacity of the economy. Once inflation picks 
up significantly and stays at elevated levels, nominal interest rates also have to rise to match 
inflation  so  that  saving  is  sustained  and  a  macro-economic  environment  conducive  to 
sustainable growth is maintained. In this regard, countries with rising inflationary pressures 
and  limited  fiscal  space  will  be  constrained  in  their  use  of  expansionary  macro  policies  to 
stimulate  the  growth  momentum.  On  the  other  hand,  where  inflationary  pressures  are 
contained, further monetary stimulus could be provided.  
Conclusion  
5. 
In conclusion, the recent financial crisis has exposed the strains in the banking system in the 
advanced  world.  While  the  banking  systems  in  many  African  countries  are  not  well 
developed, they are stable. In general, African banks are well capitalized and have avoided 
being overly exposed to the sub-prime and other financial crises that have affected the world 
economy  over  the  past  two  decades.  The  challenge  confronting  policymakers  on  the 
continent is to ensure that the hard-fought economic gains achieved during the past decade 
are not lost. In this regard, African central bankers are committed to ensuring that monetary 
policy makes a significant contribution to sustainable economic outcomes by fostering price 
and financial stability. But much more is required than what central banks can contribute: The 
challenge to Africa in general is to not only plan but also implement the structural reforms 
necessary to bolster the continent’s sustainable growth rate.  
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
