Andreas Dombret: Restoring financial stability 
Address  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank,  on  the  occasion  of  the  inauguration  of  the  Bundesbank  representative  to 
Turkey, Istanbul, 26 November 2013. 
 Dear Consul General Wolke, 
Dear Deputy Governor Kenc, 
Dear ladies and gentlemen. 
Thank you very much for honouring us tonight with your presence. 
Several  centuries  ago  Isaac  Newton  observed:  “We  build  too  many  walls  and  not  enough 
bridges”.  History  has  shown  that  there  is  a  lot  of  truth  in  this  sentence.  And  I  am  sure  if 
Newton  lived  today  he  would  be  impressed  by  what  has  been  achieved  in  Istanbul  only 
recently.  Complementing  the  existing  bridges,  the  new  Marmaray  tunnel  underneath  the 
Bosporus  Strait  has  just  been  opened.  For  the  first  time  in  history,  a  tunnel  connects  two 
continents. 
Making  connections  is  also  what  the  Bundesbank  has  in  mind  in  sending  representatives 
abroad. With  our  network  of representatives  we  aim  to  cover,  in  particular,  the major  G20 
countries outside the euro area. Turkey is a prime example of a successful emerging market 
economy. This is also reflected in Turkey holding the G20 presidency in 2015. 
Moreover, Istanbul is a financial centre of growing importance. Therefore, I am very happy 
indeed that we have now managed to close this gap in our network. 
It is my pleasure to introduce Mr Hartmut Dräger, the Bundesbank’s first ever representative 
in Turkey. He will be available in the German Consulate here in Istanbul for your questions 
related to the Bundesbank and the European System of Central Banks. In turn, Mr Dräger 
will report back to us in Frankfurt on issues that help us to better understand economic and 
financial developments in Turkey. 
Another important objective behind Mr Dräger’s secondment to Istanbul is our wish to further 
strengthen our relationship with the Central Bank of Turkey. For this reason I am grateful that 
my G20 colleague Deputy Governor Kenc was able to join us tonight. 
Earlier  this  year,  the  Governors  of  our  two  central  banks  signed  a  Memorandum  of 
Understanding.  This  Memorandum  underlines  their  joint  commitment  to  forge  a  deeper 
relationship between our respective central banks. Deputy Governor Kenc and I have agreed 
to  give  added  substance  to  the  Memorandum  by  holding  a  joint  expert-level  seminar  on 
financial stability issues in the course of next year here in your great city of Istanbul. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  let  me  come  back  to  the  quote  by  Newton.  Certainly,  before 
European  integration  started,  Europe  was  used  to  building  walls.  But  walls  separate.  In 
Europe we have since gone some way to responding to Newton’s observation. The creation 
of  the  European  common  market  without  frontiers  was  the  first  significant  step  towards 
tearing down walls and building solid bridges across Europe. 
Another milestone along the road to European integration was the introduction of the euro. 
Currently,  we  are  working  again  on  a  historic  project  of  European  integration,  namely  the 
creation of a European banking union. 
The banking union is currently our largest institutional construction site. The legal basis for 
the new European Single Supervisory Mechanism is now in place since 3 November, thus 
we  have  entered 
the 
comprehensive  assessment  of  banks.  Currently,  the  banking  supervisors  are  selecting  the 
implementation  phase.  The  major  challenge  ahead 
the 
is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  has 
critical  balance  sheet  items  of the  banks  under the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism. These 
items  will  then  be  subject  to  closer  scrutiny.  This  appraisal  of  the  present  situation  will  be 
complemented  by  a  joint  stress  test  of  the  European  Central  Bank  and  the  European 
Banking Authority which will be designed to reveal future risks. 
It is essential to convince the markets that banks are solving their legacy problems before the 
European Central Bank takes over responsibility for banking supervision at the end of next 
year. The cleaning-up of the balance sheets will be an important pre-condition to ensuring a 
smooth start for the new supervisory regime. 
In a market economy it is essential that banks, like any other business firms, can fail and can 
exit the market. “Too big to fail” was with us for much too long. Therefore, it is most important 
that  we  move  from  the  old  bail-out  regime  to  the  new  bail-in  regime  in  a  credible  way. 
Consequently, 
to  be  accompanied  by  a 
corresponding  Recovery  and  Resolution  Mechanism  with  a  view  to  protecting  taxpayers’ 
money from failing banks. 
The  rules  specifying  potential  bail-ins  have  to  spell  out  a  clear  pecking  order  for  covering 
losses. Thereby, the principle of dual subsidiarity should be observed. To put it in a nutshell: 
Before  public  money  is  used,  private  creditors  have  to  contribute  to  covering  losses.  And 
before  European financial  backstops,  such  as the  ESM,  are  used, member  states  have  to 
cover  losses  of  their  banks.  This  would  reinforce  another  important  principle,  namely  that 
liability and control have to go hand in hand. 
This being said, let me emphasize that the Single Supervisory Mechanism, accompanied by 
a Recovery and Resolution Mechanism, can neither resolve today’s debt crisis nor act as a 
substitute for structural reforms and fiscal consolidation. 
Apart  from  supervision  and  resolution,  we  have  to  look  at  bank  regulation.  The  current 
regulatory  framework  promotes  a  nexus  between  bank  and  sovereigns  because  it 
encourages  banks  to  invest  in  sovereign  debt.  This  reinforces  the  “doom  loop”,  as  Yves 
Mersch  of  the  European  Central  Bank  called  it,  between  the  sovereign  sector  and  the 
banking  system.  Should  doubts  about  the  sustainability  of  government  debt  arise,  the 
national  banking  sector  will  also  be  negatively  affected.  This  is  particularly  relevant  in  our 
monetary union as European banks often only invest in the sovereign bonds of their home 
countries. Therefore, in the medium term government debt should be backed with a level of 
capital  which  adequately  reflects  its  risks.  At  the  same  time,  caps  should  be  imposed  on 
bank sovereign debt holdings. 
Ladies and gentlemen, in Newton’s terms the deepening of the European integration means 
that  we  are  on  our  way  to  building  more  and  more  bridges. We  are  tearing  down  historic 
walls to allow for more cross-border activities and institutions to the common benefit of all 
European member states. However, this does not and cannot mean that individual member 
states can rely on the others to solve their problems. 
Likewise, re-erecting old walls like the re-introduction of capital controls is not a sustainable 
solution.  Such  ad-hoc  crisis  measures  might  help  in  the  short-term  to  preserve  financial 
stability as in the case of Cyprus, yet they have to be combined with a clear perspective for 
phasing them out again. 
I think Newton would not only recommend building new bridges. He would also be in favour 
of  grounding  these  bridges  on  solid  foundations.  In  economic  policy  terms  this  requires 
pursuing sound monetary, macroeconomic and structural policies. 
And this applies for advanced as well as emerging market economies. All of this means that 
it was about time for the Bundesbank to send a representative to Istanbul. And we are very 
much looking forward to exploring joint projects with all of you. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
