H R Khan: Certain uncertainties, uncertain certainties – India in an 
interconnected world 
Inaugural address by Mr H R Khan, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
40th  Annual  Convention  of  Department  of  Business  Economics,  University  of  Delhi  South 
Campus, New Delhi, 7 October 2013. 
 to 
the 
fore 
the  uncertainties  associated  with  such 
The speaker acknowledges the contributions of Ms. Dimple Bhandia and Shri Surajit Bose of the Reserve Bank of 
India. 
1.  It  is  a  pleasure  to  be  here  today  at  the  40th  annual  convention  of  the  Department  of 
Business  Economics  of  the  University  of  Delhi.  Let  me  begin  by  congratulating  the 
Department  for  selecting  a  very  appropriate  theme  for  the  Convention  –  “Embracing 
uncertainty: India in an interconnected world”. The events over the last few years – beginning 
from the onset of the global financial crisis, the sovereign debt crisis and, more recently, the 
events triggered by the announcement of “tapering” by the Board of Governors of the Federal 
Reserve Bank in the United States have all under-scored the fact that the globe, especially 
the  global  financial  system,  is  indeed  interconnected.  The  last  five  to  six  years  have  also 
brought 
interconnectedness. 
Interconnectedness in the financial sector can amplify shocks with an isolated event/incident 
rippling across the financial sector through a domino reaction, in some cases, blowing up into 
a tsunami. But, it is hard to predict which will be the first domino to fall – and harder still to 
predict how and to what extent problems in one part of the system will affect the other parts.1 
2.  The  events  over  the  last  year  years  have  also  conclusively  established  that  India  is 
increasingly interconnected with the global financial system. In the early months of the onset 
of  the  global  financial  crisis  in  2007,  there  was  a  growing  belief  that  India  was  largely 
decoupled from the rest of the world. After all, our external sector was relatively small and 
our growth drivers were primarily domestic. Post collapse of Lehman brothers, much to our 
bewilderment,  the  tsunami  called  the  global  financial  crisis  rolled  into  Indian  shores.  It 
showed  that  we  were  clearly  far  more  integrated  with  the  global  economy  than  hitherto 
realised or accepted. 
3. Looking at the schedule of the Convention, I see that you intend to cover an impressive 
range  of  ground  during  the  course  of  the  day  –  flagging  the  challenges  for  policy  making 
posed by global shocks, deliberating upon the building blocks for a competitive and stable 
economy and designing a growth compass for the Indian economy. Given the impossibility of 
doing justice to the breadth of subjects intended to be covered during the convention, I will 
restrict my remarks to a few broad areas. First, I will discuss the metrics of India’s growing 
interconnectedness with the global economy and touch upon the challenges to policy making 
posed by the growing integration. I will then illustrate the challenges following announcement 
of imminent tapering by the United States briefly discussing the Indian experience and policy 
measures  taken  to  counter  the  headwinds  from  the  global  economy.  Finally,  I  will  attempt 
some  comments  on  the  way  forward,  domestically  and  internationally,  to  “embrace”  the 
uncertainties engendered by an interconnected world. 
                                                
1  
Interconnectedness  and  the  importance  of  international  data-sharing”,  speech  by  Jaime  Caruana,  General 
Manager, BIS, at the 3rd Swiss National Bank – International Monetary Fund Conference on the international 
monetary system, Zurich, July, 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Growing globalisation 
4. Post-Independence, India remained one of the most closed economies of the world. Even 
as late as the 1980s, India remained very sparsely integrated with the global economy. The 
story  is  very  different  now.  Let  me  illustrate  with  a  couple  of  metrics  frequently  used  to 
measure a country’s global integration. One measure of a country’s global integration is the 
ratio of its external trade to GDP. In four decades, from 1972 to 2011, this ratio went up four 
times  from  eight  per  cent  to  37  per  cent.  Another  measure,  and  undoubtedly  a  more 
complete, is one which measures the two way flow of goods and services and finance to and 
from the country. This metric has moved up nearly eight times in four decades – from 14 per 
cent  in  1972  to  109  per  cent  in  2011.  Clearly,  even  as  India  has  become  more  and  more 
integrated  with  the  globe,  the  degree  of  its  financial  integration  has  been  deeper  than  its 
trade integration. There are other statistics which provide a similar illustration. Gross capital 
flows as a percentage of GDP stands at around 60 per cent for the country though net capital 
flows are significantly lower – at about four per cent of GDP. In recent years, the country’s 
current account deficit (CAD) has also grown to reach a high of 6.5 per cent of GDP in the 
third quarter of 2012–13, though it has since come down. The net international investment 
position  (IIP)  of  the  country  has  also  been  deteriorating  in  recent  years  –  international 
liabilities exceed  international assets by about US$ 309.4 billion  in  March 2013 as against 
US$  250  billion  in  March  2012,  though  some  improvement  has  been  observed  with  net 
liabilities at US$ 296.9 billion in June 2013. 
5.  This  increasing  integration  of  the  global  economy  is,  in  fact,  far  from  a  phenomenon 
peculiar to India. In fact, in the years preceding the global financial crisis, global economic 
integration grew and grew sharply. World trade, as a percentage of global GDP, rose from a 
little over 20 per cent of GDP to well over 30 per cent in 2007. Cross border capital flows, as 
a percentage of global GDP, also rose from about five per cent in the mid-1990s to about 
20 per cent in 2007. The ratio fell sharply as the crisis emerged but global capital flows have 
recovered since then. As a result of financial globalization, international financial openness 
(measured by the sum of countries’ external assets and liabilities as a share of GDP) more 
than doubled from 150 per cent of world GDP in mid 1990s to 350 per cent in 2007.2 Greater 
interconnectedness of the global economy was also reflected in, and, in fact, reinforced by 
the  strong  increase  in  international  banking  activities  and  the  associated  rising  share  of 
cross-border  ownership  of  financial  institutions.  According  to  the  International  Banking 
Statistics of the BIS, the value of external assets and liabilities of banks as a share of world 
GDP doubled, from about 30 per cent in 1990 to about 60 per cent in 2007 with most of this 
increase taking place in the 2000s. 
6.  Even  as  globalisation  intensified  in  the  early  part  of  this  century,  the  deepening  was 
characterised by some interesting trends and features: 
i. 
First,  while  advanced  countries  dominated  international  cross  border  flows, 
emerging  markets  also  joined  the  fray  with  their  share  in  world  capital  flows 
increasing from seven per cent to 17 per cent between 2000 and 2007; 
Second,  while  flows  from  advanced  economies  to  emerging  markets  were  largely 
driven by increased investment opportunities in many emerging market economies 
and by a substantial reduction in home bias in advanced economies, rising outflows 
from  emerging  and  developing  economies  were  mainly  driven  by  reserve 
accumulation; 
Third, the growing globalisation was accompanied by  widening global imbalances. 
The  creditor  positions  of  Germany,  Japan,  China  and  major  oil  producers 
strengthened while the United States, Spain, France, Italy and the United Kingdom 
ii. 
iii. 
                                                
2   OECD Economic Outlook, Volume 2011/1 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
became more indebted. The absolute sum of surpluses plus deficits was around two 
per cent of world GDP in 1980, more than six per cent of world GDP at their peak in 
2006,  and  over  four  per  cent  of  world  GDP  currently.  Since  current  account 
imbalances  are  matched  by  equal  and  opposite  capital  account  imbalances,  this 
means  that  there  is  a  very  large  net  capital  flow  –  net  flows  of  assets  across 
borders;3  
Fourth, as discussed earlier, financial integration deepened to a significantly greater 
extent than trade integration resulting in financial flows completely swamping trade 
flows. The sum of financial assets and liabilities roughly equalled the sum of exports 
and imports in 1970. By the onset of the global financial crisis, financial assets and 
liabilities were several multiples of the sum of exports and imports clearly pointing to 
the movement of cross border capital un-related to trade. This means that the net 
capital  flows  are  supported  by  much  larger  gross  flows  resulting  in  larger  net 
international position of foreign assets/ liabilities; 
Fifth,  for  most  countries  around  the  world,  rightly,  the  focus  has  shifted  from  net 
capital flows to gross capital flows. Gross capital flows tend to be several multiples 
of net capital flows. While they give rise to similar risks as those of net capital flows, 
viz.,  the  risks  of  sudden  ebbs  and  reversals,  the  risks  are  obviously  greater  in 
magnitude.  Thus,  movements 
in  exchange  rates  and  asset  prices  remain 
susceptible to gross capital flows; and 
Sixth, even as globalisation deepened, economic policies remained largely national. 
This inevitably leads to spillovers and sub-optimal responses to what is essentially a 
global problem. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
7. For emerging markets, such as, India, these trends have significant impact for the conduct 
of  financial  sector  policy.  External  spillovers  from  monetary  and  exchange  rate  policies  of 
major  systemically  important  countries  have  been  significant.  For  domestic  conduct  of 
policies such spillovers are taken as exogenous, and have to be managed through domestic 
policy response. This results in an inevitable loss in degrees of freedom. 
8.  The  pattern  of  capital  flows  as  they  emerged,  especially  in  the  pre-crisis  years  is  also 
critical.  Several  views  have  been  expressed  that  emerging  markets  have  imported  risky 
capital while exporting safe capital. Let me use the words of Joseph Stiglitz to illustrate this 
point. Professor Stiglitz in a 2006 paper4 stated: “The global financial system is not working 
the  way  it  ought  to.  Ordinary  laws  of  physics  say  that  water  ought  to  flow  downhill.  The 
parallel in economics is that money is supposed to flow from rich countries to poor countries, 
and risk is supposed to be transferred from the poor, who are least able to bear it, to the rich. 
But in the world today, things are moving in the opposite direction. To be precise, for the last 
several years, money has been going from the poor countries to the rich – the net flow of 
funds is going in the opposite direction of the way it should. Meanwhile, the poorest countries 
in  the  world  are  left  to  bear  the  risks  of  interest  rate  and  exchange  rate  volatility”.  Recent 
events have provided a  stark example of this. Risky flows can reverse and reverse swiftly 
reflecting  global  perceptions  as  they  move  between  risk-on  and  risk-off  states.  Emerging 
markets are very often left dealing with sudden surges of capital inflows and reversals and 
have struggled to manage the associated impact on exchange rate and interest rates. 
9. These risks were clearly illustrated by the experience in India since the onset of the crisis. 
As a country with persistent CAD, we needed net inflows of capital. But what the country has 
                                                
3   “Global imbalances: current accounts and financial flows”, Stephen G Cecchetti, Economic Adviser and Head 
of the Monetary and Economic Department, BIS, at the Myron Scholes Global Market Forum, University of 
Chicago, September 2011. 
4   Making Globalisation Work – The 2006 Geary Lecture Joseph E. Stiglitz, 2006. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
experienced is surges (net capital inflows of the order of 9 per cent of GDP in 2007–08) and 
sudden  reversals  (after  the  global  crisis);  inflows  again  in  2011–12  and  reversals  more 
recently.  The  movement  of  capital  flows  have  clearly  dominated  domestic  liquidity 
management and provided excess volatility to the exchange rate of the domestic currency. 
While both push and pull factors suggest that India may get adequate capital to finance the 
deficit,  the  pattern  of  inflows  could  remain  volatile,  and  the  impact  would  have  to  be 
managed.  Adding  to  these  challenges  is  the  fact  that,  very  often,  surges  of  inflows  and 
sudden outflows to/from the EMEs take place due to reasons which have very little to do with 
their fundamentals. The Reserve Bank of India has been following a policy of allowing the 
exchange rate to remain flexible and market determined. The result has been a sharp post-
global-crisis depreciation, followed by significant appreciation, and then depreciation again. 
While we are comfortably placed as far as foreign exchange reserves is concerned, recent 
events  prove  that,  under  stressful  conditions,  market  perception  of  reserve  level  could  be 
different. Any decline in reserves is often seen by the markets as a pressure situation. 
10.  All  these  factors  affected  the  real  economy  as  well  with  growth  slowing  down 
significantly,  though  part  of  the  slowdown  was  clearly  attributable  to  a  host  of  domestic 
factors. There is a growing element of what could be called “perception” interconnectedness. 
Any hint of trouble in one EME, for example, very often affects capital flows to all or several 
EMEs.  The  impact  is  skewed  disproportionately  towards  reversals.  Countries,  thus,  get 
interconnected  due  to  exogenous  factors,  such  as,  being  located  in  the  same  geographic 
region,  or  perceived  to  belong  to  the  same  stage  of  economic  development,  for  example. 
This kind of “herding” behaviour of capital flows again poses significant difficulties for policy 
making domestically while at the same time making international cooperation of any form for 
such intangibles challenging. This is not to suggest that individual characteristics, strengths 
and weaknesses of countries do not matter. As Ruchir Sharma very succinctly summarizes 
in  his  book  “Breakout  Nations”5,  “not  all  trees  grow  to  the  skies”  and  there  are  “scores  of 
emerging  markets  which  have  been  emerging  for  decades”.  The  post  crisis  normal  in 
emerging markets is likely to be one of a more sedate rate of growth as compared to the pre-
crisis years, the capital flows from the advanced world far more discerning with regard to the 
macro  fundamentals  and  performance  of  individual  nations.  As  I  will  discuss  a  little  later, 
countries with current account deficits and relatively weaker macro-economic fundamentals 
were  impacted  to  a  greater  extent  from  the  headwinds  triggered  by  the  Federal  Reserve 
Board’s  announcement  of  a  scaling  back  of  accommodative  monetary  policies  earlier  this 
year. 
11.  Thus, 
the  magnitude  and  complexity  of 
interconnectedness to a point where every country is vulnerable to repeated external shocks. 
These risks were driven home in the aftermath of the global financial crisis and more recently 
in the wake of the Fed announcement of possible tapering of its asset purchase programme. 
These events, what I would like to briefly dwell on now, provide very vivid illustrations of the 
uncertainties and risks associated with an interconnected world. 
financial  globalization  has 
increased 
Unconventional monetary policies 
12.  Conventional  monetary  policies  typically  operate  at  the  short  end  of  the  interest  rate 
curve. Central banks, entrusted with a mandate of low and stable inflation, operated on the 
short term (typically overnight) interest rates in a bid to affect, at the margin, funding costs for 
the banking sector. Through their operations on the short term interest rates, central banks, 
attempt to determine how other market interest rates, including long term rates, behave. As 
the global financial crisis exploded, central banks in advanced economies acted with unusual 
policy activism – slashing policy rates to zero or near zero. Soon, however, they realised that 
                                                
5   “Breakout Nations: In Search of the Next Economic Miracle”, Ruchir Sharma, 2012. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
this was not enough to restore stability to the financial markets or restore the functioning of 
key segments of the financial markets, let alone revive growth. Monetary policy, thus, found 
itself  constrained  by  the  “zero  nominal  bound”.  Faced  with  a  collapse  in  economic  activity 
and  soaring  unemployment  without  recourse  to  the  conventional  tools  of  monetary  policy, 
central  banks  responded  with  a  slew  of  unconventional  monetary  policy  measures.  These 
un-conventional monetary policy measures largely rested on two planks – forward guidance 
of continued low policy rates over extended policy horizon and large-scale asset purchases. 
The policies were unconventional in many ways: 
i. 
First,  the  quantum  of  operations  was  very  large  and  aimed,  at  least,  initially,  at 
providing ample liquidity to the frozen markets; 
Second, was the unprecedented relaxation in collateral standards with central banks 
accepting mortgage bonds, corporate bonds, commercial papers, exchange traded 
funds and real estate investment trusts; in a sense becoming market maker of last 
resort; 
Third, there were attempts by the central banks to directly affect long term interest 
rates – the ECB entered into long term repo operations (LTROs) with maturity up to 
three years while the Federal Reserve introduced two rounds of “Operation Twist” 
purchasing longer term treasuries against sale of short-term treasuries in an effort to 
depress the entire yield curve. 
ii. 
iii. 
13.  Un-conventional  monetary  policies  were  not  confined  to  advanced  economies.  Some 
emerging markets also responded with innovative measures to the headwinds of the crisis, 
although  interest  rates  did  not  hit  the  zero  bound  in  these  economies.  For  instance,  the 
Reserve  Bank  of  India  announced/operated  a  liquidity  window  for  NBFCs  and  for  mutual 
funds  at  the  height  of  the  crisis  in  2008  to  assist  the  funds  in  managing  redemption 
pressures.  Again,  in  July  2013,  we  had  announced  a  special  repo  window  for  liquidity 
requirements of mutual funds. Another innovative measure in this regard was the introduction 
of a concessional window for the banks to swap their FCNR (B) dollar funds with the Reserve 
Bank at a fixed rate for the tenor of the deposits. 
14.  The  objectives  of  the  unconventional  policies  were  multi-fold.  While  the  initial  set  of 
measures  were  aimed  at  providing  liquidity  and  at  reviving  dysfunctional  segments  of  the 
financial markets, the follow up measures were aimed at reviving credit offtake, incentivising 
long term investment and fostering economic growth. 
15. Policy rates in major advanced economies continue to remain at zero or near zero. With 
the exception of the United States, there has been little indication of exit from unconventional 
monetary policy in any of the other advanced economies. Balance sheets of central banks in 
advanced economies have burgeoned to unprecedented levels. Central bank balance sheet 
of major advanced economies currently stands at over 20 per cent of GDP as compared to 
around  10  per  cent  in  2007.  The  expansion  in  the  size  of  the  balance  sheet  has  been 
accompanied by a significant lengthening of the maturity profile of central banks assets. 
16. That there were risks from a prolonged period of monetary policy accommodation was 
well understood and debated. There were risks that the policies may not work, for example, if 
the  transmission  mechanism  between  the  real  and  financial  sector  was  impaired  or  if  the 
quantum  of  policy  measure  was,  not  appropriately  judged.  After  all,  central  bankers  were 
operating in unchartered  waters! There were risks that the policies may  work too well and 
unconventional monetary policy may become the new normal. In any case, it was clear that 
unconventional monetary policies, however necessary and justified during periods of acute 
instability,  distort  markets  over  time.  They  result  in  postponed  balance  sheet  adjustments, 
provide incentives for risk taking and increased leverage and carry the risk of distorting the 
functioning of financial markets impairing the ability of markets to measure and price risks. 
Most importantly, there were clearly risks from exit. The primary risks associated with the exit 
from  unconventional  monetary  policy  are  associated  with  an  increase  in  interest  rates, 
especially  long  term  interest  rates.  These  risks  include  the  risks  of  large  losses  of  banks, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
financial institutions and reserve managers on their fixed income portfolios, increased credit 
risk,  funding  challenges  and  spillovers  to  the  global  economy.  All  of  these  underline  the 
importance of a calibrated and gradual increase in interest rates providing markets sufficient 
time to adjust. But as recent events proved, the transition to the new equilibrium is likely to 
be far from smooth. Several years of near zero interest rates and reduced volatilities have 
curbed  tail  risks  and  provided  incentives  for  higher  risk  taking.  As  perceptions  of  two  way 
risks return to financial markets, the markets are likely to overshoot, at least partially as  a 
result  of  changing  sentiments,  making  the  adjustment  process  far  more  painful  than 
necessary. 
17. Recent market developments around the world illustrate how the anticipation of exit can 
generate  significant  volatility.  On  May  22,  2013  Federal  Reserve  Chairman  Bernanke 
announced that the improvements to the US economy could prompt a tapering in its asset 
purchase programme before the end of the year. The markets were spooked. Large capital 
outflows,  slump  in  the  stock  markets,  and  sharp  exchange  rate  depreciations  in  emerging 
markets  followed  at  the  mere  prospect  of  the  tapering  down  of  Fed  asset  purchases. 
Between May 22 and June 20 (following the FOMC press conference on June 19, when the 
Fed  chairman  unveiled  the  plan  for  tapering  off),  exchange  rates  of  emerging  markets 
depreciated considerably. This currency depreciation was concomitant with large outflows of 
debt and equity capital. The trend continued even after June 20. Rough estimates place the 
outflows from EMEs since May 22 at around US$ 44 billion till end August 2013. Emerging 
market  economies  witnessed  heightened  volatility  even  as  the  sell-off  in  key  markets 
continued  unabated.  Emerging market  equities went  down  by  almost  11  per  cent  between 
May  22  and  the  first  week  of  September  2013,  significantly  underperforming  their  mature 
market counterparts (which went down just one per cent during that period). MSCI indices for 
emerging and developed market equities showed a clear decoupling in returns from equity 
markets  in  the  recent  months.  EM  currencies  and  bonds  (as  indicated  by  the  JP  Morgan 
Emerging  Markets  Currency  Index  and  the  Bloomberg  USD  Emerging  Markets  Composite 
Bond  Index)  were  down  by  about  seven  and  eight  per  cent  respectively  during  the  same 
period.  These  figures  do  not  represent  the  trough  level  reached  in  the  different  markets 
between  May  22  and  September  5,  2013.  The  trends  have  been  accompanied  by 
significantly heightened volatilities across all markets. 
18.  The  sequence  of  events  over  the  last few  months  have  almost  been  textbook  perfect. 
Currencies  of  capital  recipients,  especially  those  with  large  current  account  deficits,  came 
under pressure. While the textbook advice is to allow the depreciation, countries remained 
wary  of  their  exchange  rate  overshooting  on  the  downside,  especially  given  the  possibility 
that  some  domestic  corporations  may  have  un-hedged  foreign  currency  debt.  There  were 
also concerns about the inflationary consequences of exchange depreciation, worry that the 
short term boost to competitiveness will not increase exports when partner-country growth is 
sluggish,  and  imported  intermediate  content  of  exports  is  generally  increasing.  There 
remained the risk that tighter monetary policy in hitherto capital recipient countries can slow 
growth and exacerbate a pattern of slowing growth. Significant falls in stock markets, if they 
persist,  could  also  hurt  growth  through  wealth  effects.  In  fact,  spillovers  are  not 
inconsequential even for industrial countries. 10 year rates in Japan, Germany and UK were 
all impacted after May 22, 2013. 
Recent trends in Indian financial markets 
19. In India, the impact of the Fed announcement has been striking, as in the case of many 
other  emerging  markets,  especially  those  with  current  account  deficits.  The  net  FII 
disinvestment  from  the  Indian  debt  market  since  May  23,  2013  (till  August  30,  2013)  was 
around US$ 10.4 billion as compared to net investment of US$ 5.6 billion during the period 
January 1-May 22, 2013. There were reversals in FII investments into equity segment from 
India  as  well,  with  net  FII  disinvestment  into  equities  since  May  23,  2013  (till  August  30, 
2013) standing at USD 2.8 billion as compared to the investment of USD 14.35 billion during 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The currency depreciated by 17.3 per cent; 
India’s equity market was down by 7.9 per cent; 
10 year interest rates were higher by 123 basis points; 
the period January 1-May 22, 2013.The impact on Indian financial markets was one of the 
most severe amongst emerging markets. Between May 22 and September 4, 2013, 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
During this period, US 10 year yields rose by about 100 bps. 
The volatility in financial markets spread like a contagion through the interconnectedness in 
markets with the rupee depreciation weighing on the stock market, foreign outflows from the 
debt  market  further  aggravating  the  FX  markets  and  impacting  yields  as  also  the  equity 
markets.  Things  have  improved  considerably  since  early  September  though  the  risks  of 
heightened volatilities persist, as I will shortly discuss. 
Triggers and drivers 
20.  A  key  driver  of  capital  inflows  over  past  years  had  been  loose  monetary  policies  in 
mature  economies,  which  were  “pushing”  money  into  the  EM  world.  This  was  helped  by 
strong  growth  in  EMs,  “pulling”  money  into  those  countries.  When  both  the  factors  lost 
strength  recently,  investors  became  increasingly  concerned  about  an  exit  from  easy 
monetary  conditions,  notwithstanding  the  announcement  of  an  aggressive  expansionary 
policy in Japan. Additionally, growth in many emerging economies has lost some momentum 
recently,  while  growth  prospects  in  mature  economies  have  brightened  somewhat,  thus 
reducing the relative attractiveness for developed market investors to move capital abroad. 
The  Fed  comments  on May  22  were  the  immediate  trigger  which  brought  these factors  to 
centre stage. 
21.  India,  as  one  of  the  major  absorbers  of  foreign  capital  has  been  vulnerable  to  these 
global trends. But, it was not only India’s problem – many EMs were hit, albeit to different 
degrees with domestic macroeconomic conditions, especially the current account deficit, to 
some extent moderating or accentuating the headwinds from the tapering announcement. 
Structural factors 
22. These trends were sparked off by fears of surging global risk aversion and a worsening 
environment for capital flows in the wake of the Fed statement. There were, however, some 
domestic  structural  factors  which  aggravated  the  trends.  Key  in  this  regard  has  been  the 
deterioration  in  India’s  external  sector  performance  including  a  high  trade  and  current 
account deficit. The deterioration in the external sector, which began in Q3 of 2011–12, has 
persisted.  The  impact  of  external  developments  on  Indian  economy  was  mainly  evident 
through trade channel and more recently through finance and confidence channels. Although 
India’s  exports  started  showing  deceleration  in  month  of  October  during  FY  2011–12,  the 
impact  of  slowdown  in  major  trading  partner  countries  on  India’s  exports  was  more 
pronounced in 2012–13. During 2012–13, merchandise exports contracted by 1.8 per cent as 
compared with a rise of 21.8 per cent in 2011–12. Growth in export to major trade partner 
countries either declined or decelerated in 2012–13. In particular, exports to trading partners, 
viz., EU, China, Singapore, Hong Kong and Japan were impacted significantly. Even though 
sluggish  trend  in  exports  continued  in  Q1  of  2013–14,  there  have  been  signs  of  recovery 
from  July  2013  onwards.  Despite  slowdown  in  domestic  economy  in  2012–13,  India’s 
merchandise  imports  grew  marginally.  Although  non-oil  non-gold  imports  declined  in  
2012–13, Petroleum, Oil & Lubricants (POL) and gold imports remained at elevated levels. 
This led to widening of trade deficit from US$ 183 billion in 2011–12 to US$ 191 billion in 
2012–13.  The  larger  merchandise  trade  deficit  along  with  the  significant  deceleration  in 
services  exports  and  higher  income  payments  led  to  a  further  widening  of  the  CAD  in  
2012–13. CAD remained elevated in the first quarter of 2013–14 at 4.9 per cent of GDP but 
is expected to narrow substantially in the following quarters. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
23.  Net  investment  income  worsened  in  recent  past  reflecting  lower  interest/discount 
earnings on foreign exchange reserves and rise in interest payments on growing foreign debt 
including  NRI  deposits,  external  commercial  borrowings  and  short  term  trade  credits.  The 
CAD-GDP ratio reached a historical high of 6.5 per cent in Q3 of 2012–13 before moderating 
to  3.6  per  cent  in  Q4.  Overall,  CAD  to  GDP  ratio  stood  at  4.8  per  cent  in  2012–13  as 
compared  with  4.2  per  cent  in  2011–12.  At  this  level,  CAD  was  well  above  the  estimated 
sustainable level for India and has emerged as a key macroeconomic risk factor in recent 
period.  The  experience  showed  that  CAD  can  increase  substantially  even  in  a  low  growth 
environment  if  supply  constraints  impact  both  growth  and  external  trade  as  has  been  the 
case  with  us.  The  higher  CAD  was  accompanied  by  an  increase  in  the  proportion  of  non-
stable  flows.  These  flows,  comprising  FIIs  and  short-term  credit,  to  total  capital  flows 
accounted  for  over  half  of  the  total  capital  flows  in  2012–13  compared  with  one-third  in  
2011–12.  This  reflects  a  continued  dependence  on  short-term  flows  to  meet  the  widening 
CAD,  which can enhance the vulnerability of the economy in a scenario of adverse global 
financial conditions. 
24. As the recent events unfolded, concerns about the impact of exchange rate depreciation 
on the balance sheet of corporates and banks came to the fore. While banks in the country 
have limited direct exposure to exchange rate movements, the same is not true of corporates 
whose overseas indebtedness has risen over the last few years. Such exposures, which are 
to  some  extent,  un-hedged,  rendered  corporate  and  (indirectly)  bank  balance  sheets 
vulnerable to the sharp exchange rate movements. 
25.  There  were  concerns  about  the  size  of  the  fiscal  deficit  and  the  possibility  of  slippage 
from fiscal deficit targets although the Government is unequivocally committed not to breach 
the  fiscal  deficit  target.  Supply  side  bottlenecks  including  infrastructure  and  issues  of 
governance also weighed on growth even as GDP growth slipped in recent quarters. Supply 
side factors also ensured that inflation remained elevated and constrained monetary policy 
action for stimulating growth. It became increasingly evident that more needs to be done to 
address structural factors. 
Risks and challenges 
26. The recent episodes underscored several risks and threw up many challenges – for the 
economy, for  policy  makers  and, I must  say, for  the global  economy.  Let  me  briefly  touch 
upon some of them: 
i. 
The first challenge arose in the context of maintaining financial stability amidst the 
recent  global  turmoil  and  conducting  macro-economic  and  regulatory  policy  in 
markets which are interconnected and globally integrated. The global financial crisis, 
the Eurozone sovereign debt crisis as well as the currency market volatility over the 
last  few  months  have  emphatically  demonstrated  how  external  developments 
influence  our  domestic  macroeconomic  situation  in  complex,  uncertain  and  even 
capricious ways. In making our policies, we have to factor in external developments, 
particularly  the  spillover  impact  of  the  policies  of  advanced  economies  on  our 
macro-economy. This will become even more important as India’s integration with 
the  global  economy  increases.  Surely,  globalization  is  a  double  edged  sword.  It 
comes with costs and benefits. 
The  recent  experience  has  once  again  demonstrated  that  vulnerabilities  in  one 
market transmit to other markets at lightening speeds often raising new challenges 
before earlier ones are addressed. The Reserve Bank tried to use the liquidity and 
interest rate channel to address the volatilities in the forex market. This resulted in a 
sharp  uptick  in  long  term  yields  and  impacted  the  functioning  of  the  money  and 
government securities markets requiring a series of market measures to arrest the 
disproportionate rise in yields and prudential measures to enable banks to manage 
the  sharply  higher  yields.  Concerns  about  the  collateral  impact  of  higher  interest 
rates on growth also emerged. 
ii. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
viii. 
The  recent  events  have  again  focused  attention  on  the  need  for  and  efficacy  of 
capital controls to manage capital flows. It has raised questions about the benefits 
and  costs  of  capital  account  liberalization.  A  recent  paper  by  Helene  Rey  of  the 
London  Business  School,6  highlights  the  fact  that  the  impossible  trinity  of  fixed 
exchange  rate,  an  open  capital  account  and  an  independent  monetary  policy  has 
now been rendered irrelevant. What is relevant today is a dilemma or an “impossible 
duo”  –  free  capital  flows  may  inevitably  mean  a  loss  of  monetary  policy 
independence. 
Till recently, in India, foreign investment in debt markets was not permitted to any 
significant degree. The market has slowly been opened up to foreign funds in recent 
years. Ironically, the outflows during the recent months happened from exactly these 
markets  reaffirming  the  belief  that  opening  up  of  debt  markets  needs  to  be 
approached with caution. 
In fact, the Reserve Bank did introduce some pre-emptive measures to limit capital 
outflows by residents but these in some ways affected sentiments in the economy – 
highlighting the importance of the confidence channel. The challenge going forward 
in managing the capital account will clearly be on ensuring that measures are taken 
in  a  nuanced  manner  so  that  the  measures  themselves  do  not  exacerbate  the 
situation. 
The recent events have refocused attention on the adequacy of foreign exchange 
reserves.  The  Reserve  Bank  has,  in  recent  years,  permitted  market  forces  to 
determine the level of the currency. Intervention has been infrequent and essentially 
to  manage  excessive  volatility. 
In  recent  months,  however,  more  frequent 
interventions  have  been  necessary  given  the  growing  turbulence  in  the  foreign 
exchange  market.  We  understand  that  this  has  been  the  experience  of  other 
emerging markets as well. 
The  role  of  offshore  or  NDF  markets  is  also  being  debated  in  the  context  of  the 
recent events for currencies which are not fully convertible. A study conducted in the 
Reserve Bank7 suggests that there is a long term relationship between the spot and 
the NDF markets. During periods of rupee appreciation, the relationship is generally 
bi-directional. During periods of rupee depreciation, however, the relationship could 
turn  uni-directional  from  the  NDF  to  the  on-shore  market,  potentially  resulting  in 
greater spillovers of international shocks. This has raised the need for much greater 
policy coordination between countries than has been the case so far, particularly as 
currencies  of  many  EMEs  including  India  are  officially  not  allowed  to  be  traded 
overseas under the current capital account management framework. 
Another  challenge  has  arisen  in  the  context  of  central  bank  communication, 
especially  during  volatile  times.  Our  experience  has  been  that  when  markets  are 
volatile  and  trending  downwards,  no  news  is  good  news.  Many  policy  measures 
have been misinterpreted by a market waiting to look at the worst possible scenario 
at  every  juncture.  We  have  been  accused  of  not  being  serious  about  addressing 
rupee volatility, trying our own version of “operation twist”, flip flopping on policy, etc. 
In fact, the efficacy of our measures are yet to be fully tested and, I hope I am not 
speaking too soon, there has been quite a bit of normalcy in our markets over the 
last few weeks. 
                                                
6   “Dilemma not trilemma: The Global Financial Cycle and Monetary Policy Independence”, Paper presented by 
Professor Helene Rey, London School of Economics, at the Jackson Hole Symposium, August 2013. 
7   Reserve  Bank  of 
P1_02ECRV220813.pdf) 
India,  Annual  Report,  2012–13 
(http://rbidocs.rbi.org.in/rdocs/AnnualReport/PDFs/ 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
ix. 
Finally,  for  India,  of  course,  the  greatest  challenge  will  be  to  the  address  the 
structural vulnerabilities which exacerbated the impact of global developments. This 
will be critical for enhancing the resilience of the economy to global headwinds of 
instability. 
Silver linings 
27.  To  address  vulnerabilities  arising  out  of  high  trade  and  current  account  deficit,  the 
Government  and  the  Reserve  Bank  have  undertaken  various  measures  in  recent  period. 
These measures  mainly  aimed  at  boosting  exports,  curbing  imports  and facilitating foreign 
capital  flows.  A  series  of  measures  have  been  taken  to  rein  in  imports,  especially  gold 
imports, in the recent months. These have been reflected in a significant moderation in CAD 
in Q4 of 2012–13. Though the CAD in the first quarter of 2013–14 was higher at 4.9 per cent 
of  GDP,  going  forward,  it  is  expected  that  the  deficit  would  moderate  significantly  due  to 
reduced imports of gold, growing exports, particularly in the context of improved economic 
conditions of the advanced countries and the lagged impact of the rupee depreciation on the 
trade balance. Our foreign exchange reserves can be considered comfortable with a reserve 
cover of over 35 months to the CAD. The government has reaffirmed its commitment to fiscal 
consolidation  and  it  is  expected  that  the  targets  will  be  met.  Domestic  growth  is  also 
expected to rebound given a still high savings rate, a good monsoon performance this year 
and  measures  being  taken  by  the  policy  makers  to  boost  investments  and  attract  foreign 
investment  flows.  There  are  of  course  risks  –  the  spillovers  of  exit  from  accommodative 
monetary policy in the advanced economies that we are discussing today and the possibility 
of recurrence of geo-political tensions and their consequent impact on oil prices. 
Way ahead 
28. I have used the sequence of events between May 22 and the first week of August 2013 
to illustrate the risks from exit from unconventional monetary policies. Some calm appears to 
have  been  restored  to  markets  especially,  after  the  decision  by  the  Federal  Reserve,  on 
September 18, not to commence tapering. But, what is clear is that the commencement of 
tapering has only been postponed. Markets have already begun speculating when the Fed 
would start the tapering. Will it be October? Will it be December? Or would the Fed wait till 
early  2014?  As  these  uncertainties  persist,  volatility  may  return  to  markets.  The  on-going 
fiscal  face-off  in  the  US,  which  also  carries  the  risk  of  US  defaulting  on  its  debt  has 
introduced another set of uncertainties for the global financial markets and growth outlook in 
the US and other countries. There is, hence, a need to look ahead and chalk out a plan of 
action, ideally a global plan of action, to address the risks. 
29.  The  recent  events  serves  as  a  useful  lesson  in  caution  to  both  those  who  are 
contemplating exiting and those who are likely to be on the receiving end of any spillovers. 
Fortunately, the incentives of both groups at a broader level are well aligned. Neither would 
like to see a disorderly exit. It is, however, unlikely that any one country’s policy needs will 
suit others since economic conditions differ across countries and their business cycles are 
not perfectly aligned. Different countries currently employing unconventional monetary policy 
will no doubt want to exit at different times. EMEs and others who are affected by the exits, in 
many cases, will also find it does not meet their immediate needs. To some extent, however, 
the lack of synchronicity may be helpful, allowing for some offset, so everyone is not moving 
in the same direction at once. 
30.  History  does  have  examples  of  past  exits  from  accommodative  monetary  policy  which 
could be instructive to review. After the 1990–91 crisis, the Fed hiked rates in February 1994. 
The  hike  was  largely  unanticipated  by  markets,  policy  rates  were  raised  sharply  within  a 
relatively short span of time. Resultantly, there was a sharp and sudden rise in bond yields 
with significant international spillover effects on global financial markets. In contrast, in 2004, 
the Fed’s exit from accommodative monetary policy was largely anticipated. Also, the pace of 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
the  argument 
increase was gradual. This time around the impact on global markets was significantly limited 
especially as compared with the 1994–95 cycle. 
31.  Experience  with  an  exit  of  the  scale  and  magnitude  currently  being  faced  is  however 
lacking,  implying  thereby  that  the  risks  from  exit  will  need  to  be  even  more  carefully 
managed.  The  key  message  and  the  major  challenge  for  all  exiting  central  bankers  is  the 
need  for  clear  and  transparent  communication  about  intent  on  purchases,  holdings  and 
policy  rates.  Of  course,  to  the  extent  that  markets  have  become  over-optimistic,  any 
communication may entail significant and abrupt adjustment of asset prices and exchange 
rates.  This  does  not  weaken 
for  effective  communication.  Opaque 
communication or conflicting signals may not prevent the eventual adjustment, and may even 
induce greater volatility in markets. What is unclear is whether the recent market reactions 
suggested an overreaction, a front-loaded reaction, or a small taste of what is to come. It is 
clear from the recent events that the global policy coordination process needs to pay more 
attention to monetary policy than it has so far. There are challenges to this. Central banks 
typically  guard  their  independence.  We  will  need  to  find  a  way  to  balance  such  national 
autonomy with greater international accountability. 
32. The need for coordination of fiscal policy among the systemically important countries is 
now  accepted,  particularly  from  the  point  of  view  of  growth  and  development  across 
economies  –  developed  &  emerging.  There  is  an  equally  compelling  case  to  include 
monetary policy in the reserve country currencies in a co-operative framework. These issues 
were  flagged  in  the  recently  concluded  G20  summit  in  Moscow.  In  fact,  bilateral  and 
multilateral arrangements may also have a critical role to play in addressing the risks from 
tapering. Markets were soothed when we recently increased the quantum of our swap lines 
with  Japan.  These  are  contingency  lines  which  we  do  not  expect  to  use  but  nevertheless 
they provide the comfort of a backstop. The joint statement issued after the sixth China-India 
Financial  Dialogue 
importance  of  bilateral 
communication and cooperation. 
33. Let me sum up by flagging some issues which need to be discussed in global fora. To 
what  extent  should  countries  take  cognisance  of  spillovers?  Do  countries  sufficiently 
internalise spillovers? Should countries posing systemic risks to the global financial system 
assume a higher burden of mitigating such risks? What are the pros and cons of enhanced 
cooperation and what form should such cooperation take – increased dialogue, liquidity/swap 
arrangements, bilateral agreements, etc. 
last  month  also  acknowledges 
late 
the 
Concluding thoughts 
34. It is clear now that the developments of the last few decades have resulted in a global 
economy  which  is  closely 
integrated  and  interconnected.  There  are  benefits  from 
globalisation.  It  is  indeed  difficult  to  argue  against  the  benefits  of  cross  border  flows.  But 
there are clearly associated costs. The challenges of globalization are only accentuated by 
the  uncertainties  surrounding  events  and  developments  in  the  global  economy.  We  were 
rudely  and  abruptly  brought  face  to  face  with  these  challenges  in  the  recent  months. 
Fortunately,  volatilities  have  retreated  but  the  only  certainty  is  that  the  uncertainties  will 
remain  even  while  uncertainty  about  certainties  persists.  It  is,  however,  critical  that  we 
prepare well to meet the challenges of uncertainties. Our structural vulnerabilities, including 
those arising out of macro-economic imbalances in the external and fiscal fronts need to be 
addressed.  This  is  not  to  say  that  we  will  then  become  immune  from  global  shocks. 
Therefore,  we  will  need  to  build  our  resilience  to  such  shocks  as  countries  like  India  with 
deeper fault lines are more vulnerable to the vagaries of capital flows. It is imperative to have 
deeper  financial  markets  which  enable  absorption  of  such  shocks  with  relatively  greater 
equanimity. For example, we need infrastructure which facilitates, in fact, incentivises market 
players to efficiently hedge their foreign exchange and interest rate risks without, of course, 
providing perverse incentives to indulge in excessive speculation, thereby adding to the risks 
of the firms at the micro-level and the financial system at the macro-level. Above all we have 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
to strive to build a strong national balance sheet with focus on growth and development that 
would sustain the interest of investors, both domestic and international, and shock-proof our 
economy and the financial markets. 
35.  Let  me  once  again  congratulate  the  Department  of  Business  Economics  of  Delhi 
University South Campus for selecting a very topical and relevant theme for this convention. I 
wish the convention every success. Thank you. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
