Sayuri Shirai: Japan’s economic activity, prices, and monetary policy – 
some perspectives on the slope of the Phillips curve 
Speech by Ms Sayuri Shirai, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting 
with business leaders, Tokushima, 27 November 2013. 
 Introduction 
I.  
Good morning. It is a great honor to have this opportunity to visit Tokushima Prefecture and 
meet with local representatives. This is my first visit, so I am really looking forward to learning 
from you about this region through an exchange of views. In addition, I would like to express 
my sincere gratitude for your cooperation with the activities of the Bank of Japan’s local office 
in Tokushima and the Takamatsu Branch. 
As  you  may  know,  at  the  Monetary  Policy  Meeting  (MPM)  held  on  October  31,  2013,  the 
Bank updated its outlook for Japan’s economic growth rate and rate of price changes over 
the three-year period through fiscal 2015. Also in October, the Bank released the Outlook for 
Economic Activity and Prices (hereafter the Outlook Report). The Outlook Report describes 
the Bank’s baseline scenario as well as upside and downside risks to the scenario from fiscal 
2013 to fiscal 2015. I believe that promoting the public’s understanding of the Bank’s outlook 
is an essential step in the conduct of monetary policy, so my speech today will focus on the 
main features of the report. 
Let me briefly describe the sequence of my speech, which contains five sections. In Section 
II,  I  will  explain  the  Bank’s  outlook  for  Japan’s  economic  activity  and  prices  (the  baseline 
scenario), touching on my views. In Section III, I will review the upside and downside risks to 
the baseline scenario, referring to my views and my related proposal that was presented at 
the  October  31  MPM.  In  Section  IV,  I  will  discuss  my  current  thinking  on  a  number  of 
“conceptual channels” that might lead to achieving the 2 percent price stability target adopted 
in  January  2013  with  a  sustainable  economic  growth  path  based  on  the  concept  of  the 
Phillips curve, which shows the empirical relationship between the rate of price changes and 
the output gap (the difference between actual and potential GDP). Finally, in Section V, I will 
present  my  proposal  to  improve  the  structure  of  the  Outlook  Report,  to  make  the  Bank’s 
communication strategy more effective. Following my speech, I look forward to hearing your 
candid opinions on its contents as well as the situation of the local economy. 
Baseline scenario of the outlook for economic activity and prices 
II.  
I will begin by describing the current condition of and the Bank’s outlook for economic activity 
based on the contents of the October 2013 Outlook Report, covering the projection period 
through fiscal 2015. This will be followed by my views on this outlook. Then, I will present the 
current condition of and the Bank’s outlook for prices in the same manner. 
Current condition of and outlook for economic activity 
A.  
Japan’s economy has been recovering moderately. On the demand side, exports have been 
picking up at a somewhat slower pace, but domestic demand – notably private consumption, 
public investment, and housing investment – has been firm. Reflecting the differences in the 
extent of recovery strength between domestic and external demand, the pace of increase in 
industrial production has remained moderate while activity in the nonmanufacturing sector, 
including services and construction, has been somewhat strong. 
Looking  ahead,  while  domestic  demand  is  likely  to  maintain  firmness,  external  demand  is 
expected  to  increase  moderately.  Therefore,  Japan’s  economy  is  projected  to  continue 
growing  throughout  the  projection  period  at  a  pace  above  its  potential  rate  of  growth 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
(considered to be around 0.5 percent on average). The projection would remain unchanged 
even if the economy were affected by the front-loaded increase and subsequent decline in 
demand  prior  to  and  after  the  two  scheduled  consumption  tax  hikes,  in  April  2014  and 
October 2015. 
The above projection just mentioned assumes four underlying developments. 
• 
Stimulative effects of the accommodative financial conditions on private demand are 
likely to strengthen as economic activity improves. 
Overseas economies are expected to pick up gradually – particularly the advanced 
economies  –  on  the  assumption  that  global  financial  markets  remain  generally 
stable. 
Public investment is expected to remain at a high level through the first half of fiscal 
2014,  mainly  reflecting  additional  economic  measures  to  be  implemented  by  the 
government as well as the effects of various past economic measures. 
Firms’ and households’ medium- to long-term growth expectations are expected to 
rise  moderately,  due  mainly  to  the  adoption  of  the  regulatory  and  institutional 
reforms  and  various  tax  reduction  measures  by  the  government,  as  well  as  firms’ 
efforts  to  expand  domestic  and  external  demand  with  innovative  goods  and 
services. 
   A comparison of the current projection with that in the July 2013 interim assessment leads to 
the judgment that the real GDP growth rates are expected to be more or less unchanged. 
Nonetheless,  the  “median”  of  the  Policy  Board  members’  forecasts  showed  slight 
modifications; namely, the real GDP growth rate is currently projected to reach 2.7 percent 
(2.8 percent in the July assessment) in fiscal 2013, 1.5 percent (1.3 percent) in fiscal 2014, 
and 1.5 percent (1.5 percent) in fiscal 2015 (Chart 1). 
My  view  is  more  or  less  in  line  with  this  baseline  scenario.  To  highlight  some  differences, 
however,  my  baseline  projections  of  the  real  GDP  growth  rates  for  fiscal  2014  and  fiscal 
2015  are  somewhat  lower  than  the  median  of  the  forecasts.  This  relatively  conservative 
outlook has remained unchanged since the time of assessment in April (when the April 2013 
Outlook  Report  was  released)  and  July  this  year. The main  reason I  have  maintained  this 
outlook is that while the additional economic measures to be introduced by the government 
will likely raise the economic growth rates for fiscal 2014 and fiscal 2015, I believe that at 
present  this  positive  effect  may  be  offset  by  other  countervailing  factors  –  namely,  the 
moderate recovery pace of real exports and industrial production. 
Indeed, the actual export performance has been unimpressive so far (Chart 2); and, I judged 
that the outlook for real exports and industrial production should be adjusted downward to 
some  extent  as  well.  A  look  at  developments  in  overseas  economies  shows  that  the 
economic  growth  landscape  has  changed  drastically  this  year.  In  other  words,  the  growth 
dynamic has been reversed, and emerging and commodity-exporting economies are losing 
momentum  while  advanced  economies  are  improving.  This  dynamic  is  likely  to  continue 
since  the  pace  of  increase  in  the  economic  growth  rate  is  likely  to  be  faster  in  advanced 
economies than in emerging and commodity-exporting economies in the future. However, the 
recovery  path  in  the  advanced  economies  is  neither  robust  nor  strong,  since  their  output 
gaps  are  likely  to  remain  negative  throughout  the  projection  period.1  Although  the 
                                                
1   The  IMF’s  World  Economic  Outlook  (October  2013)  reports  that  the  real  GDP  growth  rate  for  advanced 
economies is projected to reach 1.2 percent in 2013, 2.0 percent in 2014, and 2.5 percent in 2015. That for 
emerging economies and developing countries is projected to reach 4.5 percent, 5.1 percent, and 5.3 percent, 
respectively. The output gap, whose projection is available for advanced economies up to 2014, is reported to 
be  minus  2.9  percent  in  2013  and  2.5  percent  in  2014.  The  OECD  Economic  Outlook  (November  2013) 
reports  that  the  output  gap  for  the  OECD  economies  is  projected  to  be  minus  2.6  percent  in  2013,  minus 
2.3 percent in 2014, and minus 1.8 percent in 2015. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
improvement  in  external  demand  is  likely  to  increase  Japan’s  exports  of  items  such  as 
automobiles and capital goods, this increase may not be as large as that in the past recovery 
phase owing to the effects of the ongoing shift of production sites overseas and a change in 
the dynamic of international competitiveness. 
Current condition of and outlook for prices 
B.  
The year-on-year rate of increase in the core consumer price index (headline CPI excluding 
fresh  food)  has  been  positive  since  June  this  year  and  has  recently  been  in  the  range  of  
0.5–1.0 percent. In the October 2013 Outlook Report, it was judged that the outlook for the 
year-on-year rate of change in the core CPI (excluding the direct effects of the consumption 
tax hikes) was expected to follow a rising trend and was likely to reach around 2 percent – 
the price stability target – toward the latter half of the projection period. 
This baseline scenario reflects the following assumptions about the developments of three 
factors that will primarily determine the inflation rate going forward. 
• 
The  aggregate  supply  and  demand  balance  (output  gap)  is  expected  to  follow  a 
moderate improving trend and expand toward the latter half of the projection period. 
Nominal wages are likely to see gradual upward pressure as a tightening of labor 
supply and demand conditions becomes evident. 
Medium- to long-term inflation expectations are likely to continue on a rising trend 
with continued monetary easing, partly supported by a rise in the observed inflation 
rate, gradually converging to around 2 percent. 
Import prices are expected to exert upward pressure for the time being, reflecting 
developments in international commodity prices and foreign exchange rates. 
  Comparing the current projection with that in the July 2013 interim assessment, the October 
2013 Outlook Report concluded that the projected rates of change in the core CPI (excluding 
the direct effects of the consumption tax hikes) are more or less unchanged. However, the 
median of the Policy Board members’ forecasts changed slightly; namely, the rate of change 
in  the  core  CPI  is  projected  to  reach  0.7  percent  (0.6  percent  at  the  July  assessment) for 
fiscal 2013, while those for fiscal 2014 and fiscal 2015 remain the same at 1.3 percent and 
1.9  percent  excluding  the  effects  of  the  tax  hikes,  and  at  3.3  percent  and  2.6  percent 
including the effects of the tax hikes, respectively (Chart 1). 
This  baseline  scenario  is  more  or  less  consistent  with  my  assessment.  However,  some 
differences are present; that is, under my baseline scenario, projections for fiscal 2014 and 
fiscal 2015 are somewhat lower than the median of the Policy Board members’ forecasts. As 
is the case with the April and July 2013 assessments, I judge that the core CPI is expected to 
rise  toward  2  percent  at  a  more  moderate  pace  than  that  of  the  median.  My  relatively 
conservative views for fiscal 2014 and fiscal 2015 arise from the assumption that a rise in 
medium- to long-term inflation expectations toward 2 percent is likely to occur gradually from 
now on and that it may take some time for an improvement in the output gap to be reflected 
in the observed rate of inflation. 
Upside and downside risks to the baseline scenario 
III.  
Next, I would like to review the upside and downside risks to the Bank’s baseline scenario 
that were presented in the October 2013 Outlook Report. After that, I will present my own 
views. Before proceeding, I would like to note that the judgment on risk factors is subject to 
adjustment in the future assessments, depending on changes in economic conditions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Risk to economic activity 
A. 
The  October  2013  Outlook  Report  puts  particular  stress  on  the  following  five  factors  as 
upside  and  downside  risks  to  the  Bank’s  baseline  scenario  for  the  economy  (or  real  GDP 
growth rates). 
• 
Performance  of  overseas  economies:  warranting  close  attention  are  the effects  of 
new  energy  sources  and  consequences  of  fiscal  problems  in  the  United  States, 
European debt problems, China’s excess production capacity and debt issues, and 
economic developments together with developments in the global financial markets 
in  some  emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies  that  are  facing  current 
account deficits. 
Developments  in  households’  employment  and  income  situation:  close  attention 
should  be  paid  to  whether  firms,  in  the  face  of  intense  competition,  will  increase 
wages by taking into account an improvement in corporate profits. 
Effects of the consumption tax hikes:2 while the tax hikes will have adverse effects 
on households’ real disposable income, the adverse effects on consumption may be 
mitigated to some extent by (1) scheduled economic measures to be taken by the 
government, (2) the high probability that the tax hikes are already factored in among 
households,  and  (3)  the  positive  effect  of  alleviating  households’  future  concerns 
over the fiscal condition and the social security system. 
Developments in firms’ and households’ medium- to long-term growth expectations: 
these expectations may be affected by future regulatory and institutional reforms as 
well  as  tax  reforms,  firms’  innovation,  and  households’  income  situation.  From  a 
somewhat  long-term  perspective,  some  positive  effects  from  the  hosting  of  the 
Tokyo 2020 Summer Olympic Games might be expected. 
Medium-  to  long-term  fiscal  sustainability:  a  decline  in  confidence  in  fiscal 
sustainability  may  lead  the  economy  downward  through,  for  example,  excessive 
rises in long-term interest rates. The opposite would occur if confidence in the path 
toward fiscal consolidation strengthens. 
    Following  a  review  of  these  upside  and  downside  risks,  the  October  2013  Outlook  Report 
assessed that risks to the Bank’s baseline scenario are “balanced” as a whole. 
My views and proposal on risks to economic activity 
B.  
In principle, I view the aforementioned list of risk factors as important elements. However, I 
do  not  feel  very  comfortable  with  the  Bank’s  overall  risk  assessment  related  to  Japan’s 
economy as being “balanced.” This is because, based on my observation of various data, the 
downside  risks  appear  to  be  somewhat  greater  than  the  upside  risks  at  this  stage.  In 
addition, I found it important to indicate in a frank manner my awareness of greater downside 
risks  to  the  public  and  market  participants,  as  this  might  contribute  to  enhancing  their 
confidence in the Bank’s conduct of monetary policy and thereby provide them with a greater 
sense  of  security  regarding  the  future  economic  situation.  Therefore,  at  the  MPM  held  on 
October 31, 2013, I voted against the risk assessment described in the Outlook Report and 
presented  a  new  proposal  (the  first  point  of  my  proposal  that  I  made  at  the  MPM).  My 
proposal  was  to  insert  the  following  description  in  the  last  part  of  subsection  “A.  Risks  to 
Economic Activity” in Section II titled “Upside and Downside Risks,” in the Outlook Report: 
“on the whole, attention should be paid to the downside risks since there is a high degree of 
                                                
2  
I submitted a proposal at the MPM held on April 26, 2013, due to a lack of sufficient description of the risk 
analysis in the Outlook Report. This point was improved in the October 2013 Outlook Report, where a risk 
factor description has become much clearer. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
uncertainty  regarding  developments  in  overseas  economies  and  households’  employment 
and income situation.” 
Let  me  explain  my  views  on  the  risks  to  economic  activity  in  detail.  Overseas  economies 
remain unlikely to fall into severe recession or face tail risk. However, since April 2013 I have 
been claiming consistently that “on balance, the risks are tilted somewhat to the downside.” 
This is because of uncertainty associated with the pace of recovery in overseas economies. 
Moreover, considerable time has passed since the yen depreciated sharply from late 2012, 
but the rate of growth in real exports appears to have remained sluggish, even after taking 
into  account  the  J-curve  effect  and  the  slow  pace  of  recovery  in  overseas  demand.  This 
means  that  the  mediocre  performance  of  exports  may  be  reflecting  structural  factors  –  in 
addition to cyclical factors – such as a continuing shift of Japanese firms’ production sites to 
overseas and a change in their international competitiveness. 
Moreover, compared with the projections in the April and July 2013 assessments, I judge that 
uncertainty over developments in global financial markets and overseas economies has 
increased  moderately,  which  may  lead  to  underperformance  in  my  baseline  scenario.  My 
concerns are focused especially on the following aspects. 
• 
Developments  in  global  financial  markets:  as  recovery  in  advanced  economies 
proceeds, differences in the monetary policy stance among major central banks may 
become  more  apparent.  This  may  cause  frequent  changes  in  market  participants’ 
views regarding the direction of accommodative monetary policy measures and the 
interpretations  of  forward  guidance.  The  resulting  impact  of  such  behavior  of 
investors on financial markets and the global economy warrants close attention. 
The  performance  of  the  U.S.  economy:  owing  in  part  to  postponement  of  the 
resolution  of  fiscal  and  debt  issues  until  early  2014  as  well  as  to  the  associated 
political and economic uncertainties, it is not clear whether the U.S. economy will be 
able to post economic growth above its potential growth rate – which is an annual 
rate of about 2.2 percent for 2013 to 2018 as projected by the Congressional Budget 
Office  (CBO).  Recent  economic  growth  rates  have  been  higher  than  the  potential 
rate.  This  is  a  welcome  development,  but  the  pace  of  growth  in  business  fixed 
investment  and  private  consumption  (excluding  automobiles)  has  been  slow,  and 
therefore these developments require caution. The recovery in the housing market 
should  also  be  closely  monitored,  since  there  is  some  uncertainty  whether  the 
recovery in the number of mortgage applications will be solid amid higher levels of 
mortgage interest rates and stringent lending attitudes toward first-time buyers. 
The performance of the European economy: the euro area economy has bottomed 
out  and  shows  signs  of  a  moderate  pick-up  in  recent  months.  Japan’s  exports  to 
Europe have also begun to increase. However, the banking sector within the euro 
area remains fragmented, and thus countries in the area still have lending interest 
rate differentials. Attention needs to be paid to uncertainty regarding Asset Quality 
Reviews and stress tests to be conducted by the European Central Bank (ECB) over 
the twelve months from November 2013 and the associated recapitalization process 
that  may  occur.  The  recent  disinflation  trend  in  the  euro  area  may  aggravate  the 
repayment burden of peripheral countries as they seek to reduce their public- and 
private-sector debt, hampering their economic recovery. The internal devaluation in 
the euro area may also become harder to achieve. 
Developments in emerging and commodity-exporting economies: given that growth 
in these economies has been lacking momentum in recent months, it is possible that 
a  weaker-than-projected  growth  performance  will  materialize.  Countries  facing 
structural problems (such as current account deficits) as well as strong cross-border 
links with global financial markets may be more prone to the reversal of capital flows 
and changes in liquidity conditions in the securities and foreign exchange markets. 
The resultant tightening of financial conditions, together with the necessity to tighten 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
 the fiscal and monetary policies to cope with capital outflows in these economies, 
may undermine their economic recovery path. 
Performance  of  the  Chinese  economy:  while  the  rate  of  economic  growth 
accelerated from 7.5 percent in the second quarter of 2013 to 7.8 percent in the third 
quarter, the sustainability of the current economic growth rate is uncertain, given the 
rise in the ratio of private-sector debt to GDP, concerns over the shadow banking 
system,  the  rapid  pace  of  real  estate  price  hikes  in  the  metropolitan  areas,  and 
unresolved excess production capacity in some industries. 
As  for  domestic  demand,  greater  attention  should  be  paid  to  the  downside  risks  on  the 
following fronts, relative to the assessments made in April and July 2013. 
• 
Developments in wage growth: there is a possibility that the rate of wage growth will 
not  catch  up  with  that  of  inflation.  Alternatively,  wealth  effects may  not sufficiently 
offset a potential decline in real disposable income. Wealth effects appear to have 
become less pronounced, since the rising trend in stock prices and exchange rates 
appears to have leveled off from the second half of 2013.3 On this front, future asset 
price  movements  –  together  with  the  recent  rise  in  stock  prices  and  the  yen’s 
depreciation – should be monitored closely. While private consumption will remain a 
major driving force of Japan’s economic growth in the immediate future, it may not 
be as resilient as projected once the effects of the front-loaded increase in demand 
prior to the consumption tax hike in April 2014 dissipate. 
Developments in business fixed investment: business fixed investment is expected 
to  increase  in  the  fields  of  maintenance  and  replacement,  energy  savings  and 
rationalization,  and  investment  in  earthquake  resistance  as  well  as  research  and 
development (R&D). This is because many firms have postponed their investment 
for  several  years  due  to  a  series  of  negative  shocks.  Nonetheless,  investment  to 
expand  production  capacity  may  be  limited  if  firms  do  not  foresee  a  sustainable 
increase in domestic sales. On the whole, growth in business fixed investment may 
turn  out  to  be  more  moderate  than  projected,  particularly  in  the  manufacturing 
sector, where increased investment has just begun to take place. 
Sustainability of households’ and firms’ medium- to long-term growth expectations: a 
sustainable  increase  in  consumption  and  business  fixed  investment  as  well  as 
associated credit demand may not be feasible without a steady increase in growth 
expectations. For example, according to the Bank’s Opinion Survey on the General 
Public’s  Views  and  Behavior  conducted  in  September  2013,  the  “growth  potential 
diffusion index (DI)” of Japan’s economy deteriorated from minus 26.7 percentage 
points in June to minus 36.8 percentage points in September. This may, however, 
be  attributable  to  the  fact  that  the  September  survey  was  conducted  before  the 
announcement of Tokyo’s successful bid to host the 2020 Summer Olympic Games. 
  Risks to prices 
C.  
Turing  to  risk  factors  related  to  prices,  the  October  2013  Outlook  Report  points  out  the 
following upside and downside risks. 
                                                
3   The  Annual  Report  on  the  Japanese  Economy  and  Public  Finance  2009  compiled  by  the  Cabinet  Office 
presents  an  empirical  analysis  of  the  consumption  function.  It  showed  that  an  increase  in  stock  assets  of 
100 yen leads to a rise in consumption of 3.5 yen. This effect is larger in the United States, partly because of 
the  differences  in  exposure  to  stocks  between  the  two  countries.  In  the  United  States,  the  share  of 
stockholdings in financial assets exceeded 40 percent for all age groups (as of 2007). By contrast, the share 
of stockholdings in Japan increased with age and reached a maximum level of slightly less than 15 percent for 
the 70–75 age group (as of 2008). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Developments in firms’ and households’ medium- to long-term inflation expectations: 
while there is a possibility that inflation expectations may not readily rise in reflection 
of the moderate decline in prices and wages observed in the past, there is also a 
possibility  that  they  will  rise  relatively  quickly  with  a  rise  in  observed  inflation  and 
wages.  Effects  on  these  expectations  of  a  price  increase  associated  with  the 
consumption tax hikes in items across the board warrant attention. 
Uncertainty  regarding  the  responsiveness  of  prices  to  the  output  gap:  attention 
needs to be paid to whether firms will raise prices and wages in accordance with the 
extent to which the supply and demand balances in goods and services as well as in 
the labor market tighten over time. 
Developments  in  import  prices:  there  is  a  high  degree  of  uncertainty  regarding 
developments  in  import  prices  reflecting  fluctuations  in  international  commodity 
prices and foreign exchange rates, and the extent to which such developments are 
passed on to domestic prices. 
In the Outlook Report, the Bank assessed upside and downside risks on the price front as 
being  “largely  balanced,”  although  considerable  uncertainty  surrounds  developments  in 
medium- to long-term inflation expectations. 
My views and proposal on risks to prices 
D.  
The  aforementioned  list  of  risk  factors  related  to  prices  has  been  covered  sufficiently. 
However,  I  do  not  agree  with  the  overall  assessment  of  risks  on  the  price  front  as  being 
“largely  balanced,”  since,  based  on  my  observation  of  various  data,  the  downside  risks 
appear to be greater than the upside risks at this stage. As in the assessments made in April 
and  July  2013,  I  have  held  the  view  that  “on  balance  the  risks  are  tilted  somewhat  to  the 
downside.” Currently, however, I hold the strong view that greater attention should be paid to 
the downside risks at this stage. This is why I voted against the assessment described in the 
Outlook Report at the MPM held on October 31, 2013, with a new proposal (the second point 
of  my  proposal).  My  proposal  was  to  insert  the  following  description  in  the  last  part  of 
subsection  “B.  Risks  to  Prices”  in  Section  II  titled  “Upside  and  Downside  Risks,”  in  the 
Outlook Report: “on the whole, attention should be paid to the downside risks, because there 
is  a  high  degree  of  uncertainty  regarding  developments  in  medium-  to  long-term  inflation 
expectations  and  the  responsiveness  of  prices  to  the  aggregate  supply  and  demand 
balance.” Let me explain my concern in more detail. 
Recent Developments in Medium- to long-term inflation expectations 
Developments  in  “medium-  to  long-term”  inflation  expectations  that  are  affecting  the 
intercept  of  the  Phillips  curve  have  been  closely  monitored  by  the  Bank  as  one  of  the 
essential factors for achieving the 2 percent target. The related indicators exhibited a rapid 
increase  in  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  from  late  2012.  In  recent  months, 
however,  while  some  indicators  showed  an  uptrend,  several  others  have  showed  a  slow 
pace of increase or been more or less flat (Chart 3).4 Also, these inflation expectations are 
                                                
4   “Short-term” inflation expectations are more prone to current actual price developments and thus tend to be 
more  volatile  than  “medium-  to  long-term”  inflation  expectations  (Chart  4).  In  addition,  the  scheduled 
consumption tax hikes (an increase from 5 to 8 percent in April 2014 and an increase from 8 to 10 percent in 
October 2015) are likely to further raise “households’ short-term” inflation expectations, if the effects of these 
consumption tax hikes are factored in sufficiently. “Households’ medium- to long-term” inflation expectations 
will increase further if the term for these expectations covers the period in which the two tax hikes occur, but if 
the term covers a longer period of time the effects of the tax hikes will be diluted. As April 2014 approaches, 
short-term inflation expectations may rise further, and in fiscal 2014 they may exceed 2 percent in view of the 
effects of the tax hike, monetary accommodation, and the lagged impact of the yen’s depreciation. Attention 
should therefore be paid to whether short-term inflation expectations will turn out as expected. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
still  well  below  the  2  percent  target  and  thus  there  is  uncertainty  as  to  whether  these 
expectations  will  rise  to  the  level  of  2  percent  during  the  projection  period.  For  example, 
breakeven inflation (BEI) rates increased rapidly in line with the yen’s depreciation from late 
2012, although such a strong correlation had not been present earlier (Chart 5). However, 
the BEI rates appear to have become more or less constant since mid-2013, and this trend 
appears to be in line with the relatively stabilized exchange rate of the yen against the U.S. 
dollar. 
Changes in price responsiveness to the output gap 
Another important factor that could contribute to the achievement of the 2 percent target – in 
addition to the increase in inflation expectations – is an increase in the “responsiveness of 
prices to the output gap” (or the slope of the Phillips curve). In general, the slope of the 
Phillips curve steepens when firms find it easier to raise their sales prices or pass their input 
costs  on  to  their  sales  prices  given  the  level  of  the  output  gap.  Also,  an  increase  in  the 
frequency of price adjustments will promote a steepening in the Phillips curve. The current 
situation signals a possibility that the price-setting environment of firms may be improving. 
Meanwhile,  severe  competition  among firms  may  discourage  them from  raising  their  sales 
prices,  if  their  concerns increase  over  a  possible  loss  of market  share. Especially  in  fiscal 
2014,  the  Phillips  curve  may  remain  largely  unchanged  owing  to  the  high  degree  of 
uncertainty associated with the consumption tax hike. If many firms perceive that the price 
increase triggered by the tax hike could be sufficiently large to constrain household domestic 
demand,  they  may  partially  postpone  raising  their  final  sales  prices  (those  related  to  the 
effect of the output gap and a rise in inflation expectations) beyond the increase related to 
the tax hike in and after fiscal 2015 – that is, not fully raised within fiscal 2014. In such an 
event, the responsiveness of prices to the output gap would remain limited and the outcome 
for  prices  in  fiscal  2014  could  be  lower  than  projected  by  the  Bank.  Please  note  that  this 
remark has nothing to do with the debate on the timing of the tax hikes. In this regard, let me 
remind you that I have been supporting the scheduled introduction of the consumption tax 
hikes,  with  a  view  to  maintaining  fiscal  soundness  and  sustainability  of  the  social  security 
system. 
My proposal related to the assessment on the “path” toward achieving the 2 percent 
target 
Based on the observations just described, I judged that the current path toward achieving the 
2  percent  target  entails  uncertainty.  Reasons  for  this  judgment  can  be  summarized  as 
follows. 
• 
Although prices of a wide range of consumption items have begun to increase, the 
fact that the core CPI inflation rate has been increasing in positive territory is largely 
attributable  to  the  lagged  impact  of  the  yen’s  depreciation  at  this  stage  and  the 
increase  in  energy  prices.  The  effects  to  the  price  rise  of  the  improvement  in  the 
output gap and an increase in inflation expectations need to be confirmed with more 
evidence. 
The pace of the increase in medium- to long-term inflation expectations appears to 
have moderated or become more or less flat in recent months. 
There  is  a  considerable  difference  between  medium-  to  long-term  inflation 
expectations and the 2 percent target. 
  Thus,  my  judgment  is  not  consistent  with  the  assessment  of  the  October  2013  Outlook 
Report placed in the final paragraph in Section III titled “Conduct of Monetary Policy,” which 
said that “Japan’s economy has been following the path toward achieving the 2 percent price 
stability  target  as  expected.”  I  voted  against  this  assessment  and  proposed  that  the 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
expression “as expected” be replaced with “at a moderate pace.” This constituted the third 
point of my proposal. 
Conceptual channels for achieving the 2 percent target 
IV.  
One  thing  that  I  wish  to  emphasize  is  that  I  continue  to  support  the  2  percent  target  with 
sustainable economic growth path. My determination to make as much effort as possible to 
achieve this target has remained intact. In this light, in Section IV of my speech I will present 
my current thinking on the “conceptual channels” that could lead to achieving the 2 percent 
target. Here, I intentionally used the term “conceptual.” This is because increasing “medium- 
to long-term” inflation expectations and anchoring them at around the 2 percent level – which 
the Bank is currently pursuing through quantitative and qualitative monetary easing (QQE) – 
is  a  challenging  task  that  no  other  major  central  bank  has  ever  undertaken  in  the  past. 
Therefore, there is uncertainty regarding the realization of these channels at this point, and I 
feel  that  I  should  wait  for  more  evidence  to  confirm  their  achievability.  If  these  channels 
materialize gradually, I judge that the downside risks to the baseline scenario would decline 
accordingly. 
The estimated Phillips curve in the case of Japan 
A. 
In formal economic terms, with a view to raising inflation toward 2 percent, it is important to 
consider  the  relationship  between  the  rate  of  price  change  and  the  output  gap  –  a 
relationship  known  as  the  Phillips  curve.  The  October  2013  Outlook  Report  presented  the 
estimated Phillips curve for the observation period of 1983–2013 (Chart 6). The year 1983 
was  chosen  as  a  starting  year  for  the  observation  period,  because  the  impact  of  the  oil 
shocks that occurred in the 1970s had likely dissipated by that year. The Phillips curve was 
estimated for the entire observation period and for two subset periods (from 1983 to 1995 
and from 1996 to 2013), as shown respectively by lines A, B, and C in Chart 6. 
The  charts  suggest  two  features:  (1)  line  C,  using  the  data  of  a  more  recent  observation 
period, appears to be shifting downward, almost parallel to line B; and (2) the slope of line C 
appears  to  be  flatter  than  that  of  line  A,  for  which  the  observation  period  is  longer. While 
various  factors  influence  both  features  simultaneously,  let  me  list  some  that  may  be 
considered to have affected each of these features.5 It is possible that some of the factors 
affected both the shift in the Phillips curve and its slope. However, for the sake of simplicity, I 
will separate the factors into those that have mainly shifted the Phillips curve and those that 
have mainly steepened its slope. 
(Main factors contributing to a downward shift in the Phillips curve) 
• 
Decline  in  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations:  the  sharp  drop  in  inflation 
expectations in the 1990s may be associated with declines in the potential growth 
rate and growth expectations for the economy (Charts 7 and 8). Indeed, the average 
real GDP growth rate dropped from 4.3 percent in the 1980s to 1.5 percent in the 
1990s, and further to 0.6 percent in the 2000s. 
Negative wage gap: average wages have dropped and the resultant lower level of 
real wages has not been consistent with that of labor productivity, partly as a result 
of deregulation in the labor market since the late 1990s. Unit labor costs have also 
                                                 
5   See, for example, Bank of Japan, “Background Note regarding the Bank’s Thinking on Price Stability,” 2013; 
Kenji  Nishizaki,  Toshitaka  Sekine,  and  Yoichi  Ueno,  “Chronic  Deflation  in  Japan,”  Bank  of  Japan  Working 
Paper  Series,  No.  12-E-6,  2012;  Maiko  Koga  and  Kenji  Nishizaki,  “Bukka  Chingin  Firippusu  Kyokusen  no 
Suikei  (Estimated  Phillips  Curve  of  Prices  and Wages),”  Kin’yu  Kenkyu  (Monetary  and  Economic  Studies), 
2006,  pp.  73–105  (available  in  Japanese);  and  Ryo  Kato  and  Takuji  Kawamoto,  “Nyu  Keinjian  Firippusu 
Kyokusen (New Keynesian Phillips Curve),” Bank of Japan Review Series No. 2005-J-6, 2005 (available in 
Japanese). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
 been on a declining trend. In this circumstance, firms may have incentives to lower 
their sales prices as a result of improved profit margins driven by lower labor costs 
(Chart 9). 
Declining trend of durable consumer goods: mild deflation has been affected by a 
persistently  declining  trend  in  the  prices  of  durable  consumer  goods  (a  decline  of 
about  4.5  percent  on  average  from  1997  to  2011),  which  account  for  about 
10 percent of the total CPI weight. Such a tendency has also been seen overseas, 
including in the United States, but the decline in durable consumer goods prices – 
specifically, prices of televisions and personal computers – is more pronounced in 
Japan  despite  minor  differences  in  quality.  Underlying  factors  may  be  national 
differences  in  the  competitive  environments  of  the  retail  sectors  and  quality 
adjustment. 
(Main factors contributing to a flattening in the slope of the Phillips curve) 
• 
A structural shift to the services sector: in general, the frequency of price changes in 
the  services  sector  is  lower  than  that  in  the  manufacturing  sector.  Given  the 
relatively large shares of raw material and input costs in the total production costs in 
the manufacturing sector, changes in these prices and costs tend to be reflected in 
sales prices. By contrast, in the labor-intensive services sector, lower shares of raw 
material and input costs as well as sluggish growth in nominal wages lead to a low 
frequency of price changes. 
An increase in the price elasticity of demand: intensified competition at home and 
abroad  and  a  series  of  negative  shocks  (and  associated  plunge  in  domestic 
demand) have led to an increase in the price elasticity of demand. This has made it 
difficult  for  firms  to  pass  their  marginal  cost  of  production  on  to  sales  prices, 
generating  constant  downward  pressure  on  profit  margins  and  wages. 
Consequently,  firms,  supermarkets,  and  large  discount  stores  have  begun  to  set 
their sales prices according to their competitors’ and clients’ demand, rather than in 
response  to  the  output  gap  or  cost  developments.  A  discount-based  marketing 
strategy has become prevalent. 
 Based  on  the  observation  of  the  aforementioned  factors,  turning  the  viewpoint  conversely 
may  lead  to  the  following  inference.  That  is,  the  Phillips  curve  may  change  positively  – 
shifting upward with a steepening slope, in the case of Japan – if the trend in some of these 
contributing factors can be reversed (Chart 10). 
inflation  expectations,  especially  when  medium- 
Conceptual channels leading to an upward shift in the Phillips curve 
B.  
This subsection will focus on my current thinking on the conceptual channels that may lead 
to an upward shift in the Phillips curve. Under the inflation-targeting framework, in general, 
“medium-  to  long-term”  inflation  expectations  have  little  correlation  with  relatively  volatile 
“short-term” 
inflation 
expectations are anchored at the inflation target level. In this circumstance, medium- to long-
term  inflation  expectations  also  become  less  correlated  with  the  “actual”  inflation  rate; 
however, in the long run the actual inflation rate tends to move at around the level of these 
inflation expectations. This situation is not yet applicable in Japan, since the economy is still 
in  the  process  of  establishing  an  anchor  on  the  higher  medium-  to  long-term  inflation 
expectations at around 2 percent. Until these expectations are firmly anchored, it is possible 
that  the  actual  inflation  rate,  short-term  inflation  expectations,  and  medium-  to  long-term 
inflation expectations will continue to affect each other. My thinking on this, which I will now 
present, is based on such a perspective. 
long-term 
to 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Will the actual inflation rate Promote an increase in medium- to long-term inflation 
expectations? 
In  terms  of  the  first  conceptual  channel,  as  the  public  grows  convinced  that  the  actual 
inflation rate has been rising moderately to date and is expected to approach 1 percent by 
the end of 2013, medium- to long-term inflation expectations may increase further. According 
to the Opinion Survey on the General Public’s Views and Behavior conducted by the Bank in 
September 2013, the respondents who chose “developments in gasoline prices” as the basis 
for their outlook for price levels over the next five years were nearly 50 percent of the total, 
and those who chose “developments in prices of frequently purchased items” (such as food 
and daily necessities) also were nearly 50 percent (with multiple answers allowed). Thus, it is 
conceivable that the continuation of price increases, especially in these items, will contribute 
to raising inflation expectations. 
Let me now refer to the experience of the United Kingdom, although in that nation it is a 
case of lowering medium- to long-term inflation expectations in the presence of a high level 
of  actual  inflation  –  the  opposite  of  the  case  of  Japan.  The  United  Kingdom  exited  the 
European Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM) in September 1992. To raise the credibility of 
monetary  policy  in  line  with  this  new  move,  the  Bank  of  England  (BOE)  adopted  inflation 
targeting in October 1992, with the initial target set in the range of 1–4 percent. The target 
was subsequently lowered to a level equivalent to or less than 2.5 percent in May 1995, and 
further changed to a point target level of 2.5 percent in May 1997. In 1998, the BOE achieved 
operational  responsibility  for  setting  interest  rates  and  established  the  Monetary  Policy 
Committee. The target level was further changed to 2 percent at end-2003, together with a 
change  in  the  reference  price  indicator  from  retail  prices  to  consumer  prices  (Chart  11). 
Currently, inflation below 2 percent is judged to be just as bad as inflation above 2 percent. If 
actual inflation surpasses 3 percent or falls below 1 percent, the Governor of the BOE must 
write  an  open  letter  to  the  Chancellor,  explaining  the  reasons  for  such  a  deviation  and 
prescriptions for correcting it. 
Looking at the case of the United Kingdom, we can point out four features. 
• 
Medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  (based  on  the  average  forecasts  of 
private-sector  economists)  tend  to  change  moderately,  and  such  expectations 
dropped to around 2.5 percent by 1998. 
Setting the inflation target, as well as clarifying it, appears to have been effective in 
terms of lowering medium- to long-term inflation expectations. 
A steady decline in the actual inflation rate toward the inflation target range or level 
appears to have improved the public’s confidence in monetary policy, contributing to 
lowering medium- to long-term inflation expectations. 
The pace of decline in the actual inflation rate initially tends to be faster than that of 
medium- to long-term inflation expectations. Moreover, it is possible that the decline 
in the actual inflation rate will exceed the decline in the rate of inflation expectations, 
until these expectations are firmly anchored. 
   Since the global financial crisis occurred, the actual inflation rate has been on a rising trend 
in  the  United  Kingdom,  due  to  several  factors:  (1)  a  depreciation  of  the  pound  sterling; 
(2) changes in consumption tax rates (a decline in 2008, followed by increases in 2010 and 
2011); (3) fluctuations in commodity prices; and (4) the effects of administered and regulated 
prices.  Following  these  movements,  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  appear  to 
have risen moderately. On this point, however, the BOE holds the view that the expectations 
remain well anchored, although there may be some limited concerns about dis-anchoring of 
inflation expectations because of a persistent deviation of actual inflation above the 2 percent 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
target.6 Regarding the shift from the inflation target range to the inflation target level or point, 
it has been pointed out as appropriate because such a shift has the advantage of clarifying 
monetary  policy,  and  a  “range  bias”  appears  to  have  existed  during  the  period  when  the 
target range was adopted, with the inflation expectations fixed at around the upper bound of 
the range. Once a point inflation target was introduced, inflation expectations fell steadily, as 
the range bias was ironed out.7 
Applying the case of the United Kingdom to Japan, several points can be inferred. 
• 
It is conceivable that the actual inflation rate will lead to an increase in medium- to 
long-term inflation expectations as the actual inflation rate approaches the 2 percent 
target. 
The increase in the actual inflation rate (which is likely to be affected by changes in 
commodity  prices  and  other  factors)  may  exceed  that  of  medium-  to  long-term 
inflation expectations until these expectations are firmly anchored. 
Applying a target point, rather than a target range, may be appropriate at this stage 
since a premature introduction may result in the actual inflation rate being stuck at 
the lower bound of the range (in the case of Japan), making it harder to achieve the 
2 percent target. 
  On the third point, the idea of applying a range to the inflation target – while it should not be 
ruled out – should be examined after the actual inflation rate exceeds at least 1 percent in a 
stable  manner  and  after  it  is  judged  that  inflation  expectations  will  likely  remain  near 
2 percent.  A  more  important  concern  is  that  the  public  and  market  participants  may 
mistakenly assume that the Bank’s intention to achieve the 2 percent target has weakened, 
thus, undermining the credibility of monetary policy. 
Will an increase in the growth expectations raise inflation expectations? 
Earlier,  I  mentioned  that  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  may  be  positively 
correlated with the potential growth rate and growth expectations of the economy (Charts 7 
and 8). Therefore, as the second conceptual channel, it is conceivable that an increase in 
inflation  expectations  can  be  promoted  by  the  government’s  economic  growth  strategies, 
firms’ efforts to raise competitiveness, and financial institutions’ initiatives to take greater risk 
to  provide  financial  services  to  innovative  and  growth-supporting  firms,  with  the  continued 
support of the QQE. Conceptually, all these collective actions, if continued to be taken, will 
promote a heightening of firms’ and households’ growth expectations. Moreover, the Annual 
Report on the Japanese Economy and Public Finance 2013 compiled by the Cabinet Office 
reported that firms tend to raise their outlook for sales prices of goods and services over the 
next  year,  when  they  project  that  market  prices  over  the  same  period  will  increase.  This 
response  accounted  for  about  70  percent  of  respondents  in  the  manufacturing  sector  and 
more than 50 percent of respondents in the nonmanufacturing sector. In other words, if an 
increase in demand for goods and services leads to a rise in market prices, this may induce 
firms  to  raise  their  sales  prices.  This  situation  is  more  likely  to  occur  if  a  sustainable 
expansion of the domestic market is projected. 
Will the negative wage gap be mitigated? 
When  examining  wage  developments,  I  pay  great  attention  to  data  on  cash  earnings  per 
worker  after  separating  workers  into  those  who  are  full  time  and  those  who  are  part  time. 
                                                
6   See Bank of England, “Inflation Report,” August 2013. 
7   See,  for  example,  Andrew  Haldane,  “Targeting  Inflation:  The  United  Kingdom  in  Retrospect,”  in  Mario  I. 
Blejerer et al., eds. Inflation Targeting in Practice, which contains summaries of presentations made at the IMF 
Seminar held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil on May 3–5, 1999. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
More specifically, I find it important to look at the year-on-year rate of change in monthly cash 
earnings for full-time workers, and that in hourly cash earnings for part-time workers.8 These 
indicators show that hourly cash earnings for part-time workers have been on a rising trend 
over  the  past three  years,  reflecting  the  high  level  of the  active  job  openings-to-applicants 
ratio (Chart 12). There is a sign that supply and demand conditions in the labor market have 
been  tightening,  particularly  for  part-time  workers.  In  addition,  the  growth  rate  of  monthly 
cash earnings for full-time workers has been positive in recent months, thanks to increases in 
bonuses and overtime payments. The unemployment rate was 4 percent in September 2013 
(4.3 percent for males and 3.5 percent for females), approaching the full-employment level 
especially with regard to female workers. The Bank’s September 2013 Tankan (Short-Term 
Economic  Survey  of  Enterprises  in  Japan)  indicates  a  shortage  in  employment  in  the 
nonmanufacturing sector, regardless of firm size. 
Given these conditions and demographic changes, an increase in hourly cash earnings for 
part-time  workers  is  expected  to  continue.  This  may  help  narrow  the  wage  differences 
between part-time and full-time workers – although progress is likely to occur only gradually. 
It  is  conceptually  apparent  that  these  conditions  may  contribute  to  mitigating  the  negative 
wage  gap  mentioned  earlier.  If  the  negative  wage gap  shrinks  and the increasing trend  in 
wages  becomes  firm,  as  the  third  conceptual  channel,  this  may  eventually  exert  greater 
pressure on firms to raise their sales prices. 
C.  
Conceptual channels leading to a steepening in the slope of the Phillips curve 
This subsection will focus on the conceptual channels that may help steepen the slope of the 
Phillips curve. Current economic conditions appear to exhibit signs of a gradual steepening in 
the slope of the Phillips curve, although their sustainability is not yet clear. 
Will firms’ profit margins improve? 
Recently,  it  has  been  noted  that  the  environment  surrounding  firms  with  respect  to 
deflationary pressures is gradually changing. The depreciation of the yen has helped mitigate 
the deflationary pressure prevailing among firms, since firms no longer need to lower yen-
based export prices to maintain (foreign currency-based) international price competitiveness. 
Indeed,  the  rate  of  change  in  yen-based  export  prices  since  late  2012  has  turned  from 
negative  to  positive.  The  yen’s  depreciation  has  also  had  moderating effects  on  inflows  of 
some inexpensive import products. Moreover, the moderate movements in foreign currency-
denominated  commodity  prices  have  helped  avoid  a  sharp  increase  in  import  prices;  this 
contrasts with the mid-2000s, which were characterized by sharper yen’s depreciation and a 
commodity price surge. 
Taking these factors into account, in terms of the fourth conceptual channel, firms may be 
finding  it  easier  to  raise  their  sales  prices  and  wages  owing  to  the  healthier  prospects  for 
profitability. Moreover, the September 2013 Tankan reports that the “DI for output prices” – or 
sales prices – of large firms in the nonmanufacturing sector turned positive and that of large 
                                                
8   These decomposed data are more useful than cash earnings per worker, since they remove the effects of the 
decline in the average wages caused by the uptrend in the ratio of part-time workers. In Japan, this uptrend 
has been taking place rapidly owing to (1) an increase in the number of workers in the labor market who had 
been working as regular workers but have temporarily become non-regular workers after retirement (until they 
meet the threshold for receiving benefits from their corporate pensions); (2) a structural shift to the services 
sector in the economy; (3) the effects of the spouse tax deduction applicable to the taxable income; and (4) an 
increase in the labor force participation ratios of female non-regular workers between 15 and 64 years old as 
well as of non-regular workers over 65 years old. Provided that some of these changes are structural, it is 
appropriate to separate full-time from part-time workers and look at their wage developments individually. In 
the case of part-time workers, it is suitable to use an hourly based indicator since their working times are more 
unstable than full-time workers. In the case of full-time workers, monthly cash earnings including bonuses and 
overtime payments – rather than base salaries alone – could be useful as an indicator to examine favorable 
wage developments as a first step. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
firms  in  the  manufacturing  sector  approached  closer  to  zero,  suggesting  that  these  large 
firms have found it relatively easier to raise their sales prices (Chart 13-1). In addition, firms’ 
profit margins – which can be estimated from the difference between the DIs for sales prices 
and for input prices – have also improved, regardless of sector and firm size, compared with 
2008,  when  a  greater  depreciation  of  the  yen  and  a  hike  in  commodity  prices  caused  a 
sharper  increase  in  input  prices  and  a  deterioration  in  firms’  profit  margins  (Charts  13-1 
through 14-2). 
Based on these observations, there is a sign that the price-setting environment for firms may 
be  improving.  Nonetheless, the  conditions for  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises  (SMEs) 
may continue to suggest difficulty, since the DIs for sales prices of such firms in all sectors 
remain negative and their profit margins over the next three months are expected to continue 
to deteriorate significantly (Charts 13-2 and 14-2). Given that SMEs account for the majority 
of Japanese firms, whether SMEs are able to pass their input costs on to their sales prices is 
increasingly becoming a key to determining future price developments. 
Will changes in the marketing strategies of firms and retail stores continue? 
Recently, it was noted that the prices of a wide range of goods and services have begun to 
show a moderate increase. More importantly, a persistently declining trend in the prices of 
durable consumer goods appears to have been mitigated. In particular, the rate of change in 
prices  for  some  items  –  such  as  televisions  and  personal  computers  –  has  begun  to  turn 
positive.  This  reflects  the  fact  that  some  large  retail  stores  for  home  electronics  are 
increasingly shifting from a discount price sales strategy to a higher-value-added or higher 
unit sales price strategy (the fifth conceptual channel), in addition to the rise in import prices 
reflecting  the  yen’s  depreciation.  Some  restaurants  are  also  attempting  to  raise  their  unit 
sales  prices  by  providing  higher-value-added  menus  and  services.  It  seems  that  it  has 
become  increasingly  important  to focus  on  prices  in  order  to  secure  profits,  amid  sluggish 
growth in the overall sales volume in Japan partly reflecting demographic changes. Changes 
in  marketing  strategies  also  reflect  an  improvement  in  household  sentiment,  a  continued 
improvement in employment, wealth effects, and a front-loaded increase in demand prior to 
the  consumption  tax  hikes.  Above  all,  mitigation  of  the  persistently  declining  trend  in  the 
prices of durable consumer goods – observed since the early 1990s – suggests that firms’ 
price-setting behavior is changing. Such developments have also started to be observed in 
clothes and footwear. It is conceivable that this trend will last for a considerable time if such a 
marketing strategy spreads widely throughout society. 
To sum up, I have outlined five conceptual channels in all as factors that may lead to a shift 
in the Phillips curve and a steepening in its slope. It is conceivable that the materialization of 
these factors will contribute to mitigating the downside risks to the Bank’s baseline scenario 
of the outlook for prices and to achieving the 2 percent price stability target. 
My views and proposal on the structure of the outlook report 
V.  
Lastly, I would like to explain my views on the structure of the Outlook Report. I believe that 
the  description  in  the report  is  insufficiently  clear for  the  public  and  market  participants.  In 
particular, I think that use of the word “perspectives” with no explanation is inappropriate and 
unfriendly to readers.9 Readers could easily fail to understand the connection between the 
contents  of  the  report  and  the  two  perspectives  contained  in  it,  and  as  a  result  the  Bank 
                                                
9   This was Section III in the Outlook Report – titled “Conduct of Monetary Policy” – which focuses on the two 
perspectives. The first perspective examines whether the outlooks for economic activity and prices will follow a 
path  of  “sustainable  growth  under  price  stability”  over  the  next  three  years  or  so.  The  second  perspective 
relates to various risks relevant to the conduct of monetary policy, including (1) the overall assessment of risks 
to  the  economic  activity  and  prices  and  (2)  financial  imbalances  from  a  longer-term  perspective.  However, 
these explanations are not provided in the Report. 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
could  lose  the  opportunity  to  communicate  its  intentions  to  the  public.  Ever  since  I  was 
appointed as a Member of the Policy Board in April 2011, I have maintained views on the 
need  to  significantly  improve  the  strategy  of  the  Bank’s  communication  including  that 
expressed through various official documents including the Outlook Report, to promote the 
public’s understanding of monetary policy, and have called for improvements.10 
I  submitted  a  proposal for  the first  time  at  the MPM  held  on  April  26,  2013,  after  the  new 
leadership of the Bank was appointed.11 Although the proposal was not accepted at the time, 
in the most recent Outlook Report released in October 2013 a new footnote was inserted in 
the  section  related  to  the  Bank’s  two  perspectives,  telling  readers  to  refer  to  the  related 
Statement on Monetary Policy released in January 2013. This improvement was a welcome 
step, addressing some of my concerns. However, I believe that the insertion of the footnote 
without  any  explanation  of  the  two  perspectives  did  not  contribute  sufficiently  to  improving 
the clarity for readers. 
Accordingly, I presented a new proposal (the fourth point of my proposal) at the MPM held on 
October  31,  2013,  to  include  an  introductory  paragraph  at  the  beginning  of  the  Outlook 
Report. Under my proposal, the paragraph would have explained the sequence of the report 
and provided a brief description of the concepts behind the two perspectives. The suggested 
paragraph read as follows: “The October 2013 Outlook Report will first present the baseline 
scenario of the outlook for economic activity and prices in Japan for the next one to three 
years. It will next highlight upside and downside risks to the baseline scenario. The Bank will 
then  assess  that  scenario  from  two  perspectives:  the  first  perspective  concerns  an 
examination  of  the  scenario  from  the  viewpoint  of  whether  the  economy  will  follow  the 
sustainable growth path with price stability; the second perspective involves an examination 
of various risks considered most relevant to the conduct of monetary policy – including those 
in the longer term – from the viewpoint of achieving the sustainable growth path with price 
stability. Lastly, taking into account its assessment based on those perspectives, the Bank 
will outline its thinking on the future conduct of monetary policy.” 
This type of introduction appeared in the October 2011, April 2012, and October 2012 issues 
of the Outlook Report, but my proposal this time represents an advance in that it focuses on 
adding an explanation of the two perspectives. 
The Bank finds itself in an important phase as it aims to achieve the 2 percent price stability 
target through the conduct of unprecedented monetary easing, which is a challenging task. In 
this regard, it appears that some in the public and some market participants feel uncertain 
about the importance of achieving the 2 percent target, as well as about the Bank’s policy 
intention. Gaining the sympathy of the public and market participants with the Bank’s policy 
intention  and  promoting  their  belief  in  it  are  fundamental  to  successfully  achieving  the 
2 percent  target.  Improving  the  reader-friendliness  of  the  Bank’s  official  documents  – 
including  the  Outlook  Report  –  is  one  of  the  first  steps  toward  increasing  the  number  of 
readers and gaining their support of the Bank’s conduct of monetary policy. In this regard, I 
will do my best to pursue more effective communication by the Bank, continually examining 
how it can gain the understanding of the public and market participants, and thereby achieve 
the 2 percent target with a sustainable economic growth path. 
This brings me to the end of my speech. Thank you very much indeed for your kind attention. 
                                                
10   According to the Bank’s Opinion Survey on the General Public’s Views and Behavior conducted in June 2013, 
about  18  percent  of  the  respondents  answered  “unclear,” nearly  40  percent answered  “somewhat  unclear,” 
and  about  36  percent  answered  “difficult  to  say”  to  a  question  asking  how  they  would  describe  the  Bank’s 
explanation to the public. 
11   My proposal at the April 26 MPM called for completely removing the concept of the “two perspectives” from 
the report; instead, I suggested that what was written relating to the two perspectives in Section III be moved 
to appropriate sections throughout the entire report. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
 16 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  17 
 18 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  19 
   20 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  21 
 22 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  23 
24 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  25 
 26 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  27 
 28 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
