Jörg Asmussen: Economic convergence across Central, Eastern and 
South Eastern Europe – achievements and challenges 
Speech  by  Mr  Jörg  Asmussen,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European  Central 
Bank, at the Conference on European Economic Integration (CEEI) 2013 “Financial cycles 
and the real economy – lessons for CESEE”, Vienna, 18 November 2013. 
 Dear Ewald, 
Good evening ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure to be here with you tonight. I would like to thank the OeNB for the invitation to 
share some thoughts on the region, on which the OeNB has developed analytical excellence 
that is beneficial to the entire Eurosystem. 
I will focus my remarks on selected experiences of countries in Central, Eastern, and South-
Eastern Europe on their path of economic and institutional convergence towards the rest of 
Europe.  I  will  argue  that  both  the  successes  and  the  challenges  associated  with  the 
convergence  process  point  to  two  basic  lessons.  First,  that  we  should  never  relax  in  the 
pursuit of domestic policies oriented towards financial stability and sustainable growth. And 
second, that we need not just more, but also better European integration. 
In  what  follows,  I  will  use  the  term Western  Balkans  to  refer  to  the  six  EU  candidate  and 
potential  candidate  countries  in  the  region:  Albania,  Bosnia  and  Herzegovina,  Kosovo,  the 
Former  Yugoslav  Republic  of  Macedonia,  Montenegro,  and  Serbia].  I  will  use  the  term 
Central  and  Eastern  European  countries  to  refer  to  seven  EU  member  states  outside  the 
euro area, namely Bulgaria, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Hungary, Lithuania, Poland, and 
Romania. And I will refer to the two groups of countries taken together as Central, Eastern 
and South-Eastern Europe. 
The good experiences with convergence 
I. 
If you had to pick three “good experiences” which countries in the region have made over the 
years in terms of convergence, what would your choice be? 
Increasing living standards 
1. 
For me, the first good experience I would bring home is the improvement in the region’s living 
standards:  between  2000  and  2012,  real  per-capita  GDP,  adjusted  for  differences  in 
purchasing power, increased on average by close to 50 per cent both in Central and Eastern 
Europe and in the Western Balkans. In Lithuania, per capita income, measured in this way, 
increased from 35 per cent of the euro area average in 2000 to 65 per cent in 2012. On the 
other  side  of  the  spectrum,  the  living  standard  in  the  Former  Yugoslav  Republic  of 
Macedonia increased only from 24 per cent of the euro area average in 2000 to 32 per cent 
in 2011. The rising living standards across the region have been a by-product of remarkable 
economic and institutional transformation, which has shaken off the heavy burden of half a 
century of central planning. 
Offering a platform for the integration into the global economy 
2. 
The second good experience I would like to highlight is the global success of pan-European 
production chains. This can be a win-win story for everybody in our continent. 
Exports from Central and Eastern Europe grew at an average pace of over 10 per cent per 
year  in  the  decade  prior  to  the  global  financial  crisis.  Even  thereafter,  in  many  of  these 
countries export growth has been led by significant competitiveness gains. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
This  export  performance  can  to  a  large  extent  be  attributed  to  the  integration  of  local 
exporters into cross-border production chains, which at present account for half of all of their 
exports. What this means in practice is that local exporters typically use components sourced 
from  the  euro  area  to  assemble  intermediate  goods  and  final  products  that  are  then  sent 
down the value chain en route to final consumers around the globe. 
Local exporters are often owned outright or operated as joint ventures by companies based 
in the euro area. In fact, more than two out of three euros invested in Central and Eastern 
Europe come from the euro area. 
The win-win proposition of vertical specialisation in international trade is most visible in the 
European  automobile  industry.  A  recent  IMF  report  highlights  the  fact  that  the  German 
automobile industry embrace of this trend has allowed it to remain a leading producer and 
exporter  of  passenger  cars  with  a  global  market  share  of  around  20  per  cent  as  of  2012. 
While  domestic  production  has  remained  relatively  constant  at  around  5.5  million  vehicles 
per  year  between  1992  and  2011,  foreign  production,  particularly  in  Czech  Republic, 
Hungary, Poland and Slovakia, increased more than threefold, reaching 7.1 million vehicles. 
Another example is that of Renault, which became the majority stakeholder in the Romanian 
automobile  firm  Dacia  in  1999.  In  the  space  of  a  few  years,  Renault  turned  the  ailing 
company  into  a  driving  force  for  the  Renault  Group.  Specializing  in  robust,  economical 
models, Dacia produces vehicles primarily for new markets. 
A remarkable aspect of this production model is that, while real linkages with the euro area 
remain substantial, the economic prospects of countries in the region have become relatively 
less dependent on euro area than on world demand. I was indeed surprised when I learned 
that the share of Central and Eastern European exports destined to the euro area peaked 
already  in  2001,  at  over  60  per  cent.  This  share  has  since  declined  by  more  than 
8 percentage  points,  as  exports  to  partners  outside  the  euro  area  have  grown  faster  than 
those destined to the euro area. 
Facilitating finance for growth 
3. 
Third, country experiences with the process of EU accession suggest that new or prospective 
members not only benefit from an economic and institutional anchor. Over time, they have 
also benefited from sizeable capital inflows from the euro area that have helped finance the 
transformation of their economies. 
True, the  same  capital flows  were  a  key  ingredient  in  the  credit  booms and  busts  in most 
countries of the region. While I will return to this aspect in a moment, we should not overlook 
the importance of financial interconnectedness between the euro area and Central, Eastern 
and South-Eastern Europe. Around three quarters of bank assets in the region are foreign-
owned,  mostly  by  banks  from  other  EU  countries.  Their  subsidiaries  and  branches  have 
played  and  will  continue  to  play  a  central  role  in  improving  the  efficiency  of  financial 
intermediation across the region and contributing to credit availability. 
The bad experiences with economic convergence 
II. 
Moving  now  from  the  good  to  the  bad  experiences  with  economic  convergence,  we  are 
probably all on the same ground in this room. Let me stress those aspects which, in my view, 
policy-makers should never forget in the future. 
When growth models become prone to boom-bust cycles 
1. 
First,  in  the  run-up  to  the  crisis  the  growth  models  in  many  Central,  Eastern,  and  South-
Eastern European countries became dominated by credit-fuelled domestic demand booms. 
For  example,  between  2003  and  2008  the  average  contribution  of  domestic  demand  to 
economic growth in Central and Eastern Europe increased by more than 2 percentage points 
per year. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
We now all agree that this was an unsustainable development, fuelled by overly optimistic 
income expectations and excessive ease of financing. It led to large and persistent current 
account deficits. The median current account deficit peaked in 2008 at around 9 per cent of 
GDP  across  Central  and  Eastern  European  countries  and  15  per  cent  of  GDP  across 
Western Balkan economies. 
Across the region, the domestic demand booms were mainly financed by euro area banks 
through  funding  of  their  local  subsidiaries  and  direct  cross-border  lending.  The  ready 
availability  of  such  external  financing  was  a  contributing  factor  to  the  credit  frenzy  that 
gripped  most  economies  in  the  region.  The  median  growth  rate  of  real  bank  credit  to  the 
private sector over the period 2003–2008 averaged 20 per cent per annum across Central 
and Eastern Europe and 25 per cent per annum in Western Balkan economies. 
This experience now sounds very much as something that belongs to the past, but we have 
all learned the hard way that complacency is the best recipe for future disasters. 
Impaired lending channels and bank deleveraging complicate the recovery 
2. 
Second,  the  pre-crisis  credit  booms  turned  into  post-crisis  credit  busts.  The  resulting 
impairment  of  the  bank  lending  channel  has  been  a  stumbling  block  for  the  economic 
recovery  ever  since.  Double-digit  NPL  ratios  are  now  more  the  norm  than  the  exception 
across  the  region.  Banks  have  responded  by  setting  aside  provisions  to  cover  expected 
losses and tightening credit eligibility standards to prevent new loans from going bad. These 
developments have limited banks’ ability and willingness to lend. 
The post-crisis behaviour of euro area banks in Central, Eastern and South-Eastern Europe 
has been generally cautious, but also responsible. The Vienna Initiative played an important 
role in preventing a “run for the exits” scenario. On the one hand, euro area parent banks 
kept their local subsidiaries sufficiently capitalised to avoid bank failures. On the other hand, 
they have been unwinding in an orderly fashion their creditor positions towards the region. 
This deleveraging has contributed to the tightening of credit conditions in many countries in 
the  region.  Local  subsidiaries  were  gradually  weaned  off  cheap  parent  bank  funding  and 
forced to compete for the more limited pool of domestic deposits. 
A new banking business model is emerging in response to these developments, but it will still 
take some time before we can clearly identify a new “steady state”. 
When real convergence grinds to a halt 
3. 
Finally, the most worrying development is that real convergence has come to a virtual halt in 
the wake of the global financial crisis in many countries in the region. The average annual 
growth  rate  of  real  per  capita  GDP,  adjusted  for  differences  in  purchasing  power,  slowed 
from around 4 per cent per annum before the crisis to 0.6 per cent in its aftermath in Central 
and Eastern European countries – and half that in the Western Balkans. Unemployment has 
soared throughout the region, at times to unacceptably high levels of close to 30 per cent in 
Bosnia and Herzegovina and 17 per cent in Croatia. 
Some policy lessons 
III. 
Let me now draw two broad policy lessons from the good and bad experiences which I briefly 
outlined. 
1. 
First, the need for more – and, even more importantly, better – European 
integration is for me the core policy lesson. Let me explain. 
The  post-crisis  economic  recovery,  while  being  subdued  nearly  everywhere,  was  faster  in 
Central and Eastern European countries than in the Western Balkan economies. Exporters 
from Central and Eastern Europe were in a better position to take advantage of the recovery 
in global demand, due in part to their tighter integration in euro-area affiliated cross-border 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
in 
imbalances 
future  macroeconomic 
production  chains.  Looking  ahead,  the  dismantling  of  trade  barriers  between  the  Western 
Balkans and the EU should allow exporters in this region to also realise in full the advantages 
of  vertical  specialisation  in  international  trade.  This  is  one  of  the  reasons  why  closer 
integration in Europe will continue to be beneficial. 
Another  reason  is  that  implementing  the  new  EU  governance  framework  will  be  key  to 
prevent 
the  Member  States.  The  so-called 
Macroeconomic  Imbalance  Procedure  explicitly  monitors  the  emergence  of  internal  and 
external macroeconomic imbalances. Moreover, the existing Stability and Growth Pact was 
strengthened, introducing earlier sanctions and more automatic enforcement procedures. It 
now needs to be implemented vigorously. 
Not least, in the context of the on-going process of building the banking union the ECB has 
been granted supervisory powers. As you know, this will start in November next year, and 
will cover not only euro area banks, but also the banks of any non-euro area Member State 
wishing to join the single supervisory mechanism through so-called enhanced cooperation. 
As part of the new powers, the ECB  will monitor the financial soundness of banks and, in 
case  of  need,  impose  additional  capital,  liquidity  and  other  prudential  requirements.  The 
completion  of  a  comprehensive  banking  union  with  all  necessary  elements  will  be  a 
milestone in the construction of the new European governance. It will also be of significance 
for countries in the entire region as in many of them the banking sector is dominated by euro 
area headquartered banks. 
2. 
My second key policy lesson is that the process of economic and institutional 
convergence needs to be sustainable over the longer run. 
The fundamental logic of the EU Treaty – with the convergence framework embedded in it – 
remains  the  right  one.  Existing  members,  as  well  as  candidate,  and  potential  candidate 
countries have to make sure that they pursue sound policies. They should first and foremost 
focus  on  establishing  sound  fiscal  and  sustainable  macroeconomic  developments,  and 
complement  this  with  the  necessary  structural  and  institutional  reforms  including  a  strong 
framework for central bank independence. 
To support the process of institutional convergence, the ECB, together with National Central 
Banks of the Eurosystem, has implemented since 2007 a number of technical cooperation 
programmes  with  central  banks  of  the  Western  Balkan  countries  to  strengthen  their 
institutional capacity and prepare them for membership in the European System of Central 
Banks. I visited the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Montenegro this summer 
and I will travel to Serbia next month and plan visits in Kosovo and Albania next year in the 
context  of  the  Eurosystem  technical  cooperation  programmes.  I  find  these  visits  on  the 
ground  always  very  impressive,  because  one  gets  a  very  concrete  sense  for  tangible 
improvements  through  technical  cooperation  as  well  as  a  better  understanding  for  the 
remaining challenges. 
Revamping  growth  with  the  proper  mix  of  macroeconomic  and  structural  policies  is  of  the 
essence. By now we have learned that there is no automatism in the convergence process, 
which should rather be seen as a by-product of relentless policy efforts – which, by the way, 
should occur not only before but also after the adoption of the euro. 
Conclusion 
IV. 
Let me conclude my remarks on a positive note. All in all, we at the ECB see the record of 
countries  in  Central,  Eastern  and  South-Eastern  Europe  with  economic  and  institutional 
convergence as a success. We have learned from the mistakes made along the way and are 
working at building a stronger Union. 
A testament to this is that the broad momentum of euro area and EU accession has not been 
halted by the crisis. Since the start of the crisis three EU Member States – Slovakia, Estonia 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
and Latvia – have adopted the euro or are about to do it. A fourth country, Lithuania has set 
the target of euro adoption on 1 January 2015. And three other countries have become either 
EU members, as was the case with Croatia in July this year, or formal candidates to join the 
EU, as is the case with Serbia and Montenegro. This shows that the EU and the euro are not 
closed shops, but rather they are open to those who are willing and able to join and to fulfil 
the respective conditions on a sustainable basis. 
The EU was founded on the premise that interlocking the economic futures of participating 
members will free Europe from armed conflicts. This remains as true today as it was fifty-five 
years ago at the moment of signing the Treaty of Rome. In this regard, EU candidate and 
potential candidate countries in the Western Balkans stand to benefit from the promise of a 
prosperous and peaceful future. 
I thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
