K C Chakrabarty: Transformation of DFIs into commercial banks – the 
case of the IDBI and the role of employee unions 
Special address by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at a 
Seminar on “IDBI’s role as Development Financial Institution” organised by the United Forum 
of IDBI Officers & Employees, Kolkata, 27 September 2013. 
 1.  Shri  Basudeb  Achariya,  Hon’ble  MP,  Lok  Sabha;  Comrade  Rajen  Nagar,  President, 
AIBEA; Shri B.P. Kanungo, Regional Director for West Bengal and Sikkim, Reserve Bank of 
India;  Shri  Samir  Ghosh,  General  Secretary,  All  Indian  Reserve  Bank  Employees 
Association;  Principal  office  bearers  of  the  United  Forum  of  IDBI  Officers  and  Employees; 
officers and employees of IDBI and other delegates to the seminar; ladies and gentlemen! I 
am  pleased  to  note  that  the  United  Forum  of  IDBI  Officers  and  Employees  has  taken this 
initiative  to  organize  a  seminar  on  the  subject  of  “IDBI’s  role  as  Development  Finance 
Institution for the Social and Economic Development of the Country” in commemoration of 
the Golden Jubilee of IDBI. 
2. I observe that there is lot of confusion and misconception about the role of Development 
Finance Institutions (DFIs) not only in India but also across the globe, especially in the post 
reform  period.  In  fact,  there  is  a  feeling  among  the  public  that  in  the  post  reform  period, 
regulators  and  policymakers  are  not  encouraging  the  role  of  financial  institutions  as 
developmental  agents  and  have  oriented  their  policies  towards  a  market  led  economy  by 
sacrificing the developmental role, whereas, the fact is that policymakers and regulators in 
India continue to have a firm belief that the role of finance is to encourage development and 
that  the  financial  institutions  must  promote  this  basic  role.  The  objective  of  developmental 
finance,  thus,  continues  to  remain  the  same  and  only  the  outer  cover  in  the  form  of  the 
institutional structure needs to undergo a change from time to time. 
3. I am extremely happy to be here to address the delegates to this important seminar in this 
historic city of Kolkata which has always been the nerve centre of the all types of movements 
in  the  country  –  be  it  the  freedom  movement,  the  labour  movement,  the  trade  union 
movement or any other movement related to financial sector or politics. I am sure, befitting 
the  glorious  traditions  of  this  historic  city,  this  seminar  would  also  throw  up  pertinent 
issues/challenges  and  actionable  ideas  in  the  important  area  of  developmental  role  of 
finance, thereby justifying the organizing of this seminar in the city of Kolkata. 
4.  Let  me  begin  by  congratulating  IDBI  and  all  its  employees  on  completing  50  years  of 
glorious existence. Occasions such as Golden Jubilees are not just reasons for celebration 
for the organization, but also a moment of joy for the foot soldiers who have put their heart 
and soul into building the institution and seeing it through the initial teething phase. Hence, 
my warm wishes are also due to the Union and to the present and past employees of IDBI 
Bank. 
5.  Though  there  is  little  doubt  that  DFIs,  in  general  and  IDBI,  in  particular,  have  made 
immense contribution in the economic growth of the country in the post-independence era, 
overtime, especially in the post-reform period , they have lost their relevance due to certain 
structural changes that have taken place in the banking and financial system in the country. I 
thought  it  apt  to  use this  occasion  to  share  my  perspectives  on  the role  of  DFIs  in  India’s 
economy  and  the  path  they  should  look  to  traverse following  their  transition  to full-fledged 
commercial banks. In my address today, I would also briefly reflect on the context for setting 
up of DFIs, trace their history and their relevance in the modern day. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
What are Development Finance Institutions? 
6. A DFI is defined as “an institution promoted or assisted by Government mainly to provide 
development finance to one or more sectors or sub-sectors of the economy”. The institution 
distinguishes  itself  by  a  judicious  balance  between  commercial  norms  of  operation,  as 
adopted  by  any  private  financial  institution,  and developmental  obligations.  DFIs  adopt the 
“project  approach”  –  emphasizing  the  viability  of  the  project  to  be  financed  –  against  the 
“collateral approach”. Apart from provision of long-term loans, equity capital, guarantees and 
underwriting  functions,  a  development  bank  normally  is  also  expected  to  upgrade  the 
managerial  and  the  other  operational  pre-requisites  of  the  assisted  projects  (Scharf  and 
Shetty, 1972). 
7. Thus, the basic emphasis of a DFI is on long-term finance for industrial and infrastructure 
projects and on assistance for activities or sectors of the economy where the risks are higher 
than what the other traditional financial institutions like banks may be willing to assume. In 
fact,  in  the  olden  days,  banks  were  only  meeting  the  short  term  working  capital  needs  of 
trade and business and were generally averse to lending for the long term. The risk aversion 
of  banks  primarily  stemmed  from  the  repayment  of  project  loans  being  contingent  upon 
performance  of  the  project  and  cash  flows  arising  from  it  over  a  long  period  of  time.  The 
project  could  go  wrong  for  a  variety  of  reasons  like  technological  obsolescence,  market 
competition,  change  of  Government  policies,  natural  calamities,  poor  management  skills, 
poor  infrastructure,  etc.  Naturally,  the  risk  premium  on  the  long  gestation  projects  was 
substantially higher which not only resulted in creating a scarcity of finance for the long term 
projects, but also raised the finance cost thereby rendering the project financially unviable. It 
was precisely to overcome the twin problems of scarcity and high-cost of finance for the long 
term  projects  that  the  DFIs  were  established  almost  exclusively  under  Government 
ownership. Importantly, these institutions were also expected to develop requisite expertise 
on  project  appraisal  and  risk  management  in  long  term  lending  and  complement  private 
financial lending entities. 
Genesis of Development Finance Institutions 
8. As I mentioned earlier, the DFIs were mostly established as special financial institutions 
for  promoting  and  supporting  national  economic  development  agenda.  They  have,  indeed, 
played a catalytic role in the socio-economic development across the globe. In Europe, the 
advent of development finance can be traced back to the mid-nineteenth century when these 
institutions  were  established  primarily  to  meet  the  increased  demand  for  medium  to  long-
term capital by new and emerging enterprises during the industrial revolution. In France, long 
term finance institutions were set up in the late 1840s for giving impetus to the industrial and 
infrastructural  development.  In  the  developed  economies,  DFIs  were  also  established 
because of external developments like war, etc. DFIs in Continental Europe, in fact, played a 
major role in reconstruction of the war-ravaged economies. 
9.  In  the  post-colonial  era,  the  emerging  economies  faced  the  challenge  of  evolving  an 
appropriate mechanism for channelizing resources into the development effort. Many of them 
had inherited capital starved, primitive financial systems. Such systems could not be relied 
upon  to  allocate  resources  among  competing  demands  in  the  economy.  The  task  of 
institution  building  was  too  important  to  be  left  to  the  mercy  of  the  market  forces,  which 
themselves  were  at  a  nascent  stage  of  development.  Besides,  the  markets  and  traditional 
financial institutions were generally averse to lending for the long-term as such lending would 
be  characterized  by  uncertain  outcomes.  Facing  such  a  scenario,  several  governments  in 
Europe  and  East  Asia  decided  to  establish  institutions  specifically  to  cater  to  the 
requirements of financial resources for long term developmental efforts. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
International experience 
10. Having seen the context in which the DFIs were set up, let me now give you some global 
perspective on the DFIs. Two distinct models of development financing have been followed 
internationally.  At  one  end  of  the  spectrum  is  the  Anglo-American  model,  which  is  purely 
market  based  with  financial  markets  playing  an  important  role  in  allocating  resources  for 
competing uses, including the industry and long term projects. At the other end is the model 
adopted by Continental Europe and South East Asian Economies, in which financial savings 
were  channelized  and  allocated  through  financial  intermediaries  like  banks  and  DFIs.  The 
DFIs  played  a  very  significant  role  in  the  rapid  reconstruction  and  industrialization  of 
Germany  and  Japan  after  the  2nd World War  by  providing  long-term  credit.  In  Japan,  the 
government owned Japan Development Bank was established in 1951 for reconstruction of 
the economy. In Korea and Singapore also DFIs were set up in 1960s with the main aim of 
rapid industrial development. The emergence of DFIs in the then developing economies also 
coincided with a period when the capital market, as a source of long term funding, was yet to 
stabilize. Based on the European model, the success of the DFIs in the overseas territories 
provided strong impetus for creation of DFIs in India after independence. 
11.  The  initial  mission  for  which  the  DFIs  were  set  up  in  the  developed  economies  were 
complete by the 1980s and most of them have since been wound down or their roles have 
been  redefined.  Most  of  the  surviving  DFIs  now  operate  in  niche  segments  of  financial 
market where the entry barriers are relatively very stringent. India has also witnessed several 
structural changes in the banking and financial system, especially in the post reform period 
which  has  undermined  the  objectives  for  which  the  DFIs  were  established.  Commercial 
banks, which traditionally refrained from lending for the long term or infrastructure projects 
gradually  improved  their  project  appraisal  skills,  their  risk  management  capabilities  and 
slowly developed appetite for long term lending. The stable retail deposit base built by the 
banks also aided their asset-liability management function. Further, the development of the 
bond markets also enabled commercial banks to raise long term funds from the insurance 
and pension funds. These structural changes in the economy meant that the DFIs lost their 
competitive edge in the long term finance market and started facing challenges on solvency 
and  liquidity  fronts.  The  non-performing  assets  started  to  grow  while  the  profitability 
subsided. In a contemporaneous development, following liberalisation in the Indian Economy 
during the 1990s, there was an increasing clamour for reduced Government ownership and 
involvement  in  the  financial  institutions  mainly  from  efficiency,  accountability  and  moral 
hazard perspectives. I would return to some of the problems faced by the DFIs in India a little 
later  in  my  address.  In  essence,  since  the  DFIs  were  no  longer  in  a  position  to  meet  the 
objectives for which they were set up in an efficient and transparent manner, they were given 
an option of transitioning into a universal bank. 
Establishment of IDBI 
12.  The  desire  to  promote  rapid  economic  development  and  to  be  self-reliant  in  industrial 
output led to the establishment of several DFIs to finance industrial/infrastructure projects in 
the post-independence India. IFCI was the first DFI to be set up in 1948, which was followed 
by ICICI in 1955 and other State Finance Corporations under various Acts with the specific 
objective of providing long-term finance to industry. IDBI was set up in 1964 as a subsidiary 
of RBI by an Act of Parliament. I must compliment you for being a part of an institution which, 
for over 40 years, played a key role in nation building as an apex DFI (between July 1, 1964 
and September 30, 2004). You must be proud of the fact that as a DFI, the erstwhile IDBI 
stretched  its  canvas  beyond  mere  project  financing  to  cover  an  array  of  services  that 
contributed  towards  balanced  geographical  spread  of  industries,  development  of  identified 
backward areas, emergence of a new spirit of enterprise and evolution of a deep and vibrant 
capital market. The role of IDBI as an institution builder is also laudable in light of the fact 
that EXIM Bank and SIDBI, two of the vibrant development finance institutions of the day, 
were carved out of IDBI. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Indian experience 
13. As I mentioned earlier, in several economies, having attained their developmental goals, 
the  DFIs  were  either  restructured  or  repositioned  or  they  just  faded  away  from  the  scene. 
The  Indian  experience  has  also  more  or  less  traversed  the  same  path.  Although  the 
developmental  goals  cited  as  the  primary  reasons for  setting  up  of  DFIs  in  India  have  not 
been achieved yet, the Government’s fiscal imperatives and market dynamics has forced a 
reappraisal of the policies and strategies with regard to the role of DFIs in the system. The 
commercial  banks  have  now  taken  over  the  mantle  of  agents  of  development  from  the 
erstwhile DFIs. 
14. Let me now return to the problems faced by the DFIs in India. The DFI concept in the 
Indian context suffered from some inherent structural infirmities. As the DFIs were set up as 
public  sector  enterprises,  the  market  perceived  the  borrowings  made  by  them  as  having 
implicit  government  guarantee.  This  induced  a  sense  of  profligacy  in  the  behaviour  of  the 
DFIs  while  borrowing.  Further,  in  the  absence  of  a  competitive  environment  for  project 
lending,  the  entities  became quite  complacent  and  disregarded  the  viability  of  the  projects 
financed, while pricing. The crossholding of shares amongst the DFIs also led to a contagion 
effect  in  creating  NPAs.  The  slower  development  of  the  capital  markets  also  did  not  help 
matters as in several instances, the promoters failed to raise equity from the market after the 
DFIs  had  made  the  initial  disbursements.  The DFIs  received  low  cost  funds from  National 
Industrial  Credit  (Long  Term  Operations)  Fund  from  RBI  under  concessional  terms  and 
through government guaranteed bonds in the beginning. However, these were subsequently 
withdrawn, leading to a spike in their borrowing cost. Post the reforms programme launched 
in the early 1990s, the DFIs had to contend with increased competition from banks, which 
were also allowed to undertake project financing. Despite a significant increase in their cost 
of funds, the DFIs were forced to lend at very competitive rates, which resulted in a decline in 
their spread and profitability. The cumulative effect of all these developments was that the 
operations of the DFIs became increasingly unsustainable, at the turn of the century and they 
gradually lost their distinct identity as a vehicle for providing long term funding for industrial 
and infrastructural purposes. 
15. Following the recommendations of the Narasimham Committee II and publication of the 
RBI Discussion Paper on “Harmonising the Role and Operations of Development Financial 
Institutions  and  Banks”  released  in  January  1999,  Reserve  Bank  announced  its  regulatory 
approach for the DFIs in the annual policy statement of April 2000. It was decided to allow an 
option to any DFI which wished to convert into a commercial bank, provided the prudential 
norms applicable to the banks were fully satisfied. This paved the way for conversion of the 
DFIs  into  commercial  banks.  The  GOI  in  the  Mid-Year  Review,  2002  also  categorically 
announced  that  “financial  sector  reforms,  involving  interest  rate  deregulation,  increased 
competition from banks, and lack of concessional funds have rendered the business models 
of  development  financial  institutions  (DFIs)  unsustainable”.  Specifically  for  IDBI  bank,  the 
percentage of Gross NPAs between 1999 and 2003 ranged from 14.07% to 16.86% of total 
advances and the Net NPAs ranged from 11.64% to 14.82% of net advances. 
16.  It  was  in  this  background  that  the  Government  repealed  the  IDBI  Act  in  2003  and 
converted  IDBI  Limited  into  a  Banking  company  (as  Industrial  Development  Bank  of  India 
Limited) for undertaking the entire gamut of banking activities. In view of the tough emerging 
competitive  scenario  in  the  Indian  financial  sector,  the  managements  of  ICICI  Limited  and 
ICICI  Bank  had  already  merged  their  operations  in  2002  to  pursue  a  universal  banking 
strategy. 
Where does IDBI bank go from here? 
17. Having seen the history of DFIs and the gradual progression of IDBI from a DFI into a 
commercial  bank,  let  me  now  focus  on  the  challenges  that  the  bank  is  facing  in  its  new 
avatar and what contribution can the unions make in helping the institution regain its primacy 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
amongst the financial institutions of the country? Before I go any further let me quote former 
RBI  Governor,  Dr.  Bimal  Jalan  who  aptly  captured  the  thought  process  behind  the 
conversion of DFIs into universal banks. Dr. Jalan said “the move towards universal banking 
would  not  provide  a  panacea  for  the  endemic  weaknesses  of  a  DFI  or  its  liquidity  and 
solvency  problems  and/or  operational  difficulties  arising 
from  under-capitalization, 
non-performing  assets,  and  asset  liabilities  mismatches  etc.  The  overriding  consideration 
should be the objectives and strategic interests of the financial institution concerned in the 
context  of  meeting  the  varied  needs  of  customers,  subject  to  normal  prudential  norms 
applicable to banks”. 
18. That brings us to the question what objective has IDBI Bank set for itself and how is it 
geared to achieve it? It is been around a decade since you became a commercial bank. Are 
you satisfied with your performance? Following conversion of the DFIs into banks, the mantle 
of  leading  the  developmental  agenda  has  fallen  on  the  commercial  banks.  With  years  of 
experience in developmental banking behind it, your institution was in a perfect position to 
lead this agenda. How do you view your achievement vis-à-vis the expectations the society 
has of you? Here, I would like to remind that as unions, there is an onerous responsibility 
cast on you to help your institution fulfill this social agenda. While I would leave it upon all of 
you to dispassionately evaluate your performance over the years, let me, on my part, delve 
into  some  of  the  key  areas  in  which  I  believe  IDBI  Bank  has  huge  opportunities  which,  if 
properly exploited, would benefit the bank no end, going forward. 
19. An immediate goal which you must focus is on spurring your financial inclusion initiatives. 
There are vast untapped areas in India’s hinterland where banking services are yet to reach. 
Even after implementation of our first round of Financial Inclusion Plans by banks, close to 
three and a half lakh villages remain unserved by banks. The exclusion is not only limited to 
rural areas but also to select pockets in the urban/ metropolitan centres. According to World 
Bank Findex Survey (2012), only 35% of Indian adults had access to a formal bank account 
and 8% borrowed formally in the last 12 months. Remember the alternate cost of funds for 
this  segment  of  borrowers  is  extremely  high.  Against  this  backdrop,  it  is  beyond 
comprehension why the commercial banks do not find enough viable business propositions 
for growth. I must warn you that it is this most ‘creamy’ layer of customers that the new banks 
would be looking to tap and therefore, it is in your own interest to capture this vast customer 
base before others do so. For a bank which has one of the lowest NIMs in the industry, I do 
not know why you should not pursue this agenda actively. 
20.  In  a  scenario  where  Government  of  India  is  implementing  transfer  of  benefits  and 
subsidies through direct benefit transfers to the bank accounts in order to plug the leakages 
in the system, you must look to open as many customer accounts as you can. Remember, 
whosoever acquires the customers initially will be the winner in the longer run. As you are 
aware,  the  bank  can  use  a  combination  of  physical  branch  network  and  Business 
Correspondents for providing banking services to geographically dispersed areas. Therefore, 
the lack of a large number of physical braches can also not be considered as a constraint for 
reaching out to the masses. You should look to leverage technology and build a cost-efficient 
business delivery model to attain maximum penetration into the unbanked areas and seek to 
offer innovative products and services to customers at an affordable price. As employees of 
the  bank,  all  of  you  need  to  play  a  pivotal  role  in  bringing  about  this  focus  on  financial 
inclusion. 
21.  I  also  observe  that IDBI  Bank  has  been  unable  to  achieve  the  Priority  Sector  Lending 
targets  and  worryingly,  its  performance  on  this  front  has  been  falling.  This  is  despite  the 
merger of a primarily rural focused bank like United Western Bank. The system of Priority 
Sector  Lending  has  been  introduced  mainly  to  ensure  easier  access  of  credit  to  those 
deserving sectors and people, who otherwise, do not receive adequate credit. Moreover, RBI 
has freed the pricing of products under PSL; therefore, banks should not have any inhibition 
in  lending  to  this  segment.  Please  remember  that  the  banks  who  do  not  meet  their  PSL 
targets  have  to  contribute  funds  to  the  RIDF,  the  returns  from  which  are  quite  less 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
remunerative,  may  be  lesser  than  your  cost  of  funds.  The  bank  also  needs  to  take  up 
financial literacy campaigns to educate the potential customers on high interest charged by 
the informal credit channels and wean them away from money lenders. 
22. I have also observed an increasing trend in the Gross NPA and restructuring of standard 
advances  in  the  banks  which  reflects  deficiencies  in  the  appraisal  and  risk  management 
standards. You have to work with the Top Management in acquiring the necessary skills and 
upgrading  the  Credit  Risk  Management  system  and  initiate  necessary  steps  to  arrest  this 
disconcerting trend. 
Role of employee unions 
23. Let me now turn specifically to the responsibility that you have, as unions, in ensuring 
that IDBI Bank attains its true potential in its role as a full service bank. You must appreciate 
the  new  operating  environment  that  exists  today  and  must  realize  that  in  this  highly 
competitive  market,  no  longer  would  the  corporate  chase  you.  For  most  of  your  members 
who have cut their teeth in an era when IDBI was a DFI with limited competition and a small 
universe of customers to deal with, the transition to commercial banking might be difficult, but 
remember, if you wish to survive as an institution in this new avatar, you must be willing to 
change. What is, in fact, needed is a change in mindset and you, as responsible union, have 
to oversee a smooth transition among the employees. Retail banking is a customer centric 
business and hence, you would need to develop the passion, compassion and grace to deal 
with customers. In my opinion, IDBI had a great opportunity to leverage upon the relationship 
it had built over the years with big corporate/ public sector enterprises and could have got the 
salary  accounts  of  staff  of  these  organizations  with  the  bank.  This  would  have  given  you 
access to a stable and low cost fund. It is unfortunate, however, that this has not happened. 
24.  Employee  productivity  and  efficiency,  especially  in  the  public  sector banks,  remains  at 
abysmally  low  levels.  I  do  not  know  how  many  of  you  have  gone  through  the  speech  I 
recently made at a FICCI – IBA event. I have given detailed statistics on the productivity and 
efficiency  parameters  of  Indian  banks  and  more  so,  the  PSU  banks  vis-à-vis  their 
counterparts in rest of the world. If you peruse them closely, you would be note that we are 
not  only  doing  badly  vis-à-vis  our  counterparts  in  the  developed  world  but  also  against 
developing countries and emerging markets in Asia and elsewhere. I have also argued that 
though  some  productivity  and  efficiency  gains  have  happened  in  Indian  banks,  they  have 
happened at the cost of compromising on the allocational efficiency. The society at large has 
not  benefited  from  the  operational  efficiency  gains  that  the  banking  sector  has  seen  and 
there  is  no  perceptible  cost  reduction  for  the  customers  in  general.  I  would  say  the  only 
saving grace for us is that we are virtually at the lowest ebb and our performance can only 
improve from here on. As banking community, we need to change and very quickly at that, to 
remain relevant to the society. 
25. It is in this context that the ability of the unions to influence employee behavior becomes 
very important. Not for a single moment, I mean to undermine the role that IDBI has played, 
in its initial role as a DFI. Along with the other development financial institutions, IDBI has 
significantly contributed to economic prosperity of the country during the initial plan periods; 
but in a liberalized economy and in an era of universal banking, role of DFIs as specialized 
financial institutions has certainly diminished. It is for the unions, through seminars/interactive 
sessions like these, to sensitize their members about the changed ground realities. As I said 
earlier, for you to be able to compete in the tough existing environment, you need to veer 
away from preset rigidities and be willing to change. 
Conclusion 
26.  In  sum,  I  would  like  to  mention  that  for  all  economies,  development  is  necessary  and 
finance  has  a  central  role  in facilitating that. The  soul  of  the  DFI  has  to remain  intact  in  a 
developing economy. The structural changes in the financial system have, however, blurred 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
the boundaries between the DFIs and the commercial banks, in terms of areas of operation. 
The DFIs do not hold any competitive advantage over banks and hence the compulsion to 
tag  institutions  as  DFIs to  enable  them to  pursue  development finance, no  longer  exists. I 
feel  that  commercial  banks  are  in  a  perfect  position  to  fulfill  the  objectives  which  were 
originally intended for the DFIs. 
27. Your institution has inherited the soul of a DFI from IDBI Limited. What is required is a 
transformation in the mindset of the employees to see through this period of transformation. I 
strongly believe that rather than seeking any reversal of status for your institutions as a DFI, 
the  management  and  the  unions  of  IDBI  Bank  should  look  ahead  to  the  future.  As 
responsible  unions,  you  have  a  very  constructive  role  in motivating  the employees  of  your 
institution. Rather than resting on past laurels, you have to gear up to face the future. The 
achievements  over  the  past  50  years  should  only  be  used  for  drawing  inspiration  and 
motivation for the hard work that you have to do in the next 50 years. As employees, all of 
you have to update yourselves with the latest skills, technology, etc. to be able to deliver up 
to the optimum level. The Management and the unions have to collectively strive to ensure 
that the impressive legacy that the institution has inherited is sustained even in its new avatar 
as a commercial bank. There is enough scope for commercial banking in the country, if the 
interest for new bank license despite some of the onerous requirements on capital, financial 
inclusion,  PSL  is  anything  to  go  by.  The  need  for  the  bank  is  to  identify  the  available 
opportunities and apply your collective might towards attaining it. IDBI is a well reputed brand 
which does not need any introduction. Going forward, you must look to leverage upon your 
brand and broaden your customer base before new banks poach them. 
28.  You  may  have  to  unlearn  and  relearn  few  new  things  to  succeed  in  the  even  more 
competitive business environment that is likely to unfold shortly. It is imperative for the Top 
Management and for the employees to work collectively for the progress of your institution. I 
am  sure  the  able  leadership  of  the  United  Forum  of  IDBI  Officers  and  Employees  would 
ensure that the staff is motivated to handle new challenges and the institution can retain its 
glorious tradition in perpetuity. 
29. I thank you for inviting me on this occasion and giving me a patient hearing. I wish you all 
the very best for all your future endeavors.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
