Kikuo Iwata: Remarks at a symposium in honor of Korekiyo Takahashi 
Remarks  by  Mr  Kikuo  Iwata,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  a  symposium  in 
honor of Korekiyo Takahashi, Tokyo, 27 October 2013. 
 Introduction 
It is my great pleasure to speak at such a distinguished symposium. I would like to take this 
opportunity to express my sincere gratitude to the people of Yamaguchi Prefecture for your 
cooperation with the activities of the Bank of Japan, especially of our Shimonoseki Branch. 
I was invited to appear today at this symposium in honor of the eminent statesman Korekiyo 
Takahashi (1854–1936). Today, Japan’s monetary and fiscal policies are at a critical juncture 
with regard to overcoming the deflation that has lasted for nearly 15 years. It is indeed timely 
for us to look back on the great achievements of our predecessor, who faced and addressed 
policy  challenges  similar  to  those  of  today,  notwithstanding  the  differing  historical 
circumstances of his time. 
Takahashi lived through a very turbulent period, and his life contained enough adventures for 
any number of episodes on the big screen or television. To give just a few examples, after 
leaving for the United States as a youth in the late 1860s, he endured a period of indentured 
servitude. Later he became involved in developing mines in Peru, but was forced to return to 
Japan after the mine scheme was discovered to be a fraud and his financial resources were 
exhausted. These episodes show us that the first half of his life contained many challenges, 
but he remained a man of determination and liberal spirit. 
Toward  the  end  of  his  30s,  he  was  assigned  to  this  very  place,  Shimonoseki,  as  the  first 
general manager of the Bank’s West Branch. It was at that time that he began his career as 
a  banker  as  well  as  a  financial  administrator.  In  the  second  half  of  his  life,  he  went  on  to 
assume  a  number  of  important  roles  –  such  as  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  finance 
minister, and prime minister – and left a record of many historic accomplishments. 
Here in Shimonoseki, there are many reminders of Japan’s long history. It likewise enjoys an 
important  place  in  Japanese  economic  history,  having  nurtured  a  great  statesman  like 
Takahashi. 
Takahashi economic policy 
As I mentioned at the start of my remarks, among Takahashi’s many achievements we are 
particularly  interested  in  a  series  of  macroeconomic  measures  –  called  the  Takahashi 
Economic Policy – which were put in place to respond to the Showa Depression of 1930–31. 
Looking  back  at  economic  developments  around  that  time,  the  1920s  were  a  period  of 
persistent  depression  following  the  economic  boom  during  World  War  I,  the  Great  Kanto 
Earthquake  of  1923,  and  the  Showa  Financial  Crisis  of  1927.  Then,  in  1930,  Junnosuke 
Inoue  – finance minister  under  Prime  Minister  Osachi  Hamaguchi  –  returned  Japan  to the 
gold standard, lifting the gold embargo that had been in place since World War I. 
Japan’s  return  to  the  gold  standard  meant  a  shift  to  a  deflationary  regime,  with  current 
deficits  and  price  declines  as  a  result  of  tight  fiscal  and  monetary  policies.  In  addition,  in 
returning to the gold standard Inoue set the exchange rate between gold and the yen at its 
former level, which was equivalent to excessive appreciation of the yen. All of this served to 
produce a deflationary recession in Japan. In addition to these developments, the spillover of 
the Great Depression in 1929 into the domestic economy was regarded as the central cause 
of the Showa Depression. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
from 
Against this background, in 1931 Takahashi assumed the post of finance minister for the fifth 
time  in  his  career.  Under  Prime  Minister  Tsuyoshi  Inukai,  he  implemented  a  package  of 
accommodative  macroeconomic  policies  combining  fiscal  and  monetary  policies.  This 
became known as the Takahashi Economic Policy. 
On the first day of his return to office, he took the dramatic step of ordering an exit from the 
gold  standard  and  a  restoration  of  the  gold  embargo.  As  a  result,  foreign  exchange  rates 
became able to move in tandem with actual developments in the economy. In terms of fiscal 
policy, he increased fiscal expenditures, supporting the economy from the demand side. On 
the monetary policy front, the Bank pursued accommodative measures by cutting its official 
discount  rate  and  underwriting  Japanese  government  securities  directly 
the 
government. 
The  Takahashi  Economic  Policy  –  combining  fiscal,  monetary,  and  exchange  policies 
effectively  –  led  to  the  adjustment  of  the  yen’s  excessive  appreciation  and  counteracted 
declining price levels. As a result, among the major world powers, Japan became the first to 
succeed in achieving an economic recovery and escape from deflation during that period. 
The key to the Takahashi Economic Policy’s success was a shift in economic policymaking 
from the deflationary regime of Inoue to the reflationary one of Takahashi. This overcame the 
public’s deflationary expectations, generating inflation expectations. The need for a reversal 
of expectations through a change in policy regime is likewise inherent in the thinking behind 
the Bank’s quantitative and qualitative monetary easing of today. 
Indeed,  macroeconomic  policies  initiated  by  Takahashi  have  many  similarities  with  the 
economic policies under Prime Minister Shinzo Abe; namely, the first and second “arrows” of 
“Abenomics.” It is for this reason that the Takahashi Economic Policy is viewed as playing a 
pioneering role in Abenomics. 
The  basic  thinking  behind  the  Takahashi  Economic  Policy  was  to  manage  aggregate 
demand  through  both  fiscal  and  monetary  policies,  and  this  coincided  with  Keynesian 
principles. What is noteworthy about Takahashi’s policy package is that it was put in place 
before Keynesian economics became established. For instance, in the United States it was 
only from 1933 that President Franklin D. Roosevelt called for an exit from the gold standard, 
adopted a monetary easing policy, and introduced the New Deal, which was considered to 
embody the essence of Keynesian theory. 
By  1935,  Takahashi  judged  that  Japan’s  economy  had  returned  to  a  stable  course. While 
tightening  fiscal  expenditure,  he  tried  to  stop  the  Bank  from  underwriting  government 
securities;  otherwise,  this  would  lead  to  hyperinflation.  His  actions  were  opposed  by  the 
military,  which  sought  a  further  expansion  in  military  spending.  He  was  eventually 
assassinated  by  young  military  officers  on  February  26,  1936.  After  his  death,  the  Bank’s 
underwriting  of  government  securities  was  mismanaged,  which  led  to  hyperinflation  after 
World War II. The important point to remember is that it was not the Takahashi Economic 
Policy  itself  but  the  mismanagement  of  the  Bank’s  underwriting  of  government  securities 
after Takahashi’s death that led to hyperinflation. 
Based on the lessons learned from history, subsequently the Public Finance Act prohibited 
the  Bank  from  extending  credit  to  the  government  by  underwriting  government  securities. 
Moreover,  under  quantitative  and  qualitative  monetary  easing,  the  Bank  has  set  its  price 
stability target at 2 percent, based on the recognition that neither deflation nor hyperinflation 
is desirable. 
To  conclude,  the  Takahashi  Economic  Policy  was  consistent  with  economic  theory  and 
Takahashi  implemented  his  policy  package  expeditiously.  It  was  indeed  a  successful 
macroeconomic  policy  of  which  Japan  should  be  proud,  and  his  great  achievement  still 
stands as exceptional when compared with the contemporary episode of deflation that lasted 
for nearly 15 years. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Concluding remarks 
At today’s symposium, I understand that there will be a series of presentations highlighting 
the relationship between Shimonoseki and Korekiyo Takahashi. Looking back at the mission 
accomplished by this great predecessor, I believe that we may be able to find a number of 
insights  as  we  conduct  new  policies  going  forward.  With  this  in  mind,  I  very  much  look 
forward to participating in the symposium. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
