Ardian Fullani: The role of banks – bridges to development 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the 7th Hellenic – Albanian 
Business Forum “The role of banks – bridges to development”, Tirana, 13 November 2013. 
 Good morning ladies and gentlemen! 
For  me  it’s  a  pleasure  to  participate  in  this  economic  forum  that  brings  together 
representatives  of  Greek  and  Albanian  entrepreneurs,  and  also  of  banks  operating  in  our 
countries.  I  am  particularly  pleased  to  have  with  us  today  the  Governor  of  the  Bank  of 
Greece,  Mr.  Provopoulos,  whose  participation  in  this  forum  shows  the  attention  that  him 
personally, and the Bank of Greece, is paying to support the business sector in general, and 
more specifically, the economic relationship between Greece and Albania. This approach is 
the  right  one.  The  private  business  sector  is  the  main  contributor  in  the  GDP  of  the 
respective countries. The business sector is undergoing some severe difficulties in Greece 
currently, related with the need to deleverage and restructure in order to improve productivity 
and  become  competitive.  These  are  fierce  challenges  that  are  associated  with  huge 
economic and social costs. I do believe though that these sacrifices of Greek people will pay 
off in the future, by giving way to a more vibrant and stronger economy, a more competitive 
business sector. 
In Albania, the business sector faces challenges too. Albanian businesses must restructure 
to  become  more  competitive.  It  must  do  so,  at  a  time  when  Albania’s  economic  growth  is 
subdued and the demand is weak. This year we expect GDP growth of around 1.9%. The 
figure could be a little higher next year, but is still more reliant on foreign demand, which, on 
its  own,  is  quite  uncertain.  Our  business  sector  must  find  new  ways  and  new  markets  to 
sustain its activity and grow. 
Our experience has shown that businesses or industries which had more diversified product 
markets, which took care of their cost structures and their balance sheets, have fared better 
through the downturn and have brighter prospects on the expected upturn. It serves to show 
that, as in other areas of life, a long term approach to business yields better results. 
Financing  is  important  at  growth  times,  but  is  also  needed  at  difficult  economic  times  to 
facilitate business restructuring and ensure time consistency of change implementation. Both 
in Greece and Albania, and indeed in Europe, the banking sector is the dominant source of 
finance. 
This fact highlights the importance of a sound banking system for our economies and has 
raised deep concerns in Europe about the chances of a credit-less recovery, given the actual 
very  weak  credit  growth.  While  the  long-term  objective  should  be  to  create  conditions  for 
achieving a more balanced and diverse financial system, the shorter times objectives should 
focus  one  having  a  stable  financial  system that provides  adequate financial  services  to  its 
customers, both savers and borrowers, thus maintaining its fair share of contribution to the 
economic developments of a particular country. 
The banking sector in Albania has felt the impact of the international financial crisis, as the 
weaker credit standards before the crisis and the weaker economic growth afterwards, have 
been  translated  into  lower  asset  quality  and  difficulties  to  consistently  maintain  positive 
financial  results.  In  front  of  higher  credit  risk,  credit  terms  have  been  tightened  and  credit 
growth has been sluggish. In September 2013, credit growth turned negative driven by credit 
in foreign currency and to businesses. 
However, the banking sector remains well capitalized and liquid. Banks have been able to 
raise  new  capital  and  financial  support  from  their  mother  banks.  Especially,  Greek  banks 
operating  in  Albania  have  enjoyed  strong  support  from  their  mother  banks  so  far,  and  we 
expect  this  to  continue  in  the  future  too,  if  needed.  Overall,  in  September  2013  the  risk 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
weighted capital of the banking sector stood at 17.8%, while the ratio of liquid assets to short 
term  liabilities  was  36.5%.  The  sector  has  shown  strong  preference  for  investments  in 
Albanian government debt securities and placements abroad. 
Bank of Albania has been taking a number of measures to support credit growth and address 
the  loan  quality  problems.  Given  the  subdued  inflationary  pressures,  we  have  lowered  the 
policy rate to the record level of 3.5%. The path of the credit interest rate has followed this 
trend, although at a slower pace. Given the weakness of the credit channel in the monetary 
transmission  mechanism,  we  have  tried  to  strengthen  our  impact  by  adopting  some 
countercyclical  measures  to  promote  credit  growth.  In  this  regard,  we  have  temporarily 
increased capital requirements for placements of banks abroad and have reduced those for 
credit in the domestic economy. 
In addition, we are promoting credit restructuring at an early phase by reducing provisioning 
requirements if that is the case. Several legal and regulatory measures have been taken in 
cooperation with other authorities and the banking industry, to improve collateral execution 
process and facilitate loan write-offs. 
The results of such measures have been mixed so far, but in the coming months we expect 
their impact to be noticeable. This is also linked with the commitment of the Government to 
pay  its  arrears  to  the  private  sector  in  the  next  year.  Nonetheless,  it  is  important  that  the 
banking  industry  continues  to  support  sound  business  propositions  of  borrowers.  Banking 
activity may be driven by profits but is based on relationship with its customers. Now is the 
time when such relationship is being tested, and good bank management must look beyond 
the current challenges to keep and strengthen such relationship. 
Our focus as the supervisor of the banking sector will remain in having institutions that are 
well  capitalized  and 
their  standards  of  risk 
management. In our forthcoming communication with banks, we shall pay special attention to 
how  they  assess  and  monitor  credit,  market  and  liquidity  risks;  and  how  they  include  the 
results of this process in the management decisions. 
Finally,  I  want  to  stress  again  the  importance  of  economic  reforms  that  would  ensure 
stronger economic growth in the medium term, and will provide for more effective banking 
activity.  The  objective  of  such  reforms  must  be 
the  productivity  and 
competitiveness of our economy through: reducing uncertainties over the direction of future 
developments by identifying the right policies and reforms; creating a favorable fiscal, legal, 
business and political climate that will promote investments in the economy; improving the 
workforce  education  and  specialization;  generating  the  benefits  of  economies  of  scale 
through  integration  of  businesses  in  the  regional  or  European  market;  and  increasing  the 
efficiency  of  the  public  and  private  sector  through  the  improvement  of  governance.  In  the 
financial system, the reforms must focus on deepening and broadening the financial market, 
with the objective of improving access to finance, improve efficiency and reduce risks. 
I hope that this forum will bring up new ideas on how to overcome current challenges that the 
real  economy  and  the  financial  sector  is  facing.  In  any  case  those  ideas  can  be 
implementable  only  if  they  do  not  focus  on  a  single  sector,  but  also  recognize  the  close 
relationship and inter-linkages among various sectors in the economy. Thank you very much! 
that  continuously 
liquid,  and 
improve 
improve 
to 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
