Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Reflections on financial reform – Malaysia’s experience 
Speech  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia  (Bank  Negara 
Malaysia),  at  the  2013 China  Business  News  (CBN)  Annual  Meeting  and  Finance  Summit 
“Reflections on financial reform – Malaysia’s experience”, Beijing, 8 December 2013. 
 It  is  my  honour  and  pleasure  to  be  invited  to  speak  at  this  2013  China  Business  News 
Finance  Summit.  As  the  globalisation  of  finance  intensifies,  the  world  is  becoming 
increasingly  more  inter-connected  and  integrated.  This  has  largely  been  due  to  the  trend 
towards increased financial liberalisation by most parts of the world. It has been maintained 
that  such  deregulation  and  liberalisation  would  facilitate  the  development  of  more  efficient 
and robust financial systems and that it would result in a more efficient allocation of financial 
resources  across  borders.  While  such  financial  liberalisation  may  indeed  bring  such  wide 
ranging benefits, it also brings with it increased risks that needs to be effectively managed. 
It was for these reasons that Malaysia adopted a conscious effort to put in place the financial 
and  economic  pre-conditions  so  as  to  enable  us  to  benefit  from  such  financial  reforms 
involving the deregulation and liberalisation of our financial system. Allow me to share our 
experience in pursuing this agenda. Following the Asian Financial Crisis, Malaysia embarked 
on strategies for an orderly development of the financial sector. Focus was first placed on 
strengthening  the  institutional  capacity  of  the  domestic  financial  intermediaries  so  as  to 
narrow the performance gap between the domestic and international financial intermediaries. 
In parallel with this was the intense effort to develop the domestic bond market. 
During this phase of the development of the financial system, significant advancement in the 
banking  sector  was  made  in  terms  of  capitalisation,  risk  management  and  governance 
practices, delivery channels and in human capital development in the industry. This paved 
the way for the interest rate reform to move to greater market orientation, thereby supporting 
a more efficient pricing of financial products and services. The more competitive environment 
that it generated also became an important driver of productivity gains, customer centricity 
and innovation in the financial system. 
Equally important, was the attention that was given to the development of a deep and vibrant 
domestic bond market as an alternative channel for the efficient raising of funds, particularly 
by the corporate sector. The development of the bond market has enabled better matching of 
long-term  projects  with  long-term  funds,  and  by  reducing  the  over-reliance  on  the  banking 
system, it has contributed significantly to financial stability. Among the institutions that was 
established to support the development of the domestic bond market was the establishment 
of  the  domestic  rating  agencies  and  Cagamas,  the  mortgage  corporation.  The  Malaysian 
bond market has since evolved to become the largest in South East Asia to now account for 
110% of GDP. This market has since been liberalised to allow foreign corporations to raise 
funding in both domestic and foreign currency. In these recent few years, there has been a 
number  of  successful  Reminbi  bond  issuance  from  our  market  to  finance  investment 
opportunities in China. 
Various  other  key  financial  infrastructures  were  also  put  in  place  to  enhance  the  efficient 
functioning  of  the  intermediation  process  of  the  overall  financial  system.  This  included  the 
infrastructure  to  support  robust  payment  and  settlement  systems.  In  2012,  we  introduced 
onshore  settlement  of  Reminbi  transactions  in  our  real  time  gross  settlement  system 
RENTAS  via  a  local  onshore  settlement  institution.  As  part  of  the  development  of  our 
domestic financial infrastructure the Malaysia Deposit Insurance Corporation was establish to 
provide  a  comprehensive  deposit  insurance  and  insurance  benefit  system  for  the  banking 
and insurance sector. This institution not only imposes discipline for risk management by the 
financial institutions through the imposition of differential premiums based on the risk profile 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
of  institutions,  but  it  also  is  the  resolution  authority  in  the  event  of  failure  of  a  financial 
institution.  
Underpinning  the  financial  sector  growth  was  also  the  development  of  a  more  robust 
surveillance,  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework.  As  the  Malaysian  financial  system 
evolved  to  become  more  complex,  sophisticated  and  diversified,  the  regulatory  and 
supervisory approach has correspondingly evolved from detailed and prescriptive rules to a 
risk-based  approach  that  combined  greater  supervisory  judgment  and  intensity  with  high-
level  principles  of  sound  practice.  This  is  complemented  with  effective  surveillance  that  is 
forward looking and focused on addressing the risks to overall financial stability. 
This decade has also seen the modernisation of the legal framework, that has included the 
enactment of two comprehensive laws this year to govern the financial sector under a single 
legislative framework for the conventional and Islamic financial sectors. The implementation 
of  these  laws  have  strengthened  Malaysia’s  financial  sector  by  providing  a  consistent 
approach  to  regulation  and  supervision  and  enhancing  the  Central  Bank’s  power  to  take 
timely intervention actions in relation to financial intermediation activities that occur outside 
the banking system. Following the global financial crisis, such shadow banking systems have 
come  under  greater  regulatory  scrutiny.  Specifically,  regulators  have  been  concerned  with 
the  scope  that  exists  for  non-bank  financial  institutions  to  perform  financial  intermediation 
activities in a way that replicates the systemic risks associated with banking activities, without 
being subjected to the same rigor of regulation and supervision that is applied to banks. 
In  this  recent  decade,  the  strengthened  institutional  arrangements  in  Malaysia  to  promote 
financial stability have contributed towards addressing this important gap. They include the 
establishment  of  an  oversight  authority  for  credit  cooperatives,  and  provisions  for  the 
Malaysia Deposit Insurance Corporation to extend temporary deposit insurance coverage to 
instruments of non-bank intermediaries that are similar in nature to deposits. Also important 
has been the significant strengthening of inter-agency coordination arrangements to address 
potential regulatory gaps. The new legislation has also improved the ability of the Bank to 
respond to financial stability risks that can originate from shadow banking activities, including 
to  issue  orders  requiring  such  intermediaries  to  address  any  risk  identified  which  could 
threaten  financial  stability.  A  Financial  Stability  Executive  Committee  chaired  by  the 
Governor,  which  includes  the  Treasury  Secretary,  heads  of  key  regulatory  authorities  and 
independent  parties  as  its  members  may  impose  macro-prudential  measures  on  these  
non-bank financial institutions to prevent the build-up of financial imbalances from this sector.  
With  these  necessary  preconditions  firmly  in  place,  Malaysia  embarked  on  a  gradual  and 
sequenced  approach  towards  liberalisation  and  internationalisation.  In  2005,  Malaysia 
migrated to a flexible exchange rate regime at the very same moment that China did. It has 
provided  Malaysia  with  greater  flexibility  to  adjust  to  changing  structural  conditions  in  the 
region and the global economy. This has been reinforced by the progressive liberalisation of 
foreign exchange administration rules which have enhanced business competitiveness and 
facilitated  larger  volumes  of  trade  and  foreign  direct  investment  flows.  This  has  generated 
greater two way flows in the foreign exchange market and thus promoted orderly conditions 
in  an  environment  of  highly  volatile  capital  flows.  In  the  financial  sector  new  licences  and 
foreign equity interests in the banking and insurance sectors have now moved beyond the 
prescription of hard limits, to assessments based on the prudential and in the best interest of 
Malaysia criteria. 
In  building  a  stable  and  resilient  financial  system,  the  Central  Bank  has  accorded  greater 
emphasis on financial inclusion. This has included enhancing access to the unserved sectors 
as well as the introduction of highly innovative delivery channels such as retail outlets and 
post  offices  as  third-party  agents  to  widen  the  outreach  of  financial  services.  These  have 
worked  in  tandem  to  ensure  that  all  members  of  society,  including  the  most  vulnerable 
groups,  have  the  opportunity  to  participate  in  the  formal  financial  system.  Concurrently, 
continuous efforts are being undertaken to promote consumer protection and education, in 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
order to ensure fair and responsible market practices and conduct, and that consumers are 
better equipped with the necessary financial knowledge to make informed decisions.  
Recognising that the development of the financial sector also depends on the availability of 
high  quality  and  skilled  talent,  focus  was  accorded  to  the  development  of  human  capital 
through  the  introduction  of  institutional  arrangements  to  provide  comprehensive  education 
and  learning  programmes  for  the  financial  services  industry.  Towards  this  objective,  the 
Central  Bank  oversaw  the  establishment  of  differentiated  platforms  to  meet  the  diverse 
needs  of financial  services  professionals, from the  entry  to middle  management,  specialist 
and leadership levels. These include the setting up of programmes and institutions such as 
the Financial Sector Talent Enrichment Programme, the ICLIF Leadership and Governance 
Centre and INCEIF, the global university of Islamic finance. 
Malaysia’s imperatives for growth and stability moving forward 
Our  next  phase  of  transformation  will  continue  to  promote  inclusive  access  to  financial 
services,  encourage  the  development  of  the  range  of  financial  institutions,  products  and 
markets that will facilitate and drive the development of new domestic sources of growth, and 
accelerate Malaysia’s regional and international connectivity. The use of technology will also 
be  leveraged  in  this  new  environment,  to  enhance  the  efficiency  of  financial  transactions 
through electronic means. The implementation of these strategies will also be accompanied 
by an effective regulatory and supervisory regime that is appropriate for a more regionally- 
and internationally-connected financial sector.  
There  has  been  tremendous  payoffs  from  the  development  of  our  financial  system,  its 
restructuring,  rationalisation,  deregulation  and  subsequent  liberalisation.  During  the  recent 
global financial crisis our financial system has remained resilient. Credit flows to support the 
economy  was  never  disrupted.  Despite  the  massive  and  highly  volatile  capital  flows, 
Malaysia was able to intermediate these flows. There continued to be orderly functioning of 
the financial markets and the overall financial system.  
In  conclusion,  the  outcome  and  success  of  any  reform  strategies  will  depend  on  the 
prevailing circumstances and the state of readiness of the financial system and the overall 
economy.  As  China  undertakes  its  own  reforms,  it  has  every  potential  to  emerge  stronger 
and to continue its economic success that is now a well recognised milestone of this century 
and for the years to come. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
