Thomas Jordan: Global economic outlook and economic developments 
in Switzerland 
Introductory remarks by Mr Thomas Jordan, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss 
National  Bank,  at  the  Media  News  Conference  of  the  Swiss  National  Bank,  Berne, 
12 December 2013. 
 Ladies and gentlemen 
Welcome  to  the  Swiss  National  Bank’s  news  conference.  I  would  like  to  begin  today  by 
explaining the SNB’s monetary policy decision before moving on to present our assessment 
of the economic situation and monetary conditions. My colleague, Jean-Pierre Danthine, will 
then  talk  to  you  about  developments  in  connection  with  financial  stability  and  banknotes. 
Finally,  my  colleague,  Fritz  Zurbrügg,  will  look  at  the  current  situation  on  the  financial 
markets, as well as at the management of our currency reserves and interest rate benchmark 
reforms. As always, we will conclude with a question and answer session. 
I will now start with our monetary policy decision. 
As you will have no doubt expected, the SNB is maintaining its minimum exchange rate of 
CHF  1.20  per  euro.  The  Swiss  franc  is  still  high.  With  the  three-month  Libor  already 
practically  at  zero,  the  minimum  exchange  rate  continues  to  be  the  right  tool  for  ensuring 
appropriate  monetary  conditions  in  Switzerland.  If  the  Swiss  franc  were  to  appreciate,  this 
would  have  significant  consequences  for  the  Swiss  economy.  On  the  one  hand,  an 
appreciation  would  lead  to  a  further  decline  in  import  prices  and  a  renewed  threat  of 
deflation. In this regard, we should bear in mind that inflation in the last two years has been 
predominantly  negative.  On  the  other  hand,  with  an  ongoing  unfavourable  international 
environment and a strong Swiss franc, the situation for our economy remains challenging. 
Should it become necessary, we will therefore enforce the minimum exchange rate by buying 
foreign currency in unlimited quantities. And, if required, we will also take further measures. 
In addition, we are leaving the target range for the three-month Libor at 0.0–0.25%. 
The  SNB  bases  its  monetary  policy  decision  on  a  conditional  inflation  forecast,  which 
assumes an unchanged three-month Libor of 0.0% over the next three years. You will find 
the relevant chart in your media kit. Compared to September, our forecast has been adjusted 
downwards slightly. Reasons for this are the unexpectedly low rates of inflation for October 
and  November,  which  serve  as  a  lower  departure  point  for  the  forecast,  as  well  as  the 
decline  in  inflation  in  the  euro  area  and  the  slight  fall  in  the  oil  price,  which  both  help  to 
dampen the inflation outlook. For 2013, we still anticipate inflation of –0.2%. For 2014 and 
2015,  the  inflation  forecast  is  down  in  each  case  by  0.1  percentage  points  and  is  now  at 
0.2% and 0.6% respectively. Consequently, no inflation risks can be identified for Switzerland 
in the foreseeable future. 
Global economic outlook 
The SNB’s inflation forecast is embedded in a global economic scenario. I would therefore 
like to begin with our assessment of the global economy. 
Global  economic  recovery  continued  as  expected  in  recent  months,  with  the  main  drivers 
being the US, the UK and China. In the euro area, by contrast, growth lacked momentum 
and  inflation  slowed  considerably  more  than  expected.  In  many  emerging  economies,  too, 
economic activity was rather sluggish. 
The  outlook  for  the  global  economy  has  not  changed  significantly  since  the  September 
monetary policy assessment. Our forecasts suggest that growth will pick up gradually in the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
investment  activity. 
coming  quarters.  Further  recovery  is  likely  to  be  underpinned  by  a  number  of  factors, 
including  stable  international  financial  markets,  a  less  restrictive  fiscal  policy  and  a  very 
expansionary  monetary  policy  in  the  major  advanced  economies.  Europe,  however,  will 
continue  to  experience  below-average  growth,  with  banks’  restrained  lending  policies  and 
ongoing  uncertainty  hampering 
level  of 
unemployment in this region will also hold back private consumption. 
Uncertainty  about  the  continued  recovery  of  the  global  economy  remains  high  overall.  In 
many advanced economies, room for manoeuvre in economic policy is being constrained by 
the fact that interest rates are already very low and government indebtedness is high, making 
the global economy especially prone to shocks. We expect that the euro area will overcome 
the  crisis  in  the  medium  term.  However,  the  forthcoming  assessment  of  banks’  balance 
sheets could cause some ripples. Furthermore, exiting from unconventional monetary policy 
measures  is  as  yet  uncharted  territory.  Spikes  on  international  financial  markets  therefore 
cannot be ruled out during the process of normalising monetary policy in the major currency 
areas. 
In  addition, 
the  high 
Swiss economic outlook 
I will now look at economic developments in Switzerland. 
The economy continued to develop favourably in the third quarter. Annualised real GDP was 
up by slightly more than 2%. Unlike the previous quarter, goods exports grew substantially. 
Domestic  demand,  however,  lost  some  momentum.  On  the  output  side,  manufacturing  in 
particular  recorded  positive  growth,  having  previously  fallen  for  three  successive  quarters. 
Construction continues to be an important growth driver. 
Owing  to  this  positive  growth,  utilisation  of  production  capacity  picked  up.  Nevertheless,  it 
remained at a relatively low level in manufacturing. Employment increased slightly and the 
seasonally  adjusted  unemployment  rate  has  not  risen  further  since  summer.  Overall,  the 
output gap remains negative. 
The  indicators  already  available  suggest  that  growth  will  weaken  temporarily  in  the  fourth 
quarter.  Following  the  sharp  increase  in  the  third  quarter,  goods  exports  and  industrial 
output,  in  particular,  are  likely  to  advance  at  a  slower  pace.  In  the  coming  year,  with  the 
gradual  improvement  in  the  global  economy,  GDP  should  once  again  grow  more  strongly. 
We continue to expect growth of 1.5–2.0% for 2013. For 2014, we expect a growth rate of 
around 2.0%. 
However,  given  the  vulnerable  economic  situation  abroad,  downside  risks  still  prevail  for 
Switzerland. 
Monetary and financial conditions 
I will now turn to monetary and financial conditions. 
Last summer, sparked by the debate about a possible reduction in the US Federal Reserve’s 
bond purchase programme, long-term interest rates rose across the globe. Switzerland was 
no exception. The most recent interest rate reduction by the European Central Bank (ECB), 
by  contrast,  had  little  effect  on  Switzerland.  One  possible  reason  for  this  is  that  money 
market rates in the euro area were already at a very low level before the ECB’s decision and 
did not fall any further. 
Since  October  2011,  inflation  rates  in  Switzerland  have  been  predominantly  negative.  The 
introduction  of  the  minimum  exchange  rate  in  September  2011  prevented  a  more  severe 
deflationary trend, however. Lower price levels in Switzerland reflect, on the one hand, the 
impact of the past appreciation of the Swiss franc on import goods prices. On the other hand, 
price developments show clearly that domestic companies are lowering their costs so as to 
improve  their  price  competitiveness.  More  than  two  years  after  the  introduction  of  the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
minimum exchange rate, both effects have weakened considerably; this is also reflected in 
the current path of inflation. At the same time, inflation abroad is receding, especially in the 
euro  area.  The  inflation  differential  between  Switzerland  and  the  euro  area  has  thus 
decreased significantly. 
Inflation  differentials  play  an  important  role  in  the  valuation  of  the  Swiss  franc.  This 
decreased inflation differential means that the real effective exchange rate will hardly change 
from  now  on  and  will  remain  considerably  above  its  long-term  average.  Unless  there  is  a 
substantial  nominal  depreciation,  the  current  high  value  of  the  Swiss  franc  will  therefore 
continue. 
Growth  in  the  M1,  M2  and  M3  monetary  aggregates  has  been  perceptibly  weaker  since 
summer; this is primarily attributable to the rise in long-term interest rates. Liquidity held by 
households and companies has nevertheless remained high. In the past, a sustained high 
level of liquidity generally pointed to inflation risks. As a result of the financial crisis, however, 
this  correlation  cannot  currently  be  made.  Thus,  in  recent  years,  the  inflation  rate  has 
remained exceptionally low despite a high level of liquidity. 
At present, there are no signs of a rise in inflation in Switzerland. Our inflation forecast shows 
no  risk  of  inflation  whatsoever.  In  addition,  surveys  on  inflation  expectations  reveal  values 
that  are  consistent  with  our  definition  of  price  stability.  This  applies  not  only  to  short-term 
inflation  expectations,  but  also  to  long-term  horizons  of  up  to  ten  years.  Furthermore, 
production  capacity  in  Switzerland  is  still  underutilised,  which  also  makes  a  rapid  rise  in 
inflation unlikely. 
SNB monetary policy 
In conclusion, I would like to look at the SNB’s monetary policy. 
Overall  economic  conditions  have  hardly  changed  since  summer.  Consequently,  monetary 
policy remains a challenge for the SNB. Up to now, our economy has performed relatively 
well, considering the difficult international environment. And we have not had to enforce the 
minimum exchange rate with foreign currency purchases since September 2012. Financial 
markets expect short-term interest rates to stay very low worldwide for some time to come. 
Furthermore,  developments  in  the  global  economy  are  likely  to  remain  uncertain.  In  this 
environment, the minimum exchange rate continues to be essential in ensuring appropriate 
monetary  conditions  in  Switzerland.  The  guiding  principle  for  our  decisions  is  the  SNB’s 
mandate  to  ensure  price  stability  while  taking  due  account  of  the  development  of  the 
economy. 
The  financial  crisis  also  showed  us,  however,  that  price  stability  alone  is  not  sufficient  to 
ensure that the financial sector remains stable. In this connection, the situation on mortgage 
and real estate markets – which are showing considerable momentum – has been cause for 
concern for quite some time now. Also, mortgage lending is still growing faster than GDP, 
with the result that aggregate debt is increasing further. The countercyclical capital buffer is a 
new  tool  with  which  the  resilience  of  banks  can  be  strengthened  and  imbalances  on 
mortgage and real estate markets can be addressed. My colleague, Jean-Pierre Danthine, 
will now give you our assessment of the risks for financial stability. 
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for your attention.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
