Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Opening of Bank Negara Malaysia Beijing 
Representative Office and initiatives to promote bilateral trade and 
investment 
Remarks  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia  (Bank  Negara 
Malaysia), at the opening of the BNM Beijing Representative Office, Beijing, 18 November 2013. 
 It  is  my  great  pleasure  to  welcome  you  to  this  official  opening  of  Bank Negara  Malaysia’s 
Beijing Representative Office. The opening of this representative office today is an occasion 
of unprecedented significance for us. This Beijing office is Bank Negara Malaysia’s very first 
presence  in  Asia.  This  is  a  reflection  of  the  growing  importance  of  China  in  the  global 
economy  and  the  international  financial  system  and  the  very  significant  and  longstanding 
financial  and  economic  ties  between  Malaysia  and  China.  This  momentous  occasion  also 
marks the dawn of a new chapter as our bilateral relations transitions and evolves reflecting 
the significant changes taking place in our respective economies and financial systems. 
For  many  decades  now,  the  foundation  underpinning  the  strength  and  dynamism  of  our 
relationship  is  our  ability  to  continually  harness  the  complementarities  that  exists  between 
our economies. While bilateral trade has consistently been expanding at double digit growth 
rates over the recent two decades, the breadth and depth of our relations have also evolved 
and  expanded  into  greater financial  linkages. In  parallel  to  our growing economic  ties,  our 
financial institutions have also ventured into each financial systems, further strengthening our 
financial and economic connectivity. Currently, two of China’s biggest banks, namely Bank of 
China and ICBC have operations in Malaysia while Malaysia’s two largest banks, Maybank 
and CIMB have established their presence in China. 
Our  Beijing  Representative  Office,  being  inaugurated  today,  also  signifies  an  important 
milestone  in  the  cooperation  between  the  People’s  Bank  of  China  and  Bank  Negara 
Malaysia. Our two central banks have long cooperated in many areas of common interest in 
particular in the area of financial cooperation. In July of 2005, our currencies transitioned into 
a more flexible exchange rate regime at the very same moment. This enabled Malaysia to 
transition to this new regime effectively and efficiently. Bank Negara Malaysia has for more 
than a decade also participated in the fixed income market in China. We were among the first 
central banks in the world to be awarded the Qualified Foreign Institutional Investor (QFII) 
license to invest in China’s fixed income onshore financial markets and to be granted access 
to the China Interbank Bond Market. Our close central bank cooperation is also reinforced 
through the various regional platforms, including ASEAN+3, EMEAP and SEACEN. 
More recently, a series of measures have been undertaken to encourage the use of renminbi 
in  the  settlement  of  our  bilateral  trade  and  investment.  In  2009,  Bank  Negara  Malaysia 
entered into a Currency Swap Agreement (CSA) with the People’s Bank of China, which was 
renewed in 2012 with an expanded amount of RMB180 billion, with the objective to ensure a 
ready  supply  of  renminbi  in  the  domestic  financial  markets  to  meet  the  demand  by 
businesses.  Efforts  were  also  made  to  enhance  the  transparency  in  the  exchange  rate 
between renminbi and ringgit transactions. In 2010, a direct market quote of renminbi against 
the  ringgit  was  initiated  in  the  Kuala  Lumpur  interbank  market  as  well  as  in  the  interbank 
foreign  exchange  market  on  the  China  Foreign  Exchange  Trade  System  (CFETS).  With 
these developments there is now a direct renminbi/ringgit quotation in the spot market and a 
renminbi/ringgit  forward  exchange  rate  for  the  Malaysian  market.  To  further  facilitate 
transactions, the real  time gross  settlement (RTGS)  payment  system  in  Malaysia  has  also 
been expanded since 2012 to include settlement services in renminbi. 
The size of renminbi trade settlement in Malaysia is expanding progressively reflecting the 
shift among both Malaysian and Chinese companies across the commodity, manufacturing 
and services sectors. There are also now 19 financial institutions that facilitate renminbi trade 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
settlement, double the number in 2009. There is also a growing interest in raising financing in 
renminbi  in  the  Malaysian  bond  market.  In  2011,  Khazanah  Nasional  Berhad  successfully 
issued  the  world’s  first  offshore  renminbi  sukuk  in  2011  and  subsequently  Axiata  Group 
Berhad issued the world’s first rated renminbi sukuk in 2012. 
Today, in conjunction with the opening of the Beijing office, Bank Negara Malaysia wishes to 
announce further measures to reinforce the progress that has been made, and as part of the 
efforts to promote bilateral trade and investment. 
i. 
To  facilitate  more  effective  renminbi  liquidity  management  by  our  financial 
institutions in Malaysia, Bank Negara Malaysia is introducing of a Renminbi Liquidity 
Facility  (RLF)  to  licensed  onshore  banks.  This  facility  aims  to  enhance  renminbi 
liquidity in the domestic market by providing an additional avenue for the licensed 
onshore banks to obtain or invest RMB with the Bank. The Bank, through its own 
access  to  the  interbank  market  in  China,  will  offer  these  liquidity  facilities  via  the 
renminbi/ringgit foreign exchange market, and the renminbi money and repurchase 
markets in the Malaysian interbank market; 
Second, non-resident financial institutions that meet the prudential requirements will 
be  permitted  to  offer ringgit  trade financing,  in  collaboration  with  resident financial 
institutions. In this regard banks in China will also be allowed to provide ringgit trade 
financing in China; and 
Finally,  in  recognition  of  the  growing  significance  of  regionally  active  financial 
institutions and the increased financial inter-linkages between our two economies as 
well  as  in  mutual  recognition  and  acceptance  of  each  others’  securities,  Bank 
Negara Malaysia and the People’s Bank of China has today signed a Memorandum 
of Understanding to establish a cross-border collateral arrangement that will enable 
financial institutions access to the central bank’s liquidity facilities. 
ii. 
iii. 
Let me now conclude my remarks. The most pressuring challenge for the world economy is 
to achieve a sustained and inclusive economic growth. Beyond the short-term volatility in the 
international financial markets, the prospects of the Asian region are well anchored on solid 
fundamentals, and underpinned by our economic and policy flexibility and years of reforms. 
Collectively,  the  Asian  region  will  be  an  important  growth  center  in  the  world  economy 
contributing  to  global  stability.  China  in  particular  has  been  successful  in  rebalancing  its 
economy amidst structural adjustments and reforms that brings its economy to a sustainable 
growth  trajectory.  With  the  progressive  move  by  China  towards  the  internationalisation  of 
their financial system in the years to come, there will be increased interconnectedness of the 
Chinese financial system with the rest of the region and the world and consequently, a wider 
role of the renminbi as it continues to grow in importance in international trade and financing 
activity. It would be inevitable that the renminbi will become an important reserve currency in 
the international financial system. 
Against this development, the opening of the Bank Negara Malaysia’s Beijing Representative 
Office builds on the deep ties that has already been forged and signifies our confidence and 
commitment to this future. The Beijing office will also serve as a key point for the Chinese 
financial  community  to  engage  Malaysia  and  understand  the  opportunities  available  in  our 
countries.  Finally,  I  would  like  to  express  our  great  appreciation  to  the  People’s  Bank  of 
China for their approval and support for the Bank’s representative office.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
