Yuba Raj Khatiwada: Emerging global financial issues of common 
interest 
Welcome remarks by Dr Yuba Raj Khatiwada, Governor of the Central Bank of Nepal, at the 
49th  SEACEN  Governors’  Conference/High-Level  Seminar  and  33rd  Meeting  of  the 
SEACEN Board of Governors, Kathmandu, 21 November 2013. 
 Chief Guest Rt. Honorable President of Federal Democratic Republic of Nepal, Dr. Ram 
Baran Yadav 
Honorable Minister of Finance, Mr. Shanker Prasad Koirala 
Chair  of  SEACEN  Board  of  Governors  and  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mongolia 
Mr. Naidansuren Zoljargal 
Fellow  SEACEN  Governors,  Distinguished  Keynote  Speakers,  Delegates,  Ladies  and 
Gentlemen 
1.  It  gives  me  a  great  pleasure  to  welcome  all  of  you  to  this  49th  SEACEN  Governors’ 
Conference/High-Level Seminar and 33rd Meeting of the SEACEN Board of Governors being 
held  in  Kathmandu.  I  am  thankful  to  the  SEACEN  Governors  for  trusting  us  to  host  this 
important event after 26 years. We last had the opportunity to host this important event in 
1987  while  I  was  myself  a  junior  officer  at  the  Nepal  Rastra  Bank.  We  are  immensely 
delighted and feel highly honored to have the opportunity to host this important event and are 
overwhelmed  by  the  gracious  presence  of  Rt.  Honorable  President  of  Nepal,  Honorable 
Minister of Finance, fellow Governors and other dignitaries. 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
2.  Let  me  take  this  opportunity  to  congratulate  fellow  Governors  and  collaborators  on  the 
occasion of 30th anniversary of the SEACEN Centre whereby our collective efforts along with 
other non-member contribution have taken the Centre to a greater height of recognition and 
pride.  This  is  evident  from  the  increased  members  including  Asia’s  largest  and  emerging 
economies, growing attraction for more membership, and increased capacity of the Centre in 
research and training. The Centre has also created a platform and an opportunity for all of us 
to discuss the emerging global financial issues of our common interest. I do expect continued 
support of my fellow Governors of the SEACEN Board and our collaborators in furthering the 
SEACEN Centre to the stage of great height and recognition. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
3.  In  changing  economic  landscape,  central  banks  are  growingly  entering  in  their  
non-conventional  roles;  and  we  have  been  seeing  a  paradigm  shift  in  our  roles  and 
responsibilities.  The  advent  of  recent  global  financial  crisis  has  not  only  exposed  more 
complex  and  intricate  macro-financial  linkages  in  the  transmission  mechanism  of  the 
monetary policy, this has also shifted our attention towards that of the financial stability and 
economic growth. Growing global financial integration, financial innovation and evolution of 
new financial products and massive use of electronic technology in financial services have 
made our job even more challenging. 
4. Emerging Asian market economies are now characterized by rapid financial globalization 
andintegration  which  has  contributed  to  increased  volatility  of  capital  flows  and  rapid 
transmission  of  financial  crises.  Deepening  and  broadening  of  the  financial  sector  has 
created more financial risks and vulnerabilities in the financial system of our economies. The 
presence  of  informal  markets  and  shadow  banking  which  often  leads  to  a  weaker 
transmission  of  the  monetary  policy  has  made  the  central  banks’  role  more  challenging. 
Increasing new financial products triggered by sophisticated information technology, massive 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
for 
functions 
frameworks 
into  coherent 
cross-border  capital  flows  resulting  to  volatility  in  exchange  rates  and  uncertainty  of  the 
spillover  effect  in  the  domestic  economy  are  added  challenges  for  we  central  bankers 
towards making our financial system more stable, inclusive, and economic growth friendly. 
5.  These  challenges  call  upon  the  central  bank  authorities  to  recast  monetary  policy 
objectives  and  instrument,  to  strengthen  regulation  and  supervision  and  exercise  macro-
prudential  measures  as  a  complement  to  monetary  policy.  Priority  has  to  be  accorded  in 
identifying all the sources of risk and imbalance that can have systemic implications for the 
economy’s  growth  and  stability.  Our  monetary  policy  also  needs  to  address  how  financial 
resources  are  better  allocated  to  promote  growth  and  jobs  along  with  ensuring  macro-
economic  stability.  Furthermore,  there  is  a  need  to  effectively  integrate  or  coordinate 
monetary,  regulatory  and  supervisory 
the 
maintenance of financial stability and promotion of inclusive economic growth. 
6. This 49th Governors’ Conference and High Level Seminar aims to discuss some of these 
pertinent issues. What we have learnt is that financial system can have robust growth and 
can be stable only in an environment of real economy growing in a sustainable manner. Thus 
a  strategy  to  promote  economic  growth  must  be  an  integral  part  of  the  financial  sector 
development  strategy.  Deliberations  and  discussions  on  these  important  subjects  have 
drawn  the  interest  of  the  global  leaders  including  the  central  bankers  and  international 
financial institutions, particularly after the recent financial crisis. We will have the opportunity 
to  hear  thoughts  and  views  on  these  relevant  topics  from the  distinguished  speakers  from 
renowned institutions. I hope that it will be very much rewarding to all of us. 
7. For many of you, this may be the first time in Nepal or you may be visiting Nepal after an 
interval. I hope that your stay in Nepal will be refreshing and memorable one. You will have 
an opportunity to explore more about our rich culture, nature and the friendly people during 
your stay and during the social events that would take place following the meetings. 
8. Let me close my remarks by once again welcoming Rt. Honorable President, Honorable 
Finance  Minister,  fellow  Governors  and  distinguished  delegates  to  this  49th  Governors’ 
Conference/High  Level  Seminar  and  the  Meeting  of  Board  of  Governors  in  Nepal.  I  look 
forward  to  a  rewarding  discourse  and  exchange  of  views  and  experiences  among  fellow 
Governors which will help better deliver our central banking roles and responsibilities. 
Thank You 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
