Encik Abu Hassan Alshari Yahaya: The benefits of online banking services and 
Inter-Bank GIRO (IBG) in Malaysia 
Welcoming  remarks  by  Mr  Encik  Abu  Hassan  Alshari  Yahaya,  Assistant  Governor  of  the 
Central Bank of Malaysia, at the “Experience IBG” Roadshow, Kuantan, 2 December 2013. 
 It  is  my  great  pleasure,  ladies  and  gentlemen  to  meet  and  welcome  all  of  you  to  the 
“Experience IBG” roadshow  in Kuantan this morning This roadshow is jointly organised by 
Bank  Negara  Malaysia,  the  Association  of  Banks  in  Malaysia  (ABM),  the  Association  of 
Islamic  Banking  Institutions  Malaysia  (AIBIM)  and  the  banking  institutions  to  create 
awareness amongst the small businesses on online banking services, focusing specifically 
on  Interbank  GIRO  or  IBG,  which  is  a  payment  system  that  allows  a  person  to  conduct 
transfer of funds between banks. 
The first roadshow began in Seberang Prai on 22 October 2013, and it will end in Kuching on 
5 March 2014, after covering 12 major towns in the country. The first four roadshows have 
attracted  more  than  1,500  (1,590)  participants,  who  are  mainly  the  SMEs  and  micro 
enterprises and more than 1,000 (1,056) or 66% of the participants have signed-up for the 
online  banking  services  such  as  Internet  banking  and  mobile  banking.  This  demonstrated 
that the explanation and promotional efforts undertaken by the banks during the roadshow’s 
exhibition  has  helped  participants  to  understand  more  about  the  benefits  of  using  online 
banking in comparison to cheques. 
Our discussion this morning will provide information for participants to obtain guidance and 
have  a  closer  look  on  the  benefits  of  online  banking  services  and  IBG.  In  line  with  the 
development  in  technology  and  innovation,  making  payments  electronically  through  online 
banking  can  reduce  the  cost  of  doing  business  by  reducing  or  using  resources  previously 
used  to  handle  cash  and  cheques,  enabling  businesses  to  optimize  their  business 
performance  and  profitability.  This  can  be  achieved  through  increased  use  of  electronic 
payments  where  the  cost  of  manual  processing,  including  the  postage  fee  or  the  cost  to 
deposit cheques in the Cheque Deposit Machine (CDM) or at the counter of bank branch, 
can be saved. My point is, you can save on your petrol expenses, parking fees or even avoid 
being issued a ticket for illegal parking and most importantly, you will be able to save time 
that could be utilised to increase your business productivity. 
This is because online banking allows you to enjoy the convenience of banking at anytime 
and anywhere without the hassle of having to queue at the bank counter or hiring employees 
to perform daily banking activities. Among other benefits of online banking and IBG is that, it 
offers  faster  movement  of  funds  compared  to  payment  using  cheques.  For  example,  the 
transfer of funds through IBG performed before noon allows a person to receive the funds 
within the same day compared to cheques that will take a couple of days to three days. For a 
beneficiary  who  has  an  account  within  the  same  bank  with  the  payer,  which  is  known  as 
Intrabank, the funds will be credited instantaneously. 
The program for today includes the showing of three video clips on online banking and IBG, 
which  can  be  downloaded  through  YouTube  and  ABM  and  AIBIM’s  website,  including 
presentations by two banks. In addition, 17 banks and MyClear (the national payment system 
operator)  have  also  set  up  exhibition  booths  to  showcase  their  respective  electronic 
payments and funds transfer solutions. This is indeed an opportunity not to be missed as you 
will be able to learn and ask questions about online banking solutions and sign up for the 
special offers such as free security tokens or waiver of monthly subscription fee for business 
Internet banking as provided by some of the exhibitors today. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
In conjunction with today’s roadshow, I am pleased to announce that 2 banks namely, Bank 
Simpanan Nasional and OCBC Bank, together with 8 banks in Temerloh1 in Kuantan will hold 
their “Open Day” from today, 2 December until this Friday, 6 December. During the week-
long  “Open  Day”,  visitors  can  enquire  and  learn  more  about  e-payment solutions from  the 
branch  staff.  The  “Open  Day”  event  is  open  to  all  businesses  and  the  general  public  to 
complement the efforts of the roadshow to reach out to smaller towns and I encourage all 
participants  to  take  this  opportunity  to  visit  the  bank  branches  in  Kuantan  and  Temerloh. 
Based on the “Open Day” events held in 8 towns in 4 states for the past 2 months, more than 
900 (911) banks’ customers have signed up to use the online banking services. 
For information of all participants, to date, cheques are still widely used in our country. Based 
on the last 3 years data, an average of 205 million cheques amounting to about RM2 trillion 
are  issued  on  an  annual  basis.  In  terms  of  the  number  of  cheques  over  the  country’s 
population, or cheques per capita, it is at 7.1. This figure is much higher than 3.9 in advanced 
countries  such  as  Norway,  Finland  and  Australia.  It  is  also  worth  noting  that  92%  (or 
18.4 million)  of the total adult  population  in  Malaysia  have  banking  accounts  and  of  these, 
about 74% (13.7 million) of bank account holders have Internet banking accounts. However, 
although  74%  of  the  bank  account  holders  have  Internet  banking  access,  only  43% 
(5.9 million)  of  the  Internet  banking  subscribers  are  active  users  in  conducting  financial 
transactions. 
In this regard, we have not reached a stage where the masses are familiar or have gained 
sufficient trust in using Internet banking to conduct their financial transactions. It is through 
educational programs such as this roadshow event that we hope the businesses will take the 
opportunity to learn more about the security safeguards and safe practices to gain sufficient 
confidence  to  adopt  online  banking  and  conduct  e-payments.  Touching  on  the  issue  of 
security,  the  banking  industry  has  implemented  additional  security  features  such  as  the 
introduction  of  two-factor  authentication  to  ensure  the  validity  of  Internet  banking  users  in 
addition to the use of user identification and password. For your information, the losses due 
to Internet banking fraud, accounts for only 0.0002% of the total transactions of RM3 trillion 
recorded  in  2012  and  this  figure  has  declined  to  0.0001%  of  the  transaction  amount  of 
RM2.6 trillion  in  the  first  nine  months  (January  –  September)  this  year.  The  speakers  will 
share with us more about the safety features and safe practices to conduct Internet banking 
afterwards. 
To  encourage  the  migration  to  e-payments,  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  has  announced  a  new 
pricing  strategy  for  payment  services  in  March  this  year.  The  transaction  fee  for  IBG 
conducted via Internet and mobile banking has been reduced from RM2 to 10 sen with effect 
from 2 May 2013. This is to give the public and businesses an 11 month head-start to adopt 
e-payments  before  the  cheque  processing  fee  of  50  sen  is  imposed  on  1  April  2014.  The 
adjustment to the IBG and cheque prices is to align them closer to their cost of production. 
The actual cost of production is about RM3 per cheque and currently consumers pay only 
15 sen for the stamp duty per cheque leaf. 
The 11 months delay in the increase in cheque fee was intentional to allow the public and 
businesses  to familiarize  themselves  with  the  use  of  online  banking to conduct  e-payment 
transaction. In this regard, banking institutions have given their commitment to facilitate and 
advise  customers  on  safe  practices  in  migrating  away  from  cheques  to  adopt  electronic 
payments. 
Bank Negara Malaysia and the banking industry will continue the efforts to assist businesses 
and  the  general  public  to  ensure  a  smooth  transition  in  adopting  online  banking  and  IBG. 
This includes the increase of transaction limit for IBG and online banking from RM5,000 to 
RM10,000 to facilitate high valued payments. With the increase in the limit, 90% of the total 
                                                
1  Affin Bank, AmBank, Bank Islam, Bank Rakyat, CIMB Bank, Hong Leong Bank, Maybank & Public Bank. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
number of cheques which is 184 million from 204 million cheques in 2012, or 135 million of 
150 million cheques issued in January to September 2013, can be made via online banking. 
In  addition,  most  of  the  banks  have  shortened  the  crediting  time  for  IBG  transactions,  in 
which the beneficiaries will receive their funds faster within the same day. 
Other initiatives include several major banks will be offering IBG services via ATM and banks 
have  provided  access  to  Internet  banking  through  the  deployment  of  Self-Service  Internet 
Kiosk at all bank branches to facilitate those who do not have access to Internet banking to 
make payment electronically. As at end August 2013, more than 2,100 (2,121) kiosks have 
been deployed in 74% of the 2,341 bank branches and it is expected that almost all bank 
branches  will  be  equipped  with  the  Internet  kiosk  by  end  March  2014.  In  addition,  the 
banking industry has developed a framework on payment reference standard that will enable 
payers  to  indicate  payment  transaction  details  to  allow  beneficiaries  to  easily  identify  the 
source  and  purpose  of payment  and this  will  facilitate  more  efficient reconciliation  process 
through e-payments. 
Finally,  I  would  once  again  like  to  emphasize  that  IBG  via  Internet  banking  and  mobile 
banking  provides  significant  benefits  to  the  businesses  by  having  the  convenience  of 
transacting anytime, anywhere. It also lowers the costs of doing business through reduction 
of  cash  and  cheque  handling  costs  and  redeployment  of  resources  for  more  productive 
activities.  In  closing,  I  wish  you  an  insightful  and  productive  engagement  at this  roadshow 
event and trust that the discussions today will be beneficial to you in your adoption of online 
banking and electronic payment solutions for your business operations. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
