Hiroshi Nakaso: Japan’s economy and monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Hiroshi  Nakaso,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  a  Meeting  with 
Business Leaders, Shimane, 9 October 2013. 
 Introduction 
It  is  my  great  pleasure  to  be  given  an  opportunity  today  to  exchange  views  with 
administrative, financial, and business leaders in Shimane Prefecture. I would like to take this 
opportunity to express my sincerest gratitude for your cooperation with the activities of the 
Bank of Japan’s Matsue Branch. 
On a personal note, my relationship with the San-in region goes back long years. My father 
was born in Yonago, Tottori, and I have visited his birthplace several times. The reason why I 
feel nostalgic, despite this being my first time in Matsue, is that my roots are in this region. 
Japan’s economy has long been in a state of deflation, since the financial crisis of the 1990s. 
For Japan’s economy to escape this situation and restore its vitality, it is most important to 
first  overcome  deflation  and  change  the  mind-sets  of  economic  entities  such  as  firms  and 
households  so  that  they  become  more  proactive.  In  this  sense,  the  biggest  immediate 
challenge  facing  Japan’s  economy  is  the  overcoming  of  deflation  at  the  earliest  possible 
time,  and  I  realize  that  the  role  the  Bank  of  Japan  has  to  play  is  crucial.  Based  on  this 
recognition,  the  Bank  introduced  a  new  policy  in  April,  called  “quantitative  and  qualitative 
monetary easing” (QQE). 
Today, before exchanging views with you, I would like to talk about economic developments 
at home and abroad. I will also elaborate on the thinking behind the QQE. Lastly, I will talk 
about economic development in this region. 
I.  
Recent developments and outlook for economic activity at home and abroad 
Recent developments and outlook for Japan’s economy 
First,  I  will  focus  on  Japan’s  economy.  A  virtuous  circle  from  income  to  spending  has 
gradually  been  taking  hold  both  in  the  household  and  business  sectors.  In  the  household 
sector,  private  consumption  has  been  resilient. Sales  at  department  stores  have  remained 
firm  and  consumption  of  services  such  as  outlays  for  travel  and  sales  in  the  food  service 
industry  have  held  steady.  With  underlying  active  consumption  by  senior  citizens,  notably 
baby boomers, such resilience in private consumption seems to have been sustained mainly 
by  wealth  effects  stemming  from  a  rise  in  stock  prices  and  an  improvement  in  sentiment 
since  the  turn  of  the  year.  It  has  gradually  been  supported  by  the  improvement  in  the 
employment  and  income  situation.  The  employment  condition  continues  to  improve 
moderately, as the unemployment rate and active job openings-to-applicants ratio recovered 
almost  to  levels  seen  prior  to  the  Lehman  crisis.  Against  this  background,  special  cash 
earnings  –  such  as  bonuses  –  registered  a  clear  increase  year  on  year,  and  total  cash 
earnings  per  employee  have  begun  to  bottom  out.  Reflecting  this  improvement  in  the 
employment condition, as well as in  wages, employees’ total cash earnings in Japan as a 
whole have been increasing year on year. 
In the business sector, corporate profits continue to improve and business fixed investment 
has been picking up, mainly in the non-manufacturing sector, as evidenced by real business 
fixed investment in the GDP statistics registering a quarter-on-quarter increase for the first 
time in six quarters. This is an encouraging development, as we thought that a key to the 
sustainability of economic recovery would be business fixed investment. While the relatively 
lagging  business  fixed  investment  in  the  manufacturing  sector  is  a  matter  of  concern, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
potential  demand  for  such  investment  seems  to  be  growing  as  existing  capital  stock  has 
become  obsolete  due  to  the  restraint  on  business  investment  up  to  now,  and  firms  have 
subdued  their  R&D  investment.  Under  such  circumstances,  if  overseas economies  start to 
pick  up  gradually  and  exports  increase  moderately,  an  improvement  in  business  fixed 
investment  in  the  manufacturing  sector  –  mainly  in  investment  for  maintenance  and 
replacement of existing capital stock, R&D investment, and IT-related investment – is likely to 
become  evident.  In  fact,  in  the  recently  released  September  Tankan  survey,  the  business 
fixed  investment  plan  in  the  manufacturing  sector  for  fiscal  2013  was  for  an  increase  of 
7.0 percent year-on-year, marking a steady increase. 
Owing  to  those  developments,  the  Bank  said  in  its  statement  released  after  the  Monetary 
Policy  Meeting  in  September  that  “Japan’s  economy  is  recovering  moderately,”  using  the 
words  “is  recovering”  for  the  first  time  since  the  Lehman  crisis.  Going  forward,  the  Bank 
expects that Japan’s economy is likely to continue recovering moderately on the back of a 
virtuous circle among production, income, and spending. While the economy will experience 
a  front-loaded  increase  and  subsequent  decline  in  demand  prior  to  and  after  the 
consumption tax hike, it is likely to continue growing, as a trend, at a pace higher than its 
potential growth rate. 
Main features of present economic recovery 
Let  me  touch  on  the  main  features  of  the  current  economic  recovery.  A  typical  pattern  of 
Japan’s  economic  recovery  in  the  past  was  that  it  started  with  an  increase  in  exports  and 
production,  thereby  centering  on  the  manufacturing  sector.  However,  unlike  the  pattern  of 
past  recoveries,  the  major  feature  of  the  recovery  this  time  is  that  it  is  led  by  the  non-
manufacturing sector against the backdrop of firmness in domestic demand such as private 
consumption  and  public  investment.  That  might  be  because,  while  consumption  by  senior 
citizens  and  reconstruction-related  spending  have  been  underpinning  domestic  demand, 
there  also  have  been  effects  of  various  stimulus  policy  measures  under  “Abenomics”  and 
improvement  in  household  sentiment  on  the  back  of  high  expectations  for  the  current 
economic  policy  management,  as  well  as  favorable  developments  in  financial  markets. 
Indeed,  while  exports  and  production  remain  short  of the  pre-Lehman  crisis  levels,  tertiary 
industry  activity  index  –  an  indicator  of  the  state  of  economic  activity  in  the  non-
manufacturing sector – has come close to the pre-Lehman crisis level. A pick-up in business 
fixed  investment  also  has  taken  place  mainly  in  the  non-manufacturing  sector,  as  I 
mentioned earlier. 
The  non-manufacturing  sector  requires  more  human  resources  than  the  manufacturing 
sector. At present, improvement in employment and income, mainly in the non-manufacturing 
sector, is supporting private consumption in a virtuous cycle. The virtuous circle from income 
to  spending  has  been gradually  taking  hold,  and  this  has  supported  resilience  in  domestic 
demand. Such development is expected to continue. 
Recent developments and outlook for overseas economies 
In  this  recovery,  the  resilience  in  domestic  demand  has  been  pronounced.  Exports  are 
picking  up,  although  they  remain  lackluster  so  far.  In  considering  the  future  of  Japan’s 
economy, it is important that overseas economies pick up while domestic demand is resilient, 
and that the economy move to a phase led by domestic demand and external demand as a 
pair of wheels. Let me now turn to the recent developments in overseas economies. 
Overseas  economies  as  a  whole  are  gradually  heading  toward  a  pick-up.  Looking  at 
respective regions, the U.S. economy is on a moderate recovery trend owing to firm private 
demand in the face of the fiscal drag. As for the fiscal situation, government debt increased 
significantly, mainly due to large-scale fiscal spending after the Lehman crisis. In response, 
there have been moves toward fiscal consolidation, and austerity measures – including an 
expiration of various tax reductions and a start to budget sequestration – have been taken 
since the turn of the year. In the face of this fiscal drag, U.S. private demand is resilient due 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
to  continuing  accommodative  financial  conditions  under  low  interest  rates.  For  example, 
housing investment is picking up as a trend due to low mortgage rates. As a prerequisite for 
scaling back the pace of asset purchases, the Fed pointed out that employment conditions 
should  continue  to  improve,  supported  by  a  moderate  recovery  in  economic  growth. 
Therefore, on the assumption that the Fed will continue with its proper conduct of monetary 
policy,  it  is  unlikely  that  private  demand  will  decline  substantially.  In  this  situation,  as  the 
fiscal drag will gradually fade, the pace of recovery is expected to gradually accelerate. 
The greatest uncertainty for the U.S. economy is the consequence of fiscal consultation, an 
issue on which the Democrats and the Republicans continue to oppose each other sharply. 
As a preliminary budget has not been agreed on, some government institutions have already 
been forced to close. The debt ceiling will be reached in the middle of this month, and the 
redemption and interest payment of government securities will be stopped if it is not raised. If 
that happens, this might have significant adverse effects on the global economy through a 
downgrading of U.S. government bonds and an associated rise in premiums transmitting to 
markets  in  other  countries,  inducing  a  rise  in  long-term  interest  rates,  a  plunge  in  stock 
prices,  and  fluctuations  in  foreign  exchange  rates.  By  contrast,  if  this  problem  is  resolved 
successfully, this would eliminate the current uncertainty surrounding the U.S. economy, and 
thus might provide a boost toward economic recovery. At any rate, a prompt resolution of the 
fiscal consultation issue is critical for the global economy, including Japan. 
Turning to the European economy, while it continued to remain sluggish, real GDP growth 
registered a quarter-on-quarter increase in the April-June quarter of this year for the first time 
in seven quarters, suggesting that the economy is finally leveling off. As for crisis resolution, 
policy  measures  pertaining  to  the  European  debt  problem  have  surely  seen  a  material 
progression since the summer of 2012, including the introduction of the government bonds 
purchase  program  by  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  and  the  establishment  of  the 
European  Stability  Mechanism,  through  which  financial  assistance  will  be  provided  in  the 
event that the euro member countries encounter a fiscal crisis. In this situation, there is now 
improvement  in  both  business  and  household  sentiment.  Some  adjustment  in  the  fiscal 
austerity program has also mitigated the downward pressure on the economy from the fiscal 
side.  Moreover,  exports  are  bottoming  out,  particularly  in  Germany.  It  is  likely  that  the 
European economy will start picking up gradually as these developments continue. 
However, I must say that a fundamental resolution of the European debt problem has only 
reached the halfway point. The current stability in European financial markets seems to have 
been brought about because the ECB has been buying time through its large-scale monetary 
easing.  In  the  meantime,  it  is  necessary  to  steadily  take  steps  through  various  structural 
reforms and toward forming banking, fiscal, economic, and political unions as presented in a 
roadmap  for  unification  of  Europe.  The  time  the  ECB  can  buy  is  limited  and  might  be 
gradually becoming costly. 
The Chinese economy continues to grow steadily, although the pace of growth has become 
somewhat lower than that in the past. From the time of inauguration, the new government 
clearly  showed  its  stance  of  pursuing  structural  reforms,  by  announcing  frugality  laws  and 
measures  to  contain  real  estate  prices.  Against such  a  backdrop,  there has  been  concern 
since  around  the  turn  of  the  year  that  the  economy  might  slow  down.  However,  the 
government in July showed its stance of focusing on achieving this year’s target of economic 
growth of around 7.5 percent and it decided various measures that paid due consideration to 
economic growth; thus, looking to the future, it is expected that stable growth at around the 
current pace will continue, supported by resilient domestic demand. In terms of further policy 
responses, the fiscal situation in China remains relatively sound and there is additional room 
for  fiscal  stimulus.  Owing  to  these  developments,  the  chance  of  the  Chinese  economy 
decelerating significantly, at least in the short run, is viewed as not great. 
In the meantime, what is somewhat worrisome are emerging economies. Looking back, after 
escaping from acute symptoms of the Lehman crisis, the global economy recovered, led by 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
high growth in emerging economies. Behind this, there were mainly two reasons. First, the 
trend  of  domestic  demand  in  those  economies  was  robust  due  to  the  consumption  spree 
associated with a rise in the living standard and to the need to expand social infrastructure. 
Second, after the financial crisis, aggressive monetary easing in advanced economies led to 
capital inflow to emerging economies, providing additional impetus for emerging economies 
to grow. However, recently, the U.S. and European economies have been improving, while 
growth momentum in emerging economies is somewhat weak. The first thing that comes to 
mind as a reason for this is that, immediately after the financial crisis, emerging economies 
also  adopted  expansionary  policy  measures,  and  some  “excesses”  in  business  fixed 
investment  and  lending  may  have  emerged  during  that  process.  Second,  while  economic 
activity in the United States and Europe has been recovering, concern has been raised that 
capital inflow into emerging economies may reverse its course. 
Under such circumstances, triggered by speculation that the Fed is likely to scale down the 
pace  of  its  asset  purchases,  financial  markets  in  the  emerging  economies  have  recently 
become 
instable,  with  some,  mainly  current-account  deficit  countries,  experiencing 
depreciation  in  their  currencies.  Such  instability  in  financial  markets  might  have  adverse 
effects  on  the  real  economy  through  tightening  financial  conditions  and  deteriorating 
business and household sentiment, and this requires attention. Having said that, in my view, 
the likelihood that the current situation will become one similar to the Asian currency crisis in 
1997–98 seems marginal. The Asian crisis became widespread due mainly to vulnerability of 
the banking systems in Asian countries. By contrast, the current situation is limited to market 
risk, as exemplified by the heightening of market volatility. Moreover, from the perspective of 
safety nets, those economies have accumulated substantial foreign reserves and backstops 
were put in place, such as the Chiang Mai Initiative – a swap agreement network to make 
short-term  foreign  currencies  available  among  participating  countries.  Owing  to  these 
developments,  emerging  economies  have  become  more  resilient  against  possible  capital 
outflows. In addition, as seen at the G20 meeting and meetings at the Bank for International 
Settlement,  frameworks  are  now  in  place  that  enable  advanced  economies  and  emerging 
economies to have direct discussions. 
To sum up, while each country or region has its own risk factors, it is expected that overseas 
economies  –  most  notably  the  U.S.  economy  –  will  generally  start  picking  up  gradually. 
Under such circumstances, exports and production in Japan are expected to increase. 
Basic thinking behind QQE 
II.  
I would now like to explain the thinking behind the QQE that the Bank is currently pursuing. 
In April, the Bank, with a view to achieving the price stability target of 2 percent in terms of 
the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  consumer  price  index  at  the  earliest  possible  time, 
with  a  time  horizon  of  about  two  years,  introduced  a  new  policy  of  “quantitative  and 
qualitative monetary policy” (QQE). In this policy, the main operating target for money market 
operations was changed from the short-term interest rate to the monetary base, which is the 
sum of banknotes and currency in circulation as well as commercial banks’ current account 
balance  held  with  the  Bank,  and  the  Bank  will  double  the  monetary  base  in  two  years.  In 
doing so, it will purchase massive amounts of Japanese government bonds (JGBs), with all 
maturities  made  eligible  for  purchases.  In  addition,  in  aiming  to  achieve  the  price  stability 
target of 2 percent, the Bank made a commitment that it would continue  with such drastic 
monetary easing as long as it is necessary for maintaining the target in a stable manner. 
The  Bank  conducts  monetary  policy  based  on  the  principle  of  “achieving  price  stability, 
thereby  contributing  to  the  sound  development  of  the  national  economy.”  Therefore,  in 
achieving  the  price  stability  target,  it  is  important  to  create  a  virtuous  cycle  of  prices  that 
gradually  increase  as  the  economy  as  a  whole  grows  in  a  sustainable  fashion  and  as 
people’s standards of living improve. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Routes to raise inflation expectations 
The  QQE  is  expected  to  raise  prices  via  the  following  two  different  routes.  The  first  is 
improving  the  supply  and  demand  balance  of  the  economy  as  a  whole  by  stimulating 
economic  activity.  Namely,  through  elevating  the  level  of  economic  activity  in  Japan  as  a 
whole, the supply and demand balances in goods, services, and labor will tighten, leading to 
a pickup in prices and wages. The supply and demand balance of the economy as a whole is 
gauged  as  the  output gap  –  namely,  the  difference  between  potential  GDP,  which  can  be 
produced in an average situation for the labor force and for facilities, and actual GDP. There 
seems to be a negative output gap – where actual GDP is below potential GDP and there is 
an excess in the labor force and in facilities – remaining in Japan’s economy. We need to 
move  this  into  positive  territory.  Japan’s  GDP  has  been  growing  at  an  annualized  rate  of 
about  4  percent  for  two  consecutive  quarters.  This  growth  rate  substantially  exceeds  the 
potential growth rate, which is estimated to be around 0.5 percent. In this situation, the output 
gap has been steadily narrowing and is expected to turn positive. 
The  second route  is  raising  people’s  inflation  expectations. While  some  may  be  unfamiliar 
with  this  terminology,  these  are  inflation  rates  that  the  public  foresees.  As  deflation  has 
continued for nearly 15 years in Japan, the view that prices are unlikely to rise has become 
embedded.  In  a  state  of  deflation,  holding  cash  and  deposits,  as  well  as  related  assets, 
becomes  a  relatively  better  investment.  In  this  situation,  businesses  and  households  have 
been  refraining  from  consumption  and  making  investment,  and  the  economy’s  vitality  has 
been  lost.  In  order  to  escape  from  such  a  situation,  it  became  necessary  to  dispel  such 
deflationary  expectations  entrenched  among  the  public;  namely,  to  raise  their  inflation 
expectations.  To  this  end,  the  Bank,  upon  making  a  strong  and  clear  commitment  that  it 
would achieve the price stability target of 2 percent with a time horizon of about two years, 
decided  on  drastic  monetary  easing  both  in  terms  of  quantity  and  quality  to  underpin  the 
commitment. By doing so, the QQE aims to drastically change the deflationary expectations 
of  economic  entities  such  as  businesses  and  households.  Specifically,  how  do  these  two 
routes work on the real economy? I will explain this next. 
Impact on interest rates: logic behind real interest rates 
While  the  QQE  has  a  number  of  transmission  channels,  what  is  important  above  all  is  to 
influence real interest rates. Real interest rates are calculated by subtracting expected rates 
of  inflation  from  nominal  interest  rates.  In  other  words,  if  businesses  and  households 
consider that prices will rise and sales as well as wages will likewise rise in the future, the 
interest  burden  in  real terms  will  be  smaller  than  what  nominal  rates  may  suggest.  As  the 
spending behavior of businesses and households will be greatly influenced by real interest 
rates, if real rates can be lowered, both private consumption and business investment will be 
stimulated and the level of economic activity will heighten. As a result, supply and demand 
balances will tighten in goods and services markets, as well as the labor market, and prices 
will rise accordingly. 
It  is  considered  that  nominal  interest  rates,  notably  long-term  interest  rates,  will  be 
determined according to the outlook for economic activity and prices. Therefore, intrinsically, 
if the real economy and prices improve and inflation expectations increase, nominal interest 
rates  will  rise.  Were  nominal  interest  rates  to  rise  in  parallel  with  a  rise  in  inflation 
expectations, real interest rates would not change. That is, to lower real interest rates, it is 
necessary to raise inflation expectations while containing a rise in nominal rates. It is for this 
reason  that  the  QQE,  while  lifting  the  public’s  inflation  expectations  by  changing  their 
expectations,  undertakes  market  operations to contain  a  rise  in  nominal  rates  as much  as 
possible  through  the  massive  purchase  of  the  JGBs.  This  is  a  highly  difficult  policy  to 
conduct, and it requires subtle balancing. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Interest rate developments after introduction of QQE 
So far, this policy conduct has been successful. Inflation expectations appear to be rising on 
the  whole.  While  it  is  difficult  to  directly  observe  inflation  expectations,  taking  break-even 
inflation  rates  measured  by  inflation-linked  government  bonds  and  various  surveys  on 
households, economists, and market participants as a whole, people’s inflation expectations 
seem to have been rising. 
By contrast, Japan’s long-term interest rates have been hovering in a stable fashion. Given 
that market operations to contain an increase in nominal interest rates as much as possible 
are what the Bank is trying to achieve by purchasing massive amounts of JGBs in the JGB 
market, it is essential to have market participants’ cooperation. Therefore, from the very day 
the  Bank  introduced  the  QQE  in  April,  it  started  a  dialogue  with  market  participants. 
Subsequently,  there  were  phases  in  which  the  volatility  in  the  JGB  market  heightened  as 
market  participants  digested  the  QQE’s  contents,  and  long-term  interest  rates  rose  in 
reflection of the cautious attitude of market participants toward JGB investment. In response, 
based on its dialogue with market participants, the Bank has been improving its methods of 
purchasing JGBs. 
As  a  result  of  these  efforts,  the  JGB  market regained  stability,  and  now  long-term  interest 
rates in Japan remain stable at low levels of less than 0.7 percent. Amid the upticks in long-
term interest rates overseas in response to a rise in the U.S. long-term interest rates, on the 
back of speculation over the Fed’s scaling down of its pace of asset purchases, the stability 
in Japan’s long-term interest rates has been conspicuous. With JGB yields, which form the 
basis  for  bank  lending  rates,  having  been  stable  at  low  levels,  contractual  lending  rates, 
which  show  developments  in  lending  rates  to  firms  and  households  as  a  whole,  have 
remained at historic low levels. 
As people’s inflation expectations appear to be rising on the whole while long-term interest 
rates remain stable, real interest rates are expected to be on a declining trend. Under such 
circumstances, prices in Japan – when assessed by the year-on-year rate of change in the 
consumer price index excluding fresh food – turned positive in the middle of this year and 
accelerated to 0.8 percent in August. Looking ahead, as the aggregate supply and demand 
balance in the economy is expected to improve and inflation expectations to rise further, the 
year-on-year rate of change in the CPI is likely to reach close to the price stability target of 2 
percent from the latter half of fiscal 2014 through fiscal 2015. While we recognize that lifting 
inflation  expectations  through  monetary  policy  is  an  extremely  ambitious  approach  in 
unchartered  waters,  we  would  like  to  meet  the  longstanding  challenge  of  overcoming 
deflation on all counts by steadily gaining the fruits of pursuing the QQE. 
Concluding remarks 
In conclusion, I will touch on the economies of Shimane Prefecture and the San-in region. 
Shimane Prefecture seized the historical watersheds of “1300 years of the Kojiki – Japan’s 
oldest chronicle” in 2012 and “Izumo Taisha’s Sengu – a period of massive repair work – of 
the Heisei Period” in 2013 as golden opportunities, and has been making efforts all over the 
prefecture to establish a sightseeing brand. Its aggressive PR activities are also seen in the 
metropolitan  area.  Together  with  the  recent  boom  in  visitors  to  spiritual  places  and  the 
opening  of  the  Matsue  Expressway,  tourism  demand  has  been  increasing  to  a  substantial 
degree.  According  to  the  Bank’s  Matsue  branch,  the  economic  effect  of  an  increase  in 
tourism demand in 2013 stemming mainly from Izumo Taisha’s Sengu was estimated to be 
slightly less than 30 billion yen. Given that Shimane’s gross prefectural production is slightly 
more than two trillion yen, the increase in tourism demand will be a substantial boost for the 
regional economy, for which the average growth rate over the past 10 years has been about 
zero percent. 
In addition to firm tourism, business conditions in the non-manufacturing sector, including the 
construction  industry,  which  has  been  underpinned  by  an  increase  in  public  and  private 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
construction, have been generally improving. Business conditions have also been improving 
in  the  manufacturing  sector  due  mainly  to  strong  production  in  electronic  parts  for 
smartphones  and  tablet  computers  as  well  as  automobile-related  goods,  and  increased 
production in food & beverages and construction-related materials, reflecting an increase in 
domestic  demand  such  as  tourism  and  public  investment.  As  a  result,  the  economy  of 
Shimane  Prefecture  has  been  moderately  recovering.  According  to  the  recently  released 
September  Tankan  survey,  business  conditions  in  the  San-in  region  reached  the  highest 
level  since  1991,  confirming  that  economic  recovery  has  been  spreading.  The  business 
conditions have been at almost the same level compared with those nationwide. 
During  Japan’s  longest  post-war  economic  recovery,  between  2002  and  2007,  an 
improvement in business conditions in the San-in region was markedly sluggish compared 
with that of the national average. There were several reasons behind this. As the economic 
recovery  at  that  time  was  led  by  external  demand  reflecting  an  expansion  in  the  global 
economy, the region was not able to benefit much from the recovery. In addition, the effects 
of a cut in public investment during the period weighed heavily on the regional economy, in 
which the contribution of construction industry to the regional economy as a proportion was 
high.  By  contrast,  the  reason  why  business  conditions  in  the  San-in  region  have  been 
improving in tandem with those nationwide during this recovery phase seems to be that the 
feature  of  this  recovery  –  namely,  that  firm  domestic  demand  has  been  inducing  an 
improvement in economic activity in the non-manufacturing sector – has similarly occurred in 
the San-in region. In addition, the structure of the regional manufacturing sector – namely, a 
relatively  high  contribution  to  the  regional  economy  as  a  proportion,  compared  with 
nationwide, of the food & beverages industry and lumber & wood products industry, which 
are  highly  domestic  demand-dependent  –  has  partly  bolstered  production 
the 
manufacturing  sector.  Against  such  a  backdrop,  due  mainly  to  a  moderate  increase  in 
production,  a  virtuous  circle  from  income  to  spending  has  also  started  to  operate  in  this 
region, mainly in the business sector. 
The  Bank  will  steadily  pursue  the  QQE  to  ensure  that  this  fledgling  virtuous  circle  seen 
nationwide, inclusive of this region, will keep operating firmly in the future. In doing so, we 
believe  it  is  critical  to  carefully  examine  economic  activity  and  prices  while  firmly  gauging 
developments  in  regional  economies  through  the  Bank’s  nationwide  branch  network, 
including the Matsue branch. From this perspective, we would like to continue to seek your 
cooperation with respect to research and other activities of the Matsue branch. 
This  region  has  plenty  of  “resources”  –  namely,  the  ample  resources  of  tourism  and  of 
agriculture,  forestry,  and  fisheries,  as  well  as  a  concentration  in  the  manufacturing  sector 
with  advanced  technologies.  For  Shimane’s  economy  not  to  make  the  current  recovery  a 
transient one, it is critical to effectively utilize these resources to improve growth potential. In 
this regard, it is expected that, with the tourism industry and other regional industries working 
together,  there  will  be  further  promotion  of  initiatives  related  to  “local  production  for  local 
consumption” in a broad sense – namely, to “effectively make use of regional resources to 
spur  production  and  expand  regional  consumption.”  With  heartfelt  hope  for  further 
development through these initiatives in the economy of the region of my roots, I would like 
to conclude my speech. 
Thank you. 
in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
