Encik Abu Hassan Alshari Yahaya: Financial crime and terrorism 
financing 
Keynote address by Mr Encik Abu Hassan Alshari Yahaya, Assistant Governor of the Central 
Bank  of  Malaysia,  at  the  5th  International  Conference  on  Financial  Crime  and  Terrorism 
Financing (IFCTF 2013), Kuala Lumpur, 23 October 2013. 
 It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  be  here  today  and  I  would  like  to  thank  the  Conference 
Organiser,  the  Asian  Institute  of  Finance  in  collaboration  with  the  Malaysia’s  Compliance 
Officers’  Networking  Group,  for  the  invitation  to  deliver  the  keynote  address  at  this  5th 
International  Conference  on  Financial  Crime  and  Terrorism  Financing.  I  am  happy  to  note 
that this annual conference has received strong response and continued to provide industry 
players  with  the  developments  in  the  area  of  financial  crimes  and  terrorism  financing  and 
how financial service providers and relevant businesses and professions could continuously 
strengthen the capacity and capabilities in addressing these risks. 
I am glad to note that there has been an increased participation from the designated non-
financial  businesses  and  professions  (DNFBPs)  in  this  year’s  conference.  This  reflects 
heightened  awareness  and  seriousness  by  the  DNFBPs  to  improve  their  compliance  and 
understanding  of  their  roles  in  combating  money  laundering  and  terrorism  financing.  I  am 
also  informed  by  the  organisers that  the  Malaysian  Bar  Council,  the  Malaysian  Institute  of 
Accountants and the Association of Money Services Business have also reached out to their 
members  to  attend  this  and  by  accrediting  this  program  as  part  of  the  continuous 
professional development. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Weaknesses  in  risk  governance  have  been  one  of  the  major  cause  for  the  recent  global 
financial crisis. Until now, risk governance remains a work in progress as evident from the 
recent  money  laundering  control  failures  experienced  by  some  big  financial  institutions  in 
developed economies. The theme for this year’s conference, the “Risk, Governance & Self-
Regulation: Within and Beyond”, is not only timely but also an ongoing self-reflection for all of 
us. The organisers have also impressed upon me that this year theme is a continuation of 
2012 theme of “Compliance, Challenges and Effectiveness: The next level”. After the efforts 
in  putting  in  place  the  appropriate  risk  management  framework,  it  is  time  for  us  to  ask 
ourselves the following questions: Have we done enough on risk and governance? And can 
we do it better? 
Sound risk management is fundamental to preserve the integrity of the financial system and 
there has been increased attention given to this area. In my remarks today, I intend to focus 
on the following key points and highlight initiatives undertaken by Bank Negara Malaysia to 
strategically support financial sectors’ governance and self-regulation in preventing the risks 
related to financial crime. Firstly, the risks and its importance in setting the context: Secondly, 
the governance and risk culture; and thirdly, self-regulation. 
Risks and its importance in setting the context 
In principle, money laundering and terrorism financing risks are no different than other type of 
risks facing businesses. Key in managing the risks is to identify the sources and assess the 
extent of its impact to the business. Recognising this importance, The Financial Action Task 
Force or better known as FATF, has provided a clear statement on this under the very first 
recommendation  in  its  Revised  International  Standards  on  Combating  Money  Laundering 
and  the  Financing  of  Terrorism  and  Proliferation.  Countries,  financial  institutions  and 
designated non-financial businesses and professions are required to clearly identify, assess, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
and understand risks. Understanding of those risks will then set the context for taking actions 
and allow better allocation of resources to effectively manage and mitigate those risks. 
To respond to this development, Bank Negara Malaysia has issued revised policies on Anti 
Money Laundering and Counter Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT) in September 2013. The 
integral component of the revised AML/CFT policies is the introduction of an obligation for 
reporting  institutions  to  adopt  a  risk-based  approach  in  identifying,  assessing,  and 
understanding  the  money  laundering  and  terrorism  financing  risks  of  respective  reporting 
institutions. The risk-based approach is an over-arching requirement that runs through all the 
other elements in the AML/CFT policies. Proper assessment and understanding of the risks 
will  allow  reporting  institutions  to  tailor  an  appropriate  risk  controls  and  establish  proper 
policies and procedures to mitigate the risks. The revised policies also focused on refining 
Customer  Due  Diligence  (CDD)  requirements  to  reflect  the  varied  risk  levels.  The  revised 
policies also aimed to address implementation issues faced by both the reporting institutions 
and  the  supervisors  as  well  as  to  incorporate  FATF  requirements  under  the  revised 
standards. To ensure consistency of AML/CFT policies across the sectors, the revision was 
carried  out  jointly  with  other  financial  supervisors  such  as  the  Labuan  Financial  Services 
Authority  and  the  Securities  Commission.  Extensive  consultations  and  engagements  were 
undertaken with the industry players both during pre and post issuance of the policies. The 
consultations provided a broad range of opinions and support. Whilst majority of responses 
were supporting a risk-based approach, concerns were also raised on the cost and burden of 
compliance. Bank Negara Malaysia recognises that the cost of implementing the Customer 
Due  Diligence  under  the  risk-based  approach  may  be  high  at  the  early  stage  of 
implementation but the establishment of robust risk framework that commensurate with the 
risks of your institutions will minimise the institutions’ reputational risk and would also lower 
the overall costs in the long-run given the ability for reporting institutions to focus resources 
to the right area. 
Governance and risk culture 
Let’s  now  turn  to  governance  and  risk  culture.  Governance  refers  to  actions,  process, 
traditions  and  institutions  by  which  authority  is  exercised  and  decision  are  taken  and 
implemented. A good governance is, therefore, a mixture of legislation, non-legislative codes, 
self-regulation  and  best  practices,  structure,  culture  and  management  and  board 
competency. If we take a step back and reflect, we will notice that risk governance is woven 
through  the  risk  management  framework.  Many  elements  of  requirements  for  the  risk 
management  framework  contribute  to  risk  governance.  For  instance,  the  requirement  for 
effective  board  audit  and  risk  committee,  regular  reviews  of  the  effectiveness  of  the 
framework  and  its  implementation  and  so  on.  The  Board  plays  a  critical  role  in  risk 
governance. The Board sets standards and expectations that would influence the culture and 
management  of  the  business,  and  ultimately,  the  quality  of  risk  governance.  Common 
shortcoming  occurs  when  Board  fails  to  serve  as  a  sufficient  “check  and  balance”  on  the 
activities of the senior management, causing the business to focus excessively on short-term 
growth  at  the  expense  of  long  term  stakeholders’  interest.  For  this  reason,  Bank  Negara 
Malaysia  places  greater  expectation  on  the  roles  and  responsibility  of  Board  and  senior 
management.  This  expectation  can  be  found  in  many  policy  documents  issued  by  Bank 
Negara Malaysia since the past several years and specifically provided for in the Financial 
Services Act (FSA) and the Islamic Financial Services Act (AFSA). 
For an institution’s risk governance to be effective, there must be a strong risk culture which 
is consistent with the institution’s espoused values and risk appetite. You may asked, how 
does  Board  assess  risk  culture?  There  isn’t  simple  and  straightforward  answer  to  this 
question. Some institutions undertake “climate review” among its management and staff to 
gauge  the  culture  whilst  another  approach  could  involve  focus  group.  Ultimately,  audit, 
compliance and risk management functions would have opportunities in the course of their 
work to observe the risk culture throughout the business. From the regulator’s perspective, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
risk culture could be inferred and gauged based on the effective implementation and level of 
compliance  by  the  risk  takers  and  the  frontline  staff.  To  improve  risk  culture,  Board  and 
management  must  review  the  incentives  and  penalties  in  place  and  ensure  that  it  is 
effectively implemented. Among the key questions that Board and management should be 
asking  are;  Does  the  performance  management  and  compensation  system  reward  good 
behaviour and punish bad behaviour? And how are audit and supervisory issues handled? 
As  you  already  know,  a  weak  risk  culture  may  lead  to  staff  resorting  to  “check  the  box” 
compliance exercise whilst a strong risk culture will judge the wisdom and decision of looking 
beyond the profit number and be able to see the medium and long term sustainability. 
On  this  note,  allow  me  to  share  some  of  the  key  observations  made  by  Bank  Negara 
Malaysia  during  the  recently  completed  AML/CFT  Thematic  Reviews  on  Banks  and 
Insurance Companies. First, the good news. In general, we observed that there was greater 
awareness  among  Board  and  senior  management  on  ML/TF  risks  and  its  potential 
implication  to  their  reputation.  From  the  AML/CFT  policies  and  framework  implemented, 
there  was  also  shift towards risk-based  approach.  In most  of  the  institutions  reviewed,  the 
management  of  AML/CFT  was  no  longer  viewed  solely  as  a  “Compliance”  job  but  more 
aligned and integrated with the bank’s overall risk management function. In addition, it is also 
worth noting that in terms of management information system (MIS), more investments were 
made  to  either  upgrade  or  enhance  their  existing  MIS  to  facilitate  effective  monitoring  of 
suspicious transactions. This is encouraging. 
Now  let  me  share  the  not  so  good  news.  Implementation  of  AML/CFT  policies  and 
procedures, although has shown improvement as compared to the last review, is still an area 
that  needs  to  be  strengthened  particularly  with  regards  to  CDD  and  customer  monitoring. 
While  we  acknowledged  that  in  almost  all  cases,  CDD  were  conducted,  the  extent  of  due 
diligence  in  some  instances  were  inadequate  and  not  reflective  of  the  level  of  money 
laundering  and  terrorist  financing  risks  posed  by  the  customers  and/or  transactions.  We 
believe that to address this issue, strong risk culture must be inculcated and the performance 
and reward system should reflect that culture. 
Self-regulation 
Institutions with strong wisdom in risk governance and culture do not solely depend on the 
regulator and supervisor to tell them what to do. Self-regulation is important, particularly for 
financial  institutions. In performing the  intermediary  functions,  depositors  and  shareholders 
depend  on  the  decision  and  practice  of  the  financial  institutions  to  balance  the  risks  and 
rewards in their operations with the changes in operating environment and risk management 
expectations. We have learned and relearned abundant lessons from the experience of the 
past  crisis  and  many  of  those  lessons  lead  to  changes  in  regulation,  supervision, 
enforcement and risk management practices throughout the world. As these new rules are 
designed and implemented, we are expected to adapt and change our business models and 
risk practices. 
Bank Negara Malaysia is adapting as well. I have highlighted earlier the development on the 
regulation  and  supervision’s  front.  Allow  me  to  highlight  key  developments  on  the 
enforcement  front.  Given  that  combating  financial  crime  continues  to  be  one  of  our  key 
priorities  in  sustaining  financial  sector  integrity,  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  is  intensifying 
enforcement  actions  on  AML/CFT  non-compliances  and  breaches  of  legislations.  Since 
2012, Bank Negara Malaysia had compounded several banks and money service business 
operators  for  various  non-compliances  with  the  Anti-Money  Laundering  and  Anti-Terrorist 
Financing  Act  2001  (AMLATFA).  Besides  AMLATFA,  the  new  AML/CFT  policies  are  also 
issued under The FSA and IFSA. FSA and IFSA provide Bank Negara Malaysia with wider 
enforcement powers including the administrative and civil sanctions for breaches under these 
Acts. FSA and IFSA also allow for enforcement actions taken under these legislations to be 
made public. This means that the reputational stake for non-compliance has been set higher. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
This  is  necessary  to  strengthen  financial  sector’s  compliance  to  AML/CFT  Policies  and 
preserve the integrity of the financial system from being abuse for criminal activities. 
Bank Negara Malaysia recognises that the vast majority of the DNFBPs seek to comply with 
the  law  and  for  certain  profession  such  as  the  lawyers  and  the  accountants,  through  their 
ethical obligations. However, given that the controls on money laundering risks implemented 
at  the  financial  institutions  are  increasingly  tightened,  there  is  this  emerging  consequence 
that DNFBPs, particularly the legal professionals, are increasingly becoming more attractive 
for  the  criminals  to  launder  their  ill-gotten  gain.  According  to  the  report  published  by  the 
FATF on money laundering involving legal professionals, key among those factors are the 
perception that the involvement of legal professionals provides a further step in the chain to 
frustrate investigation by law enforcement authorities. Thus, it is imperative for DNFBPs to 
increase  their  awareness  and  understanding  on  how  their  industry  can  be  susceptible  to 
money laundering and takes necessary measures commensurate with the money laundering 
and  terrorism  financing  risks  faced  in  offering  such  business  activities.  We  hope  that  with 
higher awareness among the DNFBPs, we will be able to see higher number of submission 
of suspicious transaction reports from the DNFBPs. As the industry is aware, Bank Negara 
Malaysia is finalising the revised AML/CFT policies for DNFBPs and we are targeting to issue 
the  policy  before  end  of  October.  I  would  like  to  take this  opportunity  to  thank the  various 
associations and self-regulatory bodies who had provided comments and feedbacks to the 
draft policy papers that we had issued earlier. 
Bank  Negara  Malaysia  will  continue  to  support  and  partner  the  financial  institutions  to 
weather  the  challenges  in  fighting  emerging  trend  in  financial  crimes.  For  this  purpose,  I 
would like to reinforce your attention that Malaysia’s AML/CFT regime will be undergoing the 
3rd  Mutual  Evaluation  Exercise  commencing  August  2014.  The  assessment  methodology 
this time around will be different from the previous two assessments. It will not only depend 
on  how  good  we  are  in  achieving  technical  compliance  to  the  international  standards  by 
having the necessary laws, regulations and policies in place, but importantly, the focus of the 
assessment will be placed on the effectiveness of AML/CFT measures being implemented 
taking  into  consideration  the  risk  and  context  of  money  laundering  and  terrorism  financing 
risks  in  Malaysia.  It  is  important  for  me  to  stress  that  an  overall  positive  rating  in  the 
assessment will strengthen the confidence in our financial system and therefore the country’s 
economic development. Our success in meeting the shared goal of protecting the integrity of 
our  financial  system  against  criminal  abuse  will  continue  to  depend  on  the  cooperation 
among the regulators, the financial industry and the law enforcement authorities. I am sure 
that  this  conference  will  provide  a  meaningful  platform  for  all  of  you  to  engage,  and 
importantly, to strengthen our risk management capabilities and in promoting higher level of 
integrity in our business conducts and operations. 
On that note, I wish all of you a fruitful conference. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
