Jens Weidmann: “A minimum wage has to be depoliticised” 
Interview by Dr Jens Weidmann, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, with Jörg Eigendorf 
and Sebastian Jost in Welt am Sonntag, published in German on 29 September 2013. 
 Bundesbank  President  Jens  Weidmann  is  known  as  a  vocal  critic  of  Southern  European 
policymaking. He is now also urging reforms in Germany – although he has come to terms 
with some things 
Jens  Weidmann  has  clearly  shown  that  he  is  not  averse  to  conflict.  Whenever  the 
Bundesbank President appears in any of the euro-area peripheral countries, he is always the 
stern uncle. “More reforms” is his mantra. It is therefore not without a sense of vindication 
that  some  politicians  from  Southern  Europe  will  see  that  the  former  economic  adviser  to 
Chancellor Merkel is now also training his sights on his ex-colleagues in Berlin. In his first 
interview since the elections to the Bundestag, the 45-year-old central banker did not discuss 
monetary  policy  in  the  narrower  sense  but  talked  about  economic  policy  in  the  broadest 
sense.  That  was  a  first  for  Weidmann:  the  Bundesbank’s  last  major  blueprint  for  reforms 
dates back ten years. 
Mr Weidmann, what parties did you vote for last Sunday? 
The  ballot  is  secret  for  good  reasons,  and  I  do  not  give  recommendations  prior  to  the 
election, nor do I discuss my decision after the fact. 
Why  do  Germans  make  such  a  big  secret  out  of  whom  they  vote  for,  unlike,  say, 
Americans? 
You are not asking me as a private citizen but as Bundesbank President. The Bundesbank is 
well advised, however, to steer clear of party politics. 
You’ve  rankled  some  people  in  Berlin  by  speaking  out  on  economic  policy,  even 
though  your  actual  mandate  is  to  keep  prices  stable.  Do  you  really  need  any  more 
enemies? 
That is not the point. We speak up in situations where monetary policy is affected. Healthy 
public finances and sustainable growth are key preconditions for stable money. This is why 
we also point out problems facing Germany – without, however, laying out a detailed agenda 
of reforms. 
But the Bundesbank already did that once before, in 2003.Germany was regarded at 
the time as the “sick man” of Europe. It is now held as a model worldwide. If one looks 
at the 2003 proposals, though, not many have been implemented – apart from those 
regarding the labour market and pensions. 
Well,  those  are,  after  all,  two  extremely  central  policy  areas,  and  it  is  not  least  thanks  to 
these reforms that our economy is doing so well compared with other countries. But that is 
precisely what makes it tempting to avoid tackling still-existing deficits. Unfortunately, reforms 
are often not carried out when the need for action is still predictable but only after all other 
options have vanished. The costs are then usually higher. 
In the light of the good situation, many see your criticism as the typical attitude of a 
Bundesbank killjoy. 
Former  Federal  Reserve  Chairman  William  McChesney  Martin  once  remarked  that  the 
central  bank’s  job  was  “to  take  away  the  punch  bowl  just  as  the  party  gets  going”.  As  an 
independent central bank, it is also our role to voice unpleasant findings. 
You were the Chancellor’s economic adviser for five years. We would now like to give 
you the opportunity to list all the reforms of the past two legislative periods. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
There are quite a few … 
We are sitting on tenterhooks. 
Federal structure reform and the introduction of the debt brake, corporate tax reform – with 
some  caveats  –  and,  for  instance,  also  the  stabilisation  of  pension  insurance  through, 
amongst other things, the increase in the retirement age ... 
Giant leaps forward look different. 
That doesn’t mean, though, that retirement at 67 is not important. The Agenda 2010 reform 
programme  was  also  controversial  in  its  day.  Today  we  are  reaping  the  dividends  – 
unemployment  is  lower,  employment,  including  among  older  workers,  is  higher,  and  the 
social security scheme is in better shape financially. Another point is also important, though: 
in 2013 Germany will have a balanced government budget for the second consecutive year. 
Unlike in the past, windfall revenues and underspending have been used, at least in large 
part, to cut deficits. However, there are still many unresolved problems. 
For example? 
We have to ask ourselves again and again where our place in the global economy is going to 
be.  How  can  we  preserve  our  prosperity  in  a  globalised  world?  How  do  firms  remain 
innovative, flexible and thus competitive? How do we deal with demographic change and its 
implications for the labour market? Where will affordable energy come from? Or think of the 
debt level, which, at more than 80% of gross domestic product, is too high. 
And  could  continue  to  rise,  judging  by  the  pre-election  promises.  Pretty  much  all 
parties want to pour more money into infrastructure. 
Investment  in  public  infrastructure  can  also  make  sense  if  the  government  uses  this  to 
alleviate bottlenecks in a targeted manner. However, that should not be a carte blanche to 
run  up  new  debt.  Not  nearly  all  investments  pay  for  themselves  through  increased  growth 
alone. 
The  SPD  and  Greens,  in  particular,  simply  want  to  raise  taxes  in  order  to  fund  the 
additional expenditure. Would that be okay? 
There  are  two  things  I  can  say  as  an  economist.  First:  those  calling  for  new  government 
expenditure  should  also  show  how  it  would  be  funded.  At  all  events,  in  the  past  debt 
financing was relied on too often. Second: rising expenditure tends to curtail growth, and all 
the more the higher the tax burden already is. This means that, when calls are made for new 
expenditure, existing spending has to be subjected to scrutiny. 
Where do we need higher investment? 
There is no one-size-fits-all answer to that question. Investment is not an end in itself; each 
project  needs  to  be  examined  individually  in  terms  of  its  benefits  for  society.  Existing 
bottlenecks have to be alleviated in infrastructure, roads, railways and shipping lanes. The 
educational  system  in  particular  needs  to  be  addressed;  in  individual  cases  we  are  either 
living  off  our  assets  or  setting  the  wrong  emphasis.  But  there  is  certainly  no  nationwide 
investment bottleneck – the need for investment varies widely from region to region. 
We already redistribute large sums of money between Federal states today. Do we not 
need  a  sort  of  “Maastricht  plus”  within  Germany  –  that  is,  to  transfer  greater 
responsibility for budgets to the cities and Federal states? 
Indeed  we  do  need  actors  at  all  levels  to  bear  independent  responsibility  for  revenue  and 
expenditure.  But  there  is  also  a  shared  supraregional  interest  in  certain  tasks.  Moreover, 
binding corrective action should be taken earlier in future if Federal states or municipalities 
slowly threaten to slide into distress from which they cannot extricate themselves. However, 
in principle we have more opportunities to push through rules in our federal system than at 
the European level. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
therefore 
important  milestones.  Fiscal  policymakers  will  need 
Which  makes  us  very  pessimistic  about  Europe.  Even  the  better  opportunities  for 
intervention here cannot prevent Berlin or Bremen from being kept more and more on 
life support. 
Undoubtedly mistakes were made in the past. The debt brake, which will be binding on the 
Federal  states  with  effect from  2020,  and  the forthcoming federal  structure reform  in  2020 
are 
to  start  making 
preparations for it. 
We noticed that the speech you delivered in Düsseldorf on Wednesday omits the very 
topic which is giving the industrial sector the greatest worries: the high costs of the 
energy U-turn. 
At a cocktail reception, it is possible to discuss everything, but not in a 30-minute speech. But 
I  did  mention  energy  policy  briefly,  for  it  must  be  clear  to  us  that  energy  supply  is  a  key 
location factor. And, in addition, the sharp rise in “fracking” in the United States will by itself 
be enough to change the energy market significantly. This will have implications for global 
competition. If we want to rely, in particular, on alternative sources of energy, this is a pivotal 
decision for society. However, we should bear the various implications in mind. Households 
and enterprises will end up having to pay for expensive energy. Consumption will have to be 
cut back elsewhere, and enterprises will have to become competitive elsewhere. 
How can that be done? 
Better trained employees and more efficient production structures can make a contribution. 
The functional viability of the labour market is also a key starting point. 
It is precisely there that relatively many reforms have been undertaken to make labour 
more flexible. 
Correct,  and  these  reforms  have  also  had  an  impact.  However,  the  small  segment  of 
atypically employed persons – low-paid part-time workers, temporary workers or workers on 
fixed-term contracts – is being asked to demonstrate above-average flexibility. 
Are you against low-paid part-time work and temporary jobs? 
No,  it’s  not  about  abolishing  these  instruments,  but  about  making  the  labour  market  more 
flexible  in  the  mainstream  and  thus  distributing  the  adjustment  requirements  more  evenly. 
Such a labour market is better able to deal with structural shifts, such as if certain sectors 
shrink  while  others  are  looking  for  labour.  We  are  currently  seeing,  after  all,  a  fairly 
noticeable increase in regular jobs which are subject to social security contributions. 
The  Bundesbank  President  is  now  going  after  job  protection?  Now  that  is  sure  to 
make you popular. 
I’m  not  at  all  about  getting  rid  of job  protection.  What  counts  is  the  overall  package: firms 
need  sufficient  scope  for  action  and  certainty  of  planning,  while  at  the  same  time  workers 
need  sufficient  protection.  Reducing  job  protection  would  have  to  go  hand-in-hand  with 
improved safeguards for people who lose their jobs. 
If  the  election  programmes  are  to  be  believed,  the  parties  see  the  solution  more  in 
instituting minimum wages. That will not make it easier to find a new job. 
I remain sceptical about minimum wages. They are a very imprecise instrument for fighting 
poverty,  for  example,  and  they  largely  entail  risks  and  problems  for  future  employment 
trends. It is less a question of whether minimum wages will be associated with layoffs and 
more  of  whether  they  will  prevent  new  hiring  or  –  in  the  case  of  sector-specific  minimum 
wages – unwelcome competition is crowded out. 
Wouldn’t a general minimum wage then be the lesser evil? 
A  minimum  wage  set  by  policymakers  will  surely  tend  to  rise  more  sharply  than  would  be 
called  for  in  terms  of  labour  market  policy.  This  would  harm  precisely  those  whom  it  is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
intended to protect – low-skilled workers who have more difficulty than others finding work. If 
a  general  minimum  wage  is  to  be  introduced  anyway,  I  urgently  propose  that  it  be  de-
politicised. Taking the United Kingdom as a case in point: the legal minimum wage is set not 
by parliament or the government, but by an independent commission. 
Are you already bracing yourself for higher taxes? 
That is ultimately a political decision, though the negative impacts on growth of higher taxes 
have to be taken into account. All in all, however, we should instead increase the incentives 
to work in order to counteract the age-related decline in the labour force. Incentives to work 
for low earners, older people and secondary wage earners are possible starting points. 
Then  both  the  childcare  supplement  and  the  splitting  of  income  taxation  between 
couples  ought  to  be  abolished,  since  they  both  discourage  going  to  work.  No 
government has dared touch those hot potatoes. 
I  know  that  those  topics  are  both  hot  potatoes.  However,  we  shouldn’t  throw  everything 
overboard  only  because  it  reduces the  incentive  to  work.  All  of the  individual  programmes 
ultimately have social policy objectives. But it pays to at least be aware of the side-effects. 
The importance of these side-effects is growing in the light of globalisation and demographic 
change. 
Do you truly see the opportunity for far-reaching change to occur? Ever since Agenda 
2010, society seems to have become rather anti-change. 
Things  are  naturally  more  difficult  now  because  the  challenges  are  less  obvious  than  ten 
years ago. That is precisely why I am stimulating this debate. 
Angela Merkel may be many things – but not a reformer, if most voters do not want 
reform. 
I have the impression that the current chancellor, like her predecessors, is looking out for the 
country’s best interests. And it is also the job of policymakers to convince the public of the 
need to take the path that policymakers regard as being correct. 
Is Weidmann the central banker not keen on re-entering politics one day – to advance 
all the policy ideas in your head? 
I work for the largest central bank in the Eurosystem, and we have an important mission for 
everyone  in  Germany  and  Europe:  price  stability.  In  fulfilling  our  mission,  we  are  shaping 
continuous  change  in  Europe,  and  we  are  constantly  evolving  as  an  institution. That  is  an 
exciting and challenging task, one that I enjoy very much. I have no desire to go anywhere 
else. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
