Øystein Olsen: Macroprudential policy and financial stability 
Speech  by  Mr  Øystein  Olsen,  Governor  of  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of  Norway),  at  the 
meeting of the Norwegian Savings Banks Association, Oslo, 31 October 2013. 
 Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech: Charts in pdf-format. 
Thank you for inviting me to this meeting of the Norwegian Savings Banks Association. It is a 
pleasure to meet representatives of Norway’s many savings banks. As a key element of the 
financial system, savings banks play an important role in the Norwegian economy. 
The financial crisis showed the importance of promoting financial stability. In the wake of the 
crisis, a number of reforms were introduced in many countries. These efforts have achieved 
results. Regulations have been tightened and have incorporated a clearer macroprudential 
perspective.  Banks’  capital  ratios  have  been  raised.  There  are  also  initiatives  aimed  at 
bolstering the resilience of the financial infrastructure. 
I  will  devote  most  of  my  time  today  to  the  introduction  of  the  new  capital  framework  in 
Norway,  including  a  countercyclical  buffer  requirement,  and  I  will  also  touch  upon  the 
interaction of the buffer with monetary policy. I  will conclude by saying a few  words about 
Norges  Bank’s  settlement  system,  which  plays  an  important  role  in  promoting  financial 
stability. 
Chart: Banks play a key role 
Why capital regulation? 
A  well  functioning  financial  market  is  essential  for  virtually  all  other  economic  activity  in  a 
market-based  economy.  Banks  play  a  key  role.  Banks  channel  funds  from  savers  to 
investors. Banks determine who should be given credit and closely monitor borrowers and 
their projects. This is a task that would be difficult for small savers to undertake. 
By  offering  customers  various  kinds  of  financial  products,  banks  also  help  to  diversify  and 
redistribute risk. This function is essential in a modern market economy. At the same time, 
experience shows that complex financial structures are a source of increased vulnerability. 
Chart: Securitisation resulted in complex and vulnerable structures 
Ahead of the financial crisis, there was a proliferation of complex financial products, including 
residential  mortgage-backed  securities  in  the  US.  In  theory,  these  new  products  were 
intended to improve the distribution of risk. Banks’ exposure to risk that had been shifted off 
their balance sheets would be limited. In reality, it turned out differently. Risk was not very 
well distributed, merely hidden. With so many links in the chain between borrower and saver, 
the responsibility for monitoring borrowers became highly fragmented. 
Good  banking  is  important  for  a  sound  and  stable  economy.  Despite  thorough  credit 
assessments and close monitoring of borrowers, banks will face unexpected losses. If banks 
end up with insufficient equity capital following substantial losses in bad times, they will have 
to  tighten  lending.  This  may  amplify  a  downturn,  as  is  currently  the  case  in  a  number  of 
European countries. 
Compared  with  other  enterprises,  many  banks  have  limited  equity  capital.  It  is  often  more 
costly for banks to fund lending with equity capital than with deposits and borrowing from the 
market. As deposits are readily available to depositors and many deposits are covered by a 
deposit guarantee, depositors accept a relatively low interest rate. The insurance premium 
banks pay for the deposit guarantee bears little relation to the risk the bank takes. In addition, 
since investors can expect that the authorities will come to the aid of banks in distress, they 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
may be satisfied with a lower return. The result is an underpricing of risk, potentially leading 
to excessive risk-taking. 
Low  equity  ratios  reduce  loss-absorbing  capacity  and,  at  the  same  time,  strengthen  the 
incentive  to  take  risks.  While  owners  cannot  lose  more  than  their  equity  stake,  there  is  a 
potential for high returns on the equity they have invested. 
To avoid a situation where banks hold inadequate equity capital, banks are subject to capital 
requirements.  Each  bank  should  hold  capital  in  proportion  to  its  risk  exposure.  This  is  the 
basis of microprudential bank regulation. 
But  even  if  banks  appear  to  be  solid  individually,  the  banking  system  as  a  whole  may  be 
vulnerable. Banks are exposed to one another and can inflict losses on one another directly. 
Banks can also suffer substantial losses indirectly if they have shared exposures outside of 
the  banking  system.  This  was  clearly  evident  during  the  financial  crisis.  When  a  bank  is 
forced to sell off assets, they fall in value. This weakens the balance sheets of other banks 
holding the same type of assets. 
Chart: Total credit-to-GDP ratio 
Systemic  risk  also  arises  from  the  interaction  between  the  financial  system  and  the  real 
economy. Financial crises tend to occur following a period of mutually reinforcing increases 
in credit, property prices and demand for goods and services, culminating in a bubble that 
reaches bursting point. Each individual loan makes a scant contribution to overall risk, but 
gradually, as debt burdens increase, the economy becomes more vulnerable to shocks. This 
chart shows that Norway has also experienced periods of especially strong credit growth that 
have been interrupted by financial crises. The subsequent losses in the real economy have 
been substantial. 
Banking regulation must therefore include a macroprudential perspective. The purpose is to 
dampen  the  build-up  of  systemic  risk  and  ensure  that  the  banking  system  as  a  whole  is 
resilient  to  shocks.  In  a  number  of  countries,  frameworks  are  now  being  established  for 
macroprudential regulation, along with efforts to put policy instruments in place. 
Preferably, such instruments should focus directly on the sources of systemic risk. This is the 
principle  that  is  applied  when  taxes  are  imposed  directly  on  environmentally  hazardous 
products. In the financial system, however, this is difficult to accomplish in practice. Systemic 
risk has numerous sources. The financial system and its interaction with the real economy 
are complex, and problems spread across borders. The financial crisis was a clear reminder 
of  this.  New  sources  and  forms  of  systemic  risk  may  also  arise.  It  is  difficult  to  imagine 
instruments that can fully prevent financial crises from developing. Yet it is still appropriate to 
increase  banks’  resilience  to  losses  when  systemic  risk  increases.  This  is  the  primary 
purpose of the countercyclical capital buffer, which is now being introduced in Norway. 
The countercyclical capital buffer 
The amendments to the Financial Institutions Act that were approved in summer include a 
number of new capital adequacy standards. There are new buffer requirements in addition to 
the  minimum  Common  Equity  Tier  1  (CET1)  capital  ratio  requirement.  Banks  that  do  not 
meet  the  buffer  requirements  will  face  restrictions  on  distributing  dividend  and  paying  out 
bonuses. 
Chart: New CET1 capital requirements for Norwegian banks 
The capital conservation buffer is permanent and independent of systemic risk. The systemic 
risk buffer is designed to act as a buffer against more persistent systemic risk and will apply 
to all Norwegian banks. In addition, the largest banks will be subject to a separate capital 
buffer  requirement.  The  Norwegian  authorities  are  currently 
for 
designating systemically important financial institutions. The countercyclical capital buffer is 
designed to act as a buffer against systemic risk that varies over time. The buffer rate is to be 
formulating  criteria 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
assessed  each  quarter,  and  will  normally  be  between  0  and  2.5  percent  of  banks’  risk-
weighted assets. The requirement will apply to all banks operating in Norway, eventually also 
branches of foreign banks. 
On 4 October, a new regulation relating to the countercyclical capital buffer was approved by 
the  Government.  The  Ministry  of  Finance  has  been  tasked  with  setting  the  level  of  the 
countercyclical capital buffer. Norges Bank has been tasked with preparing a basis for the 
buffer  decision  and  providing  advice  to  the  Ministry  of  Finance  regarding  the  level  of  the 
buffer. In preparing the basis for the buffer decision, Norges Bank will exchange information 
and assessments with Finanstilsynet. 
Since  March  of  this  year,  Norges  Bank  has  published  an  assessment  of  the  need  for  a 
countercyclical capital buffer in the Monetary Policy Report in addition to its monetary policy 
assessment. Norges Bank will give its first advice on the level of the buffer to the Ministry of 
Finance in connection with the next Monetary Policy Report, to be published at the beginning 
of December. 
Text slide: Criteria for an appropriate countercyclical capital buffer 
In  line  with  the  purpose  of  the  countercyclical  capital  buffer,  Norges  Bank  has  formulated 
three  criteria  for  setting  an  appropriate  buffer  rate.  The  buffer  should  ensure  that  the 
resilience  of  banks  is  strengthened  during  an  upturn.  The  buffer  requirement  should  be 
viewed  in  the  light  of  other  requirements  applying  to  banks,  particularly  when  new 
requirements are introduced. One of the most important purposes of the capital buffer is to 
alleviate stress in the financial system. 
History shows that the foundation for banking crises is laid during upturns. When financial 
imbalances build up, this increases the likelihood of substantial losses in the entire banking 
system. In an environment characterised by large losses, insufficient equity capital may force 
banks to curtail lending to households and enterprises, amplifying a downturn. Banks should 
therefore hold larger capital buffers when financial imbalances are building up or have built 
up. 
Financial  imbalances,  or  systemic  risk,  are  difficult  to  measure.  However,  there  is  both 
empirical and theoretical support for using the credit-to-GDP ratio as one indicator of risk in 
the  financial  system.  In  the  first  chart  I  showed  today,  we  saw  that  financial  crises  have 
followed periods of strong credit growth. 
Chart: Key indicators 
Also indicators other than the credit-to-GDP ratio provide signals regarding systemic risk. We 
have emphasised in particular developments in house and commercial property prices and 
the share of banks’ wholesale funding. 
The chart shows the indicators along with both an estimated trend and a mean.1 The greater 
the positive gap above trend and historical mean, the stronger is the signal of vulnerability 
and imbalances. 
Text slide: Section 3 of the Regulation relating to a countercyclical capital buffer 
The  countercyclical  capital  buffer  is  a  part  of  the  EU’s  Capital  Requirements  Directive 
(CRD IV). Under CRD IV, national authorities shall take account of other variables in addition 
to the credit-to-GDP ratio.2 The four key indicators are also in line with the new Norwegian 
regulation, which states that the basis for the buffer decision from Norges Bank “shall contain 
an overview of the credit-to-GDP ratio and the extent to which it deviates from the long-term 
                                                 
1  The trend is estimated using a one-sided Hodrick-Prescott filter (lambda = 400000) extended by a forecast. 
The mean is for the entire period in the chart. 
2  Articles 135(1)(c) and 136(3)(c) of Directive 2013/36/EU (CRD IV). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
trend,  as  well  as  other  indicators,  and  Norges  Bank’s  assessment  of  systemic  risk  that  is 
building up or has built up over time”. 
Under  the  regulation,  Norges  Bank  shall  take  account  of  guidance  from  the  European 
Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB).  The  ESRB  is  currently  working  to  formulate  guidelines  for 
setting the buffer rate. Norges Bank and Finanstilsynet are actively participating in this effort. 
Once the guidelines are in place, recommendations from the ESRB on methodologies and 
benchmarks for setting the buffer rate will be included in the basis for the buffer decision. 
In line with the recommendations from the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision and the 
regulatory framework, there should not be a mechanical relationship between developments 
in the indicators and Norges Bank’s advice on the buffer as relationships in the economy are 
too complex. The advice will always be based on qualified judgement. As we gain experience 
and insight, indicators and methods can be developed further. 
Uncertainty  and  the  need  for  resilience  suggest  that  the  buffer  should  not  be  reduced 
automatically even if there are signs that financial imbalances are receding. In long periods 
of  low  bank  losses  and  rising  asset  prices  and  credit,  banks  will  normally  hold  a 
countercyclical capital buffer. 
Banks will be allowed to draw on the buffer in the event of an economic downturn and large 
bank losses. If the buffer functions as intended, banks will tighten lending to a lesser extent 
in a downturn. This may mitigate the procyclical effects of tighter bank lending. The four key 
indicators  are  not  well  suited  to  signalling  when  the  buffer  should  be  reduced.  Other 
information,  such  as  market  turbulence  and  loss  prospects  for  the  banking  sector,  will  be 
more relevant. 
The benefits of higher capital requirements for banks must be weighed against any costs the 
countercyclical  capital  buffer  imposes  on  the  economy.  Several  analyses,  such  as  those 
conducted  by  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  suggest  that  higher  capital 
requirements  will  not  give  rise  to  considerable,  permanent  economic  costs  in  the  longer 
term.3 In the short term, higher capital requirements may result in somewhat lower growth in 
credit  and  overall  GDP.  Analyses  conducted  by  Norges  Bank  using  Norwegian  data  find 
similar patterns.4  
When  credit  growth  is  strong,  a  higher  buffer  requirement  may  restrain  the  build-up  of 
financial  imbalances.  But  if  capital  requirements  are  raised  too  quickly,  the  result  may  be 
excessive credit tightening. The level of the buffer must therefore be considered in the light of 
other capital requirements. 
Norway  could  be  among  the  first  countries  to  apply  the  countercyclical  buffer.  Growth  in 
credit and in house prices in Norway has been high for a long period, and credit has reached 
a historical level relative to GDP. In view of this situation, banks must make extra allowance 
for the risk of an economic setback. 
Banks have taken due note of the requirements and are in the process of adjusting to them. 
Discussions  with  market  participants  suggest  that  an  expected  countercyclical  buffer  has 
been included in banks’ long-term adjustments. 
                                                 
3  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  “An  assessment  of  the  long-term  economic  impact  of  stronger 
capital  and  liquidity  requirements”,  August  2010.  http://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs173.pdf.  For  an  updated 
collection of references to studies of the costs and benefits of macroprudential regulation, see Annex 1 in IMF 
Working  Paper  WP/13/167,  by  Arregui  et  al.  “Evaluating  the  Net  Benefits  of  Macroprudential  Policy:  A 
cookbook”, July 2013. http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/cat/longres.aspx?sk=40790.0. 
4  For further detail and references, see Norges Bank Papers 1/2013. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Capital requirements and monetary policy 
The  countercyclical  capital  buffer  and  the  key  policy  rate  are  two  instruments  serving 
different objectives. The objective of the countercyclical capital buffer is to increase banks’ 
resilience to losses in a downturn. The primary objective of monetary policy is low and stable 
inflation. The key policy rate is set with a view to keeping inflation close to 2.5 percent over 
time  without  triggering  excessive  fluctuations  in  output  and  employment.  Monetary  policy 
also  seeks  to  be  robust  and  take  into  account  the  risk  that  financial  imbalances  in  the 
economy build up. 
Even though the objectives differ, both of these instruments work through banks’ responses. 
The level of the countercyclical buffer may therefore affect the conduct of monetary policy. 
Increased buffer requirements may induce banks to increase their lending margins or restrict 
access to credit in other ways. Tighter lending growth curbs economic activity and inflation. 
This suggests, in isolation, a lower key policy rate. Other developments in the economy may 
amplify or dampen this effect. 
Although  increasing  lending  margins  in  isolation  point  towards  a  lower  key  policy  rate,  a 
period of strong economic expansion, with prospects for high inflation and a risk of a build-up 
of financial imbalances, might indicate that the key policy rate should be raised while at the 
same time tightening capital requirements for banks. Conversely, in a sharp downturn with 
higher  bank  losses,  it  may  be  appropriate  to  reduce  both  the  key  policy  rate  and  the 
countercyclical buffer. 
Chart: Credit cycles and business cycles in Norway 
Having  more  economic  policy  instruments  available  can  make  it  easier  to  achieve  several 
objectives at the same time. But the countercyclical capital buffer is not a new stabilisation 
policy  instrument  on  par  with  monetary  policy.  The  countercyclical  capital  buffer  is  held  to 
lean against the financial cycle, which is longer than a normal business cycle. Economists at 
the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) find that the average length of the financial cycle 
in advanced economies is around 16 years.5 The length of the business cycle, on the other 
hand, is 8 years at most. The difference is illustrated in the chart. Twenty years passed from 
the start of the banking crisis in 1988 to the financial crisis. 
Capital  adequacy  requirements  are  only  one  of  several  factors  influencing  bank  lending 
margins and rates. And bank lending rates are only one of many factors that are given weight 
when the key policy rate is set. 
Our knowledge and experience of macroprudential regulation is at an early stage. Financial 
market participants can find ways to circumvent regulation. Taking into account the risk of a 
build-up  of  financial  imbalances  will  therefore  continue  to  be  one  of  the  criteria  for  an 
appropriate  interest  rate  path  and  an  important  element  of  a  robust  monetary  policy 
framework. 
Payment system 
Norges  Bank’s  role  in  monetary  policy  is  laid  down  in  the  Norges  Bank  Act.  The  Act  also 
assigns  responsibility  to  Norges  Bank  for  promoting  an  efficient  payment  system.6  The 
payment  system  and  the  systems  for  settlement  of  securities  and  foreign  exchange 
                                                 
5  Drehmann et al. “Characterising the financial cycle: don't lose sight of the medium term”, BIS WP 380, June 
2012. 
6  Section  1  of  the  Norges  Bank  Act.  In  addition,  the  Payment  System  Act  confers  on  Norges  Bank  the 
responsibility  for  licensing  and  supervision  of  systems  for  clearing  and  settlement  of  interbank  money 
transfers. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
transactions are crucial to financial stability. A robust financial system is not only dependent 
on solid banks. The infrastructure must also be able to withstand shocks. 
Large  amounts  are  settled  in  the  payment  system  every  business  day.  If  the  system  fails, 
payment flows can be interrupted, with serious consequences for banks, private individuals, 
the business sector and public administration. Pension and wage payments may be delayed, 
and  businesses  may  not  be  paid  for  goods  sold.  Problems  can  spread  from  one  bank  to 
another if one of the banks cannot meet its payment obligations. 
Today,  payments  are  largely  made  by  cashless  means  using  deposit  money.  This  places 
even greater demands on the payment system to function as intended. 
Chart: Net settlements at Norges Bank 
Norges Bank’s system for net settlement of interbank payments is the core of the Norwegian 
payment  system.  There  are  22  banks  that  participate  directly  in  net  settlements  (first-tier 
banks),  while  110  banks  participate  indirectly  (second-tier  banks),  through  a  private 
settlement bank. The two most important private settlement banks in Norway are DNB and 
Sparebank 1 Midt-Norge. 
Second-tier banks, normally small banks, have risk exposure towards their settlement banks. 
The  risk  to  the  payment  system  as  a  whole  increases  when  many  banks  use  the  same 
settlement bank. 
If a settlement bank encounters difficulties and there are no back-up solutions, there will be a 
risk of widespread disruption of the payment system. This risk can be reduced through good 
back-up systems. 
Second-tier  banks  have  recently  improved  their  back-up  solutions.  Most  banks  have  an 
account  at  Norges  Bank.  In  the  course  of  2013,  all  106  of  the  second-tier  banks  with  an 
account at Norges Bank have submitted authorisations permitting the bank to be moved up 
automatically to first-tier level if the settlement bank should fail, enabling them if necessary to 
participate in net settlements at Norges Bank directly at short notice. This makes second-tier 
banks and the settlement system as a whole less dependent on the private settlement banks. 
The authorisations have strengthened financial stability. 
Banks participating directly in net settlements are required to have sufficient cover for their 
clearing positions. Satisfying this requirement is the banks’ own responsibility. They can do 
this by either depositing funds at Norges Bank or pledging approved securities in favour of 
Norges Bank. Our analyses show that the great majority of second-tier banks have sufficient 
liquidity  in  Norges  Bank’s  settlement  system  to  be  able  to  participate  directly  in  the  net 
settlements. However, clearing positions can vary widely. Banks participating directly in the 
settlements over time must maintain sound liquidity management. 
Conclusion 
Allow me to conclude by highlighting that new and improved regulation of banks will help to 
reduce  the  likelihood of  deep  financial  crises. One  important  contribution  will  be to  ensure 
that those who take financial risks on behalf of others hold more capital. However, regulation 
must not be seen as a panacea for future financial crises. Good banking is essential for a 
sound and stable economy. Resilient banks are the first line of defence against shocks to the 
financial system. This is a responsibility I hope and believe Norwegian banks are willing to 
take. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   7
 8 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   9
    10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
