Benoît Cœuré: Retail payments at a crossroads 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at a joint conference by the European Central Bank and the Bank of France “Retail payments 
at a crossroads – economics, strategies and future policies”, Paris, 21 October 2013. 
 I wish to thank Monika Hempel for her contributions to these remarks. I remain solely responsible for the opinions 
contained herein. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure for me to make some introductory remarks at this conference on the 
different roads that may lie ahead for retail payments. But first of all, I would like to thank the 
Banque de France for organising this conference jointly with the ECB, and for hosting it. I am 
also grateful to Christian Noyer for opening this event. I am sure we will spend two fruitful 
days  having  some  valuable  discussions  and  exchanges  on  the  economics,  strategies  and 
policies of retail payments. 
Four  years  ago,  in  2009,  the  ECB  and  the  De  Nederlandsche  Bank  organised  the  first 
conference of this kind.1 The idea behind the conference was to foster the dialogue between 
academics  and  policy-makers  in  the  field  of  retail  payments.  The  second  conference  was 
organised with the Oesterreichische Nationalbank in 2011.2 And this is the third conference 
in the series. It shows that we are committed to build on the progress achieved and keep the 
dialogue going. 
Before the crisis, the retail payments business went largely unnoticed as a substantial source 
of revenue in banking. During the crisis, as was outlined in the 2009 conference, the retail 
payments business had been resilient, providing reliable and regular revenues. As a result, 
the subsequent realisation that banks with more stable funding models were better able to 
cope with the crisis has led in recent years to a greater recognition of the importance of retail 
banking and retail payments. 
Indeed, one of the conclusions drawn at the 2011 conference was that retail payments have 
also become more socially relevant. Businesses and individuals must have cheap and easy 
access  to  basic  retail  payment  services  in  order  to  pursue  their  economic  activities.  The 
further development of retail payments is a key factor in financial inclusion. I will come back 
to this issue later today in my panel discussion. 
That  said,  the  social  costs  of  retail  payment  instruments,  including  cash  and  non-cash 
payments,  remain  substantial,  as  a  recent  ECB  study  has  shown.  Those  costs  amount  to 
almost 1% of GDP in Europe, with considerable differences from country to country.3 
In the title of the conference we say that retail payments are at a crossroads. This means 
that the road we now follow will profoundly affect retail payment economics, strategies and 
policies. Different roads may appeal in different ways to the various economic actors. One 
possibility would be to preserve the status quo and to implement only the changes needed to 
comply  with  the  existing  regulatory  framework.  Alternatively,  we  could  follow  a  road  less 
travelled. Here, new economic actors may emerge and consumers may start to utilise more 
                                                
1   Retail Payments – Integration and Innovation. A Joint Conference by the ECB and De Nederlandsche Bank, 
25–26 May 2009. 
2   The Future of Retail Payments: Opportunities and Challenges. A Joint Conference of the European Central 
Bank and the Oesterreichische Nationalbank 12–13 May 2011. 
3   Schmiedel, H., Kostova, G. and Ruttenberg, W. “The Social and Private Costs of Retail Payment Instruments 
– A European Perspective”. ECB Occasional Paper No 137, September 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
personalised,  simple  and  secure  payment  services  and  applications  offered  by  the 
information  and  consumption  channels  they  increasingly  (and  in  some  cases  even 
exclusively)  use,  i.e.  smartphones  and  the  internet.  Also,  payment  service  providers  may 
push  forward  into  the  uncharted  territories  of  further  retail  payments  integration  and 
innovation. 
I would like to elaborate on the different roads ahead, considering integration first and then 
innovation. 
Retail payments integration 
Without wanting to pre-empt, Michel Barnier’s keynote speech on retail payments and their 
contribution to the Single Market, let me say that retail payment integration in the euro area  
– and in Europe – has made progress. Although there is still considerable effort to be made, 
we are just a few weeks away from completing the migration to new European schemes that 
have been developed for credit transfers and direct debits. It’s a big step forward. 
But progress in the field of cards has been slower. We are still far from a situation where “any 
card can be used at any terminal”. To ensure a level playing field, national borders for cards 
licensing, issuing and acquiring have to disappear, and the consistent implementation of the 
separation of scheme management and processing has to be ensured. Some movement in 
this area is expected to result from the revised Payment Services Directive and Regulation 
on  interchange  fees  for  cards.4  Regarding  standardisation,  despite  some  progress  made 
during the last years, further work is required as recommended by the Eurosystem. 
The  question  remains  whether  in  future  retail  payments  integration  will  be  mainly  a 
compliance-driven process or whether it can be pushed further, making electronic payments 
more  widely  used.  Currently,  there  is  evidence  of  cross-country  convergence  in  the  euro 
area, especially for cards, direct debits and credit transfers, and the speed of convergence 
has clearly accelerated for most of the payment instruments studied since the introduction of 
the single currency.5 
Despite  the  convergence,  however,  there  are  still  large  differences  in  payment  behaviour, 
starting with a choice between cash or cashless payments and then, say, selecting from a 
range of cashless payment instruments. For instance, the persistent use of cheques in some 
countries,  even  though  it  is  steadily  declining,  shows  that  payment  behaviour  changes 
slowly.  This  also  means  that  cash  remains  an  important  means  of  payment  in  the 
foreseeable future. Therefore, the Eurosystem continues in its efforts to protect the integrity 
of the euro banknotes and stay ahead of counterfeiters, e.g. with the introduction of our new 
series of euro banknotes, called the Europa series. 
Promoting  further  integration  of  retail  payments  in  Europe  is  seen  as  economically  and 
socially advantageous. There is empirical evidence that initiatives to integrate and harmonise 
retail payment markets boost trade and consumption and benefit the whole economy.6 Data 
from  27  markets  in  Europe  between  1995  and  2009  confirms  that  the  shift  to  efficient 
                                                
4   Proposal for a Directive on payment services in the internal market (“PSD2”, European Commission / 24 July 
transactions 
for  card-based  payment 
interchange 
2013)  and  Proposal 
(“IF Regulation”, European Commission / 24 July 2013). 
for  a  Regulation  on 
fees 
5   See  Martikainen,  E.,  Schmiedel,  H.  and  Takalo,  T.  “Convergence  in  European  Retail  Payments”.  ECB 
Occasional Paper No 147, June 2013.Sigma convergence and conditional beta convergence for cash, debit 
card, credit card, direct debit, credit transfer, cheque and e-money in the 27 EU countries for 1995–2011 were 
measured. 
6   Hasan, I., De Renzis, T. and Schmiedel, H. “Retail Payments and the Real Economy”. ECB Working Paper 
No 1572, August 2013. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
electronic retail payments stimulates overall economic growth, consumption and trade. This 
effect is most pronounced for card payments, followed by credit transfers. 
Deeper  integration  of  retail  payments  is  expected  to  bring  about  more  price  convergence 
among cashless retail payment instruments in the euro area, making those instruments more 
affordable and thereby promoting financial inclusion. 
The Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA) is instrumental in this respect. Later this week, the 
ECB  will  publish  the  second  SEPA  migration  report,  which  will  highlight  the  progress 
accomplished  and  the  remaining  challenges  as  we  come  closer  to  the  SEPA  end-date  of 
1st February  2014  for  migration  to  pan-European  payment  instruments.  As  recalled  by  the 
SEPA Council at its 23rd September meeting, the SEPA migration requirements set by law 
have  to  be  fully  respected  without  exception.  Looking  beyond  the  end-date,  the  ECB  will 
establish  and  chair  the  Euro  Retail  Payments  Board  (ERPB)  as  successor  of  the  SEPA 
Council to contribute to and to facilitate the creation of an integrated, competitive, innovative 
and  level-playing  field  market  for  euro  retail  payments.  The  ambition  is  for  the  ERPB  to 
achieve a wider membership, strengthened mandate and a more output-driven approach. I 
look forward to an active participation of the European Commission. 
At present, financial inclusion is lower in those countries which make less use of cashless 
retail payment instruments.7 Giving more people, especially those on lower incomes, access 
to  financial  services  not  only  adds  to  economic  growth,  but  also  plays  a  part  in  reducing 
income inequality and poverty. In this way, it can help to achieve higher social welfare. At the 
same  time,  it  can  integrate  payment  flows  that  currently  exist  outside  the  formal  financial 
sector  and  strengthen  the  social  role  of  banks.  This  matters  enormously  as  Europe  is 
emerging from a protracted crisis that has put its social model under strains and shattered 
public trust in the financial industry. 
To sum up, I would say that there are strong economic, social and political reasons for retail 
payment  service  providers,  users  and  regulators  to  aim  for  further  retail  payments 
integration.  European  regulation  is  essential  in  paving  the  way,  but  there  are  many  other 
roads to follow for providers and users to reap the full benefits. 
Retail payments innovation 
As I said earlier, e-commerce and new communication and information media have set new 
challenges  in  terms  of functionality  and  security for retail  payments. They  have  also  given 
providers  of  payment-related  services  new  opportunities  to  compete.  These  chances  are 
valuable because, as we know, competition is good for business, i.e. it should provide users 
with more choices and better services. 
Unfortunately, these opportunities have not yet been fully exploited by the different market 
players. Innovative retail payment solutions in the euro area are still largely being provided 
by  non-bank  service  providers,  mainly  for  the  payment  initiation  phase.  Banks  –  the 
traditional  payment  service  providers  –  are  at  a  crossroads.  They  can  either  try  to  defend 
their existing products and leave this business segment to non-bank providers, or they can 
become more open and innovative. If they go down the first road, they risk ending up in the 
unpleasant situation of, say, bookshops confronted with the rise of online competitors. The 
ability to maintain a diversified business model, including through retail banking, will be key 
to the profitability and resilience of the European banking industry. 
                                                
7   Around  58  million  consumers  over  the  age  of  15  in  the  EU  do  not  have  payment  accounts.  The  share  of 
consumers without payment accounts is highest in RO, BG, PO, IT. (Source: Measuring Financial Inclusion, 
The Global Findex Database, World Bank, April 2012). The share of cash payments as a percentage of the 
number of payments in each country is highest in GR, BG, RO, IT (Source: Schmiedel, H., Kostova, G. and 
Ruttenberg, W. “The Social and Private Costs of Retail Payment Instruments – A European Perspective”. ECB 
Occasional Paper No 137, September 2012). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
One reason for adopting a defensive posture may be that, until recently, most banks heavily 
relied on interchange fees for cards in their business model. But this business model is being 
increasingly  challenged  in  a  number  of  countries  and  jurisdictions.  I  mentioned  earlier  the 
proposal for a Regulation on interchange fees for cards. This has the potential to break the 
stalemate that has occurred not only in the cards dossier but also on the innovation front. 
Transparency  and  clarity  with  respect  to  the  real  costs  and  benefits  of  cards  and  other 
payment  instruments  are  vital  for  a  harmonised  and  innovative  European  retail  payments 
market. 
Another reason for a defensive posture may be that banks face a coordination issue within 
their own organisations. For one thing, retail payments are often perceived as a cost centre, 
not as a profit centre. Moreover, innovations in retail payments require investments in IT as 
well as the will to challenge well-established and profitable business models. Clearly, these 
are not easy things to do in times of financial distress. 
In  the  end,  whoever  provides  innovative  payment  services  should  be  mindful  of  two  key 
issues. First, those services should be safe and protected against misuse. For instance, it is 
necessary  that  clear  conditions  are  established  under  which  payment  initiation  services 
offered by third party service providers can use access to existing online banking systems. 
Second, innovative services should have the potential to become pan-European solutions. If 
we do not think about the European dimension right from the start, in a few years’ time we 
will  face  all  the  problems  of  having  to  merge  multiple  national  solutions  into  a  European 
framework. 
I  said  earlier  that  retail  payments  integration  brings  benefits.  The  same  thing  applies  to 
innovation.  Fostering  retail  payments  innovation  is  socially  important  as  it  should  help  to 
lower  costs  and  reduce  entry  barriers,  and  promote  financial  inclusion  among  the 
underbanked and the unbanked. 
Conclusion 
I have only touched upon a number of very important issues. I am confident that today and 
tomorrow,  these  issues  will  be  explored  in  greater  depth.  Taken  together,  the  speakers, 
panellists, chairs and discussants at this conference as well as you in the audience possess 
a vast body of knowledge and expertise. If all those assets are put to good use in choosing 
the future direction, I am confident that the right road will be found. 
Retail payments have reached a turning point as regards integration and innovation. As in 
the  famous  poem  by  Robert  Frost,8  the  road  that  will  be  travelled  by  will  make  all  the 
difference – economically and socially. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
                                                
8   Robert Frost (1874 – 1963): “The Road Not Taken”. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
