Rundheersing Bheenick: “On the High Street of High Finance…” 
Address by Mr Rundheersing Bheenick, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at the opening 
ceremony of the new Bramer Bank Headquarters, Port Louis, 15 November 2013. 
 It is a pleasure to be here this evening for the inauguration of these impressive new premises 
of Bramer Bank.  
A  prime  location  and  imposing  buildings  have  long  been  at  the  heart  of  the  business 
proposition  of  banks.  The  serious  inroads  of  technology  in  the  banking  space  have  not 
altered the equation for traditional banks. It is hardly necessary for bank decision-makers to 
embrace  tenets  of  economic  geography  and  spatial  theory  to  identify  the  capital-city  as  a 
place to set up shop in Mauritius. Port Louis boasts more branches than any other location in 
the country.  
As a central banker, I welcome this clustering, and the competition that it brings. It is also a 
boon for customers, keen on shopping around for better services. These new premises in a 
tastefully-restored centennial building, on the high street of high finance in Mauritius, in an 
exclusive  area  once  reserved  for  the  colonial  elite,  brings  a  certain  added  prestige  to  this 
bank. Within a radius of fifty metres, we have the grandes dames of banking in the country, 
such as MCB, State Bank of Mauritius, Barclays Bank, and HSBC. Within a stone’s throw, 
we have  SBI, Century Bank and Bank of Baroda. Jostling for space on this very street, in 
look-alike buildings, are ABC Bank and Banque des Mascareignes. Just across the street, 
we can see Afrasia Bank. Which means that 10 of the 21 banks in the country are next door 
to you. Bramer Bank could not have chosen a better location.  
A bold move, indeed! For if there is already a marchand briani1 operating in the street, a new 
one  would  not  set  up  his  stall  on  the  next  corner  unless  he  planned  to  offer  the  best  roti 
chaud2  in  town.  In  the  case  of  Bramer  Bank,  the  move  to  Place  D’Armes  sends  a  strong 
signal to all the big players on the market. With this ultra-modern branch, it takes competition 
to  the  next  level.  Competition  is  something  that  we  at  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  have  been 
encouraging with, if I may say so, some measure of success.  
Mauritius is the eponymous leader in extinct species – and no laggard in threatened species, 
either!  We  have  hardly  learned  the  lesson  of  the  Dodo.  But  when  we  look  at  the 
biogeography  of the  banking  species  over the  last few  years  (that  is  since  I  arrived  in  the 
banking habitat), you will see that the pasture has proved rich enough to support many new 
varieties  of  the  species.  What  is  more,  the  young  biches  are  not  only  flourishing,  but 
successfully challenging the main stags of the herd in their erstwhile chasses gardées. The 
habitat of banking in Mauritius has changed; and Bramer Bank is changing it further.  
Five years ago, the dominant stags in the banking pasture, the four largest banks, held over 
87 % of total domestic private sector credit. In just five years, that share has fallen by nearly 
10 points under pressure from the new breed of banks, of which Bramer Bank is a vigorous 
example,  taking  a  larger  share  of  a  growing  market.  Our  banking  sector  has  indeed 
flourished and met the needs of our growing economy. Today, 13 of our banks are among 
the Top  200  banks  in  Africa,  so  says  the Africa Report Ratings, 2013.  Bramer  Bank  will 
surely carry forward this momentum. 
The British American Investment Group has done a worthy job of transforming Bramer Bank 
into a strong alternative to the mainstream brands. This started with the acquisition of South 
                                                
1  A marchand briani is a food-hawker, selling spicy rice favoured by the locals. 
2  A roti chaud is a flat pancake made from dough, a Mauritian fast-food equivalent.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
East Asian Bank, which it levered up by the merger with Mauritius Leasing. Starting with just 
six branches in 2008, Bramer Bank now has the fourth largest branch network in the country. 
Moving ever closer to its customers, Bramer Bank’s business has grown three-fold in the last 
five years with 21 branches. It tries to live up to its tagline: “the bank that is built around you”.  
I  note  that  Bramer  Bank  has  been  very  mindful  of  our  national  history.  It  has  charmingly 
transformed an historic colonial legacy, into a modern and warm place to offer a tailor-made 
space for its private banking and trade finance customers. 
Private  banking  provides  tremendous  scope  for  growth.  The  latest  World  Wealth  Report 
indicates that the wealth of high net worth individuals grew by 10% in 2012 to reach a record 
level  of  USD46.2  trillion.  We  should  set  our  sights  on  attracting  a  bigger  share  of  global 
private banking business to our shores. I am sure that our banks will take up this challenge. 
Bramer’s private bankers and their private banking customers could hardly ask for a better 
environment than this classic setting to conduct their business. 
Today, it is customers’ evolving needs and technology that are driving the business models 
of banks. An ever-increasing share of bank revenues is now derived from digital channels. 
Banks must embrace new technology as much to offer a better and more efficient service as 
to  resist  competition  from  non-bank  sources,  such  as  telecommunications  operators  in 
mobile payments. We can harness technology to promote greater financial inclusion in the 
country.  We  score  quite  high  in  the  African  continent  in  the  matter  of  inclusion.  It  will  be 
recalled  that,  according  to  the  World  Bank  Study,  Banking  the  Poor,  published  in  2009, 
Mauritius then had the highest density of accounts in Africa, i.e. 2,010 accounts per thousand 
adults, and came just behind Singapore. However, access to banking services is lower than 
suggested by this figure.  
More  recent  data  do  not  give  us  much  cause  for  complacency.  Indeed,  the  latest  Global 
Financial Development Report, published by the World Bank in November 2013, indicates 
that  80%  of  the  population  above  15  years  of  age  have  accounts  at  a  formal  financial 
institution. The comparable figure for Singapore is 98%. Some 20% of the adult population is 
still  unbanked.  A  basic  no-frills  account  should  be  part  of  the  basic  human  rights  of  any 
citizen in a modern monetised economy. We, bankers, have our work cut out for us to make 
finance accessible to every citizen in this country. 
The inauguration of the new branch-cum-registered office of Bramer Bank today comes at a 
time when regulators across the world are struggling to erect more safeguards against future 
global  finance  and  banking  crises.  The  perimeter  of  regulation  and  supervision  is  being 
extended. Supervisory failures are being remedied. An increase in supervisory intensity is on 
the  cards.  The  regulator’s  toolkit  now  includes  macro-prudential  measures.  This  is  a  new 
label  for  a  range  of  policies  and  measures,  themselves  certainly  not  new,  to  address 
systemic  issues,  going  beyond  individual  regulated  institutions.  They  seek  to  ensure  that 
banks do their core job of safeguarding the savings of their customers while optimising the 
allocation of capital. The, global, madness of casino banking is being closed down, but it is 
not forgotten, nor indeed forgiven. For globally we have yet to see just how many of those 
banksters, our rash colleagues abroad, will end in jail, as the multi-billion dollar fines they are 
paying are not nearly the end of this story.  
Happily, here in Mauritius, with judicious regulation, prudent local bankers, and a good bit of 
luck,  we  escaped  the  worst  of  that  phase  of  irrational  trading,  and  set  our  compass  on  a 
more ethical course. Yet, rapid credit growth and asset price bubbles have made regulators 
worldwide  question  their  domestic  micro-  and  macro-prudential  policies  to  cope,  amongst 
others, with the unintended consequences of the lingering low-interest-rate environment. The 
loan-to-value ratio, that we recently introduced, aims to contain speculative pressure in our 
property  market,  which  has  been  pushing  prices  beyond  their  real  value.  First-time  buyers 
will not be adversely affected by these measures for we recognise that first-time buyers are 
an important segment of housing demand. Moreover, the risk of default is minimal as they 
are more committed to honour their obligations. Wider home-ownership is also a source of 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
social stability. This is the rationale for extending the loan-to-value ratio for first-time buyers 
from  80%  to  90%,  which  the  2014  budget  has  improved  to  95%  for  eligible  borrowers, 
subject to a partial state guarantee. 
We also introduced a debt-to-income ratio, for two reasons: first, to prevent households from 
getting  trapped  in  excessive  debt;  and  second,  to  force  borrowers  to  make  informed 
decisions  when  buying  a  property.  These  will  save  them  from  the  sale-by-levy  trap  of 
foreclosures against defaulting borrowers. These macro-prudential measures, together with 
the  adoption  of  Basel  III  early  next  year,  will  do  much  to  improve  the  resilience  of  our 
financial system.  
Over the years, we have been building our financial infrastructure to transform the country 
into  a  respectable  international  financial  centre.  It  is  a  slow  and  patient  undertaking  which 
forces  us  to  keep  abreast  with  international  best  practice.  Occasionally,  those  who  are 
comfortable in what they have been doing so far may feel that we are moving too fast. They 
fail to recognise that we are now operating in a very dynamic environment. We just cannot 
afford to have a domestic financial sector where core elements are resistant to change. We 
are  overhauling  corporate  governance  practices  in  banks,  with  particular  emphasis  on  the 
responsibility of the Board of Directors, on the choice of Board members, and on their tenure 
of office. I have no doubt that the management and Board of Bramer Bank share our belief 
that a sound corporate governance framework is the bedrock on which to build a successful 
bank.  
We expect to initiate a National Payment Switch soon. This will connect all transactions by 
card  and  mobile  phone  to  a  central  point,  and  lead  to  significant  cost  savings  for  all 
stakeholders. It will level the playing field for all banks by removing the barriers to entry which 
the costly initial investments represent for small banks, acting singly. We also recognize the 
importance  of  protecting  depositors  and  we  sincerely  hope  we  shall  overcome  remaining 
pockets  of  resistance  and  set  up  a  national  deposit  insurance  scheme,  which  is  a  critical 
missing  link  in  our  domestic  financial  architecture.  The  bien-être  of  consumers  of  banking 
services is a key concern. Customers are in a weak bargaining position vis-à-vis banks. The 
Task Force on Unfair Terms, that we have set up, is hard at work and will soon come up with 
its  recommendations  on  how  customers  can  get  a  fairer  deal.  So,  these  are  some  of  the 
priority  areas  for  us  in  our  quest  to  ensure  that  consumers  are  treated  fairly  and  get  the 
protection that they deserve.  
As regulator, I would not earn my keep if I did not use the occasion to offer some words of 
advice  to  my  regulatees.  I  am  inclined  to  caution  banks  against  undue  risks.  I  greatly 
appreciate  the  efforts  of  our  banks  in  technological  innovation  but  this  must  not  be  at  the 
expense of any relaxation in controls and risk management processes. By all means, venture 
into new areas but, first, do put in place safeguards to mitigate the potential risks! Banking is 
becoming increasingly transnational and it only takes a click of the mouse for funds to switch 
jurisdictions. We must remind ourselves that the risks of money laundering are ever-present. 
Banks  should  always  be  on  the  alert  to  combat  money  laundering  and  to  prevent  our 
financial  system  from  being  used  as  a  conduit  for  such  crimes.  I  welcome  the  recent 
measures in the budget to combat financial crime.  
My  final  comment  is  prompted  by  a  recent  press  remark  attributed  to  a  local  banker.  The 
banking industry differs in crucial respects from other business sectors and I would expect a 
banker to be aware of it. Locally, the shareholding of non-bank corporates in some domestic 
banks is very significant – which is not permitted in many jurisdictions. The return on equity 
(ROE) in the banking sector is well above those of the real sector – at 30 June 2013, the 
highest  ROE  was  28.6%.  I  am  not  aware  of  any  real  sector  operator posting  nearly  30  % 
returns in 2013, do you? Banks earn returns not just on their own initial equity, but also on 
the deposits which they mobilise from the public, which are far in excess of their own equity.  
Some  banks  have  deposits-to-equity  ratios  of  up  to  2,200%,  that  is,  in  plain  language, 
deposits  are  22  times  the  initial  equity  capital  of  the  owners,  excluding  reserves  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
accumulated  surplus.  The  yields  on  their  assets  go  to  their  bank  equity  holders.  Few 
businesses can leverage their capital that much. It is normal that in return, they are subject to 
tight  supervision  and  occasional  recourse  to  special  levies  to  finance  government 
expenditure. If some are complaining about banking being overtaxed, they can always move 
out of the banking space to other sectors of the economy. I can assure you there is no dearth 
of demand from outsiders to gain entry to the domestic banking scene. 
Let me conclude! I sincerely congratulate the Board, management and staff of Bramer Bank 
on the inauguration of these premises. I wish you success in your endeavours to fulfil your 
priorities for innovation and quality of service, to your customers and to the country. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
