K C Chakrabarty: What, why and how of retail (mass) banking – issues 
and challenges 
Inaugural address by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at 
the Bank CEOs Roundtable organised by CAFRAL, Udaipur, 2 October 2013. 
 1. 
Mrs. Usha Thorat, Director, Centre For Advanced Financial Research And Learning 
(CAFRAL);  Mr.  B  D  W  A  Silva,  Deputy  Governor  ,  Central  Bank  of  Sri  Lanka;  CEOs  of 
various commercial banks from across the globe, other fellow Central  Bankers; ladies and 
gentleman! At the outset, I would like to extend a warm welcome to all the delegates to this 
roundtable, especially the foreign delegates who have travelled to India to be a part of this 
event. It is indeed a privilege for me to address this august gathering assembled here in this 
picturesque  lake  city  of  Udaipur  to  brainstorm  on  a  very  topical  subject  –  finding  the  right 
model for taking retail banking to the masses. I am sure the CEOs present here, would not 
have  spent  a  minute  in agreeing to  be  a  part  of  this  roundtable  as this presents  a  unique 
opportunity for them to learn from the experience of fellow CEOs and pick up ideas that could 
help in their quest for building an optimal delivery model for their respective retail banking 
products  and  services.  Likewise,  I  too  did  not  have  any  second  thoughts  on  accepting 
Mrs. Thorat’s invitation to interact with this eminent group as I viewed it as an opportunity to 
learn about various impediments/irritants that they face while pursuing their brand of banking 
for the  masses.  As  in-charge  of the  department  within  RBI  looking  after financial  inclusion 
initiatives in India, I have always looked forward to joining any erudite bunch of stakeholders 
who are equally keen about promoting access of banking services to the people. As far as 
the Indian banks go, I would say that this seminar is very appropriately timed as our banks 
seek to build on the gains from the first phase of financial inclusion initiatives in India. 
2. 
The very fact that all of you have chosen to take time out of your extremely busy 
schedules to attend this event on retail banking epitomizes the significance this segment of 
banking  has  assumed,  especially  in  the  emerging  markets.  I  intend  to  commence  my 
address  by  highlighting the  context  in  which  retail  banking  has  assumed  such  significance 
amongst the commercial bankers and the regulators/supervisors alike. I would follow this up 
with discussing why the focus on this segment has sharpened now. I would also dwell upon 
the  key  characteristics  of  retail  banking  and  the  pre-conditions  for  its  success  and  would 
conclude by sharing my perspectives on the challenges faced by retail banking segment and 
the way forward. 
Context 
3. 
As you would all agree, the Global Financial Crisis has proved to be landmark event 
in  the  history  of  finance.  The  scale  of  the  crisis  is  unprecedented  in  the  sense  that  it  has 
affected all economies of the world in some form or the other. Of course, the severity of the 
shock and its after-effects has been of differing magnitude for different pockets of the world. 
The regulatory reforms unleashed in the wake of the crisis globally have aimed at making the 
financial sector a more stable arena. The first and foremost of these measures have sought 
to curb the high-risk activities undertaken by the investment/wholesale banking divisions of 
the  banks  through  structural  measures  for  controlling  systemic  risks.  The  crisis  also 
highlighted a heightened need for inclusive growth as a means to ensure financial stability. 
There was also massive outcry about imprudent market practices and an utter disregard for 
consumer  protection  by 
the  banking/financial  system  prompting  moves  by  several 
jurisdictions  to  establish  new  regulatory/supervisory  authorities  for  specifically  looking  at 
customer protection issues. Over the course of the Roundtable when you discuss the ideal 
model for the retail mass banking, it would be appropriate to bear these concerns in mind. I 
must remind you that financial sector continues to be viewed as the “least-trusted” industry 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
by the people and hence as the main stakeholders, it is our bounden duty to aim at restoring 
the lost credibility of our profession. 
What is banking? 
4. 
Before we broach the subject of retail banking, let me begin by elucidating what is 
banking. You must be wondering why I am getting down to the basics. Believe me this has a 
purpose. We  all  understand  “traditional”  banking  as  the  process  of financial  intermediation 
wherein the bank acts as an intermediary between the savers and the borrowers. It accepts 
deposits for the  purpose  of making  loans  to the borrowers  as  also facilitates  payments  as 
part of the country’s payment and settlement systems. The banking industry has, however, 
undergone a lot of transformation over the last three decades. The banks have become a 
virtual  marketplace  offering  among  others,  various  non-banking  financial  products  and 
services  to  the  customers.  Besides the  traditional  sense  in  which  banking  is  understood,  I 
consider banking as an activity of offering other products and services by the banks to their 
own  customers.  My  emphasis  on  the  word  “own”  is  not  incidental.  In  developed  markets, 
banks do not offer products and services to their customers unless they have conducted due 
diligence on the customer in terms of KYC/AML framework. While in the emerging markets, 
we  have  certain  relaxed  KYC  norms  for  ensuring  financial  access  to  the  unbanked 
population, if we have to give a significant push to retail (mass) banking, we would need to 
not  only  know  the  customers,  but  also  their  business  and  risks  associated  with  their 
business. 
Evolution of banking 
5. 
In  the  developed  markets,  banking  over  the  years  has  evolved  through  following 
three distinct phases. These three phases broadly coincide with the level of development in 
the real economy in the respective jurisdictions. 
(a) 
Initial  Phase:  During  this  phase  the  banks  were  primarily  engaged  in  offering  the 
basic  intermediation  service  i.e.  provision  of  savings  facilities  and  credit  for 
productive purposes and also facilitate payment services including remittances 
Intermediate  Phase:  Apart  from  providing  the  services  offered  in  the  initial  phase, 
the  banks  additionally  moved  into  lending  for  consumption  purposes.  The  banks 
also started offering certain para-banking services like insurance etc. The demand 
for such services arises primarily on account of a transition of the economy from an 
investment  (production)  led  growth  phase  to  a  consumption  led  growth  phase.  At 
this stage of development of the economy and the society, retail banking becomes 
relevant. 
Advanced  Phase:  Apart  from  providing  the  services  offered  in  the  intermediate 
phase, the banks have additionally started providing high-end savings & investment 
products, wealth management products, and structured products to both individuals 
and corporates. In other words, in this phase, the banking system additionally starts 
supporting  the  speculative  activities  over  and  above  for  the  production  and 
consumption  activities.  Private  banking,  an  advanced  version  of  retail  banking  for 
“classes”, becomes relevant at this stage. 
(b) 
(c) 
What is retail banking? 
6. 
Let me pose a fundamental question to you all – What is retail banking? The answer 
to the question might sound all too obvious, but let me tell you, there would, perhaps, be as 
many different perceptions about this as the number of participants here. Why only here? I 
have observed that across the globe also there is no clear understanding about the ambit of 
retail banking. Therefore, before we head into the issues proper, I would also like to define 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
“retail  banking”  and  draw  an  outline  of  its  ambit  to  ensure  that  all  of  us  share  a  similar 
understanding of the subject that we are set to discuss this evening. 
7. 
Retail  Banking  refers  to  provision  of  banking  products  and  services  offered  to 
individual customers, typically for non-entrepreneurial purposes. Let me make another point 
about banking. On the liability side, banking has invariably always been “retail” i.e. the banks 
have raised resources from a large number of retail depositors. In that sense when we talk 
about retail banking, our focus is on the asset side i.e. lending to the retail segment. Thus, on 
the whole, retail banking involves offering of products both sides of the balance sheet e.g. 
fixed, current / savings accounts on the liability side; and mortgages, loans (e.g., personal, 
housing, auto, and educational) on the asset side. Additionally, retail banking also involves 
offering  of  credit  cards,  depository  services  and  other  para-banking  products  and  services 
viz.  insurance  products,  capital  market  products  etc.  to  individuals.  Thus,  retail  banking 
services broadly corresponds to the banking services providing in the intermediate phase of 
evolution  of  banking.  It  is  contextual  to  mention  here  that  real  economies  in  most  of  the 
developing  countries  have  matured  enough  to  demand  products  and  services  offered  not 
only  during  the  intermediate  phase  but  also  during  the  advanced  phase  and  hence  retail 
banking,  embracing  all  products  and  services  relating  to  consumption  and  speculative 
function of the economy, has become relevant in these jurisdictions. 
8. 
Retail  banking  is  the  most  visible  face  of  banking  for  the  general  public.  These 
services are typically offered at the physical brick-and-mortar branches and at the ubiquitous 
ATMs. The delivery channel for retail banking is now no  longer restricted to branches and 
ATMs but also spans telephone and the fastest growing channel i.e. internet. In fact, some 
retail  banks  in  the  west  operate  solely  via  the  internet  and  do  not  have  facilities  to  serve 
customers  at  physical  outlets.  Generally,  however,  the  banks  that  focus  purely  on  retail 
clientele are relatively few and retail banking activities are generally conducted by separate 
divisions within banks. 
Typically, retail banking services begin with a target clientele which is the common 
9. 
masses and it slowly graduates through a stage which can be called as “class retail banking.” 
The  “mass  retail  banking”  is  the  stage  in  which  the  bank  provides  standardized  banking 
products and services to its customers. In this phase the banks attempt to build a sufficiently 
broad  customer  base  which  can  serve  as  a  stable  source  of  funding.  The  “class  retail 
banking” on the other hand, is the stage in which the bank offers customized products and 
services targeted at a niche customer segment, the high net worth individuals. Retail banking 
focused solely at a niche customer segment may also be termed as private banking. 
10. 
segments of banking is as under: 
A graphical representation of the positioning of mass retail banking vis-à-vis other 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
 11. 
As I mentioned earlier, there is a lot of confusion around the ambit of retail banking. 
This  is  not  really  confined  only  to  emerging  markets  but  is  a  global  phenomenon.  The 
confusion  primary  emanates from  whether the  banking  services  offered for  entrepreneurial 
purposes should be considered as part of retail banking or not. Many of the banks include 
the banking services extended to small borrowers and SME clients also as part of mass retail 
banking.  In  my  view,  the  retail  banking  in  its  most  basic  form  is  only  about  servicing  the 
individuals (mostly the masses) for non-entrepreneurial purposes. The retail banking over a 
period  of  time  can  make  a  transition  to  class  banking  and  banking  for  entrepreneurial 
purposes  for  the  individuals,  for  agriculture  or  for  small  businesses  (SMEs).  This  is 
particularly  so  as  many  aspects  of  retail  banking  in  terms  of  delivery  of  services  (large 
number of small value transactions) and risk management practices (scoring model, model 
based  capital  assessment)  are  also  applicable  to  small  businesses  run  by  individual 
entrepreneurs. 
Characteristics of retail (mass) banking 
12. 
Let me now turn to the major characteristics of the retail banking. The products and 
services under retail banking are supposed to be standardized. In other words, they are “off-
the-shelf” products without any customization for individuals. For comparison sake, I would 
equate them to products offered at a branded retail store. At retail stores, you pay for what 
you see and what is mentioned on the price tag. There is uniformity, transparency and non-
discrimination about the products and services offered. Hence, the products offered by retail 
banks also should have similar characteristics. Further, retail banking products are offered 
across  multiple  channels  and  at  multiple  places  (branch,  internet,  ATM,  telephone).  The 
banks  have  to  aim  at  delivering  these  services  in  the  most  efficient  manner.  As  the  retail 
(mass) banking involves reaching out to a group of individuals, the banks also need to have 
appropriate  systems,  structure,  manpower  and  processes  in  place  to  deal  with  the  group, 
group characteristics, group behaviour and group dynamics for the target clientele. 
Pre-conditions for success of retail banking 
Having  outlined  the  contours  of  what  is  retail  banking  and  what  are  the  typical 
13. 
characteristics of retail banking; let me now turn to some of the necessary preconditions for 
the success of retail banking. To my mind, the most important pre-requisite for retail banking 
to  succeed  is  the  presence  of  an  efficient  delivery  mechanism.  What  essentially  binds 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
for 
the  success  of  retail  banking 
The  second  essential  pre-condition 
customers to their bank is quality of services offered, the fairness and affordability of pricing 
and the promptness of service. While there is not much scope for the banks to differentiate 
their  product  and  service  offerings  in  so  far  as  the  basic  products  are  concerned,  it  is 
important for the bank to enhance the customer experience by ensuring that the services are 
made available whenever and wherever the customer demands them. Further, the banks can 
bring down their cost of service delivery, if and only if they are able to improve operational 
efficiency. In a nutshell, the banks should be able to deliver the products and services to the 
customers  in  safe,  secure,  prompt  and  cost  effective  manner  by  leveraging  technology.  I 
have analyzed various metrics of operational efficiencies for the banking system across the 
globe  and  I  can  tell  you  that  notwithstanding  the  inter  se  disparity  between  banks  in 
respective jurisdictions, almost all the jurisdictions represented here today need to improve 
their  operational  efficiencies  by  several  notches  to  reach  anywhere  closer  to  their 
counterparts  in  developed  world.  The  positive  factor,  however,  for  our  banks  is  that  the 
downside is limited and hence, the upside potential is tremendous. 
14. 
is 
appropriateness of product and services for the customers. As the banks strive to bring new 
customers into their fold and also to retain the existing ones, they must invest heavily into 
data  analytics  and  assess  what  are  the  appropriate  products  and  services  for  the  specific 
groups of their customers. The banks have to be sensitive about the customers’ needs and 
requirements.  Let  me  give  an  example.  A  migrant  laborer  in  a  metropolitan  centre  and  a 
laborer in a village may have similar balances in their bank accounts, but their requirements 
would  be  distinct  and  therefore,  the  product  offerings  of  banks  to these sets  of  customers 
would have to be different. In sum, rather than focusing on financial worth of the customers, 
the  banks  would  have  to  inculcate  a  habit  of  listening  to  their  customers  and  building 
analytics based on this interaction. 
15. 
The  next  set  of  essential  pre-requisites  relate  to  pricing.  Our  experience  in  India 
demonstrates that the pricing of the products and services –both on the liability as well as on 
the asset side are heavily weighed against the retail customers as a group. In fact, we have 
evidences  of  retail  customers  being  paid  different  interest  rates  on  their  deposits  for  the 
same tenor within the same bank. Similarly, I have seen one particular bank’s lending rate for 
automobile  loan  vary  quite  widely.  I  do  not  know  why  a  standardized  loan  product  like  an 
automobile loan should be priced differently for different customers when it is a secured loan. 
Banks should in such cases upfront decide on whether the customer can be given a loan or 
not and once the lending decision has been made I don’t see any reason for discrimination in 
the pricing of the loan. I do not understand why the banks should be looking to benefit from 
information arbitrage they hold rather than pricing their products transparently. In contrast to 
the situation in developed economies, such problems are more endemic in the developing 
world as here not only the level of financial education and literacy is low, but the financial 
consumer activism is also pretty much dismal. 
16. 
Insofar as the lending decisions in retail banking business goes, I believe the banks 
would need to start using scoring models for assessing the credit worthiness of borrowers to 
bring in greater transparency and efficiency. Credit Scoring model is a statistical technique 
that  combines  several  financial  characteristics  to  predict  the  behavior  of  new  applicants 
based on the performance of previous applicants. At least among the Indian banks, except 
for a couple of foreign banks and new generation private none of the other banks seem to 
employ them. In fact, in my interactions with the bankers I feel that there is lot of misgivings 
about the scoring models and generally people mistake it for rating model. My firm belief is 
that  for  bringing  in  uniformity,  transparency  and  fairness  in  the  retail  lending  process,  the 
banks would need to start employing credit scoring. 
17. 
As  I  briefly  alluded  to  above,  for  the  retail  banking  business  to  thrive  in  the 
developing  markets,  it  is  essential  that  an  effective  consumer  protection  environment  is 
created quickly. As most of you are aware, across the globe, the regulators and supervisors 
are  turning  increasingly  intolerant  of  unfair  market  practices  adopted  by  the  market 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
participants.  We  have  seen  large  amounts  of  penalties  levied  on  banks  by  the  regulators 
mainly for failing to protect consumers’ interests and for unfair practices. In fact, there is a 
growing feeling that the banking regulators/supervisors have proved ineffective in checking 
these unfair practices and failed in effectively protecting consumers. This has culminated in 
creation  of  separate  authorities  for  enforcing  fair  market  conduct  and  for  protection  of 
financial consumers. This transformation has happened in the Netherlands, in South Africa, 
in  Australia,  in  the  UK  and  several  other  jurisdictions.  Therefore,  unless  the  banks  in  the 
developing countries are firmly committed to treating their customers fairly and put in place 
appropriate systems and processes to ensure that, they would be well advised to refrain from 
riding the bandwagon of retail banking. 
Why the growing interest in retail banking? 
18. 
The  growing  interest  in  the  retail  banking  in  the  developing  economies  can  be 
explained on account of a few major developments. The first of them I had referred to briefly 
above and that is transitioning of the economies into the intermediate phase. As I mentioned 
earlier, in the initial phase of evolution of banking, the policy makers focused on ensuring the 
flow  of  bank  credit  to  the  productive  sectors  of  the  economy.  But  over  time,  as  the  credit 
demand  from  the  basic  industrial  and  infrastructure  sectors  have  waned  somewhat,  the 
regulators  have  become  more  accommodating  in  allowing  the  banks  to  lend  even  for 
consumption purposes. The second development that has provided a boost to retail banking 
aspiration  of  banks  is  the  availability  of  enabling  technology.  Since  retail  banking  requires 
mass  production  techniques,  the  advent  of  technology  has  enabled  the  banks  to  design 
appropriate  technology-based  delivery  channels.  Retail  banking  has  also  received  a  thrust 
from the regulators/policymakers’ push for inclusive growth in the wake of the global financial 
crisis. The Governments across the world view banks as the key component in furthering the 
cause  of  financial  inclusion.  We,  in  India,  have  also  been  promoting  a  bank-led  financial 
inclusion model and view retail mass banking as the stepping stone towards achievement of 
universal financial inclusion. The last, but not the least of the reasons for the growing interest 
in retail banking is the banks’ quest for new sources of revenue and new channels for profit. 
Slowly but surely, the banks have realized that the commerce for the poor anywhere in the 
world  is  more  viable  than  the  commerce  for  the  rich  and  hence  they  view  the  excluded 
masses as a potential source of profit in the long-run. Commercial banks cannot ignore the 
adage that the “Future of Banking is Retail Banking.” 
Deficiencies in/ challenges for retail banking 
19. 
Having  spelt  out  what  I  consider  essential  pre-requisites  for  the  success  of  retail 
banking,  let  me  now  turn  to  some  of  the  issues  which  pose  significant  challenge  for  retail 
banks.  To  my  mind,  ensuring  customer  protection  through  transparent  and  appropriate 
pricing  of  product  and  services,  curbing  mis-selling,  understanding  KYC  in  all  its 
manifestations, managing risks, inadequacy of MIS, countering the effects of disruptive new 
technologies, retaining customer loyalty, managing cost and ensuring growth are some of the 
challenges that retail banks have to counter simultaneously at the present juncture. I would 
elaborate on some of these deficiencies/challenges. 
Consumer Protection & Pricing 
(a) 
As  you  would  have  noticed  by  now,  consumer  protection  has  been  a  recurring 
20. 
theme in my address today. To say that the pricing of products and services in the banking 
system  in  India  is  non-transparent  would  be  an  understatement.  Actually,  I  have  several 
examples of pricing being discriminatory, arbitrary and to a certain extent illogical. I do not 
wish  to  elaborate  too  much  on  how  innovative  the  banks  have  been  in  fleecing  their 
customers but let me give you a flavour. There are charges for non-maintenance of minimum 
balance, charges for cheque return and there are charges even where no service has been 
provided – customers not conducting any transactions. I can understand that you charge the 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
customer once for not maintaining the minimum balance that he was supposed. But, why on 
second,  third  and  fourth  occasions?  So  much  so  that  eventually  his  balance  becomes 
negative. Why do you instead not inform him and close his account after the first instance or 
convert it to a basic savings account? In fact, I find another disquieting feature in the pricing 
of  products  and  services  by  banks  and  that  is  poor  subsidising  the  rich.  I  have  not  seen 
banks mentioning the yields to the customers of their deposits or the effective borrowing cost 
for  the  customers  on  the  lending  products.  Why  can’t  the  banks  advertise  their  Annual 
Equivalent  Rates/  Annual  Percentage  Rates  on 
their  deposit  and  credit  products 
respectively?  For  your  retail  banking  model  to  be  successful,  your  pricing  should  be  non-
discriminatory, risk-based, competitive and value added. 
21. 
As  in-charge  of  customer  service  department  in  the  Central  Bank,  every  day,  I 
receive  several  complaints  about  mis-selling  of  products  to  gullible  consumers,  some  of 
which  are  quite  outrageous.  Believe  me,  if  you  wish  your  retail  banking  to  succeed,  you 
would  have  to  address  this  deficiency  at  the  earliest.  Else,  as  I  hinted  earlier,  the 
regulators/supervisors  would  no  longer  be  as  tolerant  in  imposing  penalties  and  issuing 
strictures as earlier. 
Inadequacy of MIS 
(b) 
22. 
A  crucial  import  for  the  success  of  any  business  is  the  accurate,  consistent  and 
granular  information  about  its  various  components.  I  have  highlighted  this  in  the  past  and 
want  to  bring  this  issue  up  one  more  time.  The  information  system  in  the  Indian  banks 
continues  to  be  rudimentary  which  leads  to  impressionistic  decision  making  rather  than 
information-based decision making. The banks even lack the basic information on how many 
customers they have and how many products they have. The data on segmental revenues 
and  segments  profits  are  not  available  with  any  granularity.  Under  the  circumstances,  the 
banks would find it very difficult to make their pricing risk-based. It is crucial, therefore, that if 
the  retail  banking  has  to  be  rolled  out  successfully,  the  banks  would  need  to  build  an 
appropriate MIS. 
Understanding and tackling KYC/AML issues 
(c) 
I mentioned the importance of conducting KYC/AML for banking customers. As you 
23. 
all  know  the  banks  in  the  developed  countries  have  faced  significant  amount  of  penalties 
from  the  regulators  for  their  failure  to  conduct  adequate  due  diligence  on  their  customers. 
Even,  we  in  India,  had  to  impose  penalties  on  some  of  the  banks  for  their  failure  to  have 
proper due diligence on their customers. It is important to understand and appreciate KYC 
requirements  in  all  manifestations-  be  it  for  the  products  on  the  asset  side  of  the  balance 
sheet  or  on  the  liability  side.  Banks  would  also  need  to  be  mindful  about  the  KYC  due 
diligence for the third party products that they sell from their premises/through their delivery 
channel. You have to be increasingly vigilant in the coming days as the trend of forex inflows 
is likely to reverse thereby exposing the banks to more stringent KYC requirements from the 
host countries in the West. 
Managing risk 
(d) 
24. 
The retail banking business involves dealing with a large number of customers over 
varied  delivery  channels  thereby  creating  significant  vulnerabilities  across  banks’  systems. 
These  vulnerabilities  could  be  in  the  form  of  inadequacy  of  internal  guidelines  or  non-
adherence by staff, inadequacy in the technology systems supplied by  vendors, fraudulent 
practices  employed  by  customers,  hackers  etc. While  the banks  have  developed  sufficient 
safeguards to deal with operational risk event associated with traditional delivery channels, it 
is  the  emergence  of  non-traditional  delivery  channels  which  are  likely  to  be  the  pressure 
points for banks going forward. This is already evident in large number of technology-related 
frauds  that  we  have  witnessed  across  Indian  banks  in  the  past few  years. Though from  a 
value view point these frauds are not significant, still from an individual’s stand point they are 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
quite important. The banks would also need to recognize and manage risks arising from mis-
selling etc. besides the other business risks like market risk, liquidity risk, interest rate risk 
etc. Unless, the banks address these issues quickly, even the low-value frauds would have 
the  potential  to  cause  reputational  risk  and  unwarranted  litigation  for  the  banks.  It  is, 
therefore,  absolutely  important  that  the  banks  improve  their  risk  management  systems  to 
address these vulnerabilities. 
(e) 
Countering the effects of disruptive new technologies 
25. 
Retail banking has been most impacted by technology, thanks to the proliferation of 
alternate channels of delivery (ATMs, internet and telephone banking). The pace with which 
consumers in the developing countries have also adopted digital technologies has been quite 
amazing. According to available statistics, by the end of 2011, China and India were ranked 
first and third respective in the global league table for number of Internet users. Also the use 
of  mobile  platforms  for  accessing  internet  has  been  staggering:  in  China,  65  percent  of 
mobile-phone users regularly access the Internet via their phones, while in India, mobile-only 
web browsers are expected to comprise 55 percent of the total Internet user base by 2015. 
As  a  corollary,  the  use  of  traditional  delivery  channels  for  accessing  banking  services  has 
seen a perceptible decline. According to a McKinsey Personal Financial Services survey, in 
2011, in both the emerging and developed markets in Asia, there was a significant decline 
(more than 25per cent) in the number of consumers visiting branches for accessing banking 
services  than  in  earlier  years.  Likewise,  the  use  of  digital-channel  for  accessing  banking 
services  also  showed  significant  increase  (in  excess  of  35  per  cent). While  the  number  of 
bank customers in India and few other developing countries may still be low, but the banks 
have to be cognizant of this emerging trend and quickly adjust to the new paradigm where 
more  and  more  of  their  customers  move  online  for  accessing  banking  services.  As  the 
demographic  changes  take  place  the  “technology  acceptors”  will  soon  outnumber  the 
“technology deniers” and banks have to use this short transitory period to adequately equip 
themselves to manage the disruptions arising out of this alternate delivery channel. Further, 
since  the  internet  is  available  on  a  “24  by  7”  basis,  the  banks  would  have  to  substantially 
invest in appropriate technology and ensure that their service offerings are available round 
the clock with minimal downtime. While the use of technology-aided delivery channels has 
grown  multifold,  so  has  the  scope  for  fraudulent  transactions  through  impersonations  and 
identity  thefts.  Banks  would  also  need  to  quickly  put  in  place  lasting  technology-based 
solutions to thwart the efforts of fraudsters and minimize the customer complaints. As the use 
of  new  delivery  channels  gets  more  popular,  the  banks  would  need  to  ensure  that  their 
customers continue to have good experience with their service offerings and remain loyal to 
them. 
(f) 
Continuing growth 
26. 
I  don’t  think  growth  is  as  much  a  challenge  for  the  retail  banks  in  developing 
economies as in the developed economies. Even with our concerted efforts on increasing the 
banking penetration and bringing more and more adult population under the formal financial 
system over the last 6–7 years, more than half of the target population remains uncovered. 
Of  the  6  lakh  plus  villages  in  India,  as  on  March  2013  only  about  2.68  lakh  villages,  had 
access to banking service either through a branch mode, a banking correspondent or other 
channels.  Similarly,  the  credit  penetration  from  the  banking  system  in  the  country  is 
abysmally low at about 10%. In absence of access to formal sources of finance, the alternate 
cost of funds for the people is exorbitantly high. As the pricing of loans no longer remains 
restricted  due to  any  regulatory/  government fiat, the  banks  are free  to reasonably  charge 
their customers. All this means that the retail banks have a huge potential to grow in India 
over time. I believe that the other jurisdictions represented here also face similar conditions 
in their respective countries. I would, therefore, argue that the challenge for the retail banks 
is  not  finding  new  customers  or  new  markets;  it  is  more  of  a  mindset  issue.  The  Top 
Management and the Board of the banks need to get convinced that financial inclusion as a 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
viable  and  profit-making  business  proposition  and  pursue  that  objective  with  a  missionary 
zeal. 
Way forward 
27. 
As  I  mentioned  a  little  while  back,  there  is  little  to  differentiate  between  basic 
products  and  services  offered  by  retail  banks.  Having  conceded  that,  packaging  and 
branding of products and services are going to be the key differentiator between banks. The 
banks would have to invest quite a lot in innovation, research and product design so as to 
keep  their  product  and  service  offerings  relevant  and  contemporaneous  to  emerging 
customer needs. They would have to rummage through huge amount of customer data that 
gets generated every day in course of transactions and use appropriate analytics to develop 
products  in  keeping  with  changing  customer  preferences.  In  this  context,  banks  can  also 
think in terms of giving a dedicated platform of their webpage to the customers to solicit their 
views/ requirements. 
28. 
As  competition  gradually  brings  down  the  spreads  and  the  profitability,  the  banks 
have  to  continuously  work  towards  improving  their  productivity  and  efficiency  so  as  to 
maintain  their  RoE.  Towards  this  end,  technology  would  be  the  key  enabler.  Though, 
technology has been available and been in use in the banking sector for more than a decade 
now, my belief is that it has not yet been exploited to its optimum potential. Technology can 
assist  in  all  spheres  of  banking  activities  –  right  from  planning,  strategy,  MIS,  processing, 
delivery,  monitoring  and  follow  up.  I  feel  that  the  banks  that  can  quickly  conjure  up  a 
technology based cost-efficient delivery model for their products and services would be the 
ultimate winners in the long run. 
29. 
I briefly touched upon the need for developing standardized products and services 
for  furthering  the  retail  banking  initiatives.  Across  the  globe,  retail  lending  has  been  a 
spectacular innovation in the commercial banking sector in recent years. The growth of retail 
lending,  especially,  in  emerging  economies,  is  attributable  to  the  rapid  advances  in 
information  technology,  the  evolving  macroeconomic  environment,  financial  market  reform, 
and  several  micro-level  demand  and  supply  side  factors.  In  the  context  of  retail  lending, 
deployment of scoring models would minimize the subjective element and thereby fast track 
the  decision  making  process.  The  mass  retail  banks  of  today  would  also  have  to  plan  a 
transit path for the class banking and gradually to entrepreneurial banking. 
30. 
Quality of services offered by the banks is going to be another key differentiator. In 
ultimate analysis, providing better service to the customers would be the key to generating 
larger revenue for the banks. 
Conclusion 
31. 
The retail banking space proved to be an oasis of relative calm amidst the tumult 
caused by the Financial Tsunami that the world continues to grapple with even today. The 
customer  deposit  garnered  by  retail  banking  represents  an  extremely  important  source  of 
stable funding for most banks. In this context, it is essential for the banks to keep pushing the 
frontiers of innovation and experimentation in the retail banking space to survive and also to 
remain relevant. One of the most essential elements of a strong customer bank relationship 
is the bank’s understanding of customer needs and preferences. However, with the massive 
increase  in  their  size  and  their  customer  base,  the  banks  have  slowly  drifted  away  from 
understanding  their  customers’  needs  and  preferences  closely.  Further, the  proliferation  of 
alternate  delivery  channels  has  necessitated  that  banks  build  their  presence  across  all 
channels  (omni-channel  presence)  to  offer  their  services  to  their  customers.  As  the  banks 
can’t  probably  dictate  that  their  customers  chose  specific  channel,  the  challenges  for  the 
banks is to design products/systems which are channel/segment agnostic. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
32. 
While retail banking offers phenomenal opportunities for growth, the challenges are 
equally  daunting.  The  exacting  regulatory  requirements  on  the  consumer  protection  front, 
risks from a slowing global economy and increasing customer expectations mean that banks 
must innovate to grow. How far the mass retail banking of the future would be able to fulfil its 
socio-economic  objectives  would  in  a  large  measure  depend  upon  the  willingness  of  the 
banks to innovate and reform their business processes and structures for this cause. It is in 
the banks’ own interest to be alive to the customers’ interests; else they might have to face 
stiff regulatory sanctions. Post crisis, several jurisdictions in the developed world have seen 
public  demands  for  ethical  pricing.  In  this  Facebook  and  Twitter  age,  the  banks  cannot 
remain  oblivious  to  the  power  of  the  social  media  which  wields  enough  clout  to  forcibly 
reform the outliers through negative publicity. Only such retail banks, who inculcate ability to 
churn  out  innovative  and  differentiated  products  by  harnessing  cutting-edge  technology, 
greatly  improve  their  productivity  and  efficiency,  bring  a  fair,  transparent  and  non-
discriminatory  pricing  and  demonstrate  a  commitment  towards  fair  treatment  to  their 
customers, would be able to survive and add value to the society. 
I once again thank Ms. Thorat and CAFRAL for inviting me to this roundtable and 
33. 
giving me an opportunity to share my perspectives on a very topical subject for the banks as 
well as the regulators and policy makers. I hope that over the course of next two days as you 
deliberate on the nuances of retail banking, you would reflect on some of the issues that I 
have raised in my address today. I wish the roundtable all success. 
Thank You! 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
