G Gopalakrishna: The importance of customer service 
Speech by Mr G Gopalakrishna, Executive Director of the Reserve Bank of India, at the “Axis 
Champions Awards”, Mumbai, 1 October 2013. 
 I acknowledge with thanks contribution of Shri R Kesavan, GM, Dept. of Banking Supervision, RBI, Central Office 
in preparing this speech. 
Dr. Sanjiv Misra, Chairman Axis Bank, Smt. Shika Sharma, MD and CEO, Sr. Executives and 
ladies and Gentlemen, I have great pleasure in being a part of an event that hosts and toasts 
achievers  who  have  excelled  and  left  an  indelible  impression  on  customers  by  dint  of 
exemplary work and service. I must congratulate Axis Bank for instituting these awards and 
felicitating their personnel, which I am sure will spur them on to better their own record and 
possibly  also  inspire  many  more  to  follow  the  example.  Banking  is  essentially  a  service 
oriented industry and no service is deemed complete unless it is accompanied by satisfaction 
of the people who avail the service. Customer satisfaction and customer protection are the 
hallmarks  of  banking  service.  Regulators  and  supervisors  across  the  financial  world  have 
built policy edifices on strong foundations of consumer protection and customer service. In 
this  context,  it  is  indeed  a  commendable  initiative  on  the  part  of  the  bank  to  train  the 
employee  to  focus  on  customer  service  and  reward  exemplary  service  rendered  by 
employees. I am sure that the bank will reach even greater heights in customer service while 
simultaneously enhancing the skills of personnel in this area. 
Attributes  of  customer  service  have  changed  over  the  years.  Customers  are  more  aware, 
there  is  a  predominance  of  masses  seeking  tangible  action  to  ensure  that  their  rights  as 
customers  are  upheld.  More  importantly,  customers  are  becoming  increasingly  aware  of 
Banking Ombudsman schemes, legal channels of redressal, consumer courts etc. The same 
has also been made possible on account of leaps that information technology has taken over 
the last one decade with information on the above channels being available widely. Banking 
penetration through use of technology and the increase in number of non – face – to – face 
transactions  adds  a  different  dimension  to  the  customer  care  paradigm.  Banking  has  truly 
become  24  X  7  locally  and  globally  as  well.  These  attributes  have  brought  in  more 
challenges than we had earlier assumed and banks have been compelled to not only live up 
to contemporary expectations but also look at enhancing skill-sets in information technology, 
human resources and transactional analysis for meeting future needs. It is not without any 
reason that we at RBI specifically institutionalized the customer service aspects by carving 
out an entire Department dedicated to the subject. 
Customer service is not an exact science that can be condensed in pre-defined formulae and 
equations; nor is it a subject where answers to all queries lie in an unequivocal “yes” or “no” 
.Human  nature  is  complex  and  diverse  and  hence  an  approach  of  one-size-fits-all  to 
customer  service  can’t  be  adopted.  The  word  “customer”  has  the  inbuilt  attribute  of 
“customization” – to design, develop and deliver a product as per the customer’s needs. In 
the wake of extensive use of technology we seem to be migrating too much towards products 
and process standardization, which perhaps can lead to mis-selling. Customer service needs 
can thus be best met by a judicious combination of social sciences, HR skills, technological 
innovations and appropriate training intervention. 
In  the  rest  of  my  brief  talk,  I  would  pose  a  few  generic  questions  and  attempt  to  present 
answers. 
What  comes  first  in  customer  service  –  need  or  innovation?  Whether  needs  create 
innovations  or  innovations  create  new  needs?  There  are  arguments  in  favour  of  both 
precepts. While at most times, one could say that need would precede innovation, there is no 
doubt that banks also invest hugely in technology and personal banking initiatives to achieve 
a  better  reach  and  rapport  with  their  customers  to  keep  abreast  with  competition.  In  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
process, they offer new services resulting in the creation of new needs. At the same time, as 
long as the innovation is not understood and appreciated by consumers the efforts of banks 
to expand the customer base and satisfaction may not actually fructify. For instance, while no 
one  can  deny  that  advanced  mobile  banking  or  internet  banking  products  have  enabled 
customers  to  communicate  their  needs  to  banks  and  process  their  banking  requests,  they 
could possibly have not survived if the awareness of such products and facilities were bare 
and minimal. A technology driven solution to customer centric problems will not work where 
customers  do  not  know  how  to  use  such  technology  devices  and  contrivances.  In  such 
scenario, a lot of impetus on customer literacy, education and inclusion would be required. 
Very often, such initiative stems from the regulators who propagate the advantages of using 
paperless  instruments,  electronic  payment  systems  etc.  that  gain  acceptance  from  public 
over a period of time after customers have transcended barriers of reticence, resistance and 
technology.  The  point  being  underscored  is  that,  apart  from  need  alone,  there  would  be 
certain  other  factors  such  as  (i)  willingness  of  customers  to  embrace  customer  service 
methods and innovations, (ii) level of comfort while using an advanced technique including 
technological platforms, and (iii) cost that service providers incur to put in place an advanced 
technique to attract customers. Prominent examples of such innovations used in the banking 
industry,  which  came  to  be  embraced  by  more  customers  willingly  with  passage  of  time 
include  MICR  technology,  electronic  payment  systems  viz.  ECS,  EFT,  NEFT,  NFS,  CTS, 
various  type  of  plastic  cards  etc.  These  products  and  innovations  were  primarily  supply 
driven with a purposeful push by regulators themselves. These products were rolled out and 
banks  were  encouraged  to  make  use  of  these  products  to  render  better,  faster,  safer  and 
secure services to their customers. Thus, at times, in the larger interests of customers and 
the financial world, certain initiatives have to be pushed forward by authorities and a need 
created for them. 
We could, in the same vein, cite financial inclusion as an example, that has been extensively 
driven by the regulators and the Government of India to substantiate the above point. Here is 
thus a classic case of customer need that is “identified” (inclusive banking), targeted(publicity 
and  outreach  exercises,  financial  literacy  initiatives),implemented  (usage  of  business 
correspondents, face to face interactions, exhibitions and fairs to propagate the habit of using 
and  operating  bank  accounts)  and  innovated  (technology  based  transfers  of  funds  to 
accounts [EBT] and the entire “Aadhar” exercise to uniquely identify individuals and embed 
the same in opening/operation of bank accounts by customers). That also leads us firmly to 
the premise that, perhaps in contemporary times, technology at the right time and juncture 
will help in furthering the cause of customer service. 
Is  technology  the  panacea  to  all  customer  service  challenges?  Mostly  yes,  since 
technology  speeds  up  ease  of  access  of  customers  to  service  providers,  enables  easier 
communication and possibly also speeds up operations. However, there is an interesting and 
contrasting  evidence  that  I  choose  to  draw  from  one  of  the  examples  adduced  by  Shri  G 
Padmanabhan,  Executive  Director  in  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  who  made  a  telling 
comment on the number of mobile banking accounts that had been opened in India. While 
the number seemed staggering and really impressive, a comparison with the number of bank 
accounts opened in India revealed that the former was but a relatively insignificant proportion 
of the latter. This thus goes to support the idea that the extent of customer awareness about 
certain  techniques  and  technologies  would,  at  times,  decide  how  effective  an  innovation 
would be. Thus, this presents a contrast to an otherwise appealing concept like technology 
driven  solutions  and  also  highlights  the  need  to  popularize  the  same  with  extra  initiatives, 
features, safeguards and possibly sops too. 
The potential of information technology, however, can positively be utilized better by banks 
and financial institutions in processes relating to prevention of frauds, unique identification of 
customers  for  effective  adherence  to  KYC/AML/CFT  norms  and  generally  putting  in  place 
risk based transaction monitoring systems in the larger interest of consumer protection and 
safeguards. Further, there is an overarching need to integrate technology in the field of KYC 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
that  can  best 
compliance in the present scenario. That is one more reason why RBI  has advised banks 
very  recently  to  implement  e-KYC  across  various  customer  service  points  (CSP)  through 
appropriate  software  solutions 
integrate  UIDAI  defined  Application 
Programming Interface(API) protocols. Thus, it is not need alone that would prompt the use 
of  technology  as  an  option  but  the  associated  security  features  that  would  appeal  to  the 
common man’s psyche and attract him to banking innovations. 
How  does  one  tap  the  common  man’s  psyche?  What  are  the  possible  methods  to 
communicate  with  the  customer?  A  very  obvious  initiative  by  RBI  in  this  regard  is  the 
significant  emphasis  on  Hindi  for  bettering  customer  service.  The  reason  and  rationale  is 
extremely simple and comprehensible. The use of the official language in circulars, customer 
centric pamphlets and brochures, notices and notifications etc. appeal to a wider category of 
people and attract them to banking products. Further, the usage of Hindi has been advocated 
in  banking  technology  as  well  by  way  of  use  of  bilingual  software,  which  would  enable 
customers to access self operated kiosks, electronic platforms and bring them closer to the 
adoption of banking practices. The use of official language, local and vernacular languages 
as well, may also further the cause of financial inclusion, a cause that RBI and banks alike 
espouse  strongly.  I  would  like  to  mention  in  this  context  that  one  potential,  but  untested 
option/method to tap common man’s psyche, is survey to gauge the evolving preferences of 
the customers. 
How  does  the  edifice  of  customer  service  in  banks  work?  Institutional  structures  to 
monitor, implement and innovate in the field of customer service must necessarily factor in 
exact  needs  of  customers  and  suitability/appropriateness  of  products  being  launched  for 
them. The credibility of a bank’s grievances redress mechanism is dependent on the robust, 
responsive and reliable nature of this structure. The number of complaints actually never tells 
the true story. The customers and staff alike must be encouraged to bring on board every 
service  deficiency.  We  seem  to  take  very  defensive  and  evasive  action  when  it  comes  to 
admitting service deficiency. 
While institutionalizing such structures for monitoring customer service at various levels, right 
from  the  Board  to  branch  levels,  RBI  has  always  insisted  on  the  following  aspects: 
(i) customer inclusiveness by co-opting customer members in branch level customer service 
committees to generate feedback, which would in turn, trigger fresh initiatives and inventions 
in customer service and (ii) an appropriate product approval process overseen by the Board 
level customer service committees to determine suitability and appropriateness of products 
being launched so as to target appropriate customer profiles. Further, for any and every kind 
of  service  deficiency,  apart  from  the  grievances  redress  mechanism,  what  is  the 
compensation  policy  that the  banks  have  put  in place?  The  compensation  must  be  timely, 
adequate and effective. In many situations the payment of compensation for lapses on the 
part of the banks is viewed purely from the staff accountability angle, leaving the customer in 
the lurch for months. This attitude must change. 
What  kind  of  balance  can  be  struck  between  competition  and  correctness?  Are 
customer service and compliance mutually exclusive or inclusive? 
Here,  I  would  talk  about  implications  of  compliance  for  privacy,  customer  awareness  and 
customer protection. 
Privacy and compliance 
While uniform application of rules, regulation and direction across banks will possibly pave 
the way for good customer service, there is need for striking a balance between privacy and 
compliance. The recent customers’ resentment of compliance, perceived to be bordering on 
intrusion with regard to updating KYC information is a case in point, as they included details 
like date of anniversary of customers, number of foreign trips undertaken, etc,. Thus, over-
compliance can probably kill customer service. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Customer awareness and compliance 
Another  aspect  that  needs  attention  in  the  context  of  compliance  could  be  customer 
dissatisfaction stemming out of non-comprehension of underlying regulatory and supervisory 
guidelines; this is where customer communication plays a stellar role in assuaging aggrieved 
feelings,  calling  for  leveraging  customer  awareness  for  better  compliance.  Customer 
awareness,  education  and  interactive  communication  campaigns  can  go  a  long  way  in 
redressing  and  minimizing  such  grievances.  Banks  and  RBI  alike  have  established  help 
desks,  may  I  help  you  counters,  grievance  redressal  cells  and  citizen’s  charters  to 
disseminate information with that objective in mind. Thus, the point is that compliance and 
customer  service  have  to  co-exist,  strike  a  balance  with  each  other  and  iron  out 
inconsistencies in application so that the larger good of customers results, aided and abetted 
by able customer communication. 
Customer protection and compliance 
Customer  protection  is  the  basic  premise  on  which  most  regulations  focus.  All  financial 
operations  have  an  underlying  requirement  of  ensuring  customer  protection,  and  in  the 
process,  where  necessary,  co-operating  with  civil  and  criminal  authorities  when  customer 
grievances result in litigation and instituting quick and effective compensation practices for 
customers who have incurred losses on account of negligence on part of banks/frauds etc. It 
is this sense of caution and precaution that has increasingly found a voice in RBI’s regulatory 
and supervisory guidance to banks for optimum use of technology to advise customers to not 
fall  prey  to  fictitious  offers  for  cheap  funds,  prevent  on-line  frauds  and  scams,  advocate 
judicious  use  of  debit,  credit  and  ATM  cards,  not  compromising  security  features  such  as 
passwords  with  a  view  to  prevent  phishing  mishaps  and  deploy  an  adequate  risk  based 
transaction mechanism to serve the best interests of customers. Banks also hugely benefit 
by  adopting  such  precautionary  steps.  While  some  of  these  regulatory  and  supervisory 
missives may be a tad too repetitive, it must also be understood that they are a re-iteration of 
RBI’s concerns to address operational risk in banks, prevent escalation of legal risk in the 
form of disputes and litigation and enhance confidence of customers in banks in the long run. 
Where stricter rigors of compliance harp on safety and security of the customer, there would 
possibly be no harm done if the customer is displeased to some extent. 
Is  complaint  handling  an  art  or  science?  Can  dictates  be  employed  in  such  art  or 
science? Complaint handling, by itself is a complex art requiring references from customers 
being  identified  as  grievances  or  requests  for  information.  Once  the  reference  has  been 
slotted as a grievance, all efforts should be undertaken for prompt and satisfactory redressal. 
Handling  customers  adequately  as  well  as  creditably  requires  more  than  banking  and 
technical  knowledge.  It  requires  humanitarian  and  human  resource  skills  which  can  be 
accentuated and enhanced with training initiatives. Here, I would recall the experience with 
services  of  Direct  Sales  Agents,  employed  by  banks,  which  in  some  cases,  generated 
resentment among the customers. An element of sensitivity and sensibility has to underscore 
the behavior of such agents when banks outsource credit card operations etc. with emphasis 
on  ensuring  appropriate  behavior  by  personnel  involved  in  debt  collection  and  ensuring 
employment  of  fair  and  prudent  processes.  Coercive  actions,  in  the  wake  of  increasing 
customer  awareness  can  throw  open  gates  of  litigation  on  such  grounds  as  negligence, 
mental agony or hurt, defamation, invasion of privacy and trespassing, with all their obvious 
and extended legal connotations. 
When one talks of redressing customer grievances and complaints, an obvious reference to 
the Banking Ombudsman scheme is but inevitable. The scheme operates on the principles of 
mediation  and  arbitration  resulting  in  awards.  In  order  that  such  schemes  function 
unhindered and for the common cause of scores of aggrieved customers, it is imperative that 
banks  implement  awards  passed  by  Ombudsmen  in  right  earnest.  RBI  attaches  a  lot  of 
importance to this function and compliance by banks in this area is monitored through RBI’s 
supervisory  processes  and  appropriate  regulatory  disclosures  diligently.  Thus,  serving  the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
customer satisfactorily is at once, an art, an inexact science as also a mandatory obligation 
governed by regulatory dictate and institutional arrangements to ensure compliance. 
To conclude, Customer service deserves an outlook that puts a check on targets sought to 
be achieved by customer service executives by way of a rigor of compliance with extant rules 
and  regulations.  Profit  seeking  is the  basic  ethos  that governs  any  business  entity  but the 
same cannot and must not override the genuine demands and requirements of customers. I 
am  sure,  the  employees  being  honored  today  have  set  an  example  in  not  just  customer 
service alone but also for adhering to the compliance diktat. I wish them all success in their 
career  and  also  congratulate  Axis  Bank  on  their  endeavour  to  enhance  the  awareness  on 
customer service. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
