DeLisle Worrell: Barbadians have every reason to be confident of our 
economic future 
Op-ed article by Dr DeLisle Worrell, Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados, 31 October 
2013. 
 Barbados is well placed to address the challenging circumstances our economy faces. We 
have  achieved  a  very  high  standard  of  living,  the  highest  among  independent  Caribbean 
countries in the Human Development Index, and on par with industrial countries. We rank a 
respectable 47th of 147 countries in the World Competitiveness Index, and are first among 
Caribbean  countries  in  the  Index.  Barbados’  economic  policy  making  arrangements  are 
superior and our institutions are world class. Barbados’ social and political stability are highly 
regarded internationally, and the country has good physical infrastructure. 
How we make policy: 
The  stability  of  our  dollar  is  foremost  in  the  minds  of  all  Barbadians,  and  the  value  of  the 
currency is protected by the adequacy of the Central Bank foreign exchange reserves. Every 
day  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  top  policy  makers  of  the  Central  Bank  and  Ministries  of 
Finance and Economic Affairs receive a chart of the foreign exchange reserves, and each 
month  this  economic  team  meets  to  monitor  and  discuss  the  latest  developments  in  the 
economy  and  to  make  adjustments  as  necessary.  The  team  produces  an  annual  forecast 
which  informs  fiscal  policy:  the  budget  is  designed  to  match  foreign  exchange  outflows  to 
expected inflows, with a mid-year budget correction, if necessary. 
The recent budget was a world-class effort, which few democracies have emulated: 
A steep decline in our reserves became evident only in May this year and by the first week of 
June Cabinet had agreed on the magnitude of the adjustment that would be necessary. A 
national economic consultation on June 24 secured buy-in from the social partners. This was 
followed by discussions with all stakeholders and the passage of the August 15 budget, by all 
accounts  fit  for  purpose,  of  the  right  magnitude  and  with  appropriate  incentives.  For  a 
democratic process, this was a remarkably swift reaction. 
The growth strategy: 
The Barbados economy is fuelled by foreign exchange. We do four things at internationally 
competitive prices (tourism, international business, rum and green energy) and the foreign 
exchange we earn and save from these is used to fuel the imports we need for production 
and consumption. To grow the economy sustainably, we have to grow the foreign exchange 
earning sectors. Fiscal stimulus is not sustainable, because government doesn’t earn foreign 
exchange.  Growth  is  led  by  the  private  sector,  while  government  provides  incentives  and 
facilitation.  To  increase  the  profitability  of  our  foreign  exchange  earning  sectors  we  must 
improve  the  productivity  of  labour  and  the  efficiency  of  capital,  make  our  products  and 
services superior in every market category, enrich our products (sports, heritage and cultural 
tourism, for example), do targeted marketing and develop new markets. It is critical that we 
improve  service  quality  and  set  our  standards  at  the  very  highest  level.  There  are  many 
success stories in each of these areas and we should always keep them in mind. We should 
celebrate these achievements, and use them as inspiration for what still needs to be done. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The fiscal adjustment: 
The  fiscal  adjustment  is  designed  to  stabilize  the  economy  by  matching  foreign  exchange 
outflows to inflows, and to slow and eventually eliminate the drain on foreign exchange over 
the  next  several  months.  Reserves  are  held  for  the  purpose  of  financing  imports  in  the 
interim, while the measures take effect. We expect reserves to fall during that period, but we 
expect  that  once  inflows  and  outflows  are  brought  into  balance,  our  foreign  exchange 
reserves will return to levels that have been sustained since 2008. Barbados has no problem 
in servicing government debt. Service costs on the external debt are less than 10% for the 
foreseeable future, and the net public sector ratio to GDP is a moderate 62%. 
Barbadians have every reason to be confident of our future: 
Barbadians  have  bested  the  Caribbean  through  strength  of  character,  sound  decision-
making,  and  investing  in  ourselves.  The  quality  of  our  lives  reflects  our  achievement.  We 
have beaten the odds before, and we can do it again; experience has taught us that it is not 
as  difficult  as  it  seems,  once  you  buckle  down  to  the  task.  Patience,  persistence, 
determination and commitment to excellence will win the day. 
There  is  something  that  each  and  every  Barbadian  can  contribute  to  growth:  for 
entrepreneurs  it  is  the  development  and  promotion  of  projects  to  prospective  foreign 
investment  partners;  for  government  it  is  the  upgrade  of  business  facilitation;  and  for 
workers, the improvement of productivity and the development of the Barbadian reputation 
for excellence. 
Finally, the narrative matters. We must together build our self-confidence, by celebrating our 
successes, to give us energy for tackling the challenges ahead. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
