Mario Draghi: Hearing before the Plenary of the European Parliament on the 
occasion of the adoption of the Resolution on the ECB Annual Report 2012 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  a 
hearing before the Plenary of the European Parliament on the occasion of the adoption of the 
Resolution on the ECB Annual Report 2012, Strasbourg, 12 December 2013. 
 President, 
Honourable members of the European Parliament, 
I am very pleased to take part in this debate on the ECB Annual Report 2012. Today is the 
last time in this legislature that I participate in the plenary. This represents a good opportunity 
to take stock of the progress made over the past few years in strengthening the resilience 
and stability of the euro area. 
To introduce the debate, I would first like to review the more recent ECB’s monetary policy 
decisions. I will then address institutional matters of particular interest to your house as well 
as the progress made so far in reinforcing EMU governance. I will thereby address most of 
the issues which the ECON Committee highlighted in its draft resolution on the ECB Annual 
Report. 
ECB’s monetary policy 
Let  me  begin  by  describing  the  economic  environment  of  the  past  years.  The  economic 
recovery that followed the post-Lehman global recession of 2008–09 was aborted in the euro 
area as the sovereign debt crisis took hold. Financial stability was threatened; the viability of 
banks  that  had  survived  the  first  phase  of  the  crisis  was  called  into  question.  Credit  was 
curtailed and the recession that ensued has lasted until the first quarter of this year. Since 
then,  we  have  been  experiencing  a  weak  recovery.  Weak  economic  activity  and  high 
unemployment have resulted in a subdued inflation. Against this backdrop, and in respect of 
our price stability mandate that was assigned to us by the Treaty, we have lowered our key 
interest rates to historically low levels. 
To clarify the orientation of our monetary policy going forward in an exceptionally uncertain 
environment, we introduced forward guidance in July 2013: we stated that we expected key 
interest  rates  to  remain  at  present  or  lower  levels  for  an  extended  period  of  time.  That 
statement was conditional and based on an overall subdued outlook for inflation extending 
into the medium term, given the broad-based weakness in the real economy and subdued 
monetary dynamics. In November we acted upon that conditional pledge by reducing two of 
our key interest rates, as price pressures have diminished further and we anticipate inflation 
weakness  to  be  protracted.  In  keeping  with  these  anticipations,  we  also  re-confirmed  our 
forward guidance in its original formulation. 
Over the past two years our interest rate cuts were transmitted only unevenly across euro 
area  countries,  due  to  the  fragmentation  of  financial  markets  along  national  borders.  To 
address this problem, we adopted a series of non-standard measures. The purpose of these 
was – and remains – a more effective transmission of the ECB’s interest rate cuts, so that 
our  monetary  policy  can  reach  euro  area  companies  and  households.  Our  measures 
addressed those distortions in sovereign debt markets that were due to the redenomination 
risk and alleviated funding pressures of euro area banks. At our November meeting we also 
decided  to  extend  the  time  horizon  for  the  application  of  the  fixed  rate  full  allotment 
procedures  in  our  liquidity  operations  until  at  least  July  2015.  This  decision  provides  our 
counterparties reassurance that the liquidity necessary to re-finance their core activities will 
be forthcoming at our main refinancing rate. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
As a direct consequence, bank lending rates for households and non-financial corporations 
have decreased at the euro area level. In this way, our measures have helped SMEs, too, 
the  backbone  of  the  euro  area  economy.  We  have,  in  addition,  taken  direct  measures  to 
alleviate  the  funding  situation  for  SMEs  through  our  collateral  framework.  And  we  have 
worked with the European Commission to further improve SME financing conditions. 
in  making  our  work 
Institutional matters 
Let me now turn to institutional developments and focus in particular on measures related to 
accountability and transparency. Since our creation we have always gone beyond the Treaty 
requirements 
transparent  and  accessible.  The  monthly  press 
conferences,  which  were  without  precedent  at  the  time  among  major  central  banks,  are  a 
telling  example.  This  year  has  also  shown  that  the  ECB  stands  ready  to  adapt  its 
communication  policy  where  deemed  necessary.  For  example,  we  have  published  the 
procedures  governing  the  provision  of  Emergency  Liquidity  Assistance  (ELA).  We  have 
started  internal  reflections  on  how  to  increase  transparency  of  the  deliberations  in  the 
Governing Council without undermining independent decision-making by its members. 
Our  commitment  to  accountability  and  transparency  has  also  become  apparent  in  the 
Agreement  concluded  between  our  two  institutions  on  the  Single  Supervision  Mechanism 
(SSM). Supervision necessitates a differentiated form of accountability from monetary policy, 
while preserving the independence of the ECB as a whole. The Inter Institutional Agreement 
the  right  balance  between  ensuring  high  standards  of  accountability, 
(IIA)  strikes 
transparency  and  safeguarding  confidential 
the 
implementation of the IIA will open a new chapter of successful cooperation between our two 
institutions. In this context let me also welcome your positive vote on Ms Nouy’s nomination. 
Following her final appointment by the Council, she will become your main interlocutor on all 
matters related to the SSM as of January 1st. 
I would like to also address an issue which, I know, is as much a concern to you as it is to 
me: the gender balance at the ECB. Today, 17% of our management positions are filled by 
female staff. It is clearly not enough. This is why the Executive Board decided this summer to 
introduce gender targets aiming at 35 % women in management positions by 2019. And this 
is not an empty promise. The ECB has started to implement a diversity action plan that will 
help us attaining those targets. 
Let me now share my thoughts on the process of completing EMU. 
I  am  confident 
information. 
that 
Taking stock of the progress made towards a genuine EMU 
As this legislature comes to the end of its term, it is an opportune time to reflect on what we 
have achieved in such a short space of time. Not so long ago the euro area was facing an 
uncertain  future.  In  the  meantime,  doubts  about  the  integrity  of  the  single  currency  have 
dissipated.  Notably,  a  roadmap  for  a  genuine  EMU  has  been  outlined  encompassing  four 
pillars: banking union, fiscal union, economic union and ultimately political union. 
Through a concerted legislative effort the euro area, and the EU as a whole, has been put on 
a  more  stable  footing.  Your  institution  has  made  a  decisive  contribution  to  this  effort.  The 
establishment  of  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM)  represents  probably  the  most 
significant change to the EU since the establishment of the single currency and I am happy 
to  report  the  internal  preparations  are  well  underway.  I  strongly  welcome  the  political 
agreement  on  the  Bank  Recovery  and  Resolution  Directive  you  have  reached  with  the 
Council yesterday night. 
Swift  agreement  on  the  other  key  component  of  Banking  Union  –  the  Single  Resolution 
Mechanism – is of paramount importance. I trust you will succeed in adopting the relevant 
legislation before your term comes to an end. These institutions are essential to implement 
the “single rulebook” in the years to come. Looking ahead we will have a stronger set of rules 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
for  capital  and  liquidity.  We  will  also  have  a  new  toolbox  for  the  resolution  of  financial 
institutions. And we will have stronger national deposit guarantee schemes. 
Banking Union however is not a panacea for eliminating financial market fragmentation and 
fully  stabilising  EMU.  It  is  a  necessary,  but  not  sufficient  condition  to  break  the  bank-
sovereign nexus and restore sustainable economic growth. Equal borrowing conditions can 
only be ensured through the joint implementation of other measures. This not only includes 
continued fiscal consolidation and implementation of structural reforms, but also progress on 
the other “unions”. Only then can we say we have created a genuine EMU. Let us seize the 
opportunity  of  the  next  EP  elections  to  have  an  open  public  debate  on  the  further  steps 
needed to strengthen the architecture of EMU. 
Thank you for your attention.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
