Pentti Hakkarainen: Banking union – where do we stand in the Single 
Supervisory Mechanism? 
Key talking points by Mr Pentti Hakkarainen, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Finland, at the 
working luncheon of the EU Ambassadors, Bank of Finland, Helsinki, 12 December 2013. 
 Accompanying slides can be found on the Bank of Finlands’ website: Slides (PDF). 
We have experienced a series of different types of crises since 2008. Each of them has had 
devastating effects on the real economy. What have we learnt? 
The crises have made it very clear that a highly interconnected financial sector requires a 
stronger institutional framework than what we currently have. 
A problem at one bank can quickly spread to other ones both at home and beyond national 
borders with damaging effects on the real economy and taxpayers. The financial crisis led to 
a sudden stop of capital flows within Europe, as banks withdrew from foreign operations and 
financial integration took serious setbacks. By 2010, it became desperately evident that the 
bank and sovereign risks are tightly interconnected with two-way causality. 
The key lesson we have learnt is that financial crises have devastating effects on the real 
economy, taxpayers and the whole society. Recovery from a crisis is always painfully slow 
and long-lasting. 
Financial trilemma 
All in all, the mismatch between the scope of international bank operations and the national 
supervisory  framework  made  the  situation  extremely  challenging.  With  the  overarching 
objective of financial stability in mind, the situation can be described as “financial trilemma”, 
as Dirk Schoenmaker has proposed.1 
In principle, you can envisage three solutions to the financial trilemma. First of all, we could 
re-nationalize the financial markets. In such a solution, the single market as well as the single 
currency and single monetary policy would be lost. Second, we could just accept the risk of 
financial  instability.  Or  finally,  we  could  work  to  create  a  banking  union,  with  single 
supervision and resolution. 
Only  the  last  one  of  these  is  acceptable.  Institutional  arrangements  for  supervision  and 
resolution need to match the integrated structures of banking business in the real world. 
Banking Union 
In June 2012, EU leaders agreed to deepen economic and monetary union as a remedy for 
the crisis, including creating a true Banking Union. 
The Single Rulebook provides a foundation for the Banking Union. It is based on the idea of 
identical  regulatory  requirements,  such  as  capital  adequacy  rules  for  banks.  These  are 
achieved through European legislation and lower-level provisions, such as binding standards 
developed by the European Banking Authority. The rulebook leaves, however, some leeway 
for  national  authorities  to  impose  stricter  requirements  at  the  national  level  for  macro-
prudential reasons, such as containing real-estate bubbles. 
The greatest progress has been achieved in the field of the Single Supervisory Mechanism. 
In November, an EU regulation came into effect assigning supervisory competencies to the 
                                                
1   Dirk Schoenmaker (2011) “The financial trilemma”, Economics Letters 111, 57–59. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
European Central Bank (ECB). When the ECB will assume its supervisory tasks next year, it 
will have two clearly separated functions – monetary policy and banking supervision. 
Another  important  pillar  of  the  banking  union  is  the  Single  Resolution  Mechanism.  As  you 
know, intensive talks have been going on among Member States on this field. In addition, 
deposit  insurance  schemes  will  be  strengthened  and  harmonised  as  part  of  the  banking 
union. In the future, the Banking Union, when properly implemented, will help us avoid using 
taxpayers’ money for bank bail-outs. 
The Banking Union may also be complemented by structural reforms, as suggested by the 
High-level Expert Group on reforming the EU banking sector.2 The European Commission is 
currently  finalising  its  stance  on  the  issue,  and  further  proposals  are  expected  in  the  near 
future. 
Preparations for Single Supervisory Mechanism 
Today,  I  would  like  to  focus  on  the  status  of  preparations  for  the  Single  Supervisory 
Mechanism  (SSM).  The  EU  Regulation  assigning  supervisory  tasks  to  the  ECB  became 
effective  in  early  November.  Already  well  ahead  of  this  time,  the  ECB  and  national 
supervisors  started  practical  preparations  to  ensure  timely  adoption  of  supervisory 
responsibilities by the SSM. 
As  a  concrete  step,  the  ECB  Governing  Council  nominated  Ms  Danièle  Nouy,  the  current 
Secretary  General  of  the  ACPR,  the  French  supervisory  authority,  for  Chair  of  the 
Supervisory Board of the new Single Supervisory Mechanism. Her nomination was confirmed 
yesterday  by  the  European  Parliament.  A  broader  recruitment  process  for  supervisory 
management positions has also been launched by the ECB. 
The Supervisory Board of the SSM is now about to start its activities as soon as possible, 
most likely early next year. Before the ECB assumes its supervisory responsibilities, there is 
an on-going transition period, during which a comprehensive assessment of significant banks 
is carried out. During the same period other preparations for the SSM are to be completed. 
Before  the  assumption  of  the  SSM  supervisory  role,  the  results  of  the  Comprehensive 
Assessment  and  possible  corrective  measures  for  banks  –  where  necessary  –  will  be 
disclosed. 
In  November  2014,  the  ECB  starts  to  directly  supervise  significant  banks  –  in  close 
cooperation  with  national  supervisors.  In  addition,  while  other  banks  continue  to  be 
supervised  by  national  supervisors,  the  ECB  can  assume  direct  supervision  of  any  one  of 
credit institutions in order to ensure consistent application of high supervisory standards. 
Comprehensive Assessment 
The  Comprehensive  Assessment  is  an  essential  element  of  the  preparations for  the  SSM, 
also stipulated by the regulation assigning the supervisory responsibilities to the ECB (also 
known as SSM Regulation). It should be noted that the SSM Regulation not only requires the 
ECB to carry out the comprehensive assessment, but it also enables the ECB to obtain all 
the relevant information from the national authorities necessary for making the assessment. 
The Comprehensive Assessment has three main goals. First of all, the assessment aims at 
transparency  through  enhancing  the  quality  of  information  available  on  the  condition  of 
banks.  Its  second  goal  is  to  repair  banks’  condition  by  identifying  and  implementing 
necessary  corrective  actions  where  necessary.  Finally,  the  Comprehensive  assessment 
                                                
2   See High-level Expert Group on reforming the structure of the EU banking sector, Chaired by Erkki Liikanen, 
Final Report, Brussels, 2 October 2012. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
builds confidence by assuring all relevant stakeholders that banks are fundamentally sound 
and trustworthy. 
The  ECB  will  conduct  the  Comprehensive  Assessment  in  close  cooperation  with  national 
authorities. The ECB will detail the design and strategy of the assessment exercise, monitor 
its  execution,  perform quality  assurance  as  well  as  collect  and  consolidate the  results  and 
finalise  and  disclose  the  overall  assessment.  National  supervisors  execute  the  exercise  at 
the national level, benefitting from local knowledge, but following common data requirements 
and methodology. 
The Comprehensive Assessment is a truly huge effort, involving around 130 banking groups, 
with  a  very  large  coverage  in  the  euro  area.  For  Finland,  the  Assessment  will  cover  three 
main banking groups, OP-Pohjola Group, Nordea Bank Finland Oyj, as well as Danske Bank 
Oyj. 
The  Comprehensive  Assessment  comprises  three  main  pillars:  First,  a  Risk  Assessment 
Exercise addresses key risks in the banks’ balance sheets, including liquidity, leverage and 
funding.  Second,  an  Asset  Quality  Review  examines  banks’  balance  sheets  based  on 
information at the end of 2013. Third, a Stress Test complements the asset quality review by 
providing a forward-looking view of banks’ risk-absorption capacity under stress. 
The structure of the Comprehensive Assessment also clarifies the frequently asked question 
on the differences between the exercise and previously conducted EU level stress tests with 
clearly identified problems. The key difference is that the separate risk assessment exercise 
and asset quality review are conducted before the stress-test, applying common definitions. 
Three targets can be achieved: 
• 
Banks’  risks  and  asset  quality  are  assessed  in  a  comprehensive  manner  at  the 
Banking  Union  level.  Assessments  are  made  applying  common  definitions,  not 
allowing for diverging national interpretations. 
Sufficient corrective measures can be guaranteed as the ECB in its supervisory role 
will have all the necessary supervisory powers. 
Quality  of  assessments  is  ensured  not  only  by  the  ECB’s  strict  procedure  for  on-
going quality assurance, but also by the involvement of third party evaluators. 
  In addition, a critical approach will be taken in stress-testing on banks’ internal models and 
their own assessments on performance. 
The ECB will conclude the Comprehensive Assessment in October 2014, before assuming 
its supervisory role. The results of the assessment will be published in a single disclosure, 
including all three parts of the exercise. 
The  results  of  the  Comprehensive  Assessment  will  be  followed  by  corrective  measures 
where necessary. Such measures could include, for instance, recapitalisation, also through 
profit  retention,  equity  issuance,  re-orientation  of  funding  sources,  asset  separation  and 
sales.  The  Member  States  will  make  appropriate  arrangements  for  ex  ante  availability  of 
national  backstops  to  be  used  only  in  case  if  private  sources  of  capital  are  insufficient  for 
corrective measures. 
Other preparatory work for SSM 
Alongside the Comprehensive Assessment, a lot of preparatory work is on-going for the SSM 
supervision. 
The  SSM  Supervisory  Model  is  the  heart  of  the  structure  of  the  SSM  activities.  For 
supervisory issues, the ECB decision-making structure is different from the monetary policy. 
Following  the  legal  provisions,  all  key  decisions  are  to  be  finally  approved  by  the  ECB 
Governing  Council.  However,  as  regards  supervisory  matters,  the  new  Supervisory  Board 
will  have  a  predominant  role.  The  Board  will  provide  the  Governing  Council  with  a  draft 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
decision,  and  the  Governing  Council  approves  it  through  a  so  called  non-objection 
procedure.  This  procedure  also  helps  keep  monetary  policy  and  banking  supervision 
separate within the ECB. 
At  the  practical  level  in  the  supervisory  model, the  joint  supervisory  teams  are key  actors. 
Such  teams  are  created  for  each  significant  bank  or  banking  group  that  will  be  directly 
supervised by the ECB. Joint supervisory teams are responsible for day-to-day supervision 
of significant banks. Each team will be composed of staff from both the ECB and national 
supervisors. 
The SSM Regulation requires the ECB to take on the direct supervisory role for banks which 
are deemed “significant” under its provisions. For the identification of significant institutions, 
mapping  of  euro  area  banking  systems  is  necessary.  This  exercise  involves  surveying 
banking group structures and collection of the data on relevant banking groups. 
For  the  legal  dimension  of  the  SSM,  preparations  include  development  of  the  so  called 
Framework Regulation on covering cooperation within the SSM, among other things. In this 
respect, a public consultation is expected to take place during first half of 2014. 
Banking supervision requires a smooth flow of information between banks and supervisors. 
To this end, a high-standard data reporting framework and the associated infrastructures for 
the SSM are being developed. 
Banks’ perspective on SSM 
From the banks’ perspective, the introduction of the SSM means numerous changes. I will 
mention here only a few of them. 
For a cross-border bank, operating in multiple countries within the Banking Union, the single 
supervision effectively simplifies its contacts with the authorities. It will need to work with a 
single  supervisor  and  operate  following  a  single  rulebook.  This  implies  lower  costs  for  the 
bank in complying with the regulatory requirements. 
Common  rules  and  methods  of  supervision  also  have  a  broader  impact  on  competition 
among banks. The banks are treated equally in supervision and regulatory capture can be 
fully avoided, thereby ensuring a level playing field. 
In general, I believe that the SSM will become one of the leading banking supervisors in the 
world, applying the best possible tools for supervision – and developing such tools also for 
other supervisors. High-quality supervision will benefit those banks acting prudently and with 
most efficient business structures. 
Macroprudential policy 
Finally, I would like to point out that alongside the preparations for the SSM, a new systemic 
angle  has  been  added  to  supervision.  Also  through  the  new  EU  capital  requirement 
legislation, macroprudential policy is becoming effective in the EU. 
Macroprudential policy is about identifying, preventing and mitigating systemic risks through 
the  application  of  macroprudential  instruments.  A  key  macroprudential  instrument  to  be 
included  in  the  toolbox  of  authorities  in  the  EU  is  the  counter-cyclical  capital  buffer.  The 
relevant  authorities  may  require  banks  to  hold  an  extra  buffer  of  capital  in  addition  to 
minimum  requirements,  for  instance  if  credit  growth  in  the  financial  system  is  deemed 
excessive. 
Macroprudential policy responsibilities lie  in the first place with the national authorities, but 
the SSM Regulation assigns some macroprudential tasks also to the ECB. In particular, the 
ECB  may  decide  on  stricter  measures  than  national  authorities,  using  the  counter-cyclical 
buffer or other macro-prudential tools provided for by the EU legislation. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
As a conclusion, I would like to end my presentation on a positive note, based on the fresh 
news  we  have  heard  from  the  Ecofin  meeting  held  the  day  before  yesterday.  Discussions 
about the Single Resolution Mechanism seem to be progressing, and we can expect some 
good results from Brussels next week. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
