Carolyn Wilkins: Monetary policy and the underwhelming recovery 
Remarks by Ms Carolyn Wilkins, Senior Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the SFA 
Society Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, 22 September 2014. 
 Introduction 
Good afternoon. Thank you for inviting me. I’m delighted to be here today with this group of 
accomplished  investment  professionals.  What  I  will  speak  about  today  intertwines  your 
professional world with mine. 
Let me start with what we’ve all observed: the recovery from the global financial crisis has 
been  underwhelming,  to  say  the  least.  It  has  left  us  debating  what  kind  of  growth  we  can 
reasonably  expect  after  so  much  disappointment.  It  has  also  left  us  debating  how  central 
banks should conduct monetary policy without compromising financial stability. 
During the crisis, central banks and governments took unprecedented action. They worked 
together to prevent the failure of systemically important financial institutions, and to provide 
exceptional monetary and fiscal stimulus. These policies were successful in preventing the 
worst. 
But  even  this  forceful  policy  response  could  not  prevent  a  severe  and  protracted  global 
recession. Massive amounts of wealth were destroyed. The values of equities and housing 
plunged. The loss to global output was roughly $10 trillion by the end of last year. All told, the 
crisis left the global economy with 62 million fewer jobs.1  
The recovery has had repeated false starts and still faces considerable headwinds. Global 
growth has averaged only around 3 per cent over the past two years. That’s well below the 
average prior to the crisis, and it is unlikely that 2014 will be much better. 
Financial markets are reflecting these lowered expectations. That’s part of the reason why 
long-term interest rates in the major advanced economies, including Canada, are very low. 
Today  I’m  going  to  talk  about  three  important  matters  for  central  banks.  First,  to  conduct 
monetary policy, we need to know how much of this slow growth is cyclical and how much is 
structural. Second, to calibrate our policy we need to know how these factors, taken together, 
are  affecting  the  neutral  rate  of  interest.  And  third,  making  judgments  about  the  impact  of 
these factors is not an exact science. As you know, there is a lot of uncertainty. That is why 
we take a risk management approach to achieving our inflation target. 
Disentangling cyclical and structural factors 
So how much of this slow growth is cyclical and how much is structural? History teaches us 
that  balance-sheet  recessions  such  as  the  world  has  just  seen  are  typically  followed  by 
growth that is much slower than in the wake of a normal recession. The legacy of a financial 
crisis is a heavy burden for any country, and paying down debt impedes normal economic 
growth for a long time.2 This makes the task of disentangling the cyclical from the structural 
more  difficult,  but  it  needs  to  be  done  in  order  to  determine  the  rate  of  non-inflationary 
                                                 
1   This estimation of job losses is relative to trend. See “Global Employment Trends 2014: The Risk of a Jobless 
Recovery,” International Labour Organization, Geneva, 2014. 
2   This pattern has been well documented by Harvard professors Carmen Reinhart and Kenneth Rogoff, among 
others. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
growth. As inflation targeters, the rate of potential output growth matters a lot to us. It is a 
critical input to the appropriate path for policy rates. 
Lost potential from the crisis 
Cyclical  factors  have  clearly  been  playing  a  starring  role  in  this  underwhelming  recovery. 
During the crisis, demand plummeted and so did output. As workers left the labour force and 
firms cancelled capital investments or went out of business, potential output growth declined 
as  well.  We  are  still  facing  headwinds  from  the  deleveraging  of  households,  fiscal 
consolidation  and  uncertainty.  We  estimate  that  potential  output  in  Canada  is  about  3  per 
cent  below  where  it  would  have  been  without  the  recession.  That’s  roughly  $3,500  per 
household. In the United States, where the crisis hit harder, estimates of lost potential range 
from 5 per cent to 13 per cent – that’s US$6,500 to US$18,000 per household. 
Demographics and labour supply 
We also have structural factors weighing on potential. The population is aging, there are risks 
that  some  working-age  people  who  left  the  labour  market  may  not  return,  and  there  are 
concerns that technology is not going to deliver the leaps in productivity that we have seen in 
the past. 
Let’s  start  with  demographic  trends.  Globally,  over  the  next  two  decades,  the  number  of 
people aged 65 and over will rise by more than 80 per cent, from 600 million to 1.1 billion. 
Canada  is  no  exception  to  this  trend.  The  baby  boomers  are  starting  to  retire,  and  so  the 
proportion of the population that is of working age is shrinking. Early retirement is also taking 
people out of the labour force. For Canada, this has subtracted about 0.45 percentage points 
from potential GDP growth over the last five years. 
A  new  wrinkle  is  that  working-age  people  are  also  leaving  the  labour  force.  This  was 
discussed  at  length  last  month  by  central  bankers  at  Jackson  Hole.  The  decline  in  the 
participation rate of young and prime age workers reflects the cyclical effects of a weak job 
market. But these cyclical effects could become structural. After a long search, if you don’t 
think  you  are  going  to  find  a  job,  at  some  point,  you  become  discouraged  and  you  stop 
looking. The longer you stay out of the labour force, the more likely it is that your skills have 
deteriorated and your attachment to the job market has weakened. This is what economists 
mean when we talk about hysteresis. 
Productivity growth 
We know that with a relatively smaller labour force, a nation’s capacity for growth will depend 
on the productivity and creativity of its workers and businesses. Trend productivity growth in 
advanced economies has declined over the past decade and a half – and Canada has lost 
ground compared with the United States and some other countries. Pessimists argue that the 
high  rates  of  productivity  growth  seen  in  the  post-war  era  or  the  late-1990s  are  history.3 
Optimists say that technological progress in areas such as nanotechnology, computing and 
genetic engineering will once again generate strong productivity gains.4  
At  the  Bank  of  Canada,  we  take  a  balanced  approach  when  we  factor  all  of  this  into  our 
views on productivity. We expect business investment to pick up, which will lead to labour 
productivity growth that is a little higher than it was before the crisis. However, it will only be 
about two-thirds of its peak of around 2 per cent in the late 1990s. A similar decline is also 
expected to occur in the United States and the euro area. 
                                                 
3   R. J. Gordon, “The Demise of U.S. Economic Growth: Restatement, Rebuttal, and Reflections.” 
4   J. Mokyr, “Secular Stagnation? Not in your life,” Chapter 6 in Secular Stagnation: Facts, Causes and Cures, a 
VoxEU.org Book edited by C. Teulings and R. Baldwin (London, UK: CEPR Press, 2014). Also Joel Mokyr’s 
comments on “Growth, Innovation and Stagnation”. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Bottom line for potential 
The bottom line is that potential output growth in Canada and other industrialized economies 
will be lower than it was in the years leading up to the crisis. Our most recent estimate for 
Canada  is  that  it  will  average  just  below  2  per  cent  over  the  next  two  years.  This  is  a 
percentage point lower than average potential growth in the decade prior to the crisis. We will 
update this estimate in our next Monetary Policy Report in late October. 
We believe that some of the potential lost during the crisis will be restored through higher 
business investment and firm creation. But opinions vary on this. You may have read about a 
more  extreme  hypothesis,  the  idea  of  “secular  stagnation.”  This  is  the  theory  that  there  is 
chronically deficient demand in the global economy stemming from persistent headwinds and 
structural factors that predate the crisis. This is not the Bank of Canada’s baseline view. We 
expect the cyclical factors restraining growth to continue to dissipate over the next few years. 
We are already seeing the positive effects on growth in Canada and the United States. 
Implications for the neutral rate 
Let me turn now to what this all means for the neutral rate of interest.5 The gap between the 
policy rate and the neutral rate serves as gauge of the degree of monetary stimulus in the 
economy. It helps us to calibrate monetary policy. 
The  neutral  rate  is  to  economists  what  dark  matter  is  to  physicists.  We  are  convinced  it 
exists, it plays a central role in our models and analysis, but we can’t directly observe it. So 
it’s important to be clear about the concept and the uncertainty around it. The neutral rate I 
am  talking  about  here  is  the  real  risk-free  rate  of  interest  that  enables  the  economy  to 
operate  at  full  capacity  with  stable  inflation  after  cyclical  forces  have  dissipated.  It  is  the 
interest rate that generates just enough savings to finance investment in the long-run. Since 
savings can flow across borders, the neutral rate in Canada is influenced by both domestic 
and foreign factors. We posted on our website today a background paper on the neutral rate 
that lays this out very clearly. Let me walk you through the highlights. 
Real  interest  rates  have  fallen  worldwide  over  the  last  few  decades,  including  in  Canada. 
Given this decline and with such low interest rates today, it is reasonable to think that the 
neutral  rate  is  lower  than  in  the  past.  There  are  a  number  of  structural  factors  related  to 
investment and savings that explain why. 
Currently, investment is being held back by weak confidence and uncertainty about demand. 
These  are  cyclical  factors,  and  hardly  surprising  given  the  duration  of  the  crisis.  The 
structural undercurrent here, though, is about the speed limit of the global economy. With the 
lower expected growth in potential output that I just discussed, we can expect lower returns 
to  investment.  With  lower  returns,  investment  will  be  weaker  than  it  otherwise  would  be. 
When firms are investing less, their reduced demand for funds puts downward pressure on 
interest rates. The financial crisis also appears to have had a persistent effect on the capital-
formation risk premium. As Robert Hall points out, this helps to explain why high profits and 
low interest rates are not boosting investment to a greater extent.6  
                                                 
5   The notion of a natural or neutral rate of interest was first used by Knut Wicksell. See K. Wicksell, Interest and 
Prices: A Study of the Causes Regulating the Value of Money (London: Macmillan and Company for the Royal 
Economic Society, 1936; original edition published in Sweden in 1898). 
6   R. Hall, “Quantifying the Lasting Harm to the U.S. Economy from the Financial Crisis,” Hoover Institution and 
the Department of Economics, Stanford University, National Bureau of Economic Research Macroeconomics 
Annual, April 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
At  the  same  time,  effective  business  credit  spreads  in  Canada  today  are  around  15  to 
45 basis points higher than they were before the crisis. Wider spreads are likely to persist 
because of tougher financial regulations and other factors.7  
The  neutral  rate  is  also  being  affected  by  the  level  of  global  savings,  which  has  risen 
significantly in the last decade and a half. There are a number of factors at play, and they are 
expected to persist. For example, many emerging-market economies (EMEs), especially in 
Asia, are pursuing policies that contribute to high savings rates. At the same time, elevated 
oil  prices  mean  large  current  account  surpluses  in  many  countries  that  export  oil.  These 
savings are being invested in advanced economy assets, especially those denominated in 
U.S. dollars. EME reserves have increased tenfold to US$8 trillion since 2000. 
New  financial  sector  regulations  are  also  reinforcing  increased  demand  for  safe  assets  in 
order to meet higher collateral requirements and liquidity buffers.8  
All told, we think that the neutral rate of interest is lower than it was in the years leading up to 
the crisis because of these structural developments. We estimate that the real neutral policy 
rate is currently in the range of 1 to 2 per cent. This translates into a nominal neutral policy 
rate of 3 to 4 per cent, down from a range of 4 1/2 to 5 1/2 per cent in the period prior to the 
crisis. The neutral rate serves as an anchor for our models and analysis, but it is not a fixed 
beacon because the structural factors that influence it can change over time. Relative to this 
longer-term  concept  of  neutral,  the  policy  rate  in  Canada  is  stimulative.9  We  need  this 
stimulus to close the output gap and maintain inflation sustainably at target. But even with a 
closed output gap and inflation at target, the policy rate may not be at neutral. As long as the 
factors leaning on growth persist, a policy rate below neutral would be required to maintain 
inflation sustainably at target. In the absence of this policy stimulus, the output gap would re-
emerge and inflation would fall below target.10  
Some of the headwinds appear to be dissipating, but there is considerable uncertainty about 
how  long  they  will  persist.  Let’s  not  forget  that  advanced  economies’  debt  doubled  from 
roughly 160 per cent of GDP to 320 per cent between 1980 and 2010, and will take a long 
time  to  unwind.  In  fact,  the  global  savings  rate  is  expected  to  increase  over  the  next  five 
years. 
                                                 
7   A joint analysis by the Financial Stability Board and the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision attempts to 
quantify this adjustment. It suggests that a 3-percentage-point increase in banks’ common equity Tier 1 capital 
ratio  would  raise  lending  spreads  by  around  45  to  50  basis  points.  Estimates  for  Canada,  prepared  by  the 
Bank of Canada, fall very close to this range. 
8   O. Blanchard, D. Furceri and A. Pescatori, “A prolonged period of low real interest rates?” Chapter 8, Secular 
Stagnation: Facts, Causes and Cures, a VoxEU.org Book edited by C. Teulings and R. Baldwin (London, UK: 
CEPR  Press,  2014).  Also  see:  J.  Cruz  Lopez,  R.  Mendes  and  H.  Vikstedt,  “The  Market  for  Collateral:  The 
Potential Impact of Financial Regulation,” Bank of Canada Financial System Review (June 2013): 45–52. 
9   Common global developments play a central role in determining longer-run neutral rates in all countries, but 
country-specific  differences  in  structural  factors  do  introduce  some  heterogeneity.  Shorter-run  concepts  of 
neutral can differ even more because they are influenced by cyclical factors that can vary substantially across 
countries (for a discussion of alternative definitions of neutral rates, see Box 1 in Mendes, 2014). For example, 
using a shorter-run concept, Carney (2013) concludes that “the equilibrium real interest rate [in the U.K.] 
has been, and continues to be, negative.” Shorter-run definitions of neutral are more useful as normative 
measures  of  the  currently  warranted  policy  rate  than  as  tools  for  gauging  the  degree  of  stimulus  in  the 
economy.  Given  the  headwinds  faced  by  the  Canadian  economy,  shorter-run  measures  of  neutral  in 
Canada  would  currently  be  well  below  the  3  to  4  per  cent  range  for  longer-run  neutral  rates.  This  is 
reflected in the Banks’ policy stance. See R. Mendes, “The Neutral Rate of Interest in Canada,” Discussion 
Paper  No.  2014–5,  Bank  of  Canada  2014;  and  M.  Carney,  “The  Spirit  of  the  Season”  (speech  to  The 
Economic Club of New York, New York, 9 December 2013). 
10   For a more detailed explanation, see Technical Box 2, Headwinds, Tailwinds and the Policy Rate, Monetary 
Policy Report, July 2011. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
As I said earlier, proponents of the secular stagnation interpretation of events believe that the 
factors restraining demand are a larger and more permanent feature of the global economic 
landscape. If they turn out to be right, the real neutral rate could actually be negative and 
monetary policy could be a lot tighter than we think it is. While we cannot completely discount 
this  possibility,  we  believe  that  in  Canada  the  real  neutral  rate  is  still  positive  and  that, 
globally, monetary conditions are generally stimulative, although they vary across countries.11  
Challenges for monetary policy 
Our estimates of potential and the neutral rate, and the models in which they are used, are 
critical inputs to our policy deliberations. They are not the end of the story, though. We also 
ask ourselves how various sources of uncertainty should influence these deliberations. And 
we  clearly  articulate  the  main  upside  and  downside  risks  to  our  base-case  outlook  for 
inflation.  That  is  what  we  mean  when  we  talk  about  our  risk-management  approach  to 
monetary policy. 
As the economy recovers and we get closer to full capacity, judgments about potential output 
and the remaining slack in the economy become more important. So do judgments about the 
neutral  rate  and  the  amount  of  monetary  policy  stimulus.  Inflation  could  surprise  on  the 
upside  if  there  were  less  slack  and  more  monetary  stimulus  than  we  think.  We  watch 
developments  in  inflation  carefully  to  distinguish  between  temporary  and  lasting  effects. 
Fortunately, central banks have considerable experience dealing with inflation that is above 
target  and  can  act  quickly  to  rein  it  in.  In  fact,  given  household  debt  levels,  we  think  that 
interest rate increases could have a larger impact than in the past. 
If inflation were to surprise on the downside and remain stubbornly below target, that could 
be harder to deal with. Given where the policy rate is today, there would not be much more 
conventional monetary policy could do. We have a greater appreciation of this risk now than 
we did before the global recession, when we were more concerned about the upside risks to 
inflation. 
If we were  actually in a situation of secular stagnation, well, we would need to consider a 
different  policy  framework.  One  option  that  has  been  put  forward  would  be  to  raise  the 
inflation  target  in  order  to  deliver  negative  real  interest  rates,  since  nominal  interest  rates 
can’t go below zero.12 Not only would we face the costs of higher inflation, we would also risk 
stoking financial imbalances.13  
We are weighing the risks to financial stability posed by a low interest rate environment. We 
have made it clear that household imbalances are at the top of our list of vulnerabilities. But 
monetary policy is not the primary tool to address these risks. Regulation and supervision, 
                                                 
11   The secular stagnation hypothesis posits that much of the current deficiency of demand is a structural feature 
of the economy. In order to explain why the structural deficiency of demand was not evident before the crisis, 
proponents of secular stagnation argue that it was masked by financially unsustainable growth prior to 2008. A 
more likely explanation is that deficient demand since the crisis has been due to deleveraging and uncertainty 
in many jurisdictions. In Canada, weak global demand is a more obvious explanation than secular stagnation. 
Moreover, the data suggest that as headwinds dissipate, growth is picking up and output gaps are closing in 
many economies, including Canada and the U.S. 
12   O.  Blanchard,  G.  Dell’Ariccia,  and  P.  Mauro,  “Rethinking  Macroeconomic  Policy,”  IMF  Staff  Position  Note, 
12 February  2010,  SPN/10/03;  P.  Krugman,  “Inflation  Targets  Reconsidered,”  Draft  Paper  for  ECB  Sintra 
Conference, May 2014. 
13   Some,  including  DeLong  and  Summers  (2012)  and  Summers  (2014),  have  argued  that  stimulative  fiscal 
policies  should  be  used  to  raise  demand  and  counter  adverse  hysteretic  effects  on  potential  output.  See 
J. Bradford  DeLong  and  L.  H.  Summers,  “Fiscal  Policy  in  a  Depressed  Economy,”  Brookings  Papers  on 
Economic Activity (Spring 2012): 233–297; Also L. Summers, “U.S. Economic Prospects: Secular Stagnation, 
Hysteresis, and the Zero Lower Bound,” Business Economics, Vol 49, No 2 (2014): 65–73. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
along  with  targeted  macroprudential  actions,  are  more  effective  lines  of  defence.  These 
defences have been strengthened a number of times since 2008.14  
Conversely,  there  are  risks  that  a  premature  withdrawal  of  monetary  stimulus  could 
undermine the expansion. History provides us with a number of cautionary tales. A classic 
one  is  the  tightening  of  monetary  policy  in  1937  that  led  the  U.S.  economy  to  falter  as  it 
emerged from the Great Depression.15 
Monetary  stimulus  is  important  to  the  sustained  recovery  of  demand  and  can  potentially 
contribute to building supply by supporting investment in capital and increased labour force 
participation. Public policies such as structural reforms and fiscal stimulus play a more critical 
role. G-20 leaders have recognized the need to undertake measures to revive both demand 
and potential growth rates.16 Of course, decisions made by financial institutions, businesses 
and  households  are  the  most  important  determinants  of  our  economic  prospects  over  the 
long term. 
Conclusion 
To  do  our  job  right  we  need  to  judge  how  much  of  the  underwhelming  recovery  is  due  to 
cyclical  factors  and  how  much  to  structural  factors.  The  global  economy  continues  to  face 
headwinds associated with the balance-sheet recession. It also faces demographic changes, 
hysteresis in the labour market, and weak productivity growth. 
We aren’t buying the pessimistic view held by proponents of secular stagnation, although no 
one  really  knows  how  long  the  factors  constraining  demand  are  going  to  persist  and  how 
much  damage  they’ve  done  to  global  potential.  Some  countries  have  more  baggage  than 
others, so how long these factors persist will vary from country to country. But it is clear that 
potential  growth  rates  in  many  economies  are  lower  than  they  were  prior  to  the  crisis. 
Because of this, and given the high level of global savings, the neutral rate of interest is also 
lower. 
Our approach is to consider the main sources of uncertainty in our deliberations on how best 
to  achieve  our  inflation  target.  This  helps  us  avoid  making  big  errors  that  are  difficult  to 
correct. 
When  we  do  this,  it  is  clear  that  continued  monetary  stimulus  is  needed  to  return  the 
Canadian economy to sustainable growth and to maintain inflation at target. And, depending 
on  the  evolution  of  the  data,  it  is  possible  that  persistent  headwinds  will  mean  that  some 
degree of stimulus will be required even after the output gap is closed to keep inflation at 
target. 
 
                                                 
14   The Minister of Finance has tightened mortgage insurance rules, the Superintendent of Financial Institutions 
has developed stronger mortgage underwriting principles and the Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation 
has improved its programs. 
15   G. Eggertsson, B. Pugsley, “The Mistake of 1937: A General Equilibrium Analysis,” Monetary and Economic 
Studies (Special Edition), Vol. 24, No s-1 (December 2006):151–190. 
16   At its summit in Sydney, Australia, in February 2014, the G-20 agreed to take measures to boost global growth 
by 2 per cent over the next five years, largely by removing impediments to growth such as product and labour 
market rigidities. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
