  Njuguna Ndung’u: Banking and financial sector developments in Kenya 
Remarks by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the Kenya 
Institute of Bankers 2nd National Banking & Finance Conference, Mombasa, 26 June 2014. 
 Mr. Reuben Mbindu, Chairman, Kenya Institute of Bankers; 
Chief Executives of Commercial Banks and other Financial Institutions here present; 
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen: 
It is with great pleasure that I join you this morning at the start of this landmark conference. I 
take this opportunity to thank the Kenya Institute of Bankers for fulfilling its promise to hold 
such  a  conference  on  an  annual  basis.  I  appreciate  your  invitation  to  this  conference  and 
applaud  everyone  who  participated  in  organising  this  conference  for  their  commendable 
commitment. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: My task this morning is to represent the Cabinet Secretary to The 
National Treasury who could not make it as the Chief Guest to this 2nd National Banking and 
Finance  Conference.  Let  me  start  with  some  few  remarks  on  the  performance  of  Kenya’s 
banking sector. 
The  banking  sector  has  recorded  an  improved  performance  –  the  sector’s  balance  sheet 
expanded by 15.6 percent from Ksh.2.50 trillion in May 2013 to Ksh.2.89 trillion in May 2014 
mainly supported by an expansion of banking services and financial inclusion. Consequently, 
the sector’s profitability increased by 12.5 percent from a profit before tax of Ksh.48.7 billion 
for  the  quarter  ended  May  2013  to  Ksh.54.8  billion  for  the  quarter  ended  May  2014.  The 
gradual  improved  performance  has  been  supported  by  continued  rollout  of  innovative 
banking products, adoption of cost effective delivery channels, and continued expansion of 
banks across the country and beyond Kenya. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: As part of Kenyan banks desire to improve their performance, they 
have  explored  business  opportunities  within  and  beyond  Kenya’s  borders.  As  at 
31st December 2013: 
• 
Eleven  Kenyan  banks  had  established  subsidiaries  in  East  African  Community 
(EAC) member states and South Sudan. One Kenyan bank owned a 50% stake in a 
Mauritius bank while another Kenyan bank had a minority stake of 11.4% in a bank 
operating in Malawi. 
The  eleven  Kenyan  banks  had  established  288  branches  in  EAC  member  states 
and South Sudan as compared to 223 branches in 2011. 
The foreign subsidiaries had a total of 5,219 employees compared to 3,760 in 2011. 
The total assets of the foreign subsidiaries stood at Ksh,306.3 billion compared to 
Ksh.195.6 billion in 2011. 
The foreign subsidiaries had mobilised deposits worth Ksh.236.5 billion compared to 
Ksh.152.5 billion in 2011. 
   Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  This  snapshot  of  cross-border  operations  of  Kenyan  banks 
demonstrates  that  the  banking  sector  has  made  a  sizeable  contribution  to  the  economic 
growth of not only Kenya but that of the entire Eastern Africa region and beyond. I note with 
satisfaction that the practices of Kenya’s banks operating outside the country are serving as 
best practices in some of the host countries. I therefore commend the Kenyan regional banks 
for their role in strengthening the financial sectors of the regional countries. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  The  continued  regional  expansion  of  Kenyan  banks  augurs  well 
with  the  on-going  EAC  integration  process.  Allow  me  now  to  share  with  you  the  current 
efforts  by  the  EAC  Central  Banks  towards  the  envisaged  East  African  Monetary  Union 
(EAMU). The Monetary Union Protocol was signed by the EAC Heads of State in November 
2013  with  an  envisaged  timeline  for  a  single  regional  currency  by  2024.  Pursuant  to  the 
Protocol, the EAC Central Banks are required to integrate their financial systems and adopt 
common  principles  and  rules  for  the  regulation  and  supervision  of  the  financial  system  by 
2018. In this regard, the EAC Central Banks have already commenced efforts towards the 
harmonisation of the EAC Central Banks supervisory and regulatory rules and practices. The 
starting point was a request in 2011 to the players, especially those with regional presence, 
to indicate the aspects they would wish to be harmonised. 
Ladies  and Gentlemen:  In  order  to  achieve  a  harmonised  and  improved  supervisory  and 
regulatory  framework,  the  EAC  Central  Banks  agreed  to  use  the  pronouncements  by 
international standard setting bodies such as the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision 
(BCBS), Financial Stability Board (FSB) and Financial Action Task Force (FATF) as a basis 
for the harmonisation exercise. The main aspects of the supervisory and regulatory rules and 
practices  that  will  be  harmonised  include  the  legal  status  of  licenced  entities,  licensing 
requirements,  licence  validity,  prudential  requirements  on  capital  and  liquidity,  corporate 
governance requirements, permissible activities, prudential returns and public disclosures. 
The EAC Central Banks have developed a convergence criteria for all aspects of divergence 
and  expect  to  attain  convergence  by  the  Monetary  Union  Protocol  deadline  of  2018.  The 
benefit of these developments to Kenyan banks is to increase the market size, allow diversity 
of  banking  products  and  strengthen  our  banks.  We  have  introduced  the  East  African 
Payment  System  (EAPS)  to  reduce  the  cost  of  doing  business.  We  are  now  working  on 
convertibility of the EAC currencies – MOUs have been signed. These initiatives will bring the 
EAC closer together. The central banks in EAC believe that these are important quick wins 
for the EAC regional integration process. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: For the continued regionalisation of the banking sector operations 
to generate the desired impact, a concerted effort to up-scale the skills and competences of 
our human resources as a region is necessary. In this regard, the Kenya Institute of Bankers 
(KIB)  and  other  capacity  building  institutions  should  rise  to  the  occasion  not  only  to 
modernise  their  capacity  building  initiatives  but  to  develop  programmes  that  cater  to  the 
capacity needs of the entire EAC region and beyond. 
As  the  banking  sector  players  establish  presence  across  borders,  KIB  should  explore 
avenues of satisfying the emerging human resource needs in the countries where the banks 
are expanding to. I am aware that the annual East African Banking School organised by the 
EAC Banking Institutes is designed with the regional banking sectors in mind. However the 
on-going  integration  calls  for  more  tailored  capacity  building  initiatives.  In  this  regard,  KIB 
and  counterpart  Banking  Institutes  should  re-examine  their  strategies  to  ensure  that  the 
envisaged  integrated  financial  market  is  not  derailed  by  inadequate  human  resource 
capacity. 
Let me now turn to some interesting and current outcomes and landmark achievements for 
the  Kenyan  economy,  that  will  continue  to  enhance  and  consolidate  our  financial  sector 
performance: 
First, the success of the Sovereign Bond debut for Kenya that was over-subscribed by over 
500%.  The  government  took  US$2.0  billion  against  US$8.8  billion  offered  at  an  average 
interest rate of 6.6%. This success has several implications: 
1. 
The Sovereign Bond brings into the market an asset that is risk free and will form a 
benchmark of pricing risk free assets in Kenya. Since the interest on the Sovereign 
Bond is fairly competitive, it will lead to a re-pricing downwards of domestic financial 
assets – so domestic interest rates will decline. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 2. 
3. 
4. 
 The Sovereign Bond is already trading in the Irish Securities Exchange – This will 
improve Kenya’s standing and rating in the international capital markets. 
The government, due to this success of entry into the international capital market, 
will  reduce  expensive  domestic  borrowing.  This  will  of  necessity  release  some 
liquidity into the domestic market. For this liquidity to be usefully applied to domestic 
and regional investments, interest rates on lending will have to decline substantially. 
Since government domestic securities have now a competing exogenous substitute, 
those  banks  that  have  depended  on  trading  with  government  securities  will  now 
have to apportion a larger proportion of their funds for domestic lending to firms and 
households. The KIB should now help such banks to re-build their infrastructure for 
monitoring and screening existing and potential borrowers but also supported by the 
Credit Reference Bureaus. This may have been left behind in the rush to trade with 
risk free securities. 
Second,  the  Kenya  Bankers  Association  has  provided  a  breakthrough  to  transparency  in 
pricing of banking services. In a Committee chaired by the Cabinet Secretary to the National 
Treasury  and  whose  recommendations  were  announced  by  the  President,  there  will  be  a 
reference  interest  rate  to  be  called  KBRR  (Kenya  Banks  Reference  Rate).  It  will  be  an 
average of CBR and the 91-day Treasury bill – a risk free return on asset indicator. 
The first KBRR will be announced by the MPC on July 8th, 2014. For us at the Central Bank 
the KIB and indeed this Conference should lead the way to show how pricing of credit will 
benefit  inclusive  growth  of  the  financial  sector,  by  benefitting  both  the  borrower  and  the 
lender. At the end, we will support very strong inclusive growth agenda of the Government. 
Finally,  the  FATF  (Financial  Action  Task  Force),  a  standard  setting  body  on  Monday 
23rd June 2014 upgraded Kenya from the Dark Grey List to the Grey List on its Anti-Money 
Laundering/Combating  the  Financing  of  Terrorism  (AML/CFT)  Regime.  Kenya’s  AML/CFT 
regime  was  in  2011  found  to  be  deficient.  Since  then,  the  country  amended  its  laws, 
introduced the Terrorist Financing Law and established the Financial Reporting Centre. For 
KIB  and  Kenyan  banks,  it  means  it  is  easier  for  correspondence  bank  facilities,  easier  to 
negotiate  competitive  rates  for  international  credit  lines  and  above  all,  the  credit  and  risk 
rating for the country is now positively enhanced. These are the issues KIB should take on 
board to see the prospects of the financial sector development in line with the government 
growth agenda. 
With  these  remarks,  it  is  now  my  pleasure  –  on  behalf  of  the  Cabinet  Secretary  to  The 
National  Treasury,  Hon.  Henry  Rotich  –  to  declare  the  2nd  KIB  National  Banking  and 
Finance Conference, officially open. 
I wish you fruitful deliberations and report progress to develop our financial sector in line with 
the Government’s development agenda. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
