  Luis M Linde: The European and Spanish economic situation 
Opening  address  by  Mr  Luis  M  Linde,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Spain,  at  the  Annual 
Economists’ Forum/Consejo General de Economistas, Madrid, 29 May 2014. 
 I much appreciate the invitation to participate in this forum and the opportunity to share with 
you some brief thoughts on the European and Spanish economic situation. 
Following six quarters of negative growth, the euro area economy initiated a mild recovery in 
2013  which  has  since  continued.  The  recovery  is  essentially  being  underpinned  by  the 
gradual  pick-up  in  domestic  demand,  after  the  strong  adjustment  it  underwent  during  the 
recession. 
However, the latest GDP growth figure, for the first quarter of this year, illustrates the still-
fragile and uneven nature of this economic improvement in the euro area. 
According to the provisional estimate released by Eurostat, the increase in activity in the euro 
area  as  a  whole  in  2014  Q1  was  0.2%  in  quarter-on-quarter  terms,  below  most  analysts’ 
expectations. Note that this rate has been affected by exceptional temporary factors in some 
countries. In any event, the mixed nature of the recovery is evident if we compare the strong 
momentum the German economy is providing to the area as a whole with the behaviour of 
activity in other countries such as France, where it is practically flat, or others still such as 
Italy, the Netherlands, Portugal and Finland, where negative figures have been posted. 
The ECB and the National Central Banks of the Eurosystem are finalising a new projection 
exercise, whose results will be published in early June. That will be the time to assess the 
effects  that  this  first-quarter  figure  and  all  the  new  information  compiled  since  the  last 
exercise may have exerted on the baseline scenario for GDP growth in the coming quarters. 
As you know, in any event, the procedural rules for the ECB Governing Council set a brief 
period  immediately  before  each  of  the  monetary  policy  meetings  in  which  the  members, 
myself among them, must not make any statement that may be interpreted as pre-judging in 
any way the outcome of the meeting. You will therefore understand if I abstain from making 
any further assessment in relation to this scenario. 
In terms of employment, last year also saw a turnaround and the job destruction phase in the 
euro area touched bottom in the second quarter. But the still-moderate recovery has not yet 
provided for significant improvements in employment levels, meaning that hours worked in 
the labour market remain far below the historical average and unemployment rates are at a 
high. 
On the prices front, sluggish demand and labour market slack are strongly influencing area-
wide inflation developments. The growth rate of the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 
has stood at a level below 1% since October 2013, with figures that have generally tended to 
surprise  on  the  downside.  As  in  the  case  of  activity,  the  results  of  the  projection  exercise 
under  way  will  allow  for  calibration  of  the  effects  on  the  current  price  scenarios  and,  in 
particular, on the risk – flagged by the ECB Council at its recent meetings – that the area 
may become immersed in a prolonged period of too-low inflation. 
Turning to the Spanish economy, we are all mindful that the crisis that broke in mid-2008 was 
of unprecedented depth and extent in our recent history and caused acute losses in activity 
and  employment.  Fortunately,  since  the  second  half  of  2013,  the  Spanish  economy  has 
perceptibly been experiencing a recovery, which began with positive, moderate quarter-on-
quarter rates of change in GDP as from 2013 Q3 and which has continued in 2014 to date. 
This recent improvement in activity rests on a broad set of factors: some, such as the drastic 
correction of the external imbalance, have been helping underpin production for some time; 
others, such as the progressive normalisation of the financial environment, are more recent. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Here,  both  the  easing  of  grave  uncertainty,  which  at  one  point  threatened  the  current 
configuration  of  the  euro  area,  and  the  restoration  of  confidence  in  our  banking  system 
following  the  restructuring  and  recapitalisation  drive  undertaken,  which  culminated  in 
January, have proved decisive. 
Against  this  background,  the  contributions  to  activity  of  external  demand  and  national 
demand are being re-balanced. National demand is showing a brisker pace of recovery than 
initially  envisaged,  based  on  the  increase  in  household  consumption  and  investment  in 
equipment over the past two quarters, and on some slowing in the fiscal adjustment following 
the revision of the adjustment path last summer. 
In fact,  household  spending,  in  a  setting  of  improved  confidence resulting  largely from  the 
gradual improvement in the labour market and from some recovery in disposable income, is 
showing moderate growth, despite the fact that the necessary reduction of household debt is 
still  exerting  something  of  a  contractionary  effect  on  expenditure.  Further,  investment  in 
capital  goods  is  looking  buoyant,  in  light  of  the  improved  business  climate  and  increased 
investment  activity  by  exporting  firms.  The  contractionary  course  of  residential  investment 
has  slowed,  although  it  remains  in  negative  territory,  while  the  stock  of  unsold  housing 
remains high. 
The  outlook  of  progressively  improving  activity  is  closely  linked  to  labour  market 
developments, where the benefits of wage moderation and the improved incentives for job 
creation  driven  by  the  recent  labour  reform  are  becoming  patent.  The  latest  employment 
figures show a continuation of the positive trend discernible since the second half of 2013. 
Thus,  in  recent  months,  Social  Security  registrations  have  continued  to  increase  and  the 
pace of decline of registered unemployment has stepped up. However, on the first-quarter 
figures for 2014, the unemployment rate remains very high, still close to 26% of the labour 
force. 
The  rate  of  inflation  has  been  posting  very  moderate  figures  since  autumn  last  year  as  a 
result of the removal from the index of the base effects linked to fiscal consolidation; certain 
temporary  factors,  such  as  those  relating  to  energy  price  developments;  and  other  more 
durable factors, relating to the economy’s excess capacity, the reduction in unit labour costs 
and the relative sluggishness of spending. For the remainder of the year the inflation rate is 
expected  to  hold  at  low  levels,  below  the  euro  area  average,  thereby  permitting  further 
headway  in  gains  in  competitiveness  with  which  to  entrench  a  stronger  recovery.  Low 
inflation is conducive to gains in income purchasing power, although the counterpoint to this 
is the greater difficulty this adds to further progress in household and corporate deleveraging. 
In the more immediate future, the advances made by the Spanish economy augur a firming 
of the gradual path of recovery, underpinned by greater confidence, a progressive easing in 
financial tensions and a gradual improvement in the labour market. A crucial role will have to 
be played here by the re-balancing processes under way in the Spanish economy, especially 
the  redressing  of  the  private  sector’s  financial  position  and  fiscal  consolidation.  The 
successful culmination of these processes is pivotal for rooting the recovery in domestic and 
external  confidence  and  for  ensuring  the  external  funding  flows  that  are  vital  for  making 
sustained medium-term growth possible. 
In sum, for the first time after years of crisis, we can discern the possibility of a gradual and 
sustainable recovery, the outcome of the progress made in correcting the imbalances that we 
had built up and of the structural reforms undertaken, whose results we are beginning to see. 
The task is not complete and much work remains to be done, both in Europe and in Spain. 
Hopefully,  however,  the  progressive  perception  of  the  improvement  achieved  will  act  as  a 
powerful spur for us to persevere on the road we have taken.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
