  Glenn Stevens: Overview of economic developments affecting Australia 
Opening statement by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the 
House of Representatives Standing Committee on Economics, Brisbane, 20 August 2014. 
 Chair 
Members of the Committee 
Thank you for the opportunity to meet with you today. 
Since the hearing in March, the global economy has continued its expansion at a moderate 
pace, and Australia’s trading partner group has been growing at about its long-run average 
rate. With the abatement of the adverse winter weather, the US economy recovered in the 
June  quarter  and  the  labour  market  has  continued  to  strengthen.  Growth  in  China  has 
remained close to the target of 7.5 per cent, though Chinese residential property prices have 
declined  in  recent  months.  Chinese  authorities  at  various  levels  are  responding  to  these 
developments with the aim of maintaining stable macroeconomic and monetary conditions. 
In Japan, consumption and output grew strongly in the March quarter ahead of the increase 
in  the  consumption  tax  in  April,  and  then  contracted  sharply  in  the  June  quarter. This  is  a 
normal pattern surrounding such tax changes, but complicates reading the underlying pace 
of Japan’s economy. Economic growth in the rest of east Asia has continued. 
Commodity prices important to Australia have declined this year, as global supply – including 
from  Australia  particularly  –  has  increased.  The  terms  of  trade  have  now  fallen  by  about 
18 per cent from their extraordinary peak three years ago, but they remain over 50 per cent 
higher than their twentieth century trend level. 
Perhaps the most remarkable feature of the international scene at present is the exceptionally 
low  volatility  of  financial  prices  –  the  lowest  observed  over  the  past  25  years  for  sovereign 
bonds, equities and foreign exchange. Yields on sovereign debt of the major countries are also 
very  low,  the  lowest  on  record  in  some  cases.  Spreads  on  investment  grade  and  financial 
corporate bonds have reached multi-year lows and in Europe yields on so-called “peripheral” 
sovereign bonds have in some cases fallen below previous historic lows. 
It is not as though there has been a dearth of geo-political or financial events which might 
ordinarily  trigger  more  caution  among  investors.  But  compensation  for  risk  on  financial 
instruments remains scant. 
The  reasons  for  these  remarkable  trends,  including  the  extent  to  which  they  reflect  the 
effects  of  the  exceptional  monetary  policies  being  conducted  by  the  major  jurisdictions,  or 
other things, could be debated at length. What is clear though is that a combination of forces 
has resulted in financial conditions remaining remarkably accommodative. 
This has been reflected in a decline, at the margin, in interest rates in Australia, even though 
the Reserve Bank has not changed the cash rate for a year. Australian governments have 
continued to borrow at or around the lowest rates since Federation. Similarly, funding costs 
for financial institutions have been declining. This, and an increase in competition to lend in 
an  environment  of  still  fairly  moderate  credit  growth,  has  contributed  to  a  reduction  in  the 
rates on housing and business loans. 
Economic growth was, as recorded, clearly above trend in the March quarter. The quarterly 
result was, to a large extent, driven by a substantial increase in resource exports, as new 
mining capacity came on line and mining operations experienced fewer weather disruptions 
than usual. Data for the June quarter suggest a “payback” of lower exports, and also a period 
of  more  subdued  consumer  demand.  There  are  relatively  few  readings  for  the  September 
quarter as yet, though at least some suggest that there may have been a reasonable start to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  the quarter. Having printed lower for a few months, the rate of unemployment has recently 
been recorded at a higher level, though most leading indicators of the labour market seem to 
have improved a little this year. 
Consumer prices rose by 3 per cent over the year to the June quarter, higher than the pace a 
year  earlier.  This  partly  reflects  factors  such  as  the  increase  in  the  tobacco  excise  but 
measures  of  underlying  inflation  also  increased.  A  faster  pace  of  increase  in  prices  for 
tradable goods and services featured, a reflection of the depreciation of the exchange rate 
since April last year. The rate of inflation for “non-tradables” has actually declined over the 
past year, helped by growth of labour costs falling to its lowest rate for many years. There is 
some  evidence  that  productivity  performance  may  be  starting  to  improve,  though  this  is 
notoriously difficult to evaluate over periods less than several years. 
When  we  look  ahead,  a key feature  of the  outlook,  as  everyone  knows,  is  that the capital 
expenditure phase of the “mining boom” is winding down, while the export phase is gearing 
up. The fall-off in investment spending by resources companies has a long way to go yet and 
will probably accelerate in the coming year. This impending further fall is captivating most of 
the commentators. 
Meanwhile  growth  in  non-mining  activity  has  been  increasing.  A  recovery  in  dwelling 
investment is well under way, with spending in this area rising by 8 per cent in the year to the 
March  quarter.  Forward  indicators  for  non-mining  business  investment  suggest  a  modest 
improvement over the coming year, though intentions have remained, to date, a bit tentative. 
Consumer spending, though soft in mid year, could be expected to grow in line with income, 
or  perhaps  a  little  faster,  given  the  rise  in  household  net  worth.  But  it  seems  unlikely  that 
households will revert to their behaviour of a decade ago, when they were expanding their 
balance sheets quickly, saving much less of their incomes and increasing their consumption 
well  ahead  of  the  growth  in  incomes.  Public  spending  is  scheduled  to  remain  quite 
restrained. 
The overall growth rate of the economy is the sum of these various forces, and is also affected 
by factors not confined to the mining sector or even to Australia. Forecasting is an imprecise 
art at the best of times. At present, given the size of the mining boom, the extent of the shift in 
global relative prices over the past years, and the very unusual global economic and financial 
environment in which we still find ourselves, forecasts are likely to be even less reliable. 
With that caveat, my guess is that over the year ahead the growth of real GDP will be around 
2–3 per cent: close to trend, but probably a bit below it in the near term. Further ahead there 
are some reasons to think that growth could speed up somewhat and be a bit above trend. 
This outlook would mean that it will be a while before we see sustained reductions in the rate 
of unemployment. 
Conditional on the usual set of assumptions about oil prices, the exchange rate and so on, 
inflation  should  be  consistent  with  the  2–3  per  cent  target  over  the  horizon  relevant  for 
monetary  policy.  The  depreciation  of  the  exchange  rate  last  year  is  likely  to  continue  to 
contribute to higher prices for tradable items for a while yet. But domestic inflation is likely to 
remain contained given how slowly labour costs have been rising. The removal of the price 
on carbon will lower inflation temporarily over the coming year. 
To  say  that  growth  is  close  to  trend,  but  probably  a  bit  below  in  the  near  term,  will  be 
disappointing to many people. And that is with very accommodative monetary policy – with 
the cash rate held at its lowest in 50 years for a year now and widely expected to be held at 
or close to these levels for some time yet. 
The low returns on offer on safe investments in Australia, and the ultra-low returns on such 
assets  internationally,  are  certainly  having  an  effect  by  prompting  investors  to  “search  for 
yield”. Not only are returns on financial instruments low, but yields on the existing stock of 
physical assets – houses, commercial property, infrastructure assets – are being bid down. 
Some of that search is of course coming from offshore. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  That’s  a  big  part  of  how  accommodative  monetary  policy  works.  It  prompts  substitution 
towards  higher-risk  assets;  it  raises  asset  prices,  which  increases  collateral  values  and 
makes  credit  extension  more  viable;  it  improves  the  cash  flows  of  debtors;  and  so  on.  All 
those  things  have  been  happening  in  Australia.  Admittedly,  the  exchange  rate,  another 
channel through which monetary policy usually has an effect, is probably not doing as much 
as it might usually be expected to do in achieving balanced growth. 
But  the  thing  that  is  most  needed  now  is  something  monetary  policy  can’t  directly  cause: 
more of the sort of “animal spirits” needed to support an expansion of the stock of existing 
assets (outside the mining sector), not just a re-pricing of existing assets. There are some 
encouraging signs here. Nonetheless, if reports are to be believed, many businesses remain 
intent  on  sustaining  a  flow  of  dividends  and  returning  capital  to  shareholders,  and  less 
focused  on  implementing  plans  for  growth.  Any  plans  for  growth  that  might  be  in  the  top 
drawer remain hostage to uncertainty about the future pace of demand. 
That’s  actually  nothing new.  It’s  pretty  normal  at  this  point of the  cycle.  There  is  always  a 
period in which people can see that many of the conditions for expansion are in place but 
aren’t  yet  fully  confident  it  will  happen.  Nor  is  it  confined  to  Australia.  The  gap  between 
financial risk taking and “real economy” risk taking is seen globally at present. 
It is reasonable to expect that, at some point, this will change. After all: 
• 
not only are funding costs low, but banks want to lend and are competing to do so 
more actively than they have for some years 
net worth per household has risen by about $120,000 over the past two years 
the  community’s  monetary  assets  have  risen  by  around  13  per  cent  –  over 
$180 billion – over the same period 
productivity improvement in enterprises will presumably continue, and needs to do 
so. But there are actually a few runs on the board now 
the level of gross investment in some sectors is barely above depreciation rates 
the  population  is  growing,  meaning  there  will  be  more  demand  for  housing, 
infrastructure and consumer goods and services 
the dynamic of proximity to a rising Asia, with all its opportunities, remains. 
• 
Business  will  need  to  respond  to trends  that foreshadow  sustainable  increases  in  demand 
and incomes. Not all that response will come from the large established players; a significant 
proportion  will  come  from  smaller  and  newer  players,  most  of  which  operate  “below  the 
radar”. The financial capacity to provide credit prudently will help them do so. 
At some point, if these responses start to gather pace, the sorts of forecasts we are setting 
out at the moment will very likely prove to be conservative. The frustrating thing is that no 
one can say when that will happen, or just what might be the proximate trigger. 
In the interim, monetary policy’s contribution to  this process is to lend support to demand, 
consistent  with  its  obligations  to  seek  full  employment  and  price  stability  as  set  out  in  the 
inflation target, and taking due account of financial stability considerations. This has resulted 
in very low interest rates, and as noted earlier financial conditions in Australia have in fact 
eased a little over recent times even though the cash rate has not changed. 
In reaching its decisions, the Board has been mindful of allowing time for measures already 
taken  to  have  their  effects,  and  of  the  very  considerable  limitations  for  monetary  policy  in 
fine-tuning  economic  outcomes  over  short  periods.  It  has  also  seen  some  value,  in  the 
present circumstances, in maintaining a sense of steadiness and stability. 
My colleagues and I await your questions. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
