  Erkki Liikanen: Europe without banks? The future of financial sector 
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  Erkki  Liikanen,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Finland,  at  the  Alpbach 
Financial Market Symposium, Alpbach, Austria, 28 August 2014. 
 Introduction 
I thank the organizers for assigning me such a thought-provoking title. For a start, to me it is 
clear that we continue to need banks also in the future – especially in Europe, where the role 
of  banks  in  financing  households  and  SMEs  is  crucial  and  important  also  for  other 
enterprises. 
However, we have needed and we need a change. We have just experienced and are still 
recovering from the biggest financial crisis of our generation. The social costs of the financial 
crisis have been enormous: the losses in the GDP and the increases in unemployment have 
been very high. If policymakers, in central banks and in governments, had not learned from 
the  policy  mistakes  made  during  the  Depression  in  the  1930s,  the  crisis  could  have  been 
even more destructive. 
To avoid such crises in the future, we need a more stable and resilient banking and financial 
system in Europe. To that end, we need better regulation and supervision of banks and other 
financial institutions. Well-designed regulation would provide banks with the right incentives 
to choose their business model, scope, and size efficiently to best serve the society. 
Before the crisis, financial regulation was too lax and the supervision of financial institutions 
too fragmented. Many important steps have been taken or are being discussed to repair the 
regulatory and supervisory framework, some of which I shortly discuss in my remarks. 
Some observers have argued that the new regulation has gone too far. I disagree. It is a key 
responsibility of our generation to make the financial system much safer than it has been. To 
be sure, we do not need to return to the repressive regulation of the post-war period. But we 
do need to find a better balance between rules and flexibility in regulation than we have had. 
The rest of this speech is organised as follows. First, I discuss what the European financial 
system  looked  like  before  the  crisis.  Then  I  discuss  what  it  should  look  like  in  the  future. 
Finally, I provide some suggestions on how we can get there. 
What the European financial system looked like? 
As  convincingly  argued  in  the  recent  report  by  the  Advisory  Scientific  Committee  of  the 
European Systemic Risk Board, over the past 20–25 years banking systems in Europe have 
become, too leveraged, too concentrated, and sometimes also too big. Hence they created a 
major risk for the stability of the European financial system. 
Let me present some evidence provided by the ESRB. First, consider the amount of lending. 
In the 1950´s, bank loans to the domestic private sector as a proportion to the domestic GDP 
were almost equal in Europe, US and Japan, at about 25 per cent. In 2010, the figure for 
Europe was well over 100 per cent of the GDP, while that in Japan was about 90% and in the 
US only close to 50%.1 
                                                 
1  
In some European countries, the size of the banking sector more than doubled in a mere 20 years between 
1990’s  and  2010.  Among  the  countries  that  recorded  the  biggest  increases  were  Cyprus,  Iceland,  Ireland, 
Spain, Portugal and Greece. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  Second,  European  banks’  balance  sheets  have  ballooned.  The  total  assets  of  the  EU 
banking sector were over three times the EU GDP in 2013. In several EU countries, the ratio 
is  much  bigger.  The  Japanese  banking  sector  is  more  than  half  of  the  relative  size  of  the 
European  banking  sector,  but  the  US  banking  sector  is  only  a  quarter  of  the  size  of  its 
European counterpart. 
Third, the European banking system has also become more concentrated. Since 2000, the 
share of the three largest domestic banks of the national banking system total assets – the 
so-called C3 ratio – has increased in all major EU countries except Italy. (In Finland, of which 
I am the most familiar with, the C3 ratio is close to 90%, one of the highest figures in the EU.) 
Fourth, European banks dramatically increased their leverage before the crisis. For example, 
as  documented  by  the  ESRB,  in  the  late  1990’s  the  median  equity  to  assets  ratio  of  the 
largest 20 listed banks in the EU was around 6%. By 2008, this median level was only just 
over 3%. Because of the deficiencies of the Basel II capital rules, banks were able to halve 
their equity ratios without any increase in their risk-weighted regulatory capital requirements. 
The  increases  in  bank  sizes  and  bank  lending  have  not  been  matched  by  an  equivalent 
increase in market-based funding. For example, the ratios of stock market capitalisation to 
bank  credit  have  decreased  considerably  in  the  2000s  in  the  biggest  EU  countries,  much 
more so than in the US. As a result, the European financial structure has become even more 
bank-based than before. 
The large reliance of European firms – especially the SMEs – on bank finance has recently 
been a drag on the recovery of the European economy as banks´ ability to lend has been 
weak in many EU countries in the aftermath of the crises. 
It is now obvious that many of the developments in the European banking since the 1990’s 
sew the seeds of the banking and sovereign debt crisis: 
– 
– 
Too-big-to-fail and too-big-to-save problems became more severe; 
Banks  misallocated  too  much  funds  in  asset  markets  fostering  unsustainable 
bubbles; 
Weakly capitalised banks´ resilience to shocks became poorer; 
Increased  concentration  of  the  banking  system  made  banks  more  interdependent 
and vulnerable to contagion. 
 Some recent research suggests that a banking sector beyond size may also be harmful to a 
long-term economic growth. There are several potential reasons for that: 
– 
An overexpansion of banking may lead to a misallocation of financial capital towards 
housing loans and away from corporate lending. 
The  overexpansion  may  also  lead  to  a  misallocation  of  human  capital  as  an 
excessive share of talented individuals is employed in the financial industry rather 
than elsewhere in the economy. Financial sector needs talent individuals, so do the 
other sectors. 
Larger banking systems tend to experience more severe financial crisis. 
  What the European financial system should look like? 
Given the developments in the European banking and financial markets over past 20 years 
and  given  the  legacy  of  the  crisis,  the  policymakers  face  both  short  and  longer-term 
challenges in financial market policies. 
In the short-term, we must find ways to boost bank lending especially to SMEs to invigorate 
economic growth in Europe. The most recent results of the ECB´s quarterly euro area Bank 
Lending Survey are encouraging in that respect: for the first time in seven years, euro area 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  banks reported a net easing in credit standards in loans to enterprises in the second quarter 
of 2014. Despite that, banks´ credit supply is clearly insufficient in many European countries. 
Another short-term concern is the sorry state of the European securitisation markets: public 
issuances  in  the  European  ABS  markets  remain  low,  trading  is  thin  in  some  market 
segments  and  the  whole  market  carries  a  stigma  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  most  European 
structured finance products performed well throughout the crisis. 
In  the  short-term,  we  need  to  stimulate  ABS  markets  to  stimulate  credit  creation.  In  the 
longer-term  the  revitalisation  of  ABS  markets  would,  among  things,  (i)  allow  better  risk 
sharing  among  investors  (ii)  help  banks  to  diversify  their  funding  structure  thus  increasing 
their resilience, and (iii) make firms less reliant on bank finance. 
In the longer term, we need to reverse the unwelcome trends in banking documented by the 
ESRB.  We  need  a  banking  system  that  is  better  capitalised,  less  concentrated,  less 
procyclical,  and  relatively  smaller  than  it  is  today.  Thus,  we  need  a  financial  structure  in 
which financial markets play a larger role than today in allocating funds to final customers. 
How to get there? 
As you are well aware, we are in the process of implementing a comprehensive supervisory 
and regulatory reform to make the European financial system safer. We are likely to discuss 
many of these reforms in this panel. 
In  these  remarks,  let  me  focus  only  on  some  of  the  most  recent  policy  developments  and 
initiatives. 
Concerning  short-term  challenges,  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  decided  in  June  to 
carry out targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTROs) in the coming months. The 
aim of these operations is to enhance the functioning of the monetary policy transmission by 
supporting  lending  to  the  euro  area  non-financial  private  sector,  excluding  loans  to 
households  for  house  purchase.  The  Governing  Council  has  also  intensified  preparatory 
work related to outright purchases of asset-backed securities. 
The ECB, together with the Bank of England, also published a short issues paper in April and 
a longer Discussion Paper in June to foster discussion on how to build a better functioning 
securitisation market in the European Union. In particular, these two central banks suggest 
that  authorities  should  create  standards  for  the  so-called  high-quality  securitisations  to 
identify low-risk ABS products that are simple, robust and transparent. 
Concerning regulatory reforms, let me have a few words on the state of the reform of banking 
structures. 
The Expert Group that I chaired saw the need to simplify the structure of large and complex 
banks to shield the deposit-taking bank from an excessive risk-taking in trading activity, to 
facilitate monitoring and supervision of these banks and to make the recovery and resolution 
measures easier to impose. At the same time, we wanted to preserve the universal banking 
model that, by and large, has well served the European economy. 
Given these starting points, we proposed a mandatory separation of a deposit entity and a 
trading  entity  within  a  banking  group.  Based  on  this  recommendation,  the  European 
Commission presented its proposal for the Regulation on structural measures January this 
year.  The  objectives  of  the  Commission´s  proposal  are  similar  to  ours.  However,  the 
Commission´s proposal leaves more discretion to the authorities concerning the separation 
process.  In  addition,  the  Commission´s  proposal  includes  an  outright  ban  on  organised 
proprietary trading as in the Volcker reform. 
I welcome the Commission´s proposal and I am pleased that the Council working group has 
been negotiating of the proposal throughout the summer. Of course, more progress will be 
made in the autumn, when the new Commission and Parliament start their work. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  Concluding remarks 
Banks  play  an  important  role  in  the  economy  as  the  key  financiers  of  households  and 
companies, among other tasks. Banks´ role is especially important in Europe, as they are by 
far the most important source of finance for small and medium-sized enterprises. 
One  of  the  principal  aims  of  the  ongoing  regulatory  reforms  and  other  policy  actions  is  to 
enhance  the  ability  of  the  financial  sector  to  provide  loans  and  other  financial  services 
efficiently and without compromising financial stability. Being successful in these aims would 
improve the long-term growth prospects of the European economy and thus the welfare of 
European citizens. 
Banks´  reputation  and  the  public  confidence  towards  banks  have  suffered  badly  since  the 
financial  crisis.  That  has  harmed  not  only  banks  but  also  the  wider  economy.  We  must 
rebuild the confidence on financial institutions and financial markets. The regulatory reforms 
advance that aim. I strongly believe that the ongoing reforms will benefit us all – the citizens, 
the wider economy, but also the financial institutions. 
 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
