  Norman T L Chan: Brief remarks on the development of the RMB market 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Norman  T  L  Chan,  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary 
Authority,  at  the  Second  Hong  Kong  –  Australia  RMB  Trade  and  Investment  Dialogue, 
Hong Kong, 22 May 2014. 
 Treasury  Secretary  (Martin)  Parkinson,  (Deputy  Governor)  Philip  (Lowe),  distinguished 
guests, ladies and gentlemen: 
1. 
Good morning. It is my great pleasure to welcome you to the second Hong Kong – 
Australia RMB Trade and Investment Dialogue. I would like to especially extend a 
warm  welcome  to  our  friends  from  Australia.  This  Dialogue  attests  to  the  spirit  of 
collaboration that we share, and indeed it is collaboration that will take us forward in 
the development of the RMB market. The seminar today will be a good opportunity 
for  us  to  take  stock  of  recent  developments,  exchange  views  and  share 
experiences, and identify our priorities ahead. 
I recall that three years ago, in March 2011, I visited Sydney on a roadshow to talk 
about Hong Kong’s newly created offshore RMB business platform. This was in fact 
the very first in a series of roadshows that I and my HKMA colleagues organised, 
covering key markets in South America, Russia, Middle East, Japan, Spain, the UK 
and  the  US.  In  our  Sydney  roadshow,  I  was  particularly  impressed  by  the  keen 
interest  and  high  level  of  curiosity  of  the  Australian  audience,  who  wanted  to 
understand more what RMB internationalisation was all about and what it meant for 
them as corporates with trading and investment links with China. We were then at 
an early stage of this long and exciting journey of RMB internationalisation. At that 
time,  the  cross-border  RMB  trade  settlement  scheme  was  still  a  “pilot”  and  only 
covered  selected  provinces  in  the  Mainland.  RMB  trade  settlement  handled  by 
banks  in  Hong  Kong  was  only  some  RMB100  billion  a  month,  which  is  less  than 
one-fifth of the RMB600 billion registered in March this year. 
The offshore RMB market in Hong Kong has indeed achieved phenomenal progress 
in  the  past  three  years.  Hong  Kong’s  RMB  real  time  gross  settlement  system 
registered  an  average  daily  turnover  of  close  to  RMB700  billion  in  April  this  year, 
which is about twelve times the level when I visited Sydney in 2011. In the foreign 
exchange market – another area where activities have picked up sharply – we are 
seeing  an  average  turnover  of  RMB  spot  and  forward  transactions  of  some 
US$20 billion  to  US$30  billion  equivalent  every  day.  I  also  note  that  remarkable 
developments  have  been  achieved  in  Australia,  with  recent  data  suggesting  that 
Australia’s RMB payments value increased by close to 2.5 times year on year. More 
broadly  speaking,  the  RMB  is  now  the  seventh  most  used  payment  currency 
according  to  the  Society  for  Worldwide  Interbank  Financial  Telecommunication 
(SWIFT),  and  the  ninth  most  actively  traded  currency  according  to  the  Bank  for 
International Settlements (BIS). 
To me, the extent and pace of the development of offshore RMB business depends 
on three key factors. The first factor is the relaxation of controls and restrictions by 
the  Mainland  authorities.  The  second  factor  is  the  availability  of  the  necessary 
financial market infrastructure, such as clearing and settlement systems. The third 
factor  is  the  awareness  and  willingness  of  corporates  and  financial  institutions, 
especially banks, to develop RMB business opportunities. 
Since the RMB trade settlement pilot scheme was launched back in July 2009, the 
Mainland authorities have incrementally removed many controls and restrictions on 
the flow of RMB out of and into the Mainland. Presently all trade and current account 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 6. 
7. 
8. 
2 
  transactions between Mainland China and other parts of the world, as well as inward 
and  outward  direct  investment  into  and  out  of  China,  can  be  conducted  in  RMB. 
Moreover,  some  cross-border  portfolio  investment flows,  such  as  investments  into 
China’s bond and equity markets, can also be made in RMB via the RMB Qualified 
Foreign Institutional Investors (RQFII) scheme. 
More  importantly,  in  April  this  year  the  Mainland  and  Hong  Kong  authorities 
announced  a  milestone  project,  i.e.  the  Shanghai-Hong  Kong  Stock  Connect 
scheme. The scheme, which is to be launched later this year, will allow Hong Kong 
and  international  investors  to  invest  in  shares  listed  on  the  Shanghai  Stock 
Exchange through Hong Kong. At the same time, Mainland investors can invest in 
shares  listed  on  the  Hong  Kong  Stock  Exchange  through  Shanghai.  This 
unprecedented  bridge  linking  the  Hong  Kong  and  Shanghai  stock  markets  will 
create an additional channel for cross-border portfolio investment flows using RMB. 
Given all these relaxations and the new schemes permitting cross-border flows of 
RMB,  I  think  there  is  ample  policy  headroom  for  the  offshore  RMB  markets  to 
develop  and  flourish.  At  the  same  time,  we  have  seen  the  emergence  of  the 
necessary financial infrastructure, not just in Hong Kong but also in many offshore 
centres,  that  would  facilitate  efficient  and  safe  clearing  and  settlement  of  RMB 
transactions in the offshore markets. 
As  I  said  earlier,  the  pace  of  the  development  of  offshore  RMB  business  and 
markets  also  crucially  depends  on  the third factor, that  is the  role  that the  private 
sector can and should play in the process. It is not likely that a market can thrive just 
with  policy  headroom  and  financial  infrastructure.  Banks  and  other  financial 
institutions must develop their capability to satisfy their customers who have a need 
or  an  interest  in  using  RMB.  Trading  companies  need  trade  finance  in  RMB. 
Corporates  investing  in  China  need  direct  or  indirect  financing  in  RMB  and  asset 
owners  need  a  variety  of  RMB  financial  products.  Many  of  them  need  to  use 
instruments  to  manage  or  hedge  their  RMB  exposures.  All  these  RMB  related 
financial services and products can only be developed by the markets and financial 
institutions because they are closest to their customers and understand their needs 
best.  That  is  why  it  is  so  important  for  the  HKMA  to  collaborate  with  our  official 
sector counterparts in Australia to create this private-sector led Dialogue. The first 
Dialogue was held in Sydney in April last year, which was highly successful. I am 
very  pleased  that  it  is  Hong  Kong’s  turn  to  host  the  second  Dialogue  and  I  am 
confident that it will be equally if not more successful. I note that today’s Dialogue 
has a very rich agenda and I look forward to hearing useful and practical ideas and 
suggestions on what the private sector can do on its own or in collaboration with the 
official  sector  to  further  develop  the  offshore  RMB  markets  in  Australia  and  Hong 
Kong. 
Thank you very much. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
