  Yuba Raj Khatiwada: Overview of Nepal’s recent macroeconomic 
performances 
Speech by Dr Yuba Raj Khatiwada, Governor of the Central Bank of Nepal, at the 43rd Asian 
Clearing Union (ACU) Board of Directors Meeting, Kish Island, Iran, 23 May 2014. 
 Honorable Chairperson Mr. Valiollah Seif, Fellow Governors and members of the ACU Board 
of Directors, ACU Secretary General Mrs. Lida Borhan-Azad, Other attending delegates and 
observers, ladies and gentlemen 
Let me join fellow governors to express my sincere thanks to Governor Mr. Valiollah Seif and 
the entire team of Central Bank of Islamic Republic of Iran for the warm hospitality extended 
to  us  and  also  for  the  excellent  arrangements  made  for  the  meeting  in  this  beautiful  Kish 
Island.  I  also  thank  the  Governor  of  State  Bank  of  Pakistan  for  successfully  handling  the 
chairpersonship of ACU for 2013 and the Secretary General of ACU for efficiently managing 
the Union’s operation during the same period. 
Fellow governors and distinguished delegates, 
We  are  meeting  at  this  forum  to  foster  regional  trade  through  the  promotion  of  a  credible 
payment system. While talking regional trade, we have our eyes on the global recovery from 
the crisis, as it has significant bearing on our trade and investment activities. As we know, 
the global economic growth has shown marginal improvements in the later part of the last 
year and early part of the current year, impetus coming especially from advanced economies 
with  supportive  monetary  conditions  and  fiscal  consolidation;  but  their  growth  remains 
uneven.  Inflation  in  these  economies,  however,  has  undershot  projections  reflecting 
commodity  price  decline  and  output  gaps.  Activities  in  emerging  market  economies  and 
developing  economies  have  not  shown  very  encouraging  trend,  although  they  continue  to 
contribute  more  than  two-thirds  of  global  growth.  The  challenges  of  the  emerging  market 
economies  and  developing  economies  have  increased  with  financial  volatility  posed  by 
unexpected  normalization  of  US  monetary  policy.  Despite  that  low-income  countries  have 
succeeded  in  maintaining  strong  growth  reflecting  better  macro-economic  policies,  their 
external  environments  remain  challenging.  In  essence,  the  global  recovery  is  still  fragile 
despite  improved  prospects  and  significant  downside  risks.  The  challenge  to  growth  has 
further  fueled  by  recent  geo-political  risks,  a  sort  of  deflation  in  Euro  zone  and  external 
environment, which could result in further financial turmoil.  
Fellow governors and distinguished delegates, 
I  take  this  opportunity  also  to  shed  some  lights  on  Nepal’s  recent  macroeconomic 
performances. As an upshot of the economic and financial slowdown of the world economy 
in  recent  years  and  its  subsequent  repercussion  on  the  Nepalese  economy  coupled  with 
prevailing political instability, Nepal is grappling with the challenges of low economic growth, 
inflationary  pressure  and  vulnerable  external  sector.  However,  on  the  basis  of  recent 
improvements in the domestic political and economic environment along with improvements 
in world financial market and prospective outlook of the global economy in the year 2014, a 
positive impact is expected in some major areas of the economy specially tourism, foreign 
employment,  foreign  investments  and  exports.  The  outlook  for  2014  is  a  higher  growth  of 
around 5.5 percent, compared with less than 4 per cent in 2013, contributed mainly by sound 
performance  of  agriculture  sector.  The  consumer  price  inflation  is  expected  to  remain  at 
around 9 percent in 2014. On the external front, exports have increased slower than imports 
thus further widening the trade deficit to nearly 30 percent of GDP. However, improvements 
in the service incomes, grants and remittance inflows exceeding 31 per cent of GDP have 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  contributed to a surplus in the current account amounting to 4 per cent of GDP estimated for 
2014. The  overall  balance  of  payments  has registered  a  surplus for  the  last  several  years 
and  is  estimated  to  remain  at  USD  1.05  billion  in  2014.  As  a  result  of  the  balance  of 
payments surplus, gross foreign exchange reserves of the banking system have reached to 
US$  6.7  billion  at  April  2014;  and  the  reserves  of  the  banking  system  are  sufficient  for 
financing  merchandise  imports  of  more  than  11  months  and  merchandise  and  service 
imports of more than 10 months. 
Fellow governors and distinguished delegates, 
In the fiscal sector, a higher rate of growth in resource mobilization relative to government 
expenditure has resulted in budget surplus. Fiscal prudence over the last several years has 
helped  to  confine  outstanding  domestic  debt  at  12.9  percent  of  the  GDP.  The  country 
remains lowly indebted, as outstanding total public debt, both domestic and foreign together, 
accounts for little over 31 percent of GDP. 
Due to strong balance of payments situation mostly contributed by high remittance inflows, 
liquidity in the banking system has remained high for some time now. Monetary growth has 
remained at 18 per cent in April 2014 on point to point basis while most interest rates have 
come  down  to  single  digit.  Despite  high  monetary  liquidity,  growth  of  credit  to  the  private 
sector  remains  within  targeted  band.  Further,  the  degree  of  financialization  is  still  low  and 
total credit of banks and financial institutions stands at just 63 per cent of GDP. 
The  financial  sector  strategy  of  the  Nepal  Rastra  Bank  has  now  been  to  consolidate  the 
institutional  expansion  along  with  ensuring  wider  and  better  access  to  financial  services. 
Hence,  while  merger  of  urban-centered  institutions  is  encouraged,  expansion  of  micro 
finance  institutions  in  the  rural  areas  establishment  of  bank  branches  in  the  underserved 
areas is given a priority. On the whole, financial policy comprises of a two-pronged strategy – 
consolidating the urban financial institutions and expanding the institutional presence in the 
rural areas. Bank licensing, bank branch expansion, refinance, and credit policies are geared 
towards this direction. The NRB is of the view that the expansion of the financial sector will 
be constrained without the growth of the real sector. Thus, priority has been accorded to the 
productive  use  of  bank  credit  to  the  promotion  of  the  real  sector  through  judicious  use  of 
credit and macro-prudential policies. As a competitive, efficient and healthy financial system 
is vital for enhancing economic growth, ensuring economic efficiency and maintaining macro-
economic stability, a reasonable growth of the real economy is equally important to sustain 
the expansion of the financial services. 
As  financial  stability  has  been  a  primary  concern  of  Nepal  Rastra  Bank,  it  has  been 
addressing pertinent issues such as productive use of credit, enhancing access to financial 
services,  deposit  guarantee,  exercise  of  macro-prudential  measures,  strengthened  bank 
supervision  and  enforcement  of  good  governance  measures.  It  has  introduced  some 
measures  such  as  early  warning,  prompt  corrective  actions,  know-your  customer,  stress 
testing and risk based supervision to ensure resilience of the financial system. We are also 
embarking  on  a  strong  legal  framework  for  anti-money  laundering  and  financial  crisis 
management. 
Fellow governors and distinguished delegates, 
While  going  through  the  overall  ACU  transaction,  trade  routed  through  ACU  in  last  three 
years has declined significantly by about 30 percent, 37 percent and 8 percent in 2011, 2012 
and  2013  respectively.  Similarly,  following  the  trend  of  preceding  years,  total  transactions 
have declined by about 12 percent during the first three months of the current year on y-o-y 
basis compared to the figure of last year. Further, the trade is concentrated, primarily, within 
a few member countries. All these facts warrant member countries to evaluate the trend; and 
I urge all the fellow governors to rethink on how we can better serve the enshrined objectives 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  of  establishment  of  the  ACU  mainly  promoting  regional  trade  and  monetary  co-operation 
amongst the members. 
As regards to our activities under ACU, the share of Nepal on total transactions of the ACU 
member countries routed through ACU mechanism accounts for roughly 0.40 percent, which 
is fluctuating around same figure over the last few years and its transactions during 2013 has 
declined  by  about  30  percent  compared  to  2012.  Similarly,  there  is  a  decline  of  its 
transactions by about 23 percent over the first three months of the current year compared to 
the  same  period  of  the  previous  year.  Its  exports  to  ACU  member  countries  is  hovering 
around 5 percent of our total exports and the share of imports from ACU member countries 
has  been  around  half  percent  of  our  total  imports  excluding  the  trade  data  with  India.  As 
more efforts are needed to promote trade through the ACU mechanism, Nepal Rastra Bank 
is committed to work together with other member central banks towards creating an enabling 
environment for the same. 
In this opportune occasion, I would reiterate Nepal rastra Bank’s commitment and belief in 
the mission of our Union. I am confident that this meeting would be instrumental in exploring 
new avenues of co-operation and further simplification in the existing payment mechanism in 
the pursuit of fostering its effectiveness for facilitating trade amongst member countries and 
enhancing monetary as well as technical co-operation among us. Before concluding, I would 
like once again to thank Dr. Seif and the Central Bank of IR of Iran for the kind hospitality and 
excellent arrangements made in hosting this meeting. 
Thank you Mr. Chairman. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
