Ardian Fullani: Overview of Albania’s latest monetary and economic 
developments and outlook 
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  on  the  Monetary  Policy 
Decision of the Bank of Albania’s Supervisory Council, Tirana, 25 June 2014. 
 The Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania reviewed and approved today the monthly 
Monetary Policy Report. Based on the most recent economic and monetary developments in 
Albania, and following the discussions on their outlook, the Supervisory Council decided to 
keep  the  key  interest  rate  unchanged,  at  2.50%.  The  Council  considers  that  the  gradual 
transmission  of  earlier  interest  rate  cuts  to  the  financial  markets  will  provide  adequate 
monetary conditions for inflation to return to target over the medium term. 
Let  me  now  proceed  with  an  overview  of  the  economic  developments  and  key  issues 
discussed at today’s meeting. 
 Annual inflation rate was 1.6% in May, slightly down from the previous month. Inflation fell 
due to the reduction of health care prices, while prices of other items in the basket recorded 
low  volatility.  As  with  previous  months,  annual  inflation  continues  to  be  determined  by 
unprocessed food prices, which contribute around 88% to its final rate. 
From  the  macroeconomic  perspective,  the  performance  of  consumer  prices  continues  to 
reflect weak inflationary pressures, both from the domestic economy and the external sector. 
The  negative  output  gap  does  not  favour  an  increase  in  employment  and  wages,  leading 
thus  to  a  low  increase  of  other  production  costs.  Imported  inflationary  pressures  remain 
subdued; inflation in Albania’s trading partners and the rise in commodity prices are at low 
levels, while the exchange rate is stable. Inflation expectations and the liquidity situation in 
the economy are in line with the low inflation rates for the period ahead. 
Indirect  available  data  on  economic  activity  signal  for  positive  growth  rates  in  the  first 
months  of  the  year.  Aggregate  demand  improved,  driven  by  both  private  domestic  and 
foreign  demand,  while  the  consolidating  fiscal  policy  pursued  during  this  period  did  not 
contribute to an increase in demand. 
Incoming  data  for  June  have  not  changed  our  assessment  on  the  performance  of  private 
consumption and investments. While these important components of aggregate demand 
were  upward  during  the  period,  their  performance  remains  weak.  Their  steady  recovery 
continues to be impeded by uncertainties faced by households and businesses and reflected 
in  the  greater  risk  aversion  of  the  real  and  financial  sectors  of  the  economy.  The  Bank of 
Albania expects further improvement in private consumption and investments for the rest of 
the year, reflecting, among others, its easing monetary policy. The pace of recovery of these 
two  indicators  will  determine  the  short  and  medium-term  dynamics  of  the  country’s 
development. 
Data  on  public  sector  performance  show  a  consolidating  fiscal  policy  over  the  first  five 
months of the year. This policy materialised in a budget deficit of about 68% lower than the 
previous  year.  The  tightening fiscal  policy  is  evident  both  on  the  revenue  and  expenditure 
side. Fiscal revenues increased 9.0% in annual terms, while budget expenditures were 7.5% 
lower than the previous year. Our monetary policy easing has also taken into account this 
feature of fiscal policy that the Bank of Albania has urged and supported. However, the Bank 
of  Albania  would  like  to  bring  to  attention  the  need  for  a  more  uniform  distribution  of 
expenditures and budget deficit over the year, to enhance their effectiveness and avoid the 
fluctuations  that  their  excessive  concentration  may  cause  to  the  country’s  economic  and 
financial indicators. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The improved foreign demand and positive dynamic of some sectors of the economy were 
reflected in an increase in annual exports by 10.3% in April. The detailed analysis of trade 
data reveals encouraging signals about re-exporting and agricultural activities. Trade deficit, 
however, expanded 1.8% in April, due to the simultaneous increase of imports by 6.0%. In 
particular, the energy situation continues to burden the trade balance of the country due to 
high  levels  of  energy  imports.  Structural  improvements  to  the  economy  and  a  more 
favourable external environment would pave the way for a faster growth of Albanian exports. 
The  Bank  of  Albania  considers  this  channel  as  the  most  appropriate  tool  to  support  the 
country’s sustainable growth in the medium and long term. 
Projections for low annual inflation rates, against the backdrop of below-potential economic 
growth, have dictated the pursuit of an easing monetary policy by the Bank of Albania. At the 
end  of  May,  monetary  stimulus  was  strengthened  by  a  further  cut  in  the  key  interest  rate. 
Available information on financial markets shows that this cut has been fully transmitted to 
the  interbank  and  government  securities  markets.  It  was  also  reflected  in  lower  financing 
costs of the banking system, creating, in turn, premises for the transmission of stimulus to 
the  lending  interest  rates  and  further  to  the  economy.  The  Bank  of  Albania  calls  on  the 
banking system to comply with this important link of the transmission mechanism. 
Despite  the  easing  of  monetary  conditions,  the  economy’s  demand  for  financial  assets 
remains weak. Monetary indicators for April show a slower annual growth of money supply, 
to 0.7%. Its performance reflects the weak borrowing demand from the public sector and the 
contraction of credit to the private sector. In April, credit to the private sector was 2.4% lower 
than in the previous year, continuing to shrink for all but a year. The poor credit performance 
reflects  mainly  the  contraction  of  credit  to  businesses.  The  analysis  of  credit  demand  and 
supply  factors  shows  that  there  are  uncertainties  on  both  sides,  which  are  materialised  in 
high risk premiums. As we have previously stated, the steady improvement of crediting will 
follow the improvement of economic activity in the country. 
 At  the  end  of  discussions,  the  Supervisory  Council  concluded  that  the  incoming  available 
information does not alter our baseline projections. The economy will see a gradual growth 
during the year, with an improved pace over the second half. Nevertheless, the increase of 
aggregate  demand  will  remain  below  the  economy’s  potential  even  during  2014,  thus 
determining the gradual return of inflation to target. 
At the end of discussions, the Supervisory Council decided to keep the key interest 
rate unchanged, at 2.50%. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
