  Vítor Constâncio: Growing out of the crisis – is fixing finance enough 
Speech by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the Annual 
Hyman  P.  Minsky  Conference  on  the  State  of  the  US  and World  Economies, Washington 
DC, 10 April 2014. 
 Introduction 
In the wake of the financial crisis which started in 2008 and two years later evolved into a 
sovereign  debt  crisis,  there  is  little  evidence  that  the  European  economy  will  soon  be 
returning to robust growth. 
Risks  for  growth  remain  tilted  to  the  downside.  Many  European  countries  are  facing  low 
growth  prospects  and  are  plagued  by  record  high  unemployment,  especially  among  the 
young, pointing to a considerable slack in the labour market, lack of demand and subdued 
inflationary pressures, which in turn complicate the deleveraging process of sovereigns and 
households. 
There  is  now  a  real  but  mild  recovery  going  on,  and  there  are,  of  course,  a  number  of 
narratives about what can and should be done to restore growth on the European continent. 
Foremost among these is the idea that the economic recovery is hindered by weaknesses in 
bank balance sheets, and that if the weak European banks were to be fixed, growth would 
inevitably return. 
Naturally,  policy-makers  have  been  aware  of  the  negative  effect  that  weak  bank  balance 
sheets and deleveraging have had by restricting the normal flow of credit to the economy. 
The ECB has gone to great lengths to support the bank lending channel, and we are now 
conducting an asset quality review coupled with stress tests to ensure that banks complete 
the process of repairing their balance sheets. Furthermore, the banking union, consisting of 
genuine  supervision  and  resolution  at  the  European  level,  will  be  the  most  far-reaching 
change  introduced  since  the  inception  of the  euro.  European  countries  participating  in  this 
project can rest assured that systemic risks will be better addressed in the future, enhancing 
financial stability and boosting the credibility of banks. 
Nevertheless,  I  would  like  to  sound  a  note  of  caution  and  pose  two  questions  about  the 
benefits  of  restoring  a  well-functioning  banking  sector  in  Europe,  and  its  contribution  to 
growth: 
• 
First,  how  can  we  take  advantage,  in  terms  of  growth,  of  a  dynamic  and 
sophisticated financial industry without running into the risks it tends to create? 
Second,  is  restoring  a  well-functioning  financial  system  sufficient  for  robust  long-
term growth? 
 The  first  question  is  important  because  even  though  financial  intermediation  undoubtedly 
contributes to economic growth, the crisis has reminded us that finance can breed instability 
too,  and  that  the  welfare  costs  of  instability  can  be  very  high.  It  is  important  that  we  are 
aware  of  the  trade-off  between  growth  and  stability  when  designing  an  institutional 
framework for the future in which finance is not excessive. 
The  second  question  is  even  more  important,  as  it  refers  to  the  degree  to  which  we  can 
expect  robust  financial  sector-driven  growth  in  Europe  once  the  banking  union  becomes 
operational  and  all  the  problems  related  to  bank  balance  sheet  weaknesses  have  been 
properly addressed. It is my contention that the European economy is gripped by problems 
that are more serious than bank deleveraging and also of greater consequence, because it is 
not immediately clear how to address them. I will argue that even when bank balance sheets 
have been fully repaired, structural problems related to the slowdown in emerging markets, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  to weak domestic demand, and to structural phenomena such as the ageing population will 
continue to hamper European growth prospects. 
Finance and growth: an overview 
The  empirical  literature  on  finance  and  growth  has  accumulated  a  substantial  body  of 
evidence on the positive relationship between financial development and long-term economic 
growth over the past 20 years. From the academic literature, we have learned that countries 
with  higher  levels  of  financial  development  grow  at  a  faster  rate.  Industries  which  have  a 
greater  need  for  external  finance  and  face  better  growth  opportunities  grow  faster  in 
countries with a higher level of financial development.1 This positive effect has a well-known 
microeconomic underpinning: financial deepening alleviates financing constraints at the firm 
level, allowing firms to grow by engaging in higher capital investment and R&D investment, 
among other things.2 This large body of evidence strongly supports the view that by inducing 
a positive resource reallocation and by supporting the creative destruction-driven process of 
technological  innovation,  financial  deepening  has  a  transformational  effect  on  the  real 
economy. 
At the same time, the global financial crisis of 2008–09 reminded us of the perils of finance. 
Academic  research  has  suggested  that  financial  development  does  not  have  a  uniformly 
positive  effect  on  economic  growth,  at  all  levels  of  financial  intermediation.  The  evidence 
points  to  the  fact  that  there  is  a  threshold  beyond  which  the  positive  effect  of  finance  on 
growth starts petering out.3 A BIS paper puts that threshold at 100% to 150% of GDP.4 There 
are  different  reasons  for  this  concept  of  a  threshold.  For  example,  an  excessively  large 
financial  industry  can  lead  to  a  migration  of  talented  individuals  away  from  productive 
sectors.5  Alternatively,  as  the  financial  sector  grows  too  large,  financial  intermediaries  can 
start  taking  on  excessive  risk,  and  this  behaviour  can  expose  the  economy  to  large 
macroeconomic contractions.6 
In other words, while we know that we need a well-functioning financial sector, we have to 
pay attention to its evolution. At reasonable levels, finance is essential for growth, but once it 
grows to an excess, the damage it can do can easily wipe out its positive contribution. This is 
why we should resist the efforts of the industry to push back on regulatory reform with the 
argument  that more finance  is  always  good for growth  and  jobs.  Fortunately,  we  will  have 
now a leverage ratio that will be an important instrument to control possible excesses of the 
                                                
1   King,  R.,  and  R.  Levine,  1993,  “Finance  and  growth:  Schumpeter  might  be  right”,  Quarterly  Journal  of 
Economics 108, 717–7137; Rajan, R. and L. Zingales, 1998, “Financial dependence and growth”, American 
Economic Review 88, 559–586; Fisman, R., and I. Love, 2007, “Financial dependence and growth revisited”, 
Journal of the European Economic Association 5, 470–479. 
2   Love,  I,  2003,  “Financial  development  and  financing  constraints:  Evidence  from  the  structural  investment 
model”, Review of Financial Studies 16, 765–791; Brown, J., Fazzari, S., and M. Petersen, 2009, “Financing 
innovation  and  growth:  Cash  flow,  external  equity,  and  the  1990s  R&D  boom”,  Journal  of  Finance  64, 
151–185. 
3   Rioja, F., and N. Valev, 2004, “Does one size fit all? A re-examination of the finance and growth relationship”, 
Journal of Development Economics 74, 429–447; Manganelli, S., and A. Popov, 2013, “Financial dependence, 
global growth opportunities, and growth revisited”, Economics Letters 120, 123–125. 
4   Cecchetti,  S.  and  E.  Kharroubi,  2012,  “Reassessing  the  impact  of  finance  on  growth”,  BIS  Working 
Paper No 38. 
5   Tobin,  J.,  1984,  “On  the  efficiency  of  the  financial  system”,  Lloyds  Bank  Review  153,  1–15;  Philippon,  T., 
2010,  “Financiers  vs.  engineers:  Should  the  financial  sector  be  taxed  or  subsidized”,  American  Economic 
Journal: Macroeconomics 2, 158–182. 
6   Rajan,  R.,  2006,  “Has  finance  made  the  world  riskier?”,  European  Financial  Management  12,  499–533; 
Brunnermeier,  M.,  and  Y.  Sannikov,  2014,  “A  macroeconomic  model  with  a  financial  sector”,  American 
Economic Review 104, 379–421. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  financial system, especially if its level will be set above the 3% of the initial proposal as it has 
been done recently in the US. 
Finance and growth in the post-crisis world 
During the financial crisis, financial intermediation in Europe was greatly impaired, and the 
recovery  in  credit  supply  has  been  slow  at  best.  Credit  standards  for  loans  to  enterprises 
were  reported  to  have  been  tightened  by  a  net  percentage  of  around  40%  of  euro  area 
banks, on average, in each quarter between the third quarter of 2007 and the second quarter 
of 2009. After a period of stabilisation, they started tightening rapidly again in the summer of 
2011.7 This process reflects the rapid deleveraging that banks have been engaged in. For 
example,  just  between  May  2012  and  November  2013,  the  size  of  the  collective  balance 
sheet  of  euro  area  banks  dropped  by  €3.5  trillion.  Households  and  firms  in  the  euro  area 
have been strongly affected by this contraction of credit. Over the same period, lending to 
non-financial corporations dropped by €361 billion, or 7.5%. 
In the light of my discussion of the effect of finance and growth, this is not necessarily an 
unnatural development. The euro area financial sector was overextended before the crisis, 
with the balance sheets of the euro area’s largest banks remaining even today among the 
largest in any region of the world. Contraction is the only way to bring the financial sector to a 
more “reasonable” size which is relatively more conducive to long-term economic growth. Of 
course,  we  do  not  fail  to  recognise  that  in  a  recession  environment,  bank  deleveraging 
makes  policy-makers’  goal  of  encouraging  lending  to  non-financial  corporations,  and 
especially to SMEs (which provide the bulk of employment in Europe), very problematic. 
Many  countries  have  in  the  past  experienced  boom-bust  episodes  brought  about  by  some 
sort of financial market excess. The three major types of such excess are asset price booms, 
credit booms and real estate booms. The recessions that follow any of these episodes are 
deeper than standard business cycle contractions; they are even deeper when two of these 
excesses take place at the same time; and they are deepest when all three are present.8 The 
global  financial  crisis  was  preceded  by  all  three,  and  so  the  sluggish  recovery  of  the 
European economy simply reinforces conventional wisdom. 
The resulting state of affairs is a so-called “creditless” recovery in the euro area. Right now 
we  are  witnessing  the  co-existence  of  low  levels  of  credit  to  the  private  sector  and  three 
consecutive  quarters  of  positive  GDP  growth.  Such  creditless  recoveries  are  far  from 
unusual:  one  out  of  five  recoveries  is  “creditless”,  and  output  growth  during  creditless 
recoveries tends to be lower than output growth during recoveries when the financial sector 
is not impaired. Such recoveries are particularly common after financial crises, and are often 
preceded  by  high  levels  of  private  sector  indebtedness.9  Nevertheless,  it  seems  that 
declining  bank  credit  to  the  private  sector  does  not  necessarily  constitute  a  constraint  on 
economic  recovery  once  output  has  bottomed  out.  Moreover,  credit  growth  and  output 
growth  tend  to  be  uncorrelated  in  the  aftermath  of  financial  crises  that  were  preceded  by 
credit booms, suggesting that private sector deleveraging does not necessarily pose a threat 
to  the  post-crisis  recovery.  A  recent  BIS  paper  extends  earlier  evidence  for  emerging 
                                                
7   See the ECB’s bank lending survey. 
8   Claessens, S., Kose, A., and M. Terrones, 2008, “What happens during recessions, crunches, and busts?”, 
Economic Policy 24, 653–700. 
9   Abiad, A., Dell’Ariccia, G., and B. Li, 2011, “Creditless recoveries”, IMF Working Paper 11/58; Bijsterbosch, 
M., and T. Dahlhaus, 2011, “Determinants of credit-less recoveries”, ECB Working Paper No 1358. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
economies  to  advanced  economies.10  International  evidence  suggests  that  recoveries 
following financial crises are often not just creditless, but also jobless.11 
In  other  words,  following  a  financial  crisis,  it  is  not  uncommon  to  have  a  recovery  without 
finance.  This  is  an  important  observation,  and  one  that  is  at  odds  with  the  conventional 
wisdom that finance is indispensable for economic growth. Numerous voices these days urge 
European policy-makers to repair the balance sheets of banks so that they can lend again 
and  in  the  process  jump-start  GDP  growth.  There  will  be  no  growth  without  finance,  the 
narrative goes, and the fact that the United States has returned to robust economic growth 
faster than Europe is to a large degree put down to policy-makers acting quickly to repair the 
balance sheets of US banks. 
This narrative, while intuitively compelling, is missing two crucial points. The first is that bank 
balance sheets in the euro area have to a large degree already been repaired. For instance, 
since the onset of the global financial crisis until last year, the top 20 European banks have 
increased their capital in absolute amounts net of shares buybacks by 60% more than the 
top  20  American  banks.  As  a  result,  large  parts  of  the  sector  now  fully  comply  with  the 
minimum capital requirements under Basel III well ahead of 2018. The remaining weakness 
will  be  addressed  in  the  near  future,  and  once  the  architecture  of  the  banking  union  is 
operating  after  our  comprehensive  assessment  of  banks’  situation,  I  expect  that  the 
European banking sector will be in a solid shape. 
But even if we were to agree that finance is a necessary condition for growth (a conclusion 
that is called into question by the prevalence of creditless recoveries), it is far from clear that 
finance is a sufficient condition for jump-starting growth in Europe. I will argue that even a 
complete rehabilitation of the euro area’s banking system (which is well on its way thanks to 
the various policy steps related to the banking union) will not guarantee a quick return to high 
growth  and  low  unemployment.  In  fact,  the  euro  area  economy  faces  a  number  of  issues 
which are potentially more serious than the damage inflicted by the financial crisis and the 
subsequent euro area crisis on the euro area banking sector. These issues are also far more 
difficult to address. 
Short-run non-financial impediments to growth in Europe 
Let me now talk briefly about what I believe are the chief obstacles to growth in the future. I 
want  first  to  highlight  three  short-term  impediments  in  Europe:  the  slowdown  in  emerging 
markets,  the  fall  in  domestic  private  investment,  and  weak  domestic  demand.  I  will  then 
move on to longer-term considerations. 
In  my  view,  chief  among  these  short-term  impediments  is  the  remarkable  slowdown  in 
emerging markets. Take as an example the four BRIC countries (Brazil, Russia, India and 
China).  While  in  2007  these  countries  grew  at  an  average  rate  of  9.8%,  in  2013  they 
managed a rate of growth of only about 4%, on average, the lowest growth rate in more than 
a decade if we exclude the crisis in 2009. This was largely due to country-specific factors, 
such as excessive investment in China and infrastructure and regulatory bottlenecks in Brazil 
and India, to mention just a few. This process is necessarily accompanied by a reduction in 
demand for foreign goods, including euro area exports. This is bad news for the euro area, 
whose  recovery  so  far has  been  largely  driven  by  export  strength. In  addition  to  structural 
issues, there are a number of potential risk factors that have not materialised. For example, 
there is a risk of a real estate bubble in Brazil,  where house prices have doubled in three 
years. 
                                                
10   Takats, E., and C. Upper, 2013, “Credit and growth after financial crises”, BIS Working Paper No 416. 
11   Calvo, G., Coricelli, F., and P. Ottonello, 2013, “Jobless recoveries during financial crises: Is inflation on the 
way out?”, NBER Working Paper 19683. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
A second important factor is the large drop in domestic private investment following the 
onset of the global financial crisis. Between 2007 and 2011, private investment in the then 
27 countries  of  the  EU  fell  by  €354  billion,  a  15%  decline  relative  to  its  2007  level.  This 
compares  with  a  mere  €17  billion  (or  0.2%)  drop  in  private  consumption.  While  it  is  not 
unusual for private investment to fall sharply during a contraction in real GDP, its contribution 
to the latest contraction in the EU is among the largest on record, and some countries have 
seen unprecedented declines (for instance, over the same period private investment declined 
by  27%  in  Spain,  by  47%  in  Greece  and  by  64%  in  Ireland).  Today,  private  investment  is 
almost 20% below a 25-year trend that came to an end with the financial crisis.12 
The  third  important factor  is weakness in domestic demand.  This  is  often  left  out  of  the 
public  discourse,  but  micro  evidence  suggests  that  it  is  a  problem  that  cannot  be 
underestimated.  For  example,  SMEs  interviewed  for  the  ECB’s  “Survey  on  the  access  to 
finance  of  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises  in  the  euro  area”  have  consistently  cited 
“finding  customers”  as  their  most  pressing  concern.  This  suggests  that  euro  area 
corporations  face  serious  problems  on  the  demand  side  which  seem  to  be  more  pressing 
than the problems stemming from the bank lending channel. By way of comparison, while in 
the  latest  wave  of  the  survey  24%  of  euro  area  SMEs  cite  demand  concerns  as the most 
limiting factor  in  their  operations,  only  16%  cite “access to finance”  as their  most  pressing 
concern. 
Of course, this is not to say that financial sector weaknesses are not important, or that they 
are not recognised. The massive Comprehensive Assessment of banks’ balance sheets is 
proof enough that we take the matter very seriously. My point is rather that while the ongoing 
deleveraging in the banking sector certainly plays an important role in the inadequate current 
levels of credit supply to the real economy, factors related to the demand side are even more 
important.  The  weak  demand  outlook  combined  with  slack  industrial  capacity  is  the  most 
important  explanation  for  the  drop  in  private  investment  during  the  crisis,  and  the  most 
important limiting factor for future investment. 
Long-term trends in growth: the global economy 
Let me now turn to the other fundamental challenges for growth that lie ahead of us, for the 
world economy and, in particular, for the euro area. After almost a decade of relatively fast-
paced  economic  growth  and  subdued  inflationary  pressures  in  the  period  preceding  the 
crisis, the “Goldilocks era”, we thought that the potential growth rate of the world economy 
could continue along the same trends. The global financial crisis has shaken our certainties 
about the sources of global growth, namely: (i) an endless growth of the world population, 
global trade and financial integration; (ii) the contribution of emerging markets as a separate 
engine of world growth; and finally (iii) the impact of technological progress, largely driven by 
the information technology and communication revolution. 
Let’s  assess  the  solidity  of  these  pillars  of  global  growth,  five  years  after  the  start  of  the 
global financial crisis. 
According  to  a  recent  report  that  has  been  produced  by  the  Centre  for  European  Policy 
Studies (CEPS), the global population may peak by 2030. The negative impact that this has 
on  future  growth  has  to  be  weighed  against  the  positive  effects  stemming  from  contained 
pressures on natural resources and energy. There is evidence that trade globalisation may 
have already reached a peak, and the potential for further financial globalisation is likely to 
stem mainly from developments in emerging markets.13 
                                                
12   McKinsey and Co., 2012, “Investing in growth: Europe’s next challenge”. 
13   “The  Global  Economy  in  2030:  Trends  and  Strategies  for  Europe”,  European  Strategy  and  Policy  Analysis 
System and Centre for European Policy Studies, April 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
The global value of trade as a ratio of world GDP peaked at 64% in 2008, compared with 
an average of less than 40% in the 1980s. Over the intervening period, from the 1990s to 
2007, the trade volume of goods and services grew, in real terms, at a remarkable pace of 
around 7% per year, on average, while it has posted a meagre rate of less than 3% in the 
past two years. Overall, according to IMF projections, world trade seems to have stabilised 
relative to world GDP around a plateau close to the level reached in 2008. 
The financial crisis has been accompanied by a significant retrenchment in cross-border 
financial  flows,  concentrated  in  particular  in  banking  flows  and,  to  a  lesser  extent,  in 
portfolio  and  FDI  flows.14  Across  advanced  economies,  a  revival  of  the  boom  in  financial 
integration that we experienced in the first decade of this century is unlikely.15 Nevertheless, 
the  scope  for  financial  deepening  and  capital  account  liberalisation  is  still  large  across 
emerging  markets.  This  represents  an  opportunity  and,  at  the  same  time,  a  significant 
challenge for emerging markets, the second pillar of the growth of the world economy. 
Let me then briefly discuss the role played by emerging markets. For the first time, at the end 
of last year, emerging markets and developing economies accounted for more than 50% of 
world  GDP,  when  measured  at  purchasing  power  parity.  From  now  on,  it  is  legitimate  to 
expect  that  the  value  added  produced  by  emerging  and  developing  economies  every  year 
will be larger than that produced by advanced economies. Moreover, emerging markets are 
expected to grow at a pace of more than 5% on an annual basis, more than twice the pace of 
advanced economies, so that their share in the world economy is bound to grow further. 
Can emerging markets represent an independent source of world growth? It is questionable 
that this will be the case. Much of the catching-up potential that emerging markets had at the 
beginning of the 1990s, in terms of capital accumulation, innovation and employment growth, 
has  already  been  realised.  Over  the  medium  to  long  term,  the  growth  path  of  emerging 
markets may remain bumpy, in particular if emerging markets fail to manage the process of 
financial  and  capital  account  liberalisation  or,  as  in  the  case  of  China,  the  needed 
rebalancing from investment to consumption as a main driver of domestic growth. 
The third pillar of long-term growth is further technological progress. Recent work by one of 
the  leading  scholars  of  growth  theory,  Robert  Gordon,  offers  a  particularly  downbeat 
assessment of the future of innovation. His main tenet is that innovation is not a continuous 
process, but a discrete one where waves of inventions are followed by their application and 
refinement to extract their full potential. Against this metric, though, the latest ICT revolution, 
having  generated  a  rather  short-lived  increase  in  productivity,  ranks  well  below  previous 
industrial revolutions.16 
Even if the rate of technological progress were to continue at the same pace of recent years, 
according  to  Gordon,  the  US  economy  in  any  case  faces  severe  “headwinds”  due  to 
demography,  education,  inequality,  globalisation,  energy/environmental  factors,  and  the 
overhang of consumer and government debt. 
Gordon’s  pessimism  seems  to  have  been  rather  contagious.  Late  last  year,  first  Paul 
Krugman  and  then  Lawrence  Summers  wondered  whether  advanced  economies  were 
slipping into a state of “secular stagnation”.17 This could be depicted as a condition where the 
                                                
14   Milesi-Ferretti  G.  and  C.  Tille,  2011,  “The  great  retrenchment:  international  capital  flows  during  the  global 
financial crisis”, Economic Policy 26, 285–342. 
15   See,  for  instance,  R.  Dobbs  and  S.  Lund,  “Is  financial  globalisation  in  retreat?  And  if  so,  does  it  matter?”, 
19 June 2013, http://www.voxeu.org/article/financial-globalisation-retreat-or-reset. 
16   Gordon, R., 2012, “Is U.S. economic growth over? Faltering innovation confronts the six headwinds”, NBER 
Working Paper 18315. 
17   Krugman,  P.,  September  2013, 
in  http://krug-
man.blogs.nytimes.com/2013/09/25/bubbles-regulation-and-secular-stagnation;  Summers,  L.,  Speech  at  the 
IMF Economic Forum on 8 November 2013. 
“Bubbles,  Regulation  and  Secular  Stagnation” 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  natural and equilibrium interest rate, the rate equalising desired savings and investment at 
full employment, is negative and economies are forced to generate bubbles and an overhang 
of  private  or  public  debt  to  support  aggregate  demand.  Research  at  the  BIS  shows  that, 
accounting for the financial cycle – including in particular information on the growth of credit 
and property prices – potential output estimates are much lower before the crisis and display 
less volatility during the crisis. This can be reconciled with a view reflecting the unsustainable 
nature  of  the  pre-crisis  financial  cycle,  leading  to  a  rethinking  of  the  potential  output 
measurement to include the effects of the financial cycle.18 
The  main  concern  is  that  this  potential  “secular  stagnation”  severely  curtails  the  scope for 
using  traditional  policy  levers,  hampering  the  growth  of  advanced  economies  so  that  it 
remains  below  potential.  On the  one  hand, the zero  lower  bound  to  nominal  interest  rates 
constrains  monetary  policy;  on  the  other  hand,  after  governments  have  absorbed  the 
liabilities  of  the  private  sector  following  the  bursting  of  the  bubble  and  public  debts  have 
swollen, the room for expansionary fiscal policies is severely limited. 
Long-term trends in growth: the euro area 
Is the euro area at risk of ending up in secular stagnation? Looking ahead, what are then the 
growth prospects and challenges for the euro area? 
On  the  back  of  the  fall  in  capital  accumulation  and  labour  utilisation,  euro  area  potential 
output growth declined from a level close to 2% in the years preceding the crisis to less than 
1% on average between 2008 and 2012. Notably, total factor productivity, which gauges the 
efficiency  of  the  use  of  the  factors  of  production,  even  though  subdued,  contributed  only 
marginally to this decline.19 However, over the medium to long term, cyclical factors dragging 
down  potential  output  are  expected  to  fade,  with  investment  recovering  through  the 
normalisation  of the  credit  channel  and  net  immigration,  which  also  has  an  indirect  impact 
through  an  increase  in  the  fertility  rate,  providing  renewed  support  to  the  employment 
contribution.  According  to  the  estimates  of  the  European  Commission’s  Ageing  Working 
Group, euro area potential output growth is expected to rebound to around 1.5% until 2025, 
mainly on the back of a positive contribution from labour input, and then to even out to 1.3% 
over the long run. 
For the euro area, the main structural challenge is posed by the ageing of the population and 
the ensuing decline in the share of the working age population. According to the CEPS report 
already mentioned, the European working age population will decline annually by 0.6% until 
2030,  meaning  that  the  contribution  of  labour  to  potential  output  is  projected  to  become 
negative. Potential output is expected to be supported by capital deepening, around half a 
percentage point, and, crucially, total factor productivity, assuming that it resumes growing at 
an annual pace of close to 1%, the rate prevailing at the beginning of the previous decade. 
Unfortunately,  since  the  start  of  the  crisis,  euro  area  total  factor  productivity  growth  has 
remained  subdued,  falling  behind  productivity  growth  in  the  United  States,  where  it 
rebounded  after  reaching  a  trough  in  2009.  The  crisis  and  the  persistent  low  levels  of 
capacity  utilisation  led  to  a  destruction  of  human  capital  in  those  firms  and  sectors 
experiencing  the  most  dramatic  downsizing.  In the  euro  area,  the greater  rigidity  of  labour 
and product market regulation as compared with the United States is likely to have hampered 
the needed reallocation of resources towards the most productive sectors. I will come back to 
this  later;  the  point  I  want  to  make  now  is  that  there  are  downside  risks  to  the  long-term 
                                                
18   Borio, C., P. Disyatat and M. Juselius, 2013, “Rethinking potential output: Embedding information about the 
financial cycle”, BIS Working Papers 404. 
19   ECB  Monthly  Bulletin,  November  2013  article:  “Potential  output,  economic  slack  and  the  link  to  nominal 
developments since the start of the crisis”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  projections  for  the  growth  of  euro  area  total  factor  productivity,  unless  the  euro  area 
implements reforms that foster innovation, competitiveness and the reallocation of resources 
towards the most productive sectors. 
What can policy do? 
During the financial crisis and the ensuing sovereign debt crisis, policy was mostly focused 
on  stabilisation.  Restoring  confidence  in  the  banking  system  and  repairing  excessive 
indebtedness  were  the  two  most  pressing  concerns,  and  they  were  addressed  forcefully. 
Today, the euro area’s economies have largely been stabilised relative to three or five years 
ago. 
On the basis of current trends, the euro area is facing a medium-term future of stable but low 
growth,  with  unemployment  evolving  to  lower  levels  in  15  years  as  a  result  of  a  declining 
active population. Europe has to react swiftly if it wants to avoid a whole generation being 
wasted and sacrificed. Can structural reforms provide a solution in the long run? There is not 
much we can do about the ageing of the population because European politics is refusing 
immigration and going Malthusian. In this context, can policy address the dual problems of 
weak demand and slack industrial capacity? 
Regarding demand, only a few countries have financial scope to stimulate consumption and, 
more importantly, to increase public investment in a context of very low interest rates. That is 
the answer that Bernanke and Blanchard suggest to dispel the risks of secular stagnation. 
The reality is nevertheless that Europe as a whole is still pursuing consolidation to achieve a 
reduction of debt ratios. In this context, the challenge is to counter the structural impediments 
driving potential growth down, above all the negative demographic trends, in a situation in 
which the scope and effectiveness of conventional macroeconomic policies is reduced. I will 
contend  that  it  is  of  paramount  importance  to  carry  out  those  structural  reforms  that  may 
increase  the  participation  rate  of  the  labour  force  and  lead  to  a  more  efficient  use  of  the 
factors of production. Reforms aimed at increasing investment and employment in the most 
productive sectors are particularly needed at the current juncture. 
The  preliminary  findings  of  the  Eurosystem’s  CompNet  network,  which  has  collected 
competitiveness  indicators  across  a  huge  sample  of  about  700,000  firms  from  11  EU 
countries,  show  a  strong  heterogeneity  of  firm  labour  productivity  within  and  across 
countries. The distribution of firms’ productivity, or cost structure, is not only very dispersed 
but also very asymmetric: there are few champions and a high proportion of low-performance 
firms.  For  policy-makers,  this  has  two  major  implications.  First,  when  talking  about  the 
competitiveness or productivity of a country, we must look much deeper than simple average 
indicators,  such  as  unit  labour  costs  or  market  shares.  The  same  policy  intervention  may 
produce  different  results,  depending  on  the  initial  distribution  of  firms’  productivity,  even  if 
average productivity is the same. Second, the dispersion and skewness of firms’ distribution 
have  important  implications  for  aggregate  productivity  growth.  A  recent  strand  of  literature 
has  shown  that  aggregate  productivity  in  a  country  may  be  lagging  behind  partly  because 
inputs  are  not  allocated  efficiently  across  firms  or  industries.  This  suggests  that  there  is 
significant scope to increase productivity through targeted policies, such as product market 
reforms, that facilitate the reallocation of resources across sectors and firms. For instance, 
the work of the CompNet network shows that better regulated industries are able to channel 
resources more efficiently to the most productive firms. Moreover, it can be shown that the 
contribution of the reallocation of resources to productivity growth has been reduced during 
the crisis period in some countries, such as Italy and Spain. This evidence may be viewed as 
an indicator of structural rigidities which have become binding in the great recession.20 
                                                
20   See  CompNet  Task  Force,  2014,  “Micro-based  evidence  of  EU  competitiveness:  the  CompNet  database”, 
ECB Working Paper No 1634, February. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Labour  market  reforms  have  also  been  advocated  by  many  commentators.  A  widely  held 
view during the 1990s was that labour market institutions were too rigid and that the common 
currency would make reform of these markets even more urgent. In the absence of country-
specific  monetary  policy,  and  with  national  fiscal  policy  bound  by  rules,  labour  market 
flexibility needed to become an important channel of adjustment.21 
This is added to the fact that labour mobility across national borders is traditionally low, with 
migration responding considerably more slowly to regional labour shocks than in the United 
States.22  The  crisis  itself  had  a  more  pernicious  and  long-lasting  effect  on  the  euro  area 
labour market through the increase in “structural unemployment” and “skills mismatch”, with 
the unemployment rates of those staying out of work for longer and those with lower skills 
increasing more in relation to the average unemployment rate. Participation rates have been 
negatively influenced by “discouraged” worker effects. 
Pressed  against  the  wall,  however,  governments  have  recently  acted  to  provide  a  legal 
framework for more growth. For example, Greece, Portugal and Spain have reformed their 
legislation to reduce the burden on firms and to encourage hiring and labour mobility. More 
can be done to reduce the corporate labour burden further and to ensure a level playing field 
that  does  not  hinder  young  people  and  favours  insiders.  Encouraging  a  more  flexible 
governance  structure  of  labour  market  institutions  accompanied  by  an  appropriate  social 
safety  net  and  active  labour  policies  can  also  contribute  to  a  reallocation  towards  more 
productive sectors.23 
While  a  well-functioning  safety  net  reduces 
the  short-run  consequences  of  high 
unemployment, the fact that so many (in particular young and educated) workers are out of 
work  today  could  have  serious  implications  for  long-term  growth  prospects  in  Europe. 
Persistently high unemployment diminishes the economy’s ability to cope with more turbulent 
economic  developments,  such  as  the  restructuring  from  manufacturing  to  the  services 
industry, the adoption of new information technologies, and a rapidly changing international 
economy.24  It  is  important  to  recall  that  Europe  still  has  a  lot  of  improvements  to  make  in 
terms  of  increasing  the  segment  of  the  population  with  a  complete  tertiary  education,  a 
measure on which we lag well behind the United States and which is so important to foster 
total factor productivity. 
Policy-makers can tackle the negative long-term consequences by enacting policies aimed at 
reducing the negative impact of long-term unemployment on human capital. One such policy 
that  has  proved  effective  in  the  past  is  training.  On-the-job  training  provides  workers  with 
general skills, but especially with the industry-specific skills that are indispensable in today’s 
knowledge economies. Training has been shown to have a significant positive effect on firm-
level  value  added  growth,  productivity  and  innovation.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  costly;  for 
example, overall expenditure on professional training in the United States amounts each year 
to almost one-third of overall expenditure on formal education. So even though the benefits 
to  the  firm  of  training  are  obvious,  workers  are  less  likely  to  receive  it  in  an  environment 
where  access  to  external  finance  is  constrained.25  And  the  unemployed  are  obviously 
                                                
21   Arpaia, A., and G. Mourre, 2009, “Institutions and performance in European labor markets: Taking a fresh look 
at  evidence”,  European  Economy  –  Economic  Paper  391,  Directorate  General  Economic  and  Monetary 
Affairs, European Commission. 
22   Decressin,  J.,  and  A.  Fatas,  1995,  “Regional  labor  market  dynamics  in  Europe”,  European  Economic 
Review 39, 1627–1655. 
23   Dustmann,  C.,  Fitzenberger,  B.,  Schonberg,  U.,  and  A.  Spitz-Oener,  2014,  “From  sick  man  of  Europe  to 
economic superstar: Germany’s resurgent economy”, Journal of Economic Perspectives 28, 167–188. 
24   Ljungqvist,  L.,  and  T.  Sargent,  1998,  “The  European  unemployment  dilemma”,  Journal  of  Political 
Economy 106, 514–550. 
25   Popov,  A,  2014,  “Credit  constraints  and  investment  in  human  capital:  Training  evidence  from  transition 
economies”, Journal of Financial Intermediation 23, 76–100. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  completely  shut  out  of  firm-provided  on-the-job  training.  This  is  where  policy  can  help,  by 
subsidising  various  active  labour  market  programmes  aimed  at  equipping  unemployed 
workers  with  professional  skills.  There  is  much  evidence  that  such  programmes  are 
beneficial not only for the overall economy, as they increase its skill intensity, but also for the 
workers themselves, whose employment and earnings increase in the medium and long run. 
These benefits are greater when overall unemployment is high, as is the case in a number of 
euro area countries right now.26 
Subsidising R&D is another policy that can be used to target an improvement in long-term 
productivity in a low-growth environment. Contrary to theoretical prediction, recent evidence 
suggests that R&D investment tends to be pro-cyclical. So, rather than picking up during a 
recession, when the opportunity cost of innovation is lower – as a number of theories have 
suggested in the past – R&D investment tends to fall dramatically when demand is low.27 If 
the  market  allocates  an  inefficiently  low  fraction  of  innovation-promoting  activities  to 
recessions, then there is a clear role for policy in the form of countercyclical R&D subsidies. 
Finally,  there  is  evidence  that  policies  aimed  at  increasing  self-employment  and  small firm 
creation,  such  as  the  reduction  of  corporate  tax  rates  and  barriers  to  entry,  can  have  a 
substantial positive effect on new business creation and firm dynamism.28 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. I have argued that while finance is important for growth, and completing the 
repair of the euro area’s financial system is an essential condition, it will not be sufficient to 
jump-start the economy. Europe has turned a corner after a dangerous period of turmoil. The 
sovereign debt crisis has been stabilised, redenomination tail risks have been overcome and 
financial markets have recovered their buoyancy. ECB decisions and the painful adjustment 
in  stressed  countries  were  mostly  responsible  for  those  achievements.  We  are  now 
experiencing  a  period  of  financial  stability,  but  we  face  the  double  risk  of  short-term  high 
unemployment with low inflation that aggravates the burden of the debt overhang with a long-
term risk of quite low potential growth. The aftermath of the financial crisis and the policies 
with which it was countered left behind a labour force weakened by hysteresis effects, and 
this, combined with low levels of investment, has reduced potential growth. In the long term it 
is also negatively affected by weak demographics. Policies to foster total factor productivity 
are  crucial  to  improve  growth  prospects  and  to  help  absorb  the  high  unemployment  and 
reduce the debt overhang. 
Monetary policy has been accommodative and has helped to stabilise the economy, but after 
a banking crisis that weakened economic agents’ balance sheets, we all know that monetary 
policy loses some of its effectiveness. Nevertheless, monetary policy will continue to provide 
some  stimulus,  as  has  been  confirmed  several  times  by  our  forward  guidance  and  by  the 
recent statement by the ECB’s Governing Council that it was unanimous in its “commitment 
to using also unconventional instruments within our mandate to cope effectively with risks of 
a too prolonged period of low inflation”. The ECB will also do its best, in its role as the Single 
Supervisory Mechanism, to fix the bank-lending channel. 
                                                
26   Lechner,  M.,  and  C.  Wunsch,  2009,  “Are  training  programs  more  effective  when  unemployment  is  high?”, 
Journal of Labor Economics 27, 653–692. 
27   Barlevy,  G.,  2007,  “On  the  cyclicality  of  research  and  development”,  American  Economic  Review  97,  
1131–1164. 
28   Klepper,  L.,  Laeven,  L.,  and R.  Rajan,  2006,  “Entry  regulation as a  barrier  to  entrepreneurship”, Journal  of 
Financial Economics 82, 591–621; Da Rin, M., Di Giacomo, M., and A., Sembenelli, 2010, “Corporate taxation 
and the size of new firms: Evidence from Europe”, Journal of the European Economic Association 8, 606–616. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  However, it is important to caution that monetary policy cannot do everything and that people 
seem to expect too much from central banks. Governments have to accept responsibility for 
measures  that  favour  investment  and  increase  demand,  foster  R&D  and  technological 
innovation,  improve  education  levels  and  implement  active  labour  market  reforms  and 
policies. All advanced economies, albeit to different degrees, seem to have been caught in a 
trap of relative low growth and low inflation. Many commentators seem just to be waiting for 
the Godot of a new wave of technical innovations that will save the day. Maybe it will come, 
but I am sure that we also need active policies and new economic thinking to deal with the 
income distribution problems that the coming technology will aggravate as well as the role of 
finance  and  demand  in  monetary  economies  where  it  is  wrong  to  try  to  reduce 
macroeconomics  to  narrow  real  and  long-term  supply-side  considerations,  as  our  present 
predicament so impressively demonstrates. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
