  Raghuram Rajan: Concerns about competitive monetary easing 
Remarks by Dr Raghuram Rajan, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, in the Policy Panel 
Discussion,  at  the  “2014  BOJ-IMES  Conference  on  Monetary  Policy  in  a  Post-Financial 
Crisis Era”, organised by the Institute of Monetary and Economic Studies and Bank of Japan, 
Tokyo, 28 May 2014. 
 Good  morning.  The  world  seems  to  be  struggling  back  to  its  feet  after  the  great  financial 
crisis,  and  financial  markets  are  buoyant.  This  is  partly  because  central  bankers  are 
collectively engaged in extreme monetary easing through unconventional policies. 
I have two worries about this environment. First, unconventional policies tend to be feasible 
when domestic commercial banks are willing to accumulate significant central bank reserves 
without question. But those are typically situations where lending is unattractive – because of 
debt overhang, structural problems, or simply weak demand. Of course, a hope is that when 
commercial banks accumulate enough reserves, their behaviour will change. But this may be 
a long time coming, if at all. 
In the meantime, the consequences of these sustained unconventional policies pile up in the 
financial markets, where risk taking increases, without necessarily increasing real investment 
or  consumption.  And  they  spill  over  into  foreign  markets  as  capital  flows  lead  to  greater 
leverage  and  stronger  exchange  rates  in  recipient  countries,  and  a  shift  in  demand  away 
from them. 
The second worry I have is that such policies prompt a reaction by foreign central banks in 
both  competitor  industrial  countries  and  in  emerging  markets.  These  may  espouse 
unconventional  policies  once  again  in  order  to avoid  exchange  rate  appreciation  or  capital 
inflows.  Even  as  each  central  bank  does,  what  is  most  appropriate  for  its  domestic 
circumstances, aggregate world demand may be weaker and more distorted than it should 
be, and financial risks higher. 
The  international  rules  of  the  game  need  to  be  revisited  as  the  world  has  changed.  Both 
advanced economies and emerging economies need to adapt, else I fear we are about to 
embark on the next leg of a wearisome cycle. 
Unconventional policy 
By unconventional monetary policies (UMP), I mean both policies that hold interest rates at 
near zero for long, as well as balance sheet policies such as quantitative easing or exchange 
intervention, that involve altering central bank balance sheets in order to affect certain market 
prices. 
Let  me  first  say  there  is  a  role  for  unconventional  policies  –  when  markets  are  broken  or 
grossly dysfunctional or when deflationary expectations are strongly entrenched, as in Japan. 
The key question is what happens when these policies are prolonged long beyond repairing 
markets – and there the benefits are much less clear. Let me list 4 concerns: 
1. 
Is UMP the right tool once the immediate crisis is over? Does it distort behavior and 
activity so as to stand in the way of recovery? 
Do  such  policies  buy  time  or  does  the  belief  that  the  central  bank  is  taking 
responsibility prevent other, more appropriate, policies from being implemented? Put 
differently,  when  central  bankers  say,  however  reluctantly,  that  they  are  the  only 
game in town, do they become the only game in town? 
Will exit from unconventional policies be easy? 
2. 
3. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  What are the spillovers from such policies to other countries? 
4. 
For reasons of time, let me focus on the last two. 
Exit 
The macroeconomic argument for prolonged unconventional policy in industrial countries is 
that it has low costs, provided inflation stays quiescent. Hence it is worth pursuing, even if 
the benefits are uncertain. Central bankers such as Governor Stein have, however, raised 
concerns  about  financial  sector  risks  that  may  build  with  prolonged  use  of  unconventional 
policy. 
One reason is that leverage may increase both in the financial sector and amongst borrowers 
as  policy  stays  accommodative.  One  channel  seems  to  be  that  a  boost  to  asset  liquidity 
leads  lenders  to  believe  that  asset  sales  will  backstop  loan  recovery,  leading  them  to 
increase loan to value ratios. 
When liquidity tightens, though, too many lenders rely on asset sales, causing asset prices 
and loan recovery to plummet. Because lenders do not account for the effects of their lending 
on the “fire sale” price, and subsequently on lending by others, they may have an excessive 
incentive to build leverage. 
Leverage  need  not  be  the  sole  reason  why  exit  may  be  volatile  after  prolonged 
unconventional  policy.  As  Feroli  et.  al.  argue, 
fear 
underperforming relative to others. This means they will hold a risky asset only if it promises 
a  risk  premium  (over  safe  assets)  that  makes  them  confident  they  will  not  underperform 
holding it. 
A lower path of expected returns on the safe asset makes it easier for the risky asset to meet 
the required risk premium, and indeed draws more investment managers to buy it – the more 
credible the forward guidance on “low for long”, the more the risk taking. 
However, as investment managers crowd into the risky asset, the likelihood of possible fire 
sales increases if the interest rate environment turns. Everyone may dump the risky asset at 
that point in order to avoid being the last one holding it. 
Ideally,  market  players  would  exit  trades  gradually,  and  asset  prices  would  fall  gently,  as 
probabilities of the interest rate environment turning increase. But a rise in long rates may 
upset an incipient recovery. The central bank’s attempt, however, to hold long rates down till 
the last possible moment by reassuring markets that policy rate hikes are a long way away, 
is  not  without  danger.  If  economic  data  turn  up  strongly,  its  reassurance  may  not  carry 
credibility, and market players will exit trades en masse. 
Leverage  and  investor  crowding  may  therefore  exacerbate  the  consequences  of  exit.  The 
consequences  of  exit,  however,  are  not  just  felt  domestically,  they  could  be  experienced 
internationally. 
investment  managers  may 
the  border.  When  monetary  policy 
Spillovers 
Perhaps  most  vulnerable  to the  increased  risk-taking  in this  integrated world  are  countries 
across 
is  extremely  and 
unconventionally accommodative, capital flows into recipient countries tend to increase local 
leverage; this is not just due to the direct effect of cross-border banking flows but also the 
indirect effect, as the appreciating exchange rate and rising asset prices, especially of real 
estate, make it seem that borrowers have more equity than they really have. Exchange rate 
flexibility  in  recipient  countries,  in  these  circumstances,  sometimes  exacerbates  booms 
rather than slowing inflows. 
Recipient countries should adjust, of course, but credit and flows mask the magnitude and 
timing  of  needed  adjustment.  For  instance,  higher  collections  from  property  taxes  on  new 
large  countries 
in 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  houses  and  income  taxes  on  a  more  prosperous  financial  sector may  suggest  a  country’s 
fiscal house is in order, even  while low risk premia on sovereign debt add to the sense of 
calm.  At  the  same  time,  an  appreciating  nominal  exchange  rate  may  also  keep  down 
inflation. 
So when source countries move to exit unconventional policies, some recipient countries are 
leveraged, imbalanced, and vulnerable to capital outflows. Recipient countries are not being 
irrational  when  they  protest  both  the  initiation  of  unconventional  policy  as  well  as  an  exit 
whose  pace  is  driven  solely  by  conditions  in  the  source  country.  Having  become  more 
vulnerable because of leverage and crowding, recipient countries may call for an exit whose 
pace and timing is responsive, at least in part, to conditions they face. 
The case for international monetary policy coordination 
Hence, my call for more coordination in monetary policy. I do not mean that central bankers 
sit  around  a  table  and  make  policy  collectively,  nor  do  I  mean  that  they  call  each  other 
regularly and coordinate actions. We certainly communicate with one another enough at the 
BIS. 
In its strong form, I propose that large country central banks, both in advanced countries and 
emerging markets, internalize more of the spillovers from their policies in their mandate, and 
are forced by new conventions on the “rules of the game”, monitored by an impartial agency, 
to  avoid  unconventional  policies  with  large  adverse  spillovers  and  questionable  domestic 
benefits. 
Given  the  difficulties  of  operationalizing  the  strong  form,  I  suggest  that,  at  the  very  least, 
central banks reinterpret their domestic mandate to take into account other country reactions 
over time (and not just the immediate feedback effects), and thus become more sensitive to 
spillovers. This weak “coordination” could be supplemented with a re-examination of global 
safety nets. 
Let me be more specific. The key rationale for coordination and international monitoring is 
adverse  policy  spill  overs.  Yet  international  agencies,  with  only  a  few  notable  exceptions, 
have overwhelmingly endorsed the recent unconventional policies. Essentially, they argue, it 
is OK to distort asset prices if there are other domestic constraints to reviving growth, such 
as the zero-lower bound. But net spillovers, rather than fancy acronyms, should determine 
internationally acceptable policy. 
Otherwise,  countries  could  legitimately  practice  what  they  might  call  quantitative  external 
easing  or QEE,  whereby  they  intervene  to  keep  their  exchange  rate  down  and  build  huge 
reserves. The reason we frowned on QEE in the past is because we believed the adverse 
spillover effects for the rest of the world were significant. 
But,  if  domestic  demand  is  difficult  to  alter  because  of  a  variety  of  constraints,  one  could 
argue  QE  works  primarily  through  demand  shifting,  not  unlike  QEE.  Therefore,  if  we  are 
unwilling to evaluate all policies based on their spillover effects, there is no legitimate way 
multilateral institutions can declare that QEE contravenes the rules of the game. 
The  second  danger  is  that  a  mismanaged  exit  will  prompt  fresh  distortionary  behaviour. 
Indeed, the lesson some emerging markets will take away from the recent episode of turmoil 
is:  (i)  don’t  expand  domestic  demand  and  run  large  deficits;  (ii)  maintain  a  competitive 
exchange rate; and (iii) build large reserves, because when trouble comes, you are on your 
own.  In  a  world  with  deficient  aggregate  demand,  is  this  the  message  the  international 
community wants to send? 
Two obvious remedies suggest themselves: Less extreme monetary policies on all sides with 
some thought given to adverse spillover effects when setting policy, and better global safety 
nets to mitigate the need for countries to self-insure through reserve buffers. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Operationalizing coordination: some suggestions 
In an ideal world, UMPs such as QE or QEE should be vetted by an independent multilateral 
agency for their spillover effects. For instance, following a complaint by an impacted country, 
the  independent  assessor  could  analyse  the  effects  of  such  policies  and  come  to  a 
judgement  on  whether  they  follow  the  rules  of  the  game.  Policies  where  the  benefits  are 
largely domestic, while the costs fall largely abroad, would be especially carefully scrutinized. 
And if the assessor deems the policy reduces global welfare, pressure should be applied to 
stop such policies. 
The problems with such an idealistic process are easy to see. Where is such an impartial 
assessor to be found? And if a truly independent assessment came to the conclusion that 
certain policies were in violation, how would such a judgement be enforced? 
A more modest proposal 
Perhaps then, it would be better to settle for a more modest proposal. Central banks should 
not just worry about the immediate flows of capital to other countries from its policies, but the 
longer run reaction such as competitive easing or sustained exchange intervention that this 
would bring about. This would allow central banks to pay more attention to spillovers even 
while staying within their domestic mandate. 
At  the  same  time,  we  should  reduce  the  incentive  for  countries  to  engage  in  a  repeat  of 
substantial reserve accumulation by building stronger international safety nets. An interesting 
proposal from the IMF is a liquidity line from the IMF, where countries are pre-qualified by the 
IMF  and  told  (perhaps  privately)  how  much  of  a  line  they  would  qualify  for  under  current 
policy  –  with  access  limits  revised  every  year  after  the  Article  IV  discussions  and  any 
curtailment  becoming  effective  6  months  later.  Such  a  pushed  line  could  overcome  the 
problem that no country wants to approach the Fund because of the associated stigma. 
Conclusion 
The  current  non-system  in  international  monetary  policy  is,  in  my  view,  a  source  of 
substantial  risk,  both  to  sustainable  growth  as  well  as  to  the  financial  sector.  It  is  not  an 
industrial  country  problem,  nor  an  emerging  market  problem,  it  is  a  problem  of  collective 
action. The sooner we recognize that, the more sustainable world growth we will have. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
