  Fernando Restoy: Europe in the aftermath of the crisis 
Closing  address  by  Mr  Fernando  Restoy,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Spain,  at  the 
seminar  “Europe  in  the aftermath  of  the  crisis”, organised  by  the  Association  of  Economic 
Information  Journalists  (APIE),  at  the  Menéndez  Pelayo  International  University  (UIMP), 
Santander, 20 June 2014. 
 Introduction 
Thank you very much, Miguel Ángel, for your introduction. And thanks again for inviting me to 
close the course organised by APIE at the UIMP. As in previous years, it is a real pleasure to 
be among you. 
I  will  take  the  opportunity  to  offer  some  thoughts  on  the  situation  of  the  Spanish  banking 
system  and  the  challenges  it  has  ahead,  two  years  after  the  approval  of  the  financial 
assistance  programme  for  Spain,  and  five  months  after  the  conclusion  of  this  programme 
once its objectives were met. 
In  particular,  after  discussing 
the 
transformation of the banking sector over the past two years, I shall focus on the public cost 
the process has entailed and highlight the main challenges facing both the financial industry 
and the financial authorities. 
the  macroeconomic  environment  and  reviewing 
Progressive recovery in the Spanish economy 
1. 
Allow  me  to  begin  with  a  brief  overview  of  the  current  situation  of  the  Spanish  economy, 
which  is  far  different  from  that  two  years  ago,  when  the  extreme  tensions  on  the  capital 
markets  derived  from  the  institutional  crisis  of  the  euro  area,  the  vulnerability  of  public 
finances and of part of the banking system, and the recession under way drove the Spanish 
government to apply for financial assistance. 
At  present,  the  economy,  after  beginning  to  show  moderately  positive  growth  rates  in  the 
second  half  of  2013,  is set  on  a  path  of  recovery.  The  information  available  indicates  that 
year-on-year growth rates might draw close to 2% late next year. 
Positive  figures  can  likewise  be  seen  in  the  labour  market.  Following  a  process  of  job 
destruction that ran for over five years, the incipient recovery in the market observed in the 
closing  months  of  2013  has  gained  in  momentum  in  the  first  half  of  2014,  providing  for  a 
slight  reduction  in  the  unemployment  rate  which,  however,  remains  at  unacceptably  high 
levels. 
The firming of the improvement in the labour market is crucial for driving the expansion of 
domestic  demand  and,  thereby,  making  the  incipient  path  of  recovery  sustainable. 
Contributing  factors  here  must  also  include  the  adjustments  made  by  the  economy,  which 
have seen an appreciable moderation of the main imbalances in public finances, the external 
balance, private-sector debt and the real estate market. The measures recently announced 
by the European Central Bank (ECB), aimed at containing the risk of the euro area running 
an excessively low inflation rate over a prolonged period, likewise contribute to bolstering the 
growth outlook for our economy and assisting the adjustment under way. 
But  let  us  not forget that  the  crisis  –  complete with  double-dip  recession  –  in  the  Spanish 
economy has had a most severe impact on employment and income levels, and has caused 
a  most  pronounced  setback  in  terms  of  real  convergence  with  Europe.  Merely  restoring 
pre-crisis levels of well-being will take several years. Evidently, here, maintaining the reform 
drive is crucial for speeding the process of recovery of the levels of economic prosperity lost 
due to the crisis. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Banking sector: situation following the reform 
2. 
The Spanish banking sector has concluded a far-reaching transformation, entailing the clean-
up,  restructuring  and  recapitalisation  of  the  most  vulnerable  banks,  all  resulting  from  the 
transformation  of  the  former  savings  banks.  The  consequences  of  this  reform  have  been 
reviewed  on  various  occasions,  so  I  need  not  detail  them  here.  Allow  me  merely  to 
summarise the three key elements of the process. 
i) 
Firstly, the reform has driven an intense restructuring and re-sizing of the banking 
industry, enabling its excess capacity to be corrected. 
Of  note  has  been  the  integration  of  savings  banks  into  existing  or  newly  created  banking 
groups, which has enabled the number of credit institutions to be reduced by over 30. Banks 
have in the past two years also stepped up the process of re-sizing initiated at the onset of 
the  crisis.  Overall,  in  the  last  six  years,  the  sector  has  reduced  numbers  of  offices  and 
employees  by  around  25%.  This  has  appreciably  strengthened  the  average  operational 
efficiency of the sector. 
ii) 
Secondly, bank balance sheets have been subject to an intense clean-up. This has 
enabled  one  of  the  main  sources  of  vulnerability  of  the  Spanish  banking  sector, 
namely its excessive exposure to the real estate sector, to be defused. In particular, 
claims on the real estate sector, including loans and foreclosures net of provisions, 
declined by close to 60% from December 2011 to December 2013. 
This  has  been  possible  mainly  thanks  to  three  fundamental  factors:  i)  the  increase  in 
provisioning  requirements  established  in  2012  by  royal  decree-law,  ii)  the  revision  of  the 
classification  and  level  of  provisioning  of  restructured  and  refinanced  loans  in  light  of  the 
related guidelines issued by the Banco de España in 2013 and iii) the transfer of real estate 
assets  to  Sareb  by  the  banks  that  received  public  aid  under  the  financial  assistance 
programme. 
iii) 
Lastly,  bank  solvency  ratios  have  been  notably  strengthened  thanks  to  the 
recapitalisation of vulnerable institutions under the financial assistance programme. 
The remaining banks have also made appreciable improvements to their levels of 
own funds through various means such as the issuance of capital instruments, asset 
disposals  or  retained  earnings,  in  line  with  the  recommendations  on  dividend 
pay-outs made by the Banco de España over the past two years. 
Cost of the reform of the banking sector 
3. 
At this stage we might ask what the necessary total cost has been to ensure the stability of 
the banking system and how it has been distributed among the various parties involved. And, 
specifically, we can ask what the taxpayer has contributed in this process. 
An accurate reply to these questions is no easy task, as two factors combine to complicate 
the estimations required. First, not all aid has already been disbursed; rather, it consists of 
guarantees  covering  against  future  losses  that  only  have  a  certain  likelihood  of  occurring. 
Second,  not  all  aid  disbursed  will  entail  a  loss  for  the  public  coffers,  insofar  as  it  may  be 
partly  or  fully  recouped  through  its  return  by  the  recipient  banks  themselves  or  from  the 
proceeds of the sale of State stakes in these banks. 
That said, a good starting point to disentangle the matter is the note published last week by 
the  Banco  de  España,1  which  included  an  update  of  the  different  types  of  public  financial 
assistance provided to the banking sector in the period 2009–2013. 
                                                
1  See  “Background  note  on  public  financial  assistance  in  the  restructuring  of  the  Spanish  banking  system 
(2009–2013)” published on 12 June 2014 and available at www.bde.es  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Essentially,  three  different  types  of  public  financial  assistance  have  been  made  available. 
The  first  and  most  significant  type  have  been  the  contributions  of  funds  in  the  form  of 
subscription  of  capital  instruments,  whether  ordinary  shares  or  contingently  convertible 
bonds. These amounted to a total of €61,495 million, of which €1,760 million have already 
been  recouped,  and  encompassed  actions  both  by  the  FROB  and  the  Deposit  Guarantee 
Fund  (DGF)  which,  despite  being  financed  by  contributions  from  the  banking  industry,  is 
included for National Accounts purposes under the public sector. 
We  might  also  add  here  the  acquisition  by  the  DGF  of  shares  valued  at  €1,803  million  of 
Nova  Caixa  Galicia  Banco  Catalunya  Banc  held  by  minority  investors  in  these  banks 
following  the  burden-sharing  exercises  undertaken,  and  the  subscription  by  the  FROB  of 
capital and subordinated debt instruments of Sareb for a total of €2,192 million. 
The  second  type  of  public  financial  aid  refers  to  the  so-called  Asset  Protection  Schemes 
(APSs)  or  other  guarantees  offered  by  the  DGF  or  the  FROB  under  resolution  or 
restructuring processes. 
APSs consist of the assumption by the guarantor of a majority portion of the risk associated 
with  specific  portfolios  of  the  beneficiary  bank.  These  APSs,  therefore,  involve  a  cost  that 
depends on the actual losses incurred whose real amount will only be known at the end of 
the period over which the guarantee is in force. In any event, the expected value of this cost 
shall be regularly evaluated by independent experts so that the guarantor agency (the FROB 
or the DGF) may make the related provision in its financial statements. 
Finally,  the  third  type  of  public  aid  comprises  State-backed  guarantees  of  debt  issues  by 
certain banks and the extraordinary credit facilities offered to provide liquidity to the sector. 
As regards these guarantees, no loss from these contingencies is expected to arise for the 
State,  which  will  in  turn  receive  revenue  in  the  form  of  fees  and  commissions.  Currently,2 
69% of the guarantees granted have been returned and the termination process is expected 
to  continue  in  accordance  with  the  redemption  of  the  issues.  Likewise,  all  amounts  drawn 
down  on  the  credit  facilities  were  duly  repaid  and  the  other  available  facilities  have  been 
settled following the recapitalisation or, where appropriate, disposal of the recipient banks. 
As of today, therefore, the public assistance granted is essentially in the form of the capital 
contributions  made  and  the  guarantees  offered.  That  said,  not  all  of  the  public  assistance 
granted  that  I  have  described  involves  a  direct  cost  to  the  taxpayer,  since  the  banking 
industry has also contributed via the DGF. 
Hence, to estimate the direct cost to the taxpayer of the aid provided to banks, we should 
first consider the amounts paid out by the FROB to these banks, add this to the expected 
cost of the APSs extended by the FROB (at Banco de Valencia and Caja Sur) and of other 
guarantees and coverage offered by it in connection with resolution processes, and subtract 
the amounts recouped or expected to be recouped. 
That is to say, we should firstly calculate the funds paid out by the FROB to purchase shares 
or  contingently  convertible  bonds,  which  amount  to  €53,553  million,  adding  these  to  the 
estimated cost of the APSs and other guarantees granted in resolution processes which, on 
the latest valuations available, account for €2,087 million. 
From this amount it would be necessary to subtract the recovery of the amounts disbursed 
through the redemption of convertible bonds subscribed by the FROB or the disposal of the 
FROB’s shareholdings in the banks receiving aid. Here, the €1,760 million from the sale of 
                                                
2  As at 30 April 2014.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
NCG and the return of the aid granted to Banca Cívica by Caixabank3 should be recorded. 
Further,  the  convertible  bonds  subscribed  by  the  FROB  in  Caja3  (absorbed  by  Ibercaja), 
CEISS (absorbed by Unicaja) and Liberbank, are highly likely to be redeemed before 2017, 
entailing the return of €1,135 million. 
The most uncertain element of the recoverable amounts is the estimation of the outcome of 
the sale of Catalunya Banc, currently under way, and of the divestment of BFA/Bankia and 
BMN. However, it is likely that these disposals will entail an appreciable lessening of the cost 
that the restructuring of the financial system has involved for taxpayers. 
In any event, the figures are sizeable. However, in terms of GDP they are not higher than 
those recorded in other European countries during the financial crisis despite the fact that, in 
most of them, banks have not had to face a real shock with an impact on the scale of that of 
the collapse of the real estate sector in Spain. 
As  discussed  earlier,  the  banking  industry  –  via  the  Deposit  Guarantee  Fund  –  has  also 
contributed  notably  to  stabilising  the  financial  sector.  This  contribution  has  been  possible 
thanks  to  the  maintenance  at  all  times,  despite  the  severity  of  the  economic  and  financial 
crisis, of appreciable financial soundness at most institutions, representing more than 80% of 
the sector as a whole. 
The DGF’s support was in the specific form of direct injections into CAM, UNNIM and CCM 
(for a value of €7,942 million), the APSs granted to these institutions (whose estimated cost 
as at 31.12.2013 was €6,898 million at present value) and the potential losses caused by the 
acquisition of shares in NCG and CX, provisionally evaluated at €754 million. 
The new challenges for the sector and the authorities 
4. 
Having reviewed the transformation of the Spanish banking sector and its consequences in 
terms of costs for the public coffers, I have some thoughts I would like to add on the outlook 
for the sector. In particular, moreover, I wish to analyse the consequences, both for banks 
and public authorities, of the regulatory reforms agreed in response to the financial crisis. 
As I said earlier, the banking industry has been strengthened considerably in terms of asset 
quality, efficiency and solvency. This has been the result of the restructuring undertaken, the 
independent  measures  of  the  banks  themselves,  the  regulatory  changes  made  and  the 
proper application of the demanding accounting rules laid down by the Banco de España. I 
trust  this  will  all  come  to  light  in  the  assessment  exercise  which,  as  you  know,  is  being 
conducted  at  the  European  level  as  part  of  the  groundwork  for  the  start-up  of  the  Single 
Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) in November this year. 
However,  the  challenges  ahead  are  significant.  The  current  environment,  marked  by  still- 
weak  macroeconomic  conditions  and  very  low  interest  rate  levels,  continues  to  exert 
pressure  on  banks’  turnover  and  margins. While  the  recovery  under  way  is  being  felt  and 
there are discernible signs of credit stabilising and non-performing loans declining, it is likely 
that banks’ recurring income – in line with developments in the rest of Europe – will remain at 
still-low levels for some time. 
In addition, the new regulatory changes, both prudential and resolution policy-related, require 
not  only  the  availability  of  ample  capital  levels  but  also,  moreover,  of  other  liabilities-side 
instruments able to be converted into capital if needed. Taking advantage of the foreseeable 
improvement in economic conditions to raise the return on equity, while responding to new 
regulatory requirements, is a notable challenge for the financial system. 
                                                
3  Note  that  this  figure  does  not  include  the  sale  of  shares  of  Bankia  by  BFA  (100%-held  by  the  FROB)  in 
February – accounting for 7.5% of capital, at the price of €1.51 per share – insofar as the liquidity obtained 
remains in the selling institution and is not therefore a refund of assistance until BFA’s capital is amortised.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The  path  pursued  by the  sector  as  a  whole  –  to  contain financial  and operating  expenses 
while  combining  diversification  with 
the  harnessing  of  competitive  advantages  and 
moderating dividend pay-outs and remuneration – is an appropriate one for adjusting to the 
new competitive, regulatory and supervisory environment within the framework of the SSM. 
Turning to what are essentially institutional matters, several challenges remain. I would like 
to indicate three of these. 
First, to conclude the reform of the Spanish banking sector, it is necessary to complete the 
adaptation  of  savings  banks  to  the  new  arrangements  stipulated  in  Law  26/2013  of 
27 December 2013 on savings banks and bank foundations. This Law is a fundamental step 
for ensuring that all credit institutions are managed independently and professionally so that 
the governance problems which contributed to destabilising part of our financial system are 
diffused once and for all. 
In practical terms, this year should see the completion of the transformation of virtually all of 
the  savings  banks  –  those  still  existing  as  such  –  into  ordinary  foundations  or  bank 
foundations. For this purpose, and as it is legally conferred to do, the Banco de España is 
drafting  a  Circular.  This  Circular  will  regulate  the  core  aspects  of  the  functioning  of  bank 
foundations in order to safeguard the healthy and prudent exercise of the dividend and voting 
rights corresponding to them as the shareholders of credit institutions, thereby ensuring the 
professional management of such credit institutions. The Circular will specify aspects such 
as:  (i)  the  content  of  the  protocol  governing  bank  foundations’  management  of  their 
ownership interest in the credit institution; (ii) the financial plan, which will envisage how they 
must  meet  the  possible  capital  needs  of  the  institution  in  which  they  have  an  ownership 
interest; and (iii) the requirements which the reserve fund must fulfil as regards its funding, 
target volume and possible uses; all the foregoing in cases where, given the percentage of 
ownership they hold in the credit institutions, these requirements must be met. Similarly, the 
Circular  will  determine  the  circumstances  in  which  bank  foundations  will  be  compelled  to 
diversify  their  investments  and,  if  appropriate,  to  relinquish  control  of  the  credit  institutions 
which  they  own  through  the  corresponding  divestment.  I  trust  that  the  period  for  public 
consultation of the Circular will open shortly. 
Second,  the  new  European  framework  of resolution  is  already  prompting,  in  most  national 
jurisdictions, reflection on the institutional architecture of bank resolution. 
In  the  past,  resolution  agreements  have  required  close  collaboration  between  the  various 
authorities  involved  in  the  process;  namely,  the supervisor,  the  resolution  authority,  if  any, 
and the governments concerned insofar as the resolution has habitually required the use of 
substantial public funds. 
The experience in our country has been no exception. The current distribution of functions 
between  the  Banco  de  España  and  the  FROB  –  whose  Governing  Committee  includes 
representatives  of  the  Ministry  of  Economic  Affairs  and  Competitiveness,  the  Ministry  of 
Financial Affairs and Public Administration, and the Banco de España – has required that the 
two  institutions  were  intensely  involved  in  the  resolution  processes.  Thus,  while  the 
supervisor is responsible for initiating the resolution process of an institution and approving 
the resolution plans, the FROB must prepare these plans, put them into practice and, in sum, 
manage  the  State’s  ownership  interest  in  those  institutions  that  received  financial  aid, 
including  any  future  divestment.  Consequently,  the  coordination  between  the  Banco  de 
España and the FROB has been pivotal in ensuring effective management of the crisis. 
The Single Resolution Mechanism, whose regulation will be published shortly, includes the 
delegation of the resolution powers in relation to significant institutions to a new European 
agency (the Single Resolution Board). At the same time, as a result of the new Recovery and 
Resolution  Directive,  the  combination  of  significant  requirements  governing  the  “bail-in”  of 
bank  creditors  to  cover  the  potential  capital  shortfalls  of  non-viable  institutions  and  the 
availability  of  a  common  resolution  fund  wholly  funded  by  the  industry  will  considerably 
reduce the need to resort to using public funds in bank resolution processes. Consequently, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  the  changes  introduced  by  the  new  European  resolution  framework  could  require  some 
adjustments to national arrangements which affect the nature of the resolution authority, its 
relationship  with  the  supervisor  and  the  degree  of  direct  involvement  of  government 
authorities. 
Finally,  I  think  the  time  is  right  to  reflect  on  possible  regulatory  changes  that  may  help  to 
maintain the strength of other areas of the financial sector, such as credit cooperatives, in the 
new regulatory and competitive setting. 
The  cooperative  sector  in  Spain,  unlike  other  countries,  barely  represents  6%  of  credit 
activity  in  Spain,  but  it  plays  an  important  role  in  specific  fields  such  as  rural  areas.  The 
sector,  in  most  cases,  is  well-capitalised  with  comfortable  liquidity  positions  as  a  result  of 
pursuing  prudent,  retail  customer-focused  management  and  of  scant  exposure  to  the  real 
estate  development  business.  This  has  enabled  it  to  avoid  the  problems  experienced  by 
other types of institutions. 
That said, regulatory changes and competitive pressure also pose an important challenge for 
these  institutions  which  will  require  them  to  maintain  sufficient  levels  of  operational 
effectiveness,  effective  control  of  risk  concentration  and,  especially,  sound  foundations  for 
ensuring that regulatory capital is preserved and, if necessary, increased. 
Consequently,  in  line  with  the  recent  announcement  made  by  the  Minister  of  Economic 
Affairs  and  Competitiveness,  possible  regulatory  adjustments  need  to  be  studied  which, 
while conserving the essential core of the current business model of credit cooperatives and 
without  calling  their  identity  into  question,  ensure  the  soundness  of  the  sector  in  a  more 
demanding  environment.  I  think  that  the  organisation  of  credit  cooperatives  in  other 
advanced economies, where they represent a larger share of the banking business than in 
Spain, are a useful reference for the reflection I referred to earlier. 
Thank you very much. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
