  Stephen S Poloz: Release of the Financial System Review 
Opening statement by Mr Stephen S Poloz, Governor of the Bank of Canada, at the press 
conference following the release of the Financial System Review, Ottawa, Ontario, 12 June 
2014. 
 Good morning. It is my pleasure to hold this press conference with Carolyn Wilkins. Carolyn 
assumed the post of Senior Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada on the 2nd of May. We 
are pleased to be here with you today for the inaugural press conference for the Financial 
System Review (FSR). The Bank published the June issue this morning. 
An important part of the Bank’s work is to promote a stable and efficient financial system. We 
do this in a number of ways: providing liquidity facilities and serving as lender of last resort; 
overseeing key domestic clearing and settlement systems; and collaborating with domestic 
and international policy-makers to develop and implement policy. 
Our research and analysis of financial stability is vital to this work. Since 2002, the FSR has 
been our flagship publication for promoting informed public discussion on all aspects of the 
financial  system.  This  morning’s  press  conference  extends  that  effort.  Our  job  today  is  to 
help you leave with a solid understanding of the Bank’s assessment of financial stability in 
Canada, an appreciation of the complexity of the analysis and, importantly, how this work fits 
into our thinking about Bank policy. 
Let me provide some context. Over the two decades leading up to the global financial crisis, 
a  consensus  emerged  that  keeping  inflation  low,  stable  and  predictable  was  the  best 
contribution that monetary policy could make to the financial well-being of Canadians. 
Our  inflation-targeting  framework  has  always  had  a  degree  of  flexibility  built  into  it;  and 
financial  stability  issues  have  always  been  part  of  the  discussion.  However,  the  crisis 
crystallized the view that financial stability and the outlook for economic growth and inflation 
are intrinsically linked. As a result, the Bank of Canada – like many other central banks – is 
reconsidering how to better integrate financial stability and monetary policy objectives. 
The  assessment  of  financial  stability  is  becoming  more  rigorous  and  now  follows  a  more 
structured analytical process, informed by models, better data and richer dialogue. This leads 
to more informed judgments around the risks to the financial system. 
In this issue of the FSR, we have introduced an enhanced framework that explicitly identifies 
the  underlying  vulnerabilities  in  Canada.  These  are  the  pre-existing  conditions  that  could 
amplify  and  propagate  shocks  through  the  Canadian  system,  regardless  of  where  they 
originate. 
This  sets  the  stage  for  assessing  risks  –  events  that,  if  they  occurred,  would  threaten  the 
ability  of  the  financial  system  to  perform  its  core  functions.  Such  risks  materialize  when 
trigger events interact with vulnerabilities to cause stress in our financial system. 
This added depth allows a more complete understanding of our financial stability concerns. 
One can see that these diverse risks cannot literally be summed to estimate an overall level 
of  risk.  Nevertheless,  after  weighing  the  risks  to  financial  stability  through  our  improved 
framework and applying judgment, our level of comfort as policy-makers remains similar to 
what it was six months ago. 
The clear separation of cause and effect – vulnerabilities and risks – allows a more accurate 
weighing of the risks to economic and financial stability. It allows us to consider both in an 
integrated  fashion  as  we  deliberate  policy.  That’s  why  our  assessment  of  the  risks  to  the 
financial system is so relevant. And that’s why we’re here with you now. 
Before Carolyn and I take your questions, let me note the highlights from today’s FSR. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  The top two vulnerabilities are related to the household sector. The first is the imbalances in 
Canada’s housing market. We still anticipate a soft landing. However, stretched valuations 
and some signs of overbuilding would expose the financial system to a sharp correction in 
house prices – which is a risk we’ve identified. 
The second is the elevated level of indebtedness among Canadian households. This leaves 
households vulnerable to an unemployment shock or a sharp rise in interest rates. 
The third vulnerability is our exposure to sizable potential external shocks. An example is the 
significance of global commodity prices to our economy and financial system. 
The risks are viewed in the context of these vulnerabilities. The most important domestic risk 
is, as mentioned, a sharp correction in house prices. The probability of this risk materializing 
is low, given the expected strengthening of the global and Canadian economic recoveries. 
However,  if  it  were  to  happen,  its  impact  on  the  economy  and  financial  system  would  be 
severe. 
We also focus on three other key risks: 
 
 
 
Before I open the floor to you, it is important to note that Canada’s financial system remains 
robust. It will continue to benefit from enhanced policy measures as the G-20 reform agenda 
is implemented, both domestically and globally. 
With that, Carolyn and I are happy to take your questions. 
a sharp increase in global long-term interest rates; 
stress emanating from China and other emerging markets; and 
serious financial stress from the euro area. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
