Njuguna Ndung’u: Understanding and expanding financial inclusion in 
Kenya 
Keynote speech by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the 
launch  of the  FinAccess  GIS  Mapping  of  all  Financial  Access Touch  Points  2014,  Nairobi, 
13 March 2014. 
 insights 
to  provide 
The Chief Executive Officers of Domestic Financial Sector Regulators; 
The Chief Executive Officers and Officials of Financial Services Providers; 
The Principal Secretary – Ministry of Information, Communication and Technology 
Deputy Governor – Dr. Haron Sirima 
Representatives of Development Partners; 
Distinguished Participants; 
It is my honour and pleasure to join you this morning to formally launch the results of our GIS 
Spatial  Mapping  of  all  Financial  Access  Touch  Points  in  Kenya  under  the  auspices  of  the 
Financial Access Partnership (FAP) with Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. This GIS Spatial 
Mapping  of  Financial  Access  Touch  Points  was  supposed 
in 
understanding the financial inclusion landscape and our quest to expand financial inclusion. 
As you will recall during the launch of the Third National FinAccess 2013 Survey Report of 
top line findings on 31st October 2013, I extended to you the invitation towards the launch we 
are witnessing today. I am delighted that we have kept our word. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: Before making any further remarks, allow me to thank the Bill and 
Melinda  Gates  Foundation  and  all  our  collaborating  partners  under  the  Financial  Access 
Partnership (FAP) for their tremendous contribution towards the success of this Project. At 
this point, I cannot forget to thank Brand Fusion Marketing International Ltd. for conducting 
the field work successfully despite the numerous challenges they faced and the FinAccess 
Management  (FAM)  comprising  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya  (CBK),  Research  and  Policy 
Analysis  Department  and  the  Financial  Sector  Deepening  (FSD)  Kenya  for  ensuring  the 
project’s success and making today’s launch possible. Let me also appreciate our technical 
partner, the Kenya National Bureau of Statistics (KNBS), for providing critical support to the 
initiative. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: During the launch of the Third National FinAccess 2013 Survey, the 
Government recognized the important role played by the financial system in the economy. 
Our Vision 2030 envisages the financial sector being transformed into an innovative, vibrant 
and  globally  competitive  sector  to  drive  high  levels  of  savings  to  finance  the  country’s 
investment  needs.  The  transformation  entails  doubling  deposits  mobilization  from  44%  to 
80% of GDP and enhancing growth of savings channelled into productive investments from 
14% to over 30%. This goal cannot be achieved if the Vision’s three core objectives, 
namely:  Enhancing  Financial  System  Stability,  Efficiency,  and  Expanding  Financial 
Inclusion are not addressed. 
• 
Without expanding inclusion to financial services, there is a case for expanding 
quality  access  and  affordable,  appropriate  and  sustainable  financial  services  and 
products to majority of the population. This will inevitably increase their access and 
usage  of  financial  markets  and  products  that  will  encourage  savings/investments 
and allow capital/asset accumulation. Safe havens for savings by the poor reduces 
their  vulnerability  to  periodic  economic  and  social  shocks  and  enhances  their 
productive capacity. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 The  Three  National  Financial  Access  Surveys  for  2006,  2009  and  2013  have 
clearly  demonstrated  that  Kenya’s  financial  landscape  has  changed  considerably 
over the period 2006–2013. The financial system is now offering a wider range of 
financial  services  and  products  to  more  Kenyans,  covering  a  wider  geographical 
spread,  and  even  going  beyond  its  borders  more  than  ever  before.  These 
developments  are  attributable  to  expansions  in  financial  sector  infrastructure 
(including innovation in products and adaptive institutional outreach) and advances 
in technology. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: I am delighted to note that we have added the spatial mapping of 
financial services providers to the FinAccess Surveys by digitally mapping out all the financial 
access  touch  points  in  the  country.  This  affords  us  more  in-depth  knowledge  on  how  to 
address the challenges we face in expanding financial inclusion and ensure that the majority 
of our populace access and use affordable, appropriate and sustainable financial services. 
Some of the insights we have gained from the mapping exercise include: 
• 
Kenya  enjoys  better  financial  access  compared  to  countries  in  the  region.  The 
percentage of the population living within a 3km distance of a financial access touch 
point  is  58.7%  for  Kenya,  44.1%  for  Uganda,  42.7%  for  Nigeria  and  28.3%  for 
Tanzania. In terms of financial access touch points per 100,000 people; Kenya has 
161.7, Uganda 63.1, Tanzania 48.9 and Nigeria 11.4. 
Financial services touch points tend to be located in economically active regions of 
the  country: more  in  urban  than  in  rural  areas. In  these  areas  use of  portfolios  of 
financial services is more prevalent. 
Financial  services  touch  points  locate  away  from  areas  of  high  poverty  levels,  for 
instance, 69% of all financial access touch points are located in areas with the least 
likelihood of poverty even though only 30% of the population live in those areas. 
Kenyans  have  greater  access  to  mobile  phone  financial  services  providers 
compared  to  banks.  For  example,  Kenyans  living  within  3km  of  a  mobile  phone 
money agent is 58.6% or 23.64 million compared to only 21.2% or 8.57 million living 
near a bank branch. 
   facilities, 
innovation, 
technological 
infrastructural 
the  wider  economy, 
Ladies and Gentlemen: The results we are releasing today are as a result of developments 
in 
institutional 
developments,  natural  features,  as  well  as  financial  system  policy  and  regulatory  reforms, 
increased competition and innovations in the financial market. These developments have set 
off a dramatic shift away from the traditional delivery of financial services. In the delivery of 
financial services, innovations using technology such as Automatic Teller Machines (ATMs), 
Point-of-Sale (POS) devices, the internet and mobile phone platforms and its interlinkages 
with  financial  institutions  platforms  have  accelerated  and  moved  us  closer  to  branchless 
banking.  We,  however,  still  have  some  ground  to  cover  in  expanding  access  to  financial 
services, given that about 25% of the population remains totally excluded. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  The  information  generated  by  this  spatial  mapping  exercise  will 
help  financial  service  providers  identify  where  opportunities  exist.  I  am  delighted  that  the 
sector now has such a useful information resource at its disposal. The results from all these 
efforts  will  help  the  public  and  private  sector  to  better  understand  the  developments  and 
dynamism  of  the  broader  Kenyan  financial  market  landscape  and  its  dynamics  in  order  to 
develop appropriate policy strategies and products as well as delivery channels to targeted 
clientele that they have not served before. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  The  GIS  Spatial  Mapping  Project  brings  forth  more  information 
necessary to satisfy the objectives of the Financial Access Partnership, which remain; 
(i) 
To provide information to policymakers about the main barriers to financial access 
and inclusion; 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
To provide information to the private sector on market conditions and opportunities; 
To  provide  a  solid  empirical  basis  to  track  progress  on  financial  inclusion  and 
evaluate the effect of government, donor and industry led initiatives; 
To provide data for use in research into the impact of access to financial services 
and products on growth, development and poverty reduction. 
In conclusion, Ladies and Gentlemen, let me also observe that the FinAccess studies have 
been  championed  and  driven  by  a  partnership  between  public  and  private  institutions.  I 
commend  and  support  such  initiatives  and  hope  that  this  lays  the foundation for  a  deeper 
and sustained partnership between the public and private sector in tackling the challenges 
and  taking  advantage  of  opportunities  that  arise.  In  this  regard,  as  I  have  always  done,  I 
thank  all  the  institutions  under  the  Financial  Access  Partnership  that  have  contributed  in 
various  ways  towards  the  Spatial  Mapping  Project  and  The  Bill  and  Melinda  Gates 
Foundation. I urge financial services providers and the domestic sector regulators to work out 
modalities  of  collecting  the  spatial  data  of  all  the  financial  services  touch  points.  The 
Research and Policy Analysis Department of the Bank will champion these efforts. 
With these few remarks, Ladies and Gentlemen, I welcome you to this breakfast event 
and  launch  the  financial  access  web  portal  and  look  forward  to  further  fruitful 
deliberations. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
