  Charles I Plosser: The economic outlook and housing 
Speech  by  Mr  Charles  I  Plosser,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, at the Women in Housing & Finance, Inc., Washington DC, 
20 May 2014. 
The view expressed today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. 
 Highlights 
• 
President  Charles  Plosser  gives  his  views  on  the  sustainable  improvement  in 
housing in the context of a broader economic recovery. He also discusses the Fed’s 
monetary policy issues, including forward guidance. 
President  Plosser  is  optimistic  about  the  housing  recovery.  He  believes  that  even 
though  sales  have  leveled  off  recently,  prices  are  still  rising,  and  fundamentals 
remain  sound,  including  stronger  household  formation,  solid  job  growth,  and 
consumers with stronger balance sheets. 
He  thinks  that  the  U.S.  economy  is  on  firmer  footing  today  than  it  has  been  in 
several years. He expects continued progress in 2014. He adds that one of the more 
encouraging signs for the economy comes from the labor market. 
President Plosser believes reducing the pace of asset purchases in measured steps 
is  moving  in  the  right  direction,  but  the  time may  come  sooner  than  many  expect 
when interest rates may have to rise if we are to avoid falling behind the curve. 
   Introduction 
Thank you for inviting me here today. Women in Housing & Finance meetings have featured 
a  number  of  Federal  Reserve  policymakers  in  recent  years.  A  review  of  their  speeches 
traces an arc through the turmoil in the U.S. housing market, which led to the worst financial 
crisis and economic downturn since World War II, the regulatory reform that followed, and 
the moderate but steady recovery over the past five years.  
In  January  2008,  then-Chairman  Ben  Bernanke  addressed  your  group  a  month  after  the 
Great Recession began, following sharp and dramatic declines in the U.S. housing market 
during 2007. Then, in June 2009, former Governor Elizabeth Duke described the actions that 
the  Federal  Reserve  had  taken  to  contain  the  financial  crisis  and  promote  economic 
recovery. In February 2011, former Kansas City Fed President Tom Hoenig asked whether 
the Dodd-Frank Act would actually improve the financial regulatory climate and solve the yet-
unresolved issue of too-big-to-fail institutions. 
Today,  I  am  delighted  to  join  you  at  a  time  when,  despite  the  effects of  the  severe  winter 
weather, the economy is on the firmest footing it has been on since the recovery began. But 
this  does  not  mean  that  we  are  likely  to  see,  nor  should  we  seek  to  see,  a  return  to  the 
unsustainable levels of residential real estate activity that preceded the financial crisis. That 
did not end well. 
Instead, the perspective I will offer today is one of sustainable improvement in housing in the 
context of a broader economic recovery. Then, I will close with some thoughts on monetary 
policy. Before I continue, though, I will note that my views are my own and not necessarily 
those  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Board  or  my  colleagues  on  the  Federal  Open  Market 
Committee (FOMC). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Economic conditions 
So,  let  me  begin  with  an  overview  of  the  U.S.  economy.  We  are  almost  five  years  into  a 
recovery that began in June 2009. Growth accelerated in the second half of 2013 but faced 
some stiff winter headwinds in the first quarter of this year. Yet, I think most of us now view 
this as a temporary weather-related slowdown and not a risk to the underlying recovery. 
Snowstorms and frigid temperatures affected every aspect of the economy, from sales and 
hours worked to logistics and supply chains during the first quarter of the year. You can’t sell 
a house if buyers can’t get in the front door. You can’t sell a car if it is buried in snow. And 
even  if  your  factory  is  producing  goods,  you  can’t  deliver  them  to  your  customers  as 
scheduled if trucks can’t navigate the highways  or if trains have to slow down to half their 
normal speed. My own view is that it will take another month or two before we can hope to 
see a somewhat clearer picture of the economy.  
The  first  estimate  of  GDP  growth  for  the  first  quarter  of  2014  showed  that  the  overall 
economy  was  essentially  flat,  expanding  at  an  annualized  rate  of  just  0.1  percent.  The 
underlying details are more encouraging. Consumer spending increased 3 percent, marking 
the 19th consecutive quarter of growth. This growth is supported by the fact that households 
have reduced their debt and strengthened their balance sheets over the past few years. And 
as the values of equities and real estate have risen, consumer savings rates have fallen and 
consumption spending has increased. 
The  weakness  in  the  overall  GDP  figure  comes  predominately  from  lackluster  investment, 
both by businesses and homebuilders, as well as some pullback in exports and imports. 
Our  business  contacts  as  well  as  our  surveys  confirm  that  economic  activity  was  greatly 
hampered  by  the  winter  weather  in  the  Northeast  and  in  other  parts  of  the  country.  The 
Philadelphia  Fed’s  Business  Outlook  Survey  of  manufacturers  in  our  region  has  been  a 
reliable indicator of national manufacturing trends in the U.S. The survey results indicate that 
manufacturing activity has been expanding for 11 of the past 12 months. The only aberration 
was in February 2014, when respondents ascribed their declines to the severe weather. But 
the  survey  has  since  indicated  positive  growth  in  March,  April,  and  May.  The  ISM 
manufacturing  index,  which  measures  nationwide  activity,  similarly  dropped  in  the  winter 
months and has since bounced back. 
Thus,  I  continue  to  believe  that  the  U.S.  economy  is  on  a  firmer  footing  today  than  it  has 
been in several years. This is a cause for some optimism for continued progress in 2014. My 
forecast  has  been  for  growth  of  about  3  percent  in  2014,  and  while  the  weather-related 
softness in the first quarter may temper this full-year outlook somewhat, it hasn’t led me to 
downgrade my outlook for the remainder of the year. 
One of the most encouraging signs for the economy comes from the labor market, believe it 
or not. Employers added 288,000 jobs in April, the strongest gain since January 2012, and 
job growth in February and March  were revised upward by a total of 36,000. The gains in 
April  were  broad-based  across  sectors,  including  32,000  net  new  jobs  in  construction. 
Indeed, net job growth has exceeded 200,000 in five of the past seven months, with only the 
frozen months of December and January showing disappointing numbers. Even if we include 
those weak months, the economy has added more than 200,000 jobs per month on average 
over the past seven months. 
The unemployment rate dropped to 6.3 percent in April, down more than a full percentage 
point from  a  year  ago  and  the  lowest  rate  recorded  in  more  than five  years. This  month’s 
decline  was  particularly  sharp  and  was  driven,  in  part,  by  a  decline  in  labor  force 
participation. I would note that the household survey, which gives us the unemployment rate, 
is  more  volatile  than  the  establishment  survey,  which  measures  the  number  of  new  jobs 
added. I would not be surprised if the unemployment rate moved up a bit next month, but the 
downward  trend  continues,  and  we  are  making  significant  improvement.  The  number  of 
those unemployed for more than 27 weeks dropped by 287,000 in April, and by 1.25 million 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  since  January  2013.  While  this  is  an  improvement  in  labor  markets,  everyone  will  readily 
agree that the long-term unemployed remain a serious concern.  
I expect that the unemployment rate will fall below 6.2 by the end of 2014. If anything, this 
forecast  may  prove  to  be  too  pessimistic.  Given  the  recent  trends,  an  unemployment  rate 
below 6 percent is certainly plausible. 
Inflation  remains  benign.  It  is  running  somewhat  below  the  FOMC’s  long-run  goal  of 
2 percent. The Fed’s preferred measure of inflation is the year-over-year change in the price 
index  for  personal  consumption  expenditures,  or  PCE  inflation.  That  figure  came  in  at 
1.2 percent last year and is running at about the same pace over the first two months of this 
year. It is important to defend our 2 percent inflation target both from below and above. Yet, I 
anticipate, as the FOMC indicated in its most recent statement, that inflation will move back 
toward our target over time. Indeed, we learned last week that the CPI moved up in April and 
is now running at 2 percent over the past year and at a 2.3 percent annual rate during the 
past three months. 
I  am  encouraged  that  inflation  expectations  remain  near  their  longer-term  averages  and 
consistent  with  our  2  percent  target.  Given  the  large  amount  of  monetary  accommodation 
that we have added and continue to add to the economy, I think there is some upside risk to 
inflation in the longer term.  
There are risks with respect to my growth forecast as well. While there continues to be some 
downside risk to growth, for the first time in years, I see the potential for more upside risk to 
the  economic  outlook.  So  as  the  economy  gradually  moves  toward  our  2  percent  inflation 
target and the labor market continues to improve, we will need to calibrate monetary policy to 
reflect the improvements. 
Construction and housing markets 
Let me offer some further observations on the housing market. Residential real estate is a 
focus of many economists because it was ground zero for the financial crisis and the ensuing 
Great Recession. 
In  the  past,  we  tended  to  see  housing  lead  the  economy  out  of  the  recession,  but  for  a 
number of reasons, that was not the case this time. 
As  we  know,  sales  of  existing  homes  plummeted  from  unsustainable  peaks  during  the 
housing boom. Sales bottomed out at an annual rate of 3.5 million houses in July 2010 and 
then climbed steadily for three years to 5.4 million in July 2013. That was about the same 
annual rate that we averaged in the years preceding the boom. Sales have fallen somewhat 
since mid-2013, due in part to rising mortgage rates, but those rates remain low by historical 
standards.  The  fundamentals  of  the  housing  market  remain  sound,  including  stronger 
household formation, solid job growth, and consumers with stronger balance sheets. 
Home  prices  are  well  below  their  peaks,  but  they  continue  to  improve  as  the  market 
recovers. Two national measures were up recently: The S&P Case Shiller Home Price Index 
was  up  12.8  percent  year  over  year  in  its  latest  February  number,  and  the  CoreLogic 
National House Price Index was up 11.1 percent in March.  
Some have expressed concern over the housing recovery in recent months, but I am more 
optimistic. As I said, the fundamentals remain sound, and even though sales have leveled off 
recently, prices have continued to rise even over the past three months. That suggests that 
supply may be restricting sales more than weaker demand. But we will have to wait and see 
how the remainder of the spring and summer plays out. 
The structure of housing finance in our country remains a topic of intense discussion as it 
was  before,  during,  and  after  the  crisis.  As  I  have  argued  in  the  past,  the  government-
sponsored  enterprises,  or  GSEs,  were  permitted  to  operate  for  private  profit  but  with  an 
implicit guarantee from the government, and so they were able to take extraordinary risk at 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
the  taxpayers’  expense.1  This  was  a  classic  case  of  moral  hazard,  and  it  must  not  be 
repeated. 
There  are  many  proposals  for  a  new  system  of  housing  finance  with  varying  levels  of 
government  support.  There  is  no  clear  or  easy  answer  to  the  degree  of  government 
involvement in the housing market; that is a decision  we must make as a nation, carefully 
weighing the benefits of homeownership with the costs of the misallocation of scarce capital 
and the risks of unintended consequences.  
The U.S. subsidizes homeownership, more than any other developed country. We do so by 
providing  an  interest  deduction  for  home  mortgages  and  by  underwriting  housing  debt 
through  an  explicit  taxpayer  support  for  the  GSEs,  which  is  reflected  in  mortgage  rates. 
There are debates about the quantitative effects of these subsidies. But  we should not be 
afraid  to  ask  hard  questions.  Most  financial  advisors  would  tell  you  to  diversify  your  asset 
holdings,  yet  our  housing  policies  incentivize  families  to  do  just  the  opposite:  put  your 
savings in your home. The policies encourage homeownership over other asset classes. The 
results for many families were devastating.  
The GSEs were at the center of the housing storm and we have to date not addressed the 
fundamental reforms required. However, if as a nation we choose to continue the subsidies 
to homeownership, the government involvement and subsidies must be explicit, transparent, 
and well understood. Burying those subsidies in complex financial arrangements or in new 
semigovernment enterprises will be counterproductive. Markets work best when the risks and 
rewards of decisions are clearly defined so that prices can accurately reflect each transaction 
and the appropriate risk monitoring takes place. 
Monetary policy 
So let me turn to some issues for monetary policy. The Federal Reserve lowered its policy 
rate – the federal funds rate – to essentially zero more than five years ago. Since the policy 
rate  cannot  go  any  lower,  the  Fed  has  attempted  to  provide  additional  accommodation 
through  large-scale  asset  purchases.  We  are  now  in  our  third  round  of  this  quantitative 
easing.  
Since September 2012, the FOMC has added about $1.4 trillion in long-term Treasuries and 
mortgage-backed securities to its balance sheet through this program, known as QE3. It is 
already twice the size of the last round of asset purchases, known as QE2. 
In December 2013, the Committee announced that it would reduce the pace of purchases 
from  $85  billion  to  $75  billion  per  month.  It  announced  another  $10  billion  reduction  in 
January, March, and April and is now purchasing $45 billion a month. If the FOMC continues 
this  path  of  measured  reductions,  the  purchase  program  will  end  sometime  this  fall.  If  the 
economy  continues  to  improve,  though,  we  could  find  ourselves  still  trying  to  increase 
accommodation in an environment in which history suggests that policy should perhaps be 
moving in the opposite direction.  
In addition to asset purchases, the Fed is using forward guidance to try and inform the public 
about  the  way  monetary  policy  is  likely  to  evolve  in  the  future.  In  the  March  and  April 
statements,  the  FOMC  reaffirmed  its  highly  accommodative  stance.  The  statement  used 
qualitative  language  to  describe  the  economic  conditions  that  would  lead  to  action.  The 
Committee  reported  that  it  will  look  at  a  wide  range  of  information,  including  measures  of 
labor  market  conditions,  indicators  of  inflation  pressures  and  inflation  expectations,  and 
readings  on  financial  developments,  to  assess  progress  –  both  realized  and  expected  – 
toward its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation.  
                                                
1   Charles I. Plosser, “Some Observations About Policy Lessons from the Crisis,” remarks at the Philadelphia 
Fed Policy Forum, Philadelphia, PA, December 4, 2009. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The  FOMC  also  noted,  based  on  its  assessment  of  these  factors,  that  it  likely  will  be 
appropriate to keep its target federal funds rate near zero for a considerable time after the 
asset  purchase  program  ends,  especially  if  projected  inflation  continues  to  run  below  the 
2 percent goal and longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored. My own view is 
that,  as  we  continue  to  move  closer  to  our  2  percent  inflation  goal  and  the  labor  market 
improves, we must be prepared to adjust policy appropriately. That may well require us to 
begin raising interest rates sooner rather than later. 
Conclusion 
In summary, I believe that the U.S. economy is continuing to improve at a moderate pace. 
We are likely to see growth return to around 3 percent through the rest of 2014. Prospects for 
labor markets will continue to improve, and I expect the unemployment rate will continue to 
decline,  reaching  6.2  percent  or  lower  by  the  end  of  2014.  I  also  believe  that  inflation 
expectations  will  be  relatively  stable  and  that  inflation  will  move  up  toward  our  goal  of 
2 percent over the next year. 
I  expect  the  housing  and  construction  sectors  will  continue  to  recover.  But  we  should  not 
seek to return to the heady days of last decade’s real estate boom.  
On monetary policy, reducing the pace of asset purchases in measured steps is moving in 
the right direction, but the pace may leave us behind the curve if the economy continues to 
play out according to FOMC forecasts.  
Even  after  the  asset  purchase  program  has  ended,  monetary  policy  will  still  be  highly 
accommodative.  As  the  expansion  gains  traction,  the  challenge  will  be  to  reduce 
accommodation and to normalize policy in a way that ensures that inflation remains close to 
our  target,  that  the  economy  continues  to  grow,  and  that  we  avoid  sowing  the  seeds  of 
another financial crisis.  
Let me conclude with this thought. Over the past five years, the Fed and, dare I say, many 
other  central  banks  have  become  much  more  interventionist.  I  do  not  think  this  is  a 
particularly healthy state of affairs for central banks or our economies. The crisis in the U.S. 
has long passed. With a growing economy and the Fed’s long-term asset purchases coming 
to  an  end,  now  is  the  time  to  contemplate  restoring  some  semblance  of  normalcy  to 
monetary policy.  
In my view, the proper role for monetary policy is to work behind the scenes in limited and 
systematic  ways  to  promote  price  stability  and  long-term  growth.  Since  the  onset  of  the 
financial crisis, central banks have become highly interventionist in their efforts to manipulate 
asset  prices  and  financial  markets  in  general  as  they  attempt  to  fine-tune  economic 
outcomes. This approach has continued well past the end of the financial crisis. While the 
motivations may be noble, we have created an environment in which “it is all about the Fed.” 
Market  participants focus  entirely  too  much  on how  the  central  bank may  tweak  its  policy, 
and  central  bankers  have  become  too  sensitive  and  desirous  of  managing  prices  in  the 
financial world. I do not see this as a healthy symbiotic relationship for the long term.  
If  financial  market  participants  believe  that  their  success  depends  primarily  on  the  next 
decisions  of  monetary  policymakers  rather  than  on  economic  fundamentals,  our  capital 
markets will not deliver the economic benefits they are capable of providing. And if central 
banks  do  not  limit  their  interventionist  strategies  and  focus  on  returning  to  more  normal 
policymaking aimed at promoting price stability and long-term growth, then they will simply 
encourage  the  financial  markets  to  ignore  fundamentals  and  to  focus  instead  on  the  next 
actions of the central bank.  
I hope we can find a way to make monetary policy decision-making less interventionist, less 
discretionary,  and  more  systematic.  I  believe  our  longer-term  economic  health  will  be  the 
beneficiary. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
