  Maja Kadievska-Vojnovik: Foreign investment’s importance to the 
Republic of Macedonia’s economy 
Speech by Ms Maja Kadievska-Vojnovik, Vice-Governor of the National Bank of the Republic 
of  Macedonia,  at  the  presentation  of  the  Business  Climate  Survey  in  Macedonia, 
Macedonian-German Economic Association, Skopje, 10 April 2014. 
 trade channels 
capital flows and 
through the remittance channel. 
Dear Mr. Martin Knapp, 
Dear guests, 
It is an honor and pleasure to have this opportunity today to attend the presentation of the 
Business Climate Survey in the Republic of Macedonia, which is part of a regional survey of 
the  representative  offices  of German  Chambers  of Industry  and  Commerce  in  Central  and 
Southeast European countries. 
Namely, the Survey provides significant information on the companies’ perceptions about the 
Macedonian economy, and I would like to keep to some of its important aspects. 
It  is  more  than  clear  that  there  are  tight  connections  between  Macedonian  and  German 
economy, which are being realized through several channels, such as: 
• 
• 
• 
First, Germany is and it raises its importance as the largest trade partner of the Republic of 
Macedonia. The share of the trade of goods with the EU member states in the total trade of 
RM of 52% before the crisis, in 2008, reached 67% in 2013. This significant strengthening of 
the trade relations with the EU member states is mostly a result of the intensified trade with 
Germany,  and  moreover,  such  development  is  fully  conditioned  by  the  increase  in  the 
exports of RM to Germany. Thus the share of the export of goods to Germany in the total 
export  of  goods  of  RM  in  2008  equaled  14%,  while  in  2013  it  climbed  to  high  36%,  or  in 
absolute amounts, from Euro 383 million, for only five years, it reached Euro 1,154 million. It 
is a significant increase, a triple increase. 
It  means  that,  despite  the  crisis  in  the  Euro  area  and  its  negative  implications,  the  strong 
economy based on sound and solid economic fundaments – such as the German, proved to 
be  our  certain  partner  for  placement  of  more  than  a  third  of  the  exports.  Besides  the 
traditional  export  products,  i.e.  the  export  of  the  domestic  textile  and  metal  manufacturing 
industry,  in  the  last  two  years,  Germany  is  important  destination  for  export  of  the  new 
capacities  in  the  technological  industrial  development  zones  (TIDZs),  i.e.  for  the  export  of 
machinery and equipment and equipment of automotive industry. 
Second, Germany is our significant investor, which in 2013 advanced on the list of the ten 
most important foreign direct investors (9th). According to preliminary statistics for 2013, the 
total inflow of direct investment from Germany equals Euro 27 million, with the amount of the 
direct investment from Germany reaching Euro 111 million, or about 3 % of the overall stock 
of FDI (about Euro 4,000 million). However, this share is lower when compared with foreign 
capital originating from Austria (12%, or Euro 478 million as of 2013). 
Third, the significance of the German economy for us is perceived also through the prism of 
foreign  exchange  inflows  based  on  the  Macedonian  emigrants  in  Germany  or  the 
Macedonian  citizens  who  are  temporarily  working  in  Germany.  Thus,  the  growth  of  the 
German economy is closely correlated with the growth of this, to us, important income flow. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Generally,  the  German  economy,  the  companies  with  German  and  Austrian  capital  that 
operate in the Republic of Macedonia, are extremely important for the local economy. 
The results of the survey, i.e. the responses of the companies on the assessment of current 
business  conditions  and  perspectives,  at the  level  of  both  sector  and  company,  regarding: 
trade, exports, employees – give an impression that a large percentage of respondents (over 
80 %) have stable or positive expectations, i.e. claim that the environment is good or that it 
will  improve.  This  is  in  line  with  our  projections  for  2014,  according  to  which  we  expect 
economic growth of 3.7%, mainly determined by the growth of exports and fiscal stimulus in 
the construction sector. Also, the IMF assumes solid growth of the Macedonian economy of 
3.2% in 2014, which is higher than the growth projected for the regional countries and wider, 
and provides a clear vision that there is potential for achieving the economic growth. 
As  the  central  bank,  for  us,  it  is  extremely  important  that  the  surveyed  companies  largely 
expect increase in the exports. Thus the larger export potential, the higher foreign exchange 
inflows, i.e. narrowed trade imbalance. After all, in 2013 we witnessed trade deficit narrowing 
in the trade of goods that equaled about Euro 190 million, annually, given the increase in the 
exports  (of  3.2%/3.9%  in  services)  and  a  decrease  in  imports  (of  1.5%/0.9%  in  services). 
This improvement in the trade is closely linked to the increase in the production capacity of 
the economy, i.e. the increase in the export potential. The policies that were applied in the 
previous  period,  which  were  aimed  at  attracting  foreign  investors  in  the  tradable  goods 
sector,  which  meant  export  diversification,  proved  as  a good  pillar for reducing the foreign 
trade  imbalance.  The  export  growth  capacity  of  TIDZs  plans  indicated  that  the  foreign 
exchange rate is not a barrier to exports, i.e. that it is not overvalued. On the contrary, the 
stability  of  the  Denar  exchange  rate,  in  the  past  against  the  Deutsche  Mark,  and  today 
against  the  Euro,  is  an  important  pillar  of  all  business  decisions.  The  applied  monetary 
strategy  of  targeting  the  foreign  exchange  rate  proved  successful  in  maintaining  low  and 
stable inflation, that is, at the level of inflation in Germany, i.e. the level of the Euro area. 
So,  the  competitiveness  of  the  economy  is  not  created  through  the  exchange  rate,  but  it 
should lay on sound fundamentals that will generate long-term sustainable growth. Despite 
the  direct  effects  of  the  entry  of  foreign  investment  from  the  aspect  of  foreign  exchange 
inflows,  they  created  the  potential  for  the  Macedonian  economy  both  in  terms  of  reducing 
unemployment and in terms of transfer of know-how towards integrating local companies in 
international trade networks. Thus according to the Survey, an encouraging fact is that the 
respondents  indicate  presence  and  quality  of  local  suppliers.  The  involvement  of  local 
companies in the chain of suppliers of major export capacities means true valorization of the 
secondary effects of the FDI inflow. 
Also our expectations are towards further valorization of the positive effects of the structural 
policies  that  boost  the  competitiveness  of  the  domestic  economy.  The  macroeconomic 
policymakers  should  seek  to  improve  the  worst-rated  local  conditions,  according  to  the 
respondents’  opinion.  Although  some  of  them  noted  some  progress  in  2013,  there  is  still 
room  for  their  improvement.  They  relate  to  the  improvement  in  the  payment  discipline, 
increasing  the  legal  certainty  and  improvement  of  the  public  administration  capacity, 
enhancement of the labor force qualifications in line with market demand through measures 
in the education system. 
The Republic of Macedonia is on the map of foreign investors due to several factors, which 
were  emphasized  also  by  the  surveyed  companies.  Low  labor  costs,  i.e.  low  wages,  low 
taxes, good qualification structure of the labor force, as well as the macroeconomic stability, 
mirrored in low and stable inflation, exchange rate stability, low levels of budget deficit and 
public debt. These were the core pillars the business decisions were laid on. Therefore, we – 
the  macroeconomic  policymakers,  have  an  obligation  to  keep  the  solid  fundaments  of  the 
Macedonian economy in the next period. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
