  Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Building a collective brand for the banking 
industry 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (the central 
bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  40th  anniversary  celebration  of  the  Bank  Marketing 
Association of the Philippines, Manila, 5 September 2014. 
 Congratulations on your 40th anniversary! 
For most individuals, forty  years of service is already a full career. And in a sense, this is 
where the Bank Marketing Association of the Philippines stands today: the point where the 
success of your past meets the eagerness to address the challenges that lie ahead. 
If  we  think  back  to  what  it  was  in  early  1974,  it  was  certainly  a  time  of  change  and 
challenges. The oil crisis had triggered steep oil price hikes, oil rationing, brownouts and a 
global recession. And the country was under Martial Law. 
Amidst  this  socio-economic  climate,  BMAP  was  established.  The  objective  was  to  bolster 
bank marketing which was in its early stages of development. 
Back then, there were no online products for the retail market or structured notes for selected 
clients.  Minimum  deposit  balance  was  as  low  as  possible  and  we  had  those  blue  shaded 
2-peso bills in circulation. 
Today, we have found success in institutionalizing the “e” in e-banking while banks offer a 
multitude  of  differentiated  products  for  a  continuum  of  differentiated  clients.  One  can  now 
easily  pay  bills  online,  withdraw  from  teller-less  machines,  just  as  routinely  as  transacting 
across currencies through money changers. And while we no longer have the 2-peso bill, we 
have 5 and 10-peso coins to go with our New Generation Banknotes. 
Certainly, there have been so many changes over the past 40 years. But through it all, one 
thing has remained constant – the objective of banks to actively market their offerings to the 
retail and corporate markets. 
What has evolved is the menu of products and services that banks offer. These now come in 
variants that differ in currencies, investment objective, lot size and, cash flow requirements. 
We  talk  of  defining  differing  Investment  Policy  Statements  (IPS)  for  clients  who  may  be 
assessed as equally suitable for exposure to certain types of risks. 
All these reflect a wide variety of bank offerings that are structured to respond to the banking 
public’s  broad  range  of  financial  requirements.  After  all,  in  a  country  of  100 million 
individuals, Philippine demographics signifies opportunities in diversity. 
In other words, the marketing message and the delivery of those messages to the banking 
public can never be static and must continue to evolve. This is your area of expertise. The 
work of the important-but-behind-the-scenes individuals who craft the message and design 
the means of delivering those messages to your target markets. 
Bank  marketing  executives  form  the  backbone  of  the  industry’s  marketing  machinery.  And 
through innovations in marketing financial products and services, you as marketing experts 
and BMAP as the industry association deserve recognition for contributing to the growth of 
our banking system. 
And indeed, the industry has sustained its growth trend. What is most telling is how much we 
have become stronger even during the recent period of global financial difficulties. 
Among others: total assets of our banking sector have grown by 11.9% a year between 2009 
to June 2014, much higher than the 8.2% growth rate between 2001 to 2008. We see the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  in  recent  periods: 
same  pattern  with  peso  deposits:  from  an  annual  growth  of  11.4%  for  the  period  2001  to 
2008, deposit growth rate from 2009 to June 2014 accelerated to 14.3% a year. 
The  difference  is  even  more  pronounced  with  loans  outstanding:  it  grew  7.6%  a  year 
between 2001 and 2008 and moved up at a faster rate of 11.9% annually from 2009 to June 
2014.  Trust  activity  also  experienced  a  sharp  expansion 
from 
Php1.22 trillion  in  2008,  assets  under  management  of  trust  entities  increased  165%  to 
Php3.24 trillion by March 2013. 
The growth rates in both the deposit base and in trust activity tell us that the saving public 
has  confidence  in  our  banks  for  safekeeping  and/or  investing  their  hard-earned  personal 
savings. 
This  growth  is  best  appreciated  when  we  consider  that  6.87  Million  new  deposit  accounts 
were added in the nine quarters between March 2012 and June 2014. Of this total, 92.4% 
are  accounts  with  outstanding  balances  of  One  Hundred  Thousand  pesos  or  less.  This 
highlights the very retail nature of this expansion. 
In  the  end,  one  can  aptly  characterize  this  expansion  as  public  confidence  built  through 
targeted messaging and awareness campaigns. Simply put, it is an expansion that cannot 
unfold by itself without proper marketing of banking products and services. 
On  this  basis,  I  can  say  that  our  banks  are  successful  in  marketing  their  products  and 
services. This is surely a cause for celebration. Congratulations members of BMAP! 
Towards One 
Towards one brand 
I  believe  that  what  makes  our  banking  products  and  services  marketable  are  a  set  of 
characteristics that distinguish us from others. This is inherently a “branding issue.” 
As  more  financial  products  are  made  available  and  technology  allows  us  to  move  beyond 
national  borders,  we  need  to  be  clear  about  who  we  are  and  what  the  Philippine  banking 
system stands for. 
I believe that this will be a vital component of our efforts to prepare for an integrated ASEAN 
banking community and the further entry of new foreign banks and foreign investors into our 
banking sector under Republic Act 10641 and Republic Act 10574 respectively. 
The branding characteristics that I have in mind do not pertain to specific facets of products. 
Instead,  I  would  like  to  highlight  how  risk  management,  good  corporate  governance  and 
consumer  protection  can  and  have  made  a  real  difference  in  ensuring  the  stability  of  our 
banking system. It is this stability that underpins our banks’ value proposition to savers, while 
providing a viable counterparty for borrowers. 
The value of risk management cannot be overstated. In a market where uncertainty and risks 
are  hallmark  issues,  a  bank  can  only  be  viable  as  a  two-way  agent  between  savers  and 
borrowers if it is able to effectively manage its risk exposures. 
This certainly matters to depositors who rely on banks to keep their savings safe. Products 
you offer may have bells and whistles; but in the end, they are only as good as your promise 
to make the underlying funds available when depositors need them. 
It matters as well to your borrowers. Your ability to keep the bank operating in a safe and 
sound manner allows them to build a lasting relationship that supports their entrepreneurial 
initiatives, services their payment requirements, handles personnel accounts and manages 
their own corporate savings and investments. 
In the end, effective risk management is the skill that allows market stakeholders to operate 
as  a  going-concern.  This  is  a  skill  unique  to  banks  and  it  must  be  a  success  factor  that 
distinguishes the Philippine banking brand from the rest. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Actually,  we have achieved such distinction. In the December 2013 report of Moody’s, the 
Philippines  was  the  only  banking  system  rated  with  a  “positive  outlook”  from  among  the 
jurisdictions  it  reviews.  In  a  recent  press  statement,  Moody’s  declared  that  it  “maintains 
positive outlook on Philippine banking system in line with our expectation that GDP growth 
will  remain  one  of  the  strongest  among  emerging-market  economies  over  the  next 
12–18 months.” 
For  its  part,  Fitch  said  that  the  fundamentals  of  our  banking  sector  “remain  stable  as 
capitalization is high, funding and liquidity is healthy and loan-loss reserves are rising”. This 
is echoed by Standard & Poors which said that “Philippine banks are well positioned to meet 
the new Basel III requirements, with capital ratios that are comfortably above the regulatory 
minimum.” 
Nevertheless, as gratifying as these external views may be, the challenge is still to maintain 
our  strengths  and  address  weaknesses  that  have  been  identified.  Risk  management  may 
provide the technical on- and off-book expertise but this has to be complemented by a strong 
and unwavering culture of corporate governance. To different entities corporate governance 
can  mean  several  things;  but  for  banks  it  may  simply  boil  down  to  mitigating  conflicts  of 
interest. 
There  are  conflicts  because  savers  entrust  their  savings  to  the  banks  while  banks  must 
deploy these funds productively. In the end, it is the bank’s corporate governance culture that 
will protect the public’s savings from excessive and unwarranted risk-taking. 
We  accept  that  banking  is  a  business  where  products  are  designed  and  marketed  to  the 
public. But banking is more than just marketing and sales. Its power lies in the information 
that banks possess. Thus, the crux of the business is, in fact, protecting the integrity of the 
pre-sale process and a solid commitment to after-sale support. 
Banking  is  a  promise  to  and  a  relationship  with  stakeholders.  This  is  built  by  instilling 
confidence that the bank is operating prudently. If the business of banking is to be a going 
concern, the public must believe that the products and services which you market will provide 
them a better future. 
While we know that bankers do not have the unique ability to read tea leaves and accurately 
predict  the  future,  you  are  expected  to  think  beyond  bottom  lines.  This  should  be  another 
hallmark of the Philippine banking brand: a corporate governance culture bar none. This is a 
perpetual  call for  leadership,  exercising  sound  judgement  so that the  public’s  interests  are 
not compromised… and displaying excellence through responsive service. 
This  is  where  the  expansion  in  both  the  deposit  and  trust  books  matters  significantly. We 
take these as signs of continuing confidence in the banking system and we look to BMAP to 
sustain this trend. 
The  skill  of  effective  risk  management  and  a  commitment  to  a  corporate  culture  of 
governance lead us to the third aspect of the Philippine banking brand: that of empowering 
the financial consumer. 
This is an area which does not need much further elaboration before an audience like BMAP. 
Last year, for instance, you launched the revised “Banking Code for Consumer Protection” 
which  reflects  your  own  commitment  to  our  financial  consumers.  This  should  be  taken  in 
parallel  with  the  “Consumer  Protection  Framework”  which  the  Monetary  Board  recently 
approved. 
Together, these two initiatives suggest that we do not pay lip service to consumer protection. 
Instead,  we  now  have  live  frameworks  that  institutionalize  market  conduct  standards, 
strengthen  the  redress  mechanism,  cultivate  financial  literacy  as  an  active  element  of 
financial  well-being  and  hold  stakeholders  accountable  for  their  behaviour.  The  bar  is  set 
deliberately high but I know we are all fully committed. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  BSP support 
Moving forward, the BSP will sustain its collaboration with the industry in crafting policies that 
raise  the  bar  for  banking  excellence.  We  shall  pursue  this  through  an  environment  that 
enables the development of a distinct brand for the Philippine banking industry. 
From  our  perspective,  effective  risk  management,  a  unwavering  culture  of  good  corporate 
governance and the empowerment of the financial consumer are the fundamental aspects of 
our brand of banking. For sure, there are many challenges that lie ahead, but what you have 
achieved so far gives us confidence moving forward. 
Among others, I urge BMAP to sustain its socio-economic service of enhancing the financial 
literacy  of  seafarers.  This  is  an  important  undertaking:  to  help  our  modern  heroes  who 
faithfully send money to their families here. 
I also encourage BMAP and its members to continue promoting the gospel of saving across 
the  country.  In  particular,  I  look  forward  to  the  continuing  promotion  and  expansion  of 
BMAP’s  “Kiddie  Account  Program.”  I  understand  that  around  526,000  kiddie  savings 
accounts have been opened as of March 2014. I am happy that more children are developing 
the habit of saving but the challenge is to promote the program to more areas and to reach 
out to more children. I hope BMAP will continue to push this program forward with greater 
vigor. 
If you recall, we received the country award in 2013 from the Amsterdam-based Child and 
Youth  Finance  International  or  CYFI  for  having  the  best  financial  education  program  for 
children that combines curriculum integration of lessons on saving and money management 
with  actual  bank  campaigns  to  encourage  children  to  save  in  banks.  If  you  recall,  BMAP 
members from BDO, BPI and RCBC Savings briefed foreign delegates from CYFI on their 
respective marketing campaigns under the Kiddie Account Program. This has made such a 
positive impression that CYFI considers our integrated program an international best practice 
model. We therefore share this award with the Department of Education and BMAP. Thank 
you. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen.  Financial  education  that  leads  to  responsible  personal  finance 
management  is  now  considered  a  life  skill  everyone  must  have,  like  reading  and  writing. 
Ultimately, everyone handles money, whatever station in life one has. 
I  hope  therefore  that  BMAP  will  employ  its  creativity  and  ability  to  reach  out  to  millions  of 
financially unserved Filipinos who represent a big untapped market. 
We are happy that BMAP has initiated its own Bank Marketing Awards for best practices in 
brand and product marketing in the industry. This is aligned with our objective of creating a 
distinct brand for the industry – a brand marked by both competence and excellence. 
Certainly, these efforts can go a long way in making our banking industry truly responsive to 
the needs of our people. 
The task ahead 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  much  has  been  gained  by  and  in  Philippine  banking.  From  a 
marketing perspective, it may be beneficial if banks integrate their individual marketing plans 
into an industry marketing approach for branding purposes. For instance, if Philippine tourism 
has  “It’s  more  fun  in  the  Philippines”  tagline,  the  banking  sector  may  also  consider 
developing a program that embodies its collective aspirations. 
Competence  and  excellence  founded  on  effective  risk  management,  an  unwavering 
corporate  culture  of  good  governance  and  the  empowerment  of  the  financial  consumer. 
These are the essential brand elements we see of the Philippine banking system. 
I have no doubt that BMAP can harness your collective expertise to make this happen and to 
boost  the  overall  competitiveness  of  the  Philippine  banking  industry.  I  believe  this  is  a 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  challenge worthy of BMAP – an association that has 40 years of track record behind it. With 
the liberalization of the entry of foreign banks to the Philippines and the forthcoming ASEAN 
Integration, developing a distinct brand for Philippine banking is a goal worth pursuing. 
If BMAP is successful in developing this as a legacy, the next generations of bank marketing 
professionals can look back and celebrate this milestone as the game changer that raised 
the quality of bank marketing in the Philippines. I know BMAP is up to this challenge. It is 
said that life begins at 40. This is the perfect time therefore to start on this legacy project. 
And to add more context and perspective to BMAP’s 40th anniversary, I wish to share that 
this year, I am celebrating my 40th year – I am not referring to my birthday and certainly not 
to my waistline. This year, I mark my 40th year as a central banker. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen  of  BMAP.  To  me,  this  is  a  sign  that  good  things  will  continue  to 
develop as we continue our partnership. A partnership for a stronger, more responsive, and 
more responsible banking system that promotes sustained and inclusive growth. Together, 
let  us  work  on  this  legacy.  Finally,  I  thank  BMAP  for  its  continuing  support  to  the  BSP’s 
programs. 
Again, my congratulations to BMAP as well as its leaders and members, past and present. 
Mabuhay ang BMAP! Mabuhay ang ating mahal na bansang Pilipinas! Maraming salamat sa 
inyong lahat. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
