Mario Draghi: ECB press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank, 
Frankfurt am Main, 6 March 2014. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Vice-President  and  I  are  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  our 
press conference. We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing 
Council. 
Based on our regular economic and monetary analyses, we decided to keep the key ECB 
interest rates unchanged. Incoming information confirms that the moderate recovery of the 
euro area economy is proceeding in line with our previous assessment. At the same time, the 
latest ECB staff macroeconomic projections, now covering the period up to the end of 2016, 
support earlier expectations of a prolonged period of low inflation, to be followed by a gradual 
upward movement in HICP inflation rates towards levels closer to 2%. In keeping with this 
picture, monetary  and  credit  dynamics  remain  subdued.  Inflation  expectations for  the  euro 
area  over  the  medium  to  long  term  continue  to  be  firmly  anchored  in  line  with  our  aim  of 
maintaining inflation rates below, but close to, 2%. 
Regarding the medium-term outlook for prices and growth, the information and analysis now 
available fully confirm our decision to maintain an accommodative monetary policy stance for 
as long as necessary. This will assist the gradual economic recovery in the euro area. We 
firmly reiterate our forward guidance. We continue to expect the key ECB interest rates to 
remain at present or lower levels for an extended period of time. This expectation is based 
on an overall subdued outlook for inflation extending into the medium term, given the broad-
based weakness of the economy, the high degree of unutilised capacity and subdued money 
and credit creation. 
We  are  monitoring  developments  on  money  markets  closely  and  are  ready  to  consider  all 
instruments available to us. Overall, we remain firmly determined to maintain the high degree 
of monetary accommodation and to take further decisive action if required. 
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. 
Real  GDP  in  the  euro  area  rose  by  0.3%,  quarter  on  quarter,  in  the  last  quarter  of  2013, 
thereby increasing for three consecutive quarters. Developments in survey-based confidence 
indicators  up  to  February  are  consistent  with  continued  moderate  growth  also  in  the  first 
quarter of this year. Looking ahead, the ongoing recovery is expected to proceed, albeit at a 
slow pace. In particular, some further improvement in domestic demand should materialise, 
supported by the accommodative monetary policy stance, improving financing conditions and 
the progress made in fiscal consolidation and structural reform. In addition, real incomes are 
supported  by  lower  energy  prices.  Economic  activity  is  also  expected  to  benefit  from  a 
gradual  strengthening  of  demand  for  euro  area  exports.  At  the  same  time,  although 
unemployment  in  the  euro  area  is  stabilising,  it  remains  high,  and  the  necessary  balance 
sheet adjustments in the public and private sectors will continue to weigh on the pace of the 
economic recovery. 
This  assessment  is  also  broadly  reflected  in  the  March  2014  ECB  staff  macroeconomic 
projections for the euro area, which foresee annual real GDP increasing by 1.2% in 2014, 
1.5%  in  2015  and  1.8%  in  2016.  Compared  with  the  December  2013  Eurosystem  staff 
macroeconomic projections, the projection for real GDP growth for 2014 has been revised 
slightly upwards. 
The  risks  surrounding  the  economic  outlook  for  the  euro  area  continue  to  be  on  the 
downside. Developments in global financial markets and in emerging market economies, as 
well  as  geopolitical  risks,  may  have  the  potential  to  affect  economic  conditions  negatively. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Other  downside  risks  include  weaker  than  expected  domestic  demand  and  export  growth 
and insufficient implementation of structural reforms in euro area countries. 
According to Eurostat’s flash estimate, euro area annual HICP inflation was 0.8% in February 
2014, unchanged from the (upwardly revised) outcome for January. While energy prices fell 
more  strongly  in  February  than  in  the  previous  month,  increases  in  industrial  goods  and 
services  prices  were  higher  than  in  January.  On  the  basis  of  current  information  and 
prevailing  futures  prices  for  energy,  annual  HICP  inflation  rates  are  expected  to  remain  at 
around  current  levels  in  the  coming  months.  Thereafter,  inflation  rates  should  gradually 
increase and reach levels closer to 2%, in line with inflation expectations for the euro area 
over the medium to long term. 
This  assessment  is  also  broadly  reflected  in  the  March  2014  ECB  staff  macroeconomic 
projections for the euro area, which foresee annual HICP inflation at 1.0% in 2014, 1.3% in 
2015 and 1.5% in 2016. In the last quarter of 2016, annual HICP inflation is projected to be 
1.7%. In comparison with the December 2013 Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections, 
the projection for inflation for 2014 has been revised slightly downwards. In view of the first 
publication of a three-year projection horizon in the March 2014 ECB staff macroeconomic 
projections,  it  should  be  stressed  that  the  projections  are  conditional  on  a  number  of 
technical  assumptions,  including  unchanged  exchange  rates  and  declining  oil  prices,  and 
that  the  uncertainty  surrounding  the  projections  increases  with  the  length  of  the  projection 
horizon. 
Regarding the Governing Council’s risk assessment, both upside and downside risks to the 
outlook  for  price  developments  are  seen  as  limited  and  are  considered  to  be  broadly 
balanced over the medium term. 
Turning  to  the  monetary  analysis,  data  for  January  2014  confirm  the  assessment  of 
subdued underlying growth in broad money (M3) and credit. Annual growth in M3 increased 
to  1.2%  in  January,  from  1.0%  in  December.  The  monthly  inflow  to  M3  in  January  was 
substantial,  compensating  for  the  strong  outflow  in  December.  The  increase  in  M3  growth 
reflected a stronger annual growth rate of M1, which rose to 6.2% from 5.7% in December. 
As in previous months, the main factor supporting annual M3 growth was an increase in the 
MFI  net  external  asset  position,  which  continued  to  reflect  the  increased  interest  of 
international investors in euro area assets. The annual rate of change of loans to the private 
sector continued to contract. The annual rate of change of loans to non-financial corporations 
(adjusted  for  loan  sales  and  securitisation)  was  –2.9%  in  January,  unchanged  from 
December.  Weak  loan  dynamics  for  non-financial  corporations  continue  to  reflect  their 
lagged  relationship  with  the  business  cycle,  credit  risk  and  the  ongoing  adjustment  of 
financial  and  non-financial  sector  balance  sheets.  The  annual  growth  rate  of  loans  to 
households  (adjusted  for  loan  sales  and  securitisation)  stood  at  0.2%  in  January  2014, 
broadly unchanged since the beginning of 2013. 
Since  the  summer  of  2012  substantial  progress  has  been  made  in  improving  the  funding 
situation  of  banks.  In  order  to  ensure  an  adequate  transmission  of  monetary  policy  to  the 
financing conditions in euro area countries, it is essential that the fragmentation of euro area 
credit  markets  declines  further  and  that  the  resilience  of  banks  is  strengthened  where 
needed. This is the objective of the ongoing comprehensive assessment by the ECB, while a 
timely  implementation  of  additional  steps  to  establish  a  banking  union  will  further  help  to 
restore confidence in the financial system. 
To  sum  up,  the  economic  analysis  confirms  our  expectation  of  a  prolonged  period  of  low 
inflation, to be followed by a gradual upward movement towards levels of inflation closer to 
2%.  A  cross-check  with  the  signals  from  the  monetary  analysis  confirms  the  picture  of 
subdued underlying price pressures in the euro area over the medium term. 
As  regards  fiscal  policies,  the  ECB  staff  macroeconomic  projections  indicate  continued 
progress  in reducing fiscal  imbalances  in  the  euro  area. The  aggregate  euro  area general 
government deficit is expected to have declined to 3.2% of GDP in 2013 and is projected to 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
be reduced further to 2.7% of GDP this year. General government debt is projected to peak 
at  93.5%  of  GDP  in  2014,  before  declining  slightly  in  2015.  Looking  ahead,  euro  area 
countries should not unravel past consolidation efforts and should put high government debt 
ratios  on  a  downward  trajectory  over  the  medium  term.  Fiscal  strategies  should  be  in  line 
with  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  and  should  ensure  a  growth-friendly  composition  of 
consolidation  which  combines  improving  the  quality  and  efficiency  of  public  services  with 
minimising distortionary effects of taxation. National authorities should also continue with the 
decisive  implementation  of  structural  reforms  in  all  euro  area  countries.  These  reforms 
should  aim,  in  particular,  to  make  it  easier  to  do  business  and  to  boost  employment,  thus 
enhancing  the  euro  area’s  growth  potential  and  reducing  unemployment  in  the  euro  area 
countries.  To  this  end,  the  Governing  Council  welcomes  the  European  Commission’s 
communication of yesterday on the prevention and correction of macroeconomic imbalances 
and  on  the  Excessive  Deficit  Procedure.  Looking  ahead,  it  is  key  that  the  macroeconomic 
surveillance framework in the euro area, which was significantly strengthened in the wake of 
the sovereign debt crisis, is implemented fully and in a consistent manner. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
