   Maiava Atalina Ainuu Enari: Educating children about money matters 
Opening remarks by Ms Maiava Atalina Ainuu Enari, Governor of the Central Bank of Samoa, at 
the Awards Ceremony of the “Be Money Wi$e” Financial Literacy Poster Competition 2014, Apia, 
14 March 2014. 
 Greetings  and  welcome  to  you  all,  dear  parents,  school  principals  and  most  importantly  the 
winning students of the 2014 Be Money Wi$e poster competition. As I look across the room to the 
students, parents and principals/school reps,... without a doubt this is a Happy Friday for you all. It 
gives me great pleasure to say that, this is also a Happy Friday for us at the Central Bank – we 
are as much excited to reveal the winning poster entries as you are to be here today to receive 
your awards!! 
Talofa! Talofa Lava; 
I am delighted to be here today, at the conclusion of an important initiative for the Central Bank, to 
address  this  gathering  and  most  especially  the  winners  of  –  our  first  Be  Money Wise  Financial 
Literacy Poster Competition. This competition is one of many programs undertaken by the Central 
Bank  to  perform  one  of  its  mandates  of  promoting  financial  literacy  under  the  “FINANCIAL 
FITNESS” or “FIT for FINANCE” campaign. 
The  “Be  Money  WI$E  Poster  Competition  2014”  was  also  conducted  in  collaboration  with  the 
Global Money Week which is coordinated by Child & Youth Finance International. Global Money 
Week  takes  place  on  the  10–17  March  and  is  a  worldwide  celebration  through  events  and 
activities to help empower children and youth to be confident and responsible economic citizens. 
During this week, children are encouraged to engage in learning on how money works, including 
saving, creating livelihoods, gaining employment and entrepreneurship as well as living financially 
smart lives. And so for Samoa’s contribution to the event, the Central Bank decided to conduct a 
financial  literacy  poster  competition  to  encourage  kids  to  use  their  imaginations  and  knowledge 
about money choices, and help provide a creative outlet to demonstrate their knowledge. 
For  this  year’s  poster  competition  theme  “I  can  grow  my  money  by...”  myself  and  Mrs  Vicseta 
Meredith of Business System Limited had the pleasure AND the hard task of judging the entries. 
We were very impressed with the quality of entries that were presented to us – so it pains us that 
there are only a limited number of awards we can give out for the competition. 
“Financial literacy” or “the set of skills and knowledge that allows an individual to make informed 
and effective decisions with all of their financial resources” is an important life-skill in our diverse 
capacities as students, employees, consumers, savers and investors etc. In short, it is important 
for all responsible economic citizens to have. – So why not start now and start young? Start young 
on financial fitness...it will be fun and worth it! If we plant the financial literacy seed now, we will 
watch  as  our  children  and  students  grow  and  bloom  into  responsible  economic  citizens.  As 
parents, teachers and educators, we can do this by sharing and talking directly with our children 
about money matters, teaching them of the things to improve their money management skills, and 
be role models for them.  
To  the  winners  of  the  2014  Be  Money  Wi$e  poster  competition,  I  offer  my  heartfelt 
congratulations! You have done a magnificent job with these posters – your entries were chosen 
out of 550 entries submitted to us! I only pray that you will exercise some financial literacy with 
your cash prizes received today!! 
I  would  also  like  to  acknowledge  the  principals  and  teachers  for  encouraging  your  students  to 
participate  in  the  competition  and  for  incorporating  financial  literacy  in  your  lessons.  With  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   rewards that your individual schools will receive today I hope you are now ever more convinced 
that financial literacy is worth it and that it pay$ off! 
At  this  point  I  would  like  to  acknowledge  Meilan  Meredith  and  her  team  at  Business  System 
Limited  for  the  wonderful  partnership  in  the  poster  competition  and  kindly  donating  prizes  and 
trophies  for  our  winners  today.  Your  partnership  is  greatly  appreciated  and  we  look  forward  to 
another opportunity to work with you in the future. 
And lastly, a big faamalo to the Financial System Development team for coordinating this year’s 
poster competition. 
I wish you all, a very blessed weekend. 
Soifua ma ia manuia. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
