Jean-Pierre Danthine: Does cash have a future? 
Summary of a speech by Mr Jean-Pierre Danthine, Vice Chairman of the Governing Board of 
the  Swiss  National  Bank,  at  the  Assemblée  Générale  de  l’Association  des  Alumni  HEC, 
Lausanne, 8 May 2014. 
 The complete speech can be found in German on the Swiss National Bank’s website: www.snb.ch. 
One of the traditional tasks of the Swiss National Bank (SNB) is to provide the economy with 
banknotes and coins. Since the establishment of the SNB, banknotes have constituted the 
most  visible  link  to  the  population.  As  an  everyday  article  of  use,  but  also  symbolically, 
banknotes  embody  the  quality,  security  and  stability  of  the  SNB,  and  of  Switzerland  in 
general, not least of all also for the rest of the world. It is therefore of key importance that the 
SNB  undertake  the  task  of  cash  supply  and  distribution  conscientiously.  The  role  that 
banknotes  play  in  the  public’s  trust  in  the  institution  and  its  decisions  is  not  to  be 
underestimated. In turn, this trust is an important prerequisite for the SNB to be able to fulfil 
its core monetary policy mandate, and thereby ensure price stability. 
Due to technological developments in the post-war period, the significance of cash declined, 
as measured in terms of economic performance. Since the beginning of the 1990s, however, 
the  demand  for  cash  has  hovered  at  a  stable  level,  and  since  2008,  in  the  wake  of  the 
financial crisis, there has even been a marked increase. Thus the technological advances of 
the last 25 years – especially the internet – have not significantly diminished the demand for 
cash. People still appreciate cash as a store of value and a means of payment. It is visible 
and tangible, which makes it especially valuable when there is uncertainty about the stability 
of banks. In addition, interest rates have been very low for some time now, and therefore the 
opportunity  costs  of  holding  cash  are  also  low.  However,  the  significance  of  cash  as  a 
payment  instrument,  too,  remains  unimpaired.  In  this  regard,  two  essential  characteristics 
stand out: As legal tender, cash is widely accepted and extremely reliable to use. 
Nevertheless,  technology  is  constantly  moving forward  in  terms  of  new  forms  of  electronic 
payment  as  well  as  in  the  area  of  digital  forms  of  money. What  is  more,  the  share  of  the 
population  which  grew  up  without  bank  cards,  the  internet  and  mobile  telephones  is 
continually  shrinking.  Is  Switzerland  therefore  becoming  a  cashless  society?  Even  if  the 
importance of cash does decline over time, it is unlikely that it will be completely replaced. Its 
specific advantages suggest, rather, that it will continue to be used as a store of value and a 
means  of  payment.  With  well-established,  flexible  processes  in  banknote  production  and 
handling,  the  SNB  contributes  to  ensuring  that  cash  continues  to  meet  the  public’s 
requirements at all times. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
