Yaseen Anwar: Islamic banking potential of Pakistan 
Speech by Mr Yaseen Anwar, Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan, at the Round Table 
Conference on “Islamic banking potential of Pakistan”, Karachi, 15 January 2014. 
 Mr.  President,  Honourable  Governor  Sindh,  Honorable  Finance  Minister,  Distinguished 
guests, ladies and gentlemen, 
Assalamualaikum, 
I am indeed privileged to be here today for addressing this prestigious gathering comprising 
all major stakeholders of the Islamic Banking Industry in Pakistan. The presence of foreign 
experts  have  today  brings  global  experience  to  this  roundtable  conference  and  thus  will 
further  enrich  the  knowledge  sharing  experience.  My  appreciation  to  the  organizers  for 
holding this event to explore the real potential of Islamic banking in Pakistan, which I believe 
will give further boost to our efforts and optimism for growth and development of the industry. 
Islamic  finance  during  the  last  four  decades  has  witnessed  considerable  progress  at  the 
global  front.  Besides  the  traditional  Islamic  finance  markets  of  the  Middle  East,  financial 
centers  across  various  Western  countries  are  also  accepting  and  recognizing  the  viability 
and  utility  of  this  alternate  financial  system.  In  particular  the  relative  resilience  of  Islamic 
financial  institutions  during  the  recent  financial  crisis  due  to  its  asset  backed  nature  and 
being  devoid  of  speculation  and  uncertainty,  has  significantly  improved  its  credibility  as  a 
more prudent and stable system. The scope and range of Islamic finance products has also 
widened considerably over the years and Islamic financial institutions are presently catering 
to  most  of  the  financial  services  needs  of  various  sectors  of  the  economy.  There  are 
dedicated  regulatory,  legal  and  academic  institutions  at the  international  level  working  and 
providing support for maintaining the high pace growth of the Islamic finance industry. 
Pakistan,  with  more  than  95  percent  Muslim  population,  and  a  constitutional  obligation  of 
ensuring  a  riba  free  economic  system,  has  had  a  favorable  response  to  Islamic  finance. 
Pakistan is amongst the pioneers of Islamic finance as we started planning for nurturing the 
Shariah compliant financial system way back in 1970s, and made a bold attempt in 1980s to 
bring  the  whole  banking  and  financial  system  in  conformity  with  Shariah  principles.  The 
pioneering work of 1980s particularly on the legal and regulatory front has been a source of 
guidance and inspiration for many countries that initiated Islamic finance in the 1980s and 
90s. The attempt to transform the whole system however, met with limited success largely 
due  to  slippages  at  the  implementation  and  execution  stage.  This  lead  us  to  re-launch 
Islamic  banking  in  2001  in  parallel  to  conventional  banking  thus  allowing  both  Islamic  and 
conventional banks to co-exist and enabling the consumers to do banking with the system of 
their choice and preference. 
This approach has proved to be a huge success in promoting Islamic banking in the country 
and  ensuring  its  demand  driven  development.  The  industry  has  been  growing  at  an 
impressive  annual  growth  rate  of  over  30  percent  over  the  last  five  years  with  sustained 
growth momentum despite significantly increased base. Islamic Banking is currently spread 
across 80 districts of the country with a network of 1200 branches offering Shariah compliant 
products and services. Islamic banking assets presently constitute almost 10 percent of the 
overall  banking  system  in  the  country  while  in  terms  of  deposits  the  share  is  above 
10 percent. The future outlook of the industry is  also very positive  with bright prospects of 
doubling its market share by 2020. 
The  presence  of  his  Excellency,  the  President  of  Pakistan,  and  the  honorable  finance 
minister in the conference speaks volumes about the strong commitment of the government 
for  the  promotion  of  Islamic  banking  and  finance  in  the  country.  I  would  like  to  take  this 
opportunity  to  highlight  that  State  Bank  of  Pakistan  has  been  playing  a  leading  role  in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
related 
locally  and 
the  Shariah 
internationally.  The 
nurturing Islamic banking in the country on sound footings. Being the regulator of the banking 
sector,  SBP  over  the  years  has  introduced  and  implemented  key  regulatory  reforms  and 
prudential  measures  to  ensure  financial  stability  and  to  meet  the  evolving  needs  of  the 
industry.  We  have  also  given  a  comprehensive  and  multi-tiered  Shariah  compliance 
framework to ensure Shariah conformity of Islamic banks’ operations. To further strengthen 
the  Shariah  compliance  environment  in  Islamic  banks  we  have  also  developed  a  Shariah 
Governance  Framework,  which  explicitly  defines 
roles  and 
responsibilities  of  all  key  organs  of  IBIs  including  Board  of  Directors,  the  executive 
management and Shariah Boards. It also institutionalizes the Shariah compliance function in 
IBIs. 
Moreover,  to  develop  an  effective  prudential  and  risk  management  framework  for  Islamic 
finance, an incremental approach was adopted wherein new regulations for only such areas 
and  risks  of  Islamic  banks  were  developed  which  were  not  being  covered  by  conventional 
prudential regulations and risk management framework. 
Further, in order to align its regulatory framework with international regulatory standards and 
best practices, SBP regularly reviews and evaluates the standards issued by IFSB, AAOIFI, 
and  IIFM  for  their  possible  implementation  keeping  in  view  our  local  legal,  regulatory  and 
economic  environment.  Last  year  we  issued  landmark  Instructions  for  Profit  &  Loss 
Distribution  and  Pool  Management  for  Islamic  Banking  Institutions  (IBIs),  which  were  well 
received  both 
instructions  are  aimed  at  bringing 
standardization  and  improving  transparency  in  profit  &  loss  distribution  practices  of  the 
industry and will be instrumental in improving the perception of Islamic banking amongst the 
masses. 
Considering  the  demand  of Islamic microfinance,  SBP  has  offered  various  options  to  offer 
the services of Islamic microfinance. These options include the establishment of full-fledged 
Islamic microfinance banks, Islamic microfinance services by full-fledged Islamic banks and 
Islamic  microfinance  Divisions  in  conventional  microfinance  banks.  This,  coupled  with  its 
inherent checks on end use of the funds provided by microfinance institutions, the outlook for 
growth and development of Islamic microfinance in Pakistan is positive. 
Similarly  for  an  agro-based  economy  like  ours,  there  is  huge  potential  for  development  of 
Shariah  Based  Agriculture  financing.  SBP  is  working  with  the  industry  to  develop  Shariah 
compliant agriculture finance products particularly Dairy products which can generate more 
than $ 500 million in foreign exchange exports. 
Islamic  finance  is  an  evolving  industry  and  so  is  its  understanding  by  the  masses,  the 
business community and the policy makers. Despite significant improvement during the last 
decade,  still  a  large  segment  of  our  population  does  not  have  adequate  understanding  of 
Islamic finance and is unable to comprehend its distinction over conventional finance. The 
State  Bank 
therefore,  besides  developing  a  supportive  regulatory  and  supervisory 
framework, is also actively engaged in undertaking awareness creation and capacity building 
initiatives through its awareness campaign whereby targeted seminars and conferences are 
being  organized  for  the  business  community,  academia,  bankers  and  policy  makers 
throughout the country. In this context, the most significant milestone that has been achieved 
in the recent past is the launch of an industry wide media campaign under the support and 
guidance  of  SBP.  This  campaign  is  targeted  to  address  mass  awareness  issues  by  using 
print, electronic and digital media. 
Further,  SBP  has  recently  developed  a  five  year  Strategic  Plan  (2014–18)  for  the  Islamic 
banking  industry  in  Pakistan  in  consultation  with  all  key  stakeholders,  which  gives  a 
consensus  agenda  and  strategy  to  take  the  industry  to  its  next  level  of  growth  and 
development.  The  plan  has  an  extensive  focus  on  improving  public  perception  of  Islamic 
banking as a distinct and viable system capable of catering to the varied financial services 
needs of various segments of the society. It envisages intensifying the awareness creation 
efforts,  strengthening  consultation  mechanism  with  stakeholders,  removing  confusion  and 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
inconsistencies in legal, regulatory and taxation environment, deepening and broadening of 
product offerings by Islamic banks, doubling the outreach of Islamic banks during the next 
five years and increasing the market share to 15 percent of the banking system. 
Pakistan  has  been  an  active  member  of  leading  global  International  Islamic  finance 
institutions  like  the  Islamic  Financial  Services  Board  (IFSB),  the  Accounting  and  Auditing 
Organization  for  Islamic  Financial  Institutions  (AAOIFI),  and  the  International  Islamic 
Financial Market (IIFM) that are all playing a key role in developing prudential and Shariah 
standards  for  the  industry.  Being  part  of  the  global  efforts  for  the  development  of  global 
standards for the industry has certainly helped us in improving our presence on the global 
Islamic finance map and adopting the prudential and Shariah standards in Pakistan. 
I would also like to mention here that SBP is also a key member of the recently constituted 
steering  committee  for  the  promotion  of  Islamic  banking  by  the  government  which  is 
mandated  to  devise  a  comprehensive  policy  framework  for  the  Islamic  financial  system, 
suggest practical steps needed to be taken for implementing Shariah-based financial system, 
and  propose  solutions  for  the  Islamic  secondary  market  /  money  market  for  liquidity 
management.  These  initiatives  on  part  of  the  government  sends  a  clear  signal  that  the 
present  government  views  Islamic  banking  and  finance  as  an  integral  part  of  the  overall 
financial system. We at SBP share the same view and believe that steps like these can go a 
long way in further increasing the scope of the industry in the country. 
Innovation  requires  research,  hence  it  is  imperative  that  the  industry  players  give  utmost 
importance to research in their organizations. I am pleased to inform this esteemed audience 
that SBP has a dedicated team of researchers focusing on key areas relevant to the industry. 
We have recently conducted an extensive survey based study of 10,000 household across 
the country to assess the demand for Islamic banking and its attributes. The results of the 
survey will be shared with the industry soon and are highly encouraging as there is a huge 
untapped demand for Islamic banking in the country; and an even faster pace expansion of 
the industry would be needed to fill the demand and supply gap in the medium to long term. 
Lastly!  I  would  like  to  reiterate  the  full  support  and  ownership  of  SBP  in  developing  and 
nurturing a sound and stable financial system that meets the Shariah principles in letter and 
spirit. We will work with the industry and other stakeholders to ensure further strengthening 
of  risk  management  practices,  and  an  effective  macro  prudential 
framework  and 
transparency in financial transactions and exposures. The State Bank of Pakistan remains 
committed  to  finding  appropriate  solutions  to  these  challenges.  I  have  no  doubt  that  the 
support  and  cooperation  of  all  stakeholders  exhibited  here  today  will  lead  to  further 
strengthening the foundations of this important industry. 
A  pure  Islamic  financial  system  with  its  inherent  focus  on  equity  justice  and  social 
responsibility is ideal and this demands serious and coordinated efforts of all stakeholders on 
the continuous basis. I wish the best of luck to the industry and thanks once again to all the 
participants and organizers. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
