  Ravi Menon: Islamic finance – continued growth 
Remarks by Mr Ravi Menon, Managing Director of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, at 
the 5th World Islamic Banking Conference Asia Summit, Singapore, 3 June 2014. 
 Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, good morning. And to all our foreign guests, a 
warm welcome to Singapore. 
The sun is shining on Islamic finance. Let me highlight three promising global developments. 
First, Islamic finance continues to grow rapidly. The industry grew at double digits last year, 
as  it  has  for  the  previous  five  years,  despite  global  economic  uncertainties  and  market 
volatility. Global Islamic financial assets are estimated to have reached US$1.8 trillion by the 
end of 2013, from US$1.5 trillion in 2012. 
Second,  global  regulatory  standards  and  best  practices  are  being  established  for  Islamic 
finance.  The  Islamic  Financial  Services  Board  (IFSB),  the  Accounting  and  Auditing 
Organisation  for  Islamic  Financial  Institutions  (AAOIFI),  and  the  International  Islamic 
Financial  Markets  (IIFM)  have  been  at  the  forefront  of  this  effort,  helping  to  narrow 
differences in market practices and regulatory treatment. 
Common standards are good for facilitating cross border transactions. They help to address 
risks  that  are  idiosyncratic  to  Islamic  finance,  such  as  Shariah  non-compliance  risk.  In  so 
doing,  these  standards  serve  to  bolster  confidence  in  the  safety  and  soundness  of  the 
Islamic finance industry. 
Third,  more  countries  are  catering  for  Islamic  finance.  In  Asia,  Indonesia  has  set  out  to 
significantly  grow  its  Islamic  banking  sector  and  develop  its  Islamic  capital  markets.  India 
started introducing Islamic financial products and services last year. It has launched its first 
Islamic  stock  market  index  on  the  Mumbai  stock  exchange  and  also  licenced  a  non-bank 
financing company to operate on Shariah principles. 
As  more  countries  cater  for  Islamic  finance,  the  scope  for  cross-border  Islamic  finance 
increases. We are beginning to see more cross-border sukuk issuance within Asia as well as 
between the Middle East and Asia. 
Singapore has benefitted from this favourable global environment for Islamic finance. 
• 
Singapore is the only non-Muslim majority country among the top 15 countries for 
Islamic finance. 
Islamic  assets  under  management  have  surged  nearly  fourfold  over  the  last  five 
years. More than 40% of the Islamic assets in Singapore are managed by our asset 
management industry. 
15 banks are involved in Islamic banking, double the number five years ago. They 
hold about a third of the Islamic assets in Singapore. 
The rest of the Islamic assets are in outstanding sukuk and takaful. Singapore has 
had nearly 30 sukuk issuances to-date, with seven in 2013 alone. 
   The prospects for Islamic finance in Singapore look bright. 
• 
More funds continue to be established here, to meet demand from clients in Asia as 
well as from the Middle East. 
Several corporations have established sukuk programmes in Singapore to tap the 
market over the next few years. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  We can grow faster when we grow together. WIBC Asia provides a valuable platform to bring 
together stakeholders in Islamic finance, from Asia and the Middle  East, to foster stronger 
collaboration for sustained industry growth. I wish you fruitful discussions. Thank you.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
