Peter Praet: Interview in Expresso 
Interview with Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
in  Expresso,  conducted  by  Mr  João  Silvestre  and  Mr  Ricardo  Costa  and  published  on  18 
February 2014. 
 Q – The main discussion today is whether Portugal should seek a “clean” exit or opt 
for a precautionary programme. What do you think would be better? 
A – The eleventh review of the assistance programme began this week and will carry out its 
regular evaluation. As far as we know, the results have been impressive. While a contraction 
in GDP was underestimated at the beginning of the programme, we are currently surprised 
on  the  upside.  But  we  need  to  wait  for  the  outcome  of  the  technical  discussions  at  the 
eleventh review. I cannot anticipate any decision. 
Q – But we are in February and the Troika will leave Portugal in May. 
A  –  We  have  a  few  months.  There  are  pros  and  cons  to  the  different  options.  What  is 
important is that the government can convince markets and other euro area countries and 
the European Union that the programme will continue without hesitation. Growth in Portugal 
has started to become sustainable, which is new. The main question is whether there will be 
any  doubts  about  the  continuity  of  the  reform  programme.  The  precautionary  programme 
would  certainly  help  to  dissipate  doubts.  In  a  clean  exit  scenario,  the  Government  should 
make  a  credible  commitment  to  continuing  the  reform  process.  Ultimately,  what  matters  is 
credibility. But it is the Government’s decision. 
Q – You mean that the ECB does not need to have a defined position? 
A – My point is that for Portugal, independently of the options available, what is essential is 
being able to convince the markets and euro area partners that reforms will continue to be 
implemented. 
I think the Government is right to wait a little longer before deciding on the post-programme 
options.  Everything  depends  on  the  credibility  of  the  reform  process.  Imbalances  created 
over many years cannot be resolved in three years.  
Q – Is there a risk that, without the precautionary programme, Portugal would not 
proceed with reforms? 
A – There is obviously conditionality associated with the precautionary programme.  
Q – And there is not with a clean exit. That’s the problem. 
A – A clean exit has no formal conditionality attached to it. For the Government, the ECCL 
has a political price, due to conditionality, but I think that if it does not take the ECCL, the 
Government  will  face  the  issue  of  post-programme  credibility  whatever  option  it  chooses. 
You can say you want a clean exit with enhanced post-programme monitoring, but whatever 
the  case  the  country  will  face  scrutiny  from  markets  and  other  euro  area  mechanisms, 
especially since, after the programme, it still has to meet its obligation to reduce its deficit as 
laid down in the enhanced SGP. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Q – But, at the same time, the OMT programme, which was a kind of ECB bazooka, 
was not used. The German Constitutional Court said, “OK, we cannot decide whether 
or not it is legal” and referred it to the European Court of Justice, which will make a 
decision, but not before May. Therefore, when Portugal leaves the bailout programme, 
it will not be able to request the OMT because it won’t be available. 
A – The OMT programme exists. The case was referred to the European Court of Justice, 
which  the  ECB  deems  to  be  a  good  decision.  But  independently  of  the  court  case,  the 
instrument exists. 
Q – But it is not easy to use it before the Court has reached a decision. 
A – I wouldn’t say that. The instrument is there. For us nothing has changed. 
Q – Is it possible to activate the OMT without the precautionary programme? 
A – No, the conditions are very clear. But it does not mean that you have to make decisions 
now. Portugal is starting to regain market access. 
Q – Still with 5.1% for ten-year bonds. 
A – Yes, but it is regaining access. Interest rates have been gradually decreasing and are 
now at 4.8 % for ten-year government bonds. 
Q – These are very high rates. 
A – I agree. We have seen very significant developments, but this is still not a satisfactory 
rate for Portugal. 
Q – Looking at the interest rates, a precautionary programme would probably be better 
for Portugal. 
A – Not necessarily. The markets put a high value on the very tough policies that have been 
implemented.  We  have  seen  impressive  results  that  have  exceeded  expectations.  Market 
confidence has a lot to do with the willingness of the entire population to continue along this 
path,  with  or  without  a  precautionary  programme.  In  the  end,  the  test  is  political.  Can  the 
country continue to make these challenging efforts? 
Q – Even without a strong anti-euro movement in Portugal, there is a growing current 
of opinion which says,: “OK, we made all these political and economic efforts but are 
still paying high interest rates. It is very difficult to see where all this will end so 
perhaps it would be easier to leave the euro”. 
A  –  Sure,  I  understand.  But  I’m  not  sure  it  would  be  easier.  The  OMT  was  an  instrument 
created to address what we call “the break-up fear.” 
Q – Do you think the break-up fear has disappeared? 
A – Yes, absolutely. I think the break-up fear has disappeared, which is a very positive result. 
What is now important is the credibility of reforms. I think Portugal is on the right track. Of 
course  the  risk  premium  remains  high,  because  the  risk  is  still  high.  But  I  think  that  this 
domestic adjustment must – to the extent possible – continue in a balanced way. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Q – When we look at Europe – and we will have European elections in May – we can 
easily see that some political parties in Greece, Italy or even the UK or Germany and 
the Netherlands – not in Portugal, but... – there are anti-euro politicians who are doing 
well in the polls. 
A  –  What  we  learned  from  the  crisis  is  that  we  have  an  unfinished  Monetary  Union.  A 
Monetary Union that seemed to work well in good times, but in harsh times we saw that the 
institutional  mechanisms  didn’t  work  well.  There  was  no  crisis  preparation,  no  good  crisis 
management, no joint supervision – many things were not in place before the crisis. That’s 
what we’re doing now. So the solution, if I may say so, is not less Europe – this would have 
drastic  consequences  on  the  domestic  market  –  but  the  opposite:  what  we  need  is  more 
Europe.  The  crisis  showed  that  what  failed  were  the  unfinished  institutions  within  the 
Monetary Union. That’s what we’re building. The banking union is an example. 
For Portugal in particular, I think that it is very good news that we are talking about the end of 
the current adjustment programme, with or without a precautionary programme. The key is to 
convey  this  message  of  credibility  that  Portuguese  politicians  –  not  just  the  government  – 
continue to support reform. I know it’s not easy and I know that the European elections may 
have to deal with anti-European movements. Nevertheless, I think that the vast majority of 
European parties have come to the same conclusion, i.e. that for Monetary Union to work, 
we need stronger European institutions, not the opposite. 
Q – When you see the Portuguese government getting ready to lower taxes next year, 
do you think this undermines its credibility with the markets? 
A – I do not know. Let’s see what the outcome is. Public finances were in bad shape – this 
has  already  been  addressed  –  and  at  the  same  time  we  had  to  improve  what  we  call  the 
supply side of the economy, the productive capacity of the economy. The third point, which 
was often very difficult to meet, was to have a minimum level of balance in the measures. 
The European crisis was much costlier than it should have been, in social terms, owing to 
failure  both  on  the  part  of  institutions  and  in  terms  of  crisis  management.  Now  we  are 
preparing  the  banking  union,  which  includes  a  Single  Resolution  Mechanism,  and  we  are 
trying to catch up institutionally. I think that was the hard lesson we learned in Europe. The 
other way would have been an increase in nationalism and an entrenchment of borders that 
would have disastrous consequences for welfare. I am convinced that Portugal will continue 
to grow if reforms are sustained. 
Q – But there are things that are changing for the worse and not for the better. 
A – Like what? 
Q – Pensions have been declining for a long time, wages, the unemployment rate has 
risen sharply, there is a lot of emigration, youth unemployment, youth emigration... 
A – Certainly. It is important to look at the social consequences. 
Q – Therefore, all these structural changes in Portuguese society are very difficult to 
bear. 
A – I agree with you, it’s a difficult situation. But what can you expect, what are the possible 
alternatives?  There  comes  a  time when  countries  have  to make  reforms,  when  you  are  in 
that  situation.  What  would  have  been  the  consequences  if  these  policies  had  not  been 
adopted? I fully agree that the social and economic cost was much higher than it should have 
been, but I don’t see which other policies could have been followed at that time. Of course 
we can always think, as good planners, that we could have extended the time of the fiscal 
adjustment  process,  made  it  more  gradual,  made  the  measures  more  balanced,  but  there 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
was no time and there were no European instruments to deal with this. I think we did what 
we had to do in Europe, including in Portugal. 
Q – Do you consider it important to have a broader political consensus? 
A – It is key to have ownership. The more ownership there is at the national level, the more it 
can be demonstrated that reforms will be maintained and the less a precautionary security 
mechanism is needed. 
Q – But it is not easy to have this kind of political agreement at the time of the 
elections. 
A – It’s not easy, of course. 
Q – And at a time when society is so divided. 
A – I agree, it is not an easy choice. That’s why I say that every month counts, because we 
have seen a succession of surprisingly good results for several quarters in Portugal. I fully 
acknowledge that this national burden-sharing is obviously tragic. 
Q – When you use the term “tragic” for 2014, there are people who compare it to 1914, 
just after the start of the First World War. Many books and newspaper articles 
compare the two main events of these times and say that Europe is failing to see the 
real dangers of this kind of situation, like in 1914 when not many people predicted 
what would happen. Do you not think that the political institutions of the euro, 
particularly the ECB and the European Commission, as well as some governments, 
are not seeing the real dangers and are now looking towards the European elections 
as real political dangers? 
A – Personally I am very confident, because the economic cycle is changing positively. This 
is  very  important.  But,  again,  I  agree  with  you  that,  for  an  unemployed  person  who  will 
continue  to  be  unemployed,  the  situation  is  very  difficult.  From  a  macroeconomic  point  of 
view it is going well, but for a large part of the population it will still take a long time before 
they see results. The cycle is definitely changing for the better. I think we are building these 
institutions – we’re not over yet, but we have to look at where we came from: a situation of 
huge imbalances that we needed to fix in one way or another. At one point, markets feared 
the  break-up  of  the  euro  area  –  we  talked  about  this  –  and  that  caused  the  panic,  and 
authorities were able to stop that vicious cycle. 2013 was basically the start of the second 
half of the turning point, and now we have to consolidate this turning point. Of course it is 
very difficult for a population that, in the first ten years of the euro, saw a recovery in terms of 
income compared with the euro area average.  Therefore, it is very difficult, because there 
were  high  expectations,  but  this  level  of  income  growth  was  not  based  on  sound 
fundamentals. Tragedy is a very strong word. I do not think we can use it, as a tragedy ends 
badly. Especially in Portugal, we see the results, we see signs that there is a recompense for 
this reform; it is not in vain. 
Q – Shouldn’t some creditor countries, such as Germany, also help to correct 
imbalances? 
A – For the central bank, it has been very difficult to manage all this heterogeneity with a 
single monetary policy and, in reality, with very weak institutions to deal with this crisis. The 
measures  we  have  taken  are  working  but  the  financial  conditions  remain  very  difficult  in 
countries like Portugal. If you look at Germany, the situation is different. The Germans are 
afraid  that  monetary  policy  is  too  expansionary.  At  this  time,  could  the  German  domestic 
market be stronger? The German domestic market was afflicted by  widespread fear when 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the crisis began. I think things are calming down now, which is very good for the recovery of 
domestic demand. Wages are likely to increase by more than 3% this year. Are they doing 
enough or not? It is not easy to defend that Germany should try to boost demand by creating 
a public deficit. 
Q – The inflation rate in the euro area hit 0.7% in January and the forecast is that it will 
remain below the 2% target for quite a while. Is it the ECB’s greatest concern at the 
moment? 
A  –  This  question  is  very  important,  because  our  primary  mandate  is  price  stability  in  the 
medium  term,  which  we  define  as  below,  but  close  to,  2%.  When  we  issued  our  forward 
guidance  last  November,  we  communicated  that  we  will  continue  to  have  a  very  loose 
monetary policy and we will do whatever is necessary to fulfill our mandate. We are therefore 
very aware of what you are referring to, i.e. that low price pressures have extended to the 
medium term. Let’s make this assessment in March. Today, our assessment is that with the 
recovery that we are seeing now, inflation will converge in the medium to long term and in 
saying this I admit that the price pressures are quite weak. 
Q – What other measures can be used if necessary, since interest rates are virtually 
zero? A new round of LTRO, various other measures, etc.? 
A – We are very careful in our communication not to announce the next steps. We have a 
great deal of discussion in the Governing Council, and then we decide. We have a toolbox 
that we are ready to use if our assessment concludes that our objective of price stability will 
not be achieved. The signals we give are not so much to do with the tools themselves, but 
not having any hesitation to use them. 
President Draghi has said several times that we have various tools at our disposal and we 
will see which are the most appropriate. But we will not hesitate to use them if we consider it 
necessary  to  do  so.  If  our  mandate  is  at  risk,  we  will  act  without  hesitation,  as  we  did  in 
recent years. We do not see a risk of deflation, but we admit that the pressures on prices are 
weak, and that this weakness in price development is extending to the medium term. 
Q – Is Greece your biggest failure? 
A – I think that Greece is the biggest failure of Greece itself. It is a failure of the pre-crisis 
policy. It is true that it has been very difficult. 
Q – After all these years of great difficulty, the numbers are still not very positive... 
A – No, but I would qualify it a little better. First, the size of the problem was enormous, and 
much greater than expected for several reasons. The big problem in Greece is Greece itself 
and the difficulty that its society has to unite. That’s where large divisions appear, as well as 
a kind of decision paralysis, which is worse. A crisis feeds on itself, the fears grow, market 
confidence  is  lost,  and  we  enter  into  a  terrible  vicious  cycle  –  then  comes  outside 
intervention, trying to force a solution. So I think the biggest asset of a country is the ability of 
its society to come together in difficult times. 
Q – But if we look at debt, although Greece is much larger, it will still be very difficult 
to find a way to pay it. 
A – No, not if the country applies a sound policy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Q – No? 
A – Even in Greece, the OECD indicators show that the labour market is performing rather 
well  at  the  moment.  Clearly  there  is  still  a  lot  to  do,  but  I  would  not  lose  hope.  When  a 
country  faces  its  problems,  it  is  successful.  But  we  must  reach  a  consensus  on  reforms, 
which  I  think  Portugal  has  generally  achieved.  I  know  there  are  elections  and  all  that,  but 
every month will count in order for confidence to return. 
Q – Is the currency crisis in emerging countries a concern right now? 
A – The international environment was the main engine of growth that we have had in recent 
years,  so  of  course  we  are  very  attentive  to  developments  in  Asia  and  Latin  America  and 
emerging markets in general. We had positive surprises in developed economies like the US 
or the UK. So we had a much greater support to growth in developed economies. From the 
point of view of growth, for now, the slowdown in emerging markets is being offset by higher 
economic growth in developed countries. 
Q – What can we expect from the asset quality review and the new round of stress 
tests? 
A – For us it is a very important issue. The crisis was very severe because our institutions 
were too  weak to deal with it and there were  many imbalances. It is a difficult exercise in 
operational terms, it is a lot of work, it is crucial and will require much effort and commitment 
from  the  entire  system.  All  supervisors,  even  if  they  sometimes  complain  about  the 
operational burden – it takes a lot of time – are, I think, very committed, because everyone 
realises  that  this  is  a  milestone  on  the  road  to  recovery:  do  it  well  and  recover  credibility. 
From the point of view of the market, there is always something of a paradox: that confidence 
has returned before the exercise is complete, because the signal that went out that we would 
deal with the problems was very positive. Some say that this exercise can be bad for growth 
because banks will deleverage faster and all that, but what we see today is the opposite; it is 
a  contribution  to  the  restoration  of  confidence  in  the  banking  system.  If  we  look  at  the 
banking  systems,  Portugal,  for  example,  was,  last  year,  in  terms  of  recapitalisation  and 
restructuring,  important.  The  problem,  not  only  in  Portugal,  is  the  profitability  of  banks.  In 
general,  they  have  made  great  headway  in  terms  of  capitalisation,  and  we’ll see,  with  this 
exercise, if it is confirmed, because we analyse portfolios in great detail, but the question is 
about the profitability of the banking system in countries such as Portugal. Profitability is now 
the ultimate question. I think that recapitalisation in countries such as Portugal was extremely 
convincing,  but  the  sector  must  be  profitable  again.  With  the  recovery  and  the  gains  in 
efficiency that we see it should be so again, but this will be a very important test for 2014 and 
the industry must go back to being profitable. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
