Lars Rohde: Developments in the world economy, the Danish economy 
and in its mortgage credit system 
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  Rohde,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Denmark,  at  the  annual 
meeting of the Danish Mortgage Banks’ Federation, Copenhagen, 3 April 2014. 
 The international economy is recovering. The upswing is gaining momentum in the USA, and 
euro  area  GDP  has  increased  in  the  last  three  quarters.  With  the  exception  of  Greece, 
southern  Europe  was  also  picking  up  at  the  end  of  2013.  On  the  other  hand,  growth  has 
declined in the emerging economies, mainly as a result of weaker development in domestic 
demand. 
The US economy is now so strong that the Federal Reserve in January began the previously 
announced  tapering  of  its  asset  purchases.  At  the  same  time,  some  emerging  economies  
– including Argentina, Brazil and Turkey – saw capital outflows and pronounced weakening 
of their currencies. This should also be viewed in the context of a deteriorated growth outlook 
and internal imbalances in these economies. But the countries affected represent only some 
5 per cent of global trade, so the derived effects of this turmoil on the advanced economies 
are presumably limited. The same applies to the turmoil in Ukraine. So far, it has not led to 
large fluctuations in the international financial markets, except in Russia. 
In the euro area, price inflation has decreased in the last couple of years, to 0.5 per cent in 
March. Core inflation has also declined. Besides subdued wage developments, the low rate 
of inflation is attributable to downward pressure on import prices, to some extent reflecting 
the appreciation of the euro. In addition, factors such as the freer movement of labour and 
stronger international competition exert sustained downward pressure on import prices and 
hence on the overall rate of wage and price increase. 
In Denmark, economic activity is picking up, although the growth pattern has been somewhat 
uneven. There are positive signs in the labour market, with falling unemployment and a rise 
in the number of people in employment, especially in the private sector. But the number of 
part-time  employees  has  grown.  Private  consumption  has  not  recovered  yet,  although  the 
foundation for increased consumption is in place. The level of private savings has been high 
for some years. Interest rates remain historically low, while real wages are set to rise, partly 
due  to  low  –  but  nevertheless  positive  –  price  inflation.  Add  to  this  positive  consumer 
expectations  and  rising  net  wealth.  Although  the  households’  average  gross  debt  ratio 
remains high, and some households may have a wish for further consolidation, it is difficult to 
see  how  Danmarks  Nationalbank  could  be  criticised  for  forecasting  higher  private 
consumption in the coming years. 
In  its  most  recent  projection,  Danmarks  Nationalbank  forecasts  growth  in  GDP  at  1.4  per 
cent this year, rising to 1.7 per cent next year. This may not sound of much, but it is above 
the  forecast  potential,  so  the  capacity  situation  will  normalise  towards  2016.  If  economic 
growth  is  to  reach  a  higher  level  while  remaining  sustainable,  productivity  growth  must 
increase. Reforms to boost productivity are on the government’s agenda for the near future, 
and I welcome these initiatives. Denmark must stay on the path of economic policy reform. 
That is a precondition for future growth and prosperity. 
*** 
Now let me turn to the housing market. In general, prices have been showing a slight upward 
trend for the last 18 months. In January 2014, house prices were 6 per cent higher than in 
mid-2012, while prices for owner-occupied flats had risen by 14 per cent in the same period. 
Nevertheless, trading activity remains low, and the supply of homes for sale is still high – in a 
long-term perspective. But it has not risen any more over the last year. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
In  recent  years,  economic  activity  –  and  hence  the  housing  market  –  has  developed 
unevenly  across  Denmark.  Economic  growth  is  increasingly  a  city  phenomenon.  This  has 
been the case for many years and the same pattern is seen in other countries, but the trend 
seems to have accelerated in Denmark in recent years. Since 2008, there has been a strong 
influx of mainly young people and people with jobs to the Capital Region, while pensioners 
and unemployed people have moved out. Especially young people aged 20–29 move to the 
cities in connection with education or training, and they increasingly stay there afterwards. 
This  demographic  development  can  be  seen  in  the  housing  market.  House  prices  are 
considerably more cyclical in the cities than in the rest of Denmark. This is particularly true of 
the  Capital  Region  and  surrounding  areas,  which  are  typically  also  the  “first  movers”.  In 
addition,  house  prices  in  urban  areas  have  risen  in  real  terms  over time,  reflecting factors 
such as underlying demographics, with still more people living in an area of a virtually given 
size.  Since  the  price  of  building  a  house  is  almost  the  same  throughout  the  country,  it  is 
mainly land prices that have risen. 
The situation is exactly the opposite in the areas of Denmark where people are moving away. 
Here,  demand  for  housing  is  declining,  while  the  supply  is  more  or  less  unchanged.  This 
results in decoupling of house prices and construction prices, which are normally indicative of 
the  level  of  prices  in  the  long  term.  The  housing  surplus  means  that  some  properties  are 
falling into disrepair and are, in effect, worthless. 
The  question  is  whether  this  development  is  cyclical,  or  whether  it  is  a  more  structural 
tendency. Causality between population growth and regional economic growth can go both 
ways,  and  a  cyclical  recovery  may  stem  the  tide.  At  some  point,  the  regional  differences 
between  house  prices  may  become  so  large  that  the  gain  from  moving  out  halts  the 
migration towards the cities, but presumably this will affect only the immediate surrounding 
areas. Beyond commuting distance, the development seems to be more structural. This is a 
problem that neither can nor should be solved by the financial system. The Danish mortgage-
credit  system  is  based  on  value  behind  the  loans.  If  the  value  of  a  property  is  eroded 
completely, there is no longer a foundation for providing a mortgage loan. 
During  the  most  recent  boom,  borrowing  by  households  surged,  rising  more  sharply  than 
ever  before.  The  surge  went  hand  in  hand  with  an  even  stronger  rise  in  housing  wealth, 
which  enhanced  homeowners’  opportunities  to  raise  loans  against  the  home  as  collateral. 
Previous  analyses  have  shown  that  Danish  households  would  still  be  able  to  service  their 
debts, even during an economic downturn, and the high gross debts do not pose a serious 
threat to financial stability. One of the reasons is that the households also have considerable 
financial  assets.  But  high  loan-to-value  ratios  amplify  cyclical  fluctuations  in  the  Danish 
economy. This highlights the importance of restoring the link between property values and 
taxation. 
*** 
While  increased  stabilisation  of  house  prices  via  housing  taxes  is  not  immediately  on  the 
cards, the Folketing – the Danish parliament – on 11 March passed a legislative amendment 
to introduce contingent maturity extension of mortgage bonds if the underlying loans are not 
pre-financed. This is a very important amendment, and a good way of dealing with various 
tail  risks  in  the  Danish  mortgage-credit  model.  I  appreciate  the  positive  contribution  of  the 
sector to this process – from the presentation of the first proposal to the adoption of the final 
legislation. Input from the sector and other market participants was taken into account, but 
the  purpose  of  the  amendment  has  remained  unchanged  from  day  one.  Firstly,  a  robust 
solution for addressing the mortgage banks’ refinancing risk has now been found. Secondly, 
a credible resolution model for mortgage banks is re-established. 
I  am  also  pleased  to  note  that  the  credit  rating  agencies’  reception  of  this  amendment  is 
predominantly positive. Although this solution is not a silver bullet, Moody’s concludes that 
the new legislation removes the refinancing risk on Danish mortgage bonds. This eliminates 
a major source of credit risk, thereby supporting a high credit rating. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
It  is  essential  for  the  mortgage  banks  to  maintain  sound  credit  policies,  also  after  the 
legislative  amendment.  Investor  confidence  in  the  long-term  credit  quality  is  all-important  
–  irrespective  of  how  the  housing  market  develops.  Against  that  background,  Danmarks 
Nationalbank  recommends  reducing  the  upper  limit  for  deferred-amortisation  loans  –  as  a 
percentage of the value of the home at the time of mortgaging. This should apply to deferred-
amortisation loans underlying covered bonds, covered mortgage bonds or mortgage bonds 
issued by banks and mortgage banks. In this way, borrowers will gradually move away from 
the  maximum  loan-to-value  ratio  over  time.  This  will  further  underpin  the  high  degree  of 
security  in  the  mortgage-credit  system,  even  if  house  prices  plummet,  and  contribute  to 
macroeconomic stability. 
Experience shows that general changes in the amortisation profile, particularly the first-year 
payments,  also  have  an  initial  effect  on  the  price  of  housing,  and  hence  on  the 
macroeconomy. So the timing and dosage of restrictions on deferred amortisation should be 
considered carefully. 
In contrast, banks should not be restricted further from providing deferred-amortisation loans 
if  such  loans  are  financed  in  other  ways  than  by  issuance  of  covered  bonds.  Mortgage 
lending is a particularly secure business model that differs fundamentally from banking and 
that  is  subject  to  special  regulation.  While  mortgage  banks  finance  their  lending  purely 
through  issuance  of mortgage  bonds  that match  the  loans,  banks finance  their  lending  via 
various  sources  of funding,  such  as  deposits,  issuance  of  covered  bonds  and  issuance  of 
senior debt. As a main rule, mortgage banks can take on credit risk only – and even this risk 
is  contained  through  regulation  of  loan  limits  and  redemption  profiles.  If  a  mortgage  bank 
wants to have the same opportunities as a bank, it must obtain a banking licence. 
*** 
Now  I  will  turn  my  attention  to  Europe.  Here,  the  banking  union  is  moving  away  from  the 
design  phase  and  becoming  a  cornerstone  of  the  financial  architecture.  Some  people 
primarily see the banking union as part of the strengthening of the euro. But from Danmarks 
Nationalbank’s point of view, the key element is that the banking union will contribute to a 
well-functioning single market for financial services. 
The  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism,  SSM,  has  already  been  adopted  and  is  being 
implemented. On 4 November 2014, the ECB will take over supervision of the largest euro 
area banks. To ensure that the ECB takes over supervision of healthy, viable banks only, an 
asset quality review of the 130 largest banks is well underway. Besides its own resources, 
the ECB has employed an independent consultancy firm for this task, and in the summer a 
follow-up  stress  test  will  be  performed.  Banks  that  fail  the  stress  test  will  be  met  with  a 
demand for recapitalisation or resolution. All in all, the work to ensure that the corners of the 
house  which  the  ECB  will  be  responsible  for  are  neither  rotting  nor  crumbling  looks  very 
promising and ambitious. 
Another core element of the banking union is the Single Resolution Mechanism, including a 
Single Bank Resolution Fund. The European Parliament, the Commission and the Council 
have just negotiated an agreement on this. The rules are expected to be adopted this month. 
When your neighbours build a new house, you invariably look at your own house in a new 
perspective. The banking union is a fact and will have a substantial impact on Denmark – 
whether  or  not  we  choose  to  participate  in  this  new  financial  architecture.  In  Danmarks 
Nationalbank’s opinion, Denmark’s interests are best served by participating in the banking 
union. The standard of supervision set by the SSM under the ECB can be expected to be the 
benchmark  for  the  member  states  participating,  but  also  for  those  opting  out.  If  Denmark 
participates,  it  will  be  easier  to  adapt  the  standards  to  Danish  conditions  and  experience. 
Presumably, the SSM will be perceived as a quality stamp, as more eyes, including external 
eyes, will be focused on the supervision of banks and the key supervisory decisions. Other 
things being equal, this will give the banks in question a competitive edge over the banks of 
“outsider” member states – even if they have credible national supervisory authorities as in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Denmark’s case. If Denmark does opt out, this may require tighter supervisory practices. In 
addition, investors can be expected to require more ambitious levels of excess capital and 
liquidity than for banks within the union. 
It  is  also  in  the  clear  interests  of  Denmark  that  a  shared  practice  is  established  for  crisis 
management of banks. The Single Resolution Mechanism will make it easier to perform crisis 
management  of  cross-border  banks.  When  fully  phased-in,  the  Single  Supervisory  and 
Resolution Mechanisms will act as an insurance scheme for financial enterprises and provide 
a better guarantee of equal treatment of the creditors of distressed banks across the EU. 
*** 
New international liquidity standards are another area that due to our special Danish financial 
architecture  has  attracted  considerable  attention.  Since  the  Basel  Committee’s  first 
consultation paper on new international liquidity standards was published in 2009, both the 
authorities and the sector have had a very special interest in the liquidity of Danish mortgage 
bonds.  On  the  basis  of  a  detailed  data  set  compiled  by  the  Danish  Financial  Supervisory 
Authority  for  all  transactions  in  Danish  government  and  mortgage  bonds,  Danmarks 
Nationalbank  has  analysed  liquidity  in  these  two  markets  before,  during  and  after  the 
financial  crisis.  In  this  connection,  we  have  worked  closely  with  experts  from  the 
Copenhagen  Business  School  and  from  the  BIS.  Our  results,  which  we  published  in  2010 
and 2012, show unequivocally that highly liquid Danish mortgage bonds were by and large 
as liquid as government bonds during the crisis. 
At  the  EU  level,  the  European  Banking  Authority  in  2013  performed  a  similar  empirical 
analysis with virtually the same outcome. Now we are awaiting the European Commission’s 
decision. 
Seen  from  Danmarks  Nationalbank’s  point  of  view,  a  liquidity  buffer  should  be  well-
diversified, and it should be empirically well-documented what such a buffer may include. In 
that  context,  the  treatment  of  government  bonds  in  the  financial  regulation  is  a  bit  of  a 
paradox.  Government  bonds  from  all  EU  member  states  may  freely  be  included,  without 
being risk-weighted and without any diversification requirement. This is puzzling, given that 
the  EU  Treaty  prohibits  the  public  sector  from  gaining  privileged  access  to  financial 
institutions. 
In  Danmarks  Nationalbank’s  opinion,  thorough  empirical  analyses  with  high  credibility 
provide  a  basis  for  determining that  liquid  Danish  mortgage  bonds  should  be  classified  as 
extremely  high  quality  liquid  assets.  Mortgage  bonds  can  contribute  to  giving  financial 
enterprises  a  well-diversified  portfolio  of  liquid  assets.  We  will  maintain  this  point  of  view, 
irrespective of the EU outcome. 
On  the  other  hand,  no  true  horror  scenario  can  be  conjured  up  for  Denmark  if  the  EU  
– despite solid empirical evidence to the contrary – chooses not to classify mortgage bonds 
as extremely high quality liquid assets. Yes, there will be a price to pay. But no, it will not 
bring about the downfall of mortgage banks, banks or homeowners. The Danish mortgage-
credit system is far too stable for that. 
*** 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
