Benoît Cœuré: Interview with Thomson Reuters 
Edited excerpts from an interview with Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of 
the European Central Bank, and Thomson Reuters, conducted by Mr Paul Carrel, Ms Eva 
Taylor, Mr Sakari Suoninen and Mr Andreas Framke on 12 February 2014. 
 Thomson Reuters: What is your take on the Karlsruhe decision and how it affects the 
interim period? 
Benoît Cœuré: “We’re not commenting on court decisions. This case has been reviewed by 
the court. It will now be reviewed by another court, which is the European Court of Justice. 
We certainly stand ready to cooperate with the European Court of Justice and explain what 
we’ve  been  doing.  The  OMT  is  a  programme  that  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  has 
designed in a way that make it both efficient and safe legally, so we firmly believe that the 
OMT is safely within the remit of the ECB in terms of being monetary policy and in terms of 
not being monetary financing of governments. We have ourselves set a number of limits to 
the programme to make sure we are on the safe side. 
The status of the OMT is not changed. It is ready to be used but it is highly unlikely it would 
have to be used at the moment. 
Would you consider setting limits to the OMT? 
We have to wait and listen to the European Court of Justice. Meanwhile there is not much 
that we can do to enter that discussion. 
It is certainly not our role to double-guess or to anticipate what either the European Court of 
Justice or the German Constitutional Court would say. 
Is the OMT off the table now? 
As I said, it’s not needed today, so that’s not a discussion that is very high on the agenda. 
Bond-buying  to  cope  with  the  redenomination  risk,  the  way  that  the  OMTs  have  been 
designed, that’s not a discussion that is on the agenda. 
More  generally,  ECB  President  Mario  Draghi  has  been  clear  that  the  ECB  can  use  all 
instruments that are allowed by the Treaty, and that includes asset purchases. We’ve done it 
already, many central banks have done it, including in the past in Europe, and it’s being done 
daily in other regions. So it’s possible of course, provided that it is justified in view of the ECB 
mandate, namely: provided that it is monetary policy and that is not monetary financing of 
governments.” 
Within  that  framework,  a  range  of  instruments  are  possible,  and  that  includes  asset 
purchases, which we’ve done already. 
Is QE possible if we see a risk of deflation? 
First, let me take one step back and say we’re not seeing deflation in the euro zone. We see 
low  inflation,  slowly  increasing  from  the  current  low  levels  back  to  below  but  close  to 
2 percent. That is the base-line scenario from which we are working. The discussion is which 
kind  of  risks  we  have  around  the  scenario.  Certainly  we  have  upside  risks  and  downside 
risks and we are alert to the notion that we are close to the region where a downside shift in 
our  inflation  path  could  bring  us  into  dangerous  areas,  so  we  have  to  be  prepared.  But, 
again,  this  is  not  a  discussion  on  deflation.  It  is  a  discussion  on  how  low  can  inflation  be 
without triggering adverse dynamics. We are not there, but we have to be alert that negative 
shocks could trigger that kind of scenario and then we have to be ready to react. 
The second point is what we would do. We have a range of instruments that we can use to 
cope with different kinds of shocks and we have to distinguish broadly between shocks to the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
liquidity situation in the euro zone that would start from the front end of the money-market 
curve, and for that we have a number of instruments. Then we have other shocks that would 
change our medium-term inflation path and then we have other instruments. It can be either 
or a combination of instruments that we can use. The bottom line here is that it all depends 
on the nature of the shocks, so it has to be driven by the data and it has to be informed by 
judgment. 
In that data that we will analyse, certainly ECB staff forecasts will feature prominently, but it’s 
really too early to comment since we don’t have the numbers. But staff forecasts are not the 
only input, the Governing Council will base its judgment on all economic data, soft and hard. 
Will there be a certain trigger? 
There is no trigger, it’s all a matter of judgment. We have a very clear mandate and that’s 
medium-term price stability. 
Are you concerned that emerging market turmoil will affect that scenario? 
That’s certainly part of the developments that we have to follow closely. The G20 discussions 
in  two  weeks  in  Sydney  will  be  an  important  milestone  because  then  we’ll  know  more,  in 
particular from our emerging-market colleagues what the situation is in their jurisdictions. 
It’s too early to tell whether what we are seeing in global financial markets today can lead to 
disruptions that can prompt a change in either our growth scenario or our inflation scenario, 
or whether this is a shift in global demand that would have to take place anyway and that can 
be managed in a smooth way by the international community. It’s too early to tell. 
Just as an example, we haven’t seen the exchange rate of the euro going up significantly 
since the start of the current emerging market developments. We haven’t seen that much of 
a spillover effect on the euro zone so far, which is grounds for cautious optimism. 
What channels of impact are you watching? 
Generally,  the  main  channel  is  the  output  channel.  We  have  to  understand  whether  the 
current volatility on global markets will have an impact on global output generally. That’s why 
the G20 discussion is so important, since this has to be informed by the IMF in particular. So 
far the jury is still out. 
In terms of inflation, it sounds like we are teetering on the brink of the danger zone, as 
ECB President Mario Draghi talked about. Is that a fair assessment? 
It is a fair assessment, but what we are seeing from incoming data from the real economy in 
euro zone countries is that all so far confirms that the euro zone economy, both in core and 
in non-core countries, is on a recovery path. In our baseline scenario, the forces coming from 
the  real  economy,  i.e.  the  ongoing  strengthening  in  aggregate  demand  are  enough  to 
countervail disinflationary forces. 
We will get the 2016 inflation outlook in March. Would a rate cut help if it turned out 
that  inflation  is  moving  too  slowly  back  towards  the  target  of  below  but  close  to  2 
percent? 
You first have to ask yourself what are the causes for low inflation and in particular whether 
downward  pressures  on  prices  come  from  the  demand  or  the  supply  side.  That  is  a  very 
important  discussion  from  a  monetary  policy  standpoint.  Certainly  aggregate  demand  is 
weak, which explains a lot the low level of inflation. But we see positive news coming from 
this  side. We  see  aggregate  demand  now  developing  in the  euro  zone. But  on the  supply 
side, we have an ongoing adjustment of relative prices in several countries, which relates to 
reforms on the labour and on the product markets, in particular through compressed margins. 
This  also  contributes  to  the  low  inflationary  pressures,  but  on  this  front  there  is  nothing 
monetary  policy  can  do  and  there  is  nothing  monetary  policy  should  do,  because  it  is  a 
healthy adjustment in these economies. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
It sounds like you are pretty relaxed and there is no need to do anything? 
Central bankers are never supposed to be relaxed (laughs). More seriously, we are confident 
that the baseline scenario is a safe one, in terms of inflation coming back to 2 percent. But as 
I said there are risks around this scenario and we are certainly ready to act in case shocks to 
the European economy would significantly change the scenario. It is not only about the staff 
forecasts, because the Governing Council decisions are a matter of judgement. There is no 
mechanic link between the staff forecasts and Governing Council decisions. It will depend a 
lot on our understanding of the forces that are at play in the euro zone economy and these 
are complex forces. But if the conclusion of the Governing Council discussion is that we see 
a significant risk that inflation does not come back to 2 percent, even in the medium term, 
then of course we will have to act and we certainly stand ready to do it. 
Is  there  any  thought  being  given  to  extending  the  horizon  beyond  two  years, 
publishing or looking at forecasts further out? 
We decided to extend the disclosure horizon of the staff forecasts, so in March there will be a 
forecast  until  2016  published.  That  does  not  imply  that  the  definition  of  medium  term  has 
changed. There has never been a number attached to the definition of the medium term and 
there is one good economic reason for it, which is that it all depends on the nature of the 
adjustment path and on the nature of shocks that hit the economy. Shocks can be more or 
less  persistent  and  I  would  certainly  argue  personally  that  given  the  persistence  of  the 
adjustment process over a long period of time in the euro zone, the definition of medium term 
under  the  current  environment  is  probably  longer  than  what  it  would  have  been  under 
different kind of shocks, say an oil shock. 
Would  you  say  that  money  markets  are  in  a  self-regulating  mode?  What  is  your 
assessment of the situation? 
Money markets are today in a self-regulating mode. Market participants are learning to adapt 
to an environment with a lower level of excess liquidity. They are learning their way back to 
normality. They are using the instruments currently provided by the ECB, meaning the main 
refinancing operations (MRO) and the SMP sterilisation operations, to regulate the level of 
liquidity and prices. This is now stabilising. That said, there is an element of inherent fragility 
that is related to fragmentation in the money market. There are pools of liquidity that cannot 
necessarily be tapped when liquidity is needed. Liquidity is not flowing smoothly across the 
euro zone, the market remains fragmented and that hampers the self-balancing process that 
you should normally see in a market. This makes the euro zone money market vulnerable to 
shocks  either  from  the  inside  or  the  outside.  That  explains  why  we  remain  vigilant.  And 
certainly in case we would see the current equilibrium being unsettled, the ECB would stand 
ready to act and add to liquidity. It is very easy for us to do so. We have instruments that are 
ready and usable. We stand ready to do it, but I do not see the need to do it today. 
Would a negative deposit rate help to address the fragmentation in money markets? 
It  is  a  very  possible  option.  That  is  something  we  are  considering  very  seriously.  But  you 
should not expect too much of it. It can help to provide an additional incentive, but it is not the 
answer to everything. But it is possible and something that we have been discussing and as 
you know, we are technically ready to do it. 
Would  other  options,  such  as  suspending  the  sterilisation  or  cutting  the  reserve 
requirements, just add to the existing liquidity pools or would they also be effective? 
They can be effective to recreate a level of excess liquidity which would find its way in all the 
cracks of the system, as we saw when excess liquidity was at very high levels about a year 
ago. They can be effective in particular circumstances where there would be a need at some 
point in time to inject liquidity into the market. But I don’t see the need to do it now. And they 
are very much one-off measures and cannot be a permanent answer to the issues faced by 
the money market. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
If deflation in the euro zone is a very alarming situation, why is deflation in the part of 
euro zone not a very alarming situation a very alarming situation for that part? 
Because deflation is a dynamic concept. It has to do with expectations and, it has to do with 
both  inflation  and  output.  One  measure  of  deflation  is  private  agents  in  the  economy 
postponing their decisions to invest or consume and these are by essence macroeconomic 
dynamics that can only be observed at the euro zone level, because our economies are not 
closed economies. The euro zone economy is one economy. You have trade links and links 
through the  interest rate,  the money  market  and  capital  markets. Within a  monetary  union 
with a single market for goods, services and capital, which is our situation, you cannot have a 
deflationary spiral at the level of one single country. You can have relative price adjustment, 
but  you  cannot  have  a deflationary  spiral.  And by  the  way,  we  are  not seeing  consumers, 
households or companies postponing their spending decisions. Quite to the contrary, what 
we  are  seeing  is  aggregate  demand  accelerating.  That’s  the  best  evidence  that  we  don’t 
have deflation. 
What  do  you  think  would  be  the  most  effective  way  to  strengthen  your  forwards 
guidance, should you need to? 
The best way to support the forward guidance is to act whenever necessary in compliance 
with  the  forward  guidance.  That  is  why  we  are  saying  we  are  ready  to  act  if  the  situation 
would need it, consistent with our forward guidance that rates will remain low or lower for an 
extended period of time. The Governing Council certainly is ready and has started to confirm 
its  commitment  to  the  forward  guidance.  What  I  would  not  favour  personally  is  putting 
numbers  on  the  forward  guidance,  by  putting  thresholds  or  triggers.  An  unemployment 
threshold in our case doesn’t make sense because we don’t have a single labour market in 
the euro zone and we have a primary price stability mandate. And an inflation threshold is 
not  feasible  in  my  view  because  the  euro  area  is  undergoing  deep  structural  change  that 
shifts the relationships between economic variables. 
So this leaves us with an interest rate cut? 
If warranted. 
It’s not necessary to sharpen the forward guidance now? 
So far the forward guidance as it has been designed by the Governing Council has served us 
well in the sense that is has made it possible to some extent to disconnect European interest 
rates from U.S. interest rates. 
It  has  served  us  well  to  protect  our  money  market  from  outside  shocks  and  it  remains 
consistent with the monetary policy framework of the ECB, meaning that it is fully consistent 
with both the economic pillar and the monetary pillar of the ECB. So, if we can find ways to 
strengthen  it,  why  not.  But  I  would  not  argue  for  introducing  thresholds.  I  don’t  think  that 
would work in our case. 
What other ways are possible to strengthen it? 
One of the stated objectives of the forward guidance is to stabilise our money market and it 
has been, in my view, pretty successful so far. We have a number of instruments that are 
available to stabilise the money market, for instance fixed rate full allotment. The Governing 
Council has decided that fixed rate full allotment will stay until July 2015. And fixed rate full 
allotment is, in my view, the most powerful instrument that we have to stabilise the money 
market and it is being used by market participants, meaning that the MRO effectively acts as 
a safety valve. It is being used by market participants to stabilise liquidity. 
Something  we  could  do  if  there  is  a  need  to  extend  the  horizon  under  which  this  liquidity 
backstop  is  available  to  market  participants  is  just  to  extend  the  horizon  of  fixed  rate  full 
allotment.  That’s  not  very  spectacular  but  that’s  a  way  to  provide  security  to  the  money 
market in a way that is consistent with our forward guidance. That’s just an example. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Would  you  now  be  upset  if  we  see  Eonia  and  other  very  short-term  interest  rates 
steadily and an in orderly fashion go to the refi rate? 
What  matters  most  for  me  is  stability  in  the  money  market  rate,  meaning  that  it  is  either 
stable around a level known to market participants or it fluctuates in a way that is known to 
market  participants.  And  it  will  fluctuate,  because  we  do  have  liquidity  cycles  in  the  euro 
zone. We have a maintenance period, you have autonomous factors – treasuries pumping 
liquidity in an out of the market etc – and these are factors well known to market participants 
that explain why there is a certain amount of cyclicality in both liquidity and Eonia within the 
maintenance period. 
Insofar  as  this  is  stable  and  known  to  market  participants,  I  think  that’s  fine  because  this 
does not create uncertainty. Another important criterion for me is that any volatility in short-
term money market conditions does not spill over to longer maturities, where they would start 
having an impact on lending rates to households and companies  –  variable rate mortgages, 
for instance. We are not seeing this at all. We have seen movements up and down in the 
front end of the money market curve but we haven’t seen that being transmitted to longer 
maturities, which explains also why I don’t see a reason to act now. So that’s about stability. 
We used to be in a situation before the crisis where the Eonia was fluctuating close to the 
MRO. We’re probably back to a situation where we will see wider fluctuations between the 
deposit facility rate and the MRO but that’s also because of fragmentation that hampers the 
adjustment process. But at long as this is a stable process I think it is fine. 
What  are  your  expectations  as  regards  the  recent  proceeding  in  the  European 
Parliament’s on the SRM? 
The  ECB  deems  the  single  resolution  mechanism  a  necessary  complement  to  the  single 
supervision  mechanism,  so  it’s  very  important  that  an  agreement  is  reached  in  this 
parliamentary  session.  Any  remaining  time  should  be  used  to  improve  this  mechanism. 
We’ve suggested for instance that shortening the timeframe for mutualisation of the single 
resolution  fund  would  be  helpful  to  give  a  clearer  perspective  that  a  single  European 
backstop will come within a reasonable timeframe, helping to cancel the link between banks 
and  sovereigns.  That  does  not  necessarily  imply  that  the  contributions  of  banks  would  be 
accelerated,  because  you  can  build  up  the  fund  within  a  certain  timeframe  and  have  a 
different timeframe for mutualisation within the fund.  
Do  you  expect  bank lending  to recover  now that  banks  have  adjusted  their  balance 
sheets for the asset-quality review? 
It would be a risky situation in my view to start single supervision without a perspective for a 
single resolution mechanism. That would be a very uncomfortable situation for the ECB as a 
supervisor. 
We’ve seen a certain amount of front-loading, of accelerated deleveraging ahead of the AQR 
cut-off  date,  meaning  Dec.  31,  2013.  There  is  a  risk  that  we  will  see  another  wave  of 
deleveraging when the AQR results are known and action has to be taken. My personal plea 
to supervisors and to banks would be that this will be done through raising capital rather than 
by cutting loan books. 
How  concerned  are  you  about  the  mood  in  Europe  and  the  lack  of  trust  towards 
European institutions? 
We  see  elements  of  a  negative  spiral  whereby  European  citizens  don’t  trust  European 
institutions  and  governance,  while  at  the  same  time  it  is  necessary  to  strengthen  them  to 
provide  a  solution  to  the  crisis  and  put  the  euro  zone  back  on  a  sustainable  growth  pact. 
European institutions jointly have to break that negative spiral and to create enough trust so 
that  European  citizens  will  feel  comfortable  and  then  they  can  deliver  on  addressing  the 
sources of the crisis. We have to turn that negative spiral into a positive spiral. The best way 
to  do  it  is  first  to  deliver  on  what  has  already  been  decided,  in  particular  the  economic 
reforms in EU member countries. Reform really starts in countries and it starts bearing fruits, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
with competitiveness being restored and growth coming back, even in the periphery. It has to 
be continued to give tangible evidence to citizens that reform efforts are bearing fruit. 
Europe also has to deliver on what has been decided in terms of euro zone governance and 
that’s  where  the  banking  union  features  prominently.  Delivering  the  single  resolution 
mechanism, delivering the bank resolution and recovery directive, these are all elements of 
trust for the citizens. The burden of proof is not on the side of citizens, it is on the side of 
European institutions.” 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
