  Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Towards realising the Asian century 
Keynote  address  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia  (Bank 
Negara Malaysia), at the Asian Banker Summit 2014 “Towards Realising the Asian Century”, 
Kuala Lumpur, 21 May 2014. 
 It is my honour and great pleasure to be here today to speak at this Asian Banking Summit. 
The  Summit,  now  in  its  14th  year,  has  been  an  important  constructive  platform  to  surface 
important issues that are shaping the future of the financial services industry. For the Asian 
region,  this  has  meaningful  relevance  as  we  reflect  on  our  journey  towards  realising  the 
Asian Century in this highly dynamic environment that is being significantly transformed. 
The Asian region has remained remarkably resilient during this recent global financial crisis 
of 2008/09 and its aftermath. The region is also emerging as an important source of global 
growth. While Asia certainly still has some distance to go in our journey towards the Asian 
Century, by many accounts, Asia’s performance for a number of decades now has been its 
best  so  far.  While  the  journey  ahead  for  Asia  has  tremendous  promise,  it  also  presents 
significant  challenges  arising  from  the  changes  that  are  reshaping  the  regional  and  global 
environment.  Strategies  that  have  brought  our  previous  successes  will  now  need  to  be 
reexamined. The issue before us is whether Asia can rise to these new challenges to realise 
what is being envisioned. 
Asia from a global perspective 
Asia’s  role  in  the  global  economy  has  for  several  decades  experienced  significant 
transformation. The changes have been multi-faceted, not only in terms of its increasing size, 
but  also  in  terms  of  its  influence  in  the  global  economic  and  financial  developments.  Asia 
now constitutes about one-third of the global economy, accounting for 35% of world GDP in 
2013,  increasing  from  26%  since  2000.  Excluding  Japan,  Asia  accounts  for  30%  of  world 
GDP in 2013, an increase from 18% since 2000. Significantly, Asia contributed 62% of global 
GDP growth in 2013, compared to 30% in 2000. 
Asia also accounts for 32% of world trade, increasing from 25% in the year 2000. In addition, 
today, Asia has become a global hub of information technology services and continues to be 
at the forefront of the manufacturing sector, with the top five ranking countries being in the 
Asian region1. In addition to trade flows, net inflows of private capital into the region averaged 
USD83  billion  a  year  between  2000  and  2010.  Regional  capital  markets  in  several  of  the 
East Asian economies have expanded significantly, in particular, the bond market, which has 
expanded by more than thirteen-fold since 2001, with significant foreign participation. At the 
same time, Asia also hosts a large and diverse group of foreign financial institutions, many of 
which have a long history and entrenched presence in the region. Finally, the population of 
3.7 billion that resides in Asia accounts for 55% of global population. With the intensification 
of urbanisation, of the 26 mega cities in the world in 2012, 16 are in Asia. In addition, about 
45% of Asia’s population is in urban areas compared to 37% in 2000. 
Economic and financial progress has also been accompanied by remarkable social progress. 
These  include  rising  life  expectancy,  lower  mortality  rates,  increasing  literacy  rates  and 
higher  education  levels.  According  to  estimates,  Asia  collectively  lifted  over  430  million 
people out of extreme poverty in a period of five years spanning 2005 to 2010, representing 
93% of the global poverty reduction during this period. 
                                                
1   Source: Cushman & Wakefield, Where in the World: Manufacturing Index 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The Asian story: building resilience 
The rising prominence of the region in the global economy is however, not by chance. An 
important  focus  for  Asia  has  been  to  strengthen  the  region’s  potential  to  progress  and  its 
capacity  to  manage  the  attendant  risks  associated  with  a  more  challenging  global 
environment. In the period that followed the Asian financial crisis, during a period of relative 
stability,  the  region  has  taken  the  opportunity  to  press forward  with  economic  adjustments 
and  restructuring,  and  wide-ranging  financial  reforms.  The  economic  rebalancing  and 
financial  reforms  have  resulted  in  stronger  fundamentals,  and  a  solid  and  sound  financial 
system, both of which have proved to be vital in enabling Asia to weather the recent global 
financial  turbulence.  With  more  diversified  economic  structures,  in  particular  with  the 
increased role of domestic demand as an important source of growth, with the shifting role 
from the public to the private sector, and with more developed and resilient financial systems, 
Asia  was  able  to  swiftly  recover  from  the  global  financial  crisis  and  has  become  better 
positioned to cope with highly volatile capital flows arising from the shifts in global liquidity. 
Over  this  challenging  period,  credit  flows  in  most  financial  systems  were  sustained, 
supporting overall economic growth in the region. While these developments brought risks of 
too rapid credit growth and excesses, vigilance was heightened to guard against the risk of 
the build-up of financial imbalances. 
To  further  develop  more  resilient  financial  systems,  regulatory  regimes  and  supervisory 
approaches were significantly strengthened, and governance and risk management practices 
in  financial  institutions  were  enhanced.  The  development  of  institutional  frameworks  that 
supported  financial  stability  was  also  aggressively  advanced.  At  the  same  time,  efforts  to 
deepen domestic and regional capital markets have reduced reliance on the banking sector 
and further diversified funding sources. In several parts of Asia, this was complemented by 
reforms towards greater market orientation and progressive liberalisation, including adopting 
more  flexible  exchange  rate  regimes.  This  served  to  promote  a  more  competitive 
environment,  while  affording  greater  flexibility  to  adjust  to  changing  external  conditions. 
Enhanced  surveillance  and  the  development  of  a  wider  range  of  policy  tools,  including 
macroprudential  tools,  have  increased  the  ability  of  policymakers  to  pre-emptively  mitigate 
risks in the financial sector. 
Policymakers and business leaders in Asia had also recognised early the benefits of being 
integrated into the supply chain of an increasingly globalised market, and pursued strategies 
to reinforce this trend. While Asia is one of the most diverse regions in the world in terms of 
size, stages of development, resource endowments, economic structure, degree of openness 
and market orientation, it has been able to harness the strengths and comparative advantage 
that exists in the region. This is evidenced by Asia’s large network of comprehensive supply 
chains,  which  has  generated  significant  expansion  in  intra-regional  trade,  investment  and 
financial  flows.  This  has  allowed  the  region  to  not  only  foster  the  development  of  smaller-
scale  domestic firms,  but  also  home-grown  multinational  companies.  More  than  150  Asian 
multinational companies were listed in the global Fortune 500 companies in 2013, reinforcing 
the region’s stature in the global economy. 
Challenges and imperatives in the drive towards the Asian century 
While the regional reforms of the recent decade have brought us to where we are today, Asia 
needs to press ahead, building on the foundations and momentum of its current progress to 
achieve greater inroads in the coming decades. To be positioned to strategically capitalise on 
the opportunities in the new and evolving global economic and financial environment, Asia 
needs to address the challenges of the 21st Century. It is against this background that I wish 
to highlight several key challenges and imperatives that will need to be addressed for Asia to 
sustain its previous success and to firmly anchor Asia’s future growth and stability. 
First, is the priority that needs to be given to achieving balanced and inclusive growth. Over 
the recent two decades, developing Asia achieved remarkable progress in lifting millions out 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  of poverty. Yet, Asia today still accounts for almost two-thirds of the world’s poor. As Asia 
charts its future, it is critical to ensure that the pursuit of growth is accompanied by an equally 
determined pursuit of greater equality and inclusion. While the development of supply chain 
networks have contributed towards lifting the economic potential of low- and middle-income 
countries,  there  is,  however,  much  more  that  Asia  needs  to  do  to  reinforce  economic 
empowerment and further entrench inclusion. Of importance, is the need for greater leverage 
on  technology  and  new  institutional  arrangements  to  extend  the  outreach  to  a  wider 
spectrum of society. 
Another  development  affecting  economic  well-being  is  the  rapid  urbanisation  in  Asia.  This 
trend is expected to continue, with the region’s urban population projected to increase from 
1.9 billion currently to 3.3 billion by 2050. The bulk of this urban population will consist of the 
middle income, where the current middle class of more than 500 million people is projected 
to exceed 3 billion by 2030. These developments are presenting immense challenges to the 
region. The inability for supply to meet the rapid growth in demand has resulted in rising cost 
of living as well as strains on public infrastructure and housing. Collectively, if these issues 
are not addressed, it could result in the displacement of some segments of the society and 
rising urban poor, with its consequent socio-economic problems. The challenge is therefore 
multi-dimensional. Further efforts will be needed to expand employment opportunities for the 
growing  urban  population,  especially  the  youth,  as  well  as  access  to  essential  and  high 
quality services in particular healthcare and education, as well as for retirement. In addition, 
the provision of social housing and adequate public transportation facilities will serve to raise 
the standard of living of the urban community. 
While public policies to address these issues are important, it also needs to be reinforced by 
private industry if we are to succeed in achieving truly inclusive growth that brings benefits to 
the many. In the immediate aftermath of the global financial crisis, global financial institutions 
came  under  criticism  for  opportunistic  practices  that  focused  on  short-term  growth  and 
reverse  generation  with  little  consideration  for  responsible  and  ethical  conduct.  In  the 
regional and other cross-border expansion strategies by many international corporations, it is 
important for such organisations to also contribute to the economic environment of the host 
countries where they have operations. The alignment to the long-term interest of the country 
will be mutually reinforcing as it will provide for achieving socio-economic stability, thereby 
creating a stable environment for the conduct of business activity. 
Second,  Asia  needs  to  be  better-positioned  to  harness  the  opportunities  from  productivity 
enhancement. As Asia becomes more developed, its future growth will increasingly depend 
on the transition from growth based on labour and capital accumulation, to one that is more 
deeply  rooted  in  productivity  gains.  This  will  need  to  involve  the  wider  adoption  of  high 
technology  in  production,  transport  and  marketing,  the  effective  protection  of  intellectual 
property  rights,  and  the  development  of  a  more  vibrant  financing  ecosystem  to  catalyse 
innovation.  In  tandem  with  this  is  the  need  for  a  stronger  emphasis  on  human  capital 
development and talent mobility to ensure the workforce has the requisite skills which would 
result  in  higher  value  creation,  and  the  capacity  for  increased  innovation.  As  a  greater 
proportion of the population is educated to higher levels and become proficient, it will result in 
well-being. Productivity is thus not only a function of physical technology, but also of talent 
development.  Collectively,  these  elements  will  be  key  components  of  Asia’s  productivity 
gains in the new Asian Century. 
Third,  is  the  further  deepening  of  economic  and  financial  integration  within  Asia.  Despite 
Asia  recording  the  highest  savings  in  the  world,  with  several  countries  having  sizeable 
current  account  surpluses,  Asia  faces  immense  funding  requirements  for  its  development 
and investment projects. Currently, a large part of Asian funds are still intermediated through 
global financial markets and then recycled back into Asia. Within the ASEAN region, more 
than  90%  of  cross-border  portfolio  investment flows  are  with  advanced  economies  outside 
Asia.  Greater  regional  financial  integration  will  facilitate  more  effective  and  efficient 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  intermediation  of  funds  to  enable  at  least  some  part  of  Asia’s  surplus  savings  to  be 
channelled towards productive investment opportunities in the region. 
Economic  and  financial  integration  in  Asia  is  important  in  paving  the  way  towards  a  more 
dynamic  and  competitive  Asia.  It  will  allow  us  to  leverage  on  our  respective  strong 
comparative advantages and complementarities. Further benefits to Asia were evident in the 
more  recent  period,  when  banks  within  Asia  stepped  in  to  bridge  the  gap  left  by  the 
retrenchments  of  lending  activities  by  some  of the  European  banks, thereby  mitigating  the 
impact of the financial crisis on the region. Deeper economic and financial integration also 
enables Asia to pool its resources to address common regional objectives that are beyond 
any  one  nation,  at  a  lower  cost  and  with  improved  risk  diversification.  This  includes  the 
financing  of  cross-border  infrastructure  projects  and  developing  solutions  for  disaster  risk 
management – an area of increasing importance to Asia given the environmental and climate 
changes that the region is exposed to. 
Fourth,  is  the  continued  efforts  to  strengthen  the  foundations for financial  stability.  As  the 
region  becomes  more  interconnected,  strengthening  Asia’s  resilience  needs  to  consider 
potential contagion effects and the potential for a financial crisis on a regional scale. At the 
national level, this will entail continued commitment for the development of strong regulatory 
and supervisory systems and the strengthening of institutional arrangements that safeguard 
financial stability. Regionally, important progress has already been achieved in the areas of 
regional surveillance and supervisory arrangements, and in crisis prevention, management 
and resolution. The capacity of the region to respond to stressed conditions has also been 
enhanced through cross-border liquidity support arrangements and the multi-lateralisation of 
currency  swap  agreements  which  would  extend  support  to  participating  economies  in  the 
region during such times. Going forward, collective and coordinated actions will enhance the 
ability to manage and respond to risks to the region, thus contributing to regional financial 
stability. 
Fifth,  is  the  need  to  further  strengthen  overall  practices  for  greater  transparency, 
accountability,  governance  and  integrity.  These  enhanced  practices  will  empower  both  the 
public and private sectors to successfully implement reforms and ensure resource allocation 
that  will  contribute  to  sustainable  growth.  Of  importance,  is  to  ensure  that,  in  tandem  with 
rising  growth,  there  continues  to  be  economic  and  financial  accountability.  For  Asia,  this 
involves  the  development  of  more  transparent  business  models,  responsible  leadership 
expectations,  and  strengthened 
incentive  systems  and  governance  arrangements. 
Additionally, consumer and shareholder activism are also powerful complements in exerting 
discipline and serving as a check and balance, against imprudent and irresponsible behavior. 
For Asia to truly reach its potential, a further area of focus is to give attention to closing the 
governance  deficit  in  businesses  and  governments,  and  to  raise  the  standards  of 
management in all spheres of economic activities. Examples of these include the production 
of goods and services by businesses and in the delivery of public services, such as safety 
and  security,  healthcare  services  and  transportation  that  have  strict  adherence  to  the 
appropriate standards. To achieve this, it requires not just the adoption of best governance 
and management practices, but also ensuring the effective implementation and monitoring. 
There are several examples in advanced economies, including in Asia, in which these high 
standards have contributed significantly to the economic well-being. 
Sixth  is  for  Asia  to  remain  fully  engaged  in  the  international  process.  Asia  has  much  to 
contribute  to  global  discourse  and  dialogue,  particularly  in  standard-setting  bodies  where 
Asia  can  bring  to  the  table  the  emerging  market  and  Asian  perspectives,  ensuring  that 
international standards take account of its potential unintended consequences, particularly in 
emerging  economies.  This  is  important  in  the  building  of  a  safer  and  more  stable  global 
financial  architecture,  that  emerging  economies  need  to  be  a  part  of.  Asia  has  made 
significant inroads with the broader representation today of Asian economies in international 
bodies  such  as  the  Group  of  20  (G20)  and  the  Financial  Stability  Board.  Asian  groupings 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  have  also  increased  their  participation  in  shaping  developments  in  other  important  areas 
such  as  international  accounting  standards.  Going  forward,  efforts  should  be  made  to 
strengthen these links to also include the smaller Asian economies. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude my remarks. Following the first chapter of Asia’s remarkable growth story, 
the second chapter – the dawn of the Asian Century, needs the same spirit of cooperation 
and  collaboration  to  succeed.  A  strong  commitment  to  cooperation  and  a  clear  focus  on 
enhancing Asia’s long-term potential is key to bridge between Asia today and Asia in the new 
Asian  Century.  Will  Asia  be  able  to  replicate  its  successes?  Clearly,  there  is  tremendous 
potential, but it will require strong political fortitude, the alignment of economic and financial 
interests with sustainable goals and the continued agility to respond to the rapidly changing 
environment. 
Just  as  Asian  economies  built  bridges  that  connected  isolated  societies  in  our  countries  – 
freeing  resources  and  transforming  lives,  we  must  now  build  bridges  connecting  our 
economies  –  harnessing  the  potential  and  transforming  Asia.  May  this  conference  inspire 
discussions,  and  solidify  solutions  as  Asia  advances  towards  the  Asian  Century.  On  that 
note, I wish you an engaging and productive conference. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
