Narayana Kocherlakota: Monetary Policy Report to the People of 
Rochester, Minnesota 
Speech  by  Mr  Narayana  Kocherlakota,  President  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
Minneapolis, at the Rochester Chamber of Commerce, Rochester, Minnesota, 8 April 2014. 
 Thanks to David Fettig, Terry Fitzgerald and Sam Schulhofer-Wohl for their assistance with these remarks and 
the supporting materials. 
Accompanying graphs can be found at the end of the speech. 
Thanks  for  the  introduction,  and  thank  you  for  the  invitation  to  join  you  here  today.  It’s  a 
pleasure to be back in Rochester. 
I’ll begin my speech with some basics about the Federal Reserve System and the Federal 
Open  Market  Committee  (the  FOMC).  But  the  bulk  of  my  remarks  should  be  viewed  as  a 
quarterly  report  of  sorts.  Your  elected  representatives,  the  Congress  of  the  United  States, 
have charged the Federal Reserve with achieving key macroeconomic goals. My speech will 
be  a  report  to  you,  the  people  of  Rochester,  about  how  the  FOMC  is  doing  in  terms  of 
achieving those goals. Please keep in mind, though, that I will be expressing my own views, 
and they are not necessarily those of others in the Federal Reserve System. 
I look forward to responding to, and learning from, your questions at the conclusion of my 
remarks. 
Federal Reserve system basics 
Let me begin with some basics about the Federal Reserve System. I like to tell people that 
the  Fed  is  a  uniquely  American  institution.  What  do  I  mean  by  that?  Well,  relative  to  its 
counterparts  around  the  world,  the  U.S.  central  bank  is  highly  decentralized.  The  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis is one of 12 regional Reserve Banks that, along with the Board 
of  Governors  in  Washington,  D.C.,  make  up  the  Federal  Reserve  System.  Our  Bank 
represents the ninth of the 12 Federal Reserve districts and includes Montana, the Dakotas, 
Minnesota, northwestern Wisconsin and the Upper Peninsula of Michigan. 
Eight times per year, the FOMC meets to set the path of interest rates over the next six to 
seven  weeks. All 12 presidents of the various regional Federal Reserve Banks – including 
me  –  and  the  seven  governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Board  contribute  to  these 
deliberations. However, the Committee itself consists only of the governors, the president of 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and a rotating group of four other presidents. I’m one 
of  those  four  presidents  this  year.  In  this  way,  the  structure  of  the  FOMC  mirrors  the 
federalist structure of our government, because representatives from different regions of the 
country – the various presidents – have input into FOMC deliberations. 
This  basic federalist  structure  has  a  long  history.  In  fact,  this  year  is  the  centennial  of the 
opening  of  the  12  Reserve  Banks  and  the  start  of  the  work  undertaken  by  the  Federal 
Reserve System. It’s been a fascinating hundred years, with many twists and turns along the 
way. I’m sure that many of you have questions about that journey – for example, how the 
heck did Minneapolis get chosen over Rochester as headquarters for the Ninth District? The 
answers to all of your questions – and probably more – are on a new website that the Fed 
has  created.  I  encourage  you  to  visit  this  site  to  learn  more  about the people,  places  and 
events that have shaped Federal Reserve history. 
I won’t say too much more about Fed history – perhaps to the relief of some of you! – but I do 
want  to  address  one  of  the  things  that  I  think  has  changed  the  most  over  the  Federal 
Reserve’s  history:  our  communication  with  the  public.  A  hundred  years  ago,  Congress 
created a system that was designed specifically so that the residents of Main Street would 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  have a voice in monetary policy. Technology has changed a lot since 1914 – I’m told that 
they didn’t even have smartphones back then – and so the ways that we gather information 
from Main Street have changed. But this fact-finding is still an important part of the making of 
monetary  policy.  Indeed,  earlier  today,  I  met  with  southern  Minnesota  business  leaders  to 
gather exactly this kind of information. 
Communication is a two-way street, however. During the past century, the Federal Reserve’s 
communications  to  the  public  about  its  monetary  policy  actions  have  also  evolved  greatly. 
The pace of change was especially rapid in the past eight years under Chairman Bernanke’s 
leadership.  During  that  time,  the  Federal  Reserve  specified  an  explicit  target  for  inflation, 
began holding regular press conferences and greatly expanded its use of forward guidance – 
that  is,  its  communications  about  the  likely  future  evolution  of  policy.  So,  as  the  Federal 
Reserve  System  plans  for  its  second  century,  I  would  say  that  the  importance  of  two-way 
communication  is  a  key  lesson  from  the  System’s  first  century.  In  order  for  the  Fed  to 
continue  to  be  effective,  it  needs  to  communicate  its  policy  decisions  transparently  to  the 
public. Conversely, it also needs the public’s input on how those policies are affecting them. 
Events like the one today, and my meeting with business leaders earlier today, are a key part 
of fostering that two-way communication. 
With that background in mind, let me turn back to the FOMC and the making of monetary 
policy. I mentioned that the FOMC meets eight times per year. At those meetings, we decide 
on the level of monetary stimulus for the economy. I won’t get into too many details of what 
that term “monetary stimulus” means, although I’m more than happy to take questions about 
it  later.  For  now,  I’ll  just  make  three  high-level  points.  First,  when  the  FOMC  changes  the 
level of stimulus, our actions tend to push inflation – that is, the rate of growth of prices – and 
employment  in  the  same  direction.  Raising  the  level  of  stimulus  puts  upward  pressure  on 
both  inflation  and  employment.  Lowering  the  level  of  stimulus  puts  downward  pressure  on 
both  inflation  and  employment.  Second,  the  FOMC’s  actions  only  affect  inflation  and 
employment with a lag, usually thought to be about one and a half to two years. Finally, over 
the long run, monetary policy is the prime determinant of the overall rate of inflation in the 
economy, but many factors beyond monetary policy affect the level of employment. 
What is the FOMC seeking to achieve by varying the level of monetary stimulus? Congress 
has  charged  the  FOMC  with  making  monetary  policy  to  promote  price  stability  and  to 
promote maximum employment. The FOMC has interpreted the first goal, price stability, to 
mean keeping inflation close to 2 percent. The FOMC’s job is to vary monetary stimulus over 
time to meet these mandated objectives. 
The remainder of my speech will take the form of a report to you about how the FOMC is 
doing in terms of meeting these goals set for us by your elected representatives in Congress. 
Price stability 
I will start with price stability. Again, operationally, the FOMC has translated this into keeping 
the rate of increase of the price level – that is, the inflation rate – close to 2 percent. Even 
more specifically, the FOMC uses what’s called the personal consumption expenditure price 
index, or PCE, to calculate inflation. This measure of inflation captures the rate of increase in 
all goods and services, including those related to food and energy. 
The Great  Recession  is  dated  as  starting  in  December  2007.  Here’s  a graph  of  how  PCE 
inflation has behaved since that date. (Graph) 
The main take-away is that, since that date, the PCE inflation rate has averaged 1.5 percent 
per year. Furthermore, there has been a downward drift since early 2012. Currently, the PCE 
inflation rate is running near 1 percent. 
So, inflation has been running too low over the past six-plus years to be consistent with price 
stability.  The  good  news  is  that  the  FOMC  does  expect  inflation  to  turn  back  toward 
2 percent. However, I expect that return to 2 percent to take a long time – probably on the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
order of four years. And I’m not the only one forecasting a slow return to 2 percent inflation. 
Earlier  this  year,  the  Congressional  Budget  Office  predicted  that  inflation  will  not  reach 
2 percent until 2019. 
To sum up: The FOMC is undershooting its price stability goal. 
Low inflation: why it matters 
I’ve told you that inflation has been, is and will be too low relative to the FOMC’s target of 
2 percent. But why should you care that inflation is too low? Isn’t it a good thing when goods 
and services aren’t as expensive to buy? The answer to this – very good – question is: You 
should care because below-target inflation signals a significant problem in our economy. 
Let me explain what I mean. At a basic level, you should think of prices as a signal about 
how our economy is using its available resources. In 2012, I had an experience that brought 
home  this  intuition  in  a  very  clear  way.  I  visited  Williston,  on  the  western  edge  of  North 
Dakota. As it is today, when I visited Williston, it was in the heart of a major oil boom. That 
boom was pushing hard on the physical resources – like roads, water, housing – available to 
Williston  and  pushing  hard  on  the  human  resources  available  to  Williston.  The  result  was 
relatively high inflation. 
So, when inflation is high compared to the Fed’s target, like it was in Williston, we know that 
demand is pushing hard on available resources. The converse is also true: Inflation is low 
compared to the Fed’s target when the demand for goods and services is too low to fully use 
the  available  resources  in  society.  The  low  inflation  in  the  United  States  tells  us  that 
resources are being wasted. 
What  exactly  are  these  wasted  resources?  There  are  multiple  answers  to  this  question  – 
when  demand  is  too  low,  lots  of  resources  are  left  unused.  But  the  biggest  and  most 
disturbing answer is our fellow Americans. There are many productive people in the United 
States available to work more hours, and our society is deprived of their production. 
This key  point  is generally  underappreciated. I’ve  said  that the  FOMC  is  undershooting  its 
price stability objective and is expected to continue to do so. But we should all keep in mind 
that this outcome – and especially the forecast for continued undershooting – typically means 
that  the  FOMC  is  also  underperforming  on  its  other  objective  of  promoting  maximum 
employment. 
Maximum employment 
I’ve  argued  that  the  low  inflation  rate  is  a  signal  that  the  FOMC  is  underperforming  with 
respect  to  its  maximum  employment  objective.  But  we  don’t  need  to  rely  on  this  signal  to 
reach this conclusion. We can readily see this underperformance in numerous key metrics of 
labor market performance. 
I’ll begin by showing you data on the evolution of the unemployment rate. In March 2007, the 
unemployment rate was 4.4 percent. It rose slowly throughout 2007 to reach 5 percent by the 
end of the year. The National Bureau of Economic Research dates the Great Recession as 
having begun in that month. In the wake of the recession, the unemployment rate reached a 
peak of 10 percent in October 2009. 
Since  that  date  –  over  four  years  ago!  –  the  unemployment  rate  has  fallen  slowly  to 
6.7 percent. This is still unusually high relative to the past quarter century or so. The current 
unemployment  rate  is  also  high  relative  to  most  forecasts  of  its  expected  long-run  level. 
Personally, I expect that, over the long run, the unemployment rate will converge to just over 
5 percent. Basically, an unemployment rate of 6.7 percent means that the U.S. labor market 
is far from healthy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  But  I  would  say  that  this  measure  –  troubling  as  it  is  –  could  well  overstate  the  degree of 
improvement  in  the  U.S.  labor  market.  To  estimate  the  unemployment  rate,  the  Census 
Bureau asks people two questions: Are you working? And, if not, have you looked for work in 
the past four weeks? The unemployment rate measures the ratio of the second number – the 
recent  job  searchers  –  to  the  sum  of  the  two  numbers  (the  recent  job  searchers  and  the 
workers).  This  means  that  the  unemployment  rate  can  decline  for  two  reasons:  because 
more  people  are  finding  work  or  because  fewer  people  are  looking  for  work.  Most  of  the 
declines in the unemployment rate since October 2009 have occurred because the fraction of 
people who are looking for work has fallen. This characterization is borne out if we look at the 
evolution  of  the  fraction  of  people  over  the  age  of  16  who  have  a  job  –  what’s  called  the 
employment-to-population ratio. (Graph) 
In March 2007, the employment-to-population ratio was over 63 percent. The employment-to-
population  ratio  fell  sharply  during  the  Great  Recession  and  bottomed  out  at  just  over 
58 percent in mid-2011. The percentage has risen little from this low point and remains lower 
than at any time between 1986 and 2007. 
It is true that, even without the Great Recession, demographic forces would have led to some 
decline in the employment-to-population ratio since 2007. As the baby boom birth cohort – 
born between 1946 and 1964 – ages, the fraction of retirees in the population grows steadily. 
But these demographic forces are still not large enough to account for most of the decline in 
the employment-to-population ratio that I’ve described. One way to see this – but not the only 
way – is to focus on people who are outside the normal retirement age. Here, I’ve plotted the 
fraction of the population aged 25 to 54 who have a job. This ratio has improved from its low 
point, but also remains lower than at any time between 1986 and 2007. (Graph) 
Even  among  those  who  have  a  job,  there  are  signs  that  the  economy  is  significantly 
underemploying our human resources. The Bureau of Labor Statistics reports each month on 
the number of Americans who are working part time, would like to work more hours, but are 
unable  to  obtain  those  additional  hours.  That  fraction  of  the  labor  force  has  fallen,  but 
remains unusually high. (Graph) 
To summarize what we learn from the charts: The good news is that the labor market has 
improved  since  the  end  of  the  Great  Recession.  The  bad  news  is  that  the  rate  of 
improvement over the past four-plus years has been painfully slow. As a consequence, there 
is still significant underutilization of our country’s most important resource – its people. We 
have  to  conclude  that  the  FOMC  is  underperforming  with  respect  to  its  goal  of  promoting 
maximum employment. 
Conclusions 
Earlier, I asked you to consider this speech as a report to you, the people of Rochester, on 
the FOMC’s performance with respect to its two congressionally mandated objectives. We’ve 
seen that the FOMC is undershooting its price stability objective, in that inflation is running 
well  below  the  FOMC’s  goal  of  2  percent  and  is  expected  to  remain  that  low  for  several 
years. The undershooting is problematic because it suggests that the American economy is 
wasting available resources, especially its human resources. We’ve seen strong evidence of 
this underutilization in the performance of key labor market metrics. Hence, the FOMC is also 
underperforming with respect to its maximum employment objective. We need to do better as 
a Committee – and I look forward to working with my colleagues to make that happen. 
Thank you for listening. I’d be happy to take your questions. 
 
 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
     6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
