Encik Abu Hassan Alshari Yahaya: Continuing efforts to combat money 
laundering and terrorism financing in Malaysia 
Keynote address by Mr Encik Abu Hassan Alshari Yahaya, Assistant Governor of the Central 
Bank  of  Malaysia,  at  the  Anti-Money  Laundering  and  Counter  Financing  of  Terrorism 
(AML/CFT) Compliance Conference 2014, Sesana Kijang, Kuala Lumpur, 17 September 2014. 
 It  is  my  great  pleasure and  honour  to  welcome  all  of  you  today  to  our  annual  Anti-Money 
Laundering and Counter Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT) Conference. Today’s line up of 
programme  and  most  importantly,  your  presence  here  today  underscores  our  continuing 
efforts  to  combat  money  laundering  and  terrorism  financing  in  Malaysia  and  the  critical 
importance  of  the  role  that  financial  services  industry  contributes  in  supporting  regulators, 
government and law enforcement to tackle and mitigate the threats. 
I  am  pleased  to  note  that  today  we  have  close  to  350  participants  representing  banking, 
insurance, takaful, investment and securities industries in Malaysia. I also would like to take 
this  opportunity  to  express  my  appreciation  to  all  the  speakers  and  moderators  for  your 
willingness  to  share  knowledge  and  views  for  the  two  concurrent  sessions  that  we  will  be 
having later this morning. 
Money laundering is a serious global problem 
Money laundering is a serious global problem. At the global level, the International Monetary 
Fund  (IMF)  estimated  the  extent  of  money  laundering  to  be  at  2%  to  5%  of  global  GDP. 
According  to  the  United  Nation  Office  on  Drugs  and  Crime  (UNODC),  that  translated  to 
800 billion  to  2  trillion  US  dollars  in  current  GDP.  UNODC  acknowledged  that  the  margin 
between those figures is huge but we will agree that even the lower estimate underlines the 
seriousness of the problem. 
Money laundering is directly linked with crimes as crimes are largely motivated by money. In 
Malaysia, for the period between 2011 and 2012 alone, total amount investigated for serious 
crimes by our law enforcement authorities stood at RM13.1 billion. This is the amount that 
has the potential to be laundered through our system. We recognize that the actual extent of 
money laundering is difficult to measure. Certain type of crime may not be even reported, let 
alone  investigated.  For  example,  in  the  case  of  corruption,  if  both  the  giver  and  taker  are 
willing giver and willing taker, the case will not be reported unless there is report from third 
party.  It  also  acknowledged  by  the  international  convention,  that  for  every  10  crimes 
committed, only one will get reported. 
Crimes and money laundering jeopardized socio-economic development of the 
country 
Crimes  and  money  laundering  would  jeopardize  socio-economic  development  our  country. 
Serious crimes such as drug trafficking, corruption, tax evasion are intrinsically damaging to 
the country as they can weaken the economy. Not taking sufficient enforcement measures 
on the proceeds of crimes will perpetuate more crimes in the country as the benefits from the 
proceeds  would  incentivize  perpetration  of  more  and  bigger  crimes.  Crimes  also  reduce 
productivity and increase leakages in the economy as resources and manpower need to be 
channeled towards combating crimes instead of more productive utilization of resources. 
From the reputational perspective, Malaysia cannot afford to be seen as a weak link in the 
chain of international efforts to combat money laundering and terrorism financing. Although in 
the  previous  Mutual  Evaluation  in  2007,  we  received  commendable  ratings,  the  coming 
Mutual Evaluation in November this year will be based on a more holistic methodology where 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
greater focus  will  be  on  the  effectiveness  of  our  implementation.  If  we  did  not  attain  good 
rating, the consequences could be high. We do not want our country to be listed in the FATF 
Public Statement as country with significant deficiency in AML/CFT. 
As you are aware, compliance with FATF Standards helps maintain our country’s reputation 
and  the  reputation  of  our  businesses,  including  financial  institutions,  on  the  world  stage. 
Globally,  a  country’s  rating  on  compliance  with  FATF  Standards  on  AML/CFT  is  often 
considered  as  a  key  measure  of  the  robustness  of  the  country’s  AML/CFT  regime. 
Unfavourable rating would mean that Malaysian  businesses, including financial institutions, 
would face greater scrutiny, higher costs of doing business, delays and other time consuming 
and unnecessary barriers when doing business with overseas counterparts. 
The impact of money laundering and terrorism financing risks to the financial institutions and 
financial system is no less severe. We all understand that financial institutions operate on the 
basic tenets of public confidence and integrity. In the short term, a financial institution that is 
seen condoning money laundering and terrorism activities will lose public confidence and the 
confidence  of  their  depositors.  The  institution  will  also  face  higher  liquidity  risks  as  funds 
derived from illegal activities tend to be less stable. Ultimately, in the long term, coupled with 
higher  cost  of  doing  business,  the  institution’s  ability  to  perform  its  important  economic 
intermediation process will also be affected. 
Understanding of money laundering and terrorism financing risks is key for an 
effective AML/CFT measures 
For an AML/CFT measure to be effective, we need to understand our money laundering and 
terrorism  financing  risks  and  vulnerabilities.  Understanding  of  the  risks  will  facilitate  our 
efforts in channeling our resources and priority towards areas that would pose the greatest 
risks  to  the  country  and  the  institutions.  Recognising  these  needs  and  in  line  with  the 
requirements of the FATF Standards, at the country level, we had conducted a national risk 
assessment (or the NRA) to identify, assess and understand specific money laundering and 
terrorism  financing  threats  in  the  country,  in  particular  the  scale,  sources  and  methods  of 
those threats, as well as the vulnerabilities and risks across various sectors. We will share 
with you shortly the result of the NRA so that you will have better understanding of the risks 
at the country’s level. Subsequently, the results of this NRA needs to be translated into your 
institution’s own policies, procedures and risk controls. 
Effective AML/CFT regime is important. It prevents criminals benefiting from crime 
proceeds and reduces crime pervasiveness 
With the negative impact of money laundering and terrorism financing in mind, we all have a 
strong incentive to ensure that our AML/CFT regime is effective. There is no other option. 
Financial  institutions,  being  one  of  our  most  important  partners  in  combating  money 
laundering  and  terrorism  financing  risks,  play  an  important  role  of  deterring  and  detecting 
money laundering and terrorism financing activities. As we know that criminals are generally 
motivated  by  money,  access  to  legitimate financial  services  is  a  key  mechanism  by  which 
criminals  can realise  the  benefits  of  their  crimes.  And  if  we  worked  together,  we  can  do  a 
great deal to help make Malaysia to be a hostile place for criminals and terrorist financiers. 
But we know that this is not easy. Whilst large majority of those who use financial services do 
so  for  entirely  legitimate  purposes,  criminals  and  terrorist  financiers  also  need  access  to 
financial services. And the challenge for you, and for all of us, is how we can prevent and 
detect that abuse. 
The good news about the industry efforts to comply with AML/CFT law and regulations is that 
the  vast  majority  of  our  institutions  are  doing  a  good  job,  with  comprehensive  compliance 
programme in place and most importantly, suspicious transactions (or the STRs) are being 
diligently reported. Financial institutions (particularly banking institutions) are consistently the 
top  contributors  for  STRs  submitted  to  Bank  Negara  Malaysia.  The  STRs  submitted  are 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
valuable to us and to law enforcement agencies. Based on the feedback that we received 
from  the  law  enforcement  agencies,  the  STRs  submitted  have  provided  leads  to  their 
investigation and have resulted in the number of joint initiatives. More than 70% of the STRs 
disclosed to the enforcement agencies have resulted in the opening-up of Enquiry Papers or 
Investigation Papers. The remaining of the information disclosed will be is used as part of the 
database for future investigation. 
Compliance  with  AML/CFT  law  and  regulations  in  the  financial  institutions  require  high 
commitment  from  all  level  of  staff,  particularly  the  front-liners.  Non-compliances  will  be 
seriously dealt with. At the international level, we have witnessed banks been penalised to 
the  tune  of  billion  of  dollars  for  failure  to  comply  with  AML/CFT  law  and  regulations.  In 
Malaysia, we have also taken and will continue to take strong actions on banks that failed to 
comply  and  implement  AML/CFT  law  and  regulations.  With  the  implementation  of  the 
Financial Services Act, there are various forms of enforcement actions that can be taken by 
Bank Negara Malaysia including private and public reprimand. In terms of the penalties, the 
amendment  to  the  Anti-Money  Laundering,  Anti-Terrorism  Financing  and  Proceeds  of 
Unlawful  Activities  Act  2001  (AMLATFA)  that  came  into  force  on  1  September  2014  had 
increased the penalty amount. For instance, maximum penalties under general offence that 
normally applies for non-compliances with requirements under Part IV of the AMLATFA (that 
is  on  reporting  obligations  by  the  reporting  institutions)  have  been  increased  from 
RM250,000 to RM1 million. 
Cooperation and collaboration among regulators, supervisors, law enforcement 
authorities and reporting institutions are vital for an AML/CFT regime to be effective 
Needless to say, preventing and deterring money laundering and terrorism financing is only 
possible  if  there  is  a  working  partnership  between  all  the  law  enforcement  authorities, 
regulators, supervisors and the private sector. Without that, our efforts will be futile. Hence, 
for  an  AML/CFT  regime  to  be  sound, cooperation  and  collaboration  is  not  an  option  but a 
vital  requirement.  Having  said  that,  it  is  important  for  me  to  stress  that  having  a 
comprehensive  AML/CFT  framework  alone  is  not  enough.  What  is  more  important  is  how 
effective are our implementation and its impact in reducing money laundering and criminal 
activities. 
At the end of the day, the test is on how good we are in achieving the ultimate objective of an 
effective  AML/CFT  regime,  that  is  to  ensure  that  the  financial  system  and  the  broader 
economy  are  protected  from  threats  of  money  laundering  and  the  financing  of  terrorism, 
thereby strengthening financial sector integrity that contributes to the safety and security of 
the country. 
Before I end my speech, let me recap the following key points: 
i. 
Crimes and money laundering could pose significant threat to our financial system, 
economy and society; 
Understanding  of  risks  is  key  in  ensuring  that  our  AML/CFT  measures  are 
commensurate with the risks, in order for us to protect the financial institutions and 
the integrity of our financial system; 
Non-compliances  will  be  viewed  very  seriously  and  strong  regulatory  and 
supervisory actions are to be expected; 
Cooperation and collaboration between financial institutions and LEAs are vital for 
an effective AML/CFT regime; and 
Legal,  regulatory  and  operational  frameworks  alone  are  not  sufficient  without 
effective execution and overall implementation. Results would need to be measured 
based on the outcome and impact. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
In  relations  to  the  Mutual  Evaluation  that  will  be  undertaken  from  13  to  25  November  this 
year, I wish inform that some financial institutions will be called to meet the assessors during 
the  on-site  assessment  in  November.  The  purpose  of  the  meeting  is  for  the  assessors  to 
assess  how  effective  AML/CFT  measures  are  being  implemented  by  the  reporting 
institutions. We have identified several potential institutions as per the criteria given by the 
assessors. If your institution is being selected, you will receive formal notification from us in 
due course. Nevertheless, there are also high possibilities that the assessors may request to 
meet institutions of their choice during the on-site assessment. 
On  the final  note,  I  would  like  to  once  again thank  all  of  you  here today  for  attending this 
conference and for the moderators and panellists who are willing to share their experiences 
for  the  collective  benefits  of  everyone  attending  the  conference  today.  I  would  also  like  to 
thank the Association of Banks, Malaysia (ABM), Association of Islamic Banking Institutions 
Malaysia  (AIBIM),  Life  Insurance  Association  of  Malaysia  (LIAM),  Malaysian  Investment 
Banking  Association  (MIBA),  Malaysian  Takaful  Association  (MTA)  and  the  Securities 
Commission Malaysia for coordinating the participation from your members. I wish all of you 
a successful and productive conference ahead.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
