Ignazio Visco: The recovery and the risks – an Italian central banker view 
Speech by Mr Ignazio Visco, Governor of the Bank of Italy, at the 20th ASSIOM FOREX (the 
Financial Markets Association of Italy) Congress, Rome, 8 February 2014. 
 The recovery and the risks 
Since  last  summer  the  continued  strengthening  of  economic  activity  in  the  advanced 
economies,  particularly  the  United  States,  has  been  accompanied  by  an  improvement  in 
financial  conditions  and  a  decline  in  the  risk  premiums  on  government  bonds  in  the  euro 
area.  In  Italy,  net  capital  inflows  have  continued,  and  the  Bank  of  Italy’s  debit  balance  in 
TARGET2 has diminished by a third compared with the high point recorded in the summer of 
2012. 
The  easing  of  tensions  in  the  euro  area  reflects  the  progress  made  in  European  Union 
governance,  the  resolute  steering  of  monetary  policy  towards  the  maintenance  of 
accommodative  conditions,  and  the  correction  of  national  imbalances,  with  significant 
progress being made in the countries hardest hit by the crisis. 
Nevertheless, the risks remain high. Tensions on the international markets, which had arisen 
after  the  Federal  Reserve’s  initial  announcement  of  the  gradual  tapering  of  security 
purchases, have returned in recent weeks, exacerbated by signs of economic slowdown in 
China. This has affected the emerging economies, especially those with structural problems 
and short-term financing difficulties. 
The euro-area economy has begun to grow again, but slowly and  with  marked differences 
between countries. In Italy, industrial production, which had declined in every quarter since 
the summer of 2011, grew by about 1 per cent in the last quarter of 2013. Since last summer, 
sales  and  orders  of  industrial  firms  have  been  increasing  moderately  and  the  qualitative 
indicators  have  improved  steadily,  pointing  to  a  continued  expansion  of  output  in 
manufacturing  and  a  move  back  towards  growth  in  services  as  well.  GDP  is  estimated  to 
have increased by several tenths of a percentage point in the fourth quarter of 2013, after 
ceasing  to  fall  in  the  third.  Our  latest  baseline  scenario  put  GDP  growth  at  about  three 
quarters of a percentage point in 2014. 
The recovery in sales in industry is driven by exports, which in recent years have grown in 
line with our outlet markets, after a lengthy period of decline in Italy’s market shares. 
Domestic demand, by contrast, is still struggling. Household consumption has been affected 
by the persistent weakness of the labour market and insufficient growth of income, as well as 
by the desire to bring saving back to higher levels after the decline of recent years. Given the 
good performance of export orders, investment should return to growth this year, but as a 
percentage  of  GDP  it  will  remain  at  the  lowest  levels  of  the  last  twenty  years.  If  capital 
formation  is  to  show  a  stronger  increase,  the  uncertainty  regarding  the  prospects  for  the 
medium  term  must  diminish  and  the  credit  supply  tensions  and  the  financial  imbalances 
affecting our firms must be overcome. 
The recovery has not spread to all sectors of the economy, nor to all parts of the country; the 
improvement  has  mostly  involved  larger,  more  export-oriented  firms  located  in  the  Centre 
and North. What sets the firms that continue to expand sales and jobs apart from those that 
are  struggling  to  stay  in  the  market  is  their  ability  to  innovate  products  and  processes,  to 
compete  successfully  on  domestic  and  international  markets  and  to  penetrate  the  most 
dynamic of these. 
The  competitiveness  of  manufacturing  firms,  measured  on  the  basis  of  producer  prices, 
improved  by  about  4  per  cent  between  2007  and  2013.  Unit  labour  costs  increased  more 
than in the other main countries of the area, mainly because of the dynamics of productivity, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
but this was offset by a reduction in profit margins. The gain in competitiveness in trade with 
non-euro-area  countries  due  to  the  depreciation  of  the  euro  between  2007  and  2012  has 
been practically wiped out in the last year. 
Several contrasting factors affect the performance of exchange rates. An appreciation of the 
euro  is  favoured  both  by  the  rising  surplus  in  the  euro  area’s  current  account  and  by  the 
inflow of capital associated with the attenuation of the sovereign debt crisis. An impetus to 
depreciation, however, particularly against the dollar, derives from the cyclical improvement 
and the start of monetary tapering in the United States. 
In  any  case,  the  gains  in  competitiveness  that  might  possibly  result  from  changes  in  the 
exchange rate will be transient in the absence of a recovery in productivity. In the last three 
years, it is estimated that total factor productivity in Italy has only just recouped the loss due 
to the contraction of 2009, whereas in France it has grown by 1.5 per cent and in Germany 
by about 5 per cent. Investment per worker fell by almost 9 per cent in Italy, compared with 
an increase of 2 per cent in France and 8 per cent in Germany. 
Over the past few months the first signs of a stabilization in employment and an increase in 
hours worked have emerged. But the unemployment rate now nears 13 per cent, twice as 
high as before the crisis and the highest on record since this statistical series began to be 
collected  in  the  1950s.  Given  the  extensive  use  of  wage  supplementation,  and  also 
considering the longer-term changes produced by technological innovation, employment runs 
the risk  of recovering  only  slowly,  and  with  a  lag  behind  the upturn  in activity.  As  in  other 
countries, the protracted slump in economic activity has weighed most heavily on the young: 
the employment rate for young people aged between 15 and 24 years, not counting students, 
has fallen to 43 per cent from 61 per cent in 2007; for the 25–34 age group it has fallen from 
74 to 66 per cent. 
Overall, the recovery still appears to be weak and uncertain. Every effort must be made, at 
national and European level, to increase demand by fostering, in a shared vision of clearer 
prospects  for  the  future,  the  creation  of  new  job  opportunities,  business  investment,  and 
innovation geared to achieving productivity gains to transfer to incomes. 
The political and social difficulties besetting this course are accompanied by the presence of 
some  risks  that  need  special  consideration.  Besides  the  evolving  international  situation, 
these relate to price dynamics, conditions on the sovereign debt market and access to credit. 
Price dynamics 
In  recent  months,  inflation  in  the  euro  area  and  in  Italy  has  regularly  fallen  by  more  than 
expected; since October, the twelve-month rise in consumer prices has stood below 1 per 
cent. 
Eurosystem  projections  suggest  that  consumer price  inflation,  both  this year  and  next,  will 
remain  well  below  the  level  considered  consistent  with  the  European  Central  Bank’s 
definition of price stability, namely inflation below but close to 2 per cent over a medium-term 
horizon. Our forecasts paint a similar picture for the evolution of consumer prices in Italy. 
The deceleration of prices reflects not only the downward trend in the energy component, but 
also  the  cyclical  weakness  of  the  economy.  The  exceptional  decline  in  economic  activity 
provoked by the crisis may have heightened the sensitivity of inflation to cyclical conditions, 
in particular for goods other than food and energy. 
We are not in a situation of a generalized price reduction, of deflation. But even a prolonged 
period of price changes below the level compatible with monetary stability is undesirable. It 
hinders  the  correction  of  macroeconomic  imbalances  through  the  adjustment  of  relative 
prices. It can reduce consumers’ spending capacity and adversely affect the cost of capital 
for investment. Above all, the risk – limited at present – that long-term inflation expectations 
may become detached from price stability must not be underestimated. This is a nonlinear 
process, capable of materializing suddenly. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
For  this  reason,  the  ECB’s  Governing  Council  has  reaffirmed  its  intention  to  maintain  an 
accommodative  monetary  policy  stance for  as  long  as  necessary  and  has firmly  reiterated 
that policy rates will remain at present or lower levels for an extended period. In line with its 
mandate, the Council will use all the tools needed to keep actual and expected inflation in 
line with the definition of price stability in the medium term. 
Sovereign debt 
The narrowing of the spread between ten-year BTPs and German Bunds to about 200 basis 
points, the level recorded in July 2011, reflects the abatement of the risk of a euro-area break 
up and strengthening market confidence. 
Upward pressures on global interest rates stemming from the consolidation of the recovery 
or  from  international  turbulence  cannot,  however,  be  ruled  out;  only  a  return,  including  in 
Italy, to sustained growth can offset such pressures, by favouring a further reduction of the 
component of sovereign bond yield differentials due to different trends in the fundamentals. 
Hard-won  confidence  must  not  be  undermined  by  the  resurgence  of  fears  about  the 
determination of Italy, and of all the countries of the euro area, to continue on the path of 
reform and responsibility. Failure to do so would hinder the improvement of the conditions of 
access to credit, with inevitable repercussions on the cost of capital and investment by firms. 
The  path  ahead  is  a  narrow  one,  and  in  taking  it  due  consideration  must  certainly  be 
accorded to the needs of those who are suffering the most as a result of the long crisis and 
the major changes accompanying the opening of markets and the rapid emergence of new 
technologies,  changes  for  which  most  of  the  necessary  structural  adjustment  is  still 
incomplete. 
Observance of budgetary constraints does not only stem from formal obligations; it is what 
guarantees full access to the financial markets for the Treasury. In 2013, the public sector 
borrowing  requirement  amounted  to  around  €80  billion.  Including  the  rollover  of  maturing 
debt, the Treasury’s annual recourse to the markets is on the order of €400 billion. 
Net foreign purchases of Italian government securities, in particular by institutional investors, 
began  to  show  signs  of  recovery  in  mid-2012,  and  continued  through  2013.  But  the 
confidence of foreign investors, at times summarily dismissed as “speculators”, can be very 
quickly undermined by any sign of deterioration in a sovereign borrower’s creditworthiness. 
Between  summer  2011 and  spring 2012, the share  of Italian government  bonds  in foreign 
hands  (not  counting 
the  Eurosystem’s  purchases 
the  Securities  Markets 
Programme) fell by 16 percentage points to 31 per cent. 
Before the crisis, Italy had postponed the reduction of its structural deficit and failed to grow 
enough  to  ensure  a  rapid  reduction  of  the  debt-to-GDP  ratio.  The  acceleration  of  the 
adjustment came at the most difficult moment; it has had inevitable procyclical effects, but it 
served the need to avoid the worst. It could not keep the debt ratio, in these years of crisis, 
from rising. 
What the European rules require is the reduction of this ratio, not of the absolute amount of 
the debt. In order to achieve this, even given moderate growth, it is sufficient not to deviate 
from the objective of structural budget balance. The credibility that Italy has regained with its 
efforts and its awareness that there is no alternative to proceeding along the road of reform is 
producing savings on interest payments, making it easier to contain the budget deficit. 
This  credibility  can  allow  the  country  to  exploit  the  margins  of  flexibility  envisaged  by  the 
European  rules  to  finance  public  investment,  and  enable  it  to  uphold,  with  authority,  the 
completion of the European construction, with a view among other things to a fiscal union 
that makes  it  possible  to  use  common  resources  to  step  up  infrastructural  investment  and 
facilitate the implementation of reforms. 
through 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Access to credit 
The decline in lending to Italian firms has continued, with a contraction of more than 9 per 
cent  over  the last  two  years  after  an  expansion  of  nearly  14  per  cent  between  the end  of 
2007 and the autumn of 2011. Against the background of an economic outlook still clouded 
by uncertainty, credit demand remains weak, but the supply-side tensions are obstinate as 
well. 
The responses of Italian banks to last quarter’s bank lending survey confirm the attenuation 
of credit restrictions; however, a large percentage of firms, especially small businesses, still 
report finding it difficult to obtain credit. The gap between the cost of new loans to firms in 
Italy and the euro-area average has narrowed – to under 80 basis points in December, from 
nearly 100 at the end of 2012 – but it remains wide. 
Banks’  liquidity  has  improved  in  the  last  year.  Recourse  to  Eurosystem  refinancing  fell  to 
€224 billion at the end of January 2014, €50 billion less than a year earlier. Italian banks, led 
by the largest ones, have repaid €64 billion of the €255 billion they obtained in the two three-
year  refinancing  operations  of  December  2011  and  February  2012.  Improvement  in  the 
conditions on the wholesale funding market could facilitate early repayment of the remaining 
amounts. 
The  tensions  affecting  credit  supply  stem  above  all  from  the  increasing  incidence  of  non-
performing loans in banks’ balance sheets and from their worsening perception of borrowers’ 
creditworthiness. 
New bad debts have ceased to rise in proportion to outstanding loans since the third quarter 
of 2013, and in our estimates should remain virtually stable in the coming quarters. However, 
reflecting the long recession, the ratio of total bad debts to total loans reached 9.1 per cent in 
December, almost 7 percentage points higher than at the end of 2008. For loans to firms, the 
ratio rose from 3 to 13 per cent. 
The requisite  provisions  for  the  deterioration  in  loan  quality  dent  banks’  profitability;  in  the 
first  nine  months  of  2013  they  absorbed  three  quarters  of  operating  profit.  The  return  on 
equity was particularly low. 
In Italy, the private market in impaired assets is underdeveloped. Some recent transactions 
signal  interest  on  the  part  of  specialized  investors  in  managing  these  assets.  The  actions 
under way at a number of banks to rationalize the management of non-performing loans by 
creating  dedicated  structures  able  to  enhance  the  efficiency  of  the  procedures  and  the 
transparency of these assets go in the right direction. More ambitious interventions, whose 
compatibility with European rules must be pondered, are not to be ruled out. They could, at 
moderate cost, release resources to be used for financing the economy. 
The revaluation of the Bank of Italy’s share capital has adjusted values that were unchanged 
for decades. The excess concentrations of holdings will be eliminated. The ensuing increase 
in the highest quality capital of the shareholding banks, though it cannot be considered in the 
assessment of asset quality being conducted in the euro area, will help to sustain the supply 
of credit. 
As the economic recovery gathers strength and the riskiness of loans gradually diminishes, 
the banking system will be able to offer greater support to the economy, helping in turn to 
stimulate  growth.  A  contribution  to  this  can  come  from  targeted  measures,  some  of  them 
already decided, such as the refinancing of the Guarantee Fund for SMEs and changes to 
the tax rules on loan loss provisions in banks’ balance sheets. 
The Bank of Italy’s supervisory action and the banking union 
Thanks in part to the action of the Bank of Italy and in spite of the sharp deterioration in loan 
quality,  between  September  2012  and  September  2013  the  non-performing  loan  coverage 
ratio rose from 38.3 to 39.9 per cent on average for Italian banking groups. The ratio of core 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
tier 1 capital to risk-weighted assets rose from 10.0 to 10.6 per cent. Coverage and capital 
ratios  must  continue  to  increase;  this  preserves  investors’  confidence  in  the  banks  and 
lowers  the cost  of funding,  thus  helping  to  ensure  an  adequate flow  of  credit  to  economic 
activity. During the crisis, lending has been more buoyant at the better-capitalized banks. 
The  Bank  of  Italy  is  scrutinizing  the  weaknesses  in  the  structure  and  working  of  banks’ 
boards of directors; the aim is to remove factors that can hinder banks’ capital strengthening 
and  to  foster  better  business  management.  The  proposals  put  forward  in  last  December’s 
public  consultation  document  are  designed  to  improve  banks’  governance  by  limiting  the 
number  of  directors  and  increasing  the  possibility  for  shareholders  to  make  their  views 
known.  The  Bank  will  take  account  of  the  comments  that  emerged  during  the  public 
consultation  when  it  issues  the  final  provisions.  Correct  organizational  arrangements  are 
essential  for  efficiency  and  stability.  The  growth  in  the  number  of  banks  in  difficulty  was 
mainly  due  to  the  recession,  but  weak  governance  systems  also  played  a  role,  as  did 
episodes of outright malfeasance. 
During the crisis the vicious spiral between the state of the banks and that of their respective 
sovereign issuers had a perverse effect on intermediaries’ creditworthiness and their ability 
to raise funds in the market. Banking Union can make a decisive contribution to breaking this 
link. The first step is the launch of the single supervisory mechanism. 
The  comprehensive  assessment  of  the  leading  euro-area  banks’  balance  sheets    to  be 
carried out by the ECB and the national authorities  will contribute to the single supervisory 
mechanism’s launch, at the end of this year, on a solid and credible basis. This will make 
clear and comparable information available on the state of European banks’ health. 
The exercise will be carried out transparently and rigorously, with uncertainty about the way it 
is performed reduced to the minimum. The assessment will cover all the asset items and the 
related risk profiles. In examining the quality of exposures, uniform criteria will be used, in 
line with Italian practices, which are acknowledged to be among the most scrupulous. 
The first phase of the examination of the quality of banks’ assets, devoted to the selection of 
riskier portfolios, is drawing to a close. In the second phase, which will get under way in the 
coming weeks, a large number of credit files will be analyzed and the adequacy of the value 
adjustments in banks’ accounts will be assessed. 
In the last few days the European Banking Authority and the ECB have announced the main 
features of the stress test. The exercise will refer to the three years 2014–16. The threshold 
value of the capital ratio that banks must comply with at the end of the period is 8 per cent in 
the baseline scenario and 5.5 per cent in the adverse one. The definition of capital, which will 
take due account of the choices made by national authorities, in line with the provisions of 
the transitional regime, will be that in force at the end of 2016. 
The corrective measures that intermediaries will be asked to take will be related to the nature 
of  the  capital  weaknesses  revealed  by  the  stress  test.  If  they  emerge  in  the  baseline 
scenario, banks will be asked to implement the necessary measures rapidly; if, instead, they 
only appear in the adverse scenario, the time frame will be determined appropriately as part 
of a recapitalization plan agreed with the supervisory authorities. 
In recent months I have already drawn attention to the need for a rapid definition of public 
backstop  mechanisms,  capable  of 
the  authorities’ 
determination  to  tackle  and  overcome  any  weaknesses  that  should  emerge  from  the 
assessment  exercise.  The  design  of  the  Banking  Union  must  be  completed  with  the 
introduction of the single resolution mechanism for failed banks. The negotiations under way 
between  the  Council,  the  Commission  and  the  European  Parliament  on  the  agreement 
reached by the Council at the end of last year must move forward and be concluded rapidly, 
so as to allow the responsibilities of supervision to be aligned with those of the management 
and resolution of crises as soon as possible. The decision-making process must be speeded 
up  and  made  more  effective.  The  long  transitional  period  envisaged  before  the  resolution 
the  markets  about 
reassuring 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
fund  becomes  fully  effective  must  be  shortened,  so  as  to  make  the  overall  mechanism 
entirely credible. 
In order to return to rapid, sustained economic growth it is not enough to eliminate the factors 
of risk that I have recalled – to counter excessive disinflation, ensure the credibility of fiscal 
consolidation  and  stimulate  renewed  lending.  Italy  has  still  not  risen  properly  to  the 
challenges  of  technological  innovation  and  the  globalization  of  markets.  Mere  financial 
support to troubled sectors is no solution. Competitiveness can be recovered only through a 
wide- ranging, consistent reform strategy involving the public sector, firms and the financial 
system. 
The commitment to creating a more business-friendly institutional and legal environment has 
to  be  strengthened,  with  further  simplification  of rules  and  regulations,  improvement  in  the 
quality of essential public services, and continuing action to combat illegal behaviour. 
Especially in today’s circumstances – marked by profound transformation – an easing of the 
fiscal  burden  on  productive  factors,  together  with  selective  spending  cuts  to  reduce  waste 
and  measures  to  make  government  more  efficient,  can  be  decisive  to  the  ability  of  the 
system to undertake the necessary changes. Income support, retraining and job placement 
programmes for workers driven out of traditional forms of production are needed to protect 
those who will be disadvantaged in the short term. 
There  is  no  lack  of  firms  capable  of  taking  up  the  challenge,  growing  large  enough  to 
compete  in  global  markets,  increasing  the  technological  and  innovative  content  of  their 
products. A better balance in sources of finance, reducing dependency on bank loans and 
increasing the importance of equity capital, would help in providing enterprises with adequate 
resources.  New  forms  of  intermediation  can  facilitate  the  financing  of  firms  by  institutional 
investors. In other countries, banks’ ability to stimulate and sustain innovation on the part of 
firms – including by offering high-value-added financial services – is one of the key drivers of 
economic growth. 
In Italy as elsewhere, the financial system must regain public trust, which has been sapped 
by the excesses, occurring mostly in other countries, that led to a global crisis with enormous 
costs.  It  must  demonstrate  its  ability  to  perform  its  function  to  the  full.  The  negative 
perceptions  of  the  conduct  of  banking  and  finance  must  not  be  allowed  to  trigger 
disproportionate reactions. Public hostility must be overcome through decisive improvements 
to governance  and through sound  and  prudent intermediation,  ensuring  that finance  is  not 
denied to those who deserve it and share the risk and that the financial system continues to 
support real economic activity. We are fully conscious of the difficulties that lie ahead. We 
are working to help remove them in the firm belief that sound finance remains essential to 
eliminate  the  liquidity  constraints  that  cramp  economic  activity  and  prevent  the  fruitful 
exploitation of ideas and to promote growth by fostering innovation. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
