  Pentti Hakkarainen: Banking union – implications for Nordics? 
Speech by Mr Pentti Hakkarainen, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Finland, at the Sveriges 
Riksbank, Stockholm, 5 May 2014. 
Accompanying slides can be found on the Bank of Finland’s website. 
 In  Nordic  countries  we  have  a  long  tradition  and  experience  on  highly  interconnected  and 
integrated financial market. If we look at the banking sector, same names are represented in 
all countries. We had our own severe crises in early 1990s, but this time our financial sector 
has survived pretty well, keeping itself in a rather good shape. 
Since 2008, we have experienced a series of different types of crises. Each of them has had 
devastating effects on the real economy. 
In  2010  it  became  desperately  evident  that  the  bank  and  sovereign  risks  are  tightly 
interconnected and with a two-way causality, the so called bank-sovereign loop, weak banks 
weakened sovereign and vice versa. A problem in one bank can quickly spread not only to 
other banks but also to sovereigns beyond national borders with damaging effects on the real 
economy and taxpayers both at home and in other countries. 
The crises have made it very clear at least that international, highly interconnected financial 
markets require a stronger institutional framework than what we have had in recent years. 
The  authorities  need  proper  tools  to  deal  with  ailing  banks  operating  in  integrated  cross-
border markets. The creation of these tools has taken major steps forward since, but there is 
still a lot of work ahead. 
The key lesson we have learnt is that economic dislocations without proper arrangements to 
tackle  troubled  banks  have  devastating  effects  on  the  real  economy,  taxpayers  and  the 
whole society. And coming back to “normal” proves to be painfully slow and long-lasting. 
Financial market flaws 
All in all, the mismatch between the scope of international bank operations and the national 
supervisory framework made the situation extremely challenging. 
What to do? In principle, we can envisage three solutions. First of all, we could re-nationalize 
the financial markets. In such a solution, the single market would be lost. We would turn the 
clock  back,  lose  benefits  of  integrated  markets.  Second,  we  could  just  accept  the  risk  of 
financial  instability  and  periodically  pay  the  price.  Or,  finally,  we  could  work  to  create  a 
banking  union,  with  better  suited  institutions  and  systems  for  single  supervision  and 
resolution. 
Only  the  last  one  of  these  is  acceptable.  Institutional  arrangements  for  supervision  and 
resolution need to match the integrated structures of banking business in the real world. 
Before I continue to the Banking Union, I would like to recall ideas that Stefan Ingves raised 
in 2006 
“I  propose  the  establishment  of  a  new  pan-European  body,  a  European 
Organization for Financial Supervision (EOFS). The idea is to create a separate 
agency to follow the major cross-border banking groups in Europe”. 
“The  EOFS  should  only  focus  on  the  presently  about  40  truly  cross-border 
banking groups and not deal with the about eight thousand European banks with 
a predominately national character.” 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  “The  EOFS  should  have  three  tasks:  It  should  gather  information  about  the 
banking  groups  and  their  activities  in  different  countries.  Importantly,  it  should 
also create unified risk-assessments of each cross-border banking group. Finally, 
it should also oversee the activities and risks of these banking groups.” 
“To  achieve  these  tasks,  there  is  a  need  for  a separate  agency,  staffed  with  a 
sufficient  number  of  competent  employees.  Initially,  these  employees  could  of 
course  be recruited  from  the  existing  national supervisors.  Also  the  staff  of  the 
EOFS would have to cooperate with the national supervisors.” 
At the moment, after eight years and severe crises, we are taking steps pretty much towards 
the direction proposed by Stefan. However, he also mentioned that the authority should be 
independent and not the ECB or the European Commission, but as we know according to the 
current EU-treaties this was not a feasible option.. 
The  European  Union  is  now  taking  a  significant  step  forward  by  establishing  the  Single 
Supervisory  Mechanism  for  the  euro  area  and  the  non-euro  area  member  states  have  a 
possibility to join in the form of “close co-operation”. Therefore, it may be fair to ask whether 
we someday see Sweden to join the Single Supervisory Mechanism. 
Banking Union 
As part of the economic and monetary union and as a remedy for the crisis, the EU leaders 
agreed in June 2012 on creating a true Banking Union. 
The Single Rulebook provides a foundation for the Banking Union. It is based on the idea of 
identical  regulatory  requirements,  such  as  capital  adequacy  rules  for  banks.  These  are 
achieved through European legislation and lower-level technical standards. 
One  of  the  main  pillars  of  the  Banking  Union  is  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism.  I  will 
come back to the recent developments in its construction later on. 
Another important pillar is the Single Resolution Mechanism. As you know, intensive talks in 
the  form  of  EU  trilogue  ended  in  March  and  European  Parliament  approved  the  SRM 
regulation  in  April.  In  addition,  deposit  insurance  schemes  will  be  strengthened  and 
harmonised as part of the banking union in the long run. 
The  Banking  Union  may  also  be  complemented  by  structural  reforms.  The  European 
Commission  has  made  a  legislative  proposal  based  on  the  Liikanen  report  and  it  will  be 
finalised under the term of the next European Parliament. 
In the future, the Banking Union, when properly implemented, will help us resolve banking 
problems while avoiding to use taxpayers’ money for bail-outs. This in turn means also better 
incentives in banking and hence a more stable financial system. 
Preparations for Single Supervisory Mechanism 
Let me now share with you some recent developments in the Single Supervisory Mechanism 
(SSM). The EU Regulation assigning supervisory tasks to the ECB became effective in early 
November 2013. Already well ahead of this time in late summer 2012, the ECB and national 
supervisors established the High-Level Group which steered practical preparations to ensure 
timely adoption of supervisory responsibilities by the SSM. Thus we have got a “flying start” 
for the whole project. 
As a concrete step, the ECB Governing Council nominated Ms Danièle Nouy for Chair of the 
Supervisory  Board  of  the  new  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism.  The  Heads  of  Directorates, 
four Director Generals have been appointed and most of the mid-level managers have been 
nominated as well. A broader recruitment process of supervisors and analyst is under way 
and they will join the ECB in waves by the end of the year. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The Supervisory Board had its historical first meeting in January and now on it meets twice a 
month. At the beginning many of the issues have related to accepting, confirming and further 
developing the issues prepared by the High-Level Group. 
Now  there  is  an  on-going  transition  period,  during  which  a  comprehensive  assessment  of 
significant banks is carried out. During the same period other preparations for the SSM are to 
be completed. 
Comprehensive Assessment 
The  Comprehensive  Assessment  of  European  banks  is  an  essential  element  of  the 
preparations for the SSM. It should be noted that the SSM Regulation also enables the ECB 
not  only  to  obtain  all  the  relevant  information  from  the  national  authorities  necessary  for 
making  the  assessment  but  also  to  take  over  direct  supervision  of  any  credit  institution  it 
deems necessary. This is important to guarantee consistent application of high supervisory 
standards. 
The Comprehensive Assessment has three main goals. First of all, the assessment aims at 
transparency  through  enhancing  the  quality  of  information  available  on  the  condition  of 
banks. Its second goal is to repair banks’ condition by identifying and having the necessary 
corrective  actions  implemented  where  necessary.  Finally,  the  Comprehensive  assessment 
builds confidence by assuring all relevant stakeholders that banks are fundamentally sound 
and trustworthy. 
The  ECB  will  conduct  the  Comprehensive  Assessment  in  close  cooperation  with  national 
authorities, and also with ESRB and EBA. The ECB will detail the design and strategy of the 
assessment exercise, monitor its execution, perform quality assurance as well as collect and 
consolidate  the  results  and  finalise  and  disclose  the  overall  assessment.  National 
supervisors execute the exercise at the national level, benefitting from local knowledge, but 
following  common  data  requirements  and  methodology.  As  an  example  of  the  extensive 
methodology,  the  Asset  Quality  Review  Phase  2  Manual  was  published  in  March.  The 
manual provides specific guidelines for all involved parties on the conduct of relevant steps 
of the exercise. 
The Comprehensive Assessment is indeed comprehensive. First we do a Risk Assessment 
addressing key risks in the banks’ balance sheets, including liquidity, leverage and funding. 
After that an Asset Quality Review is carried out examining banks’ balance sheets based on 
information at the end of 2013. And finally, a Stress Test, done in collaboration with the EBA, 
complements  the  asset  quality  review  by  providing  a  forward-looking  view  of  banks’  risk-
absorption capacity under stress. 
The  Asset  Quality  Review  has  progressed  and  some  details  of  its  coverage  have  been 
released. Approximately 135 000 loan books will be examined by the authorities. The loan 
file  review  covers  both  corporate  and  retail  portfolios.  It  covers  total  banking  book  risk-
weighted assets (RWA) of approximately € 3.7 trillion, representing 58 % of total credit risk-
weighted  assets  across  the  banks  subject  to  the  assessment.  In  addition,  29  banks  with 
material  trading  book  exposures  are  subject  to  a  specifically  tailored  AQR  of  the  trading 
book. 
The structure of the Comprehensive Assessment also clarifies the frequently asked question, 
how  this  assessment  differs  from  previously  conducted  EU  level  stress  tests?  The  key 
differences to my mind are as follows: 
• 
Banks’  risks  and  asset  quality  are  assessed  in  a  comprehensive  manner  at  the 
Banking  Union  level.  Assessments  are  made  applying  common  definitions, 
abolishing – or at least showing explicitly – any diverging national interpretations. 
Sufficient corrective measures can be guaranteed as the ECB in its supervisory role 
will have all the necessary supervisory powers. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Quality  of  assessments  is  ensured  not  only  by  the  ECB’s  strict  procedure  for  on-
going quality assurance, but also by the involvement of third party evaluators. 
 The  results  of  the  assessment  will  be  published  in  a  single  disclosure,  including  all  three 
parts of the exercise. 
The  results  of  the  Comprehensive  Assessment  will  be  followed  by  corrective  measures 
where  necessary. The ECB  published  last  week  more  details  on  how  banks’ should  cover 
possible capital shortfalls. Capital shortfalls will be expected to be covered within six months 
for those identified in the AQR or the baseline stress test scenario, and within nine months 
for those identified in the adverse stress test scenario. Recapitalisation measures to cover 
any shortfalls detected should rely on capital instruments of the highest quality, unless the 
shortfalls  are  reduced  through  other  means.  Such  other  measures  could  include,  for 
instance,  retained  earnings,  and  reduced  bonus  payments,  new  issuances  of  common 
equity, suitable strong contingent capital and sales of selected assets at market prices. 
Other preparatory work for SSM 
Alongside the Comprehensive Assessment, a lot of other preparatory work is going on. 
The  SSM  Supervisory  Model  is  constructed  so  that  the  decision-making  on  supervisory 
matters and other related procedures are kept separate from the monetary policy. As regards 
supervisory matters, the new Supervisory Board will have a predominant role; in most of the 
cases,  it  will  be  the  final  decision  maker.  In  addition  to  internal  rules  and  restrictions  on 
exchange of information, a concrete example of this separation is that supervisory function 
and monetary policy are located in separate buildings and from 2015 even in separate areas 
in Frankfurt. 
At  the  practical  level  in  the  supervisory  model, the  joint  supervisory  teams  are key  actors. 
Such  teams  are  created  for  each  significant  bank  or  banking  group  that  will  be  directly 
supervised by the ECB. Joint supervisory teams are responsible for day-to-day supervision 
of significant banks. Each team will be composed of staff from both the ECB and national 
supervisors. 
For  the  legal  dimension  of  the  SSM,  preparations  included  the  development  of  the  SSM 
Framework Regulation on covering cooperation within the SSM, among other things. In this 
respect, after the public consultation, it was published on 25th of April. 
From accountability point of view, the SSM has started to publish periodically a report called 
the  SSM  Quarterly  Report  to  the  European  Parliament,  the  EU  Council  and  the  European 
Commission. The next report will be published in these days and it covers progress achieved 
since the publication of the first report in the beginning of February. 
Banking  supervision  requires  a  smooth  flow  of  information  between  banks  and  their 
supervisors.  To  this  end,  a  high-standard  data  reporting  framework  and  the  associated 
infrastructures for the SSM are being developed. 
SSM vs national interests 
Banking, and financial services more generally, is a high value added industry and there are 
national  interests  at  play.  One  can  even  say  that  national  banking  supervisors  have 
traditionally had a dual role to play: first, to carry out effective supervision and thus promote 
financial  stability  but,  second,  to  also  promote  the  interests  and  competitiveness  of  the 
national  financial  industry.  In  today’s  economies  and  also  for  banks  themselves  it  may  be 
better  to  create  level  playing  field  internationally  and  enhance  competition  than  look  after 
interests  of  domestic  banks  only.  Over  time, the  banking  union  is  envisaged to  lessen the 
role that national interest play but, in the short term, the banking union may exacerbate the 
conflict between the two roles. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The  ECB,  as  an  established  and  strong  European  institution,  is  well  placed  to  tackle  the 
emergence of national interests in supervision. It is therefore imperative that the powers are 
concentrated  at  the  ECB.  The  structures  and  the  processes  of  the  SSM  must  support 
European  perspective  and  interests.  So  far,  all  the  developments  seem  to  point  to  this 
direction. The fact that the ECB can, if deemed necessary, take over the direct supervision of 
any bank operating in the Banking union area underlines that the ECB is fully in charge of the 
SSM. 
Banks’ perspective on SSM 
Are there any benefits for banks? From the banks’ perspective, the introduction of the SSM 
means numerous changes. I will mention here only a few of them. 
For a cross-border bank, operating in multiple countries within the Banking Union, the single 
supervision effectively simplifies its contacts with the authorities. It will need to work with a 
single  supervisor  and  operate  following  a  single  rulebook.  This  implies  lower  costs  for  the 
bank in complying with the regulatory requirements. 
Common  rules  and  methods  of  supervision  also  have  a  broader  impact  on  competition 
among banks, not only for international but also domestically oriented banks. The banks are 
treated equally in supervision and regulatory capture can be fully avoided, thereby ensuring a 
level playing field. 
In general, I believe that the SSM will become one of the leading banking supervisors in the 
world, applying the best possible tools for supervision – and developing such tools also for 
the benefit of other supervisors. 
Bank resolution 
The second pillar of the Banking Union is the Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM), which is 
the necessary complement to the Single Supervisory Mechanism. The SRM creates a single 
authority, which is responsible for swift and orderly resolution of cross-border banks in the 
euro  area  and  participating  member  states.  The  SRM  is  complemented  by  the  Single 
Resolution Fund which will be financed via levies on the banking sector itself. The Fund will 
start from national compartments but it will gradually, in eight years, mutualise to become a 
truly single European Fund. 
Underlying  the  new  regime  is  the  Bank  Recovery  and  Resolution  Directive  (BRRD)  which 
dramatically changes the culture. It ends the era of the bail-out and moves us to the culture 
of the bail-in. Bail-in will be the rule, bail-out a rare exception. As from the beginning of 2016, 
or in some countries even earlier, the BRRD requires bail-in of shareholders and creditors 
equal to at least 8% of the total liabilities of a bank. In most cases this should be enough. 
Only after the threshold of 8% bail-in can money from the resolution fund be used and only at 
the very end of the process can public money be used. It is notable that public money can, in 
exceptional cases, be used to fund resolution functions, not to bail-out nonviable banks. 
Macroprudential policy 
Finally,  I  would  like  to  make  a  couple  of  short  remarks  on  macroprudential  policy  that  is 
becoming  effective  in  the  EU  alongside  the  changes  in  microprudential  supervision  due  to 
the establishment of the SSM 
In  Finland,  a  government  bill  was  submitted  to  Parliament  in  April,  including  provisions 
establishing  macroprudential  policy 
the  Finnish  FSA  as 
macroprudential  policy  authority.  The  law  is  expected  to  become  effective  in  June  2014. 
Following  the  adoption  of  this  law,  the  macroprudential  policy  frameworks  in  Sweden  and 
Finland are likely to resemble each other in several respects. While the supervisory authority 
would be the actual macroprudential decision-making body in both countries, other relevant 
the  Board  of 
tools  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  authorities, including central banks, have a role in analysing the systemic risks and needs for 
macroprudential action. 
However,  there  is  one  notable  difference  between  the  macroprudential  frameworks  in  our 
countries  if  Sweden  remains  outside  the  banking  union.  Within  the  banking  union,  while 
macroprudential policy responsibilities lie  in the first place with the national authorities, the 
SSM Regulation assigns some macroprudential tasks also to the ECB. In particular, the ECB 
may decide on stricter measures than national authorities, using the counter-cyclical buffer or 
other  macro-prudential  tools  provided  for  by  the  EU  legislation.  The  role  of  the  ECB  in 
making  macroprudential  decisions  within  the  banking  union  can  be  seen  as  a  useful 
complement to our framework so as to avoid the so called inaction bias in macroprudential 
policy. 
As  a  conclusion  and  positive  end  of  my  presentation,  let  me  recognise  the  very  good 
cooperation we have had not only between authorities from Banking Union countries but also 
with  authorities  outside  the  Banking  Union.  Indeed  a  lot  of  progress  has  been  made  to 
correct  basic  flaws  we  have  had  in  our  internationally  integrated  financial  markets.  And  in 
doing  that,  national  interests,  and  I  argue  that  banks'  interests  as  well,  are  taken  care  of 
when matching regulatory and supervisory institutions with the reality of banking business. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
