Benoît Cœuré: Asset purchases as an instrument of monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the high-level conference on “Monetary Policy in the New Normal” organised by the IMF, 
Washington DC, 13 April 2014. 
 Thank you very much for inviting me to open this session on whether central banks should 
continue to target longer-term bond yields in normal times. My first instinct when presented 
with this question was to provide a rhetorical answer and say that to continue targeting long-
term bond yields one has first to have started doing it. And indeed, the ECB has so far only 
intervened in long-term bond markets, such as the covered bond market, to restore monetary 
policy transmission in malfunctioning market segments and help enforcing a given monetary 
policy stance. We have not so far resorted to a policy of targeted asset purchases that aim to 
alter the monetary policy stance – what is universally, if in my view inaccurately, referred to 
as quantitative easing. 
On  second thoughts,  however,  this  would  be  the  wrong  way  to  reply. It  would  not  only  be 
wrong because we have recently made clear that asset purchases are an instrument that we 
are  ready  to  use  if  we  deem  necessary.  It  would  also  be  the  wrong  answer  because  the 
question  of  whether  central  banks  should  target  longer-term  bond  yields  provides  a  good 
focal point to reflect on what monetary policy is trying to achieve in the first place. In other 
words, instruments are just the tail that wags the dog. 
Let me try and explain what I mean as concisely as possible. 
Focusing  specifically  –  and  at  the  risk  of  over-simplifying  the  issue  –  on  the  interest  rate 
channel  of  monetary  transmission,  monetary  policy  operates  by  raising  or  lowering  the 
interest rate in the economy. A lower (real) interest rate lowers the cost of capital for firms, 
encourages investment spending and stimulates consumption. A higher real interest rate has 
the opposite effect. 
But  the  point  of  course  is  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  one  interest  rate  to  which  all 
economic  agents  respond.  There  are  at  least  three  ways  in  which  interest  rates  are 
differentiated  in  the  euro  area.  There  is  vertical  differentiation  –  different  economic  agents 
are  sensitive  to  interest  rates  with  different  maturities.  There  is  spatial  differentiation  – 
different interest rate curves provide the reference rates in different jurisdictions. And there is 
horizontal  differentiation  –  within  jurisdictions,  different  markets  determine  firms’  and 
households’ cost of borrowing. 
What  this  implies  is  that  the  levels  of  medium-  and  long-term  real  interest  rates  across 
jurisdictions and markets will always be relevant to the formulation of monetary policy. The 
difference between normal and abnormal times is therefore not what we are trying to achieve 
– it is how we strive to achieve it. 
In  normal  times,  central  banks  affect  this  array  of  interest  rates  by  steering  the  overnight 
interest rate and influencing expectations. We do the former through setting policy rates and 
the  latter  by  communicating  transparently  our  reaction  function.  This  allows  market 
participants  to  form  reasonable  assumptions  about  future  short-term  rates,  which  in  turn 
allows our monetary impulses to be transmitted along the yield curve to longer-term interest 
rates. 
Monetary  policy-making  becomes  more  complicated,  however,  when  short-term  nominal 
rates reach the effective lower bound. Here, our ability to alter the monetary policy stance 
relies  comparatively  less  on  the  level  of  the  overnight  rate,  and  comparatively  more  on 
influencing expectations, i.e. on the shape of the yield curve. This is why central banks have 
introduced  forward  guidance,  which  is  enhanced  communication  on  the  expectations  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
reaction function of the central bank. It is essentially a natural extension of “normal” monetary 
policy. 
Forward guidance influences the long-term interest rate by acting on both its determinants. It 
helps steer expectations about the level of future rates. And it lowers uncertainty about this 
level – that is, reduces the time-value of money or the term premium. Yet, as an instrument it 
also  has  natural  limitations.  A  monetary  policy  committee  cannot  credibly  commit  to  keep 
interest rates low beyond its horizon of visibility. This is reflected in the specific wording of 
our forward guidance, in particular the fact that it is outcome-contingent. 
Hence,  should  further  monetary  accommodation  be  needed,  it  is  reasonable  to  consider 
other  operations  aimed  at  lowering  the  term  premium.  This  is  where  targeted  asset 
purchases enter the toolset of monetary policy. Targeted asset purchases mean operations 
aimed  primarily  at  impacting  the  level  of  the  term  premium  across  maturities  and  market 
segments. 
Consistent with public statements made by members of the ECB Governing Council recently 
– in particular our President, Mario Draghi, and my colleague on the board of the ECB, Peter 
Praet  –  I  would  like  to  make  a  few  qualifying  remarks  about  the  possible  use  of  such 
purchases by the ECB. 
First, at its meeting last week the Governing Council confirmed our baseline scenario – that 
is, a prolonged period of low inflation followed by a gradual rise in inflation rates towards 2%. 
Further monetary easing is therefore not excluded, but remains contingent on outcomes. 
Second, if such easing is called for, the Governing Council is unanimous in its commitment to 
use  also  unconventional  instruments  within  its  mandate.  The  question  we  face  is  whether 
asset  purchases  would  be  the  appropriate  unconventional  measure.  And  if  we  deem  that 
asset purchases would be appropriate, the question then becomes how we could implement 
such a policy in way that is useful and that complies with our mandate. 
This means, among other things, ensuring that any such purchases comply with the Treaty, 
keeping  in  mind  that  Article  18  of  the  ESCB  Statute  allows  the  ECB  and  national  central 
banks  to  operate  in  the  financial  markets  by  buying  and  selling  outright  claims  and 
marketable instruments. It also means guarding against operations that unduly distort market 
allocations or worse, that would have intended distributive effects. And it means designing a 
programme  that  is  effective  given  the  financial  structure  of  the  euro  area  –  where,  for 
instance, bank-based intermediation is pre-dominant and wealth effects through equity and 
real estate prices are less important transmission channels than, say, in the US. 
These  considerations  in  turn  imply  thinking  in  terms  of  the  three  forms  of  interest  rate 
differentiation that I described above. 
First, vertical differentiation – the relevant maturities at which asset purchases should take 
place. In practice, purchases would naturally be linked to the interest rate maturities that are 
most important for firms’ and households’ investment and consumption decisions. In the euro 
area, this tends to be the intermediate to longer part of the yield curve. 
Second,  spatial  differentiation  –  the  jurisdictions  across  which  asset  purchases  should  be 
spread. Here we would have to take into account the interest rates in different jurisdictions 
that provide the benchmarks for loan pricing. In the euro area, remember, there is no single 
yield curve that refers to a “commoditised” reference asset and that is equally relevant for 
loans to firms and households. Creating such an asset would ease the implementation of our 
monetary policy, but this cannot be a short term project. 
Third, horizontal differentiation – the markets within jurisdictions that asset purchases should 
target.  When  financial  markets  are  highly  integrated  with  a  high  degree  of  substitutability 
between assets, purchases in one asset class, such as government bonds, are more likely to 
affect  term  premia  across  all  asset  classes.  This  is  because  the  process  of  portfolio 
reallocation facilitates a relatively homogenous transmission. But given the segmentation of 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
euro area financial markets, this effect cannot just be assumed. To achieve a homogenous 
reduction of term premia across relevant interest rates, segmentation would have to be taken 
into consideration in our strategy. 
Overall, the yardstick for the success of any targeted asset purchases would not be the size 
of  our  balance  sheet,  but  the  observable  effect  of  our  operations  on  term  premia  across 
markets and jurisdictions. Or put differently, asset purchases in the euro area would not be 
about quantity, but about price. This is why I said that quantitative easing is a misnomer. 
However, whether reducing term premia would in turn be effective in reducing real interest 
rates  for  firms  and  households  depends  on  complementary  policies,  in  particular  the 
continued repair of the banking sector. For example, the sizeable reduction of spreads we 
have  witnessed  since  July  2012  has  not  in  itself translated  into  higher credit  volumes  and 
lower bank lending rates. This is largely because the restructuring of the euro area banking 
sector remains ongoing. Thus, an essential complement to any monetary policy strategy is a 
strict  implementation  of  the  ongoing  Comprehensive  Assessment  of  euro  area  banks  and 
swift corrective action to bridge identified capital shortfalls. 
Let me conclude. 
Unconventional monetary policy tools are less unconventional than the word implies. They 
are unusual, because they respond to highly unusual circumstances. They imply risks that 
have to be carefully weighed and mitigated. But fundamentally, unconventional tools are only 
a  means  for  central  banks  to  continue  doing  what  they  have  always  done:  managing 
aggregate  demand,  by  influencing  the  level  of  real  interest  rates  and  other  monetary 
transmission  channels,  to  maintain  price  stability.  To  borrow  from  Giuseppe  Tomasi  di 
Lampedusa, in these unusual times “everything must change, so that everything stays the 
same”.  It  is  this  that  will  determine  both  the  appropriateness  of  using  targeted  asset 
purchases in our monetary policy operations, and the design of any such purchases. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
