  Ewald Nowotny: Taking stock of the progress made towards a European 
banking union 
Opening remarks by Prof Dr Ewald Nowotny, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic 
of Austria, at the 42nd OeNB Economics Conference, Vienna, 12 May 2014. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
On behalf of the Oesterreichische Nationalbank, I am very pleased to welcome all of you to 
the OeNB’s 42nd Economics Conference here in Vienna. 
I am especially honored to welcome Sonja Steßl, State Secretary in the Austrian Ministry of 
Finance,  and  this  year’s  keynote  speakers,  Axel  A.  Weber,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of 
Directors of UBS, and Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank. We 
are  once  again  fortunate  to  have  a  distinguished  panel  of  speakers  and  discussants 
consisting of academics, policymakers from supervisory authorities and central banks as well 
as  financial  practitioners.  Thank  you  for  contributing  your  ideas  and  research  to  our 
conference. I would also like to take the opportunity to thank the staff members of the OeNB 
for their great efforts in organizing this event. 
At last year’s conference, we addressed the changing role for central banks, and today and 
tomorrow  we  are  going  to  follow  up  on  this  theme,  so  to  speak,  by  taking  stock  of  the 
progress  we  have  made  toward  a  European  banking  union.  Central  banks  have  assumed 
additional responsibilities in supervision, and conferring the role of single banking supervisor 
in the euro area on the European Central Bank is one of the cornerstones of the system of 
bank regulations that is commonly referred to as “banking union.” At this year’s conference, 
we will not only assess the effects the upcoming banking union will have for central banks, 
but we will also examine the consequences for economic policy, for the banking sector and 
for the economy at large. 
The term “banking union” has been coined in analogy to monetary union – and most likely 
also  to  political  union,  which  continues  to  be  an  overarching  aim  in  Europe.  What  does 
banking union stand for in a nutshell? It means that the key instruments of banking policy 
are being centralized at the European level with a view to strengthening and extending the 
supervision  and  the  resolution  of  banks.  The  aim  of  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism 
(SSM),  designed  to  reduce  the  probability  and  severity  of  banking  crises,  is  mainly 
preventative, whereas the Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM) and the Bank Recovery and 
Resolution  Directive  (BRRD)  are  primarily  remedial,  designed  to  protect  national  public 
finances from the consequences of bank failure. 
Even if the banking union’s setup may be deemed by many as being far from perfect – and 
we will have ample opportunity to discuss its flaws and imperfections in the next two days – 
the  very  fact  that  this  project  has  been  brought  on  track  shows  that  European  decision 
makers are able to act, and reach a consensus, on important matters in a timely manner. 
Creating the legal framework of banking union has taken less than two years: At the June 
2012 EU summit, the heads of state or government announced their intention to transfer key 
instruments  of  banking  policy  to  the  European  level,  and  last  month,  the  European 
Parliament approved the SRM and thus the final pillar. Given the complexity of the matter, 
this has been rather swift, not only by European decision-making standards. 
The motion to set up a banking union has been an integral part of the response to the crisis. 
Consequently,  banking  union  must  be  seen  in  the  wider  context  of  the  new  European 
financial  architecture.  The  crisis  exposed  a  host  of  weaknesses  in  the  banking  sector, 
ranging  from  a  dramatic  increase  of  nonperforming  loans,  which  required  banks  to  repair 
their balance sheets and triggered a process of deleveraging, to an impaired profitability that 
undermined the capacity of banks to retain earnings. This brought about a considerable loss 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  of  confidence  within  and  into  the  banking  system,  and  banks’  refinancing  conditions 
deteriorated  severely  as  a  result.  Moreover,  as  these  effects  varied  across  euro  area 
countries, the trend toward greater financial market integration that had been observed since 
the  start  of  monetary  union  went  into  reverse,  and  market  fragmentation  increased  again. 
The  crisis  also  revealed  flaws  in  the  institutional  framework  of  the  European  banking 
markets,  which  continued  to  be  regulated  at  the  national  level  despite  the  far-reaching 
integration of the euro area financial market. 
From  a  short-term  perspective,  announcing  the  “banking  union”  project  and  taking  steps 
toward its implementation have – together with other measures – already reassured markets, 
as can be seen for instance in the stark reduction of risk spreads over the past two years. 
However, the full benefits of this project will materialize only over the long term. While not 
“curing” the current crisis, the banking union will help prevent and mitigate future problems in 
the banking sector. 
Banking union is aimed primarily at breaking the nexus between government and banks 
and to decouple sovereign creditworthiness from banks’ creditworthiness in a given country. 
Under the current setup, when bank solvency is put into question, the looming restructuring 
implies  a  heavy  financial  burden  for  the  sovereign,  which  increases  doubt  over  the 
creditworthiness  of  this  particular  state.  According  to  Eurostat  data,  public  interventions  in 
support  of  financial  institutions,  such  as  direct  recapitalizations,  overall  fiscal  support 
measures  and  the  nationalization  of  banks,  are  reflected  in  a  cumulative  5  %-of-GDP 
increase in the national debt of euro area countries until 2013. However, this link between 
weak sovereigns and weak banks works both ways. As sovereign bonds account for a large 
share  of  bank  assets,  doubts  about  sovereign  creditworthiness  directly  translate  to  a  re-
evaluation of banks’ assets, and consequently to doubts about the solvency of these banks. 
In the future, the SRM will ensure that the costs of bank failure are borne first and foremost 
by the private sector, with sovereigns providing funds only in exceptional circumstances. The 
SRM  structure  is  explicitly  based  on  the  principle  that  any  losses  are  to  be  borne  by 
shareholders and creditors and that any public assistance should only be transitory and be 
recouped  by  means  of  ex  post  levies  on  the  banking  sector.  By  improving  private  risk-
sharing, the banking union will importantly sever the link between financial system instability 
and  resulting  threats  to  fiscal  sustainability  of  individual  euro  area  countries,  especially 
smaller ones. 
The  high  risk  premiums  some  banks faced  in  refinancing markets  meant  that they  did  not 
benefit from the low interest-rate environment provided for by the accommodative monetary 
policy  stance  of  the  ECB.  Consequently,  they  were  not  in  a  position  to  pass  on  these 
favorable  interest  rates  to  their  customers.  Therefore,  in  some  countries,  the  low  interest 
rates and unconventional measures did not feed through to the customer level. Decoupling 
the correlation between the cost of funding of euro area banks and that of their respective 
sovereigns  will  remove  an  impediment  to  the  proper  functioning  of  monetary  policy 
transmission and will ease the fragmentation of banking markets. In a number of euro area 
countries  under  stress,  not  only  had  interest  rates  for  loans  remained  elevated,  but  also 
volumes of bank loans had contracted during the crisis. When this contraction had been due 
to tighter credit standards as a result of banks’ impaired access to market funding, breaking 
this  link  should  benefit  the  private  sector,  and  especially  the  corporate  sector,  in  these 
countries. In Austria, loan developments had been less worrisome, and the corporate sector 
has not so far suffered from credit constraints witnessed in the euro area as a whole. 
Banking union is expected to increase the efficiency of financial intermediation by banks. 
In a bank-based economy like the euro area, this is particularly relevant, because enterprises 
rely to a much greater extent on banks for funding than e.g. firms in the U.S.A. According to 
a recent ECB report, loans on bank balance sheets account for close to 50 % of nonfinancial 
corporate  debt  in  the  euro  area,  but  only  20  %  in  the  U.S.A. Therefore, strengthening the 
banking system is also essential for the real sectors of the economy, as more resilient banks 
are much more effective in performing their vital functions vis-à-vis the real economy. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  First of all, a credible and respected supervisor together with clear rules on bank resolution 
will  reduce  the  uncertainty  premiums  that  many  European  banks  currently  pay  on  their 
refinancing. As the ECB is set to be an exacting and respected supervisor, banks subjected 
to  its  supervision  will  enjoy  high  confidence,  and  this  should  result  in  a  reduction  of  the 
uncertainty  premiums.  Moreover,  the  principle  of  bail-in  in  case  of  bank  failures  and  the 
uniform cascade of liability as it is laid out in the Banking Recovery and Resolution Directive 
(BRRD)  will  help  strengthen  market  discipline,  although  the  ensuing  effects  on  banks’ 
funding costs will differ depending on the structure of their liabilities. In some cases, this may 
entail additional costs, as banking industry representatives have pointed out. For example, 
unsecured creditors that until now have almost always avoided a bail-in will demand higher 
risk  premiums.  At  the  same  time,  deposits  can  be  expected  to  become  less  sticky,  which 
again might exert upward pressure on funding costs (which will definitely be the case with the 
annual  contributions  to  the  Resolution  Fund,  scheduled  at  EUR  5.5  billion).  But  overall, 
banking union will result in a more stable refinancing structure of the banking sector and thus 
enable banks to better contribute to the economy. 
Likewise,  banking  union  will  be  a  strong  incentive  for  banks  to  improve  their  risk 
management.  Yet,  while  it  is  certainly  one  of  the  central  aims  of  banking  union  to  make 
banks’  lending  policies  more  risk  sensitive,  supervisors  will  also  have  to  bear  in  mind  the 
impact their actions have on the real economy. Banks’ willingness and ability to share the 
risks of the real sectors of the economy lies at the heart of the house bank principle that 
prevails in much of the euro area (and certainly in Austria). Close long-term relationships with 
their customers have so far enabled banks to continue financing enterprises and projects that 
are relevant to the economy also in times of less favorable cyclical conditions. Without doubt, 
the  issue  of  forbearance  has  to  be  addressed  properly;  however,  banks  that  immediately 
take  action  on  the  first  signs  of  a  customer’s  potential  default  do  not  fulfill  their  economic 
function  properly.  Vice  versa,  banks  that  persistently  fail  to  take  measures  against 
nonperforming debtors would not fulfill their function as intended, either. Overall, even if this 
ability of banks to share risks with the nonfinancial sectors were to be preserved, it can be 
expected to diminish. Capital markets are likely to gain in importance for corporate finance. 
However,  as  this  funding  option  is  available  primarily  to  larger  companies,  this  leaves  the 
issue of SME finance. 
Let me now turn to the institutional design of banking union. For one thing, this project is also 
aimed  at  remedying  political  weaknesses  in  the  supervision  process.  In  regulation 
economics,  the  term  “regulatory  capture”  refers  to  a  phenomenon  when  regulators  or 
supervisors end up identifying too strongly with the interest of those they were charged with 
regulating.  I  do  not  think  that  this  theoretical  concept  is  very  relevant  for  the  role  of  the 
Oesterreichische  Nationalbank  and  can  imagine  that  the  Austrian  bankers  present  in  this 
room  are  not  always  too  happy  about  that.  But  generally  speaking,  once  supervision  is 
elevated to the more remote European level, supervisors are expected to be less prone to 
“deal making” and forbearance might be less likely to occur – which could, of course, add to 
the increasingly pro-cyclical effects of the newly emerging supervisory structure in Europe. 
An  entire  session  of  the  conference  will  be  devoted  to  this  aspect  and  we  will  be  able  to 
discuss these problems in more detail. Monetary policy making was centralized one and a 
half  decades  ago,  and  now  banking  supervision  is  about  to  follow  suit,  which  can  be 
regarded as a further decisive building block in completing economic and monetary union. 
The course of events during the crisis has shown that safeguarding financial stability is a key 
theme for central banks. What is, however, less clear is the exact definition of the role central 
banks  are  supposed  to  play  in  this  context.  Just  think  of  the  microprudential  versus  the 
macroprudential  aspects  of  supervision.  There  cannot  be  any  doubt  that  macroprudential 
policy is a task for central banks. Macroprudential policy, aiming to identify, prevent and 
mitigate  systemic  risks,  was  recognized  as  an  important  instrument  early  on  during  the 
process  of  drawing  lessons from the  crisis. While  not  being  directly  part  of  banking  union, 
macroprudential policy is a precondition for the proper functioning as macro system instability 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  can put individual banks at peril. Therefore, the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) was 
established in 2010, well ahead of the SSM and SRM, to add a new systemic perspective to 
supervision. Nevertheless, when we talk about the microprudential supervision of individual 
banks,  the  role  for  central  banks  is  less  clear  cut.  The  SSM  was  established  under  the 
responsibility of the ECB in order to avoid changes to the EU treaties. The legal basis for the 
banking union reform was Article 127(6) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European 
Union, which allows for conferring specific tasks concerning policies relating to the prudential 
supervision of credit institutions upon the ECB. 
Let  me  note  in  this  context  that  the  supervision  of  individual  banks  is  not  an  overly 
attractive  task.  When  it  works  well,  nobody  will  notice,  but  if  not,  it  entails  considerable 
reputation risks. Moreover, there might be conflicts of interest between banking and financial 
system stability and the price stability objective of the central bank (something we discussed 
at  our  last  year’s  conference). While  political  economy  considerations  explain  why,  at  this 
point  in  the  euro  area’s  history,  the  SSM  needs  to  be  hosted  by  the  ECB,  we  should 
nevertheless always bear these risks and potential conflicts in mind. Having said this, there is 
a strong argument for keeping the Resolution Agency clearly separate from the ECB. 
Frictions  may  arise  between  national  and  European  supervisors,  between  the  various 
supervisory institutions at the European level or within the resolution regime, where the tasks 
to  be  solved  are  complex  and  the  intricacy  of  the  decision-making  process  is  especially 
pronounced. These complexities might give rise to operational concerns and therefore need 
to be properly addressed right from the start as only the most stringent implementation and 
enforcement can restore confidence in the banking system and the institutional framework. 
Another  point  of  criticism  is  that  banking  union  only  covers  deposit-taking  institutions. 
Apart  from  competitive  aspects,  this  contradicts  the  lessons  from  the  financial  crisis  of 
2007/2008,  which  exposed  risks  to  financial  stability  that  resided  outside  the  traditional 
banking sector. Thus, there is a danger that intensified regulation in the banking sector might 
cause important and risky business activities to be shifted into less regulated areas such as 
shadow banking entities. 
Competitive  distortions  could  also  arise  from  a  failure  to  establish  a  genuine  Single  Rule 
Book  and from  the  discretion  that  national  authorities  maintain  regarding, for  example, the 
implementation  of  macroprudential  tools.  Notable  national  differences  in  supervision  might 
therefore  remain  in  place;  in  other  words,  the  playing  field  would  then  not  be  completely 
level. On the other hand, it may be argued that there should be scope for some degree of 
differentiation  below  the  euro  area  level.  After  all,  different  cultures  and  languages  will 
continue  to  exist  within  the  euro  area.  In  the  same  vein,  the  question  remains  if  the  new 
supervisory system is apt to address national problems properly. For instance, there will still 
be national or local financial cycles, as has been the case for business cycles to this day. As 
small banks will remain within the remit of national supervisory authorities, there will in any 
case be the need for a two-tier supervisory regime. 
Banking  union  will  not  only  affect  relationships  among  the  various  players  within  the  euro 
area,  but  also  relationships  with  players  outside  the  euro  area.  The  fact  that  banking 
union currently only covers the euro area may give rise to competitive concerns. To be sure, 
all EU countries can be expected to benefit indirectly from banking union via a more stable 
financial system in the participating countries. But let me stress here that it would be in the 
interest of all if as many countries as possible decided to join. Banks domiciled in countries 
that opt to join will enjoy the reputational gains from being subject to the same supervisory 
standards as their euro area peers, which might for instance dampen risk premiums on their 
debt.  Obviously,  this  might  encourage  a  number  of  Central,  Eastern  and  Southeastern 
European countries which are not (yet) part of the euro area to join banking union. 
To  conclude,  centralizing  banking  policy  at  the  European  level  undoubtedly  constitutes  a 
milestone  in  deepening  and  completing  the  euro  area’s  economic  and  institutional 
integration. At the same time, banking union is of course no panacea, and in itself does not 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  solve  the  problems  surrounding  banks.  Furthermore,  the  problems  of  the  banking  sector 
were  by  no  means  the  only  reason  behind  weak  growth,  rising  government  debt  or 
fragmentation  in  the  euro  area.  Banking  union  can  therefore  only  be  one  –  albeit  an 
important  –  element  in  the  overall  set  of  measures  which  are  instrumental  in  putting  the 
future development of the euro area on a more sound economic and institutional footing. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I hope one thing has become obvious from my short remarks: the European banking union, 
while  being  an  important  step,  will  require  a  lot  of  work  in  its  implementation  and  in  the 
process will require a lot of further thinking, creative problem solving and persistent work. I 
am confident that today’s and tomorrow’s distinguished lineup of speakers will shed light on a 
number of challenges that have yet to be tackled on the road toward full banking union. I very 
much  look forward  to  two  days  of  lively  discussions  with  all  of  you,  given  the  multitude  of 
perspectives represented here. I hope you will find our conference useful and insightful. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
