  Ravi Menon: Getting in all the cracks or targeting the cracks? Securing 
financial stability in the post-crisis era 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Ravi  Menon,  Managing  Director  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of 
Singapore, at the Asian Monetary Policy Forum (AMPF), Singapore, 24 May 2014. 
 Monetary policy at the crossroads 
1 
Professor  Tan  Chorh  Chuan,  President  of  the  National  University  of  Singapore, 
distinguished  guests,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  good  morning,  and  welcome  to  the  inaugural 
Asian Monetary Policy Forum. Thank you all for coming. 
2 
I would like to particularly thank Steve Davis of Chicago Booth and Bernie Yeung of 
NUS Business School. It was your vision and tireless effort that made this Forum possible. 
You  have  assembled  here  a  dazzling  array  of  eminent  economists  and  respected 
practitioners to discuss and debate the most pressing questions in monetary policy today. 
3 
One of these questions must be: what role should monetary policy play to help secure 
financial  stability?  For  two  decades  before  the  Global  Financial  Crisis,  central  bankers 
thought  they  had  found  the  secret  sauce  of  monetary  policy.  The  recipe  was  simple  –  an 
independent central bank, a single target (price stability) and a single instrument (the interest 
rate).  Monetary  policy  was  directed  at  achieving  price  and  output  stability,  with  the  central 
bank’s reaction function well-characterised by the Taylor rule on an ex-post basis. 
4 
The  recipe  worked  brilliantly.  Sustained  price  stability  and  steady  economic  growth 
were the order of the day. The result was the Great Moderation. Indeed, monetary policy was 
getting boring. 
5 
Monetary  policy  was  unencumbered  by  financial  stability  considerations.  To  be  fair, 
central  bankers  were  not  unconcerned  about  financial  stability.  But  financial  stability  was 
seen as the preserve of prudential regulation and supervision. Academic thinking reinforced 
policy  practice:  the  macroeconomic  models  central  banks  relied  on  did  not  map  clear 
linkages between financial and real variables. 
6 
Economists warned that it was difficult to identify a financial bubble. How does one tell 
if  the  value  of  an  asset  reflected  economic  fundamentals  or  speculative  fever?  So,  when 
faced with potential financial vulnerabilities, it was deemed better to clean up after a bubble 
had actually burst than to try to lean against suspected bubbles. 
7 
But  beneath  the  still  waters  of  macroeconomic  stability,  deadly  financial  whirlpools 
were  forming.  Financial  imbalances  built  up  steadily  in  the  advanced  economies  from  the 
mid-1990s  to  mid-2000s  and  culminated  in  the  Global  Financial  Crisis  of  2008/2009.  The 
Crisis sent financial systems into a tailspin and plunged economies into recession. The cost 
of  cleaning  up  after  the  bubble  had  burst  proved  extremely  high.  The  “clean  versus  lean” 
debate  has  been  re-ignited,  and  within  the  “lean”  camp  there  are  differences  over  how  to 
lean. Monetary policy has become interesting again. 
Financial stability: what we know and what we don’t know 
8 
Following the Crisis, there has been growing consensus that it is important for central 
banks to pay more attention to financial stability. We know now that macroeconomic stability 
does  not  guarantee  financial  stability.  Nor  does  prudential  supervision  of  individual 
institutions guarantee financial stability at the systemic level. 
9  We also have a much better appreciation of how credit cycles have strong implications 
for financial stability. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
     Moritz Schularick and Alan Taylor describe financial crises as “credit booms gone 
wrong”.1 Risks to financial stability stem from both the pace of credit creation as well 
as the level of credit. 
Claudio Borio and Piti Disyatat argue that the amplitude of financial cycles, such as 
for credit, exceeds that of business cycles due to what he calls “excess elasticity” of 
the financial system. Cross-border financial flows amplify domestic credit booms and 
domestic monetary policy fails to constrain the credit creation process adequately. 
Frederic  Mishkin  warns  how  the  bursting  of  credit-fuelled  asset  price  bubbles  can 
lead  to  episodes  of  financial  instability  that  are  particularly  damaging  for  the 
economy. 
10  These findings help us better understand the conditions that led to the Global Financial 
Crisis.  And  the  concerns  remain  valid  in  the  post-Crisis  environment.  Central  banks  have 
kept policy rates low for long, and purchased assets in large quantities further out along the 
yield curve. 
• 
Even  though  the  United  States  is  already  “tapering”  its  asset  purchases,  global 
financial conditions remain extremely loose. 
There are signs of growing risk-taking: in the form of leveraged loans, covenant-lite 
corporate bonds, and narrowing spreads on sub-investment grade paper. 
The risks to financial stability are nowhere near pre-Crisis levels, but they bear close 
watching. We must not repeat the mistakes of the past. 
  11  But there is as yet no consensus on how to secure financial stability and, in particular, 
what role, if any should be played by monetary policy. 
12  There are three broad approaches to these questions. 
• 
The  first  is  to  stick  to  the  status  quo.  Monetary  policy  remains  focused  on  price 
stability  and  no  recourse  is  made  to  macroprudential  policy  beyond  the  use  of 
capital buffers to pre-empt insolvencies. 
In  the  second  approach,  monetary  policy  explicitly  takes  account  of  financial 
stability in addition to price stability. 
Under the third approach, monetary policy remains focused on price stability, while 
financial stability is secured with the help of macroprudential policy. 
  13 
I  will  keep  my  remarks  on  the  first  approach  brief  as  it  is  well-known  and  is  still  the 
dominant practice in most central banks today, especially in the advanced economies. Under 
this  inflation  targeting  approach,  monetary  policy  will  not  try  to  respond  to  credit  cycles  or 
asset bubbles unless they have a demonstrable impact on inflation outcomes. 
• 
As  Lars  Svensson  puts  it,  flexible  inflation  targeting  “remains  the  best-practice 
monetary policy before, during, and after the financial crisis”. 
John  Taylor,  who  will  address  us  this  evening,  provides  a  more  rule-based 
characterisation of this approach through the Taylor rule. 
He  finds  that  if  monetary  policy  in  the  US  had  been  appropriately  configured  to 
macroeconomic  outcomes  in  the  2000s,  the  housing  boom  would  have  ended  in 
2003 instead of 2006 and that mortgage debt levels would not have risen so high. 
  14 
Let me now take up the second and third approaches in more detail. 
                                                
1  The phrase is taken from Eichengreen and Mitchener’s 2003 BIS working paper on “The Great Depression as 
a Credit Boom Gone Wrong”. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Monetary policy: getting in all the cracks 
15  The  intellectual  underpinning  for  the  second  approach  is  based  on  the  insight  that 
monetary  policy  has  the  potential  to  affect  financial  stability  through  the  “risk-taking 
channel”.2 
• 
Jeremy Stein puts it succinctly – “Monetary policy is fundamentally in the business 
of altering risk premiums”. 
Loose monetary policy can heighten vulnerabilities in the financial system by altering 
16 
both the perception of risk and the tolerance for risk. 
• 
In conventional monetary policy, lower policy rates boost incomes and profits, and 
enhance  asset  and  collateral  values.  This  reduces  banks’  estimated  probability  of 
defaults and losses, leading to greater leverage and risk-taking. 
In  unconventional  monetary  policy,  large  scale  asset  purchases  by  central  banks 
depress  returns  along  the  entire  yield  curve.  This  provides  asset  managers  the 
incentive to take on more risk, often in a herd-like fashion. 
 17  When interest rates are below the natural rate at which desired investment and savings 
equilibrate, banks will continue to expand credit. When economic agents are determined to 
take risks, they will find ways to circumvent measures that central banks and regulators have 
put  in  place.  Non-monetary  tools  like  macroprudential  policy  will  therefore  not  adequately 
address the root problem caused by interest rates that are too low. 
18  Under these circumstances, only monetary policy can “get in all of the cracks” to plug 
the  vulnerabilities.  An  increase  in  short-term  interest  rates  will  trigger  a  more  realistic 
evaluation of asset and collateral values, income flows, and thus risks. This will curtail the 
extent  of  leverage  created  by  banks  and  capital  markets  and  keep  asset  managers  from 
crowding into risky assets. The effects of monetary policy are all-pervasive, and cannot be 
easily circumvented. 
19  This approach, if formalised, amounts to augmenting the Taylor rule with an additional 
term  to  capture  deviations  in  financial  variables  from  their  equilibrium  levels.3  If  financial 
market imbalances are growing, ceteris paribus, monetary policy should be tightened, even if 
it causes further deviations in output from potential in the short term. This approach does not 
preclude the need for robust financial regulation and supervision. But the key is to get the 
price of money right, to encourage a more realistic perception and tolerance of risks. 
20  While  no  central  bank currently  implements monetary  policy  in  this  way,  the  concept 
behind the approach may not be as abstract as it seems. I know from my conversations with 
central  bankers  that  they  do  not  ignore  financial  stability  considerations  when  setting 
monetary policy. 
Why “getting in all of the cracks” may not always work 
21  Relying  solely  on  monetary  policy  to  secure  financial  stability  may  not  always  be 
sufficient. Let me offer three reasons why. 
• 
First,  monetary  policy  could  be  constrained  by  its  traditional  mandate:  price  and 
output stability. 
                                                
2  Borio and Zhu (2012) coined the term “risk-taking” channel of monetary policy to refer to the transmission of 
monetary policy through its impact on asset and collateral values, which would consequently influence agents’ 
willingness to take on risk. 
3  The augmented Taylor Rule equation is: it = πt + rt
* + απ(πt – πt
*) + αy(yt – yt
*) + αf(ft – ft
*) , where f is a variable 
that measures financial market vulnerability, and f* is the equilibrium level of that variable.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Second, monetary policy could be constrained by global financial factors. 
Third, monetary policy may get in all the cracks, but it may not be able to fill some of 
them. 
 I  will  touch  on  each  of  these  considerations  in  turn,  drawing from  the  Asian  experience  in 
recent years. 
22  First, it is possible that there is a conflict between the objectives of price stability and 
financial stability in the short term. Financial cycles have longer frequencies than business 
cycles, and the two cycles tend to diverge. The interest rate appropriate for price and output 
stability  may  therefore  not  be  consistent  with  financial  stability.  This  has  been  the  case  in 
Asia in recent years. 
23  When Asian economies recovered fairly quickly from the Global Financial Crisis, their 
central  banks  raised  interest  rates.  This  was,  by  a  happy  coincidence,  congruent  with  the 
need  to  stem  rapid  credit  growth  that  was  being  fuelled  by  improved  economic  prospects 
domestically and easy monetary conditions globally. 
24  But  subsequently,  economic  activity  in  Asia  started  slowing  down,  following  the 
Eurozone  debt  crisis  and  other  domestic  shocks.  It  became  untenable  for  Asian  central 
banks to raise interest rates further. However, risk-seeking capital flows continued washing 
into the region, inducing further increases in credit and asset prices. The business cycle and 
financial cycle began to diverge. 
25  A  second  constraint  on  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  to  deal  with  domestic 
financial  stresses  is  the  prominent  role  played  by  international  liquidity  in  fuelling  these 
stresses. 
• 
Philip Lane has detailed the strong inter-linkages between global liquidity conditions, 
international debt flows, and domestic credit conditions. 
Hélène  Rey  has  observed  that global  liquidity  conditions  determined  by  advanced 
economies’  monetary  policies,  can,  at  times,  override  domestic  monetary  policy 
even with exchange rate flexibility. 
Maurice  Obstfeld,  who  will  speak  on  this  subject  in  a  few  minutes,  takes  a  less 
extreme view. He argues that monetary independence is still possible, but because 
of  the  impact  of  financial  globalisation,  monetary  policy  carries  a  much  bigger 
burden in trying to achieve both financial stability and purely macro objectives. 
  26  Recent  Asian  experience  is  illustrative.  The  exuberance  in  Asian  asset  markets  and 
consequent  build-up  of  financial  risk  in  recent  years  has  been  exacerbated  by  the  global 
search for yield in a zero interest rate environment. Raising policy rates may not sufficiently 
alter the level of risk-taking in these economies. 
• 
In fact, paradoxically, a central bank that tightens monetary policy to stem financial 
vulnerabilities could perversely attract more capital flows into the economy, resulting 
in stronger credit growth and rising asset prices. 
27  Third, it is not clear that monetary policy can fill all the cracks. Monetary policy flows 
into all the cracks no doubt, but some cracks are just too big to fill. 
28  Financial  vulnerabilities  are  not  evenly  spread  across  the  economy.  They  tend  to  be 
concentrated  in  specific  sectors  and  segments,  such  as  in  real  estate.  So,  even  when 
monetary policy has configured overall liquidity and risk-taking settings appropriately, specific 
pockets of financial market vulnerabilities, e.g. a property bubble, could remain. 
29  Monetary policy is too blunt an instrument for addressing such specific risks to financial 
stability, and it can cause significant collateral damage on the rest of the economy if it tries to 
do so. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     During  a  property  boom,  compared  to  interest  rates,  expectations  of  price 
appreciation may have a greater influence on current prices. 
Kenneth Kuttner and Illhyock Shim estimate that a 100 basis point increase in the 
short-term  interest  rate  would  lower  real  annualised  credit  growth  by  less  than 
1 percentage  point  in  the  following  quarter.  Such  a  rate  hike  will  also  reduce  real 
housing price growth by only 1 percentage point. 
Using monetary policy to prick a property bubble may therefore require very sharp 
increases in interest rates to be effective. But this may have unintended spillovers 
on other parts of the economy. 
to 
the 
to  securing 
third  approach 
Macroprudential policy: targeting the cracks 
30  This  brings  us 
financial  stability:  using 
macroprudential policy, while monetary policy continues to focus on price and output stability. 
Macro-prudential  policies  can  be  more  effective  for  “targeting  the  cracks”  where  specific 
vulnerabilities are concentrated. 
31  But what exactly are macroprudential policies? Given its recent rise to prominence, it is 
still  a  nebulous  concept  with  differing  definitions.  Let  me  offer  my  thoughts  on  what 
macroprudential  policy  is  and  what  it  is  not, from  the  perspective  of  Singapore,  which  has 
been an early experimenter and practitioner in this area. 
32  First, it is closely related to yet distinct from microprudential policy. Some have called 
macroprudential policy “old wine in new bottles”. Yes and no. Many of the tools are indeed 
the  same  as  the  microprudential  limits  familiar  to  regulators:  loan-to-value  ratios,  debt-to-
income ratios, debt service ratios, and so on. 
33  But  there  are  some  key  differences.  When  these  prudential  limits  are  used  for 
macroprudential purposes, the scope and impact are much larger. Let me give an example. 
• 
A loan-to-value ratio of 80% for property loans, applied through the cycles, as we 
have had in Singapore for many years, is a microprudential tool. 
But when we limit the loan-to-value ratio to 20% for a third property loan, as we have 
done in Singapore recently, it becomes a macroprudential measure. 
Macroprudential policy may well be old wine, but it is in much bigger bottles! 
34  Second, unlike monetary policy which has a single instrument, macroprudential policy 
requires a multi-dimensional approach. There is no single instrument that has a stable and 
reliable relationship with financial stability or asset price stability. 
35  Macroprudential  policies  encompass  more  than  just  counter-cyclical  capital  buffers. 
Adjusting capital requirements in a counter-cyclical fashion or increasing the risk weights for 
loans to vulnerable sectors cannot fill the cracks completely. In a boom market characterised 
by  keen  competition  among  banks,  higher  capital  charges  do  not  translate  into  sufficiently 
higher lending rates that can restrain demand. 
• 
A cross-country study by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision shows that a 
1  percentage  point  increase  in  capital  ratios  results  in  a  median  rise  in  lending 
spreads of only 13 basis points. 
 36  Dealing  with  the  magnitude  of  financial  cycles  or  bubble  dynamics  that  economies 
typically  face  from  time to  time  requires  some  absolute  prudential  limits.  In  Singapore,  we 
have employed the following limits on property loans: 
• 
Loan tenure cap of 35 years. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
 Loan-to-value ratios of 80%, 50%, and 40% for the first, second, and third property 
loans  respectively,  for  tenures  less  than  30  years;  for  loan  tenures  more  than 
30 years, the loan-to-value ratios are 60%, 30%, and 20%. 
Total debt-service ratio of 60%, taking into account all debt obligations and using a 
medium-term interest rate of 3.5% for residential properties. (Current mortgage rates 
are generally below 2%.) 
Cap on banks’ property-related exposures at 35% of their total exposures. 
• 
37 
In  fact,  macroprudential  policies  need  not  even  be  limited  to  prudential  tools  at  the 
disposal  of  central  banks  or  financial  regulators.  In  the  face  of  abundant  global  liquidity, 
credit-based  prudential  measures  may  not  constrain  loan  growth  or  asset  price  increases 
sufficiently. Singapore has therefore also adopted fiscal measures such as stamp duties on 
buyers and sellers of properties as part of the macroprudential toolkit. 
• 
The  seller’s  stamp  duty  ranges  from  4%  to  16%,  while  the  buyer’s  stamp  duty 
ranges from 3% to 18%. 
These are essentially transactions taxes that aim to curb the speculative flipping of 
properties. 
 38  Third, it is important to draw a distinction between macroprudential policies and capital 
flow  management  measures.  Capital  flow  measures  are  applied  “at  the  gate”  seeking  to 
regulate flows  into  and out  of  the  economy; macroprudential  measures are  applied  “inside 
the house” targeted at sectors where financial vulnerabilities are building up. 
• 
Capital  flow  measures  are  highly  distortionary  and  pose  long-term  costs  to  the 
economy.  Clearly,  such  measures  should  not 
the  place  of  needed 
macroeconomic adjustments. 
Capital flow measures may be warranted under extreme circumstances to safeguard 
financial stability. But as the IMF puts it, their implementation should be “targeted, 
transparent, and generally temporary”. 
take 
 39  Asian  economies  have  deployed  macroprudential  policies  to  deal  with  financial 
imbalances, to a greater extent than other economies. So far, the results have not been bad. 
They  have  largely  tempered  the  credit  cycle  and  the  pace  of  asset  price  increases,  while 
generally maintaining price and output stability. 
A synthesis? 
40 
Let  me  bring  together  the  main  strands  of  my  remarks.  The  view  that  central  banks 
ought to pay due consideration to financial stability is gathering momentum. I have described 
two alternative approaches to the status quo to achieving this: 
• 
The second approach incorporates financial stability considerations in the setting of 
monetary policy; and 
The third actively uses macroprudential policy to help secure financial stability. 
• 
41  Perhaps  the  differences  between  the  two  approaches  are  exaggerated.  Both 
approaches  require  the  central  bank  to  integrate  monetary  policy  functions  effectively  with 
prudential policies. 
• 
In  the  second  approach,  strong  supervisory  and  regulatory  policies  have  to  be  in 
place even as monetary policy adjusts the level of risk-taking in the economy. 
In  the  third  approach,  monetary  policy  must  be  appropriately  calibrated  to  the 
economy  for  macroprudential  measures  to  effectively  target  specific  areas  of 
imbalances. 
    6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  42 
In  practice, the  difference  between  the  two  approaches  is  likely  to  be  one  of  degree 
and  emphasis  rather  than  of  fundamental  principle.  Central  banks  will  choose  the  most 
appropriate  combination  of  the  two  approaches,  taking  into  account  the  structure  of  their 
economies and the nature of the threats to financial stability existing at any point in time. 
43  And let us not forget the continued relevance of the traditional approach. Just because 
central  bankers  had  previously  ignored  financial  stability  considerations  with  costly 
consequences,  we  must  not  overcompensate  now  by  placing  such  an  undue  burden  on 
monetary policy to secure financial stability, that it becomes detrimental to price and output 
stability. 
44  We do not need to reinvent macroeconomics. Nor do we need to discard most of what 
we  know  about  monetary  policy,  built  from  decades  of  rigorous  research  and  painful 
experience.  Much  of that knowledge  remains relevant.  In thinking  about the  so-called  new 
normal, we should pay equal heed to what is new and what remains normal. No doubt, we 
need to update our paradigms to meet new realities. But we do not need to overhaul them. 
45  We should also bear in mind that the current situation is highly unusual. We must not 
fall into the trap of believing that the innovative policy measures being taken now in response 
to these unusual conditions represent the basis for a new paradigm in the future. 
46 
policy regimes will not look drastically different from pre-Crisis days. 
• 
I suspect that when the dust has settled and more normal conditions return, monetary 
I think more central banks will have an eye to financial stability considerations – at 
least informally – when setting monetary policy. 
More  central  banks  are  also  likely  to  have  macroprudential  policy  toolkits  at  their 
disposal, which they will use from time to time but perhaps not on the scale that has 
been used in Asia in recent years. 
But  in  essence,  monetary  policy  will  remain  largely  focused  on  price  and  output 
stability – as it should be. 
  47  Perhaps as T S Eliot puts it, the end of all our exploring is to arrive where we started 
and know the place for the first time. 
48 
I wish you a successful conference. Thank you. 
References 
Bank for International Settlements (2010), “An assessment of the long-term economic impact 
of stronger capital and liquidity requirements”, Basel Committee of Banking Supervision. 
Borio,  C  and  Zhu,  H  (2012)  “Capital regulation,  risk-taking  and  monetary  policy:  a  missing 
link in the transmission mechanism?” Journal of Financial Stability, Vol. 8(4), pp. 236–251. 
Borio, C and Disyatat, P (2011), “Global imbalances and the financial crisis: link or no link?”, 
BIS Working Papers No. 346. 
Eichengreen, B J and Mitchener, K J (2003), “The Great Depression as a credit boom gone 
wrong”, BIS Working Papers No. 137. 
IMF  (2012),  “The  Liberalization  and  Management  of  Capital  Flows:  An  Institutional  View”, 
Staff Paper. 
Kuttner, K and Shim, I (2013), “Can Non-Interest Rate Policies Stabilise Housing Markets? 
Evidence from a Panel of 57 Economies”, BIS Working Papers No. 433. 
Lane,  P  R  (2014),  “International  Capital  Flows  and  Domestic  Credit  Conditions”, 
Macroeconomic  Review  Vol.  XIII(1),  Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore,  Economic  Policy 
Group. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  (2014), 
“Trilemmas  and  Tradeoffs:  Living  with  Globalization”,  paper 
Mishkin, F S (2008), “How Should We Respond to Asset Bubbles?”, speech at the Wharton 
Financial Institutions Center and Oliver Wyman Institute’s Annual Financial Risk Roundtable, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 15 May 2008. 
Obstfeld,  M 
commissioned for the Asian Monetary Policy Forum (draft). 
Rey,  H  (2013),  “Dilemma  not  Trilemma:  The  Global  Financial  Cycle  and  Monetary  Policy 
Independence”,  Proceedings  –  Economic  Policy  Symposium  –  Jackson  Hole,  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Kansas City. 
Schularick, M and Taylor, A M (2009), “Credit Booms Gone Bust: Monetary Policy, Leverage 
Cycles and Financial Crises, 1870–2008”, NBER Working Paper No. 15512. 
Stein, J C (2014), Comments on “Market Tantrums and Monetary Policy”, speech at the 2014 
U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, New York, 28 Feb 2014. 
Svensson,  L  E  O  (2009),  “Flexible  inflation  targeting  –  lessons  from  the  financial  crisis”, 
speech at the workshop “Towards a new framework for monetary policy? Lessons from the 
crisis”, organized by the Netherlands Bank, Amsterdam, 21 September 2009. 
Taylor, J B (2007), “Housing and Monetary Policy”, NBER Working Paper No. 13682. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
