K C Chakrabarty: Human resource challenges in Indian banks – 
“foolproofing” the employees 
Keynote address by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at 
the  Conference  of  HR  Heads  of  Banks  and  Financial  Institutions,  held  at  College  of 
Agricultural Banking, Pune, 6 February 2014. 
 1. 
Smt.  Meena  Hemchandra,  Principal,  College  of Agricultural  Banking (CAB),  Pune; 
Shri  R.K.Gupta,  Executive  Director,  Bank  of  Maharashtra;  delegates  to  the  Conference; 
ladies and gentlemen! I thank the Principal, CAB for inviting me to inaugurate this conference 
of HR heads of banks and financial institutions. I feel the choice of theme for the Conference 
i.e. “Future Proofing of Banking Personnel” is quite interesting. Given that this Conference is 
now in its 7th year, I wonder whether hitherto you have only been deliberating about “present 
proofing”  of  employees.  Given  the  enormous  challenges  that  the  banking  profession  has 
countered  over  the  last  few  years,  I  can’t  fault  you  for  doing  so.  The  larger  question  is 
whether  our  banks  have  now  reached  a  stage  where  they  can  feel  secure  about  their 
existence  in  future?  I  will  leave  that  debate  for  another  day  and  for  another  forum. 
Irrespective of the outcome of that debate, there is little doubt that the employees of banks 
will have a big role to play in whatever future course banks chart for themselves. Hence, the 
relevance of this brainstorming session on HR function is easily appreciated. 
2. 
So, let me now turn to the theme for the Conference. What do we want to achieve 
when  we  say  that  we  are  working  towards  “Future  Proofing  of  Banking  Personnel?”  The 
Collins English Dictionary describes a future-proof system as something which is guaranteed 
not to be superseded by future versions, developments, etc. More generally, a future proof 
system would be expected to have the following characteristics: 
Not easily destructible 
• 
Flexible and adaptable 
• 
Ability to weather extreme challenges 
• 
Non-obsolescence 
• 
3. 
On  an  individual  bank  level,  “Proofing”  could  also  mean  insulating  their  human 
capital  from  being  poached  by  the  rival  banks  and  also  planning  their  man  power 
requirements  for  meeting  the  future  needs  of  the  business.  Thus,  the  purpose  of  “Future 
Proofing” is to prepare the employees against adverse developments in future. Undoubtedly, 
the rapidly changing business environment and the impending entry of new banks are posing 
new  challenges  for  the  banks  in  terms  of  recruiting  skilled  personnel  and  retaining  the 
existing  talent,  but  the  larger  issue  is  whether  the  existing  crop  of  human  resources  are 
geared to perform optimally in the existing environment. With this consideration, I would like 
to give the theme of this Conference a wider sweep. You would agree that even in a benign 
economic environment with good economic growth as also with most banks having adopted 
technology,  the  productivity  and  efficiency  in  our  system  continues  to  be  at  extremely  low 
levels. Also, this period has witnessed significant increase in employee compensation across 
all cadres in the banking sector. So, the need is to not only prepare our banking personnel to 
face the adverse developments of future, but also to ensure that they perform optimally and 
take full advantage of a perfectly favourable environment. Hence, rather than attempting to 
“Future-Proof” the banking personnel, I would like the banks to attempt “Foolproofing” their 
employees. By “Foolproofing”, I mean preparing the employees to deliver what is expected of 
them.  In  that  sense,  the  employees  need  to  be  proofed  against  sub-optimal  performance 
under  all  circumstances,  whether  favourable  or  adverse.  In  my  address  today,  I  intend  to 
highlight the key challenges that the HR function in banks in India faces and the measures 
that  are  needed  for  foolproofing  the  banking  personnel  not  only  against  the  adverse 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
developments  but  also  adequately  equip  them  to  perform  to  their  optimal  potential  in  the 
“Business as Usual” conditions. 
Human Resource Management (HRM) in Indian banks 
4. 
HRM can essentially be summarized as a function that entails “planning, organizing, 
directing  and  controlling  of  activities  relating  to  the  development  of  employees  in  terms  of 
enabling them to acquire competencies needed to perform their present and future jobs with 
ease  and  enthusiasm”.  The  HR  function  in  banks  is  no  different  from  that  in  other 
organizations. It is a continuous process that seeks to ensure the development of employee 
competencies,  dynamism,  motivation  and  effectiveness,  in  a  systematic  and  planned 
manner. It also deals with bringing about improvements in physical capacities, relationships, 
attitudes,  values,  knowledge  and  skills  of  the  employees  for  achieving  the  objectives  for 
which  the  bank  stands.  If  you  ask  me  how  the  HR  function  has  fared  against  the 
expectations,  my  unqualified  answer  would  be  that  they  have  failed  miserably.  Part  of  it, 
especially  in  the  case  of  Public  Sector  Banks  (PSBs),  can  be  blamed  on  the  quality  and 
competence  of  people  that  manage  the  HR  function  in  these  institutions.  Quite  often,  the 
officials  in  HR  departments  virtually  have  no  expertise  or  training  in  HR  management  and 
they  land  there  more  as  a  matter  of  providence  than  by  design.  The  failure  of  the  HR 
personnel in the banks and its impact on their performance has also got partly masked due 
to lack of competition in the banking segment. 
5. 
In  fact,  until  the  opening  of  the  economy  in  the  early  90s,  the  banks  in  India 
generally  neglected  the  human  resource  function.  As  I  mentioned  earlier,  this  apathy  may 
largely be attributed to lack of competition and abundance of available opportunities which 
kept the banking sector profitable without breaking much sweat. Even after opening up of the 
sector, the Government control initially kept the wages under control. As availability of new 
jobs  in  other  sectors  in  the  post-liberalized  economy  improved,  the  banking  sector  started 
feeling  the  pinch.  Further,  with  the  entry  of  new  players  in  the  banking  sector  armed  with 
innovative products, the system as a whole and the older banks in particular started to face a 
widening  gap  in  skill  sets  of  human  resource.  The  new  Private  Sector  Banks  and  Foreign 
Banks  had  a  head  start  over  their  PSB  peers  as  on  the  back  of  a  market  related 
compensation  structure,  coupled  with  technology-supported  delivery  processes;  they  were 
able  to  acquire  younger  and  more  talented  staff  with  newer  skills  and  competencies.  The 
older banks, on the contrary, had to compete with the newer players with a huge baggage of 
disadvantages. The PSBs also lost trained man power to the newer banks due to attractive 
compensation  structure  and  better  career  progression  opportunities.  It  is  against  this 
backdrop that HR function in banking sector has not only assumed utmost significance but is 
also faced with myriad challenges that we would discuss. 
Foolproofing employees: HR challenges 
Defining job roles 
Having  set  the  broader  context,  let  me  now  turn  to  specifics.  What  are  the  HR 
6. 
challenges  in  the  banking  sector  and  how  can  we  “foolproof”  our  employees?  In  all  my 
interaction  with  HR  professionals  in  banks,  I  am  told  that  lack  of  people  is  the  biggest 
challenge. Obviously, finding enough people in one of the most populous nations in the world 
cannot be a challenge. So, what they actually mean is that they are saddled with too many 
non-performers. 
7. 
This  brings  me  to  the first  step  that  I  would  suggest  the  banks  to  initiate  towards 
making their employees “Foolproof” and I begin by asking a few fundamental questions: “Do 
you know how many people you need for carrying out all activities in your bank? Have you 
done  a  detailed  analysis  of  roles  and  responsibilities  of  each  individual  in  your  respective 
banks?  More  crucially,  do  all  desks  have  a  job  profile?”  At  least  in  the  banks  that  I  have 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
worked I have not seen a detailed job role of each individual or a job profile of each desk. 
Unless you do that, I am not sure how you can be sure of the number of people that you 
need.  Defining  job  role  of  each  desk  would  also  enable  an  assessment  of  the  skill  sets 
required to man that desk. Thus, it would also help the HR in mapping each desk function to 
the available manpower by imparting training to the existing staff or by recruiting appropriate 
people  with  the  desirable  skill  sets.  Also,  unless  you  have  a  detailed  job  role  for  each 
individual  how  can  you  make  a fair  assessment  of  whether  your  people  are  performing  or 
not? I will return to the subject of employee performance measurement in a little while. So, 
the first task for all of you is to define the job prolife for each desk. Believe me, the exercise 
could throw up some surprising outcomes as it might highlight the redundancies you have in 
certain job profiles. 
Performance Measurement System 
8. 
Let me now come to the second area which needs a thorough overhaul in most, if 
not all banks – the employees’ performance measurement system. Incentivizing talent with 
fairness and transparency is a key objective of HR managers and the goal of the promotion 
policy of every organization. A transparent performance management process enhances the 
abilities and morale of the human resource. As a part of the Top Management in all banks, 
wherever I have worked, I have faced a typical situation at the conclusion of every promotion 
exercise. Invariably, I hear from my HR department, that few people are “promotable” but not 
“postable” and then there are certain others who are “postable” but not getting promoted. The 
reason  for  emergence  of  such  a  situation  is  the  faulty  Performance  Management  System 
(PMS) that we have in the banks. The PMS is highly subjective or impressionistic and quite 
often  determined  by  factors  other  than  actual  performance  at  the  work  place.  In  fact,  I 
observe that performance rating of a big majority of the employees falls in the top quartile. 
But the HR continues to complain about not having adequate number of good people. This 
dichotomy highlights the failures of the existing PMS in banks. 
9. 
So, as I mentioned before, the way to make the PMS work, is to make it as objective 
an  assessment  as  possible.  We  need  to  identify  upfront  the  performance  benchmarks  for 
each individual and their performance and rating should follow from there. The objectivity in 
the  PMS  system  would  instill  more  discipline  in  the  way  performance  is  judged  across 
banking system today and enable the banks to devise their reward and motivations schemes 
accordingly.  A  related  question  is  how  do  you  deal  with  the  non-performers?  I  have  seen 
banks  with  list  of  top  performers  but  I  haven’t  seen  any  bank  having  a  list  of  top  non-
performers. There could be major potential gains from improving the performance of the top 
non-performers. An objective PMS will enable you to design your training and development 
programme based on the individual’s strength and weakness. The point I am trying to make 
is unless you put in place an objective performance management system, you would not be 
able to improve people and bring in a system of accountability. 
10. 
In  the  context  of  promotions,  I  have  a  question.  Why  do  you  need  a  grade/scale 
concept?  Why  people  should  move  up  vertically  in  the  banks?  Why  can’t  they  seek 
employment elsewhere if they need promotion and then come back to the same bank at a 
higher level? It is quite common in the private sector, why can’t we have the same in public 
sector as well. 
Training and development 
11. 
Let  me  now  turn  to  third  challenge  that  the  banks  need  to  overcome  for  Fool-
proofing their employees which is training & development. In fact, training and development 
remains one of the most maligned aspects of HR management in banks. I have observed 
utter disregard in the way employees are sent for training. Neither there is an earnest attempt 
made to assess the utility of training for the employee nor is there any exercise to map the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
training needs of the individuals on the basis of their core competencies or their placement. 
This, again is partly on account of lack of a definitive job profile for each functional area. 
12. 
Another  important  area  pertaining  to  training  is  behavioral  i.e.  the  attitude  part. 
Behavioral  training  focuses  on  exploring  the  unknown  and  hidden  potential  of  our  human 
resource,  which  we  call  as  human  capital.  With  most  banks  now  adopting  modern 
technology,  including  new  delivery  channels;  technology  no  longer  remains  a  major 
differentiator  among  banks.  You  must  remember  that  the  key  differentiator  amongst  the 
banks in the decade ahead will be the ability to harness the human capital and building a 
competitive  advantage  on 
the 
implementation  of  Basel  III,  banks’  return  of  equity  is  likely  to  go  down,  the  same  can  be 
recouped by improving the return on their human capital by enabling the ordinary people to 
produce extraordinary results so as to prop up their sinking bottom lines. 
13. 
I  would  also  like  to  utilize  this  opportunity  of  interacting  with  the  Heads  of  HR 
function  in  the  banking  sector  to  share  my  views  on  some  of  the  other  HR  issues  which 
would have a bearing on “Fool Proofing of the banking personnel” going forward. 
the  strength  of  their  human  resources.  While  with 
Employees compensation 
a) 
14. 
Finding  skilled,  experienced,  responsible  employees  is  a  challenge  for  human 
resource  departments  in  any  industry,  more  so  in  a  service-oriented  industry  like  banking. 
The main task of the HR policy of banks is to create a favourable atmosphere where people 
get  the  opportunity  to  showcase  their  potential  and  receive  adequate  compensation. 
Inadequacy  of  compensation  is  made  out  as  an  issue  in  the  PSBs,  which  encourages 
attrition. Let me set the record straight here. I have done comparative analysis of the staff 
compensation  in  the  public  sector  and  private  sector  banks  and  my  finding  is  that  the 
average compensation of the public sector bank employees is more than that of the private 
sector bank employees in this country. Add to that, the job security in a public sector and the 
scale tilts decisively in favour of the public sector. I think the challenge for the HR heads of 
PSBs  is  to  percolate  this  message  down  to  the  lower  levels.  It  will  help  in  tackling  the 
challenge of staff attrition and improve employee morale. 
15. 
A  related  issue  that  I  want  to  raise  is  why  do  public  sector  banks  still  conclude 
industry  level  wage  settlements  rather  at  individual  bank  level.  Some  of  the  banks  have 
precarious financial conditions and if forced to give a raise at par with other banks, that would 
severely  constrain  their  ability  to  do  business  going  forward.  Therefore,  in  the  long  term 
interest of the banks, it is necessary that each bank revises the wages of its employees as 
per its ability to pay. Further, why the PSBs cannot even do employee wise negotiations on 
salary hike as in the private sector? This would be a motivating factor for the performers. 
Differential salary structure 
b) 
16. 
The recruitment policy of the banks should be oriented towards having a right-sized 
and  right-skilled  workforce  in  tune  with  their  medium  to  long  term  business  plans.  For 
instance,  in  line  with  the  national  emphasis  on  financial  inclusion  and  spreading  banking 
services  to  unbanked  remote  areas,  it  may  be  necessary  to  bring  in  specialists  who  have 
knowledge of rural operations, agricultural finance, etc. and are willing to work in rural areas. 
In  this  context,  I  wish  to  raise  a  debatable  issue.  Should  the  PSB  Boards  not  consider 
appointing employees who would be willing to serve in the rural areas at lower wages? I think 
it is high time the PSB banks created a differential wage structure for the employees serving 
in various areas. The spin off benefit of this would be in terms of increased viability of their 
rural business and increased financial inclusion. 
Role of the top management 
c) 
17. 
In a service-oriented industry like banking, the quality of human resources has to be 
the central plank. Unless the organizations leverage the strength of their human resource to 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
the maximum, they would fail miserably in attaining a competitive edge in the global banking 
arena. This makes the role of the CMD and Board very crucial. The HR policy needs to be 
strategically  aligned  and  connected  with  business.  Given  the  criticality  of  HR  issues,  they 
need  to  be  debated  at  Board  level.  Boards  of  banks  need  to  spend  quality  time  on 
formulation  and  deliberation  of  strategies  involving  leadership  development,  succession 
planning for critical levels and specialized areas, performance standards, compensation and 
rewards  management,  redesign  of  organization  structure,  etc.  The  banks  need  to  have  a 
policy which clearly spells out the short term and long term HR agenda. The CMDs of the 
banks should spearhead and champion the HR functions to reduce people’s anxieties and 
simultaneously seek higher levels of productivity and performance. They should also frame 
policies which helps them manage the expectations of their staff, whether at the lower level 
or at the middle management level. 
Road ahead 
18. 
The  current  decade  is  already  proving  to  be  a  challenging  one  for  the  HR 
professionals in banks, particularly for those in the public sector banks. This is because of 
the significant number of employees retiring during this decade. This not only poses unique 
challenges but also presents opportunities for HR managers across the industry. At stake is 
a chance to transform HR practices and create a workforce that can provide individual banks 
with a strategic edge in an environment that is likely to become increasingly competitive in 
the days ahead. The “retirement decade” provides an opportunity, especially for the PSBs, to 
transform  their  work  force  by  hiring  the  right  talent,  right-sizing  and  right-skilling  them  and 
thereby bringing about a cultural transformation in the functioning of these banks. As the crop 
of  the  70s  bid  good  bye,  the  banks  have  moved  on  to  a  fast  paced  recruitment  spree  to 
welcome the gen next. The banks cannot afford to be complacent while recruiting new set of 
employees  as  their  recruitment  decisions  today  would  determine  the  performance  of  their 
respective organizations over the coming decades. They must use more statistical tools to 
foresee  their  manpower  needs  over  the  medium  to  long  term  and  prepare  themselves  by 
better  planning.  Sound  MIS  should  form  the  basis  of  all  manpower  planning  decisions 
including recruitment, placement, performance management, etc. The gap in knowledge and 
work experience between the outgoing and incoming groups is, however, significant and the 
impact  of  this  transition  could  be  potentially  disruptive.  This  gap  needs  to  be  filled  by 
“mentoring  and  coaching”  the  new  incumbents  by  senior  executives.  The  transfer  of 
knowledge  from  mentor  to  mentee  should  be  fast.  Moreover,  the  mentor  need  not  be 
physically present with the mentees; they can be together with the help of technology, sitting 
at two different places. 
19. 
Although the banks in India have come a long way, they still have a lot of catching 
up to do to reach international standards. The gap in service delivery standards, innovations 
in  products  and  services,  corporate  governance  standards,  creation  of  structured  financial 
solutions, etc. is still quite wide. Our efficiency and productivity levels do not compare well, 
even with Asian standards. Our Risk Management systems also need to be strengthened to 
match global standards. The HR function has a very significant part to play if our banks have 
to improve on these measures and reach global standards. 
20. 
We all know that banking in the future is going to be quite different from what we 
have  seen  and  experienced  in  the  past.  Hence,  we  must  be  willing  to  shed  the  methods, 
structures,  policies  and  technologies  that  succeeded  in  the  past  while  retaining  the  useful 
elements. Most importantly, our employees’ must get away from yesterday’s mindsets and 
you as the HR chiefs; have a very critical role in ensuring this transition. Technology is also 
compelling us to reinvent ourselves, our methods and our way of doing business. As Peter 
Drucker,  the  American  Management  Consultant  has  said  “we’re  in  one  of  those  great 
historical periods that occur every 200 to 300 years when people don’t understand the world 
anymore, when the past is not sufficient to explain the future”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Conclusion 
21. 
Going forward, the human resources function in banks would be a key differentiating 
factor.  HR  can  be  a  powerful  asset  or  a  debilitating  liability  depending  upon  how  well  it  is 
harnessed.  It  is  one  of  the  most  important  challenges,  rather  a  risk,  which  needs  to  be 
appropriately managed. For the bank employees to be “Foolproof”, the HR personnel would 
have to review their existing policies and practices and reorient them, wherever necessary. 
22. 
My  purpose  in  putting  forth  the  future  challenges  facing  the  banking  sector  is  to 
enable you to ideate and deliberate on them during the course of the Conference and come 
out with actionable ideas for reforming the HR in your respective banks. I would like to stress 
that the “People” factor will be at the centre stage and play a critical role in the transformation 
of  the  Indian  Banking  sector.  We  need  to  improve  their  skill  set,  mould  their  mindsets 
towards providing customer service and convert our human capital into high value factors of 
production. As future is always difficult to predict, we need not be too disheartened even if 
employees  are  not  fully  “Future-Proof”,  but  we  must  at  least  ensure  that  our  employees 
develop  a  sense  of  empathy  for  the  customers  and  do  their  best  to  serve  the  objectives 
towards  which  their  banks  are  committed.  Importantly,  the  inherent  unpredictability  in  the 
business environment makes it imperative for HR processes to be flexible and to imbibe this 
flexibility  and  adaptability  in  the  organization’s  ethos.  As  heads  of  HR  in  your  respective 
banks, it is your duty to optimally harness the potential of your human resources both in the 
present and in the future. As Thomas Edison said “there is always a better way”. We cannot 
be  complacent  even  with  our  employees  becoming  “Foolproof”  under  the  existing 
environment. We would need to remain alive to the changing business scenario and keep re-
visiting our policies and procedures to ensure that the employees stay prepared to face new 
challenges. The transformation of the HR function has to, necessarily, be top driven and I am 
sure  that  the  HR  heads  assembled  here  would  don  the  role  of  change  agents  in  their 
respective organization. 
I wish the Conference all success and wish you successful and purposeful deliberations. 
Thank you! 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
