  Daniel K Tarullo: Dodd-Frank implementation 
Testimony  by  Mr  Daniel  K  Tarullo,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal 
Reserve System, before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, US Senate, 
Washington DC, 9 September 2014. 
 Chairman  Johnson,  Ranking  Member  Crapo,  and  other  members  of  the  committee,  thank 
you for the opportunity to testify on the Federal Reserve’s activities in mitigating systemic risk 
and implementing the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-
Frank Act). In testifying before this committee in February, I noted my hope and expectation 
that  this  year  would  be  the  beginning  of  the  end  of  our  implementation  of  the  major 
provisions  of  the  Dodd-Frank  Act.  Seven  months  later,  we  are  on  track  to  fulfill  that 
expectation.  The  Federal  Reserve  and  other  banking  supervisors  have  continued  to  make 
progress in implementing the congressional mandates in the Dodd-Frank Act, promoting a 
stable financial system, and strengthening the resilience of banking organizations. In today’s 
testimony,  I  will  provide  an  update  on  the  Federal  Reserve’s  implementation  of  the  Dodd-
Frank  Act  and  describe  key  upcoming  regulatory  and  supervisory  priorities  to  address  the 
problems  of  “too  big  to  fail”  and  systemic  risk.  The  Federal  Reserve  is  committed  to 
continuing to work with our fellow banking agencies and with the market regulators to help 
ensure that the organizations we supervise operate in a safe and sound manner and are able 
to support activity in other sectors of the economy. 
As we complete our revisions to the financial regulatory architecture, we are cognizant that 
regulatory compliance can impose a disproportionate burden on smaller financial institutions. 
In addition to overseeing large banking firms, the Federal Reserve supervises approximately 
800 state-chartered community banks that are members of the Federal Reserve System, as 
well as several thousand small bank holding companies. In my testimony, I also will describe 
how the Federal Reserve is seeking to ensure that its regulations and supervisory framework 
are  not  unnecessarily  burdensome  for  community  banking  organizations  so  they  can 
continue their important function of safe and sound lending to local communities. 
Recent Dodd-Frank Act implementation milestones 
Since  the  passage  of  the  Dodd-Frank  Act  more  than  four  years  ago,  the  Federal  Reserve 
and  the  other  agencies  represented  at  this  hearing  have  completed  wide-ranging  financial 
regulatory  reforms  that  have  remade  the  regulatory  landscape  for  financial  firms  and 
markets. Internationally, at the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS), we have 
helped  develop  new  standards  for  global  banks  on  risk-based  capital,  leverage,  liquidity, 
single-counterparty  credit  limits,  and  margin  requirements  for  over-the-counter  derivatives. 
We have also worked with the Financial Stability Board (FSB) to reach global agreements on 
resolution  regimes  for  systemic  financial  firms  and  on  a  set  of  shadow  banking  regulatory 
reforms. 
Domestically,  we  have  completed  many  important  measures.  We  approved  final  rules 
implementing  the  Basel  III  capital  framework,  which  help  ensure  that  U.S.  banking 
organizations  maintain  strong  capital  positions  and  are  able  to  continue  lending  to 
creditworthy households and businesses even during economic downturns. We implemented 
the Dodd-Frank Act’s stress testing requirements, which are complemented by the Federal 
Reserve’s annual Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review. Together, these supervisory 
exercises provide a forward-looking assessment of the capital adequacy of the largest U.S. 
banking  firms.  Pursuant  to  section  165  of  the  Dodd-Frank  Act,  we  established  a  set  of 
enhanced standards for large U.S. banking organizations to help increase the resiliency of 
their  operations  and  thus  promote  financial  stability.  In  addition,  the  Federal  Reserve 
implemented a rule requiring foreign banking organizations with a significant U.S. presence 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  to establish U.S. intermediate holding companies over their U.S. subsidiaries and subjecting 
such  companies  to  substantially  the  same  prudential  standards  applicable  to  U.S.  bank 
holding  companies.  We  finalized  the  Volcker  rule  to  implement  section  619  of  the  Dodd-
Frank Act and prohibit banking organizations from engaging in short-term proprietary trading 
of  certain  securities  and  derivatives.  These  and  other  measures  have  already  created  a 
financial regulatory architecture that is much stronger and much more focused on financial 
stability than the framework in existence at the advent of the financial crisis. 
More recently, the Federal Reserve, often in tandem with some or all of the other agencies 
represented at this hearing, has made progress on a number of other important regulatory 
reforms. I will discuss those steps in more detail. 
Liquidity rules for large banking firms 
Last week, the Federal Reserve and the other U.S. banking agencies approved a final rule, 
consistent with the enhanced prudential standards requirements in section 165 of the Dodd-
Frank Act, which implements the first broadly applicable quantitative liquidity requirement for 
U.S. banking firms. Liquidity standards for large U.S. banking firms are a key contributor to 
financial  stability,  as  they  work  in  concert  with  capital  standards,  stress  testing,  and  other 
enhanced prudential standards to help ensure that large banking firms manage liquidity in a 
manner that mitigates the risk of creditor and counterparty runs. 
The rule’s liquidity coverage ratio, or LCR, requires covered banking firms to hold minimum 
amounts  of  high-quality  liquid  assets  –  such  as  central  bank  reserves  and  high-quality 
government  and  corporate  debt  –  that  can  be  converted  quickly  and  easily  into  cash 
sufficient  to  meet  expected  net  cash  outflows  over  a  short-term  stress  period.  The  LCR 
applies to bank holding companies and savings and loan holding companies with $250 billion 
or  more  in  total  consolidated  assets  or  $10  billion  or  more  in  on-balance-sheet  foreign 
exposures. The rule also applies a less stringent, modified LCR to bank holding companies 
and savings and loan holding companies that are below these thresholds but with more than 
$50 billion in total assets. The rule does not apply to bank holding companies or savings and 
loan  holding  companies  with  less  than  $50  billion  in  total  assets,  nor  to  nonbank  financial 
companies  designated  by  the  Financial  Stability  Oversight  Council  (FSOC).  The  Federal 
Reserve will apply enhanced liquidity standards to designated nonbank financial companies 
through a subsequently issued order or rule following an evaluation of each of their business 
models, capital structures, and risk profiles. 
The rule’s LCR is based on a liquidity standard agreed to by the BCBS but is more stringent 
than the BCBS standard in several areas, including the range of assets that qualify as high-
quality liquid assets and the assumed rate of outflows for certain kinds of funding. In addition, 
the rule’s transition period is shorter than that in the BCBS standard. The accelerated phase-
in of the U.S. LCR reflects our objective that large U.S. banking firms maintain the improved 
liquidity positions they have already built following the financial crisis, in part because of our 
supervisory  oversight.  We  believe  the  LCR  will  help  ensure  that  these  improved  liquidity 
positions will not weaken as memories of the financial crisis fade. 
The final rule is largely identical to the proposed rule, with a few key adjustments made in 
response  to  comments  from  the  public.  Those  adjustments  include  changing  the  scope  of 
corporate debt securities and publicly traded equities qualifying as high-quality liquid assets, 
phasing in reporting requirements, and modifying the stress period and reporting frequency 
for firms subject to the modified LCR. 
Swap margin reproposal 
Sections 731 and 764 of the Dodd-Frank Act require the establishment of initial and variation 
margin requirements for swap dealers and major swap participants (swap entities) on swaps 
that  are  not  centrally  cleared.  These  requirements  are  intended  to  ensure  that  the 
counterparty  risks  inherent  in  swaps  are  prudently  limited  and  not  allowed  to  build  to 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  unsustainable  levels  that  could  pose  risks to  the  financial  system.  In  addition,  requiring  all 
uncleared  swaps  to  be  subject  to  robust  margin  requirements  will  remove  economic 
incentives  for  market  participants  to  shift  activity  away  from  contracts  that  are  centrally 
cleared. 
The  Federal  Reserve  and  four  other  U.S.  agencies  originally  issued  a  proposed  rule  to 
implement these provisions of the Dodd-Frank Act in April 2011. Following the release of the 
original  proposal,  the  BCBS  and  the  International  Organization  of  Securities  Commissions 
began working to establish a consistent global framework for imposing margin requirements 
on uncleared swaps. This global framework was finalized last September. After considering 
the  comments  that  were  received  on  the  April  2011  U.S.  proposal  and  the  recently 
established  global  standards,  the  agencies  issued  a  reproposal  last  week.  Under  the 
reproposal, swap entities would be required to collect and post initial and variation margin on 
uncleared swaps with another swap entity and other financial end user counterparties. The 
requirements  are  intended  to  result  in  higher  initial  margin  requirements  than  would  be 
required for cleared swaps, which is meant to reflect the more complex and less liquid nature 
of uncleared swaps. 
In accordance with the statutory requirement to establish margin requirements regardless of 
counterparty type, the reproposal would require swap entities to collect and post margin in 
connection  with  any  uncleared  swaps  they  have  with  nonfinancial  end  users.  These 
requirements,  however,  are  quantitatively  and  qualitatively  different  from  the  margin 
requirements  for  swaps  with  financial  end  users.  Specifically,  swaps  with  nonfinancial  end 
users  would  not  be  subject  to  specific,  numerical  margin  requirements  but  would  only  be 
subject to initial and variation margin requirements at such times, in such forms, and in such 
amounts, if any, that the swap entity determines is necessary to address the credit risk posed 
by the counterparty and the transaction. There are currently cases where a swap entity does 
not collect initial or variation margin from nonfinancial end users because it has determined 
that  margin  is  not  needed  to  address  the  credit  risk  posed  by  the  counterparty  or  the 
transaction.  In  such  cases,  the  reproposal  would  not  require  a  change  in  current  practice. 
The agencies believe that these requirements are consistent with the Dodd-Frank Act and 
appropriately reflect the low level of risk presented by most nonfinancial end users. 
The agencies in the reproposal have taken several steps to help mitigate any impact to the 
liquidity of the financial system that could result from the swap margin requirements. These 
steps include incorporating an initial margin requirement threshold below which exchanges of 
initial  margin  are  not  required,  allowing  for  a  wider  range  of  assets  to  serve  as  eligible 
collateral,  and  providing  smaller  swap  entities  with  an  extended  timeline  to  come  into 
compliance. We look forward to receiving comments on the reproposal. 
risk-based  capital 
Modifications to the supplementary leverage ratio and adoption of the enhanced 
supplementary leverage ratio 
Also last week, the Federal Reserve and the other U.S. banking agencies approved a final 
rule  that  modifies  the  denominator  calculation  of  the  supplementary  leverage  ratio  in  a 
manner  consistent  with the  changes  agreed  to  earlier  this year  by  the  BCBS.  The  revised 
supplementary leverage ratio will apply to all banking organizations subject to the advanced 
approaches 
the 
supplementary  leverage  ratio  will  result  in  a  more  appropriately  measured  set  of  leverage 
capital requirements and, in the aggregate, are expected to modestly increase the stringency 
of these requirements across the covered banking organizations. 
This  rule  complements  the  agencies’  adoption  in  April  of  a  rule  that  strengthens  the 
internationally  agreed-upon  Basel  III  leverage  ratio  as  applied  to  U.S.-based  global 
systemically  important  banks  (GSIBs).  This enhanced  supplementary  leverage  ratio,  which 
will be effective in January 2018, requires U.S. GSIBs to maintain a tier 1 capital buffer of at 
least 2 percent above the minimum Basel III supplementary leverage ratio of 3 percent, for a 
total  of  5  percent,  to  avoid  restrictions  on  capital  distributions  and  discretionary  bonus 
in  2018.  These  modifications 
rule  starting 
to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  payments.  In  light  of  the  significantly  higher  risk-based  capital  rules  for  GSIBs  under 
Basel III,  imposing  a  stricter  leverage  requirement  on  these  firms  is  appropriate  to  help 
ensure that the leverage ratio remains a relevant backstop for these firms. 
Key regulatory priorities 
As we near the completion of the implementation of the major provisions of the Dodd-Frank 
Act,  some  key  regulatory  reforms  remain  unfinished.  To  that  end,  the  Federal  Reserve 
contemplates near- to medium-term measures to enhance the resiliency and resolvability of 
U.S. GSIBs and address the risks posed to financial stability from reliance by financial firms 
on short-term wholesale funding. 
The  financial  crisis  made  clear  that  policymakers  must  devote  significant  attention  to  the 
potential threat to financial stability posed by our most systemic financial firms. Accordingly, 
the Federal Reserve has been working to develop regulations that are designed to reduce 
the  probability  of  failure  of  a  GSIB  to  levels  that  are  meaningfully  below  those  for  less 
systemically  important  firms  and  to  materially  reduce  the  potential  adverse  impact  on  the 
broader financial system and economy in the event of a failure of a GSIB. 
GSIB risk-based capital surcharges 
An  important  remaining  Federal  Reserve  initiative  to  improve  GSIB  resiliency  is  our 
forthcoming proposal to impose graduated common equity risk-based capital surcharges on 
U.S. GSIBs. The proposal will be consistent with the standard in section 165 of the Dodd-
Frank  Act  that  capital  requirements  be  progressively  more  stringent  as  the  systemic 
importance  of  a  firm  increases.  It  will  build  on  the  GSIB  capital  surcharge  framework 
developed by the BCBS, under which the size of the surcharge for an individual GSIB is a 
function of the firm’s systemic importance. By further increasing the amount of the most loss-
absorbing form of capital that is required to be held by firms that potentially pose the greatest 
risk  to  financial  stability,  we  intend  to  improve  the  resiliency  of  these  firms.  This  measure 
might also create incentives for them to reduce their systemic footprint and risk profile. 
While our proposal will use the GSIB risk-based capital surcharge framework developed by 
the  BCBS  as  a  starting  point,  it  will  strengthen  the  BCBS  framework  in  two  important 
respects. First, the surcharge levels for U.S. GSIBs will be higher than the levels required by 
the BCBS, noticeably so for some firms. Second, the surcharge formula will directly take into 
account each U.S. GSIB’s reliance on short-term wholesale funding. We believe the case for 
including short-term wholesale funding in the surcharge calculation is compelling, given that 
reliance  on  this  type  of  funding  can  leave  firms  vulnerable  to  runs  that  threaten  the  firm’s 
solvency and impose externalities on the broader financial system. 
Resolvability of GSIBs 
Our enhanced regulation of GSIBs also includes efforts to improve their resolvability. Most 
recently,  in  August,  the  Federal  Reserve  and  the  Federal  Deposit  Insurance  Corporation 
(FDIC) completed reviews of the second round of resolution plans submitted to the agencies 
in October 2013 by 11 U.S. bank holding companies and foreign banks. Section 165(d) of the 
Dodd-Frank Act requires banking organizations with total consolidated assets of $50 billion 
or  more  and  nonbank  financial  companies  designated  by  the  FSOC  to  submit  resolution 
plans  to  the  Federal  Reserve  and  the  FDIC.  Each  plan  must  describe  the  organization’s 
strategy for rapid and orderly resolution in the event of material financial distress or failure. In 
completing the second round reviews of these banking organizations’ resolution plans, the 
FDIC and the Federal Reserve noted certain shortcomings in the resolution plans that the 
firms must address to improve their resolvability in bankruptcy. Both agencies also indicated 
the expectation that the firms make significant progress in addressing these issues in their 
2015 resolution plans. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  In addition, the Federal Reserve has been working with the FDIC to develop a proposal that 
would require the U.S. GSIBs to maintain a minimum amount of long-term unsecured debt at 
the  parent  holding  company  level.  While  minimum  capital  requirements  are  designed  to 
cover losses up to a certain statistical probability, in the even less likely event that the equity 
of a financial firm is wiped out, successful resolution without taxpayer assistance would be 
most  effectively  accomplished  if  a  firm  has  sufficient  long-term  unsecured  debt  to  absorb 
additional losses and to recapitalize the business transferred to a bridge operating company. 
The presence of a substantial tranche of long-term unsecured debt that is subject to bail-in 
during a resolution and is structurally subordinated to the firm’s other creditors should reduce 
run risk by clarifying the position of those other creditors in an orderly liquidation process. A 
requirement for long-term debt also should have the benefit of improving market discipline, 
since  the  holders  of  that  debt  would  know  they  faced  the  prospect  of  loss  should  the  firm 
enter resolution. 
The  Federal  Reserve  is  working  with  global  regulators,  under  the  auspices  of  the  FSB,  to 
develop  a  proposal  that  would  require  the  largest,  most  complex  global  banking  firms  to 
maintain a minimum amount of loss absorbency capacity beyond the levels mandated in the 
Basel III capital requirements. 
Another  element  of  our  efforts  to  promote  resolvability  of  large  banking  organizations 
involves  the  early  termination  rights  of  derivative  counterparties  to  GSIBs.  Some  of  the 
material  operating  subsidiaries  of  GSIBs  are  counterparties  to  large  volumes  of  over-the-
counter derivatives and other qualifying financial contracts that provide for an event of default 
based solely on the insolvency or receivership of the parent holding company. Although the 
Dodd-Frank  Act  created  an  orderly  liquidation  authority  (OLA)  to  better  enable  the 
government to resolve a failed systemically important financial firm – and the OLA’s stay and 
transfer  provisions  can  prevent  exercise  of  such  contractual  rights  by  counterparties  to 
contracts under U.S. law – the OLA provisions may not apply to contracts under foreign law. 
Accordingly,  counterparties  of  the  foreign  subsidiaries  and  branches  of  GSIBs  may  have 
contractual  rights  and  substantial  economic  incentives  to  accelerate  or  terminate  those 
contracts  as  soon  as  the  U.S.  parent  GSIB  enters  OLA.  This  could  render  a  resolution 
unworkable  by  resulting  in  the  disorderly  unwind  of  an  otherwise  viable  foreign  subsidiary 
and  the  disruption  of  critical  intra-affiliate  activities  that  rely  on  the  failing  subsidiary.  The 
challenge would be compounded in a bankruptcy resolution because derivatives and other 
qualifying  financial  contracts  are  exempt  from  the  automatic  stay  under  bankruptcy  law, 
regardless of whether the contracts are governed by U.S. or foreign law. 
The international regulatory community is working to mitigate this risk as well. The Federal 
Reserve is working with the FDIC and global regulators, financial firms, and other financial 
market actors to develop a protocol to the International Swaps and Derivatives Association 
(ISDA)  Master  Agreement  to  address  the  impediments  to  resolvability  generated  by  these 
early termination rights. The FSB will be reporting progress on this effort in the fall. 
Short-term wholesale funding 
As I have noted in prior testimony before this committee, short-term wholesale funding plays 
a critical role in the financial system. During normal times, it helps to satisfy investor demand 
for  safe  and  liquid  investments,  lowers  funding  costs  for  borrowers,  and  supports  the 
functioning  of  important  markets,  including  those  in  which  monetary  policy  is  executed. 
During  periods  of  stress,  however,  runs  by  providers  of  short-term  wholesale  funding  and 
associated  asset  liquidations  can  result  in  large  fire  sale  externalities  and  otherwise 
undermine financial stability. A dynamic of this type engulfed the financial system in 2008. 
Since  the  crisis,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  taken  several  steps  to  address  short-term 
wholesale  funding  risks.  The  Basel  III  capital  framework  and  the  Federal  Reserve’s  stress 
testing regime have significantly increased the quantity and quality of required capital in the 
banking  system,  particularly  for  those  banking  organizations  that  are  the  most  active 
participants in short-term wholesale funding markets. Similarly, the implementation of liquidity 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  regulations such as the LCR, together with related efforts by bank supervisors, will help to 
limit the amount of liquidity risk in the banking system. 
We have also taken steps to reduce risks posed by the use of short-term wholesale funding 
by actors outside the banking system. These include leading an effort to reduce reliance by 
borrowers in the tri-party repo market on intraday credit from clearing banks and increasing 
the  regulatory  charges  on  key  forms  of  credit  and  liquidity  support  that  banks  provide  to 
shadow banks. In part because of these actions and in part because of market adjustments, 
there is less risk embedded in short-term wholesale funding markets today than in the period 
immediately  preceding  the  financial  crisis.  The  short-term  wholesale  funding  markets  are 
generally  smaller,  the  average  maturity  of  short-term  funding  arrangements  is  moderately 
greater, and collateral haircuts are more conservative. In addition, the banking organizations 
that  are  the  major  intermediaries  in  short-term  wholesale  funding  markets  are  much  more 
resilient based on the measures I discussed earlier. 
Nevertheless, we believe that more needs to be done to guard against short-term wholesale 
funding  risks.  While  the  total  amount  of  short-term  wholesale  funding  is  lower  today  than 
immediately  before  the  crisis,  volumes  are  still  large  relative  to  the  size  of  the  financial 
system.  Furthermore,  some  of  the  factors  that  account  for  the  reduction  in  short-term 
wholesale funding volumes, such as the unusually flat yield curve environment and lingering 
risk aversion from the crisis, are likely to prove transitory. 
Federal  Reserve  staff  is  currently  working  on  three  sets  of  initiatives  to  address  residual 
short-term wholesale funding risks. As discussed above, the first is a proposal to incorporate 
the use of short-term wholesale funding into the risk-based capital surcharge applicable to 
U.S. GSIBs. The second involves proposed modifications to the BCBS’s net stable funding 
ratio (NSFR) standard to strengthen liquidity requirements that apply when a bank acts as a 
provider of short-term funding to other market participants. The third is numerical floors for 
collateral haircuts in securities financing transactions (SFTs) – including repos and reverse 
repos, securities lending and borrowing, and securities margin lending. 
Modifications  to  the  NSFR  could  be  designed  to  help  address  the  types  of  concerns 
described in my previous testimony regarding SFT matched book activity. In the classic fact 
pattern,  a  matched  book  dealer  uses  SFTs  to  borrow  on  a  short-term  basis  from  a  cash 
investor, such as a money market mutual fund, to finance a short-term SFT loan to a client, 
such as a leveraged investment fund. The regulatory requirements on SFT matched books 
are generally low despite the fact that matched books can pose significant microprudential 
and macroprudential risks. Neither the BCBS LCR nor the NSFR originally finalized by the 
Basel Committee would have imposed a material charge on matched book activity. 
In January, the BCBS proposed a revised NSFR that would require banks to hold a material 
amount  of  stable  funding  against  short-term  SFT  loans,  as  well  as  other  short-term  credit 
extensions, to nonbank financial entities. By requiring banks that make short-term loans to 
hold stable funding, such a charge would help limit the liquidity risk that a dealer would face if 
it experiences a run on its SFT liabilities but is unable to liquidate corresponding SFT assets. 
In  addition,  by  making  it  more  expensive  for  the  dealer  to  provide  short-term  credit,  the 
charge could help lean against excessive short-term borrowing by the dealer’s clients. 
Turning to numerical floors for SFT haircuts, the appeal of this policy measure is that it would 
help  address  the  risk  that  post-crisis  reforms  targeted  at  banking  organizations  will  drive 
systemically risky activity toward places in the financial system where prudential standards 
do  not  apply.  In  its  universal  form,  a  system  of  numerical  haircut  floors  for  SFTs  would 
require  any  entity  that  wants  to  borrow  against  a  security  to  post  a  minimum  amount  of 
excess margin to its lender that would vary depending on the asset class of the collateral. 
Like minimum margin requirements for derivatives, numerical floors for SFT haircuts would 
serve as a mechanism for limiting the build-up of leverage at the transaction level and could 
mitigate the risk of procyclical margin calls. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Last August, the FSB issued a consultative document that represented an initial step toward 
the development of a framework of numerical floors. However, the FSB’s proposal contained 
some  significant  limitations,  including  that  its  scope  was  limited  to  transactions  in  which  a 
bank or broker-dealer extends credit to an unregulated entity and that the calibration of the 
numerical floor levels was relatively low. Since then, the FSB has been actively considering 
whether to strengthen the proposal along both of these dimensions. 
Financial sector concentration limits 
In May, the Federal Reserve proposed a rule to implement section 622 of the Dodd-Frank 
Act,  which  prohibits  a  financial  company  from  combining  with  another  company  if  the 
resulting  financial  company’s  liabilities  exceed  10  percent  of  the  aggregate  consolidated 
liabilities of all financial companies. Under the proposal, financial companies subject to the 
concentration  limit  would  include  insured  depository  institutions,  bank  holding  companies, 
savings and loan holding companies, foreign banking organizations, companies that control 
insured  depository  institutions,  and  nonbank  financial  companies  designated  by  the  FSOC 
for Federal Reserve supervision. Consistent with section 622, the proposal generally defines 
liabilities  of  a  financial  company  as  the  difference  between  its  risk-weighted  assets,  as 
adjusted to reflect exposures deducted from regulatory capital, and its total regulatory capital. 
Firms  not  subject  to  consolidated  risk-based  capital  rules  would  measure  liabilities  using 
generally accepted accounting standards. We anticipate finalizing this rule in the near term. 
Credit risk retention 
Section  941  of  the  Dodd-Frank  Act  requires  firms  generally  to  retain  credit  risk  in 
securitization  transactions  they  sponsor.  Retaining  credit  risk  creates  incentives  for 
securitizers to monitor closely the quality of the assets underlying a securitization transaction 
and discourages unsafe and unsound underwriting practices by originators. In August 2013, 
the  Federal  Reserve,  along  with  several  other  agencies,  revised  a  proposal  from  2011  to 
implement section 941. The Federal Reserve is working with the other agencies charged by 
the Dodd-Frank Act with implementing this rule to complete it in the coming months. 
Rationalizing the regulatory framework for community banks 
Before  closing,  I  would  like  to  discuss  the  Federal  Reserve’s  ongoing  efforts  to  minimize 
regulatory burden consistent with the effective implementation of our statutory responsibilities 
for  community  banks,  given  the  important  role  they  play  within  our  communities.  Over  the 
past  few  decades,  community  banks  have  substantially  reduced  their  presence  in  lines  of 
businesses such as consumer lending in the face of competition from larger banks benefiting 
from  economies  of  scale.  Today,  as  a  group,  their  most  important  forms  of  lending  are  to 
small-  and  medium-sized  businesses.  Smaller  community  banks  –  those  with  less  than 
$1 billion in assets – account for nearly one-fourth of commercial and industrial lending, and 
nearly 40 percent of commercial real estate lending, to small- and medium-sized businesses, 
despite their having less than 10 percent of total commercial banking assets. These figures 
reveal  the  importance  of  community  banks  to  local  economies  and  the  damage  that  could 
result if these banks were unable to continue operating within their communities. 
Banking regulators have taken many steps to try to avoid unnecessary regulatory costs for 
community banks, such as fashioning more basic supervisory expectations for smaller, less 
complex  banks  and  identifying  which  provisions  of  new  regulations  are  relevant  to  smaller 
banks. In this regard, the Federal Reserve has worked to communicate clearly the extent to 
which new rules and policies apply to smaller banks and to tailor them as appropriate. We 
also work closely with our colleagues at the federal and state banking regulatory agencies to 
ensure  that  supervisory  approaches  and  methodologies  are  consistently  applied  to 
community banks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
  But several new statutory provisions apply explicitly to some smaller banks or, by failing to 
exclude any bank from coverage, apply to all banks. The Federal Reserve is supportive of 
considering areas where the exclusion of community banks from statutory provisions that are 
less  relevant  to  community  bank  practice  may  be  appropriate.  For  example,  we  believe  it 
would  be  worthwhile  to  consider  whether  community  banks  should  be  excluded  from  the 
scope of the Volcker rule and from the incentive compensation requirements of section 956 
of  the  Dodd-Frank  Act.  The  concerns  addressed  by  statutory  provisions  like  these  are 
substantially greater at larger institutions and, even where a practice at a smaller bank might 
raise concerns, the supervisory process remains available to address what would likely be 
unusual circumstances. 
Another  area  in  which  the  Federal  Reserve  has  made  efforts  to  right-size  our  supervisory 
approach with regard to community banks is to improve our off-site monitoring processes so 
that  we  can  better  target  higher  risk  institutions  and  activities.  Research  conducted  for  a 
2013  conference  sponsored  by  the  Federal  Reserve  System  and  the  Conference  of  State 
Bank Supervisors addressed the resilience of the community bank model and showed how 
some banks performed better than others during the recent crisis. Building on this research, 
we are updating our off-site monitoring screens to reflect experience gained during the crisis 
and recalibrating our examination scoping process for community banks to focus our testing 
on higher-risk banks and activities, and whenever possible reduce procedures for banks of 
lower risk. 
Recognizing the burden that the on-site presence of many examiners can place on the day-
to-day business of a community bank, we are also working to increase our level of off-site 
supervisory  activities.  Responding  to  on-site  examinations  and  inspections  is  of  course  a 
cost for community banks, but this cost must be weighed against the supervisory benefit of 
face-to-face  interactions  with  bank  examiners  to  explore  and  resolve  institution-specific 
concerns. The Federal Reserve aims to strike the appropriate balance of off-site and on-site 
supervisory activities to ensure that the quality of community bank supervision is maintained 
without creating an overly burdensome process. To that end, last year we completed a pilot 
on conducting parts of the labor-intensive loan review off-site using electronic records from 
banks. Based on good results with the pilot, we are planning to continue using this approach 
in future reviews at banks where bank management is supportive of the process and where 
electronic  records  are  available.  We  are  also  exploring  whether  other  examination 
procedures  can  be  conducted  off-site  without  compromising  the  ability  of  examiners  to 
accurately assess the safety and soundness of supervised banks. 
Conclusion 
The Federal Reserve has made significant progress in implementing the Dodd-Frank Act and 
other  measures  designed  to  improve  the  resiliency  of  banking  organizations  and  reduce 
systemic risk. We are committed to working with the other U.S. financial regulatory agencies 
to  promote  a  stable  financial system  in  a  manner  that  does  not impose  a  disproportionate 
burden on smaller institutions. To help us achieve these goals, we will continue to seek the 
views of the institutions we supervise and the public as we further develop regulatory and 
supervisory programs to preserve financial stability at the least cost to credit availability and 
economic growth. 
Thank you for your attention. I would be pleased to answer any questions you might have. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
