Inia Naiyaga: Growing the private sector – the micro, small to medium 
businesses 
Address  by  Mr  Inia  Naiyaga,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji,  at  the  Fiji 
Indigenous  Business  Council  2014  Symposium  “Indigenous  businesses  –  creating  our 
future”, Suva, 20 March 2014. 
 The President, Mr Ulai Taoi and office bearers of the Fiji Indigenous Business Council, 
Members of the Council, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen 
Ni sa bula vinaka and a Very Good Morning to you all. 
It is indeed a great pleasure for me to participate in today’s forum with the appropriate and 
topical theme “Indigenous businesses – Creating our future”. At the outset, let me commend 
the Fiji Indigenous Business Council for holding such an important forum and for looking at 
such a critical issue as a strategy for encouraging employment and commercial opportunities 
for our I’taukei. 
I  was  asked  to  speak  on  the  subject  “Growing  the  private  sector:  the  small  to  medium 
business”. I have taken the liberty to add Micro businesses as well in my speech today as 
this  is  not  just  a  buzz  word  but  a  reality,  as  most,  if  not  all,  businesses  start  as  a  micro 
enterprise with Fiji’s well known large businesses being no exception. 
My presentation today is divided into four parts. 
• 
Firstly, I have taken this opportunity to provide an update on the current state of the 
Fiji economy; 
Secondly, I will highlight the importance of the Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises, 
or MSMEs to the economy; 
Thirdly, I wish to highlight some recent initiatives and incentives by Government and 
the RBF to the MSME sector; and 
Finally, share my thoughts on how the indigenous or we, the I’taukeis can increase 
our participation in business. 
   The current state of the Fiji economy 
1. 
Ladies  and  gentleman, the  recovery  in  the  Fijian  economy  which  started  in  2010  has  now 
gained  a  much  firmer  footing,  despite  the  continued  sluggishness  in  key  trading  partner 
economies during the same period. 
The  Fijian  economy  is  estimated  to  have  expanded  by  3.6  percent  last  year  following  a 
2.7 percent  and  1.7  percent  expansion  in  2011 and  2012,  respectively.  We now  have  four 
years  of  consecutive  growth  not  normally  seen  in  our  history.  Last  year,  all  sectors  of  the 
economy, with the exception of the mining and fishing sectors, contributed positively towards 
this growth.  
This  improved  confidence  can  be  attributed  to  a  number  of  factors  such  as  increased 
spending  by  Government 
infrastructure  development  and  social  welfare  and 
accommodative monetary policy by the Reserve Bank and the consequent easier access to 
credit  and  historical  low  interest  rates.  Furthermore,  the  concerted  effort  by  Government 
towards an inclusive parliamentary democracy in 2014 has also been a major contributor to 
regained confidence amongst investors and consumers alike. 
The improved confidence is well reflected in our major macroeconomic indicators. Consumer 
spending  has  been  buoyant  throughout  2013  underpinned  by  better  labour  market 
in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
conditions, increases in the income tax threshold and wages for Government workers, higher 
inward remittances and increased lending by financial institutions. Partial indicators such as 
Value  Added  Tax  (VAT)  collections,  new  consumption  lending,  new  vehicle  sales  and 
imports of consumption goods have all noted annual increases in 2013. 
Additionally, investment indicators showed continued resilience and growth last year as well. 
Total investment is estimated to have been around 28 percent of GDP last year as all partial 
indicators  such  as  imports  of  investment  goods,  lending  for  investment,  domestic  cement 
sales and value of work-put-in-place registered annual increases. 
The  improved  investment  climate  and  confidence  has  translated  well  into  the  demand  for 
labour. The Reserve Bank survey based recruitment measure showed that the number of job 
advertisements rose by 9.3 percent in 2013, driven by improved recruitment intentions in the 
community, social & personal services followed by the wholesale, retail trade, restaurants & 
hotels, construction and the manufacturing sectors. 
The  improved  economic  prospects  are  also  a  result  of  Government’s  expansionary  fiscal 
policy stance in 2013. In an effort to stimulate economic growth and investment, a substantial 
amount was spent on capital works, particularly infrastructure development. 
Inflationary pressures remained generally soft in 2013, mainly on account of stable food and 
oil prices. The year-end inflation rate stood at 3.4 percent compared to 2.5 percent at the end 
of 2012. 
However,  our  external  sector  continued  to face  some  challenges.  Export  performance  has 
been  unsatisfactory  and  data  up  to  November  2013  reveal  that  total  domestic  exports 
declined by 2.7 percent. As alluded to earlier, imports continued to surge due to the pick-up 
in demand across the economy. As a result the trade deficit widened further last year, though 
this  was  supported  to  some  extent  by  favourable  inflows  of  tourism  and  remittances. 
Remittances  performed  exceptionally  well  last  year  and  reached  a  new  record  of 
$339 million. Nonetheless, our overall external position remained stable and foreign reserves 
was recorded at $1.8 billion at the end of last year, sufficient to cover 4.9 months of retained 
imports of goods and non-factor services. 
Ladies and gentleman, what is in store for us in 2014? Pre-2014 National Budget forecast for 
growth  in  2014  was  3.0  percent.  However,  given  the  significant  increase  in  Government 
expenditure on infrastructure, wages and salaries and social benefits such as free education 
as announced in the 2014 National Budget, growth is now forecast to surpass the projection 
and  is  currently  being  reviewed.  Additionally,  the  surge  in  consumption  and  investment 
spending  is  expected  to  continue  and  can  even  be  further  boosted  by  the  increased 
disposable income. 
Confidence  in  the  economy  is  expected  to  remain  strong  and  is  supported  by  sentiments 
expressed  by  retailers  and  businesses  in  RBF’s  business  expectations  and  retail  sales 
surveys which suggests a positive outlook for consumption and investment activity in 2014. 
Macroeconomic  fundamentals  are  poised  to  remain  strong  and  conducive  to  growth  in 
business in 2014. A growing economy should therefore augur well for the Micro, Small, and 
Medium Enterprises. 
2. 
Importance of the Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) to the 
Economy 
We  all  recognise  that  micro,  small  and  medium  enterprises  (MSMEs)  play  a  vital  role  in 
economic development. They are an important engine of economic growth not only for less 
developed economies but also the advanced nations. I am sure you all know why MSMEs 
are important. I will therefore re-iterate these factors briefly: 
• 
It Raises Economic Growth: In developing countries in Asia, SMEs make up the bulk 
of  their  economies,  some  as  high  as  60  percent  of  GDP.  In  Fiji,  there  are 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
in 
the  agriculture, 
approximately  4,200  registered  MSMEs,  mainly 
fishing, 
manufacturing  and  retailing  and  tourism  sectors.  It  is  estimated  that  the  MSMEs 
sector  accounted  for  almost  12  percent  of  our  GDP  in  2013  valued  at  around 
$800 million.  However,  total  outstanding  borrowing  by  this  sector  from  the 
commercial banks was $316 million as at the end of 2013 or just above 8 percent of 
the total loans portfolio. This shows that this sector is still largely untapped and there 
is a lot of potential to develop a strong MSME sector as this leads to job creation, 
empowering  individuals,  increase  exports  and  investments  and  in  turn  economic 
activity. 
It Raises Exports/Investment: Small businesses do not always stay small; they grow. 
Many of our now large companies like Tappoos, Motibhais, Hotbread Kitchen and 
many others were once MSMEs. I am confident that as our small businesses grow 
they  can  help  raise  exports  and  investment  in  Fiji.  They  can  also  help  in  import-
substitution thereby reducing our imports bill and narrowing the trade deficit. 
It  Creates  Employment:  Small  businesses  are  the  answer  to  our  unemployment 
problem. Our formal sector cannot absorb all our school leavers – this is the same in 
all developing countries. The employment growth required for our future can come 
from the small business sector. Rough estimates suggest that close to 60 percent of 
Fiji’s  labour  force  is  involved  in  various  forms  of  businesses  that  fall  under  the 
heading of MSMEs. 
It  Combats  Poverty:  MSMEs  are  also  a  way  to  combat  poverty  and  can  help  us 
achieve  our  Millennium  Development  Goals.  MSMEs  allow  people  to  help 
themselves rise above poverty, by supplying the means to provide for basic needs 
such  as  education,  food,  shelter  and  clothing.  SMEs  give  people  the  dignity  of 
working for a living. 
   3. 
Let me now move on to recent government and RBF policy initiatives to 
support the MSMEs 
Over  the  years,  the  Government  and  the  RBF  has  put  in  place  various  incentives  and 
supportive policies to create a conducive environment for MSME activity. 
As a way to increase the involvement of the financial sector and to enable greater access to 
finance by micro-entrepreneurs around the country, the RBF in 2010 required all commercial 
banks  to  set-up  microfinance  units  at  their  branches.  Commercial  banks  also  established 
agents in rural areas using merchants and post office agents to facilitate finance activity. At 
the end of 2013, 81 agents were in operation providing basic banking services such as cash 
withdrawals, deposits and payments. 
In addition, since 2010, a total of 17 Microfinance expos have been held. These expos bring 
together financial stakeholders that provide financial services, financial literacy training and 
create  more  awareness  on  microfinance  activity  to  those  in  the  surrounding  vicinity  of  the 
expo. 
The RBF’s Import Substitution and Export Finance Facility (ISEFF) were set up to improve 
Fiji’s  BOP  position  by  assisting  exporters,  renewable  energy  and  import  substitution 
businesses to obtain credit at concessional interest rates. Currently, the maximum interest 
rate  charged  on  the  facility  is  5%  p.a.  The  Bank,  from  July  2010  to  31  January  2014 
approved around $54 million under the Facility. Of this amount, $44.7 million was approved 
for  export  finance,  around  $5.7  million  for  import  substitution  businesses,  $4.0  million  for 
energy projects. Of the total $80 million allocated by the RBF for the Facility, approximately 
$25.6 million still remains unutilised. 
The  Government  also  continues  to  support  MSME  development  with  various  funding 
allocations and policies in its National Budgets. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
To  better  monitor  the  development  of  the  MSME  sector,  the  RBF  and  Solicitor  General’s 
office will work together to put in place a legal framework for the governance of MFIs. 
In  2012,  the  Government  announced  the  SME  Credit  Guarantee  Scheme.  Under  the 
scheme, the Government guarantees to pay 50 percent of the principal outstanding amount 
on defaulted SME loans, up to a limit of $50,000 per business. Today, the total allocation for 
this scheme has increased to $4 million with a total of 483 loans covered under the scheme 
at a value of $28.6 million, to date. 
Moreover,  to  support  and  facilitate  economic  activity,  the  Government  has  in  recent  years 
focused its funding on the development of infrastructure – particularly on roads and bridges 
and utilities – which will improve access and encourage MSME activity. 
In 2013, the Reserve Bank introduced the first ever National Microfinance Awards with three 
categories 
the  Best  Microfinance 
Entrepreneur  –  Partnership  and  the  Best  Microfinance  Service  Provider  to  recognise  the 
contribution of MSME’s and micro-entrepreneurs in Fiji.  
the  Best  Microfinance  Entrepreneur  – 
Individual, 
4. 
      4 
 including  our 
fail  because  of 
I’taukei  businesses 
I now move on to some personal observations for us, the I’taukeis to succeed 
in business 
When  I  was  invited  by  Mr  Joe  Taoi to  deliver  this  presentation,  my  initial  reaction 
was that I am not an authority on the subject matter as I do not have the experience 
of being in a private business. However, my background as an Accountant and my 
almost  four  decade  experience  as  a  central  banker  has  taught  me  some  lessons 
that I feel are important to share with you at this forum. My first advice to aspiring 
I’taukei businessmen and women is that revenue is NOT EQUAL to profit. A lot of 
businesses, 
this  simple 
misconception. 
Secondly,  to  invest  in  a  business,  we  first  must  learn  to  save.  As  I’taukeis  our 
savings rate is much lower compared with others. If we do not save, we will not be 
able  to  start  a  business  or  use  our  saving  as  equity  to  borrow  from  the  banks. 
Building up Savings and prudent management of our finances are very critical for us 
to succeed in businesses. 
One of the most challenging aspects of Financial and Business Management I have 
noticed with most I’taukei businesses is the lack of budgeting and lack of financial 
discipline. Financial and Business literacy is, in my review, the key to our success. 
One of the reasons many small businesses fail is because we sell goods on credit. 
Selling goods on credit means that your cash flow as a small business is affected 
resulting in the inability to restock or repay your loans. In most cases, such credit 
become bad debt and as a small business operating with narrow margins and low 
volumes,  this  can  be  disastrous.  When  you  walk  into  a  store  owned  by  a  non-
I’taukei,  you  will  see  a  notice  prominently  displayed  which  says  “No  Credit”.  We 
therefore  must  follow  this  same  rule  of  “no  kerekere”  if  we  are  to  succeed  in 
business. 
I  often  hear  our  own  people  saying  that  we  the  I’taukeis  do  not  have  it  in  us  to 
succeed in business. I totally disagree as there are some of you here are a living 
testimony of businesses that have been successful. It is therefore important that we 
tell  ourselves  that  We  CAN  succeed  in  business  otherwise  the  battle  will  be  lost 
before the contest begins. 
As  I  had  highlighted  earlier,  the  Government  introduced  a  SME  credit  guarantee 
Scheme. In my view, this facility is well suited for the I’taukei to take advantage of as 
the  interest  rate  on  such  loans  does  not  exceed  10%  p.a.  and  the  Government 
guarantees to pay 50 percent or whichever is less, of the SME loans that go bad. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Our assessment is that very few I’taukei business people have accessed this Facility 
out  of  the  483  loans  advanced  to  date.  It  is,  therefore,  important  for  us  to  take 
advantage of this Facility as well as the ISEFF which attracts a maximum interest 
rate of 5% p.a. 
While I am of the view that I’taukei businesses must be assisted, we must also be 
careful not to give too much handouts as it has the potential to create this “handout 
mentality  with  no  responsibility  and  accountability  as  it  is  given  free”.  We  must 
change this hand-out mentality. 
Talking of changing behaviours is easy but most importantly, how do we go about 
changing  them?  We  all  cannot  be  business  people.  However,  we  can  create  the 
right  environment  for  our  children  and  future  generations  to  be  successful  in 
business. You may be aware that Financial Literacy is now being integrated into the 
school curriculum and taught in all primary and secondary schools in Fiji since 2013. 
A  pilot  program  with  28  schools  commenced  in  2012.  Starting  early  at  primary 
school  level  will  ensure  that  our  citizens  of  tomorrow  will  not  only  be  financially 
literate  but  more  important  we  are  instilling  in  our  children  some  form  of 
responsibility and financial discipline at an early age. 
Finally,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  we  have  some  successful  business  people  in  this 
Council and in this room. You are important role models and mentors for upcoming 
I’taukei business entrepreneurs. If we look at the non I’taukeis we will note that the 
tricks of the trade are passed down from one generation to another. I therefore urge 
you as I’taukei business leaders to please continue to mentor our people who are 
thinking  of  starting  a  business  or  have  just  started  one.  There  are  no  better  role 
models than you to help them succeed. 
I wish you every success. 
May your business ventures continue to be a blessing to you, your families and our beloved 
Country, Fiji. 
Vinaka vakalevu. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
