  Luis M Linde: Monetary policy following the Great Recession 
Presentation  by  Mr  Luis  M  Linde,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Spain,  of  the  Papeles  de 
Economía issue: “Monetary policy following the Great Recession”, Fundación de las Cajas 
de Ahorros, Madrid, 13 June 2014. 
 Let me first thank FUNCAS for their kind invitation to inaugurate this presentation of the issue 
of the review Papeles de Economía Española dedicated to “Monetary policy after the Great 
Recession”. 
In my address I will briefly review the predominant view before the crisis. I will then discuss 
how the crisis has affected this consensus. Finally, I shall conclude with some thoughts on 
two changes which, as a result of the foregoing, are already taking place in monetary policy 
conduct:  how  to  structure  its  interaction  with  macro-prudential  policy  and  the  role  of 
unconventional monetary tools. 
Before the crisis 
Before the crisis, low inflation, low price volatility and the high degree of economic stability 
attained in the advanced economies enabled a certain consensus to be forged on what the 
essential components of a successful monetary policy should be. 
Monetary  policy  would  be  delegated  to  an  independent  central  bank  whose  remit  saw  the 
maintenance of price stability as its main objective. This objective, in turn, could be translated 
into a more explicit goal in terms of inflation targets. 
To fulfil its mandate, the central bank would confine itself to controlling the short-term interest 
rate. Its interventions would be transmitted to the real economy through three main channels: 
the long-term interest rate, inflation expectations and financial asset prices. 
The credit channel played a secondary role. Indeed, in most of the macroeconomic models 
used by central banks, the private banking sector would play a marginal role, if any at all. 
The assumption of financial market efficiency and self-regulation meant that credit was not a 
central variable. 
The consensus then prevailing also had it that, in order to ensure financial stability, it sufficed 
to  supplement  price  stability  with  regulatory  and  micro-prudential  supervisory  policy  action 
geared to ensuring the strength of individual credit institutions. 
In step with this concept, the role of monetary policy in the face of potential risks to financial 
stability  would  be  confined  to  cleaning  up  or  repairing  damage  when  such  risks  ultimately 
materialised. The Federal Reserve’s measures following the bursting of the “dot.com” bubble 
illustrate this type of conduct. 
The crisis 
From  the  summer  of  2007  and,  above  all,  following  the  Lehman  brothers’  debacle  in 
September 2008, a crisis broke that generated the most severe global economic contraction 
since the Great Depression. Among other side-effects, this crisis obliged us to revise much of 
the previous consensus on monetary policy. 
It  would  however  be  unfair  to  ignore  the  fact  that,  in  the  specific  monetary  policy  realm, 
discordant  voices  had  some  years  back  raised  objections  to  the  predominant  model.  In 
particular, the Bank for International Settlements had maintained since the early 2000s that, 
in specific circumstances, central bank conduct in the face of severe risks to financial stability 
would have to be pre-emptive and not only reactive. Simply put, the damage wielded by a 
financial crisis might be so great that some price stability slippage in the present would be 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  warranted in exchange for preventing a future, more serious deviation that might prove more 
difficult and costly to reverse. 
The Bank for International Settlements also asserted that the combination of a price stability-
oriented monetary policy and a merely micro-prudential supervisory policy did not ensure the 
stability  of  the  financial  system  as  a  whole.  In  this  connection  a  third  tool  was  needed:  a 
macro-prudential supervisory policy. 
While it is still too early to draw all the economic policy lessons arising from our experience of 
this crisis, I believe certain necessary changes can be discerned. Among these, the need to 
pursue macro-prudential policies is one of the most evident implications. 
Macro-prudential policy 
The  crisis  has  demonstrated  that  the  previous  combination  of  monetary  policy  and  micro-
prudential policy is insufficient both for shoring up the stability of the financial system as a 
whole and for ensuring, in the event of crisis, that the impact on the real economy is limited. 
To achieve these goals a macro-prudential policy is also needed, and it must be equipped 
with new objectives and instruments. 
There is already some agreement on the need to have this new macro-prudential policy rest 
on two levels or dimensions. 
First, a cross-sectional dimension, focused on controlling the distribution of risks within the 
financial system at each point in time. This requires analysis of how institutions interact and 
what are the consequences of these interactions for the system as a whole. The aim should 
be to identify those interactions of most global systemic significance in order to subject them, 
logically, to more demanding soundness requirements. 
Further, macro-prudential policy should also heed the time dimension, which analyses how 
aggregate risk evolves and how it interacts with the normal functioning of the real economy. 
This  is  the  perspective  needed  in  order  to  design,  for  example,  measures  to  temper  the 
procyclical tendencies inherent in the financial system. As is known, the Banco de España 
was  a  pioneer  in  this  field  when,  in  2000,  it  introduced  dynamic  provisioning.  In  the  initial 
stages  of  the  crisis  the  potential  of  such  a  tool  was  evident;  however,  the  subsequent 
heightening of the crisis also showed its limitations. 
The  interactions  between  monetary  and  macro-prudential  policy  will  pose  complex 
challenges  to  central  banks.  Theoretically,  monetary  policy  should  continue  focusing  on 
maintaining  price  stability;  and  macro-prudential  policy,  on  ensuring  financial  stability.  In 
practice,  however,  action  by  each  of  them  will  inevitably  exert  a  strong  influence  on  the 
objectives  of  the  other,  and  that  has  implications  for  the  institutional  design  of  the  macro-
prudential authority. 
The advantages arising from coordination between both policies would suggest assigning the 
central bank with a pivotal role in the pursuit of macro-prudential policies. This has been the 
path  followed  to  date  in  most  cases.  Thus,  for  instance,  in  the  United  Kingdom  a  sister 
committee has been set up within the Bank of England and alongside the Monetary Policy 
Committee, namely the Financial Policy Committee. Italy, Belgium and Ireland have followed 
similar  arrangements.  In  other  countries  such  as  France  and  Germany,  committees  have 
been set up with the participation of other economic authorities, but the central bank plays a 
very important role in them, and actually wields veto powers over the decisions of the macro- 
prudential body relating to or affecting the field of competence of the national central bank or 
of the Eurosystem. 
Nonetheless, concentrating different and occasionally conflicting economic policy objectives 
within a single institution no doubt makes accountability more complicated and may make the 
institution’s  mandate  more  ambiguous.  This  is  indeed  one  of  the  reasons  why  in  other 
instances, such as the United States, the option chosen was to create institutions in which 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  responsibilities  are  distributed  more  symmetrically  between  the  central  bank  and  the  other 
economic authorities. 
This  is  no  doubt  a  complex  debate  with  unquestionable  political  connotations.  I  see  more 
advantages than drawbacks in the European approach, since I believe that to achieve good 
coordination between monetary and macro-prudential policies and ensure sufficient capacity 
and  speed  of  response,  the  central  bank  should  play  an  important  role  in  the  design  and 
management of the new macro-prudential instruments and measures. 
The use of unconventional measures in monetary policy implementation 
The second change I wish to discuss regarding monetary policy management is the role of 
what are dubbed unconventional measures. 
As  you  will  recall,  central  banks’  immediate  reaction  to  the  first  signs  of  the  crisis  was  to 
deploy  all  available  conventional  instruments.  Firstly,  faced  with  clogged-up  interbank 
markets,  central  banks  had  to  directly  assume  the  task  of  liquidity  re-distribution  among 
banks.  
Also  under  the  heading  of  conventional  measures,  most  central  banks  aggressively  cut 
official  interest  rates  to  prevent  an  abrupt  and  deep  decline  in  activity  from  triggering  a 
deflationary process. This policy ultimately took intervention interest rates to very low levels. 
Accordingly, when the worsening of the crisis made it necessary to relax the monetary policy 
stance even further, most central banks had to look to unconventional instruments. 
Unconventional  measures  can  be  grouped  into  three  major  blocks:  forward  guidance; 
measures  aimed  at  expanding  the  central  bank  balance  sheet,  and  changes  in  the 
composition of this balance sheet. 
The  use  of  forward  guidance  to  steer  inflation  expectations  and  interest  rates  has  spread 
among the main central banks. The ECB resorted to this last summer to anchor interest rate 
expectations. The Federal Reserve and, to a lesser extent, the Bank of England have also 
used this instrument to signal their intention to provide a greater stimulus to the economy. 
Unconventional measures affecting the size and composition of the central bank’s balance 
sheet are also being extensively used. In the euro area, in October 2008, the ECB changed 
its liquidity management policy, implementing its main refinancing operations at a fixed rate 
with full allotment. In May 2009 it lengthened the average maturity period of monetary policy 
operations  and  set  in  train  a  purchase  programme  for  covered  bonds  and  other  similar 
assets to reactivate this market segment. One year later, faced with the qualitative leap that 
the euro area sovereign debt crisis entailed, it introduced the Securities Market Programme. 
Under  this  programme  it  purchased,  always  on  the  secondary  market,  public  debt  of  the 
countries  where  the  tensions  were  disproportionately  restricting  the  funding  of  their 
economies.  Finally,  when  doubts  over  the  viability  of  the  euro  reached  critical  levels  in 
summer 2012, the ECB responded with an announcement that it would, within its mandate, 
do  whatever  was  needed  to  save  the  euro.  It  designed  a  new  securities  purchase 
programme – the Outright Monetary Transactions Programme – which, though its use has 
not  been  necessary,  has  been  instrumental  in  changing  expectations  in  a  favourable 
direction for market stability and normalisation. 
Conversely, in the United States, the changes in the Federal Reserve balance sheet have 
been  linked  to  massive  asset  purchases  as  part  of  a  standard  quantitative  easing 
programme. These purchases, far higher than those in Europe, have been conducted with 
the express purpose of contributing to easing monetary and financial conditions. The Bank of 
England has, in this respect, been closer to the Federal Reserve than to the ECB. 
There  have  therefore  been  notable  divergences  in  the  use  of  unconventional  instruments 
between the ECB, on one side, and the Federal Reserve and the Bank of England on the 
other. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  These divergences reflect the characteristics of the respective financial systems, in particular 
the  predominant  role  of  banks  in  the  euro  area  compared  with  the  greater  significance  of 
capital markets in the United States and the United Kingdom. 
However, they also respond to a different perception of the risks that a central bank can and 
should assume in terms of its credibility and reputation. Widespread opinion has it that the 
Fed’s strategy has involved some blurring of the boundaries between monetary, fiscal and 
financial  stability  policies.  The  ECB,  on  the  other  hand,  has  kept  a  greater  distance  from 
these  boundaries  because  the  joint  existence  of  a  single  central  bank  with  the  fiscal  and 
financial authorities of 17 independent countries (18 as of today and, possibly, 19 as from 
January) poses particular challenges and difficulties. 
In sum, I have focused on structural aspects of monetary policy. I believe, nonetheless, that 
some brief thoughts on the monetary policy decisions adopted by the ECB governing Council 
last week would not go amiss. 
As you know, a broad raft of measures was agreed last Thursday covering the three main 
spheres of action of the ECB throughout this crisis. The conventional monetary policy stance 
was additionally eased with a further cut in official rates which, for practical purposes, have 
now reached their lower bound. The horizon for the policy of generous liquidity provision was 
extended  once  more  to  2016.  And,  lastly,  a  further  step  was  taken  in  respect  of 
unconventional  measures  with  the  launch  of  a  new,  four-year,  long-term  refinancing 
operation aimed and designed at promoting greater credit flow. 
As we know, neither the ECB nor monetary policy alone can resolve the problems at the root 
of the crisis still besetting the euro area. But decisions such as those last Thursday no doubt 
contribute to facilitating the action of other economic policy tools which, by their nature, may 
have a more powerful and lasting effect on growth and employment. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
