Ignazio Visco: The exit from the sovereign debt crisis: national policies, 
European reforms and monetary policy 
Lectio magistralis by Mr Ignazio Visco, Governor of the Bank of Italy, at the Almo Collegio 
Borromeo, Pavia, 25 March 2014. 
 The  road  to  European  integration  is  a  long  and  arduous  one;  it  is  not  linear:  we  often 
advance step by tiny step, but at times by vigorous leaps. The introduction of the euro was 
one such leap; it was a definite advance but it certainly did not complete the journey. The 
euro  is  a  currency  without  a  State;  this  is  the  lack  it  suffers  from.  The  divergences, 
sometimes  the  diffidence,  that  still  mark  the relations  between  the  member  states  weaken 
the Economic and Monetary Union in the eyes of the international community and in those of 
its citizens. 
This incompleteness, together with the weaknesses of some member countries, has fueled 
the sovereign debt crisis of the euro area. If the weaknesses have engendered doubts about 
the  sustainability  of  national  public  debts,  the  incompleteness  has  raised  fears  for  the 
integrity of the union, allowed the risk of redenomination of the area’s financial assets and 
liabilities in national currencies to gather strength, and reintroduced exchange rate risk within 
a monetary union, thus further weakening the position of the countries in difficulty. 
Without  political  union,  European  economic  governance  has  been  founded  upon  budget 
rules and the ban on rescues between member countries; it has relied on the pressure of the 
single market for economic convergence. However, in many cases the budget rules have not 
been  respected  and  the  macroeconomic  conditions  have  remained  divergent,  also 
structurally. The convergence of interest rates towards the low levels of the most “virtuous” 
countries  allowed  other  countries  to  put  off  the  necessary  adjustments.  For  years  the 
financial markets did not consider the possibility of an increase in sovereign risks. Before the 
crisis,  the  spreads  between  the  yields  on  euro-area  government  securities  had  fallen  to 
virtually nil. 
The tensions in the euro area came to a head in an environment already fragile as a result of 
the  global  financial  crisis  and  the  consequent  recession  of  2008–09.  Initially  they  involved 
Greece in view of the state of its public finances, Ireland owing to its real-estate bubble and 
consequent banking crisis, and Portugal as a result of its macroeconomic imbalances. In the 
summer  of  2011  the  announcement  of  the  involvement  of  private-sector  investors  in  the 
restructuring  of  the  Greek  public  debt  clearly  revealed  the  implications  of  the  ban  on  the 
financial rescue of a Member State imposed by the Maastricht Treaty and of the lack of a 
protocol  for  handling  sovereign  crises.  The  tensions  became  systemic;  the  countries  that 
suffered the most were Spain, above all owing to its banking system’s excessive exposure to 
the property market, and Italy, which was vulnerable because of its high public debt and the 
loss  of  competitiveness and  growth  capability  in  connection  with  the  country’s  pronounced 
slowness  to  adjust  to  the  major  political,  commercial,  demographic  and  technological 
changes of the last twenty years. 
The yield spreads between the euro-area’s sovereign securities increased rapidly. For some 
countries,  including  Italy,  they  rose  far  above  the  level  justified  by  the  economic 
fundamentals.  The  spread  between  ten-year  BTPs  and  German  Bunds,  still  less  than 
200 basis points in the first half of 2011, reached 550 basis points at the end of that year. 
After narrowing in the early months of 2012, it returned above 500 basis points in July. We 
estimated then − and explained in technical analyses and public interventions − that less than 
half of this amount was due to the weaknesses of our economy; the rest reflected the fears of 
the single currency breaking up. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
National policies and European reforms 
To  achieve  a  given  number  of  objectives,  economic  policy  must  have  at  least  an  equal 
number  of  independent  instruments  at  its  disposal.  And  in  fact  the  European  strategy  in 
response  to  the  crisis  did  identify  two  instruments  with  which  to  pursue  two  objectives: 
national policies to remove the fragilities present in individual economies and a strengthening 
of the union to dispel the fears for the integrity of the single currency. In this case, however, 
since the fears of euro reversibility and those for member countries’ debt sustainability fueled 
each other, the instruments were not independent. The reform of European governance thus 
necessarily  hinged  on  the  tightening  of  the  budget  rules  and  the  introduction  of  new 
procedures for the control of other macroeconomic imbalances. 
The  considerable  time  needed  to  implement  this  strategy  conflicted,  however,  with  the 
persistent  market  uncertainties  and  the  lack  of  an  instrument,  such  as  a  common  budget, 
that  would  make  it  possible  to  combat  the  recession  that  had  followed  the  financial  crisis, 
offsetting  the  adverse  short-term  effects  of  the  necessary  national  budgetary  adjustments 
with  expansionary  unitary  policies.  The  succession  of  conventional  and  unconventional 
monetary policy measures helped to make market conditions easier and, as far as possible, 
to counter the fall in demand. 
At  the  same  time,  in  the  worst-hit  countries  the  aggravation  of  the  social  and  economic 
consequences  of  the  crisis  made  it  harder  to  implement  the  necessary  structural  reforms, 
which,  if  they  help  to  restore  an  economy’s  growth  potential,  carry  undeniable  short-term 
costs.  The  immediate  visibility  of  the  results  of  budgetary  policies  has  been  obscured.  In 
Italy, despite the reduction in the budget deficit from 5.5 to 3 per cent of GDP, between 2009 
and  2013  the  ratio  of  the  public  debt  to  GDP  rose  by  more  than  16  percentage  points  to 
132.6 per cent, reflecting above all the brusque slowdown of the economy. One contributory 
factor, counting for nearly 4 percentage points, was Italy’s direct and indirect support to the 
financial adjustment of other euro-area countries. 
The  fragmentation  of  the  financial  markets  produced  by  the  inception  of  a  vicious  circle 
between the situation of sovereign borrowers and that of the corresponding banking systems 
interfered with the transmission of monetary policy, making the conditions of financing to the 
economy  severely  dishomogeneous  among  the  euro-area  countries  and  holding  back  the 
expansionary impulses in the economies that most needed them. The gap between the cost 
of  new  loans  to  firms  in  Italy  and  Germany  widened  progressively  from  virtually  nil  in  the 
summer  of  2011  to  one  percentage  point  at  the  end  of  that  year.  With  the  three-year 
refinancing  operations  decided  in  December  2011  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB 
countered the consequences of the fragmentation and prevented a much worse contraction 
in credit than actually occurred. 
In emergency conditions and with a good deal of uncertainty, national and European policies 
have nonetheless moved in the right direction overall. The state of the public finances of the 
countries most exposed to the crisis has improved, albeit at very high social costs in some 
countries.  Reforms 
to  support  competiveness  have  been  enacted  and  are  being 
implemented. Above all, work has begun to rebuild trust among member states. 
At  the  outset  of  the crisis  Europe  had  no  instruments for financial  assistance  to  sovereign 
issuers: the first measures in favour of Greece, and to a lesser extent Ireland, took the form 
of  bilateral  loans.  With  the  European  Financial  Stability  Facility  (EFSF),  a  temporary 
arrangement  set  up  in  May  2010,  and  the  European  Stability  Mechanism  (ESM),  a 
permanent institution with its own capital endowment inaugurated in October 2012, Europe 
secured a lending capacity of almost €700 billion. Between 2010 and 2013 over €320 billion 
in loans was disbursed to the countries in difficulty. Including the amount paid in towards the 
capital stock of the ESM, Italy’s contribution to this effort was in excess of €55 billion. 
The need to address the asymmetry between the single monetary policy and the multiplicity 
of  national  fiscal  and  structural  polices  has  been  recognized.  The  plan  published  by  the 
European Commission in November 2012 and the report of the President of the European 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Council in June of the same year (updated the following December), plotted the stages of a 
further gradual strengthening of the Economic and Monetary Union. The first, Banking Union, 
is currently being implemented. Other, more difficult stages lie ahead: independent financial 
capacity for the euro area as a whole, a common budget and, in the future, political union. 
In advancing resolutely along this road, one important challenge remains: namely, a marked 
attenuation  of  the  diffidence  found  today  between  governments  and  between  national 
communities.  To  this  end,  Europe  cannot  confine  itself  to  identifying  the  weaknesses  of 
some,  objective  though  they  may  be,  and  requiring  adjustments,  albeit  necessary,  with 
reference  above  all  to  the  short-term results. We  must  look responsibly  to  the  longer-term 
prospects, while also taking account of the sustainability of the sacrifices and the distribution 
of the benefits. 
Preparations for the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM), composed of the ECB and the 
national  authorities,  are  proceeding  apace.  This  constitutes  a  complex  feat  of  institutional 
engineering, at least as demanding as that preceding the introduction of the single currency. 
Building  on  the  accumulated  technical  expertise  of  the  national  authorities,  the  SSM  must 
represent a supranational vision based on best practices in supervisory methods, analytical 
models  and  banking  risk  assessment.  The  transition  to  the  single  supervisor  will  enable 
easier  comparison  of  the  intermediaries  and  systems  of  the  various  countries,  helping  to 
combat  the  tendency  to  segmentation  of  financial  markets  along  national  lines.  The 
comprehensive assessment of the euro area’s leading banks, currently being carried out in 
preparation for the launch of the SSM, goes in the same direction. 
The recent agreement of the European Council, Commission and Parliament on the Single 
Resolution Mechanism (SRM), due to be approved by the latter in plenary session in April, 
marks a further step towards Banking Union, with the harmonization of the responsibilities for 
crisis  resolution,  following  that  of  supervision.  With  respect  to  the  agreement  previously 
reached  by  the  European  Council,  this  has  simplified  the  decision-making  process  and 
shortened the time it will take for the mechanism to become fully operational. 
The SRM will operate through a Single Bank Resolution Fund financed out of contributions 
from  the  participating  banks  and  managed  by  a  Board  comprising  permanent  members, 
representatives  of 
the  European 
Commission,  the  latter  with  observer  status.  The  Board,  on  the  basis  of  the  ECB’s 
assessments concerning the existence of troubled banks, will determine whether bankruptcy 
can be avoided and whether there is a public interest justifying the activation of the resolution 
instruments.  If  so,  it  will  draw  up  a  crisis  resolution  plan  subject  to  the  approval  of  the 
Commission and, through a tacit consent procedure, of the Council. Disbursements of up to 
€5  billion  will  be  decided  at  an  executive  session  of the  Board,  comprising  the  permanent 
members and the resolution authorities of the countries in which the intermediary operates; 
other  decisions  will  be  adopted  in  plenary  session,  at  which  all  the  national  resolution 
authorities participate. 
The Fund will reach its full endowment of €55 billion in eight years. The banks’ contributions 
will be paid into national compartments, which will be progressively mutualized starting with a 
share of 40 per cent in the first year and a further 20 per cent in the second. The Fund may 
also  borrow  on  the  market  on  the  basis  of  decisions  made  in  plenary  session.  All  the 
operational  aspects  must  now  be  rapidly  finalized  to  permit  accurate  assessment  of  its 
financial capacity and to prevent uncertainty from amplifying the national component of risk 
premiums,  thereby  perpetuating  financial  market  fragmentation  and  the  vicious  circle 
between the conditions of sovereign borrowers and banks. 
the  national  resolution  authorities, 
the  ECB  and 
Outright monetary transactions 
As  I  observed,  national  policies  and  European  reforms  have  introduced  changes  that  will 
take  a  long  time  to  implement;  the  distortions  remaining  in  the  financial  markets  in  the 
meantime can jeopardize the whole process. During the crisis, the ECB’s Governing Council 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
made decisive use of the instruments at its disposal, cutting official interest rates repeatedly 
and introducing new refinancing operations with a long maturity and full allotment. In August 
2012 it announced Outright Monetary Transactions (OMT), a new way of intervening in the 
secondary market for government securities. 
The OMTs enabled the ECB to counter the effects of incorrect assessment of a sovereign 
borrower’s  risk  –  in  particular  for  the  component  linked  to  fears  of  the  monetary  union 
breaking  up  –  by  purchasing  securities  on  the  secondary  market  with  no  limits  of  time  or 
quantity,  forgoing  the  status  of  privileged  creditor.  As  a  result  of  the  interdependence 
between  fears  of  euro  reversibility  and  fears  for  the  sustainability  of  individual  countries’ 
public  debt,  OMTs  are  conditional  on  precise  public  finance  commitments  and  structural 
reforms within the framework of the ESM financial assistance programmes. 
The announcement brought success; even without actual intervention on the markets, it was 
instrumental in the drastic reduction of the part of the sovereign risk premium connected with 
fears for the euro’s survival: spreads have fallen to values closer to those consistent with the 
fundamentals, and markets are less fragmented. The yield spread between ten-year Italian 
and  German  government  bonds  has  fallen  back  below  200  basis  points.  Bank  of  Italy 
estimates show that this improvement has been mainly due to the drastic reduction in the risk 
of  the  euro  area  breaking  up.  There  have  been  signs  of  renewed  interest  in  the  Italian 
markets, including the government bond markets, reflected in a decline in the Bank of Italy’s 
debtor  position  in  TARGET2,  which  fell  to  €190  billion  at  the  end  of  February,  almost 
€100 billion less than the peak registered in August 2012. 
These results would have been impossible without the start on resolving national imbalances 
and  the  reform  of  European  governance.  The  single  monetary  policy  cannot  guarantee 
stability unless the economic fundamentals and the institutional architecture of the area are 
consistent with it. The risks are still present and tensions are ready to flare up again. In Italy 
the  national  component  of  the  yield  spread  reflects  high  public  debt  and  poor  growth 
prospects;  it  needs  to  be  reduced  further:  before  the  recession  of  2008,  for  ten-year 
maturities this national component was less than 50 basis points. 
The reform of European governance has resulted in surrenders of sovereignty, albeit limited, 
on  the  part  of  all  member  states,  in  the  areas  of  both  fiscal  and  structural  policy. 
Unconventional monetary policy measures were taken in response to the crisis. There is a 
legitimate  need  to  examine  the  conformity  of  the  solutions  adopted  with  national 
constitutional law. 
Besides  provoking  a  heated  public  debate,  OMTs  were  scrutinized  by  the  German 
Constitutional  Court,  which  applied  to  the  European  Court  of  Justice  for  a  judgment  as  to 
their legitimacy. The German Court argued that OMTs do not pursue a monetary policy goal 
in the strict sense, but since they have been used to safeguard the euro they have taken on 
a responsibility that properly lies with national governments; OMTs, it is held, overstep the 
ECB’s  mandate,  violating the ban  on the monetary financing  of  budget deficits;  they  could 
also lead to a redistribution of resources among the countries of the area, thus achieving the 
same effect as a transfer system that is not envisaged by the European treaties. 
The  aim  of  OMTs  is  to  preserve  monetary  policy  transmission  in  the  euro  area,  which  is 
jeopardized by distortions in the financial markets caused by the sovereign debt crisis. The 
goal is not to neutralize the spreads on the government bonds of specific euro-area member 
states  in  order  to  reduce  their  financial  difficulties  by  interfering  illegitimately  with  price 
formation in the market, but instead to reduce the components of spreads linked to factors 
independent of the financial sustainability of individual countries. Intervention does not aim to 
sustain the purchase of risky assets but to correct the misperception of that risk. The yield 
spreads between sovereign bonds observed at the moments of greatest tension were due 
only in part to market scepticism over the ability of individual member states to ensure the 
sustainability of their public finances and avoid a worsening of their credit risk. In large part, 
rather, they are explained by investors’ fears of euro reversibility. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Lastly, the OMTs do not allow the ECB to buy government bonds whenever the monetary 
policy transmission mechanism is interrupted, but only when the interruption does not reflect 
a  member  state’s  sustainability  conditions.  OMTs  are  never  supposed  to  be  used  to 
purchase  the  securities  of  a  country  with  unsustainable  public  finances.  As  regards  the 
argument concerning the risk of resources being redistributed as a result of OMTs, the risk 
that would be incurred by forgoing them would be far worse. 
The way out of the crisis 
Exit from the crisis in the euro area cannot be achieved by the isolated actions of individual 
economic  policy  authorities.  In  particular,  monetary  policy  alone  cannot  guarantee  the 
financial stability of the euro area if the problems underlying the sovereign debt crisis are not 
resolved at national as at European level. 
The  fragility  of  the  public  finances  in  some  countries  is  the  result  of  protracted  fiscal 
imprudence  and  a  culpable  underestimation  of  the  consequences  of  broad  and  persistent 
losses of competitiveness. Budgetary policy must ensure debt sustainability and full access 
to the market. The rules agreed at European level are the means, not the end. 
The real budget constraint for our country is given by the need to guarantee the sustainability 
of the public debt and to maintain full access to the financial market. As I have pointed out on 
more  than  one  occasion,  our  Treasury’s  annual  resort  to  the  markets  is  on  the  order  of 
€400 billion.  In  a  context  still  fraught  with  tension,  it  takes  very  little  to  undermine  investor 
confidence.  This  is  what  happened  between  the  summer  of  2011  and  the  spring  of  2012, 
when the share of Italian government bonds in foreign hands plummeted. 
The agreements concluded in the last two years have put the earlier budget commitments 
into practice. The rule on public debt, which will apply to Italy for the first time in 2016, calls 
for  an  average  annual  reduction  of  about  one twentieth  of  the  excess over  60  per  cent  of 
GDP. In order to comply, it is not necessary to lower the nominal size of the debt. In “normal” 
conditions  of  close  to  3 per  cent  nominal  economic  growth,  all  that  is  needed  is  structural 
budget balance. Contrary to what some commentators say, a correction of €40–50 billion a 
year  will  not  be  required,  nor  will  it  be  necessary  to  maintain  a  restrictive  budget  policy 
permanently. 
Although the debt rule does allow some room for flexibility, we must continue to aim for real 
growth in the economy, and hence the recovery of investment – which is at once a supply 
factor  and  a  fundamental  demand  component.  As  to  price  developments,  inflation  is  still 
below the level consistent with the ECB’s definition of price stability, i.e. an annual price rise 
of below but close to 2 per cent in the medium term. 
Actually, consumer price inflation in the euro area and Italy has fallen consistently more than 
expected in recent months and has kept below 1 per cent since October last year. According 
to  recent  estimates  by  the  ECB,  euro-area  inflation  will  average  1.0  per  cent  this  year, 
1.3 per  cent  in  2015  and  1.5  per  cent  in  2016.  Our  forecasts  paint  a  similar  picture  for 
consumer prices in Italy. 
We are not in a situation of generalized price reduction, of deflation. But even a long period 
of  excessively  small  price  changes  can  have  undesirable  consequences:  it  hinders  the 
correction  of  macroeconomic  imbalances  through  the  adjustment  of  relative  prices;  it  can 
prompt consumers to postpone purchases, especially of durable goods; it can affect the cost 
of capital thus deterring capital formation; and it makes debt service more onerous. If such a 
situation lasts too long, it can cause inflation expectations to become dangerously detached 
from the monetary policy. 
The risk of long-term inflation expectations no longer being anchored to price stability must 
be resolutely countered. This risk is limited for the time being, but there are signs that should 
not  be  underestimated.  The  downward  trend  in  inflation  expectations  has  sharpened  in 
recent months, spreading even to more distant time horizons: the yields on inflation swaps 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
indicate that the expected annual inflation rate is 1.2 per cent three years ahead and 1.6 per 
cent  five  years  ahead.  Professional  forecasters  surveyed  by  the  ECB  estimate  a  nearly 
20 per cent probability that in two years’ time inflation will be 0.9 per cent or lower. 
The formation of expectations is a non-linear process; major changes can occur suddenly, 
almost  without  warning, making  it more  difficult  to  regain  control.  Against  this  background, 
the  ECB’s  Governing  Council  has  reaffirmed  its  intention  to  maintain  an  accommodative 
monetary policy stance for as long as necessary and has firmly reiterated that policy rates 
will  remain  at  present  or  lower  levels  for  an  extended  period. In  line  with  its  mandate,  the 
Council will use all the tools needed to maintain price stability. 
To  accompany  the  reform  efforts  of  individual  countries,  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy 
commitment in its area of responsibility must be matched by the commitments of the other 
institutional actors. The debate on the euro area’s “fiscal capacity” launched by the Report of 
the President of the European Council and the Commission’s Plan was abruptly broken off 
after  the  Commission  presented  its  plans  for  major  economic  reforms  and  for  financial 
support  to  structural  reforms  in  March  last  year.  The  delays  in  implementing  structural 
reforms in many countries are responsible for the build-up of the macroeconomic imbalances 
that  have  fuelled  the  current  crisis.  The  Commission’s  proposals,  expressly  open  to 
discussion  in  order  to  discover  any  scope  for  improvement,  go  in  the  right  direction  of 
identifying mechanisms to support the convergence needed to strengthen the Economic and 
Monetary Union. 
Italy must succeed in taking full advantage of all the opportunities offered by the Union. In the 
past,  for  example,  we  were  not  able  to  benefit  fully  from  the  European  Structural  Funds. 
Introducing  structural  reforms  that  help  us  to  regain  competitiveness  is  an  essential  step 
towards the country’s recovery. The measures that need to be taken have long since been 
identified. The process of European coordination could help to flesh out the details, but the 
ultimate responsibility for the reforms still lies with us. 
It is important to continue resolutely along the path to a fuller Union. The adoption of single 
mechanisms  for  banking  supervision  and  resolution  is  a  crucial  step.  The  benefits  of 
strengthening  European  integration  far  outweigh  the  alleged  advantages  of  weakening  it. 
Choices must be made responsibly. We cannot fear only the risks of action and disregard 
those of inertia. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
