  Richard W Fisher: Forward guidance (With reference to Monty Python, 
Odysseus, Apollo, Paul Fisher, Deng Xiaoping and Mario Draghi’s Old 
Man) 
Remarks  by  Mr  Richard  W  Fisher,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  Dallas,  before  the  Asia  Society  Hong  Kong  Center,  Hong  Kong,  4  April 
2014. 
 The views expressed by the author do not necessarily reflect official positions of the Federal Reserve System. 
Thank you, Alice (Mong). It is always an honor to speak before the Asia Society anywhere in 
the world but especially here in Hong Kong, one of my favorite cities. I was in Hong Kong 
during  the  transition  ceremonies  in  1997  when  the  White  House  called  to  ask  if  I  would 
become deputy U.S. trade representative. It was a position in which I served for four years 
under President Clinton, and it put me on the path to high-level public service. That and my 
love  for  the  spectacular  food  here  have  cemented  Hong  Kong  in  my  heart.  Thank  you for 
inviting me to stop here on my way to Beijing. 
I want to talk today about “forward guidance” in monetary policy. It is the subject du jour of 
central bankers. We’ve seen it popularized by the Bank of Canada and Bank of England, and 
it  figured  prominently  in  the  statement  recently  released  by  the  Federal  Open  Market 
Committee  (FOMC)  of  the  Federal  Reserve  after  our  meeting  of  March  18–19  and  again 
during  the  post-meeting  press  conference  of  the  Fed  Chair,  Janet  Yellen.  It  is  front  and 
center on the agenda of the FOMC. 
To understand forward guidance and its prominence in current discussions within monetary 
policy circles, it helps to retrace recent history. 
Adieu quantitative easing 
To  encourage  economic  recovery  from  the  debacle  of  the  financial  crisis  of  2007–09,  the 
FOMC  cut  interest  rates  to  near  zero.  The  Fed  introduced  an  array  of  special  lending 
facilities  during  the  most  panicked  stage  of  the  crisis.  These  credit  and  liquidity  programs 
were largely self-liquidating as market functioning improved. But still being “zero bound,” we 
embarked  upon  a  program  of  massively  expanding  the  Fed’s  balance  sheet,  referred  to 
internally as “large-scale asset purchases” and popularly known as quantitative easing (QE). 
By  buying  copious  quantities  of  longer-term  U.S.  Treasury  bonds  and  mortgage-backed 
securities (MBS), our balance sheet has grown from slightly under $900 billion prior to the 
crisis to $4.3 trillion at present. 
When the Fed buys a Treasury note or bond or an MBS, we pay for it, putting money out into 
the economy with the expectation that the money will be used by banks and other creditors 
and investors to finance job-creating investment, the purchase of homes and other expansive 
economic activity. 
Thus far, much of the money we have pushed out into the economy has been stored away 
rather than expended to the desired degree. For example, we have seen a huge buildup in 
the  reserves  of  the  depository  institutions  of  the  United  States.  Less  than  a  fifth  of 
commercial  credit  in  the  highly  developed  U.S.  capital  markets  is  extended  through 
depository  institutions.  Yet  depository  institutions  alone  have  accumulated  a  total  of 
$2.57 trillion  in  excess  reserves  –  money  that  is  sitting  on  the  sidelines  rather  than  being 
loaned out into the economy. That’s up from a norm of around $2 billion before the crisis. 
The  Fed’s  large-scale  asset  purchases  dramatically  and  more  broadly  impacted  credit 
markets. The U.S. credit markets are awash in liquidity. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  As of March 14, our par holdings of fixed-rate MBS exceeded 30 percent of the outstanding 
stock  of  those  securities.  Through  these  purchases,  we  have  driven  down  mortgage  rates 
and helped rekindle the U.S. housing market. 
We  now  own  just  shy  of  24  percent  of  the  stock  of  Treasury  coupon  securities.  Having 
concentrated our purchases of Treasuries further out on the yield curve, and done so in size, 
we have driven nominal interest rates across the credit spectrum to lows not seen in over a 
half century. 
This has allowed U.S. businesses to restructure their balance sheets, manage their earnings 
per  share  through  share  buybacks  financed  with  bargain-basement  debt  issuance,  bolster 
stock  prices  through  enhanced  dividend  payouts  and  position  themselves  for  financing 
growth once they see the whites of the eyes of greater certainty about their economic future. 
By driving nominal interest rates to half-century lows, we have also reduced the hurdle rate 
by  which  future  cash  flows  of  publicly  traded  businesses  are  discounted.  Thus,  through 
financial engineering, we have helped bolster a roaring bull market for equities: The indexes 
for stocks have nearly tripled from the lows reached in March 2009. 
Alongside these signs of rebound have been some developments that give rise to caution. I 
have  spoken  of  these  in  recent  speeches,  echoing  concerns  I  have  raised  in  FOMC 
discussions: 
• 
The  price-to-earnings (PE)  ratio  of  stocks  is  among the  highest  decile  of  reported 
values since 1881. Bob Shiller’s inflation-adjusted PE ratio reached 26 this week as 
the Standard & Poor’s 500 hit yet another record high. For context, the measure hit 
30 before Black Tuesday in 1929 and reached an all-time high of 44 before the dot-
com implosion at the end of 1999.1 
Since  bottoming  out  five  years  ago,  the  market  capitalization  of  the  U.S.  stock 
market as a percentage of the country’s economic output has more than doubled to 
145 percent – the highest reading since the record was set in March 2000. 
Margin  debt  has  been  setting  historic  highs  for  several  months  running  and, 
according  to  data  released  by  the  New  York  Stock  Exchange  on  Monday,  now 
stands at $466 billion.2 
Junk-bond yields have declined below 5.5 percent, nearing record lows.3 
Covenant-lite lending is becoming more widespread. In my Federal Reserve District, 
96 percent of which is the booming economy of Texas, bankers are reporting that 
money center banks are lending on terms that are increasingly imprudent. 
   The former funds manager in me sees these as yellow lights. The central banker in me is 
reminded  of  the mandate  to  safeguard financial  stability.  As  I  said  recently  in  a  speech  in 
Mexico, we must watch these developments carefully lest we become responsible for raising 
the ghost of irrational exuberance. 
It  is  clear to me  that  we  have  a  liquidity  pool  that  is  more  than  sufficiently  deep  and  wide 
enough nationwide to finance job-creating capital expansion and reduce labor market “slack.” 
But that will happen only if and when our fiscal authorities – the Congress and the president 
                                                
1   Robert Shiller’s price-to-earnings ratio for the S&P 500 is based on average inflation-adjusted earnings from 
the previous 10 years, known as the cyclically adjusted PE ratio. 
2   Data  on  market  activity  and  margin  debt  can  be  found  at  www.nyxdata.com/nysedata/asp/factbook/ 
viewer_interactive.asp. 
3   As measured by the Bank of America/Merrill Lynch high-yield corporate debt index covering credits rated BB+ 
and below. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  –  are  able  to  muster  the  courage  to  craft  tax,  spending  and  regulatory  incentives  for  job-
creating enterprises to mobilize liquidity for expansion and payroll growth. 
Thus far, inflation has yet to raise its ugly head, and inflation expectations as measured by 
consumer surveys and market-traded instruments have remained stolid. However, with each 
passing day, constantly adding massive amounts to the monetary base will inevitably present 
a significant challenge to the FOMC, which must ultimately manage this high-power money 
so that it does not become fuel for sustained inflation above the committee’s 2 percent target 
once it is activated and flows into the economy. 
Thus,  I  was  more  than  supportive  of  the  collective  decision  of  the  FOMC  to  begin  cutting 
back on our rate of accumulation of assets beginning in December. Over the course of our 
recent meetings,  we  have  cut  back from  accumulating  $85  billion  per  month  in  Treasuries 
and MBS to a present rate of $55 billion per month. This is still somewhat promiscuous. Even 
with the taper, the recent decline of mortgage supply has driven our absorption of the MBS 
market to 85 percent of fixed-rate MBS issuance. The fall in net MBS supply is outpacing the 
taper. 
At  the  current  reduction  in  the  run  rate  of  accumulation,  the  exercise  known  as  QE3  will 
terminate in October (when I project we will hold more than 40 percent of the MBS market 
and almost a fourth of outstanding Treasuries). We will then be back to managing monetary 
policy through the more traditional tool of the overnight lending rate that anchors the yield 
curve. 
Enter forward guidance 
This  is  no  small  matter.  Quantitative  easing  has  made  life  easy  not  only  for  corporate 
treasurers and homeowners and consumers burdened by debt, but also for money market 
operators. It has run up the price of stocks and bonds mostly in straight-line fashion, and it 
has  taken  volatility  out  of  the  marketplace,  allowing  market  operators  and  their  clients  to 
profit with little effort. The question of when and under what conditions the FOMC will begin 
to raise the base rate off the floor is understandably of intense interest. 
For example, every quarter, FOMC participants each provide forecasts of the year in which 
they presently think the target overnight rate will be raised, based on what they individually 
consider to be the proper conduct of monetary policy. This has given rise to what I consider a 
rabid focus on the economic projections, or “dots,” that accompany our FOMC statements on 
a  quarterly  basis.  Monty  Python  could  almost  have  written  a  sketch  on  the  pundits’ 
preoccupation with the dots.4 
Truth  be  told,  although  many  of  us  have  econometric  models  and  all  of  us  have  a 
phenomenal team of economists who help us develop our projections, these estimates are, 
in the end, largely guesswork. Especially the further out in time they go. Yet the press and 
the markets focus on them as though they were the writ of all-knowing, all-seeing monetary 
sages. On Monday night, for example, there was much ado made about Janet Yellen noting 
in Chicago that the central tendency of our best guesses was that full employment would be 
somewhere between a 5.2 and 5.6 percent unemployment rate. 
It is nonetheless helpful to contemplate what may be useful guideposts for deciding when to 
raise  the  base  rate  and  how  we  may  convey  this  to  the  markets.  And  so  the  FOMC  is 
grappling  with  just  what,  in  fact,  we  can  provide  the  marketplace  in  the  form  of  forward 
guidance about our future modus operandi. 
                                                
4   Monty  Python  is  the  British  comedy  troupe  known  for  its  satirical  skits.  A  parody  about  the  FOMC’s  “dots” 
could  rank  up  there  with  the  spoof  about  the  argument  clinic  “intended  to  create  grievous  mental  
confusion 
enjoyment: 
www.youtube.com/watch?v=kQFKtI6gn9Y. 
the  general  public.”  A 
provided 
among 
here 
your 
link 
for 
is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Odysseus or Apollo? 
Research  papers  have  addressed  this  subject.  For  example,  some  academic  economists 
draw  on  Greek mythology  to  distinguish  different  techniques for crafting forward guidance, 
making a distinction between Odyssean and Delphic forms of guidance. 
The  Odyssean  model  involves  committing  to  a  policy  rule  or  to  a  criterion  for  choosing 
between different policy alternatives. Policymakers tie themselves to the mast of this rule or 
criterion, sacrificing some of their short-run freedom of action in order to achieve what they 
hope will be superior outcomes over the long term. In monetary policy, commitment can in 
theory reduce the risk of future recession and more tightly control medium-horizon inflation 
expectations  at  the  cost  of  a  somewhat  poorer  near-term  inflation  or  unemployment 
performance. 
Commitments  come  in  lots  of  different  flavors  and  styles,  and  forward  guidance  isn’t 
necessarily  helpful  or  wise  just  because  it’s  Odyssean. Tying  yourself to  the  mast  isn’t  an 
especially good idea if your ship is sinking, or if enemy forces are directing fire toward your 
deck. Committing to a particular path for the funds rate, or to a time schedule for funds-rate 
liftoff, is not something in which I or many of my colleagues have any interest. Commitments 
that are contingent on future economic conditions, in contrast, enjoy at least some support on 
the  FOMC.  President  (Narayana)  Kocherlakota  of  the  Minneapolis  Fed,  for  example,  has 
notably  proposed  that  the  committee  promise  to  delay  liftoff  at  least  until  either  the 
unemployment rate reaches 5 1/2 percent or forecasted inflation hits 2 1/4 percent (provided 
longer-term  inflation  expectations  remain  well-anchored,  and  possible  risks  to  financial 
stability remain well-contained). 
My own view is that commitments aren’t always credible, especially if they purport to extend 
far into the future. It’s hard to bind future policymakers, and it’s difficult to anticipate all the 
various economic circumstances that might arise down the road. As a general rule, then, the 
further into the future a commitment extends, the vaguer it tends to be. Along these lines, the 
FOMC periodically reiterates its commitment to do what it is legally mandated to do: pursue 
full  employment,  price  stability  and  a  stable  financial  system.  But  getting  from  there  to  an 
actual prescription for the funds rate isn’t straightforward. If it were, FOMC meetings wouldn’t 
take eight-plus hours of discussion and hundreds of pages of briefing materials. 
Delphic forward guidance is less binding than Odyssean guidance. Like the responses of the 
oracle of Apollo at Delphi, it is more obscure, more enigmatic. It amounts to saying, “Here’s 
what we think we are going to want to do if the economy evolves as we currently expect.” 
Delphic  guidance  clarifies  your  current  thinking  about  future  policy  without  making  any 
promises – even contingent promises. 
Our  current  FOMC  statement  is  chock-full  of  Delphic  guidance.  On  asset  purchases:  “If 
incoming information broadly supports the committee’s expectation of ongoing improvement 
in  labor  market  conditions  and  inflation  moving  back  toward  its  longer-run  objective,  the 
committee will likely reduce the pace of asset purchases in further measured steps ...” On 
the timing of liftoff: “The committee continues to anticipate ... that it likely will be appropriate 
to maintain the current target range for the federal funds rate for a considerable time after the 
asset purchase program ends ...” On the post-liftoff path of the funds rate: “The committee 
currently anticipates that, even after employment and inflation are near mandate-consistent 
levels, economic conditions may, for some time, warrant keeping the target federal funds rate 
below levels the committee views as normal in the longer run.” 
As a former practitioner, I can tell you that market operators prefer Odyssean guidance to 
Delphic guidance, and within the Odyssean model, tend to prefer inflexible, calendar-based 
guidance  to  guidance  that’s  either  conditional  or  qualitative.  Life  in  my  former  incarnation 
would  naturally  be  much  more  pleasant  if  I  could  dial  in  the  specific  dates  and  levels  of 
interest  rate  movements.  But  as  a  central  banker,  I  am  haunted  by  a  comment  made  by 
Winston  Churchill  in  1926,  shortly  before  things  began  to  unravel  in  the  global  financial 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  markets.  Speaking  at  the Waldorf  Hotel  in  London,  he  said:  “In  finance,  everything  that  is 
agreeable is unsound and everything that is sound is disagreeable.”5 
I worry that the predictability of calendar-based commitments can quite possibly be unsound 
in two key dimensions. First, the quantitative moorings may be misplaced – especially given 
shifts  in  economic  relationships  following  the  worst  downturn  since  the  Great  Depression. 
Second, I question if it is sound policy to remove all uncertainty or volatility from the market. I 
wonder whether being totally predictable may, at best, lead to a false complacency that can 
too  easily  be  upset  should  we  need  to  change  course.  At  its  worst,  I  fear  calendar-based 
commitments  can  lead,  perversely,  to  market  instability  by  encouraging  markets  to 
overshoot, as they appear to be doing in some quarters at present. I say “calendar-based 
commitments,”  even  though  the  FOMC  has  tried  to  couch  its  calendar-based  guidance  in 
Delphic language. The problem is that guidance intended to be Delphic is, in practice, often 
given an Odyssean interpretation. Whether because of wishful thinking by market operators 
or because of policymaker inertia (it’s easier to stick with the previously announced plan than 
to explain a departure from that plan), the Delphic undergoes metamorphosis and becomes 
Odyssean. 
Thus, I wonder if anything beyond the Delphic is practicable, as much as I might like to set 
our  compass  on  autopilot.  But  even  expressing  meaningful  forward  guidance  along  more 
amorphous lines is challenging. 
“We’ll see”: 摸 石 頭 過 河 
The  point  is:  Forward  guidance  can  be  a  complicated  monetary  policy  tool.  I  had  an 
interesting discussion about this two weeks ago with a couple of the members of the Bank of 
England’s Monetary Policy Committee (MPC). They noted that Chris Giles of the Financial 
Times has devoted a substantial amount of thoughtful attention to the discussion of forward 
guidance. 
In  Giles’  Money  Supply  blog  post  of  Oct.  2,  2013,  he  wrote:  “Forget  triggers,  thresholds, 
knockouts and long lists of conditions. Paul Fisher, the Bank of England’s head of markets, 
says  everyone  is  wrong  to  think  forward  guidance  is  complicated.  The  policy  was 
summarized in a single simple sentence of the [Bank of England’s] explanatory document, he 
said in a speech today. This is the sentence,” and I’m quoting Giles quoting Paul Fisher: “In 
essence, the MPC judges that, until the margin of slack within the economy has narrowed 
significantly, it will be appropriate to maintain the current exceptionally stimulative stance of 
monetary  policy,  provided  that  such  an  approach  remains  consistent  with  its  primary 
objective of price stability and does not endanger financial stability.” 
To  a  central  banker,  that  may  have  seemed  about  as  concise  a  Delphic  statement  as 
possible. But Giles suggested, “I’m sure we can all do better than that.” He took a stab at 
translating the sentence himself, suggesting that it meant “the MPC will let the recovery run 
for as long as it can,” but he invited others who might have “better, more elegant and more 
accurate translations” to submit them via social media. Later that day, he announced the best 
summation received. Forward guidance expressed in a two-word sentence: “We’ll see.”6 
That  about  sums  it  up.  The  FOMC  is  seeking  to  make  sure  that  we  have  a  sustained 
recovery without giving rise to inflation or market instability. We will conduct monetary policy 
accordingly. Regardless of the way we may finally agree at the FOMC to write it out or have 
Chair Yellen explain it at a press conference, we really cannot say more than that. 
                                                
5   From Churchill by Himself: The Definitive Collection of Quotations, edited by Richard Langworth, Philadelphia: 
Perseus Books Group, 2008, p. 17. Langworth cites Churchill from March 15, 1926. 
6   “Forward guidance in a sentence,” by Chris Giles, Financial Times, Money Supply (blog), Oct. 2, 2013. Giles 
announced the “forward guidance in a sentence … winner” on Twitter later that same day. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  So that’s where we are: “We’ll see.” Or as Deng Xiaoping would have phrased it: “We will 
cross the river by feeling the stones” ( 摸 石 頭 過 河). We will feel the stones of the economy 
with the bottoms of our feet as central bankers and proceed accordingly. 
Draghi’s Old Man 
At a recent meeting I attended in Frankfurt, Mario Draghi of the European Central Bank told 
of a man who needed a heart transplant. The doctor leveled  with him that he had several 
choices,  including  the  heart  of  a  75-year-old  central  banker.  “I’ll  take  that  one,”  the  man 
answered immediately. “Why?” the doctor asked. “Well,” said the man, “because it’s never 
been used.” 
As  was  made  clear  in Chair  Yellen’s  speech  in  Chicago  earlier  this  week,  central  bankers 
have hearts, and the Fed is working to harness monetary policy to relieve the plight of the 
cyclically unemployed. But we also need to be vigilant in making clear that we are obligated 
to maintain price stability and that allowing inflation to take grip is a cardinal sin for a central 
bank, for it is the cruelest of afflictions for all of society. 
Joachim Fels of Morgan Stanley noted that Draghi’s little joke serves as a reminder not that 
my  colleagues  and  I  at  the  Federal  Reserve  belong  to  a  heartless  tribe  but  that  “central 
banking  is  about  making  rational,  cool-headed  and  unemotional  decisions  often  under 
difficult  circumstances”7.  We  must  conduct  monetary  policy  in  a  cool-headed  and 
unemotional  manner  in  order  to  achieve  both  of  the  mandates  Congress  has  given  us  – 
preserving  price  stability  and  achieving  full  employment  –  while  avoiding  financial  market 
turbulence. 
This  is  the  very  best  we  can  offer  you,  whether  you  are  from  ancient  Ithaca  or  Delphi  or 
modern Hong Kong. Those who think we can be more specific in stating our intentions and 
broadcasting our every next move with complete certainty are, in my opinion, clinging to the 
myth  that  economics  is  a  hard  science  and  monetary  policy  a  precise  scientific  procedure 
rather than the applied best judgment of cool-headed, unemotional decision-makers. We will 
cross  the  river  that  separates  us  from  a  normalized  economy  and  a  normalized  monetary 
policy by feeling the stones. We may slip on occasion, but you should not underestimate our 
intention  to  apply  whatever  talents  we  possess  as  policymakers  to  do  what  is  right  to 
advance economic prosperity while strictly adhering to our commitment of containing inflation 
and maintaining market stability. 
Thank you (謝 謝). 
                                                
7   Richard  Fisher  joined  Mario  Draghi,  Mark  Carney,  Joachim  Fels  and  others  at  a  symposium  on  “Financial 
Stability and the Role of Central Banks,” organized by Jens Weidmann and Deutsche Bundesbank in Frankfurt 
am Main on Feb. 27–28, 2014. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
