  Narayana Kocherlakota: Monetary Policy Report to the Minnesota 
Business Partnership 
Speech  by  Mr  Narayana  Kocherlakota,  President  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
Minneapolis, at Minnesota Business Partnership, Minneapolis, Minnesota, 8 July 2014. 
 Thanks  to  Manuel  Amador,  David  Fettig,  Terry  Fitzgerald  and  Sam  Schulhofer-Wohl  for  their  assistance  with 
these remarks and the supporting materials. 
Thanks  for  the  introduction,  and  thank  you  for  the  invitation  to  join  you  here  today.  It’s  a 
pleasure to speak to the Partnership again. 
I’ll begin my speech with some basics about the Federal Reserve System and the Federal 
Open  Market  Committee  (the  FOMC).  But  the  bulk  of  my  remarks  should  be  viewed  as  a 
quarterly  report  of  sorts.  Your  elected  representatives,  the  Congress  of  the  United  States, 
have charged the Federal Reserve with achieving key macroeconomic goals. My speech will 
be  a  report  to  you,  the Minnesota  Business  Partnership,  about  how  the  FOMC  is  doing  in 
terms  of  achieving those  goals.  Please keep  in  mind,  though, that I  will  be  expressing my 
own views, and they are not necessarily those of others in the Federal Reserve System. 
I look forward to responding to, and learning from, your questions at the conclusion of my 
remarks. 
Federal Reserve System basics 
Let me begin with some basics about the Federal Reserve System. I like to tell people that 
the  Fed  is  a  uniquely  American  institution.  What  do  I  mean  by  that?  Well,  relative  to  its 
counterparts  around  the  world,  the  U.S.  central  bank  is  highly  decentralized.  The  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis is one of 12 regional Reserve Banks that, along with the Board 
of  Governors  in  Washington,  D.C.,  make  up  the  Federal  Reserve  System.  Our  Bank 
represents the ninth of the 12 Federal Reserve districts and includes Montana, the Dakotas, 
Minnesota, northwestern Wisconsin and the Upper Peninsula of Michigan. 
Eight times per year, the FOMC meets to set the path of interest rates over the next six to 
seven  weeks. All 12 presidents of the various regional Federal Reserve Banks – including 
me  –  and  the  seven  governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Board  contribute  to  these 
deliberations. However, the Committee itself consists only of the governors, the president of 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and a rotating group of four other presidents. I’m one 
of  those  four  presidents  this  year.  In  this  way,  the  structure  of  the  FOMC  mirrors  the 
federalist structure of our government, because representatives from different regions of the 
country – the various presidents – have input into FOMC deliberations. 
At  those  eight  meetings,  the  FOMC  decides  on  the  level  of  monetary  stimulus  for  the 
economy.  I  won’t  get  into  too  many  details  of  what  that  term  “monetary  stimulus”  means, 
although I’m more than happy to take questions about it later. For now, I’ll just make three 
high-level points. First, when the FOMC changes the level of stimulus, our actions tend to 
push inflation – that is, the rate of growth of prices – and employment in the same direction. 
Raising  the  level  of  stimulus  puts  upward  pressure  on  both  inflation  and  employment. 
Lowering  the  level  of  stimulus  puts  downward  pressure  on  both  inflation  and  employment. 
Second, the FOMC’s actions only affect inflation and employment with a lag, usually thought 
to  be  about  one-and-a-half to  two  years.  Finally,  over  the  long  run, monetary  policy  is  the 
prime determinant of the overall rate of inflation in the economy, but many factors beyond 
monetary policy affect the long-run level of employment. 
What is the FOMC seeking to achieve by varying the level of monetary stimulus? Congress 
has  charged  the  FOMC  with  making  monetary  policy  to  promote  price  stability  and  to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  promote maximum employment. The FOMC has interpreted the first goal, price stability, to 
mean keeping inflation close to 2 percent. The FOMC’s job is to vary monetary stimulus over 
time to meet these mandated objectives. 
The remainder of my speech will take the form of a report to you about how the FOMC is 
doing in terms of meeting these goals set for us by your elected representatives in Congress. 
Price stability 
I will start with price stability. Again, operationally, the FOMC has translated this into keeping 
the rate of increase of the price level – that is, the inflation rate – close to 2 percent. Even 
more specifically, the FOMC uses what’s called the personal consumption expenditure price 
index, or PCE, to calculate inflation. This measure of inflation captures the rate of increase in 
all goods and services, including those related to food and energy. 
The Great  Recession  is  dated  as  starting  in  December  2007.  Here’s  a graph  of  how  PCE 
inflation has behaved since that date. 
 
  The main take-away is that, since the beginning of the Great Recession, the PCE inflation 
rate has averaged 1.5 percent per year. 
In some sense, going back to 2007 is a little misleading, because the FOMC did not adopt its 
2  percent  inflation  target  until  January  2012.  However,  even  since  that  decision,  PCE 
inflation has been running lower than 2 percent. 
So, whether we look over the past six years or over the past two years, inflation has been 
running too low to be consistent with price stability. The good news is that the FOMC does 
expect inflation to turn back toward 2 percent. However, that return to 2 percent could take a 
long time. For example, the minutes from the April FOMC meeting reveal that the Federal 
Reserve Board staff outlook is for inflation to remain below 2 percent over the next few years. 
In  a  similar  vein,  earlier  this  year,  the  Congressional  Budget  Office  (CBO)  predicted  that 
inflation will not reach 2 percent until 2018 – more than 10 years after the beginning of the 
Great Recession. 
This subdued inflation forecast may be surprising to some of you. After all, as you look at the 
chart, you can see that PCE inflation has risen relatively rapidly over the past three months 
and is now 1.8 percent – very close to the FOMC’s target. But the chart also clearly shows 
that many large fluctuations in PCE inflation end up being purely transitory. To formulate an 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  accurate  forecast  for  inflation,  we  need  to  look  through  these  transitory  fluctuations,  no 
matter how large they might be – and that’s not always easy. 
Of course, my forecast is only a forecast. I am extremely confident that the actual path of 
inflation  over  the  next  four  years  will  turn  out  to  be  higher  or  lower  than  what  I  currently 
expect it to be! What you should take away, though, is that I currently see the probability of 
inflation’s  averaging  more  than  2  percent  over  the  next  four  years  as  being  considerably 
lower than the probability of inflation’s averaging less than 2 percent over the next four years. 
And  that’s  why  I  conclude  my  discussion  of  inflation  by  saying  that  the  FOMC  is 
undershooting its price stability goal. 
Low inflation: why it matters 
I’ve told you that inflation has been, is and will be too low relative to the FOMC’s target of 
2 percent. But why should you care that inflation is too low? Isn’t it a good thing when goods 
and  services  aren’t  as  expensive  to  buy?  There  are  two  answers  to  this  –  very  good  – 
question. 
The first answer is that borrowers and lenders in our economy count on the Federal Reserve 
to deliver the inflation rate it targeted. If inflation is higher than the target, lenders are harmed 
because  they  receive  payments  that  are  smaller  than  they  expected  in  real  terms.  Put 
another way, they can buy fewer goods and services with their payments than they expected. 
If inflation is lower than the target, borrowers are harmed because they must make payments 
that are larger than they expected in real terms. Why is that? When inflation is below target, 
goods and services are indeed cheaper, but wages also tend to be lower. Depressed wages 
mean  that  a family’s  mortgage  payment consumes  a  larger fraction  of  the family’s  income 
than they expected when they took out the loan. That unexpectedly high mortgage payment 
harms the family, and it’s a harm that the FOMC can prevent by achieving the inflation rate 
that it targeted. 
The  second  answer  is:  You  should  care  about  below-target  inflation  because  it  signals  a 
significant problem in our economy. 
Let me explain what I mean. At a basic level, you should think of prices as a signal about 
how our economy is using its available resources. In 2012, I had an experience that brought 
home  this  intuition  in  a  very  clear  way.  I  visited  Williston,  on  the  western  edge  of  North 
Dakota. As it is today, when I visited Williston, it was in the heart of a major oil boom. That 
boom was pushing hard on the physical resources – like roads, water, housing – available to 
Williston  and  pushing  hard  on  the  human  resources  available  to  Williston.  The  result  was 
relatively high inflation. 
So, when inflation is high compared to the Fed’s target, like it was in Williston, we know that 
demand is pushing hard on available resources. The converse is also true: Inflation is low 
compared to the Fed’s target when the demand for goods and services is too low to fully use 
the  available  resources  in  society.  The  low  inflation  in  the  United  States  tells  us  that 
resources are being wasted. 
What  exactly  are  these  wasted  resources?  There  are  multiple  answers  to  this  question  – 
when  demand  is  too  low,  lots  of  resources  are  left  unused.  But  the  biggest  and  most 
disturbing answer is our fellow Americans. There are many productive people in the United 
States available to work more hours, and our society is deprived of their production. 
This key  point  is generally  underappreciated. I’ve  said  that the  FOMC  is  undershooting  its 
price stability objective and is expected to continue to do so. But we should all keep in mind 
that this outcome – and especially the forecast for continued undershooting – typically means 
that  the  FOMC  is  also  underperforming  on  its  other  objective  of  promoting  maximum 
employment. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Should the FOMC make up for past inflation misses? 
I’ve described how I expect that the PCE inflation rate will run below the FOMC’s 2 percent 
target for several years – possibly until 2018. Let’s assume that forecast turns out to be right. 
This  outcome  raises  a  key  policy  question:  How  should  the  FOMC’s  inflation  goals  in  the 
years  following  2018  be  influenced  by  the  undershooting  of  the  inflation  target  in  the 
preceding years? 
In addressing this question, I’ll compare two possible approaches: the standard approach of 
inflation targeting and the more novel approach of price level targeting. Let me note before I 
begin  that  I  won’t  take  a  stand  today  on  which  of  those  approaches  is  better.  My  goal  is 
simply  to  initiate  a  policy  conversation  about  future  –  indeed,  possibly  far-off  future  – 
monetary policy choices. 
 
  The FOMC announced its 2 percent inflation target in January 2012. Since that date, inflation 
has averaged about 1.4 percent per year. As I noted earlier, I anticipate that inflation will rise 
only slowly. As you know, the inflation rate is the growth rate of the price level – that is, how 
much people pay for a typical bundle of goods and services. Hence, the downside misses 
with respect to inflation cumulate into a significantly lower price level. If my inflation forecast 
is right, the price level in 2018 will be about 2.2 percent below what it would have been had 
the FOMC hit its inflation target over the preceding six years. 
How should the FOMC respond to this shortfall in the price level? If the FOMC simply targets 
a  2  percent  inflation  rate  after  2018,  then  the  price  level  will  be  permanently  2.2  percent 
lower  than  was  expected  in  2012.  This  approach  to  policy  –  which  is  the  standard  one 
followed by most leading central banks around the world – is called inflation targeting. But 
there is an alternative: The FOMC could target a slightly higher inflation rate for a few years 
after 2018 in order to make up for the shortfall in the price level. This latter policy approach is 
often termed price level targeting. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    Why would the FOMC want to use price level targeting? There are two reasons – and they 
are closely related to the concerns about low inflation that I raised earlier. 
The first reason is that price level targeting makes long-term contracts safer for borrowers 
and lenders. For example, suppose a family took out a 30-year mortgage in 2012, under the 
expectation that the FOMC would deliver on its commitment to keep inflation at 2 percent. 
Because  inflation  has  been  so  low  over  the  past  two  years,  the  borrower’s  current 
repayments are now surprisingly expensive in real terms. (By “real terms,” I mean that the 
borrower has to give up a surprising amount of goods and services to be able to afford the 
repayments.) The FOMC can’t solve that problem today, of course. But if the FOMC uses 
inflation targeting, the borrower’s repayments are likely to remain surprisingly expensive  in 
real  terms  even  in  2042,  30  years  after  taking  out  the mortgage.  In contrast,  if the  FOMC 
uses price level targeting, the borrower’s repayments in 2042 are likely to be close, in real 
terms, to what the borrower expected when originally taking on the loan. 
The  second  reason  that  the  FOMC  might  want to  use  price  level  targeting  is that  it  would 
serve  as  an  automatic  stabilizer  for  the  economy.  As  I  described  earlier,  when  demand  is 
low, inflation tends to be below target. With price level targeting, the FOMC makes up for low 
inflation  by  using  monetary  policy  to  stimulate  higher  future  inflation  and  higher  future 
demand. But this prospect of higher future demand is an incentive for businesses to hire and 
invest  more  now.  Thus,  with  price  level  targeting,  the  FOMC’s  anticipated  future  policy 
choices automatically offset current adverse shocks.1  
I’ve framed the decision about inflation targeting versus price level targeting in terms of its 
impact  on  the  FOMC’s  future  policy  decisions.  As  I’ve  just  talked  through,  though,  these 
future  decisions  have  the  potential  to  affect  near-term  macroeconomic  outcomes.  In 
particular, if the FOMC were to decide today to follow price level targeting, then businesses 
would  anticipate  more  stimulative  future  monetary  policy  and,  consequently,  higher  future 
demand. That expectation of higher demand would provide an additional incentive for them 
to  hire  and  invest  today.  In  this  way,  the  FOMC’s  decision  about  price  level  targeting  –  a 
decision about choices to be made several years from now – has the potential to affect the 
near-term speed of the economy’s recovery. 
                                                
1   See,  for  example,  Gauti  Eggertsson  and  Michael Woodford,  2003,  “The  Zero  Bound  on  Interest  Rates and 
Optimal Monetary Policy,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  I suspect that all of this sounds pretty dry to some of you. I assure you that the debate over 
price  level  versus  inflation  targeting  is  about  as  exciting  as  central  banking  can  get!  I’m 
certainly not trying to resolve that debate today. In particular, I’ve not talked at all about the 
thorny and important question of how the FOMC should respond to past overshooting of its 
inflation target. But I do think that the question of whether to target the inflation rate or the 
price level should be a subject for serious discussion among central bankers. 
Maximum employment 
I’ve  argued  that  the  low  inflation  rate  is  a  signal  that  the  FOMC  is  underperforming  with 
respect  to  its  maximum  employment  objective.  But  we  don’t  need  to  rely  on  this  signal  to 
reach this conclusion. We can readily see this underperformance in numerous key metrics of 
labor market performance. 
 
  I’ll begin by showing you data on the evolution of the unemployment rate. In March 2007, the 
unemployment rate was 4.4 percent. It rose slowly throughout 2007 to reach 5 percent by the 
end of the year. The National Bureau of Economic Research dates the Great Recession as 
having begun in that month. In the wake of the recession, the unemployment rate reached a 
peak of 10 percent in October 2009. 
Since  that  date  –  over  four  years  ago!  –  the  unemployment  rate  has  fallen  slowly  to 
6.1 percent. While this decline reflects a welcome improvement, the current unemployment 
rate remains above most forecasts of its expected long-run level. Personally, I expect that, 
over the long run, the unemployment rate will converge to just over 5 percent. 
But I would say that this measure could well overstate the degree of improvement in the U.S. 
labor  market.  To  estimate  the  unemployment  rate,  the  Census  Bureau  asks  people  two 
questions: Are you working? And, if not, have you looked for work in the past four weeks? 
The unemployment rate measures the ratio of the second number – the recent job searchers 
– to the sum of the two numbers (the recent job searchers and the workers). This means that 
the unemployment rate can decline for two reasons: because more people are finding work 
or because fewer people are looking for work. Much of the decline in the unemployment rate 
since October 2009 has occurred because the fraction of people who are looking for work 
has  fallen.  This  characterization  is  borne  out  if  we  look  at  the  evolution  of  the  fraction  of 
people over the age of 16 who have a job – what’s called the employment-to-population ratio. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    In March 2007, the employment-to-population ratio was over 63 percent. The employment-to-
population  ratio  fell  sharply  during  the  Great  Recession  and  bottomed  out  at  just  over 
58 percent in mid-2011. The percentage has risen little from this low point and remains lower 
than at any time between 1986 and 2007. 
It is true that, even without the Great Recession, demographic forces would have led to some 
decline in the employment-to-population ratio since 2007. As the baby boom birth cohort – 
born between 1946 and 1964 – ages, the fraction of retirees in the population grows steadily. 
But these demographic forces are still not large enough to account for most of the decline in 
the employment-to-population ratio that I’ve described. One way to see this – but not the only 
way – is to focus on people who are outside the normal retirement age. Here, I’ve plotted the 
fraction of the population aged 25 to 54 who have a job. This ratio has improved from its low 
point, but also remains lower than at any time between 1986 and 2007. 
 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  Even  among  those  who  have  a  job,  there  are  signs  that  the  economy  is  significantly 
underemploying our human resources. The Bureau of Labor Statistics reports each month on 
the number of Americans who are working part time, would like to work more hours, but are 
unable  to  obtain  those  additional  hours.  That  fraction  of  the  labor  force  has  fallen,  but 
remains unusually high. 
 
  To summarize what we learn from the charts: The good news is that the labor market has 
improved  since  the  end  of  the  Great  Recession.  The  bad  news  is  that  the  rate  of 
improvement over the past four-plus years has been painfully slow. As a consequence, there 
is still significant underutilization of our country’s most important resource – its people. We 
have  to  conclude  that  the  FOMC  is  underperforming  with  respect  to  its  goal  of  promoting 
maximum employment. 
Conclusions 
Earlier, I asked you to consider this speech as a report to you on the FOMC’s performance 
with respect to its two congressionally mandated objectives. We’ve seen that the FOMC is 
undershooting its price stability objective, in that inflation is running below the FOMC’s goal 
of  2  percent  and  is  expected  to  remain  low  for  several  years.  The  undershooting  is 
problematic because it suggests that the American economy is wasting available resources, 
especially  its  human  resources.  We’ve  seen  evidence  of  this  underutilization  in  the 
performance  of  key  labor  market  metrics.  Hence,  the  FOMC  is  also  underperforming  with 
respect to its maximum employment objective. I continue to believe that we need to do better 
as a Committee. 
Thank you for listening. I’d be happy to take your questions. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
