  Cyril Roux: The 2014 prudential and regulatory agenda of the Central 
Bank of Ireland 
Address  by  Mr  Cyril  Roux,  Deputy  Governor  (Financial  Regulation)  of the  Central  Bank  of 
Ireland, to the Deloitte Future of Prudential Regulation Briefing, Ireland, 15 April 2014. 
 the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD); 
the Deposit Guarantee Schemes Directive (DGS); and 
the Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM) Regulation. 
Ladies and gentlemen, it is my pleasure to be here today and I would like to thank Deloitte 
for arranging this briefing. Several who have spoken before me have already shed light on 
the prudential and regulatory agenda of the Central Bank. 
Allow me to elaborate. 
The regulatory agenda of the Central Bank is driven by Europe. This European dimension is 
reflected across all of the sectors we regulate be it banking, insurance, securities or markets. 
We are coming closer to a European banking union. As you know, the European Parliament 
is voting today on three key legislative texts: 
• 
• 
• 
We are thus moving towards the completion of the legislative work underpinning the banking 
union. 
On  the  insurance  front,  EIOPA  will  soon  publish  technical  specifications  to  its  preparatory 
guidelines for Solvency II. Both insurance companies and insurance supervisors are working 
towards entering this new regime by the end of next year. 
And in the markets area, the Central Bank is working hard with regulated firms and market 
participants to implement AIFMD and EMIR. 
Yet  other  parts  of  the  Central  Bank  agenda  in  2014  are  purely  domestic.  Some  regulated 
entities, such as credit unions, do not fall under European directives. And we have significant 
domestic  priorities  in  enforcement,  anti-money  laundering,  and  consumer  protection.  I  will 
mention these domestic priorities again a little later. 
But let us turn first to the banking union. 
We are leaving behind the world of supervision based on national implementation of CRD III 
and  moving  towards  a  common  regulation  based  on  CRD  IV/CRR  and  the  EBA  single 
rulebook. 
Within the Eurozone, that common regulatory regime takes a significant step further with the 
Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM). 
The Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) 
Agreement on the Single Supervisory Mechanism was reached under the Irish Presidency of 
the  EU  last  year. This  new  supervisory  regime will  enter  into force  on 4  November  of this 
year. 
At the Central Bank, as at every other supervisory authority in the euro area, we are very 
much  in  the  midst  of  getting  ready  for  this  new  supervisory  regime.  This  is  the  most 
significant project currently in progress within the Financial  Regulation remit of the Central 
Bank. 
What does this mean for us here in Ireland? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  It means first a thorough review of the way we supervise banks. Why, you may ask, such a 
root  and  branch  review  when  only  5  Irish  banks  are  subject  to  the  Comprehensive 
Assessment of the ECB? 
The answer is simple. All Eurozone banks fall under the SSM. The SSM Supervisory Manual 
applies equally to all. Yes, for the largest banks decisions will be made in Frankfurt, while for 
all other banks, decisions will remain with the Central Bank here in Dublin. But supervisory 
engagement and methodology will be the same for all, throughout the Eurozone, under the 
watchful eye of the ECB. 
The internal organisation and processes of Irish banking supervision will follow the rules and 
procedures set out by the SSM. Our new director of credit institutions supervision, Sharon 
Donnery, will lead this work, which involves our resources in supervision, but also in HR, IT, 
Legal and Enforcement, and in our Policy and Risk Divisions. 
We have established a dedicated project team to manage this change process and to ensure 
that we are ready come 4 November. 
This Thursday, we will have the pleasure to host a series of meetings with Dr Korbinian Ibel, 
the Director General in charge of DG IV of the SSM – that is to say, in charge of the teams 
which  will  ensure  that  all  national  supervisory  authorities  apply  the  SSM  rules  and 
procedures consistently. It will be the first of many visits by the ECB to the Central Bank. 
The Comprehensive Assessment exercise is a significant element of this preparatory work. 
The Comprehensive Assessment 
Allow me to say a few words about this analytical exercise. The ECB and national competent 
authorities  commenced  the  Comprehensive  Assessment  (CA)  in  November  2013.  The 
assessment exercise comprises three distinct elements: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
It has three main goals: 
1. 
An Asset Quality Review (AQR); 
A Supervisory Risk Assessment; and 
finally a stress test. 
Transparency  –  the  aim  is  to  enhance  the  quality  of  information  available  on  the 
condition of banks; 
Repair  –  the  aim  is  to  identify  and  implement  necessary  corrective  actions,  if  and 
where needed; and 
Confidence building – this is an opportunity to assure all stakeholders that banks are 
fundamentally sound and trustworthy. 
2. 
3. 
This exercise will be complete in advance of the SSM entering into force on 4 November. It is 
an  important  first  step  for  the  ECB,  to  undertake  a  health  check  of  the  banks  before 
assuming  its  supervisory  responsibilities.  In  total,  the  Comprehensive  Assessment  will  be 
carried out for 128 banking groups in the eurozone. 
It also represents a significant step for us here in Ireland. You will be aware that five credit 
institutions in Ireland will be subject to this assessment – AIB, Bank of Ireland, Permanent 
TSB, Ulster Bank and Merrill Lynch. Subsidiaries of Eurozone banking groups, such as KBC 
and ACC, also fall indirectly  within scope of this Comprehensive Assessment as they may 
have loan or asset portfolios subject to the Asset quality review. 
Having conducted numerous such exercises during the EU-IMF Programme, my team is well 
placed to deliver the assessment for the Irish banks. Indeed, the practice of assessing banks’ 
balance  sheets  through  Data  Integrity  Validation,  AQR  and  stress  testing  is  well  practiced 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  here.  We  have  recently  undertaken  a  Balance  Sheet  Assessment  of  the  Covered  Banks. 
This was concluded just last November. 
This assessment was intended to be in line with the AQR. It is therefore largely consistent 
with  the  current  Comprehensive  Assessment  exercise.  Both  involve  a  review  of  the 
adequacy  of  provisions  and  a  review  of  the  classification  of  loans  on  the  banks’  balance 
sheets. We see the Balance Sheet Assessment and the overall Comprehensive Assessment 
process as being intrinsically linked as a result. 
Therefore the appropriate time to disclose information is when the overall exercise, including 
the stress test, is completed later this year. This is consistent with the approach taken at the 
European level where consolidated results of both the point-in-time AQR and forward-looking 
stress test will be published simultaneously. 
My team at the Central Bank is very familiar with the process. We will draw on this expertise 
in our delivery of the Comprehensive Assessment. 
I would like to spend some time on each of the three broad elements of the Comprehensive 
Assessment. 
 Asset Quality Review 
Firstly, the Asset Quality Review. You are aware that this has begun and project delivery is 
well  underway.  This  assessment  is  broad  and  inclusive,  comprising  credit  and  market 
exposures (including a quantitative and qualitative review of hard-to-value assets, particularly 
those qualifying as level 3 assets), on and off-balance sheet positions and domestic and non-
domestic  exposures.  The  asset  quality  review  is  conducted  with  reference  to  harmonised 
definitions, including those for non-performing exposures and forbearance – for example, the 
simplified definition of the European Banking Authority (EBA) for non-performing exposures. 
The asset quality review process includes: 
• 
a  data  integrity  validation  (DIV)  process  to  ensure  the  data  provided  by  banks  is 
consistent and robust; 
a  review  of  selected  risky  portfolios  so  that  at  least  50  per  cent  of  risk  weighted 
assets and half of material portfolios are reviewed; and 
where applicable, an assessment of the adequacy of banks’ asset valuations. 
• 
For the Irish banks, the focus is almost exclusively on their banking book loan portfolios. For 
those loan portfolios that are assessed for impairment on an individual exposure basis (for 
example  commercial  real  estate)  we  select  tranches  of  large  exposures  along  with 
representative  random  samples  of  the  rest  of  portfolio.  These  reviews  are  backed-up  with 
collateral valuations which include, for a proportion of the exposures, third party valuations 
according to market standards. 
The results of the file reviews are expected to be reasonably extrapolated to the rest of the 
portfolio.  An  assessment  of  the  adequacy  of  provisions  can  then  be  made  by  the  Central 
Bank.  Likewise,  for  loan  portfolios  that  are  assessed  on  a  collective  basis  (for  example 
residential  mortgages)  the  assessment  is  by  way  of  loan  file  review  sampling  to  assess 
classification and an independent assessment of provisions through the use of an alternative 
model by the Central Bank. 
A project of this scale is resource intensive. Loan file reviews, valuations and data integrity 
validation take considerable time and require a very specific skill set. And it takes time away 
from  our  other  activities,  be  they  supervisory,  regulatory  or  business  as  usual.  For  this 
reason, many competent authorities have appointed third parties to aid in the delivery of the 
asset quality  review. We  are  no  different. In  our  case,  Deloitte,  KPMG  and  EY  have  been 
appointed to complete certain elements of the AQR. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Our  project  team  works  closely  with  the  ECB  Comprehensive  Assessment  project 
management office. In addition, the ECB country team, which comprises ECB staff members 
and supervisors from fellow Eurozone countries assigned to working with Ireland, have spent 
a number of days in Dublin engaging with our teams. Their role is to ensure consistency and 
quality assurance within and across countries in the application of the AQR methodology and 
approach. 
This ensures that we are conducting this exercise to the highest standards in line with best 
practice. 
Stress tests 
Let me now turn to the second element of the Comprehensive Assessment – the stress tests. 
Stress  testing  can  be  a  useful  tool  for  supervisors  in  quantifying  the  vulnerabilities  of 
regulated  entities  or  those  of  the financial  system  as  a  whole.  They  are  both  a  micro  and 
macro-prudential tool for financial supervisors and central banks. 
As  an  aside,  let  me  remind  you  that  this  year  the  larger  insurance  undertakings  will  also 
undergo  a  stress  test.  The  methodology  and  parameters  of  this  stress  test  are  currently 
being finalised  at  EIOPA.  The  scenarios for  this  insurance  exercise  will  be  different  to the 
ones  used  for  the  banking  exercise.  Scenarios  are  chosen  to  reflect  the  risks  and 
vulnerabilities  of  each  sector.  Tailored  scenarios  are  needed  to  maximize  their  relevance. 
There is no read across from the set of parameters chosen for insurance stress testing to the 
set chosen for banking. 
For  insurance  undertakings,  natural  catastrophes  and  a  prolonged  period  of  low  interest 
rates would be two significant challenges to their resilience. 
In  banking,  the  main  vulnerabilities  centre  on  the  course  of  risk  aversion,  credit  quality, 
balance sheet repair, and policy reforms. The knock-on effects of adverse development on 
one or several of these fronts would alter the paths of a number of macroeconomic variables 
such as GDP growth, consumer price inflation, real estate prices and unemployment. 
So where and when are these stress tests decided? 
The baseline for the next three years is to be provided by the European Commission, starting 
with their 2014 and 2015 economic forecasts. 
As for the adverse scenario, it is a matter for the ESRB and EBA to decide. Meetings of their 
respective boards will be held shortly so that the scenarios can be finalised and published 
soon. 
The overarching objective of the stress test element of the Comprehensive Assessment is to 
build  on  and  compliment  the  asset  quality  review.  The  stress  test  will  provide  a  forward-
looking view of banks’ shock-absorption capacity under stress. 
The  stress  testing  process  will  overlap  with  the  AQR  so  that  an  initial  forward  looking 
assessment  can  be  made  at  the  end  of  the  summer.  This  will  allow  AQR  specific 
adjustments, for example to the assumed level of provisions required and Common Equity 
Tier 1 (CET 1) ratio, to be integrated into overall results and applied to derive the final capital 
assessment.  So  both  the  AQR  and  Stress  tests  will  be  published  at  the  same  time  –  in 
November. A framework for disclosure will be agreed across countries and banks. Banks will 
have to pass capital thresholds of 8 per cent for the baseline scenario and 5.5 per cent for 
the  adverse  scenario.  Where  capital  deficiencies  are  observed,  remedial  plans  will  be 
required. 
At  its  heart,  the  stress  test  is  a  constrained  bottom-up  forecast  conducted  by  the  banks 
themselves.  The  Central  Bank,  as  the  competent  authority,  will  challenge  the  results 
produced  by  the  banks  for  conservatism,  consistency  and  quality.  We  have  also  now 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  developed models to challenge the results of the banks in this area. This will increase the 
credibility and robustness of the exercise and results for these banks. 
Both the banking and insurance industry should be aware of the processes and requirements 
expected in these exercises. In particular, data collection and data quality are an integral part 
of  the  input  into  stress  testing  models.  Competitive  advantage  can  be  obtained  by  those 
banks  that  have  invested  in  the  correct  infrastructure  for  data  recording  and  the  correct 
personnel for using this data for risk assessment. 
It is important that such an investment is made by all financial institutions and our significant 
credit institutions in particular, in data collection and storage infrastructures so that we can 
ensure that all risks can be tracked. 
This will ensure that we implement best practice supervision in line with and possibly even 
ahead of other EU member states. 
Risk Assessment 
Finally,  the  third  element  of  the  Comprehensive  Assessment  is  the  supervisory  risk 
assessment. 
The  supervisors  at  competent  authorities  are  continuously  assessing  risk.  Indeed  many  of 
you will be aware that our supervisors regularly assess the risk profile of your banks. In doing 
so  the  supervisory  risk  assessment  aims  to  continually  address  key  risks  in  the  banks’ 
balance sheets, including liquidity, leverage and funding. 
At the moment, the ECB and the national competent authorities are jointly developing a new 
risk  assessment  system  that  will  be  deployed  as  a  key  supervisory  tool  in  the  SSM.  The 
competent authorities continue to be legally required to conduct risk assessments however. 
The idea is that this methodology will only be partially used to allow comparability of results 
and to ensure a smooth transition. This risk assessment can have the effect of increasing 
capital requirements where banks have underestimated Pillar 1 risks or where Pillar 2 risks 
exist. 
Of  course,  the  AQR  and  stress  tests  themselves  provide  explicit  and  extremely  valuable 
supervisory risk assessment information. They will be central to any determinations made by 
the Central Bank in the context of the risk assessment. 
Preparatory work outside of the Comprehensive Assessment 
In order to prepare fully for the advent of SSM  on 4 November, a considerable amount of 
other work distinct from the Comprehensive Assessment is also underway. I referred earlier 
to the project we have established in this regard. A key element of this project is legislative in 
focus. We need to ensure that we identify the necessary legislative change that will need to 
be made at a domestic level to facilitate the coming into force of the SSM. 
The SSM Regulation sets out the division of competences between the ECB and the national 
competent  authorities.  Of  course 
is  directly  effective.  Nevertheless 
amendments  may  need  to  be  made  to  our  domestic  financial  services  legislation  here  in 
Ireland. These amendments may be required to ensure that the Irish legislative framework 
accommodates and facilitates the new structure of prudential supervision. More importantly 
we need to ensure that our legislation does not conflict with any requirements or provisions 
of the SSM Regulation. 
For instance, given that the ECB will be the decision-maker with respect to applications for 
authorisations  for  new  credit  institutions,  the  domestic  legislative  provisions  may  require 
amendment to reflect the role of the ECB in this regard. The Central Bank will retain the role 
of performing an initial assessment of an application in this instance. 
this  regulation 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  To offer another example, in the case of a notification of acquisition of qualifying holdings, 
the  Central  Bank  will  perform  the  initial  assessment  of  the  acquisition  but  the  decision  to 
oppose such acquisitions will ultimately rest with the ECB. 
As such, we need to review our domestic legislative framework here in Ireland to assess how 
best to accommodate this new division of competence. 
Enforcement 
With  regard  to  our  enforcement  powers,  it  is  becoming  increasingly  clear  to  us  that  the 
enforcement  role  of  the  Central  Bank  will  change.  Under  the  SSM,  both  the  ECB  and  the 
Central Bank will have the power to impose administrative penalties on credit institutions. 
How will this work in practice? 
I will share with you our current understanding, while recognising that the set-up is yet to be 
finalised. 
If there is an infringement of the Capital Requirements Regulation (CRR), the ECB will have 
the power to impose administrative pecuniary penalties upon a significant credit institution. 
The  Central  Bank  of  Ireland  may  impose  administrative  pecuniary  penalties  on  less 
significant credit institutions. 
The ECB will be able to impose administrative pecuniary penalties of up to twice the amount 
of  the  profits gained  or  losses  avoided  because  of  the  breach  or  up  to 10  per  cent  of the 
amount of the total annual turnover in the preceding business year. 
The ECB will also have a sanctioning role in relation to both significant and less significant 
credit institutions where there is a failure to comply with obligations under ECB regulations or 
decisions. 
Where  there  is  an  infringement  of  national  law  transposing  the  Capital  Requirements 
Directive (CRD IV), the Central Bank may impose administrative sanctions on both significant 
and  less  significant  credit  institutions  but  may  only  open  sanctioning  proceedings  against 
significant credit institutions upon the ECB’s instruction. 
The  Central  Bank  will  be  exclusively  competent  to  impose  non-pecuniary  administrative 
penalties on significant and less significant credit institutions. Again, the Central Bank may 
only  open  sanctioning  proceedings  against  significant  credit  institutions  upon  the  ECB’s 
instructions.  The  Central  Bank  will  also  be  exclusively  competent  to  impose  administrative 
penalties on a natural person (e.g. a member of the board of a credit institution). The ECB 
has no sanctioning role in relation to individuals. 
The ECB’s infringement procedure will be designed and operated by the ECB itself, and we 
believe that the ECB investigating unit will be the point of contact for institutions. The Central 
Bank will be only one of many voices in setting the direction of enforcement by the ECB, but 
our voice will be advocating an approach similar to that implemented here in Ireland. That is, 
enforcement  should  be  strong  enough  to  be  a  deterrent  against  future  failures,  and  be 
publicised so that it acts as such a deterrent. 
Supervision must be underpinned by a credible threat of enforcement. 
Coupled together, the ECB’s sanctioning role and the Central Bank’s existing role will cover 
the whole rulebook. So while the faces may change for certain breaches by credit institutions 
– and the process may feel different – and some of the sanctions certainly are different – the 
approach by the ECB and the Central Bank will be substantially the same. 
Compliance should, therefore, remain a key priority for all institutions. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Regulatory priorities of the Central Bank of Ireland for 2014 
It is important to realise that while the Central Bank’s powers and functions may need to be 
presented in such way that acknowledges the new supervisory role of the ECB, the Central 
Bank  will  continue  to  directly  supervise  less  significant  entities. The  Central  Bank  will  also 
continue  to  supervise  all  credit  institutions  with  respect  to  their  compliance  with  non-
prudential rules, including consumer protection and anti-money laundering. 
At  the  Central  Bank,  there  are  other  prudential  regulatory  issues  high  on  our  regulatory 
agenda  on  which  we  will  continue  our  focus  for  2014.  We  will  continue  to  work  towards 
delivering  the  respective  mandates  of  each  of  the  regulatory  areas  in  pursuance  of  the 
overall  strategic  and  statutory  objective  of  the  central  bank  –  safeguarding  stability  and 
protecting consumers. 
The primacy of this objective within our mandate is not affected by the laws establishing the 
SSM. 
In the consumer protection, assessing conduct risk under the existing PRISM framework will 
continue to be a key area of focus. Through the enactment of the Central Bank (Supervision 
&  Enforcement)  Act  2013,  we  now  have  new  powers  to  direct  regulated  firms  to  provide 
redress  for  widespread  or  regular  specified  defaults  by  a  firm.  These  powers  provide  the 
Central  Bank  with  a  significant  additional  consumer  protection  vehicle  in  ensuring  that 
regulated firms deal efficiently and effectively with arising consumer issues. We have seen 
that  inadequate  consumer  protection  was  a  key  driver  in  the  global  financial  crisis.  Our 
ultimate aim is to instill confidence in financial services, products and regulation. 
We strive to meet international best practice standards in the protection of our consumers. 
We have requested that another competent authority conduct a peer review of our consumer 
protection work. This will also take place later this year. 
Our  regulatory  agenda  in  banking  supervision  is  driven  by  the  need  to  repair  our  banking 
system.  In  this  context,  the  way  banks  tackle  mortgage  arrears  and  their  non-performing 
loans more generally remains a key priority for the Central Bank in 2014. 
Our  supervision  of  credit  unions  continues.  A  number  of  important  issues  are  on  our 
regulatory agenda for 2014, including: 
• 
• 
our next cycle of engagement under PRISM; 
the  conclusion  of  a  public  consultation  on  a  tiered  regulatory  approach  to 
supervision; 
the commencement of further requirements under the new Act; 
enforcement; and 
further restructuring of the credit union sector. 
• 
• 
• 
Some restructuring within this sector is essential if it is to be sustainable for the future and to 
deliver for its members. 
In the insurance space, our insurance supervisors and policy advisors will be busy making 
the  necessary  preparations  for  the  implementation  of  Solvency  II.  As  I  have  already 
mentioned, the insurance industry will be stress tested. On top of these stress tests, we will 
request  that  the  IMF  undertake  a  review  of  our  insurance  supervision  practices.  This  will 
benchmark  our  approach  to  insurance  supervision  against  best  practices.  We  will  work  to 
remedy  any  deficiencies  identified  in  our  approach  so  that  we  can  meet  international 
standards. 
The  focus  of  the  Markets  Directorate  for  2014  will  include  thematic  inspections  of  firms 
focussing on five specific areas: 
• 
outsourcing; 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  data-integrity of regulatory returns; 
governance in funds and fund managers; 
conduct of business in investment firms; and 
the safekeeping of client assets. 
• 
• 
• 
• 
In  addition,  as  part  of  our  supervisory  strategy  for  our  large  population  of  funds,  we  will 
continue to harness the various pools of data at our disposal and develop analytics to identify 
industry trends and specific supervisory issues. We continue to look for more efficient ways 
to manage our high volume regulatory workflow such as authorisations and inter-regulatory 
notifications.  A  significant  project  is  underway,  as  a  priority  in  this  area  in  2014,  to  re-
engineer and automate this work in the funds areas. This supervisory approach, along with 
active  stakeholder  engagement,  ensures  that  we  have  an  influential  voice  in  international 
policy discussions. 
As provided for in Central Bank legislation, we regularly review our supervisory practices. In 
fact,  the  IMF  has  recently  undertaken  a  review  of  our  supervisory  practices  in  the  area  of 
banking, comparing us against the Basel Core Principles of Banking Supervision. They have 
also  assessed  the  supervision  of  securities  and  markets,  pitching  us  against  the  IOSCO 
principles. Where instances of non-compliance were identified, we have responded to outline 
how  we  intend  to  overcome  these  issues.  Both  the  reviews  and  our  response  will  be 
published in the coming weeks and will be available for you to review. 
Conclusion 
In prudential and regulatory terms, 2014 will be a remarkable year. 
At  the  Central  Bank,  we  will  continue  to  prioritise  our  focus  on  key  prudential  regulatory 
issues  in  2014.  Our  agenda  for  the  coming  year  includes  a  review  of  our  supervisory 
practices,  stress  tests  of  our  credit  institutions  and  insurance  firms  and  continued  positive 
engagement with the entities we supervise and regulate. 
SSM implementation represents a considerable challenge within a demanding timeframe but 
it is undoubtedly a positive step in banking supervision for Ireland, for the Eurozone, and for 
the EU as a whole. 
The  Comprehensive  Assessment  taking  place  on  European  banks  includes  the  most 
stringent stress test to date. It will pave the way for the ECB to have full transparency of the 
health of the banking sector in advance of it assuming its duties in November 2014. 
It also represents another step for us here in Ireland in restoring confidence in our banking 
sector. 
We,  at  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland,  look  forward  to  your  continued  participation  and 
cooperation as we work towards the delivery on our objectives for 2014. 
Thank you for your time this morning. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
