  Vítor Constâncio: Recent challenges to monetary policy in the euro area 
Speech by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the Athens 
Symposium  ‘‘Banking  Union,  Monetary  Policy  and  Economic  Growth’’,  Athens,  19  June 
2014. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Seven years have passed since the financial market turmoil in the summer of 2007 marked 
the  beginning  of  the  financial  crisis  and  the  ensuing  recession.  These  years  have  been 
challenging for all central banks. They have marked the end of a long period of remarkably 
stable,  good  macroeconomic  performance.  The  widespread  adoption  of  an  explicit  price 
stability  objective  had  been  conducive  to  low  inflation  outcome  in  an  environment  of 
prolonged  economic  growth.  Existing  monetary  policy  strategies  –  mostly  variants  of  the 
inflation  targeting  model,  though  with  notable  exceptions  at  the  ECB  and  at  the  Federal 
Reserve – appeared to be adequate and sufficient to attain this goal. Consistently with the 
Tinbergen principle, the primary objective of price stability was achieved everywhere through 
a single, conventional monetary policy instrument: a short-term interest rate. 
The  global  financial  crisis  changed  this  situation  abruptly.  Since  then,  some  central  banks 
have  been  endowed  with  additional  macro-prudential  instruments  and  a  more  explicit 
mandate to preserve financial stability. While no explicit change in monetary policy strategies 
has taken place, it is fair to say that there has been a generalised increase in the attention 
paid to banks’ balance sheet conditions and to the evolution of credit. By far the most visible 
innovation since the beginning of the Great Recession however, has been the increase in the 
array of instruments used for monetary policy purposes, particularly forward guidance about 
interest rates and most notably the use of central banks’ balance sheets through Large Scale 
Assets Purchases (LSAP, i.e. Quantitative Easing or QE). 
In  theoretical  debates,  other  proposals  were  made  namely,  to  change  the  targets  of 
monetary  policy  to  price  level  targeting  or  to  nominal  GDP  or  simply,  to  increase  the 
established objective of 2% in inflation targeting regimes to 3% or 4%. For practical reasons, 
these proposals were not retained and forward guidance and QE were the new instruments 
of choice for many central banks. 
Before the crisis, the established instrument of monetary policy was a short-term interest rate 
steered  either  by  traditional  open-market  operations  of  buying  and  selling  securities  or 
through  temporary  lending  to  banks  via  repos,  like  in  the  ECB’s  case.  After  the  crisis,  all 
major central banks significantly increased their balance sheets and the respective monetary 
base. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
 Chart 1 
   
It  would,  nevertheless,  be  misleading  to  compare  the  changes  in  balance  sheet  size  as  if 
they  were  originated  by  the  same  policies  and,  consequently,  had  the  same  impact.  The 
case of the ECB is different from the other central banks as the expansion of the balance 
sheet happened as the result of lending to the banks through repos of different maturity. The 
increase  in  the  balance  sheet  was  dependent  on  the  demand  of  primary  liquidity  by  the 
banks,  facilitated  however,  by  the  provision  of  liquidity  through  a  regime  of  fixed  rate  full 
allotment of banks’ demand, introduced in September 2008. The impact on overall monetary 
conditions  was,  as  before  the  crisis,  dependent  on  the  behaviour  of  the  banks  to  pass-
through the higher monetary base into credit and broad money, which did not happen. What 
did happen was a justified fulfilment of the role of lender of last resort but not a new type of 
monetary  policy  instrument  in  the  sense  of  aiming  at  a  new  transmission  channel.  The 
adoption of a fixed-rate full allotment regime of liquidity provision, which has been in place 
since  and  was  recently  extended  until  December  2016  (at  the  very  least)  was  indeed  an 
extraordinary unconventional measure. It supported the banking sector and avoided a more 
detrimental  credit  crunch.  However,  the  size  of  our  monetary  base  declined  significantly 
during 2013 when banks decided to start the repayment of their previous high borrowings. 
On the other hand, as per the following table, total outright purchases of assets by the ECB 
under two different programmes was not behind the increase of the balance sheet as they 
represent a relatively small proportion of total assets compared with other central banks. 
 
 2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 Table 1 
   Before the crisis, both methods of conducting liquidity management transactions (via outright 
purchases  or  lending  to  the  banks)  previously  mentioned,  had  the  objective  of  steering  a 
short-term interest rate close to the policy rate decided by the central bank. It would therefore 
be misleading to interpret the increase of banks’ balance sheets through LSAP or QE as just 
an  increase  in  scale  of  the  traditional  outright  purchases.  There  is  a  different  objective  of 
intervening directly in different asset markets and in higher maturities in order to influence the 
respective prices or yields. The intention and the composition of the assets purchased are 
thus relevant and different from what was previously done to manage short-term rates. QE 
has  several  transmission  channels:  besides  the  direct  impact  on  prices/yields  of  the 
purchased assets (Treasuries or ABSs), it triggers portfolio adjustments on other assets, like 
equities  or  exchange  rates,  and  is  accompanied  by  wealth  effects.  While  the  theoretical 
debate on the exact channels of transmission remains active,  many event and time-series 
studies  have  tried  to  measure  the  QE  effects.  John  Williams  (2013)  presents  a  survey  of 
several studies and reports that USD 600 billion of FED asset purchases achieves a result 
equivalent to a cut in the federal funds rate of 0.75 to 1 percentage point.1 
                                                 
1   For a survey of results, see John Williams (2013), President of the San Francisco FED, “Lessons from the 
financial crisis for unconventional monetary policy” NBER Conference, October. See also Krishnamurthy, A. 
and A. Vissing-Jorgensen (2013), “The Ins and Outs of LSAPs,” presented at the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Kansas City’s Jackson Hole Symposium on the Global Dimensions of Unconventional Monetary Policy; IMF 
Policy  Paper  on  “Global  impact  and  challenges  of  unconventional  monetary  policies”,  October;  Neely,  C. 
(2013), “Unconventional Monetary Policy Had Large International Effects”, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis 
Working  Paper  2010–018E,  updated  August  2013;  Joyce,  M.,  M.  Tong  and  R.  Woods  (2011),  “The  United 
Kingdom’s quantitative easing policy: design, operation and impact”, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin Q3. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  The  concerns  expressed  by  various  economists  and  the  media  that  the  extraordinary 
increases  in  the  monetary  base  in  many  countries  would  lead  to  significant  inflation  rates, 
never  materialised.  As  the  following  slide  illustrates,  there  was  no  transmission  in  the 
prevailing economic situation by the banks, to credit or broad money aggregates. Inflation did 
not respond, putting in doubt the quantitative vision about its origin. When asked about what 
Japan should do to overcome deflation, Milton Friedman answered in 2000: “It is very simple. 
They can buy long-term government securities and they can keep buying them and providing 
high-powered  money  until  the  high-powered  money  starts  getting  the  economy  into  an 
expansion”.2 The more recent Japanese experience is still open to analysis but the channels 
envisioned  by  Milton  Friedman  have  seemingly  not  been  operating  in  the  other  advanced 
economies. As mentioned, the transmission channels at play in the recent QE experiences 
are indeed different from the traditional quantitative view. 
Chart 2 
The ECB monetary policy in the European crisis. 
As  the  financial  crisis  led  to  the  Great  Recession  and  then  evolved  into  the  European 
sovereign  debt  crisis,  the  ECB  started  providing  liquidity  in  fixed-rate  full  allotment  mode, 
progressively  and  considerably  extended  the  maturity  of  its  loans  to  commercial  banks, 
widened the set of eligible collateral, made medium-scale purchases of financial assets and 
announced the Outright Monetary Transactions programme. 
As  a  result  of  these  extraordinary  measures,  at  the  end  of  2012  calm  started  returning  in 
financial markets, leading to lower financial spreads and a reduction in volatility. The initial 
                                                  
2   Quoted  by  Michael  Woodford  in  his  2012  Jackson  Hole  paper  “Methods  of  policy  accommodation  at  the 
interest rate lower bound”. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  signs of economic recovery started appearing. Preliminary formal analyses indicate that non-
standard  measures  were  instrumental  in  supporting  financial  intermediation  and  economic 
activity in the euro area.3 
Despite  these  recent,  encouraging  developments  on  the  financial  side,  real  economy 
recovery  has  been  weak  and  inflation  outcomes  have  been  surprisingly  low.  The  new 
challenge  we  face  in  the  euro  area  today  is  to  avert  the  risk  of  a  prolonged  period  of 
excessively  low  inflation.  Euro  area  annual  HICP  inflation  was  0.5%  in  May  2014,  after 
averaging  0.7%  in  the  first  four  months  of  the  year.  The  June  2014  Eurosystem  staff 
macroeconomic  projections  foresee  a  gradual  increase  in  annual  HICP  inflation  towards 
levels consistent with our definition of price stability. The pace of the increase is, however, 
slow. From 0.7% in 2014, inflation is expected to reach 1.1% in 2015 and, more uncertainly, 
1.4% in 2016. All three figures have been revised downward in comparison with the March 
2014 ECB staff macroeconomic projections and portray a situation distant from our objective 
of keeping inflation below but close to 2% in the medium-term. 
Inflation developments alone go a long way in motivating the combination of the measures 
announced by the Governing Council of the ECB on 5 June, to provide additional monetary 
policy accommodation  and to support lending to the real economy. This package included 
further  reductions  in  the  key  ECB  interest  rates,  new  longer-term  refinancing  operations 
targeted to stimulate credit creation, and preparatory work related to outright purchases of 
asset-backed securities. In addition, the ECB committed to an extension of the fixed-rate full 
allotment  regime  in  tender  procedures  and  decided  to  suspend  the  weekly  fine-tuning 
operation sterilising the liquidity injected under the Securities Markets Programme. Over time 
these measures will contribute to a return of inflation to levels closer to 2% and safeguard the 
anchoring of medium to long-term inflation expectations. 
Nevertheless,  with  policy  interest  rates  close  to  the  effective  lower  bound  and  persistently 
timid growth prospects, there is a small, but non-insignificant risk that any additional adverse 
shock  may  open  the  door  to  a  more  protracted  period  of  low  inflation.  Against  this 
background, I would like to organise the rest of my remarks today around three issues. 
First,  why  do  we  find  ourselves  in  the  current,  low  inflation  predicament?  I  sustain  that 
inflation fluctuations have been somewhat surprising ever since the beginning of the Great 
Recession.  In  part,  they  were  the  result  of  adverse  exogenous  shocks.  To  some  extent 
however, they were also connected with unwarranted variations in markets’ expectations of 
the future stance of monetary policy. 
Second, I will argue that the Governing Council meeting at the beginning of June is important 
not only for the decisions that were actually adopted. It is important also for the clear signal 
that we provided about the determination to do more in the future, in the event of additional 
downward pressures on inflation. I will develop these two points which deal with the way our 
recent policy decisions will produce effects. 
The third question is: how would the ECB react, should the risks of a protracted period of low 
inflation  materialise?  At  this  point  in  time,  this  is  essentially  a  scenario  analysis  –  and 
specifically  an  analysis  of  a  low  probability  scenario.  Outright  purchases  of  a  range  of 
financial  assets  would  be  effective  in  this  situation,  but  structural  reforms  would  also  be 
essential to spur economic growth. 
                                                 
3   See  Giannone,  D.,  M.  Lenza,  H.  Pill  and  L.  Reichlin  (2011):  “Non-standard  policy  measures  and  monetary 
developments”, ECB Working Paper Series No. 1290; De Pooter, M., R.F. Martin, and S. Pruitt (2012): “The 
effects of official bond market intervention in Europe”, Federal Reserve Board of Governors, mimeo; Eser, F., 
and B. Schwaab (2013): “The yield impact of central bank asset purchases: The case of the ECB’s Securities 
Markets  Programme”,  ECB  Working  Paper  Series  No.  1587  and  Ghysels,  E.,  J.  Idier,  S.  Manganelli,  and 
O. Vergote (2014): “A high frequency assessment of the ECB Securities Markets Programme”, ECB Working 
Paper Series No. 1642; Altavilla, C., D. Giannone, and M. Lenza (2014): “The financial and macroeconomic 
effects of the OMT announcements”, CSEF Working Paper No. 352. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  Inflation developments since the Great Recession 
Euro area inflation developments over the past six years have been remarkably volatile. 
From the 4.1% peak of July 2008, HICP inflation fell markedly at the trough of the recession 
and reached negative levels in the short period between June and October 2009. However, 
in  the  second  half  of  2009,  prices  started  increasing  again,  also  due  to  a  rise  in  energy 
prices. In spite of a persisting level of economic slack, the HICP inflation climbed rapidly and 
steadily up to a peak of 3% from September to November 2011. Similar developments could 
be observed in the U.S., where inflation remained stable after a decline in the first months of 
2009 and gave rise to a debate on the “missing disinflation”.4  
If  those  developments  were  somewhat  surprising  for  their  swiftness,  more  recent  inflation 
dynamics  have  displayed  a  remarkably  high degree  of  persistence. As  of  2012,  euro  area 
inflation started falling again, and has continued to do so to date. Since October 2013, the 
year-on-year rate of growth of the headline HICP has oscillated between 1% and 0.5%, in 
spite  of  the  slowly  consolidating  economic  recovery.  A  situation  of  low  inflation  is  now 
common to many advanced economies, creating a moral general puzzle. 
All  in  all,  the  lack  of  a  tight  relationship  between  inflation  developments  and  estimates  of 
slack in economic activity, such as the output gap, is not surprising from the point of view of 
modern  monetary  theories.  The  new  Keynesian  Phillips  curve  suggests  that,  net  of  erratic 
factors, inflation is determined by the whole path of expected future output gaps, not just its 
current level. Hence, economic slack at any given point in time need not be associated with a 
deflationary episode, if it is accompanied by expectations that the output gap will eventually 
turn sufficiently positive. 
In turn, expectations of the future stance of monetary policy play a key role in determining 
expected  future  output  gaps.  The  absence  of  persistent  disinflation  in  2009  may  thus  be 
ascribed to the monetary accommodation imparted by many central banks between the end 
of 2008 and 2009 through both standard and non-standard tools. The monetary policy easing 
was commensurate to the size of the shock, i.e. such as to roughly offset the disinflationary 
pressures produced by the recession.5 
The recent fall in inflation could equivalently be ascribed to unwarranted fears of a possible 
tightening of the monetary policy stance not too far into the future. 
Such fears could clearly be observed one year ago, when the Federal Reserve announced 
the tapering of its large-scale asset purchases. In spite of clear Fed communication on the 
disconnect  between  this  decision  and  the  timing  of  “lift-off”  of  policy  interest  rates,  the 
tapering  announcement  quickly  led  to  a  rise  in  forward  interest  rates  on  both  sides  of  the 
Atlantic. The ECB’s adoption of forward guidance in July 2013 was largely the result of these 
unwarranted  developments.  Recent  studies  confirm  that  our  forward  guidance  was 
successful  in  reversing  the  previous  increase  in  forward-rates  and  in  clarifying  the 
persistently accommodative intonation of the ECB policy stance.6 
The same market logic that led to the interpretation of the Fed’s tapering announcement as a 
signal  of  a  forthcoming  tightening  of  policy  interest  rates  may  also  have  been  applied  to 
interpret the implications of the reduction in the size of the ECB balance sheet that occurred 
                                                 
4   See, for example, Coibion, O. and Y. Gorodnichenko (2013), “Is The Phillips Curve Alive and Well After All? 
Inﬂation Expectations and the Missing Disinﬂation,” NBER Working Paper 19598; see also Hall, R.E. (2011), 
“The  Long  Slump,”  American  Economic  Review  101,  pp.  431–469;  and  Ball,  L.  and  S.  Mazumder  (2011), 
“Inﬂation Dynamics and the Great Recession,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, 337–402. 
5   For a formal analysis of this point, see Del Negro, M., M. Giannoni and F. Schorfeide (2013), “Inflation in the 
Great Recession and New Keynesian Models”, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report No. 618. 
6   Schwaab, B. (2013): “The impact of the ECB’s forward guidance”, ECB mimeo. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  over the past couple of years. From a total dimension equal to over 32.5% of GDP in June of 
2012, our balance sheet has shrunk to 19% in May 2014, as a result of banks’ decision to 
exercise  the  early  repayment  option  for  outstanding  3-year  LTROs.  The  contraction  in  the 
ECB  balance  sheet  is  particularly  striking  when  compared  to  the  balance  sheet  of  the 
Federal Reserve, which continued expanding from 19% of GDP at the end of 2012 to 25.7 % 
in  May  2014.  These  developments,  which  are  accompanied  by  a  similar  evolution  of  the 
respective monetary bases, if jointly interpreted as signals of the relative evolution of future 
policy rates in the two monetary areas, may have contributed to sustain the appreciation in 
the exchange rate of the euro which, against the U.S. dollar, went from 1.21 in July 2012 to a 
peak above 1.39 in May 2014. 
The lagged impact of the marked euro appreciation played an important role in determining 
the  recent,  low  inflation  outcomes.  Since  mid-2012  the  exchange  rate  appreciation  is 
estimated to explain a decrease of 0.5 percentage points in our inflation rate. Together with 
falling energy and food prices, it explains the bulk of the imported downside pressure on euro 
area consumer prices. 
Of course, the euro appreciation may also have reflected other factors, for example changes 
in attitudes towards risk. Such factors can be expected to produce only temporary effects on 
inflation, and would therefore not normally require a monetary policy response. Unwarranted 
fluctuations  in  markets’  perceptions  over  the  future  stance  of  monetary  policy,  however, 
could  be  a  more  persistent  source  of  low-inflation  risk.  In  this  case,  a  monetary  policy 
reaction would be necessary to steer perceptions away from unlikely future outcomes. 
to 
technical  assumptions.  These  assumptions  relate 
How will our recent policy decisions make a difference? 
From  this  standpoint,  I  believe  that  there  are  three  clear  channels  through  which  the 
decisions adopted by the Governing Council in June is effective. 
The first channel is standard and has to do with the expansionary impact of the measures on 
the real economy and inflation. To gauge the extent of such an impact, it is useful to refer 
again  to  the  ECB  macroeconomic  projections  and  recall  that  they  are  conditioned  on  a 
number  of 
the  evolution  of 
macroeconomic  and  financial  variables,  which  specifically  include  market  expectations  of 
short-term interest rates and of exchange rate developments over the projection horizon. 
The  conditioning  assumptions  for  the  June  2014  projections  were  computed  based  on 
information  available  on  14  May  2014.  Over  the  past  month,  financial  market  prices  have 
adjusted to reflect the ECB decisions in early June. As a result, expected short-term rates 
have  fallen  by  10  basis  points  at  all  horizons  and  the  euro  has  depreciated  since  May  by 
2.5% to 1.354. If taken as new conditioning assumptions, these developments would move 
the  whole  path  of  the  inflation  projections  upwards  and  ensure  a  faster  return  to  price 
stability. 
The  second  channel  through  which  the  recent  ECB  decisions  will  be  consequential  is  the 
credit channel, which is expected to be positively impacted by the new targeted LTRO facility 
and the extension of the ACC programme.7 
The third channel has to do with expectations. The announcement of the measures adopted 
at the beginning of June has been accompanied by a clear communication concerning the 
future path of policy. 
In his Press conference, President Draghi emphasised again that “key ECB interest rates will 
remain  at  present  levels  for  an  extended  period  of  time  in  view  of  the  current  outlook  for 
                                                 
7   The Additional Credit Claims (ACC) programme is an extension of our collateral policy to accept directly loans 
to non-financial firms as eligible collateral for banks to borrow from the ECB. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
  inflation”.  He  also  added  that  “if  required,  we  will  act  swiftly  with  further  monetary  policy 
easing. The Governing Council is unanimous in its commitment to using also unconventional 
instruments  within  its  mandate  should  it  become  necessary  to  further  address  risks  of  too 
prolonged a period of low inflation.” 
With this statement, the ECB has left no doubts about its resolve to avoid any downward turn 
in  the  euro  area  inflation  developments,  because  such  developments  would  be  extremely 
harmful.  With  interest  rates  at  their  effective  lower  bound  and  persistently  timid  growth 
prospects, lower than expected inflation rates would increase the real value of debt, slowing 
down  the  deleveraging  process  of  borrowers,  both  public  and  private.  If  a  low  inflation 
outlook  became  entrenched  in  the  expectations  of  firms  and  households,  the  real  interest 
rate  would  rise,  leading  consumers  and  investors  to  postpone  their  expenditure  plans.  A 
vicious circle of lower demand and lower prices could ensue. 
How would the ECB react, should the risks of a protracted period of low inflation 
materialise? 
But  what  exactly  could  the  ECB  do  in  the  face  of  a  protracted  period  of  low  inflation  and 
economic stagnation? 
As  I  have  already  mentioned,  the  ECB  stands  ready  to  deploy  additional  unconventional 
instruments,  should  the  likelihood  of  this  scenario  increase.  The  policy  response  would 
involve  a  broad-based  asset-purchase  programme.  The  experience  of  other  countries  with 
such programmes testifies that they can be effectively designed. As previously mentioned, 
various empirical studies suggest that the large purchases carried out in the U.S. and in the 
U.K.  were  instrumental  in  decreasing  yields  by  several  tens  of  basis  points,  with  spillover 
effects  on  other  asset  prices,  including  mortgage  rates  and  exchange  rates.  In  turn,  GDP 
growth and inflation rates also appear to have  been significantly affected. After all, even if 
they have to use new instruments, central banks cannot avoid their responsibility in ensuring 
price stability, as long as inflation continues to be determined by monetary policy. 
Broad-based asset-purchases would allow the ECB to continue pursuing its mandate even 
under more adverse circumstances. It is however important that other policies also play their 
part. An extreme adverse scenario that has recently appeared in the public debate is that of 
a “secular stagnation”.8 This is effectively a situation where the “natural” long run growth rate 
of the economy falls significantly and permanently, e.g. because of a fall in the growth rate of 
population or because of a fall in technological progress, or both. This scenario is only still a 
possibility, but it is illustrative of a broader need for structural policies to again unleash the 
growth  potential  of  our  economies.  Public  spending  should  be  redirected  towards  public 
investment in infrastructures and education. International trade and labour mobility should be 
fostered.  These  are  the  best  recipes  to  ensure  that  the  secular  stagnation  will  remain  a 
purely academic hypothesis. 
Conclusions 
Today,  I  have  focused  on  the  low  inflation  challenges,  but  let  me  conclude  with  a  quick 
reminder that we remain watchful of financial market developments. A necessary condition to 
ensure the effectiveness of our intended monetary policy stance is to alleviate credit supply 
constraints.  This  explains  why  new  targeted  LTROs  are  part  of  the  package  of  measures 
decided by the Governing Council in June. 
                                                 
8   See  e.g.  Krugman,  P 
(2013) 
“Secular  Stagnation,  Coalmines,  Bubbles,  and  Larry  Summers” 
http://krugman.blogs.nytimes.com;  Krugman,  P.  (2014)  “Inflation  Targets  Reconsidered”,  presented  at  ECB 
Forum  on  Central  Banking,  Sintra;  Summers,  L.  (2013)  “Remarks  at  IMF  Fourteenth  Annual  Research 
Conference  in  Honor  of  Stanley  Fischer’’;  Eggertsson,  G.  and  Mehrotra,  N.  (2014)  “A  model  of  Secular 
Stagnation”, mimeo. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  To sum up, the main challenge monetary policy faces in the euro area today is to avert the 
risk of a prolonged period of excessively low inflation. The ECB has adopted significant new 
measures in June to ensure a return of inflation to levels closer to 2% and to safeguard the 
anchoring  of  medium  to  long-term  inflation  expectations.  It  also  has  powder  left  for  an 
additional  expansion  of  the  monetary  policy  stance,  in  case  of  downward  departures  of 
inflation and inflation expectations from current projections. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
