  Fritz Zurbrügg: Current developments in the financial markets 
Introductory  remarks  by  Mr  Fritz  Zurbrügg,  Member  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss 
National Bank, at the media news conference of the Swiss National Bank, Berne, 19 June 
2014. 
 I  will  begin  today  by  looking  at  the  situation  on  the  financial  markets.  Then  I  will  discuss 
structural changes on the foreign exchange and money markets which are of importance for 
the SNB. I will close with a few comments on the progress that has been made in reforming 
benchmark interest rates. 
Situation on financial markets 
The positive sentiment on financial markets overall has continued since the beginning of the 
year. On the one hand, investors have been encouraged by the fact that economic recovery 
has continued on both sides of the Atlantic, even if it has been hesitant, as well as by mainly 
positive  business  results.  On the  other,  the general  low-interest-rate  environment,  with  the 
accompanying  search  for  yield  by  investors,  is  likely  to  have  been  a  major  factor. 
Nevertheless,  this  positive  sentiment  was  put  to  the  test  on  a  number  of  occasions  –  for 
instance,  in  January,  when  signs  of  economic  weakening  and  political  risk  in  a  number  of 
emerging  economies  gave  rise  to  considerable  uncertainty,  and  again  in  March,  when  the 
political conflict in Ukraine intensified. The gradual tapering of the US Federal Reserve bond 
purchase programme, however, was taken quite calmly by market participants. 
In this situation, most stock market indices have registered gains since the beginning of the 
year.  Indeed,  a  number  of  indices,  such  as  Switzerland’s  SPI,  the  US  S&P  500  and 
Germany’s  DAX,  have  attained  record  levels  in  recent  weeks.  Meanwhile,  demand  for 
sovereign bonds issued by euro area peripheral countries was high. This was attributable, 
first to a gradual improvement in fundamental data, but also to the fact that investors were 
anticipating the monetary policy easing measures introduced by the European Central Bank 
at  the  beginning  of  June.  Consequently,  risk  premia  against  German  sovereign  bonds 
declined again significantly. They are currently at levels last seen in 2010, before the onset of 
the  sovereign  debt  crisis.  Sovereign  bonds  issued  by  emerging  economies  also  benefited 
from investors’ increasing risk appetite. Despite the uncertainty at the beginning of the year 
which I mentioned before, their risk premia are now lower than at the end of 2013, apart from 
a very few exceptions. 
Alongside  sinking  risk  premia,  volatility  on  financial  markets  has  also  decreased  since  the 
beginning of the year. Chart 1 shows the standard volatility measures for US equities (VIX), 
US government bonds (MOVE) and foreign exchange markets (Global FX), all of which are 
derived  from  option  prices.  To  ensure  comparability,  the  individual  data  series  have  been 
normalised.  They  show  how  many  standard  deviations  above  or  below  their  long-term 
average the figures are situated. In addition, the troughs since 2000 have been indicated at 
the right-hand edge of the chart. In January, volatility measures rose temporarily; since then, 
however, they have returned to a declining path. At present, they are at least one standard 
deviation  below  average  in  all  markets  –  and  only  marginally  above  the  lowest  level. 
Apparently,  expectations  that  the  major  central  banks  will  continue  their  exceptionally 
accommodating monetary policy in the foreseeable future have firmed. The danger here is 
that risks will no longer be correctly priced, thereby making financial markets vulnerable to 
sudden mood swings on the part of investors. 
Despite  the  fundamentally  positive  investor  sentiment,  demand  for  secure  investments 
remains  high.  Yields  on  sovereign  bonds  with  high  credit  ratings  have  therefore  declined 
significantly since the beginning of the year, particularly in the US, Germany and Switzerland, 
where ten-year yields are currently around 50 basis points lower than at the end of 2013. The 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  decline  in  yields  was  especially  marked  in  January,  when  uncertainty  in  a  number  of 
emerging economies and surprisingly weak economic data from the US spurred demand. In 
April  and  May,  yields  decreased  further.  This  time,  demand  was  attributable  less  to  the 
publication of economic data and more to investors who, having speculated on rising yields, 
had  covered  their  short  positions  when  yields  declined.  The  cautious  attitude  of  many 
investors was also reflected in the continued high value of the Swiss franc. Chart 2 shows 
how the Swiss franc has moved sideways against both the euro and the US dollar since the 
beginning  of  the  year.  In  trade-weighted  terms,  the  Swiss  franc  is  currently  almost 
unchanged from January. 
Structural changes in the foreign exchange and money markets 
As  you  will  know,  the  Swiss  National  Bank  (SNB)  implements  its  monetary  policy  via  the 
money  and  foreign  exchange  markets.  Consequently,  structural  changes  in  these  markets 
are particularly important to us. I would now like to talk briefly about the major changes and 
their significance for our work. 
On  the  foreign  exchange  market,  we  are  seeing  a  substantial  decline  in  turnover  in  the 
primary interbank market. Meanwhile, the size of the market as a whole has decreased only 
slightly. This means that the interbank market has lost market share. The primary interbank 
market covers trading via the electronic communication networks. Between 2010 and 2013, 
turnover  through  these  networks  fell  by  almost  40%  overall.  In  chart  3  you  can  see  an 
example of this decline in turnover for the EURCHF and USDCHF currency pairs. In 2013, 
this  was  already  below  the  previous  levels,  and  a  further  decline  in  turnover  is  becoming 
evident  for the  current  year. This  development  is  attributable,  in  essence,  to three factors. 
First, there is an increasing tendency for large merchant banks to use internal clearing for 
customer transactions. This means that the need for hedging transactions on the interbank 
market has declined. Second, to an increasing extent, merchant banks are offering liquidity 
via  other  electronic  distribution  channels  such  as  their  own  trading  platforms  or  multibank 
platforms.  This  enables  them  to  attract  more  business  and  to  benefit  from  the  additional 
internalisation.  Third,  smaller  banks  are  increasingly  becoming  direct  customers  of  larger 
banks, which means that less trading is taking place on the interbank market. 
Nevertheless,  because  the  interbank  market  allows  for  price  determination  and  therefore 
provides  reference  prices,  it  performs  a  key  function  for  the  foreign  exchange  market. 
Consequently,  a  well-functioning  interbank  market  is  also  very  important  for  the  SNB.  Our 
analyses show that the decline in turnover has not yet resulted in a deterioration in market 
quality. Despite the fall in turnover, transaction costs are low and the interbank market is still 
working  properly.  However,  we  are  keeping  a  close  eye  on  developments  in  the  structure 
and quality of the market.  
The  focus  of  monetary  policy  implementation  is  currently  the  foreign  exchange  market. 
However,  a  well-functioning  money  market  is  no  less  important  to  us.  Structural  changes 
have also taken place in this market. On 2 May 2014, SIX Group Ltd commenced operations 
with a new trading platform for the Swiss money market. Since then, the SNB has conducted 
all open market operations, all transactions for its standing facilities as well as the auctions 
for  the  Swiss  Confederation  through  this  platform.  This  also  means  that  banks  can  only 
obtain  funds  under  the  liquidity-shortage  financing  facility  through  this  platform.  The 
successful  launch  of  the  new  platform  can  be  measured  by  the  fact  that  140  foreign  and 
domestic participants already have access, and additional participants have applied to join. 
With  the  introduction  of  the  new  platform,  collateral  eligible  for  SNB  repos  has  been 
combined  in  new  baskets.  For  the  first  time,  the  SNB  has  classified  these  securities 
according  to  the  new  Basel  III  liquidity  coverage  ratio  requirements,  which  require  credit 
institutions to  hold  a minimum  level  of  high-quality  liquid  assets  so  that  they  can  cover  an 
exceptional short-term liquidity requirement themselves. These new baskets therefore meet 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  a  significant  market  need.  In  this  way,  the  SNB  is  helping  to  ensure  that  the  repo  market 
remains liquid, also under the new liquidity requirements. 
Reform efforts in the area of benchmark interest rates 
I would like to close by talking about progress that has been made in reforming benchmark 
interest  rates.  The  international  efforts  to  improve  the  credibility  and  acceptance  of 
benchmark interest rates are being coordinated by the Financial Stability Board, whose final 
report on this matter will be published this summer. As part of this work, a group of private 
sector financial market participants has drawn up alternatives to the Libor. Data are currently 
being collected so that the proposals can be evaluated. Surveys are being carried out in all 
currency  areas  affected,  including  the  Swiss  franc  area,  and  the  first  results  will  also  be 
available  this  summer.  Both  the  final  report  and  the  survey  results  are  important  steps 
towards reforming benchmark interest rates. 
However,  the  organisation  that  will  administer  the  Libor  interest  rates  has  already  been 
established. It is ICE Benchmark Administration Limited (IBA), a London-based subsidiary of 
the US exchange operator, Intercontinental Exchange (ICE). Along with the Bank of England 
and  the  Federal  Reserve,  the  SNB  is  represented  as  an  observer  in  the  IBA  oversight 
committee.  Matters  discussed  by  the  oversight  committee  include  methodology,  definition 
and  data  basis  for  the  Libor  rates;  as  such  it  plays  an  important  role  in  supporting  and 
evaluating the reforms that have been adopted. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
 Charts 
    4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   5 
