Ravi Menon: Securing good jobs in a growing financial industry 
Remarks by Mr Ravi Menon, Managing Director of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, at 
the Inauguration of BNP Paribas’ Asia Pacific Campus, Singapore, 7 March 2014. 
 Alain Papiasse, Deputy Chief Operating Officer and Head of Corporate and Investment 
Banking, BNP Paribas Group, 
Eric Raynaud, Chief Executive Officer of BNP Paribas Asia Pacific, 
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon. 
I am delighted to join you today to celebrate the opening of BNP Paribas’ new Asia Pacific 
Campus here in Singapore. It is a truly impressive campus, skilfully combining the charms of 
a colonial heritage building with state-of-the-art facilities and technologies. 
A significant move 
The opening of this Campus in Singapore is significant for a few reasons. 
• 
First, 
it  demonstrates  BNP  Paribas’  firm  commitment  to  strengthening  the 
capabilities  of  its  staff  in  Asia.  This  is  BNP  Paribas’  first  corporate  training  centre 
outside of France. 
Second, it shows strategic foresight. BNP Paribas took the decision to invest in this 
Campus  three  years  ago,  when  it  was  facing  a  very  challenging  economic 
environment with the Eurozone gripped by crisis. 
Third,  it  reflects  in  a  way  a  broader  story  of  the  continued  importance  of  Asia  to 
European  banks.  After  almost  two  years  of  stagnation,  European  bank  lending  to 
Asia has started to rise again. In the area of trade finance for example, recent data 
shows  that  European  banks  are  increasing  their  trade  finance  activities  and  have 
even regained some market share in Singapore. 
  Three dimensions of a successful finance professional 
The financial industry in Asia and Singapore will continue to grow and generate good jobs. 
• 
In 2013, Singapore’s financial sector grew by 11%, against an overall GDP growth 
rate  of  4.1%.  Growth  was  supported  by  increased  activities  in  areas  such  as 
corporate  transaction  banking,  trade  finance,  fund  management,  private  banking 
and re/insurance. 
Last year, a total of 4,500 jobs were created in the financial sector, most of them in 
higher value-added activities. 
 depth in core competencies 
cross-functional adaptability 
Asian knowledge and expertise 
The demand for highly qualified finance professionals will only grow in the coming years. To 
take advantage of this opportunity, our finance professionals must acquire three things: 
• 
• 
• 
First, depth in core competencies. Jobs in the financial industry are becoming more complex, 
requiring deeper knowledge, expertise, and skill sets. 
Take for example, a client adviser working in a wealth management function. Ten years ago, 
maybe he was only expected to offer advice on simple loans and basic investment products. 
Today, the client is more sophisticated and demanding – he expects more comprehensive 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
and customised wealth management solutions. The banker must be able to offer advice on 
alternative investments, options for intergenerational wealth transfer, and risk management 
strategies. In short, he needs much more depth. 
Second,  cross-functional  adaptability.  Job  functions  and  business  lines  are  no  longer  as 
static  and  predefined  as  they  used  to  be.  It  is  increasingly  important  that  finance 
professionals are exposed to a broader range of business areas. Movement across business 
lines generates fresh perspectives that could in turn help to drive innovation and identify new 
areas of competitive strength. 
A compliance professional, for instance, may start off on compliance matters that pertain to 
credit  activities.  Over  time,  it  would  be  useful  to  widen  his  compliance  knowledge  in  other 
areas of business such as capital markets. This broader exposure will help him to think about 
compliance  and  risk  management  issues  across  different  functions  of  the  bank  in  a  more 
consistent and coherent fashion. Such a capability will be a key asset when taking on larger 
functions and responsibilities in the bank. 
Third,  Asian  knowledge  and  expertise.  Asia  is  a  diverse  mix  of  economies.  They  are  at 
different stages of development, with different financing needs and different regulatory and 
governance  structures,  not  to  mention  different  cultural  norms.  To  operate  a  successful 
regional business franchise, finance professionals will need a deep understanding of these 
differences and know how to navigate the different terrain. 
Take for example, a corporate banker, who may be advising the treasurer of a Singapore-
based  multi-national  corporation  with  operations  in  the  region.  Each  jurisdiction  may  have 
different rules and regulations that could impact the cash management and credit needs of 
this client. The banker must therefore have deep regional knowledge and strong networks to 
deliver solutions for this client. Gaining exposure to Asian markets will therefore put him in a 
better position to assume greater responsibilities over time. 
Our ecosystem to develop human capital 
MAS  wants  to  see  more  of  our  finance  professionals  in  Singapore  build  up  these  three 
dimensions  of  expertise.  And  there  is  a  strong  ecosystem  in  Singapore  to  nurture  this 
process. 
First,  MAS  and  the  Institute  of  Banking  and  Finance  have  established  a  set  of  industry 
standards  for  Asian  financial  practitioners,  through  the  Financial  Industry  Competency 
Standards (FICS). 
• 
This offers finance professionals a clear roadmap for building competencies as they 
progress in their career, across different job roles and levels. 
Through this framework, we aim to build a strong pipeline of Singaporean talent and 
leaders in finance, so that our people can avail themselves of the opportunities that 
a growing financial industry will create. 
 Second,  our  industry  associations  are  playing  an  important  role  in  supporting  talent 
development within specific sectors. 
• 
The  Life  Insurance  Association  of  Singapore,  for  instance,  is  working  with  the 
Singapore  College  of  Insurance,  to  develop  a  talent  framework  that  provides 
structured training and development opportunities for insurance professionals. 
The  General  Insurance  Association  of  Singapore  is  running  a  global  internship 
programme  which  seeks  to  provide  undergraduates  with  hands-on  experience  at 
insurance firms overseas. 
 Third,  we  have  in  Singapore,  fortunately,  a  strong  academic  and  intellectual  climate  or 
platform to deepen specialisation in finance. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   We have world-class universities such as INSEAD and University of Chicago based 
here,  who  will  collaborate  with  this  Campus  to  design  programmes  to  offer  high-
quality, specialised courses in banking and finance. 
We have research centres such as the Centre for Asset Management Research and 
Investments and EDHEC conducting specialised research in areas relevant to the 
financial industry. 
We  have  training  providers  such  as  the  Wealth  Management  Institute  and  Risk 
Management  Institute  organising  programmes  and  conferences  to  further  thought 
leadership in areas of finance. 
BNP Paribas’ Asia Pacific Campus is a welcome addition to Singapore’s ecosystem to build 
human capital in finance for the future. 
Conclusion 
This is an exciting time to be in the financial industry, notwithstanding the challenges it has 
gone  through  since  the  crisis.  It  is  also  an  exciting  time  to  be  in  Asia.  But  to  seize  the 
opportunities  in  Asian  finance,  we  need  a  deep  pool  of  highly  skilled  and  trusted 
professionals. 
I thank BNP Paribas for growing with Singapore, and for being a strong partner with MAS in 
our  efforts  to  develop  talent  and  capabilities.  I  am  confident  your  strong  presence  in 
Singapore will serve you well as you continue to extend your Asian footprint. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
