  Mario Draghi: Monetary policy communication in turbulent times 
Speech by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at the Conference “De 
Nederlandsche  Bank  200  years:  central  banking  in  the  next  two  decades”,  Amsterdam,  
24 April 2014. 
Summary 
 Communication  and  transparency  have  become  more  important  for  central  banks  like  the  ECB  in  recent 
decades, and will become even more important in the decades to come. A transparent central bank is not 
only more accountable, but also more effective in implementing its monetary policy. If the general public 
and financial markets can understand how the ECB is likely to respond in a given situation – its so-called 
“reaction function” – they can form reasonable expectations about future monetary policy. This in turn gives 
the  ECB  the  capacity  to  influence  interest  rates  at  longer  maturities  and  steer  broader  financial  and 
economic conditions. 
While such “management by expectations” worked relatively well in normal times, the crisis inevitably made 
our decision-making process more complicated and our policies more difficult to understand. For example, 
the use of unconventional measures implied a wider range of possible monetary policy responses to a given 
shock.  To  continue  to  steer  expectations  in  this  environment,  the  ECB  had  to  be  more  explicit  in  its 
communication. This involved reaffirming our mandate and explaining its medium-turn orientation and euro 
area perspective. Furthermore, the Governing Council will be equally active in guarding against inflation and 
deflation. And, faced with the effective lower bound and different contingencies, we had to explain our future 
policy intentions and clarify our more complex reaction function. 
With our forward guidance, we aim to give guidance on the expected level of future interest rates, and to 
remove uncertainty about that level by strengthening communication on our reaction function. We have also 
further  simplified  our  reaction  function  by  laying  out  some  contingencies  that  would  warrant  a  monetary 
policy reaction. These are, first, an unwarranted tightening of monetary policy stance (from developments in 
short-term money markets, global bond markets or foreign exchange markets) that could be tackled through 
more conventional measures. Second, a further impairment in the transmission of our stance, in particular 
via the bank lending channel, for which a targeted LTRO or an ABS purchase programme might be the right 
response. Third, a worsening of the medium-term outlook for inflation, which would warrant a more broad-
based  asset  purchase  programme.  The  Governing  Council  is  committed  –  unanimously  –  to  using  both 
unconventional and conventional instruments to deal effectively with the risks of a too prolonged period of 
low inflation. 
Despite these efforts to enhance transparency, the predictability of the past will not readily return. Hence, 
judgement is likely to play a greater role in decision-making, and this involves trade-offs that need to be 
explained. That is why the Governing Council has been reflecting on the publication of a record or account 
of  its  policy  deliberations.  Such  a  written  account  would  provide  a  more  detailed  explanation  of  the 
reasoning  behind  the  Governing  Council’s  decisions,  and  give  a  sense  of  the  discussion  and  the  main 
arguments. 
Any  written  account  needs  to  preserve  the  independence  of  the  Governing  Council  members  and  the 
collegiality  of  their  decision-making.  Releasing  an  account  of  the  main  arguments  considered,  in  a  non-
attributed form, should on balance achieve these goals. Such a release should complement the real-time 
messages conveyed in the press conferences and offer additional information to improve understanding of 
our reaction function. 
 Dear Klaas, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Thank you very much for inviting me to speak at this conference marking the bicentenary of 
De  Nederlandsche  Bank  (DNB).  Congratulations  to  you,  Klaas,  and  to  all  the  staff  of  the 
DNB! 
We  are  tasked  today  with  reflecting  on  central  banking  in  the  next  two  decades,  and  the 
theme I would like to talk about is central bank transparency and communication. This is not 
only  because  transparency  and  communication  has  grown  ever  more  important for central 
banks over the past twenty years, and look set to become even more important over the two 
decades  to  come.  It  is  also  because  the  Netherlands  seems  a  fitting  setting  for  such  a 
discussion. 
As  you  know  well,  this  country  has  a  long  history  of  transparency  –  households  in  the 
Netherlands  are  renowned  for  keeping  open  their  curtains.  The  classic  explanation  is  that 
people do this for the benefit of others: with nothing to hide, they are happy to grant passers-
by a look inside. Another explanation I have heard is that people do it for themselves: in dark 
Northern  European  climates,  they  simply  want  to  let  more  light  into  their  houses.  But 
whatever  the  motivation,  what  matters  is  that  an  open  curtain  benefits  both  those  on  the 
outside and those on the inside. The same is true for us as central banks. 
A  transparent  central  bank  serves  the  general  public,  by  improving  understanding  of  its 
actions and accountability for its decisions. And a transparent central bank contributes to its 
own mission, by steering expectations and making its monetary policy more effective. Let me 
therefore begin by explaining how central banks across advanced economies, and the ECB 
in particular, have taken up the challenge of transparency and openness. 
Transparency and monetary policy effectiveness 
Up until the early 1990s, central banks tended to be rather secretive institutions, inclined to 
lock away their thinking like the gold in their vaults1. Remember that it was only in 1994 that 
the Federal Reserve decided to make its interest rate decisions public. Before that, markets 
had to guess whether or not the FOMC had changed its federal funds rate target. 
Today, however, central banks have realised they are more likely to fulfil their mandates if 
they  inform  the  public  and  the  markets  about  their  strategies,  assessments  and  policy 
decisions in an open, clear and timely manner.2 Also, the granting of more independence to 
central  banks  called  for  a  commensurate  increase  in  accountability  to  the  wider  public. 
Central banks responded and opened up. 
The  ECB  has  faced  the  same  expectations  of  openness,  not  least  given  the  particular 
challenges for democratic legitimacy in a multi-country monetary union. From the start, we 
have fully embraced the merits of being transparent and accountable. For example, we were 
the first major central bank to hold a regular press conference immediately after our monthly 
policy  meetings  to  explain  our  decisions  in  real-time.  We  also  report  regularly  to  the 
European Parliament. 
Moreover, we have recognised that, in a market economy, transparency and communication 
are  central  to  the  effectiveness  of  our  monetary  policy.3  First,  having  a  clear  objective 
supports  credibility  and  helps  anchor  inflation  expectations.  Second,  adopting  an  explicit 
                                                
1  See Brunner (1981), Cook and Hahn (1989) and Goodfriend (1986). 
2  For an overview of the way central banks have been providing more information about their monetary policy 
making, see for example Geraats (2014). For a survey of empirical evidence on the effects of communication, 
see Blinder et al. (2008). 
3  A  body  of  empirical  evidence  supports  the  view  that  high  transparency  and  good  communication  reinforce 
policy effectiveness and market efficiency. See, for example, Levin, Natalucci, and Piger (2004); Gürkaynak, 
Levin, and Swanson (2006); and Castelnuovo, Nicoletti-Altimari, and Rodriguez Palenzuela (2003). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  monetary policy strategy helps markets and the public understand how the central bank is 
likely to respond to economic and monetary developments – its so-called “reaction function”. 
Together, a credible objective and a well-understood reaction function allow financial markets 
and the public to form reasonable expectations about our future interest rate policy. This in 
turn gives us the capacity to influence interest rates at longer maturities and steer broader 
financial and economic conditions. This is what Mike Woodford has called “management by 
expectations”.4 
In the pre-crisis times, these expectation effects worked relatively smoothly. We had – and 
still have – a clear objective given to us by the Treaty, price stability. In 1998 we provided a 
quantitative  definition  of  price  stability,  clarifying  in  2003  that  we  aimed  at  inflation  rates 
“below, but close to, 2%” over the medium-term. We deployed a single standard monetary 
policy  instrument  to  reach  that  objective  –  the  main  ECB  interest  rates.  And  our  reaction 
function could be understood well, based on our strategy and actions, and ex post could be 
broadly captured by simple policy rules, such as the Taylor rule, in the same way as for other 
central banks.5 
The need for more communication during the crisis 
In crisis conditions, however, the implementation of monetary policy inevitably changed. We 
were forced to turn to unconventional measures to fulfil our mandate, for two main reasons. 
First, we faced severe impairments to the transmission of monetary policy across the euro 
area,  with  marked  heterogeneity  from  country  to  country.  This  called  for  unconventional 
measures tailored to the specific frictions at hand. Second, like many other central banks, we 
had to operate in an environment where our standard monetary policy instruments, the short-
term  policy-controlled  interest  rates,  became  increasingly  inhibited  in  the  vicinity  of  the 
so-called zero lower bound. 
In 
these  circumstances,  understanding  our  decision-making  process  became  more 
complicated – and this was true for all major central banks. Simple policy rules became less 
useful  to  describe  our  policies,  meaning  signals  were  harder  to  extract.  And  the  use  of 
unconventional measures implied that there was a wider range of possible monetary policy 
responses to a given shock. Thus, to continue to steer expectations about future policy, we 
had to be more explicit about how we understood this new environment. 
Our response  was  to  place  more  emphasis  on enhanced  communication  –  both regarding 
our  commitment  to  our  price  stability  objective,  and  regarding  our  assessment  of  and 
response to the rapidly changing economic and financial situation. Let me explain why both 
were necessary. 
Reaffirming the price stability objective 
The crisis has of course not altered our price stability mandate, which is defined in primary 
law, in the Treaty. Nonetheless, the events of recent years have made it important for the 
ECB  to  reaffirm  that  mandate  –  specifically,  to  explain  its  medium-term  orientation  and  its 
euro  area  perspective.  Furthermore,  the  Governing  Council  will  be  equally  active  in 
responding  to  medium-term  developments  in  inflation  that  fall  short  of  our  objective  as  to 
those that exceed it. 
                                                
4  On the role of expectations for monetary policy, see, for example, Woodford (2005). 
5  See, for example, Taylor (2012) for a historical account of monetary policy in the US from 1985 to 2003 using 
policy rules as a benchmark. For a survey of available evidence in the euro area, see Blattner and Margaritov 
(2010). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  This is especially important given the unique features of this crisis. It is a crisis that originated 
from  excessive  leverage  and  has  bequeathed  a  debt  overhang  in  many  developed 
economies, and, in the case of the euro area, also a loss of competitiveness in a number of 
countries.  Students  of  economic  history  know  that  in  past  episodes  debt  overhangs  have 
been  reduced  through  higher  inflation.  Higher  inflation  also  makes  competitiveness 
adjustments easier. Thus, fears might easily have arisen that we might be tempted to do the 
same,  especially  in  the  light  of  some  of  the  unconventional  measures  we  have  taken. 
Underlining our price stability mandate is essential to remove any doubt about future excess 
inflation. 
By  the  same  token,  the  aftermath  of  a  debt  crisis  often  leads  to  a  prolonged  period  of 
balance sheet adjustment, low economic growth and possible risks of a debt deflation spiral. 
Such  broad-based  deflation  risks  are  not  what  we  see  in  the  euro  area  today,  where  it  is 
mainly falling food and energy prices combined with weak demand that have pushed inflation 
into low territory. In these circumstances, inflation nonetheless becomes more vulnerable to 
any further downward shock. Reiterating our price stability objective helps here, too, by firmly 
anchoring  medium-term  inflation  expectations  near  2%.  In  other  words,  emphasis  on  the 
symmetry of our objective helps contain both inflationary and deflationary expectations. 
With  this  heightened  vulnerability  to  shocks,  equally  important  has  been  emphasising  the 
medium-term orientation of our monetary policy. This orientation implies that there are types 
of  shocks  that  are  relevant for  our  price  stability  assessment,  and  those  that  are  not.  The 
relevant type of shocks are those that are likely to persist into the medium-term and affect 
medium-term inflation expectations. Communicating clearly this distinction allows the public 
to understand how monetary policy will respond when a given shock hits, and in turn to have 
well-anchored  inflation  expectations. While  inflation  will  remain  low  for  a  prolonged  period, 
we see it gradually rising back to 2%. The delay is largely explained by the impairments in 
the transmission mechanism that lengthen the lag between our accommodative policy stance 
and price developments. 
Finally,  given  the  need  for  relative  wage  and  price  adjustments  between  parts  of the  euro 
area, the crisis has made it more necessary to recall that monetary policy is geared to the 
euro  area  as  a  whole.  During  an  adjustment  in  relative  prices,  there  will  always  be  some 
jurisdictions where inflation rates fall substantially below the euro area-wide objective, while 
inflation rates will naturally have to exceed the objective elsewhere. In this context, our role is 
to  remain  clearly  focused  on  achieving  price  stability  for  the  euro  area;  we  cannot  make 
policy in favour of subsets of countries. This is because our legitimacy flows from the Treaty, 
which establishes our constituency as the whole euro area. And it is only by respecting this 
that we justify our powers and independence. 
Explaining a more complex reaction function 
Nevertheless,  even  with  a  transparent  and  credible  objective,  crisis  conditions  make  it 
unavoidably harder for observers to predict how we will respond to unusual and sometimes 
unforeseeable circumstances, and which measures could be deployed. This in turn makes it 
harder  for  monetary  policy  to  steer  expectations  about  future  policy.  There  are  two  main 
challenges here. 
First,  when  central  banks  come  up  against  the  effective  lower  bound,  the  possibility 
disappears  to  use  current  changes  in  the  short  rate  to  signal  the  policy  response  to  a 
changing inflation outlook. There is therefore less information on which to base future interest 
rate expectations, which in turn implies that the central bank has less traction over the shape 
of  the  yield  curve  and  economic  conditions.  Thus,  it  becomes  more  important  to 
communicate  directly  about  future  interest  changes  and  their  response  to  a  changing 
economy, i.e. to give forward guidance. 
Second, the different contingencies in crisis conditions and the policy measures associated 
with them are unfamiliar to the public. This makes understanding our reaction function more 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  complex.  Hence,  the  probability  distribution  of  outcomes  tends  to  widen,  the  number  of 
economic and financial variables that observers consider relevant for monetary policy and its 
transmission  increases,  while  the  yield  curve  becomes  less  informative  as  a  summary 
indicator.  To  accurately  steer  expectations  across  a  wider  array  of  measures,  more  active 
communication on our reaction function is needed. 
The  purpose  of  enhanced  transparency  is  to  respond  to  these  challenges:  to  reduce 
uncertainty about our future policy intentions and to clarify our reaction function in unusual 
circumstances. Let me explain. 
First, forward guidance enhances transparency through two channels. It gives guidance on 
the expected level of future interest rates, conditional on the outlook for price stability. And it 
reduces  uncertainty  about  that  level  by  strengthening  communication  on  our  reaction 
function.  Specifically,  we  have  communicated  that,  given  low  inflation  and  broad-based 
economic  weakness,  we  expect  interest  rates  to  stay  at  present  or  lower  levels  for  an 
extended period of time. 
This  communication  has  indeed  had  the  overall  effect  of  lowering  longer-term  rates  and 
partly  insulating  euro  area  money  markets  against  developments  elsewhere.  Forward 
guidance  has  also  reduced  uncertainty  related  to  our  reaction  function.  Implied  densities 
extracted from EURIBOR options and used to gauge expectations of the forward OIS rate 
show  that  the  dispersion  of  short-term  rate  expectations  has  declined  to  levels  closer  to 
those  observed  in  early  May  2013,  after  we  cut  interest  rates.  The  sensitivity  of  money 
market forward rates to macroeconomic data releases has declined as well. And note that by 
cutting  rates  in  November  last  year  we  followed  up  words  with  actions,  which  effectively 
strengthened our forward guidance. 
We  have  also  recently  helped  further  clarify  our  reaction  function  by  laying  out  some 
contingencies that would warrant a monetary policy reaction. These contingencies illustrate 
well  the  multiple  dimensions  of  our  reaction  function,  both  as  regards  the  risks  to  price 
stability, and as regards the array of instruments we have at hand to deal with those risks. 
One contingency would be an unwarranted tightening of the policy stance. Such a change in 
the policy stance could emanate from at least three sources. 
First, a need for action could emanate from renewed tensions in short-term money markets 
to  the  extent  that  these  are  propagated  to  the  medium-term  curve,  in  particular  in  an 
environment  of  receding  excess  liquidity  in  the  euro  area.  This  is  distinct  from  the  type  of 
short-term money market volatility we saw towards the end of last year that was associated 
with technical factors. 
Second,  a  tightening  of  the  policy  stance  may  arise  from  developments  in  global  bond 
markets that unduly spill over to the interest rate term structure in the euro area. So far our 
forward  guidance  has  managed  to  decouple  euro  area  forward  curves  somewhat  from 
developments in the US. 
Third, the policy stance may also be affected by a continued appreciation of the exchange 
rate. The exchange rate is not in itself a policy target, but a rise in the exchange rate, all else 
being equal, implies a tightening of monetary conditions, a downward impact on inflation and 
potentially a threat to the ongoing recovery. If so, this would call for policy action to maintain 
the current accommodative stance. This is why we have said that the exchange rate is an 
increasingly important factor in our assessment of the outlook for price stability. 
This  assessment,  however,  needs  to  take  in  the  whole  picture.  To  the  extent  that  the 
exchange rate is rising because confidence in the euro area is returning and capital inflows 
are  increasing,  this  leads  also  to  looser  financing  conditions.  While  exchange  rate 
appreciation contributes to low inflation in the short run, falling long-term rates support rising 
inflation over time, insofar as they are passed on into lower bank lending rates and stimulate 
demand. As a result, the overall policy stance has to take this balance of forces into account. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  What  would  be  our  policy  response  should  this  contingency  arise?  In  our  view  an  undue 
tightening  of  the  policy  stance  can  be  addressed  through  a  variety  of  more  conventional 
measures. These include a further lowering of the interest rate corridor, including a negative 
deposit  rate.  They  include  a  further  extension  of  the  fixed-rate  full  allotment  procedure, 
beyond  the  period  currently  envisaged.  Remember  that  in  November  2013  we  announced 
our  decision  to  continue  conducting  the  main  refinancing  operations  (MROs)  as  fixed-rate 
tender  procedures,  with  full  allotment,  at  least  until  July  2015.  Finally,  if  necessary,  the 
measures could include new liquidity injections via our liquidity operations, including longer-
term fixed-rate operations. 
Another  contingency  that  would  warrant  a  monetary  policy  reaction  would  be  further 
impairments  in  the  transmission  of  our  stance,  in  particular  via  the  bank  lending  channel. 
Given the reduction in bank funding costs over the last year and the ongoing clean-up of the 
banking sector through the comprehensive assessment, our assessment is that bank lending 
conditions  are  improving  and  will  continue  to  improve.6  Yet  if  this  scenario  does  not 
materialise, we may have to respond. This could take several forms, including a longer-term 
refinancing  operation  targeted  towards  encouraging  bank  lending  or  an  ABS  purchase 
programme, supported by the necessary regulatory changes aimed at revitalising high quality 
securitisation in Europe. 
A  third  contingency  would  be  a  worsening  of  the  medium-term  outlook  for  inflation.  One 
cause for this could be by a broad-based weakening of aggregate demand that derails our 
baseline  scenario  of  a  moderate  recovery.  Another  cause  could  be  a  substantial  positive 
supply shock that, given the current low level of inflation, loosens the anchoring of medium-
term inflation expectations. Unlike the other contingencies, the objective here would not be to 
defend  the  current  stance,  but  rather  to  increase  meaningfully  the  degree  of  monetary 
accommodation.  Hence,  the  limited  margin  for  manoeuvre  that  remains  over  short-term 
interest  rates  would  not  be  sufficient.  This  would  be  the  context  for  a  more  broad-based 
asset purchase programme. 
Ultimately, all these contingencies point to the same conclusion: in order to fulfil its mandate, 
the  Governing  Council  is  committed  –  unanimously  –  to  using  both  unconventional  and 
conventional  instruments to deal effectively  with the risks of a too prolonged period of low 
inflation. 
Opening up the ECB’s decision-making 
In spite of these efforts to enhance transparency, and their observable effectiveness, there is 
little  doubt  that  our  simpler  understanding  of  monetary  policy  in  the  past  will  not  readily 
return.  Policymakers  are  operating  in  a  more  complex  and  heterogeneous  environment. 
Structural breaks and model uncertainty imply that the regularities of the past can no longer 
be relied upon. This in turn means that judgement plays a greater role in decision-making. 
Yet, judgement always involves trade-offs, which are important for the public to understand 
and  for  policy-makers to  be  accountable for.  And  while  trade-offs  exist  in  normal  times,  in 
crisis  conditions  they  become  both  more  complex  and  more  consequential.  For  example, 
each of the unconventional measures that I discussed above could be effective in addressing 
specific impairments in monetary transmission and risks to price stability, but could also have 
side effects that need to be considered. 
This  is  why  last  August  I  reported  that  the  Governing  Council  felt  a  need  for  a  “richer 
communication of the rationale behind its decisions” so as to give a sense of the discussion 
that has taken place. The Governing Council has since been reflecting on the publication of 
                                                
6  For more details see lecture by M. Draghi, “A consistent strategy for a sustained recovery”, at Sciences Po, 
Paris, 25 March 2014, http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2014/html/sp140325.en.html. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  some record or account of its policy deliberations. I would like to share with you my views on 
this matter today. 
A written account of our policy deliberations would provide a more detailed explanation of the 
reasoning behind the Governing Council’s decisions, and give a sense of the discussion and 
the  main  arguments.  This  would  allow  the  public  and  markets  to  further  improve  their 
understanding of the Governing Council’s reaction function, our assessment of the economy 
and our policy responses in light of evolving conditions. For this reason, I am convinced that 
it would be useful. Yet, we need also to be careful. We need to take proper account of the 
specific institutional setting of the euro area and the unique communication challenges in a 
multi-country monetary union.7 
This  implies,  first,  that  any  modifications  we  introduce  in  reporting  on  our  monetary  policy 
deliberations must not put at risk or call into question the independence of the members of 
the Governing Council. They act in a personal capacity in the interest of the euro area, rather 
than as representatives of their countries of origin. To my mind this precludes the attribution 
of  positions  to  individual  Council  members,  which  could  all  too  easily  be  misconstrued  or 
misinterpreted  through  a  national  perspective  and  expose  the  members  to  external 
pressures, perceived or real. 
Second, we need to ensure that any account of our proceedings preserves the collegiality of 
the Governing Council’s deliberations. For good reason Article 10.4 of the Statute stipulates 
that  the  proceedings  of  the  Governing  Council  meetings  shall  be  confidential,  while  the 
Council may decide to make the outcome of its deliberations public. This not only protects 
the independence of the Council members, but also ensures an open and frank exchange of 
views inside the Governing Council, which is essential for the effectiveness of our collegiate 
decision-making. 
Like  any  committee,  the  Governing  Council  benefits  from  the  diversity  of  views  and 
perspectives that are brought to the table. At the same time, decision-making by committee 
reflects  more  than  the  sum  of  the  pre-established  views  of  its  individual  members.  What 
counts  is  the  quality  of  the  arguments  and  the  contributions  made  towards  reaching  a 
common decision. There needs to be scope for a give-and-take in these discussions to reach 
the  best  decisions.  This  implies  a  readiness  to  re-consider  positions  in  the  light  of  all 
considerations  brought  forward  in  the  course  of  the  meeting  –  an  approach  that  helps  to 
forge a consensus. An account should not limit the flexibility of Council members to reach 
such a collective view. It should support collegiality, which comes at a premium in a multi-
country context. 
My view is that releasing a more complete account of the main arguments considered in our 
monetary policy deliberations, in a non-attributed form, will on balance serve to strengthen 
the  Governing  Council’s  collegiate  decision-making  and  communication.  Such  a  release 
should naturally complement the real-time messages conveyed in the press conferences. It 
should offer additional information that improves understanding of our reaction function, with 
respect to the relevant medium-term horizon, while taking care to avoid triggering short-term 
market noise. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
From the time the ECB was set up, not two centuries, but just 16 years ago, its commitment 
to  its  price  stability  mandate  has  not  wavered.  But  its  conduct  and  communication  of 
monetary policy have evolved. The ECB’s reporting obligations have, unsurprisingly, grown. 
                                                
7  For earlier discussions and evidence on ECB communication, see, for example, Issing (2005), Winkler (2000), 
Ehrmann and Fratzscher (2007a,b). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  And  as  we  take  on  banking  supervisory  powers  later  this  year,  there  is  a  need  for  even 
greater  accountability  and  transparency,  which  has  been  reflected  in  our  inter-institutional 
agreement with the European Parliament. 
The publication of a richer account of our monetary policy deliberations represents a logical 
next  step  in  the  ECB’s  evolving  communications.  After  16  years  of  operation  and  seven 
years  of  crisis,  the  Eurosystem  has  matured  enough  to  engage  more  fully  with  the  public 
about how we go about fulfilling our mandate. Such an interaction is ultimately the best basis 
for  an  effective  monetary  policy  and  for  maintaining  credibility  and  trust  in  our  institution  – 
which hopefully, like the DNB, will last for centuries to come. 
References 
Blattner, T. S. and E. Margaritov (2010), ‘Towards a robust monetary policy rule for the euro 
area’, ECB Working Paper No. 1210. 
Blinder, A.S., M. Ehrmann, M. Fratzscher, J. De Haan and D-J. Jansen (2008), ‘Central Bank 
Communication  and  Monetary  Policy:  A  Survey  of  Theory  and  Evidence’,  Journal  of 
Economic Literature, 46:4, pp. 910–945. 
Brunner, K (1981), ‘The Art of Central Banking’, Centre for Research in Government Policy 
and Business, Working Paper No. 81–6. 
Castelnuovo,  E.,  Nicoletti-Altimari  S.,  and  D.  Rodriguez  Palenzuela  (2003),  ‘Definition  of 
Price  Stability,  Range  and  Point  Inflation  Targets:  The  Anchoring  of  Long-Term  Inflation 
Expectations’, ECB Working Paper No. 273. 
Cook, T. and Hahn, T. (1989), ‘The Effect of Changes in the Federal Funds Rate Target on 
Market Interest Rates in the 1970s’, Journal of Monetary Economics, 24, 331–51. 
Ehrmann, M and M. Fratzscher (2007a), ‘Explaining monetary policy in press conferences’, 
ECB Working Paper No. 767. 
Ehrmann,  M  and  M.  Fratzscher  (2007b),  ‘Communication  and  decision-making  by  central 
bank committees – different strategies, same effectiveness?’ Journal of Money, Credit and 
Banking, 39, 509–541. 
Geraats P. (2014), ‘Monetary policy transparency’, CESifo Working Paper No. 4611, January 
2014. 
Goodfriend,  M.  (1986),  ‘Monetary  Mystique:  Secrecy  and  Central  Banking’,  Journal  of 
Monetary Economics, 17, 63–97. 
Gürkaynak,  R.,  Levin,  A.,  and  E.  Swanson  (2006),  ‘Does  Inflation  Targeting  Anchor  Long-
Run  Inflation  Expectations?  Evidence  from  Long-Term  Bond  Yields  in  the  US,  UK  and 
Sweden’, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper No. 2006–09. 
Issing,  O.  (2005),  ‘Communication,  Transparency,  Accountability:  Monetary  Policy  in  the 
Twenty-First Century’, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review 87, 65–83. 
Levin,  Andrew  T.,  Fabio  M.  Natalucci  and  Jeremy  M.  Piger  (2004),  “Explicit  inflation 
objectives and macroeconomic outcomes”, ECB Working Paper No 383. 
Taylor,  J.  (1993), 
Conference, Series on Public Policy, 39, pp.195–214. 
Taylor  J.  (2012),  ‘Monetary  policy  rules  work  and  discretion  doesn’t:  a  tale  of  two  eras’, 
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 44, No. 6. 
Winkler, B. (2000), ‘Which kind of transparency? On the need for clarity in monetary policy 
making’, ECB Working Paper No. 26. 
in  practice’,  Carnegie-Rochester 
‘Discretion  versus  policy  rules 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Woodford, M. (2005), ‘Central Bank Communication and Policy Effectiveness’, Presentation 
to the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Symposium. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
