  Agus D W Martowardojo: Making headway towards sustainable growth – 
challenges in a volatile world 
Keynote address by Mr Agus D W Martowardojo, Governor of Bank Indonesia, at “Managing 
ASEAN Risk”, American Indonesia Chamber of Commerce, New York, 14 April 2014. 
 And,  here,  I  would  like  to  reaffirm  that  given  the  political  transitions  is  underway, 
Good morning, 
Distinguished guests, Ladies and Gentlemen 
1. 
It is a distinct pleasure to be here, on my way back to Indonesia after attending the 
World  Bank/IMF  meeting  in  Washington  DC.  I  would  like  to  thank  American  Indonesian 
Chamber of Commerce for the invitation. 
2. 
I also like to say that this event-theme namely “Managing ASIAN Risk” is timely and 
appealing.  Since  last  couple  weeks,  you  must  have  already  heard  many  interesting 
discussions about the parliamentary and presidential election in Indonesia. 
3. 
Indonesian economy remain offering causes for optimism. 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
4. 
I am pleased to share that the recent development particularly since the final quarter 
of  2013  showed  that  the  preemptive  and  decisive  policy  measures  carried  out  by  Bank 
Indonesia and the Government has effectively steered the economy to the right track. 
5. 
Despite  unfavorable  weather  condition,  in  the  last  three  months  inflation  remains 
under  control  and  back  to  its  normal  path.  Current  account  deficit  is  moving  towards  a 
healthier and a more sustainable level. It decreased sharply during the final quarter of 2013, 
amounting to just 1.98% of GDP, which is well below the 3.85% of GDP reported in the third 
quarter of 2013. 
6. 
to lower the current account deficit gradually to a sustainable level. 
It’s my firm believe that any delay in responding to economic imbalance often cause us to 
lose momentum, which carries a harmful consequences on the economy as a whole. As well, 
a sustainable economic growth requires not only a low and stable inflation, but also a healthy 
posture in current account. 
7. 
For  that  reason,  we  (Bank  Indonesia  and  Government)  geared  policy  mix  to  put 
priority on the stabilization over the growth, and commit to safeguard the adjustment process 
to be a soft landing one. Given saw moderation in domestic demand, we have managed to 
allow  for  an  orderly  adjustment  in  the  economy,  without  sacrificing  too  much  growth.  Last 
year,  economic  growth  stood  at  5,8%  which  reasonably  high  compared  to  our  peers 
countries. 
8. 
The dynamics in the economy throughout 2013 has also brought home a lesson that 
in order to achieve the desired optimal balance in the economy we need a discipline, forward 
looking,  and  bold  macroeconomic  policy.  In  fact,  improved  economic  fundamentals 
supported by strong policy have bolstered confidence among global investor, hence attracted 
foreign portfolio flows back to domestic financial market. 
9. 
Since  early  January  until  April  4,  2014,  the  influx  of  global  portfolio  flows  into 
Indonesia’s  financial  market  reached  US$6.9  billion.  As  a  result,  the  Indonesian  Rupiah 
gained  7,0%,  become  the  strongest  currency  among  Emerging  Market  currencies.  Once 
considered a “fragile five currencies”, the Indonesia rupiah now set itself apart as a result of 
preemptive and strong policy actions. 
Since I took the office in May 2013, I was in the view that the policy shift is needed 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  10. 
This  picture  is  contrast  against  the  event  in  mid-2013  at  the  time  I  jointed  Bank 
Indonesia where the changing market’s enthusiastic reactions to Federal Reserve’s signal of 
so-called “QE tapering” led to a sell-off of emerging market debt and equities, and reversal of 
foreign capital flows. 
11. 
There  is  also  a  mark  positive  in  the  microstructure  of  onshore  foreign  exchange 
market.  Foreign  exchange  liquidity  in  onshore  market  is  currently  ampler  with  a  greater 
interbank trading volume, thus buffering the IDR exchange rate against unwanted  volatility 
due  to  the  sudden  surge  in  dollar  demand.  With  a  greater  market  volume  certainly  help 
alleviate the past perception where the central bank was perceived as the sole main supplier 
of US dollar. 
12. 
Likewise,  there  is  a  greater  transparency  in  the  foreign  exchange  price  discovery 
and  JISDOR  (Jakarta  Interbank  Spot  Dollar  Rate)  has  been  well  accepted  by  the  market, 
including by the ABS Singapore formally as spot reference for NDF market in last February 
2014. 
Managing short term volatility 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
11. 
Indeed,  in  the  recent  months,  turbulence  in  the  global  financial  markets  seems  to 
have somewhat been moderated. This possibly reflects the fact that much of future risk of the 
Fed tapering has been priced in during the second half of 2013 outflow episodes. 
12. 
This is, however, not to say that short-term volatilities are no longer with us. In these 
uncertain times and with all the increased interconnectedness of the world economy, volatility 
and short-term fickleness of marketplace are unavoidable. 
13. 
The  interplay  between  market  players’  expectations,  their  self-fulfilling  nature  and 
spillover  effects  frequently  paves  the  way  for  market  exuberance  in  response  to  a  trigger 
event. Therefore, we should realize that we are definitely not out of the woods and it’s not 
going to be an easy task to be sustained. 
14. 
Beside,  emerging  market  like  Indonesia  still  has  to  prepare  to  face  a  rocky  and 
bumpy road ahead. The G20/IMF meeting last week raise concern that the balance of risks 
to global growth has improved, but that some hurdles along the way remain. These include 
the potential risk for reversal in capital flows from emerging markets to advanced economies 
as risk averse investors seek relatively more attractive advanced economies’ assets. 
15. 
And  there  is  a  risk  of  renewed  bouts  of  market  volatility  with  the  expected 
normalization to a more neutral monetary policy stance in the United States. In either case, 
the  result  could  likely  lead  to  financial  turmoil  and  difficult  adjustments  in  some  emerging 
markets, with a risk of contagion. 
16. 
These risks if not well-managed could reawaken similar environment that have put 
many emerging market economy in jeopardy last year. Hence, the challenges going forward 
for policymakers are, not only to have the right set of “firm policy responses in place” to deal 
with these short-term volatilities, but also to assure that all the market participants are well 
prepared for the scenarios that could be expected. 
17. 
In this regard, I have frequently encouraged the business sector at home to manage 
their foreign exchange risk. In this context, Bank Indonesia has taken many steps to promote 
the  use  of  hedging  instrument  including  by  relaxing  the  foreign  exchange  regulation.  I 
believe,  in  these  uncertain  times  where  information  and  confidence  are  very  important  in 
influencing market actions, protection against the foreign exchange risks should be viewed 
as the foremost strategy. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Upgrading of the supply slide 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
18. 
Although  short-term  volatility  has  often  caught  us  by  surprise,  there  is  a  pressing 
need to consider longer-term issues. And to support long-term perspective, Bank Indonesia 
has  set  macroeconomic  and  financial  environment  to  support  such  goal.  Indeed,  sound 
macroeconomic  have  been  instrumental  in  safeguarding  economic  stability  and  for  some 
extend helping Indonesia weather through numerous shocks that have come its way. 
19. 
But, we should also not be under the illusion that sound macroeconomic practices 
can  be  taken  for  granted.  It  would  be  a  mistake  to  be  soothed  into  complacency  by  the 
success of short-term volatility management. 
20. 
In  particular,  there  remain  important  long-term  challenges  to  the  sustainability  of 
growth  in  Indonesia.  As  we  all  aware,  in  many  emerging  market  including  Indonesia  most 
policy  responses  have  been  focused  on  demand-side  management  through  monetary  or 
fiscal policy. After all, pursuing demand management policies alone can only take us so far – 
somewhat  akin  to  stepping  on  the  gas  pedal  without  “upgrading”  or  modifying  the  car  we 
drive. 
21. 
Thus,  from  domestic  backdrop,  Bank  Indonesia  give  serious  consideration  on  the 
need to address structural issues to be very pressing since the real lift of potential growth of 
the economy must essentially come from supply-side progress. Without effective structural 
policy,  an  external  shock  would  always  require  substantial  adjustment  in  the  demand  side 
that will only intensify boom-and-bust cycle in the economy. 
22. 
Indeed, the task is not going to be easy. Reorienting the economic growth strategy 
to focus more on skills development, innovation, and productivity involves deliberate planning 
over  relatively  long  stretch  of  time.  Two  principles  are  of  the  essence:  consistency  and 
continuity.  Due  to  the  long-term  nature  of  structural  readjustments,  continuity  of  policy 
implementation is required for the policy measures to take meaningful effect on the economy. 
23. 
The good news is that some of the infrastructure projects in Indonesia have already 
been  in  progress  and  will  continue  move  on  regardless  of  “the  political  regime  shift”.  Last 
month,  the  construction  of  double  tract  railways  just  completed,  connecting  Jakarta  and 
Surabaya, as the biggest and second biggest city respectively. Meanwhile, the other many 
ongoing  projects  remain  the  responsibility  of  the  next  administration  to  ensure  adequate 
infrastructure in the medium term. 
24. 
To be sure, in Indonesia, democracy is a continuous process since its conception 
fourteen years ago rather than a fixed state of bliss to be attained. The process is shaped by 
voices of the people, under an institutional setup that provides checks and balances. With 
more than 500 elected offices throughout the archipelago, election and peaceful transition of 
power  actually  occur  almost  every  day  in  Indonesia.  I  am  confident  that  the  upcoming 
presidential  elections  will  be  no  different.  And  it  will  be  a  testament  to  the  strength  of  our 
democracy and its ability to support economic development. It’s my firm believe that the next 
administration  will  ensure  quality  public  policy 
the  country’s 
competitiveness and sustain long-term growth. 
that  can  enhance 
Outlook 2014 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
25. 
Against  the  background  of  quite  an  unpredictable  external  environment,  I  believe 
that the Indonesian economy would be more stable, balanced, and growth at reasonable rate 
in the range of 5,5–5,9%. Many of the supporting factors remain in place, including stronger 
export and improving business confidence which should provide an enabling environment for 
growth. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  26. 
Bank credit is projected to grow at 15–17% range which is reliable with the effort to 
bring  the  current  account  to  a  healthier.  That  being  said,  we  expect  the  current  account 
deficit  to  continue  shrinking  below  3,0%.  Indeed,  latest  trade  figure  already  pointed  to  an 
upbeat-sign as shown by the surplus of trade balance in February and March 2014. 
27. 
Inflation will remain under control and within its target corridor of 4.5%±1% in 2014. 
With  many  uncertainties  ahead,  it  is  wise  to  keep  the  inflation  rate  low  to  ensure  that  the 
economy  remains  competitive  and  to  minimize  pockets  of  instability,  whether  through 
excessive growth of bank credits or asset price bubbles. 
Closing 
Distinguished guests, Ladies and Gentlemen 
28. 
I  would  like  to  end my  talk this  morning  by  stressing that  despite many  roles  that 
Bank Indonesia  plays  in  ensuring  economic  and financial  stability,  Bank  Indonesia’s  policy 
alone cannot ensure sustainable economic growth. 
29. 
A sustainable growth requires a structural reform for having a reliable infrastructure, 
– in terms of physical, financial, institutions, and human capital – as an enabler for Indonesia 
to grow and break into the high-income level bracket. 
30. 
If  infrastructure  development  is  unable  to  keep  up  with  expanding  economy  and 
growing demand of the population, the economic growth is constantly constrained to achieve 
its full potential. Encouragingly, in Indonesia, progress has been observed in many projects 
although room for improvement remains. 
31. 
I believe the next administration remain placing emphasize on the structural reform, 
while Bank Indonesia will continue to ensure a stable financial and economic environment, 
so that businesses can continue to thrive and individuals can enjoy better standards of living 
on a sustainable basis. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
