  Yves Mersch: Law, money and market – the legal dimension of monetary 
policy 
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the Information Club Meeting, Luxembourg, 31 May 2014. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Thank you very much for inviting me to speak at this event. 
What I would like to address in my remarks is what went wrong with the governance of the 
euro area and how to fix it. But as this has been much discussed in the past, I want to come 
at  the  question  today  from  a  slightly  different  perspective:  that  is,  to  go  back  to  the  first 
principles of what makes a market economy function, and then to look at the situation in the 
euro area from there. 
Law, money and the market 
1. 
A  well-functioning  free  market  is  a  socio-economic  construct.  It  is  created  by  a  consistent 
accord of rules, instruments and institutions. 
As economies develop, what this accord entails changes. But at the most fundamental level 
there  must  be  a  harmony  of  law,  money  and  freedom.  This  is  because  the  rule  of  law 
guarantees the freedom of the individual by defining the scope and boundaries of his or her 
action.  And  in  turn,  it  is  the  freedom  of  the  individual  that  creates  the  agency  and  choice 
which is essential to produce a free market to the benefit of the whole society. 
The  way  money  fits  into  this  framework  was  well  illustrated  by  Nicolas  Oresme,  who  was 
bishop of Lisieux and adviser to Charles V, the king of France. In 1360 Oresme initiated a 
sweeping monetary reform after a period in which the currency was debased many times. A 
comment that is attributed to him at this time is that “Money must be as solid as a law, as 
stable as a law of nature”.1 
In essence, what Oresme was saying was that solid law and stable money are two sides of 
the  same  coin  (if  you  will  forgive  the  expression).  They  both  support  the  ends  of  the 
individual. The law exists to create an environment in which individuals can make free and 
safe  decisions.  Money  is  the  same.  And  both  are  pre-conditions  for  a  market  economy  to 
function. 
Even one of our most famous Luxembourgeois, John the Blind, implicitly appreciated these 
interactions. By experimenting with various currency reforms he sought to ensure that each 
coin  in  his  realm  would  have  the  same  value  in  trade  and  commerce,  regardless  of  its 
geographic origin or disparities in physical appearance. At the time of course the debate was 
about the law of God taking precedence over the law of kings. But fittingly, his motto was “Ich 
dien”  –  German  for  “I  serve”.  And  indeed,  this  notion  of  money  as  “public  service”  was 
exported and lived on: the same phrase appeared on British two pence coins until 2008. 
Thus, there is a long intellectual tradition linking rule of law and sound money to functioning 
of free markets. But this connection found perhaps its clearest expression in the ordoliberal 
school that developed in Germany in the 1930s. Conceived at the University of Freiburg by 
Walter  Eucken  and  Franz  Boehm,  the  central  understanding  of  ordoliberalism  was  that  a 
stable  and  well-functioning  market  economy  required  a  strong  legal  and  institutional 
                                                
1   “Moneta debt esse quasi quaedam lex et quaedam ordinacio firma”. Nicolas Oresme, Traité de la première 
invention des monnaies (ca. 1355). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  framework. Pure laissez-faire capitalism was unstable and liable to capture by monopolies. 
Collectivist central planning, on the other hand, led towards waste and totalitarianism. 
Thus, as the ordoliberals saw it, the role of government was to frame markets in such a way 
that actual outcomes would approximate the theoretical outcome in a perfectly competitive 
market.  Achieving  such  outcomes  could  imply  de-regulation,  if  government  was  interfering 
too much in market processes, or re-regulation, if market failures were apparent – a feature 
that  distinguished  it  from  a  laissez-faire  approach.  In  other  words,  the  role  of  government 
was both to untie the “invisible hand”, and to keep it firmly cuffed to the rule of law. 
At  the  same  time,  ordoliberalism  recognised  the  crucial  importance  of  monetary  and 
economic  stability  to  a  well-functioning  market.  This  implied  an  economic  framework  built 
around price stability, competition regulation and budgetary discipline – in Eucken’s words, 
the perfect “economic constitution”.2 This thinking had a strong influence on the design of the 
post-war  social  market  economy  in  Germany,  and  is  seen  by  some  as  the  foundation  for 
German economic success in that period. 
Interestingly, as many developing countries transitioned from planned to market economies 
in  the  1980s  and  1990s,  there  was  something  of  a  large-scale  social  experiment  of  the 
ordoliberals’  views  outside  of  Germany.  Several 
the 
macroeconomic  policy  recommendations  of  the  so-called  Washington  Consensus,  which 
emphasised  the  laissez-faire  side  of  liberalism  –  decentralization,  deregulation  and 
privatization  –  while  downplaying  the  legal  and  institutional  underpinnings  of  a  well-
functioning market economy. 
The  “poster  boy”  for  this  approach  was  Chile  in  the  1980s  under  the  influence  Augusto 
Pinochet  and  German  immigrants  connected  to  his  regime,  together  with  the  so-called 
“Chicago Boys.”3 While quite striking results were achieved initially, leading Milton Friedman 
to refer to “the miracle of Chile”, financial speculation and foreign debt quickly built up behind 
the  scenes.  Moreover,  privatisation  allowed  formerly  public  monopolies  to  become  private 
monopolies  –  precisely  what  market-oriented  reforms  were  supposed  to  avoid.  The 
speculation bubble then burst in 1982, after which economic policy changed track. 
A  similar  pattern  was  observable  in  other  transition  economies.  Russia,  for  example, 
privatised and liberalised extensively following the collapse of the U.S.S.R. Without a solid 
legal  and  institutional  framework  to  organise  market  interactions,  however,  the  country 
experienced a series of crises, while resources ended up being concentrated in the hands of 
a few powerful individuals. 
These experiences led the assumptions of the Washington Consensus to be progressively 
revised. Even the IMF acknowledged the flaws in the original list of suggestions, in particular 
regarding  the  importance  of  institutions.4  Reviewing  the  available  evidence,  the  economist 
Dani  Rodrik  wrote  that  the  strength  of  institutions  is  the  most  important  element  of 
development economics. The mantra of the so-called “revised” Washington Consensus, he 
wrote, should be to “get the institutions right.”5 
transition  economies  followed 
                                                
2   Vanberg,  Viktor  J.  “The  Freiburg  School:  Walter  Eucken  and  Ordoliberalism.”  Walter  Eucken  Institut,  April 
2004. 
3   The  Chicago  Boys  were  a  group  of  young,  liberal  economists  from  Chile  educated  at  the  University  of 
Chicago. 
4   “Report on the Evaluation of the Role of the IMF in Argentina, 1991–2001.” Independent Evaluation Office of 
the IMF, July 2004. 
5   Rodrik, Dani, et al. “Institutions Rule: The Primacy of Institutions over Integration and Geography in Economic 
Development.” IMF Working Paper Series, November 2002. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The principles of effective economic policy 
2. 
The aim of this brief review is to underscore that all well-functioning market economies are 
based on a consistent accord of rules, instruments and institutions. And what I would like to 
turn to now is the state of that accord in the euro area. 
The designers of the euro area clearly intended to build a consistent rules-based framework.6 
The  euro  area  fitted  within  a  single  market  centred  on  a  strong  competition  authority  that 
could  break-up  monopolies  and  remove  competitive  distortions.  The  ECB  was  established 
with a mandate to focus solely on price stability. National fiscal policies were expected to be 
stability-oriented and conducted within a strict framework, known as the Stability and Growth 
Pact  (SGP).  This  would  be  supplemented,  it  was  believed,  by  the  disciplinary  force  of 
financial markets. 
This  begs  the  question:  why  did  the  euro  area  then  have  a  major  crisis?  The  answer,  in 
short, is that the designers got it wrong. The accord of rules, instruments and institutions in 
the euro area was in fact inconsistent. 
There were two dimensions to this: 
• 
The first was inconsistency within policy areas, which produced a fragmented and 
unstable governance framework. 
The  second  was  inconsistency  between  policy  areas,  which  caused  negative 
interactions between them to appear. 
 Let me address each in turn. 
Inconsistency within policy areas 
In a highly integrated currency area like the euro area, there are several types of economic 
policies  that  are “of  common  concern”. This  may  be  because  they  have consequences  on 
euro area aggregates – for example, excess domestic demand in one large country pushing 
up overall euro area inflation – or because they create spillovers for other Member States. 
These policies therefore warrant some form of coordination at the euro area level, notably via 
common rules. The implementation of these rules, however, can broadly speaking take two 
forms. 
One form is where rules are agreed centrally but applied decentrally by national authorities. 
For this to work, however, there has to be very little room for discretion in how those rules 
are applied. Otherwise, political and economic preferences at the national level or industry 
lobbies  can  lead  to  substantial  divergence  between  member  countries.  This  in  turn  risks 
externalities for others in the currency area. 
Another  form  is  where  rules  are  agreed  centrally  and  applied  centrally  by  a  European 
institution.  In  this  case  there  can  be  discretionary  decision-making,  as  the  European 
institution,  provided  it  has  sufficient  independence,  is  not  influenced  by  preferences  at  the 
national level. Moreover, through appropriate accountability arrangements it will be de facto 
forced to take a euro area-wide view and apply that discretion evenly. 
When  EMU  was  launched,  only  really  monetary  policy  conformed  to  one  of  these  forms. 
Monetary  policy  decision-making  was  fully  centralised  in  a  European  institution,  the  ECB, 
which had substantial discretion in how it implemented its tasks. This was made possible by 
the ECB’s clear mandate referenced in terms of the euro area as a whole, for which it was 
                                                
6   For a more in depth exposition of this argument see: Nedergaard, Peter. “The Influence of Ordoliberalism in 
European  Integration  Processes:  A  Framework  for  Ideational  Influence  with  Competition  Policy  and  the 
Economic and Monetary Policy as Examples.” MPRA Paper No. 52331, December 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  accountable ex post. This internal consistency explains why monetary policy is the only part 
of the EMU framework that has clearly functioned as designed. 
Fiscal policies were supposed to conform to the other form of governance, where countries 
would decide on and execute their own budgets, but within the strict constraints of the deficit 
and debt limits set in the Treaty. Those limits were supposed to be policed by markets, the 
Commission and other Member States, but in practice the incentives of the latter to enforce 
the rules were weak. This meant that de facto rules could be applied with discretion, while 
Member States themselves decided on how to exercise that discretion – in other words, the 
worst combination of the two forms. 
The  result  was  that  fiscal  positions  diverged  significantly,  which  then  created  substantial 
spillovers  for  other  euro  area  members.  But  perhaps  more  fundamentally,  internal 
inconsistency  meant  that  fiscal  policy  itself  became  ineffective  in  several  jurisdictions.  A 
number of governments either did not have the fiscal space to absorb the shock they faced in 
the early stage of the crisis, or they were unable to maintain the trust of the market when 
investors finally reacted – and over-reacted. Fiscal policy therefore had to effectively give up 
its  stabilisation  function  –  which  is  vital  with  a  single  monetary  policy  –  and  switch  to 
convincing investors of debt sustainability. 
Prudential  policies  were  also  supposed  to  fit  the  decentralised  model,  although  here  the 
framework  was  even  looser.  While  a  general  set  of  rules  for  European  banks  was 
progressively established in successive capital requirements directives, substantial flexibility 
remained in how those rules was interpreted at the national level. The Lamfalussy process 
was  launched  in  an  effort  to  iron  out  these  differences,  but  the  process  rested  entirely  on 
cooperation  between  national  supervisors,  with  no  possibilities  for  binding  mediation  or 
enforcement at the European level – and it was fiercely resisted by countries with financial 
centres. 
The  divergence  this  permitted  in  the  application  of  regulatory  and  supervisory  standards 
allowed serious financial imbalances to build-up in some jurisdictions, which then of course 
created  serious  blowback  for  the  euro  area.  But  similar  to  fiscal  policies,  an  inconsistent 
framework also undermined the value of prudential policy itself. As, for example, definitions 
of  forbearance  and  non-performing  exposures  differed  widely  across  countries,  investors 
simply  did  not  trust  in  banks’  stated  asset  values  and  provisions.  In  other  words,  the 
confidence effects that prudential policy is supposed to provide disappeared when they were 
most needed. 
For  structural  policies  there  were  no  binding  European  rules  at  all,  as  they  were  seen  as 
having a primarily national significance. 
Inconsistency between policy areas 
These governance arrangements were not only internally inconsistent, however; they were 
inconsistent  with  each  other.  Governance  of  the  euro  area  can  be  imagined  like  a  set  of 
interlocking  cogs  wheels:  they  do  not  all  need  to  be  of  similar  size  –  that  is,  we  do  not 
necessarily need the same degree of centralisation in each area – but they need to all move 
in the same direction. If one cog moves in the other direction, the whole machine grinds to a 
halt. 
There were several inconsistencies between policy areas in the euro area that had such a 
countervailing effect. 
To  begin  with,  the  frameworks  for  economic  and  financial  policies  pulled  in  different 
directions. Increasing financial integration encouraged capital to flow from core to periphery, 
but this was not accompanied by increasing integration of product and services markets to 
ensure that this capital was allocated efficiently. In fact, as competitive pressures remained 
weak,  in  particular  in  the  non-tradable/services  sector,  certain  industries  were  able  to 
maintain excessive rents and distort price signals. This meant that the low marginal product 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  of  capital  in  these  industries  was  offset  by  rising  profit  margins,  leading  capital  to  become 
misallocated. 
The fiscal and financial frameworks also interacted negatively with one another. In particular, 
policy-makers underestimated the extent to which financial integration depended on the false 
perception of relatively homogenous sovereign credit risk. As euro area banks were heavily 
exposed  to  own  governments’  debt,  when  perceptions  of  sovereign  creditworthiness 
diverged,  so  did  confidence  in  their  respective  banking  systems.  The  resulting  market 
fragmentation further increased sovereign risk, entrenched domestic banks as the marginal 
buyer of their sovereigns’ debt, and thus deepened this bank-sovereign nexus. 
Finally,  the  interaction  between  bank  and  sovereign  risk  jarred  with  the  single  monetary 
policy.  A  fragmented  banking  system  not  only  impaired  monetary  policy  transmission.  But 
more  fundamentally,  it  called  into  question  the  singleness  of  money.  Money,  it  has  to  be 
remembered, is a liability of the banking system. Banknotes represent only a fraction of the 
money  we  use  daily;  the  bulk  of  money  is  deposits.  Thus,  for  there  to  be  a  truly  single 
money,  there  has to  be  full fungibility  of  deposits  across  borders.  If  confidence  in  national 
banking systems diverges, such that a deposit in one jurisdiction is seen to worth less than a 
deposit in another, then money within the euro area is no longer unquestionably single. 
Bringing consistency back 
3. 
To sum up, the problems the euro area has faced derive from the fact that it did not learn its 
own lesson. The stability of European countries in the second half of the 20th century was 
based on providing their national economies with the right accord of rules, institutions and 
instruments  to  produce  desirable  market  outcomes.  Yet  when  it  came  to  the  euro  area 
economy, these tried and tested principles were somehow overlooked. Several policy areas 
were  governed  inconsistently,  with  little  reflection  given  to  how  the  different  cogs  wheels 
would fit together. 
The main aim of the euro area today is therefore to bring consistency back: that is, to make 
governance  of  different  policy  areas  mutually  consistent  and  internally  consistent.  Let  me 
briefly review how this is being addressed in the banking, fiscal and economic domains. 
Banking union 
Since 2012, the priority has been to restore consistency between the single monetary policy 
and other policies – that is, to guarantee the singleness of money irrespective of the fiscal 
health  of  sovereigns.  Essentially,  this  had  to  involve  removing  the  fault  lines  between 
national banking systems that called into question the fungibility of deposits, and that meant 
bringing  those  national  systems  together  into  a  single  system.  This  is  where  the  banking 
union comes in. 
Banking union means three things: it means a single supervisory framework that minimises 
equally the risk that a euro area bank takes excessive risk and runs into failure. It means a 
single resolution framework, so that if a bank does still fail, it can be resolved in the same 
way,  with  limited  use  of  taxpayer  money,  irrespective  of  where  the  bank  is  located  or  the 
fiscal strength of its government. And it means a system of deposit protection that provides 
depositors with equal confidence that their deposits are safe, regardless of jurisdiction. 
In  terms  of  implementing  these  three  elements,  the  euro  area  has  made  considerable 
progress. And importantly, the governance reforms that have been agreed are much more 
internally  consistent.  They  come  close  to  the  two  ideal  forms  that  I  mentioned  earlier:  in 
some  areas  there  will  be  centralisation  and  discretion;  in  others  decentralisation  and  no 
discretion. 
From November this year banking supervision will be centralised in the Single Supervisory 
Mechanism  (SSM).  Bank  resolution  will  also  be  centralised  in  the  Single  Resolution 
Mechanism  (SRM).  The  latter  is  particularly  important  as  the  legal  framework  it  will 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  implement  –  the  Bank  Recovery  and  Resolution  Directive  (BRRD)  –  contains  quite  some 
discretionary exemptions, in particular from the new bail-in provisions. 
For deposit guarantee, there is no centralisation yet. But under the recently adopted directive 
national  schemes  will  have  to  meet  the  same  minimum  standards  for  levels  and  funding, 
meaning that there is also little discretion. Implementation, therefore, will be key. 
Fiscal union 
Banking Union will certainly help reduce the impact of sovereign risk on the banking system. 
But  still,  there  is  little  that  can  be  done  if  sovereigns  pursue  manifestly  unsound  fiscal 
policies.  Domestic  banks  remain  heavily  exposed  to  their  sovereigns.  And  any  regulatory 
initiatives to address this issue – e.g. large exposure limits or doing away with the risk-free 
treatment of sovereign debt – can only be introduced very gradually in order to avoid market 
turmoil,  and  most  likely  only  in  the  context  of  other  governance  reforms.  Thus,  to  be 
consistent,  a  single  banking  system  and  a  single  currency  require  a  fiscal  framework  that 
guarantees budgetary solidity. 
The  euro  area  has  done  a  lot  since  the  start  of  the  crisis  to  strengthen  fiscal  rules.  In 
particular, Member States have sought to move away from the unstable middle ground of the 
first SGP by anchoring fiscal rules more firmly in national law. The Fiscal Compact – which 
requires  countries  to  run  balanced  budgets  over  the  cycle  and  reduce  their  debt  levels 
progressively  towards  60%  of  GDP  –  has  to  be  written  into  national  constitutions  or 
equivalent,  and  is  overseen  by  national  fiscal  councils.  This  comes  closer  to  the  model  of 
having decentralised implementation of rules, but with very little discretion. 
But will this be enough? I see two possible outcomes. 
The first is a stable equilibrium between centralised banking governance and decentralised 
fiscal  governance.  That  is,  banking  union  better  insulates  national  budgets  from  financial 
shocks, meaning budget deficits are generally milder. And in this context, the Fiscal Compact 
provides sufficient medium-term credibility to allow fiscal policy to operate counter-cyclically 
without threatening market access. 
The second possibility is some form of deeper fiscal union at the euro area level. 
Economic union 
Clearly,  the  political  economy  of  deeper  fiscal  integration  is  difficult,  especially  given  the 
preferences expressed at the recent European Parliament elections in some reform-resistant 
countries. Thus, we should focus our efforts for now on making the new equilibrium work. But 
here again we need consistency. If the current fiscal rules are to be credible, we need higher 
growth,  and  that  means  looking  deeply  at  how  we  coordinate  structural  policies  across 
Europe. 
On our current reform-resistant course, I see a distant but distinct probability that growth in 
the euro area begins a secular downward drift. With inflexible markets, downswings are likely 
to  deeper,  as  adjustment  has  to  happen  slowly  through  quantities  –  i.e.  unemployment  – 
rather  than  quickly  prices.  And  with  low  productivity  and  investment,  upswings  might  be 
shallower  as  growth  is  driven  only  by  cyclical  rather  than  structural  factors.  Indeed,  most 
estimates find that potential growth in the euro area has diminished during the crisis. 
This  is  why  moving  ahead  with  structural  reform  is  essential.  The  best  way  to  raise  real 
growth  in  the  euro  area  is  to  open  up  product  and  services  markets  and  to  reallocate 
resources to the most productive industries. When I see that most countries in the euro area 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
periphery have a revealed comparative advantage in services,7 and yet these markets are 
the least integrated in Europe, it strikes me as a missed opportunity. 
Implementing structural reforms is of course mainly a national responsibility. But so far we 
have not done enough at the European level to help gather momentum behind them. Some 
might  argue  that  the  European  elections  will  make  this  harder  still,  but  I  would  tend  to 
disagree. First, the reasons for extremism in some countries have more to do with national 
governments than with Europe. Second, what is causing some people to turn against the EU, 
in my view, is not a dislike of European governance per se; it is a lack of delivery on jobs and 
growth.  If  European  policy-makers  can  find  better  ways  to  get  the  most  out  the  European 
project, I strongly doubt the voters as a whole would be against that. 
Conclusion 
4. 
Let me conclude. 
What I have tried to underline today is that a well-functioning market depends on getting the 
rules,  institutions  and  instruments  that  govern  it  right.  And  the  source  of  the  euro  area’s 
difficulties, in my view, is that policy-makers failed to do so. 
For this reason, it would be wrong to conclude that Europe, or the euro, has failed. It was 
policy that failed. But importantly, policy can also be fixed. What we need now, therefore, is 
to finish what we started in 1999 and make the euro area work. 
We have done much to stabilise the euro area with Banking Union and other reforms; but 
now we need to find ways to make the euro area sustainably grow. Voters in Europe have 
overall  given  policy-makers  a  mandate  to  do  this;  we  have  a  pro-European  majority  in 
Parliament. If we do not seize this mandate, however, they may not provide another one. 
                                                
7   For  more  details  see  Rahman,  Jesmin  and  Tianli  Zhao.  “The  Role  of  Vertical  Supply  Chains  in  Boosting 
Growth”, in Jobs and Growth: Supporting the European Recovery, IMF, April 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
