Amando M Tetangco, Jr: The pursuit of financial stability – a daunting 
but necessary prudential agenda 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central bank of the Philippines), at the Financial Stability Co-ordination Council (FSCC) MOA 
signing, Manila, 29 January 2014. 
 Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  Chairperson  Teresita  Herbosa, 
Insurance 
Commissioner Emmanuel Dooc, Philippine Deposit Insurance Corporation President Valentin 
Araneta, National Treasurer Rosalia De Leon, representing DoF Secretary Cesar Purisima, 
members of the Monetary Board, our partners from the various government institutions, my 
colleagues  from  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas,  members  of  the  media,  ladies  and 
gentlemen, good morning. 
The BSP is honored to host this signing of the Memorandum of Agreement formalizing the 
creation of the Financial Stability Coordination Council. 
Today, the five agencies represented here – the DoF, SEC, IC, PDIC, and the BSP – publicly 
affirm our collective resolve to pursue financial stability as the norm for prudential policy. 
With  that  resolve  comes  the  commitment  to  identify,  monitor  and  mitigate  the  build-up  of 
system-wide financial risks and deploy as necessary so-called macroprudential measures. 
The bigger picture 
This is certainly not the first time that we have publicly mentioned financial stability and our 
desire to make it the pillar of financial market oversight. 
However,  financial  stability  is  prone  to  being  misunderstood,  if  not  under-appreciated. 
Perhaps, it is the sheer enormity of the tasks ahead that creates confusion. Or perhaps, it is 
the  absence  of  a  holistic  and  formalized  textbook  framework  that  makes  the  journey  to 
financial stability and maintaining it quite daunting. 
The financial stability agenda talks of co-mingled risks, and systemic consequences. This is 
not  the  type  of  language  or  focus  that  we  have  been  used  to  in  organizing  our  prudential 
oversight of our respective segments of the financial market. Yet, the dislocation that comes 
with  financial  instability  has  been  very  evident  for  everyone  to  see  and,  unfortunately,  for 
many jurisdictions to experience. 
From  the  breakdown  of  Wall  Street  to  the  difficulties  in  the  Eurozone  and  general 
weaknesses in consumer protection, we saw for ourselves how previously unmonitored and 
unrecognized  risks  could  create  system-wide  consequences  that  are  a  burden  borne 
ultimately by financial consumers. 
The  global  reform  agenda  is  thus  designed  precisely  to  prevent  the  recurrence  of 
dislocations whose magnitudes are felt worldwide. 
The  Basel  3  Accord,  Financial  Market  Infrastructures,  systemically  important  financial 
institutions, 
exposures, 
interconnectedness, managing capital flows, OTC derivatives, consumer protection. 
These are but some of the components of the evolving global reform agenda. The change 
institutionalized  by  each  one  of  these  is  structured  precisely  to  better  achieve  financial 
stability. 
corporate 
leverage, 
banking, 
liquidity, 
shadow 
large 
The significance of the MoA 
This is why today’s event is nothing short of a milestone. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The five institutions represented here publicly recognize that financial stability matters. We 
appreciate  that  the  task  is  extensive  and  challenging  but  we  are  driven  by  our  common 
commitment to nurturing the gains that we have already achieved by recognizing the intricate 
nature of financial risks. 
This healthy respect for financial risks balances the rewards that we can reasonably expect 
from such exposures as against the need to remain prudent in taking on acceptable risks. 
We  likewise  fully  appreciate  that  each  of  the  institutions  will  continue  to  oversee  their 
respective  markets  and/or  pursue  their  respective  mandates.  But  the  financial  system  is 
certainly much more than the collective sum of the parts. This synergy brings forth the risks 
and rewards that are at the heart of financial stability. 
The progress thus far 
Ladies and gentlemen, we mark a historic day for the financial system by signing a document 
that binds five financial authorities towards pursuing the financial stability agenda. 
The  truth  is  that  our  work  on  financial  stability  does  not  only  start  today.  The  various 
committees  have  invested  their  time  and  effort  for  over  a  year  now.  They  have  been 
evaluating  global,  regional,  local  developments,  with  the  end  in  view  of  pro-actively 
positioning our financial market for evolving challenges. 
For  the  silent  but  diligent  work  that  the  five  workstreams,  our  steering  committee  and  the 
administrative team have put forward to-date, we in the Executive Committee sincerely thank 
you.  We  recognize  the  enormous  challenge  before  you  and  as  a  small  token  of  our 
appreciation of your efforts, may I call on everyone to give these men and women a hearty 
round of applause. 
With a collective commitment and a shared responsibility to implement the financial stability 
agenda, I am sure that we will be able to rise to this challenge. 
Thank you very much and I wish you all a pleasant day. 
 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
