Andreas Dombret: Germany and the euro area – beware complacency 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank,  at  a  Joint  Seminar  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Republic  of  Turkey  and  the 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Istanbul, 5 July 2014. 
 1 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
As  I  pointed  out  in  my  opening  remarks  yesterday,  I  am  happy  to  be  here  in  Istanbul  to 
attend  this  joint  seminar  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Republic  of  Turkey  and  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank. Over the past two days  we have  shared ideas about macroprudential policy, 
and we have improved these ideas through discussion. 
At this point, I wish to change the perspective and take a closer look at the real economy and 
the macroeconomic situation in Germany. And as Germany is part of a monetary union, my 
presentation would be incomplete without discussing the situation of the euro area as well. 
Germany: no time for complacency 
2 
Looking to the past, the German economy has shown a remarkable development. As late as 
2004, the Economist magazine dubbed Germany “the sick man of Europe”. Plagued by high 
unemployment  and  a  lack  of  competitiveness,  Germany  undertook  structural  reforms  that 
were  as  painful  as  they  were  successful.  Germany  left  the  sick-bed  and  took  bold  steps 
towards recovery – only to be hit full-force by the fall-out of the financial crisis. 
In 2009, amidst a global recession, German GDP dropped by 5.1%. For Germany this was 
by  far  the  biggest  downturn  in  post-war  history.  However,  the  economy  recovered  quickly 
and  in  2011,  German  GDP  had  returned  to  its  pre-crisis  level  –  sooner  than  in  any  other 
country in the euro area. 
What is the story behind this V-shaped recovery, the big drop and the quick rebound? From 
a general point of view, it was the structural reforms I mentioned before that prepared the 
ground for the strong recovery following the crisis. 
Nevertheless,  the  distinctive  pattern  of  a  severe  drop  and  a  rapid  recovery  highlights  a 
specific feature of the German economy: its pronounced export orientation. When the global 
economy  faltered  in  2009,  Germany  was  hit  far  worse  than  other  countries.  But  when  the 
global economy began to recover in 2010, Germany followed suit. Exports were the major 
driving force behind the upturn in the German economy. 
This  strong  influence  of  international  trade  worried  some  observers.  Many  felt  that 
Germany’s reliance on exports was risky, as it exposed Germany to the ups and downs of 
the  global  economy.  Thus,  suggestions  have  been  voiced  to  adapt  the  German  “business 
model”  and  reduce  reliance  on  exports.  However,  these  arguments  neglect  the  fact  that 
Germany is not a company with a business model that management can change at will. In 
the end, it is the decisions of thousands of individual companies that determine the structure 
of an economy. 
In  any  case,  I  have  doubts  that  turning  away  from  global  markets  would  strengthen  the 
German economy. Facing global competition ensures that German companies keep up with 
technological  progress  and  retain  their  high  productivity.  This  might  come  at  the  price  of 
higher volatility, but to me this seems like a price worth paying. 
Having said that, the German economy would certainly profit from strengthening competition 
in  the  domestic  market  as  well.  Take  the  services  sector  as  an  example.  For  the  last 
20 years,  total  factor  productivity  growth  in  services  has  been  markedly  lower  than  in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
manufacturing.  In  fact,  while  total  factor  productivity  in  manufacturing  has  grown  by  more 
than 30%, growth in services has barely budged. 
What is behind this phenomenon? The data point to a higher degree of competition in the 
manufacturing sector following the launch of the Common Market: mark-ups, an indicator of 
the pricing power of firms, have gone down since then. By contrast, mark-ups on services 
have stayed high in Germany, higher even than in many other European countries. 
Thus,  there  is  room  to  improve  the  functioning  of  the  services  sector  by  promoting 
competition:  opening  up  closed  professions,  cutting  red  tape,  and  improving  financing 
conditions for nascent digital firms would be options to achieve this objective. 
But  still,  over  the  last  two  years  or  so,  domestic  drivers  of  growth  have  strengthened  in 
Germany. This is certainly good news, as the basis for growth has become broader. 
The good shape of the German economy is also reflected in more recent developments. Last 
year, the economy regained momentum after a brief dip in late 2012 and early 2013. And in 
the first quarter of this year, the economy grew by 0.8%, while the euro area as a whole grew 
by 0.2%. However, the strong growth in the first quarter was boosted by favourable weather 
conditions. Consequently, we expect growth to be weaker in the second quarter. Overall, the 
German economy is back within the normal range of capacity utilisation. 
Against  this  backdrop,  what  can  we  expect  from  the  future?  Well,  the  internal  drivers  of 
growth I mentioned will remain in place while foreign demand is likely to pick up again. As a 
result, growth will be even more broadly based, and its pace is likely to increase further over 
the next two years. The Bundesbank expects growth to be 1.7% this year, and to accelerate 
to 2.0% in 2015. 
Yet  despite  this  relatively  favourable  economic  position,  there  is  absolutely  no  room  for 
complacency.  The  German  economy  certainly  faces  significant  challenges.  Demographic 
trends, for instance, will pose a sizable challenge to Germany sooner rather than later. The 
German  potential  labour  force  will  start  to  decline  from  2018  onwards.  Germany  therefore 
needs to act now. 
One path would be to increase labour force participation. And there are indeed labour force 
reserves, particularly among women and the elderly. Germany needs to go to great lengths 
to integrate them more closely into the economic process. But there is an additional option to 
address  demographic  challenges:  immigration.  A  systematic  approach  to  attract  skilled 
labour from abroad would help cushion the impact of an ageing society on the labour market. 
In any case, Germany has to accept that fewer workers might be at its disposal in the future. 
Thus, it will be all the more important for those workers to be trained as well as possible. This 
will  require  an  education  system  that  meets  high  standards  which  are  comparable  across 
Germany.  Such  a  system  will  give  children,  youth  and  young  adults  the  necessary 
environment and assistance to develop their talents to the fullest. 
And there is another aspect of demography one has to consider. The demographic burdens 
on Germany’s public budgets will soon grow sharply. Reducing the debt ratio is therefore a 
matter of urgency in order to combat this. After all, to quote a German politician, “New debt is 
tantamount to issuing bills of exchange which my grandchildren will pay off.”1 However, many 
still  tend  to  agree  more  with  Groucho  Marx,  who  is  reputed  to  have  asked  himself,  “Why 
should I care about posterity? What has posterity ever done for me?” This is probably not the 
best approach. 
To conclude: there are challenges ahead, but the German economy is in good shape and the 
outlook  is  quite  favourable.  I  think  it  is  justified  to  attribute  this  to  the  structural  reforms 
                                                
1  Kurt Biedenkopf in an interview with the Berliner Kurier, 6 July 2003. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
undertaken  more  than  a  decade  ago.  Does  this  make  Germany  a  role  model  for  other 
countries in the euro area? Certainly not down to every detail. Each country is different, and 
each  country  needs  a  different  set  of  reforms.  There  is  one  thing  we  can  learn  from 
Germany’s experience, though: reforms do pay off eventually. This is an important point to 
remember and it is confirmed by the current state of the euro area. Let us take a closer look. 
The euro area: approaching the end of the crisis 
3 
In the euro area, the end of the crisis is getting closer – slowly but steadily. Most importantly, 
the  euro  area  as  a  whole  has  finally  emerged  from  recession.  So  far,  we  have  seen  four 
consecutive quarters of positive growth, and looking ahead, we expect growth to continue. 
Latest projections by the ECB suggest that euro-area GDP will grow by 1.0% in 2014 and by 
1.7% in 2015. 
And  this  recovery  is  not  only  driven  by  the  “core  euro-area”  countries  such  as  Germany. 
Some of the crisis-hit countries have also finally embarked on the path to recovery. It seems, 
then, that the efforts to implement structural reforms are indeed bearing fruit. 
Competitiveness  has  improved  in  most  peripheral  countries.  Improving  competitiveness  in 
turn drives exports higher. All peripheral countries, except Cyprus, are projected to see some 
export growth this year. These achievements are reflected in current accounts increasingly 
reverting to positive balances. 
And Germany is part of this rebalancing equation. Since 2007, Germany’s current account 
surplus vis-à-vis the euro area has shrunk continuously from 4½% of GDP to 2% of GDP. As 
business investment in Germany is projected to pick up in 2014 and 2015, this rebalancing 
should continue. 
The progress that these abstract figures reflect is also visible in more concrete events. For 
example, Ireland, Spain and Portugal have exited their financial support programmes without 
any friction. All three countries recently returned to the sovereign bond markets at relatively 
low yields. 
At the same time, stock markets in these economies have been rising for some time now. 
These developments underscore the progress that some peripheral euro-area countries have 
made in adjusting their economies. 
However, despite these favourable developments, there is again no time for complacency. In 
many  countries  structural  reforms  are far from finalised,  as  a  report  by  the  EU  Parliament 
suggests. At the same time, public debt is still very high in many countries and has to come 
down. 
Against  this  backdrop,  the  recent  debate  about  loosening  the  rules  of  the  Stability  and 
Growth Pact worries me. It seems that the experience from the crisis is already fading from 
collective memory. Given the deceptive tranquillity in the financial markets, we are at risk of 
forgetting what the crisis has taught us about public finances. 
But that would have dire consequences. As I emphasised in my opening remarks yesterday, 
the  markets  do  anticipate  that  reforms  will  be  finalised  and  that  public  budgets  will  be 
consolidated.  Thus,  any  doubts  over  the  sustainability  of  public  finances  can  send  huge 
shockwaves across the euro area. In addition, mountains of private and public debt block the 
way towards sustainable economic growth. And on a side note: at this stage of integration in 
the euro area, euro-bonds would not be the right path to choose as they would weaken the 
incentives for prudent fiscal policy. 
Nevertheless, to me, the recent debate about the Stability and Growth Pact shows something 
else. It seems that there is an expectation that, in the end, monetary policy will provide the 
ultimate backstop. This expectation, however, is dangerous and cannot be the guideline for 
policy action – or rather inaction. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Monetary policy certainly helped prevent the crisis from escalating. Still, there is one thing we 
should be clear about: monetary policy cannot solve the underlying causes of the  crisis. It 
can only buy time. And it is up to national governments to use that time to dig out the root 
causes of the crisis. Failing to do so will push us back into dangerous territory. We must not 
let that happen. 
4 
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen 
I  have  presented  what  I  consider  to  be  good  news.  The  German  economy  is  gaining  in 
strength and the euro area has embarked on the path to recovery. Nevertheless, we should 
keep  in  mind,  what  the  Irish  horse  racing  jockey  Tony  McCoy  said:  “there  is  no  place  for 
arrogance  or  complacency  in  racing  because  you  are  up  there  one  minute  and  on  your 
backside the next”. Keeping up economically is certainly a race and we should avoid the risk 
of landing on our backside. Thus, my warning: beware complacency. As a final point, let me 
emphasise  that  I  have  very  much  enjoyed  attending  this  seminar.  It  has  certainly  helped 
strengthen the ties between the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey and the Deutsche 
Bundesbank. Personally, I am looking forward to more visits next year when Turkey assumes 
the G20 presidency. 
Thank you very much.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
