  Mario Draghi: Interview with Lithuanian business daily Verslo Zinios 
Interview by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, with Verslo Zinios, 
conducted by Mr Dalius Simenas on 25 September 2014. 
 The saying that “When America sneezes, Europe catches a cold” was absolutely true 
in the aftermath of the dramatic collapse of Lehman Brothers in the autumn of 2008. 
We are now seeing signs of a recovery in the United States and the United Kingdom, 
but are still not seeing any in the euro area. Does this worry you? What is missing? 
I am not sure I can agree with the last part. The euro area has, in fact, been recovering since 
the  second  quarter  of  2013,  when  the  economy  returned  to  growth  after  six  quarters  of 
recession. It is true, however, that the recovery seems to have lost momentum recently: the 
flat  GDP  reading  in  the  second  quarter  of  2014  was  disappointing.  According  to  the 
preliminary  information  received  over  the  summer,  economic  conditions  have  been 
somewhat weaker than expected. Overall, however, we expect modest growth in the second 
half  of  the  year  and  continue  to  expect  euro  area  domestic  demand  to  be  supported  by 
various  factors.  These  include  our  accommodative  monetary  policy  stance,  favourable 
financing  conditions  and  structural  reforms,  which  should  sustain  private  consumption  and 
investment. At the same time, unacceptably high unemployment and continued weak credit 
growth  are  likely  to  curb  the  strength  of  the  recovery.  There  are  clear  risks  in  sight:  in 
particular,  heightened  geopolitical 
tensions  could  dampen  business  and  consumer 
confidence.  Furthermore,  the  risk  of  insufficient  structural  reforms  could  weigh  on  the 
business environment. 
How  can  this  uncomfortable  cocktail  of  high  unemployment  (11.5%  this  July)  and 
ultra-low inflation in the euro area (0.3% in August, i.e. far below the ECB’s target of 
below, but close to, 2%) be overcome? How, if at all, can Europe avoid a stagnation 
scenario such as that faced by the Japanese economy for decades? 
We  do  not  see  Japanese-style  deflation  in  the  euro  area,  as  a  number  of  factors  differ 
distinctly from Japan in the 1990s. Firstly, we, the ECB, took decisive action at a very early 
stage  in the crisis,  and have  continued  to  do  so.  Most  recently,  against the  backdrop  of a 
persistently  weak  inflation  outlook,  slowing  growth  momentum  and  subdued  monetary  and 
credit dynamics, we decided in early September to adopt a number of additional monetary 
policy  initiatives  which  will  complete  and  complement  the  measures  already  announced  in 
June.  On  the  basis  of  our  current  information,  we  expect  inflation  to  remain  at  low  levels, 
before gradually increasing during 2015 and 2016. 
Furthermore, while inflation expectations have declined, particularly at shorter maturities, our 
measures  will  underpin  the  firm  anchoring  of  inflation  expectations  in  line  with  our  aim  of 
maintaining inflation rates below, but close to, 2%. 
Additionally,  our  Comprehensive  Assessment  and  stress  tests  have  been  rigorous  and 
thorough; this means that banks’ balance sheet problems are being dealt with and that the 
necessary transparency will be provided on the health of European banks. This is in contrast 
to the pronounced balance sheet problems of Japan in the 1990s. 
Finally,  a  number  of  euro  area  countries  have  implemented  structural  reforms  to  increase 
their competitiveness. Clearly, these efforts now need to gain momentum to achieve higher 
sustainable growth and employment in the euro area. In this context, it is also essential that 
governments conduct fiscal adjustment that is growth-friendly. 
Economists and politicians in Lithuania sometimes voice concerns that the economic 
benefits of being part of the euro area are offset by the rising costs of having the euro, 
e.g. with the implementation of the Single Supervisory Mechanism, contributions by 
Member States to the European Stability Mechanism, etc. What would your response 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
be to these concerns? Why does Lithuania need to be part of the euro area despite 
those costs? 
Joining the euro area is not a free lunch: it entails significant obligations, but many benefits at 
the same time. The obligations are stated very clearly in the Treaty and in EU regulations. In 
this respect, compared with those countries that joined in the first wave of entry, Lithuania 
has the advantage of joining a stronger euro area. The euro area has painfully recognised 
the flaws in its original design and taken major steps to repair them. There are tougher rules 
for fiscal policies, stronger oversight of macroeconomic imbalances, a lender of last resort for 
sovereigns  in  the  form  of  the  European  Stability  Mechanism,  and  there  will  soon  be  a 
sounder and more integrated banking sector thanks to the creation of the Single Supervisory 
Mechanism.  The  euro  area  has  gone  through  its  difficult  initial  learning  phase,  and  new 
members  will  reap  the  benefits,  which  certainly  outweigh  the  costs  associated  with  the 
existence of these institutions. 
Joining a stronger euro area will increase the long-term prosperity of its members and their 
resilience to adverse shocks. But there are also other concrete benefits stemming from trade 
and  foreign  direct  investment,  which  will  be  bolstered,  especially  given  Lithuania’s  strong 
trade  ties  with  its  two  Baltic  neighbours  in  the  euro  area,  Estonia  and  Latvia.  Moreover, 
Lithuania will be an equal partner at the Governing Council table and will fully participate in 
deciding monetary policy for the whole monetary union. 
Do you share the view that being a member of the euro area is an additional safeguard 
for  countries  such  as  the  Baltic  states  or  Finland  against  the  spillover  effects  of 
geopolitical  tensions  in  Europe  (or  even  an  insurance  policy  against  Russian 
aggression), such as those that we have recently witnessed in Ukraine? Does the euro 
make us safer and, if so, how? 
While  we  currently  consider  geopolitical  developments  as  a  downside  risk  to growth,  I  will 
refrain  from  commenting  on  the  political  aspects  of  these  tensions,  as  these  issues  fall 
outside the mandate of the ECB. 
As regards the economic effects, the recent crisis concerning Ukraine and the consequent 
imposition of sanctions on and by Russia has so far had limited spillover effects on the euro 
area economy, either via trade or financial links. However, the Baltic states and Finland are 
more likely to feel any negative effects than other euro area economies owing to the strong 
trade ties they have with their eastern neighbours. But on the economic risks, I would like to 
add  that  the  European  “family”  provides  safety  nets  to  partly  offset  the  negative  effects  of 
geopolitical tensions related to Russia and Ukraine. For instance, the European Commission 
announced support measures to protect food producers affected by Russia’s food embargo. 
The euro area is a large market that can help Lithuanian producers to make up for losses 
from the Russian market. Finally, euro area countries can use the emergency liquidity lines 
provided  in  euro  by  their  national  central  banks,  which  in  turn  would  receive  euro  liquidity 
from the Eurosystem, in the event of significant turbulences in the financial sector. 
Why is lending to the real economy in the euro area sluggish? What else needs to be 
done in addition to the mix of different measures that the ECB is applying, such as low 
interest rates (or negative interest rates for bank deposits at the ECB) and the planned 
asset-backed securities programme? 
It  is  true  that  credit  dynamics  remain  weak.  At  the  same  time,  recent  trends  show  some 
positive  changes.  Among  other  things,  in  our  own  bank  lending  survey,  banks  have  been 
reporting an increase in loan demand for all loan categories for two successive quarters, as 
well as an easing in credit standards for loans to enterprises. However, we should not forget 
that credit standards overall remain rather tight from a historical perspective. 
As  mentioned  before,  it  was  exactly  against  the  backdrop  of  weak  credit  dynamics 
contributing  to  a  subdued  inflation  outlook  that  we  decided  in  early  September  to  adopt  a 
number  of  additional  monetary  policy  measures,  specifically  designed  to  support  the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  extension of credit to the real economy. As they work through the economy, these measures 
will help inflation rates return to below, but close to, 2%. 
What else is needed: well, it is now in the hands of governments to act decisively on further 
structural  reforms  that  will  ensure  higher  sustainable  growth  and  employment  in  the  euro 
area. Also, on the fiscal policy side, governments should not unravel the progress made in 
fiscal consolidation, but use any leeway to make fiscal policies more growth-friendly. 
As regards monetary policy, we remain fully determined to counter risks to the medium-term 
outlook for inflation. As I said in the European Parliament last Monday, we stand ready to use 
additional unconventional instruments within our mandate, and alter the size or composition 
of our unconventional interventions should it become necessary to further address risks of a 
too prolonged period of low inflation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
