Ardian Fullani: Overview of Albania’s latest monetary and economic 
developments and outlook 
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  on  the  Monetary  Policy 
Decision of the Bank of Albania’s Supervisory Council, Tirana, 26 February 2014. 
 Today, on 26 February 2014, the Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania reviewed and 
approved  the  monthly  Monetary  Policy  Report.  Based  on  Albania’s  latest  monetary  and 
economic developments and discussions about their outlook, the Supervisory Council of the 
Bank  of  Albania  decided  to  lower  the  key  interest  rate  by  0.25  percentage  points,  to 
2.75%.The Supervisory Council deems that increasing the monetary stimulus creates proper 
conditions to meet inflation target in the medium term, by boosting aggregate demand and 
anchoring inflation expectations. 
Let me now proceed with an overview of economic developments and key issues discussed 
at today’s meeting. 
 Macroeconomic developments in 2013 were characterised by weak economic growth and 
downward pressures on inflation. For 2014, the Bank of Albania expects that the economic 
activity  will  improve  gradually  but  the  Albanian  economy  will  remain  below  potential  and 
inflation will be low. In particular, excise tax increase will make lower than expected impact 
on  inflation.  Against  this  backdrop,  easing  of  monetary  conditions  aims  to  create  proper 
monetary stimulus to push inflation back to its target in the medium term. 
Annual inflation was 1.7% in January, falling slightly from the previous month due to lower 
unprocessed food inflation, as a consequence of lower prices in Albania’s trading partners 
and  higher  domestic  agricultural  production.  Excise  tax  increase  for  certain  product 
categories made additional impact by 0.5 percentage points to headline inflation but the fall 
in food inflation fully offset it. Prices of other CPI basket items fluctuated around past months’ 
levels. 
Overall economic and financial environment transmitted weak inflationary pressures over 
the  last  two  years.  The  sluggish  private  demand  continued  to  determine  the  cyclical 
vulnerability  of  the  economy,  being  associated  with  slight  increase  in  employment  and 
producer  prices,  and  putting  pressure  on  profit  margins.  This  factors  chain  was  further 
transmitted to weak pressures for raising the final prices of domestically produced consumer 
goods and was reflected in low core inflation rates. Besides, the low inflation global-wide and 
exchange rate stability were reflected in low imported inflation rates. This picture is likely to 
be present over the next quarters. 
Albanian  economy  showed  clear  signs  of  slowdown  in  2013.  External  demand  and  fiscal 
stimulus were main drivers of economic growth, while private investments and consumption 
shrank.  Incoming  information  on  real-sector  developments  over  the  fourth  quarter  has 
confirmed  our  projections  for  a  weak  aggregate  demand  and  below-potential  economic 
growth. However, it has shifted to the downside the balance of risks around the projection. 
Low  business  and  consumer  confidence,  sluggish  labour  market  and  tight  lending  terms 
continue to weigh on private demand. 
Disposable income increased and consumer balances were liquid. However, consumers are 
reluctant to spend and tend to save. On the other hand, lack of final demand and unutilised 
capacities curbed private investments. 
The latest data on external trade show an annualised 13.5% widening of the trade deficit for 
December. Exports of goods continued to trend up but import growth at double-digit paces 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
led  to  a  higher  trade  deficit  for  this  period.  Imports  widened  as  traders  intensified  their 
importing  activity,  one  month  in  advance,  awaiting  the  entry  into  force  of  the  new  fiscal 
package in January 2014. Imports rose 15.8%, while exports rose 19.5%. 
Fiscal policy was easing in 2013, giving 1.3 percentage points impulse to economic growth. 
Fiscal stimulus was reflected in higher expenditures and lower fiscal revenues. Thus, budget 
spending increased 4.7% in annual terms, while fiscal revenues fell 0.5%. However, budget 
deficit  was  lower  than  expected,  reaching  4.8%  of  the  gross  domestic  product,  from  6.2% 
projected. 
In 2014, the fiscal policy is expected to be cautious, reducing the budget deficit and fiscal 
stimulus. In view of this policy, arrears payment will improve the private sector balances and 
will create better conditions for the recovery of demand. 
The  Bank  of  Albania  has  requested  and  supported  taking  of  measures  to  maintain  public 
debt  sustainability.  In  spite  of  short-term  costs,  maintaining  public  debt  at  subdued  and 
sustainable levels would lead to lower uncertainty, higher space for private sector and higher 
flexibility of public finances. In a longer term, we deem that an efficient and transparent fiscal 
rule should be adopted. 
In response to easing monetary policy and calm liquidity situation, financial markets appear 
calm in terms of trading and tend to slightly reduce the interest rates. The inter-bank market 
is characterised by higher volumes and low interest rates. 
Following the seasonal increase at year start, the government security yields tended to fall 
again  in  February  but  did  not  reach  December’s  levels.  As  already  expected,  deposit  and 
loan interest rates fell over the last months. 
Monetary  indicators  performed  in  line  with  the  real-economy  developments  and  our 
analyses show weak monetary pressures on inflation. Money supply expanded at slow paces 
during 2013, supported mainly by the private-sector demand, which was marked in the first 
half  of  the  year.  Lending  remained  weak,  reflecting  economic  agents’  low  demand  for 
financing and banks’ conservative lending policies. Lowering credit interest rates in the fourth 
quarter did not boost the credit demand. At year-end, the annual change in the banks’ loan 
portfolio settled at –1.2%. 
 Our  baseline  projections  for  future  economic  developments  show  a  gradually  recovered 
growth  rate  in  2014.  Alongside  the  positive  external  demand,  private-sector  demand  will 
improve this year. Private-sector arrears payment is believed to improve this sector’s liquidity 
and  ease  the  banks’  balance  sheets.  Also,  accumulating  financial  savings  and  easing 
monetary policy stimulus  will materialise into better performance of private investment and 
consumption.  Besides  improvement,  the  Albanian  economy  is  expected  to  operate  below 
potential  over  the  period  ahead.  Below-potential  economic  growth  and  weak  inflation 
pressures from the external sector will lead to a low inflation rate. 
At the end of discussions, the Supervisory Council decided to lower the key interest 
rate  by  0.25  percentage  points,  to  2.75%.  Given  the  available  information,  the  Bank  of 
Albania  deems  that  the  expected  economic  and  financial  outlook  requires  maintaining  an 
easing  monetary  policy  over  the  quarters  ahead  to  help  create  the  proper  conditions  for 
meeting inflation target in the medium term. 
 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
