  Andreas Dombret: European banking union – where do we stand? 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at a press briefing, Frankfurt am Main, 23 July 2014. 
 Introduction 
1.  
Ladies and gentlemen 
I am delighted that so many of you have been able to attend our press briefing. But before 
we kick off, I would first like to make a couple of points of my own. 
I  am  certainly  not  overstating  the  case  when  I  describe  the  banking  union  as  the  most 
ambitious European project since the launch of the euro. Yet at the same time, it represents 
a  step  forward  that  is  as  necessary  as  it  is  logical.  A  single  monetary  policy  calls  for 
integrated financial markets, and that includes the banking union. 
The banking union is set to become a reality on 4 November this year – at least in the form of 
the European Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM). The second pillar of the banking union 
– the European Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM) – does not come into play until 2016. 
The third pillar – a joint European deposit guarantee scheme – has been shelved for the time 
being. 
But  the  main  topic  I  would  like  to  discuss  with  you  today  is  the  Single  Supervisory 
Mechanism. 
The world pre 4 November 
2.  
Much  remains  to  be  done  before  the  SSM  can  set  to  work  on  4  November.  The  biggest 
project leading up to the launch of the SSM is the comprehensive assessment, in which a 
total of 128 banks across Europe will be subjected to a thorough health check, including a 
“cardiac  stress  test”.  This  check  aims  to  provide  maximum  transparency  and  strengthen 
confidence among market players, and to enable the SSM to get down to work free of legacy 
issues. 
The comprehensive assessment is made up of two core components. The first is the asset 
quality review, or AQR. To stay with the medical metaphor, the AQR is rather like looking at 
an X-ray image – it allows supervisors to detect any nasty surprises that might be lurking on 
bank balance sheets. The second component is a stress test. This “cardiac stress test” gives 
an  outlook  for  the  patient’s  health  going  forward.  Its  aim  is  to  gauge  the  extent  to  which 
banks can withstand a deterioration in the economic setting. 
The bulk of the on-site inspections performed as part of the AQR have now been completed. 
These inspections focused on scrutinising credit exposures and collateral valuations, looking 
both  at  individual  exposures  and  aggregate  portfolios.  The  resulting  data  were  used  to 
ascertain  whether  there  was  any  need  for  valuation  adjustments.  Level  3  fair  value 
exposures were also inspected. 
The findings, having been quality-assured at the national level, have, over the past weeks, 
been  forwarded  to  the ECB,  which  is  now  engaged  in  central  quality  assurance.  The  next 
step  will  be  to  calculate  an  AQR-adjusted  capital  ratio.  After  that,  banks  will  be  asked  to 
make the adjustments needed under the accounting standards. 
In the stress test, banks need to simulate two macroeconomic scenarios, the aim being to 
discover how each bank’s risks, and thus their CET1 ratios, respond under stress conditions. 
The  baseline  scenario  is  largely  consistent  with  the  European  Commission’s  2014  winter 
forecast, whereas the adverse scenario simulates a much more difficult economic setting in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  which the euro area experiences a recession, with GDP shrinking by 0.7% in 2014 and by 
1.4%  in  2015,  followed  by  zero  growth  in  2016.  This  simulated  economic  slump  is 
accompanied  by  rising  unemployment  and  falling  prices  in  the  financial  and  real  estate 
markets. At the same time, the scenario simulates an increase in general interest rate levels 
as well as renewed divergence in European sovereign bond spreads. 
The  final  step  of  the  comprehensive  assessment  is  “joining  up”  the  AQR  findings  with  the 
outcome of the stress test. Generally speaking, we should work from the bottom up wherever 
possible  –  in  other  words,  on  the  basis  of  the  specific  data  provided  by  the  banks. 
Generalised assumptions should be made as little as possible. But the tight time schedule 
naturally means that some trade-offs will need to be made. Publication of the final outcome 
of the comprehensive assessment is scheduled for the second half of October. 
As I see it, clear communication is crucial for the success of the comprehensive assessment. 
The process needs to be as transparent as possible, and banks should be involved at the 
earliest possible stage, ad hoc reporting requirements permitting. In any case, supervisors 
constantly  interact  with  the  banks  throughout  the  comprehensive  assessment,  from  the 
clarification of issues during the credit file reviews through to the supervisory dialogue, which 
is when representatives from the ECB and the national competent authorities discuss partial 
and preliminary findings before the final results are disclosed. 
There is one point I would like to make quite clear. These inspections are being conducted in 
an even-handed and open-minded manner. At the current juncture, it is simply impossible to 
say  with  any  certainty  how  the  results  will  turn  out.  That’s  why  I  find  it  downright  ill-
considered for third parties to suggest that they know the outcome. Bearing this in mind, I 
trust  you  will  appreciate  that  the  Bundesbank  will  refrain  from  making  any  further  public 
statements on the comprehensive assessment as from mid-September. 
If the AQR or the stress test reveal any capital shortfalls, it will be up to the banks to cover 
them  as  quickly  as  they  can,  first  and  foremost  by  approaching  their  stakeholders  for 
additional funding. No later than two weeks after publication of the results, institutions will be 
required to submit capital plans in which they explain in detail how they intend to cover any 
capital shortfall. 
However, let us not forget one thing. The comprehensive assessment is based on balance 
sheet data as at 31 December 2013. When considering the published results, it is therefore 
important to pay particular attention to the column listing the capital measures taken in 2014. 
We expressly welcome the fact that several banks have strengthened their capital base in 
recent months. This helps make the banking system more stable. 
If  there  are  not  enough  private  funds  to  fill  any  capital  shortfalls  identified,  the  state  in 
question  will  be  obliged  to  provide  a  “backstop”.  As  a  last  resort,  the  government  is  to 
recapitalise banks, issue guarantees or take on risks. However, this government support is 
subject to strict conditions. The bank must be solvent, and the support must not offset any 
accrued losses. Moreover, government assistance may be granted only if it serves to avert 
disruption to the real economy or dangers to financial stability. 
The comprehensive assessment is a major organisational undertaking for all involved, and 
one  which  must,  furthermore,  be  implemented  under  massive  time  pressure.  At  its  peak, 
more  than  1,700  auditors  and  230  Bundesbank  and  BaFin  supervisors  were  involved  in 
Germany  alone.  Moreover,  my  experience  in  the  Bundesbank  is  that,  ultimately,  far  more 
colleagues  are,  of  course,  involved  in  the  comprehensive  assessment  than  just  those 
officially assigned to the project. Some are helping out temporarily or indirectly, while others 
have  had  to  take  on  tasks  originally  performed  by  staff  now  directly  involved  with  the 
comprehensive assessment. 
For  banks,  too,  taking  part  in  the  assessment  involves  a  lot  of  work.  And  yet,  the 
comprehensive assessment is decisive if the Single Supervisory Mechanism is to get off to a 
good start. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The world post 4 November 
3.  
Under  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism,  the  ECB  will  take  on  direct  responsibility  for 
supervising the 120 most significant euro-area banks from 4 November. 
What does that mean for Germany? First, BaFin and the Bundesbank will continue to directly 
supervise around 2,000 smaller German credit institutions; second, we will hand over direct 
supervisory  responsibility  for  the  21  German  SSM  banks  to  the  ECB,  but  will  continue  to 
provide them with ongoing supervision; third, we will be involved in supervising the 99 foreign 
SSM banks. 
How will that work in practice? Supervision of the SSM banks will pass to what are known as 
Joint Supervisory Teams. These teams will be headed by an ECB coordinator. Under current 
plans, the coordinator of a Joint Supervisory Team may not come from the country in which 
the supervised bank is headquartered. 
The teams themselves are largely made up of staff from the national competent authorities. 
The Bundesbank and BaFin will consequently continue to supervise the German SSM banks. 
That ensures that national supervisors’ expertise is not lost. In terms of the Bundesbank, it is 
not just our know-how and experience that count, but also the fact that we have offices in 
those locations where the banks are headquartered and operate – whether that be Munich or 
Hamburg. 
The SSM’s clout hinges on the people behind it. And herein, too, lies a major challenge. The 
ECB is planning to employ around 770 staff for the new supervisory body. In addition, it is 
looking for some 200 employees to undertake support functions. 
Given the proximity, moving to the ECB is, of course, particularly attractive for Bundesbank 
staff working in Frankfurt. So far, 48 colleagues have taken up regular SSM positions, nine of 
which are managerial positions, including one Deputy DG post, while 32 have taken working 
level positions and 7 are employed in support functions. In addition, 19 Bundesbank staff are 
currently  seconded  to  the  ECB  to  assist  with  the  SSM  on  a  temporary  basis.  A  very 
prominent  example  of  a  Bundesbanker  currently  working  for  the  ECB  is,  of  course,  our 
former Deputy President, Sabine Lautenschläger. 
As the majority of the selection decisions are yet to be taken, we expect more Bundesbank 
staff to switch to the ECB by November. To fill the resultant gaps, we carried out what we 
refer to as “frontloading” at the beginning of the year. Our plan is to fill any vacancies that 
arise in the meantime as rapidly as possible by advertising internally and externally and by 
allocating more junior staff to the area. 
Allow  me  to  mention  one  last  point.  Who  will  pay  for  the  new  European  supervisory 
authority?  How  can  the  costs  be  distributed  fairly  across  institutions,  and  what  is  the  right 
allocation key? In my opinion, all banks should be involved, albeit in proportion to their size 
and  risk  weight.  A  level  playing  field  can  be  guaranteed  only  if  supervisory  activity  is 
exercised  appropriately,  ie  in  proportion  to  a  bank’s  size  and  risk.  The  Bundesbank  is 
particularly committed to this objective, but our ECB colleagues have also stressed this to be 
a  concern.  Ultimately,  however,  smaller  institutions  will  also  benefit  from  the  Single 
Supervisory Mechanism, even if they are not supervised by the ECB directly. 
4.  
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen 
We  have  set  ourselves  an  ambitious  goal,  to  make  the  financial  system  more  stable.  The 
banking union is, without doubt, one of the largest steps towards achieving this objective. I 
am confident that it will get off to a smooth start when the Single Supervisory Mechanism is 
launched  on  4  November. Then,  when  the  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  starts  its  work  in 
2016,  we  will  have  gone  a  long  way  towards  creating  a  more  stable  financial  system. 
However, there is still a lot of work to be done. 
Thank you very much. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
