  Vítor Constâncio: Accounting and financial reporting by central banks 
Speech by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the fourth 
ECB  conference  on  accounting,  financial  reporting  and  corporate  governance  for  central 
banks, Frankfurt am Main, 3 June 2014. 
 Good morning ladies and gentlemen, 
Welcome  to  the  fourth  ECB  conference  on  accounting,  financial  reporting  and  corporate 
governance  for  central  banks.  And,  of  course,  a  special  welcome  to  the  distinguished 
speakers  and  our  thanks  for  their  participating  and  sharing  their  thoughts  on  the  topics 
covered today and tomorrow. 
This  conference  has  become  well  established  in  the  meantime,  as  demonstrated  by  the 
audience,  the  size  of  which,  to  our  regret,  had  to  be  restricted  on  account  of  insufficient 
space. The good news is that in the years to come, we will have more room at the ECB’s 
new premises. 
The conference will deal with four main topics on which I would like to say a few words: 
developments in international accounting standards; 
interaction between financial reporting and financial regulation; 
central bank balance sheets in stormy times; and 
central bank financial reporting and governance issues. 
On the first topic, the ECB supports the establishment of a single set of global accounting 
and financial reporting standards. This is vital for the sake of consistency, comparability and 
thus transparency. It is also important not only for investors and other stakeholders, but also 
with a view to banking supervision and regulation. As you all know, accounting information 
serves  as  a  basis for  various  prudential  measures, such  as minimum  capital  requirements 
and the leverage ratio. In the EU, the new capital framework for banks that came into effect 
on  1  January  2014  (what  is  known  as  the  “CRR/CRD  IV”),  and  the  supervisory  approach 
within  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM),  is  aimed  at  harmonising  prudential 
requirements and practices for all EU banks. This is commonly referred to as the “single EU 
rulebook”  or  the  “single  supervisory  model”.  The  coexistence  of  different  accounting 
frameworks would obviously be inconsistent with this objective. 
Nevertheless,  the  ECB  understands  that  the  International  Accounting  Standards  Board 
(IASB) may have to go towards the finalisation of International Financial Reporting Standard 
(IFRS) 9, even if a broader agreement cannot be achieved. 
To  pick  out  one  particular  issue,  the  ECB  considers  the  more  forward-looking  loan-loss 
provisioning  as  a  positive  development.  While  acknowledging  that  the  replacement  of  the 
incurred-loss model by the expected-loss model may be criticised as being judgemental and 
as allowing a considerable degree of subjectivity, it nonetheless has the advantage of being 
more forward-looking and, therefore, less pro-cyclical. 
Furthermore,  the  ECB  welcomes  the  Maystadt  report  on  how  to  reinforce  the  EU’s 
contribution  to  the  IFRS  and  to  the  improvement  of  the  governance  of  the  European 
institutions  developing  these  standards.  The  ECB  broadly  supports  the  enhanced  role  of 
public  authorities  in  the  new  Board  of  the  European  Financial  Reporting  Advisory  Group 
(EFRAG), which would contribute towards ensuring that financial stability and public interest 
considerations are adequately taken into account in the endorsement process for IFRS. The 
need  for  taking  into  account  financial  stability  considerations  in  the  process  of  setting 
accounting standards is an issue that has long been championed by the ECB. In our view, 
enhancing the role of public authorities in this process is conducive towards achieving that 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  goal, and would, through an increased interaction between standard setters and regulators, 
contribute to taking financial stability considerations into account in a more pronounced way 
in accounting standard-setting. 
The presentations of the first session of this conference will shed light on these issues and 
provide you with information on the latest developments in this area. 
The second part of this conference deals with the interaction between financial reporting 
and financial regulation. 
As  you  are  aware,  the  ECB  has  been  entrusted  with  the  responsibility  for  banking 
supervision  in  Europe  within  the  framework  of  the  SSM.  The  SSM  will  provide  for  the 
aforementioned “single supervisory model”, which will be applicable to all banks in the euro 
area.  In  the  future,  other  EU  countries  may  also  decide  to  participate  in  the  SSM.  The 
ECB/SSM will formally take over supervision in November 2014. It is being designed to solve 
the  “financial  trilemma”1  created  by  the  unstable  co-existence  of  national  supervision, 
financial integration and financial stability by moving supervision to the European level. 
The ECB/SSM’s currently on-going comprehensive assessment exercise covers 128 banks 
that represent 85% of the total assets of the euro area banking sector. The exercise, which is 
to  be  concluded  ahead  of  the  operational  start  of  the  SSM,  will  contribute  to  greater 
transparency of the banks’ balance sheets. Moving forward, the SSM will ensure consistency 
of supervisory practices in Europe. It will lead to a harmonised treatment of non-performing 
exposures  and  provisioning  rules,  which  varies  between  jurisdictions  at present  and  is  not 
directly  comparable  for  investors.  It  will  moreover  address  heterogeneity  in  banks’ 
calculations regarding risk-weighted assets. 
Many  measures  analysed  in  the  comprehensive  assessment  exercise  are  based  on 
accounting  data.  The  vast  majority  of  the  banks  undergoing  the  assessment  report  their 
accounts in line with IFRS. But some euro area banks still apply local Generally Accepted 
Accounting Principles (GAAP). This creates challenges regarding the comparability of data at 
the  European  level.  It  is  therefore  now  appropriate  to  discuss  the  links  between  financial 
reporting and financial regulation. 
In  the  context  of  applying  a  more  harmonised  approach  to  supervision,  the  European 
Banking Authority (EBA) has developed technical standards for the regular reporting of bank-
level supervisory data, using the CRR/CRD IV as a basis. 
Accounting values are the basis for determining regulatory capital. Nonetheless, accounting 
capital  and  regulatory  capital  reported  under  the  new  regulatory  reporting  standards  will 
generally  differ. This  is  due  to  the  different  objectives  of  accounting  and  supervisory  data. 
Consequently, prudential filters, as well as other instruments, are applied in order to adjust 
accounting figures to prudential figures. 
In  addition  to  supervisory  information,  banks  have  to  report  further  financial  data  to  the 
supervisory  authorities.  These  reports  consist  of  “pure”  accounting  data  without  any 
regulatory  adjustments  and  include  the  balance  sheet,  off-balance-sheet  activities  and  the 
income  statement,  as  well  as  detailed  breakdowns  thereof.  The  reported  values  are 
measured according to the applicable accounting framework, which is IFRS for most banks 
in the EU, as said before. Furthermore, consistency of data reported in the annual accounts 
and regulatory reports has to be ensured. 
All  these  aspects  show  that  banking  supervisors  have  convincing  reasons  to  call  for  the 
application  of  high-quality  accounting  frameworks.  Regulatory  ratios  and  reports  depend 
heavily  on  accounting  figures,  and  the  accounting  framework  applied  can  substantially 
influence the reported values. It is thus crucial for supervisors to understand the accounting 
                                                
1   Dirk Schoenmaker, “The financial trilemma”, Economic Letters, No 111, 2011, pp. 57–9. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  rules behind the figures and to promote sound accounting practices. Therefore, I would like 
to  emphasise  once  more  that  the  ECB  supports  a  greater  harmonisation  of  accounting 
frameworks by applying IFRS, also with a view  to ensuring equivalence in the supervisory 
assessment of reported data. Indeed, it would seem desirable that all banks regulated under 
the SSM apply IFRS, thereby ensuring equivalence in any assessment of data dependent on 
accounting information. 
We have a number of interesting speeches on various aspects of this challenging topic in our 
conference  programme  for  this  afternoon,  which  deal  with  interaction  and  repercussion 
effects  between  financial  reporting,  financial  regulation  and  financial  stability.  Given  that 
accounting  data  are  used  as  the  basis  for  financial  reporting,  regulatory  reporting,  and  for 
market and financial stability analysis, you may hear some interesting views on, for example 
certain  accounting  approaches,  and  with  regard  to  the  extent  of  disclosures  and 
transparency. 
Turning to the third part of our conference that will deal with central bank balance sheets 
during  the  crisis,  the  financial  crisis  required  unconventional  monetary  policy  tools  and 
liquidity support that had a considerable impact on the size of many central banks’ balance 
sheets, influenced their risk profile and left marks on their financial buffers and profit and loss 
accounts. 
The  Eurosystem  reacted  to  the  financial  crisis  by  increasing  its  intermediation  in  bank 
funding  markets  via  an  increased  range  of  monetary  policy  instruments.  Consequently  the 
Eurosystem  risk  profile  partially  shifted  and  increased,  from  FX  rate  and  gold  price  risk  to 
credit  risk  related  to  domestic  assets.  Any  related  counterparty  default  risk  is  however 
mitigated  by  adequate  underlying  collateral  which  provides  an  additional  guarantee.  The 
operational  framework  was  adapted  accordingly  –  examples  thereof  are  the  extension  of 
credit maturities, outright purchase programmes for securities and changes to the collateral 
framework. 
Similar developments were experienced by many central banks around the world. In the case 
of the Eurosystem, the balance sheet expansion was largely due to an increase in the size 
and  maturity  of  temporary  lending  operations  under  the  fixed  rate  full-allotment  tender 
procedures. The Eurosystem had increased its lending to banks after tensions in the money 
market  emerged  in  August  2007,  but  the  increase  in  its  balance  sheet  size  remained 
relatively  limited  until  September  2008;  it  became  significant  only  after  the  collapse  of 
Lehman  Brothers.  As  of  mid-2012,  excess  liquidity  and,  concomitantly,  the  size  of  the 
Eurosystem balance sheet have started to decline again. On 23 May 2014, monetary policy-
related lending to euro area credit institutions stood at EUR 640 billion, which is roughly half 
as much as at the peak in 2012. Other major central banks have conducted mainly large-
scale outright asset purchases. 
In  the  aftermath  of  the  financial  crisis,  the  Eurosystem’s  risk  control  frameworks  were 
developed further and refined. The Eurosystem ensures that it is protected in financial terms, 
inter  alia,  through  the  implementation  of  prudent  risk  management  and  accounting 
frameworks, and through a cautious allocation of its invested assets. As a result of these risk 
control  measures,  the  risk  profile  of  the  Eurosystem’s  balance  sheet  has  been  contained, 
despite the use of the various non-standard measures since mid-2007. 
Furthermore,  financial  protection  was  enhanced.  The  ways  in  which  central  banks  can 
achieve this depend on their legal, statutory and accounting frameworks. Some central banks 
have  sufficient  leeway  to  create  reserves  and  others  are  able  to  build  up  appropriate  risk 
provisions,  while  some  enjoy  state  guarantees  with  respect  to  their  recapitalisation  in  the 
event of certain losses. Regarding the ECB itself, we gradually doubled our capital during the 
financial crisis up to its statutory ceiling – at the end of 2013, it amounted to EUR 7.6 billion. 
Moreover, we have built up a general risk provision that stood at the same level at the end of 
2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Notwithstanding  the  significant  increase  in  its  balance  sheet  during the  financial  crisis, the 
financial  strength  of  the  Eurosystem  has  been  preserved.  This  reinforces  the  financial 
independence of the Eurosystem as a whole, including that of the ECB. 
The discussions that take place tomorrow morning will provide some very interesting insight 
into  the  issues  of  central  banks’  balance  sheets,  risk  management  and  both  current  and 
future financial challenges. 
The fourth and final part of this conference will focus on central bank financial reporting 
and governance issues. 
As you know, there is an increasing worldwide demand for transparency to be strengthened, 
also triggered by the financial crisis. This, in turn, impacts on financial reporting and how it is 
tackled, as well as on the way in which governance issues are presented. 
One aspect that the ECB has paid particular attention to in recent years is the development 
of  its  management  report.  The  management  report  is  aimed  at  providing  the  ECB’s 
stakeholders with comprehensive information on primarily issues with a financial impact such 
as portfolio management, the production of its financial accounts, various risk management 
aspects, financial resources and financial results, as well as related governance issues. 
I  am  sure  that  many  of  you  face  similar  considerations  and  initiatives,  and  are  taking 
measures to strengthen financial reporting further on an on-going basis. However, we should 
never  forget  that  central  banks  exist  to  conduct policies  of  price  and financial  stability  and 
must  be  judged  by  their  success  in  ensuring  those  goals  for  the  general  welfare  of  our 
societies. 
This  notwithstanding,  we  have  to  recognise  that  the  roles  of  financial  reporting  and  risk 
management have become more prominent than they were before, and that they are subject 
to  increased  public  scrutiny.  In  this  context,  both  accounting  and  governance  frameworks 
remain  key  components  when  it  comes  to  the  understanding  of  a  central  bank’s  financial 
situation, and we should all aim at applying these frameworks in order to make our positions 
as clear and understandable as possible to our numerous stakeholders. 
Ladies and gentlemen, I thank you for your attention and wish you a fruitful conference. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
