  Vítor Constâncio: Understanding the yield curve 
Opening address by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at 
the  ECB  workshop  “Understanding  the  yield  curve:  what  has  changed  with  the  crisis?”, 
Frankfurt am Main, 8 September 2014. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  welcome  you  on  behalf  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European Central Bank to this topical workshop on “Understanding the yield curve: what has 
changed with the crisis?”. This event is part of a sequence of very productive workshops on 
asset  pricing  that  have  been  jointly  organised  by  the  ECB  and  the  Bank  of  England  for 
several years now. I am very pleased to see this established practice of collaboration across 
our two central banks continuing and gaining further ground. 
I  would  also  like  to  welcome  all  participants:  colleagues  from  other  central  banks,  among 
them many from the Federal Reserve System and from the co-organising Bank of England, 
the  participants  from  academia,  guests  from  the  private  sector  and  colleagues  from  the 
European Central Bank. 
In my remarks today, I will first give a short overview of the role of the yield curve in monetary 
policy deliberations, mentioning also the impact of the crisis. I will then go on to talk about 
some  topical  and  much  discussed  issues  that  are  related  to  the  challenges  central  banks 
face in interpreting the information coming from fixed income markets. 
The role of the yield curve in monetary policy deliberations 
As we all know, the understanding of the dynamic evolution and the forecasting of the yield 
curve has many practical applications: pricing asset and derivatives, devising strategies for 
public debt programs, managing risk and conducting monetary policy. An old simple use of 
the  yield  curve,  more  common  in  the  US,  was  to  use  its  slope  to  forecast  recessions.  In 
2009, Rudebusch and Williams1 published a paper about what they call “the puzzle of the 
enduring power of the yield curve” to forecast recessions. In 2006, when the US yield curve 
got inverted predicting a recession, the whole idea was dismissed as having finally failed only 
to be confirmed by the Great Recession. In a very recent paper, Chinn and Kucko2 examine 
the issue for the US, the euro area and eight European countries. The results show that the 
slope indicator performance has deteriorated in recent years although it seems to work better 
than other leading indicators for some European countries. 
Today we are mainly interested in examining the important role the yield curve has for the 
conduct of monetary policy. 
The yield curve is important mainly for two reasons. First, it is an indicator of what the market 
is thinking about the expected path of future monetary policy. This follows because long-term 
rates under certain conditions reflect expectations of the future path of short-term rates. Of 
course, besides future rate expectations, longer maturity yields typically contain risk premia. 
The quantification of these premia is not without challenges even in normal times. 
                                                
1  Rudebusch, G. and J. Williams, (2009), “Forecasting Recessions: The Puzzle of the Enduring Power of the 
Yield Curve”, Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, American Statistical Association, vol. 27(4).  
2  Chinn, M. and K. Kucko, (2014) “The predictive power of the yield curve across countries and time”, mimeo 
available at http://www.ssc.wisc.edu/~mchinn/Chinn_Kucko_Feb2014.pdf 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The  second  reason  results  from  the  yield  curve  being  a  key  part  of  the  transmission 
mechanism  of  monetary  policy.  Therefore,  it  is  something  the  central  bank  wants  to 
influence,  not  only  just  learn  from.  In  particular,  while  the  first  step  in  the  transmission 
process of monetary policy is typically related to very short-term interbank interest rates, the 
wider  transmission  requires  that these  effects spread  more  widely  to  medium-  and  longer-
term rates. In the next step, the monetary policy impulse spreads to the pricing of assets that 
are relevant for the financing conditions of households and corporations, their consumption, 
production and investment decisions and, finally, inflation. 
The impact of the crisis 
Naturally, the crisis has brought up a number of challenges for our understanding of the yield 
curve. 
For example, credit and liquidity premia have been important drivers of sovereign yields in 
the  euro  area  and  elsewhere,  thereby  complicating  the  process  of  inferring  market 
expectations of the future path of policy, and also impairing the transmission mechanism of 
monetary policy to the wider economy. Moreover, high sovereign spreads in the euro area 
have raised the question of what is the appropriate yield curve to monitor. In an article in the 
July Monthly Bulletin we discussed this issue in the context of measuring the euro area risk-
free rate. Should we use Bund yields, euro area average AAA rates or OIS rates, or does it 
depend on the matter at hand? 
Incidentally,  an  intriguing  question  in  a  currency  union  is  the  following:  if  it  is  difficult  to 
identify a risk-free rate in a currency union, this means that there is no risk-free asset either, 
besides the central bank’s own liabilities, the currency. Whether this peculiar situation adds 
to the challenges facing the central bank of a monetary union, in terms of signal-extraction 
and analysis of expectations, I leave to you as a topic for reflection. 
The crisis has also proved the important role that central banks play in influencing the yield 
curve  through  both  their  conventional  and  unconventional  policies;  including  forward 
guidance,  asset  purchases  and  enhanced  credit  support.  This  raises  a  host  of  questions 
about  the  relative  effectiveness  of  these  policies,  but  also  about  conventional  yield  curve 
models and whether they adequately capture the mechanisms that explain the role of these 
policies,  particularly  given  that  for  tractability  and  simplicity  real-world  complications  like 
credit and liquidity premia, pricing anomalies and even the influence of the macro economy 
and monetary policy are often not directly considered. 
It  is  well  known  that  during  decades  the  fields  of  finance  and  macroeconomics  dealt  with 
interest  rates,  asset  prices  and  the  yield  curve  in  a  total  different  way  and  without  much 
interaction. As Diebold and Rudebusch point out in their book published last year on “Yield 
curve  modelling  and  forecasting”:3  “In  macro  models,  the  entire  financial  sector  is  often 
represented by a single interest rate with no accounting for credit or liquidity risk and no role 
for financial intermediation or financial frictions. Similarly, finance models often focus on the 
consistency of asset prices across markets with little regard for underlying macroeconomic 
fundamentals. To understand important aspects of the recent financial crisis … a joint macro-
finance perspective is likely necessary”. 
The  macro-finance  approach  to  the  analysis  of  the  yield  curve  had  several  developments 
even  before  the  crisis.  In  2006,  Hördahl,  Tristani  and  Vestin,4  (the  last  two,  ECB 
                                                
3  Diebold, F. X. and G. Rudebusch, (2013), “Yield curve modelling and forecasting: the dynamic Nelson-Siegel 
approach”, Princeton University Press.  
4  Hördahl  P.,  O.  Tristani  and  D.  Vestin,  (2006),  “A  joint  econometric  model  of  macroeconomic  and  term 
structure dynamics”, Journal of Econometrics, 131. See also by the same authors (2008), “The Yield Curve 
and Macroeconomic Dynamics”, Economic Journal, Royal Economic Society, vol. 118(533).  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  researchers),  published  a  paper  embedding  the  analysis  of  the  term  structure  of  interest 
rates into a DSGE model. With a few changes in the standard framework of the time, they 
were able to replicate key features of the term structure usually present in the data. Diebold, 
Rudebusch  and  Aruoba,  also  in  2006,5  provided  a  bidirectional  connection  between  the 
factors of a dynamic Nelson-Siegel model of the yield and macro variables. The first factor, 
the  level,  showing  a  high  correlation  with  inflation  and  the  second  factor,  the  slope,  being 
highly correlated with real economy activity. Later, in 2007, Rudebusch and Wu6 developed a 
macro-finance model with a no-arbitrage dynamic specification of the term structure and a 
small new Keynesian model. In an application of this model to the great moderation period, 
they find the level factor associated with the perceived inflation target of monetary policy and 
the slope factor connected with the cyclical response of monetary policy with the economy. 
The field of macro-finance continued to expand and recently focused on how to consider the 
zero lower bound into yield curve models and we have an example of that research in our 
workshop. 
Current policy questions 
Judged  in  terms  of  the  number  of  policy  questions,  this  is  an  excellent  time  to  be  doing 
research on yield curves. Yields in the euro area have recently fallen to record lows. Does 
this  reflect  the  underlying  fundamentals  in  the  euro  area,  the  expectation  of  additional 
monetary loosening, or some kind of mispricing by markets? What is the risk that yields could 
suddenly snap back to much higher levels? 
For all the analysis that has been done on the effects of unconventional monetary policies on 
the  yields  curve,  there  is  still  a  great  deal  of  disagreement  on  the  effectiveness  of  these 
policies and the main channels they work through. What can be said about this and how can 
we best evaluate the relative impact of these policies? As well as guiding the future use of 
these  policies,  this  is  also  important  for  gauging  the  likely  impact  when  these  policies  are 
removed.  With  the  Fed  about  to  end  its  asset  purchases  and  both  the  Fed  and  Bank  of 
England expected to start raising policy rates next year, long rates should have increased. 
However, in the US, after an increase last year following the May tapering announcement, 
long rates have been decreasing since the beginning of the year in what James Hamilton has 
called the bond market conundrum redux. 
Given that the euro area is some way from exiting non-standard policies, a related issue is 
on the nature of the likely spillovers of the US monetary policy. At various times in the past, 
we  have  seen  US  and  euro  yields  move  very  closely  together  but  they  have  diverged 
somewhat  recently.  In  contrast,  UK  and  US  rates  are  currently  very  closely  linked.  What 
determines  the  degree  of  coupling  or  decoupling  between  yields  and  what  can  we  expect 
going forward? And finally, when do markets expect the ECB to start raising rates? Given the 
role of term premia and the impact of the zero lower bound, how can we best estimate this 
date? 
The workshop papers and concluding remarks 
Many of these issues are taken up in some way by the papers that are going to be discussed 
over the next day and a half. A couple of the papers will look at the impact of Treasury supply 
on yields, drawing on new research based on the US experience and also research on the 
economic  mechanisms  involved,  the  so-called  portfolio  balance  channel.  There  are  also 
                                                
5  Diebold, F. X., G. Rudebusch and S. B. Arouba, (2006), “The macroeconomy and the yield curve: a dynamic 
latent factor approach”, Journal of Econometrics, 131, 309–338.  
6  Rudebusch,  G.  and  T. Wu  (2007)  “Accounting  for  a  shift  in  term  structure  behaviour  with  no-arbitrage  and 
macro-finance models”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 39, 395–422.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  some papers that look more specifically at recent asset purchase programmes and how they 
have affected yields and also the spillovers from them to other countries. 
Other papers look at the impact of monetary policy on the yield curve, finding for example 
that monetary policy is one of the factors that explain movements in the term premium. There 
are also several papers that estimate so-called shadow rate models that recognise the zero 
lower  bound  that  prevents  interest  rates  going  negative.  There  are  also  papers  that  look 
more  specifically  at  euro  area  bonds  markets  during  the  crisis  and  the  role  of  credit  and 
liquidity premia and evidence of pricing anomalies, in both cases highlighting the role of the 
ECB’s interventions. 
We are  also  pleased to  welcome  two  keynote  speakers from  the  US, Gregory  Duffee  and 
Glenn Rudebusch, who are both leading researchers in the literature, representing academia 
and  the  Federal  Reserve  System,  respectively.  Both  will  talk  about  the  influence  of 
unconventional  monetary  policy  on  the  yield  curve  and  it  will  be  enlightening  to  hear  their 
perspectives on the subject. 
Finally, we have a distinguished panel of market experts, who have been primed to talk to 
some  of the  issues I  have  mentioned, followed  by  a  Q  &  A,  which  should  ensure  that the 
workshop ends on a high note. 
These  are  the  reasons  that  make  almost  superfluous  my  wish  for  some  stimulating 
discussions over the next day and a half and a very productive workshop. 
Thank you for your attention.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
