  William C Dudley: What kind of jobs have been created during the 
recovery? 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, at the Regional Economic Press Briefing, New York City, 21 May 
2014. 
 Good  morning  and  welcome  once  again  to  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York’s 
Regional Economic Press Briefing. I am pleased to have this opportunity to speak with you. 
This morning I want to focus on economic conditions in our region, giving particular attention 
to the kinds of jobs created in New York, Northern New Jersey and Puerto Rico during the 
recovery from the Great Recession. As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and 
not  necessarily  those  of  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC)  or  the  Federal 
Reserve System. 
While the New York Fed has broad operating responsibilities on behalf of the FOMC and the 
Federal  Reserve  System,  we  are  also  deeply  committed  to  our  region.  That  commitment 
manifests itself in several ways. We produce monthly indices of economic activity that enable 
us to gauge the performance of the region’s economy. We conduct a regular poll of small 
businesses in our region, and just last week, we hosted a summit examining new sources of 
credit  for  small  businesses.  We  developed  block-by-block  flood  maps  which  were  created 
after Superstorm Sandy to inform residents and businesses in Brooklyn of their vulnerability 
to  future  storms.  And,  we  work  with  area  schools  to  improve  students’  understanding  of 
monetary policy, the Fed and economics. 
It is also important to me that I visit different parts of our District on a regular basis and talk 
directly with the people who live and work here. For example, last fall I visited Western New 
York and saw the many positive changes helping to revitalize what has been a slow growing 
economy for some time. Earlier this year, I met with companies on a visit to Brooklyn and 
observed some of the new hi-tech jobs that are being brought to the City – a good precursor 
to today’s presentation. While in Brooklyn, I also visited Brownsville, a neighborhood which 
underscores the reality of the challenges that many face and the fact that the economy is not 
improving for everyone. Later this year, I have similar trips planned to Puerto Rico, the Bronx 
and Albany. Obtaining on-the-ground intelligence is valuable and helps shape my view of the 
region, the economy and my outlook on policy. 
As  you  may  know,  the  District  we  cover  is  quite  diverse.  It  is  not  just  a  single  regional 
economy, but rather many different local economies. Let me talk a bit about how the different 
parts of our region have been doing. 
Regional economic conditions 
Since  our  last  briefing  in  November,  the  economic  recovery  has  been  variable  across  the 
region – strong in some places but weaker in others. Let me begin with the area that has 
struggled  the  most.  Puerto  Rico’s  economy  has,  unfortunately,  been  in  a  deep  economic 
slump that has lasted for nearly a decade. Over the past few years, public sector job losses 
have continued to weigh against modest job gains in the Island’s private sector. And ongoing 
difficulties in the Island’s labor market continue, with labor force participation still alarmingly 
low, and unemployment stubbornly high at a rate well above the mainland’s. The good news 
is that we are finally beginning to see some firming in economic conditions on the Island. 
At the other end of the spectrum, New York City has been experiencing a robust recovery. 
While  the  Great  Recession  was  clearly  the  worst  post-war  downturn  in  U.S.  history,  New 
York City was not as badly affected as the rest of the country. As of April, almost five years 
since the end of the recession, the nation has recovered nearly all of the jobs that were lost. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  By contrast, New York City reached this milestone more than two years ago. And, as we’ve 
highlighted  in  previous  press  briefings,  this  rebound  has  occurred  despite  the  lack  of  any 
significant recovery in employment on Wall Street. 
The recovery has generally progressed at a more moderate pace in the other parts of our 
region. Consistent with historical patterns, Upstate New York as a whole has been growing 
modestly,  with  Buffalo  and  Rochester  doing  a  little  bit  better  than  their  upstate  peers. 
Binghamton,  on  the  other  hand,  has  really  been  struggling  with  no  signs  yet  of  any 
meaningful recovery. Meanwhile, Northern New Jersey’s economy had  been growing fairly 
steadily  until  this  past  winter  when  activity  softened,  probably  due  at  least  in  part  to  the 
unusually  harsh  weather.  Now  that  spring  is  finally  upon  us,  we  hope  to  see  economic 
conditions improve more significantly. 
What kinds of jobs have been created during the recovery? 
Let me turn to the topic of today’s press briefing: how the types of jobs in the region have 
changed over the last business cycle. Firms often change the way they utilize workers and 
the  mix  of  skills  they  employ  during  recessions  and  recoveries.  The  weakening  demand 
during recessions forces firms to look for new ways to be more efficient to cope with hard 
times.  These  adjustments  do  not  affect  all  workers  equally.  Indeed,  it’s  what  we  typically 
think  of  as  middle-skilled  workers  –  for  example,  construction  workers,  machine  operators 
and  administrative  support  personnel  –  that  are  hardest  hit  during  recessions.  Further,  a 
feature of the Great Recession and indeed the prior two recessions, is that the middle-skill 
jobs  that  were  lost  don’t  all  come  back  during  the  recoveries  that  follow.  Instead,  job 
opportunities have tended to shift toward higher- and lower-skilled workers. 
As we’ll show, these same trends have played out in our region. While there’s been a good 
number  of  both  higher-skill  and  lower-skill  jobs  created  in  the  region  during  the  recovery, 
opportunities for middle-skilled workers have continued to shrink. 
I  believe  it  is  important  for  us  to  highlight  these  job  trends  and  to  understand  their 
implications  for  our  region.  There  have  been  significant  and  long-lasting  changes  to  the 
nature of work. As a result, many middle-skilled workers displaced during the recession are 
likely to find that their old jobs will never come back. Furthermore, workers are increasingly 
facing  higher  skill  requirements  in  order  to  land  a  good  job.  These  dynamics  in  the  labor 
market present a host of challenges for the region to address. However one thing is clear: 
workers will need more education, training and skills to take full advantage of the types of job 
opportunities being created in our region, as well as across the nation. So, it’s important that 
we work together to find ways to help people in our region adapt to these changes. 
I will now ask Jaison Abel to provide an update of economic conditions in our region. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
