  Haruhiko Kuroda: Toward the early achievement of the 2 percent price 
stability target and sustainable growth of Japan’s economy 
Speech  by  Mr  Haruhiko  Kuroda,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  Keizai  Doyukai 
(Japan Association of Corporate Executives) Members’ Meeting, Tokyo, 23 June 2014. 
Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
 Introduction 
It  is  my  great  honor  to  be  invited  to  the  Keizai  Doyukai  (Japan  Association  of  Corporate 
Executives) Members’ Meeting and have the opportunity to address distinguished business 
leaders in Japan. 
In April last year, the Bank of Japan introduced quantitative and qualitative monetary easing 
(QQE) to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent at the earliest possible time, with a 
time horizon of about two years. More than one year has passed since then and QQE has so 
far  been  having  its  intended  effects,  with  Japan’s  economy  on  a  path  suggesting  that  the 
2 percent price stability target will be achieved as expected. However, we are only half way 
there. The Bank will therefore continue with QQE, aiming to achieve the price stability target 
of 2 percent, as long as it is necessary for maintaining that target in a stable manner. 
The topic I would like to talk about today is the Bank’s view concerning the current state of 
and  outlook  for  economic  activity  and  prices.  Based  on  that,  I  will  then  talk  somewhat  in 
depth  about  the  mechanisms  based  on  which  inflation  is  expected  to  increase  toward 
2 percent.  In  concluding,  I  will  offer  my  views  on  the  challenge  of  strengthening  Japan’s 
medium- to long-term growth potential. 
I. 
Current situation of and outlook for economic activity and prices 
Economic activity 
Let  me  start  with  the  economic  situation.  Domestic  demand,  including  business  fixed 
investment,  remains  resilient  as  a  trend,  although  a  decline  in  demand  following  the 
consumption  tax  hike  in  April  this  year  –  mainly  in  private  consumption  such  as  durable 
goods  –  can  be  observed.  In  this  situation,  along  with  the  clear  improvement  in  the 
employment and income situation, the virtuous cycle of economic activity has continued to 
operate steadily, and Japan’s economy has continued to recover moderately as a trend. 
Looking  ahead,  as  domestic  demand  is  likely  to  remain  firm  and  exports  are  expected  to 
increase moderately, the virtuous cycle among production, income, and spending is likely to 
be maintained. Therefore, for the next three years or so, Japan’s economy as a trend is likely 
to  continue  growing  at  a  pace  above  its  potential,  although  growth  will  be  affected  by 
fluctuations in demand associated with the two rounds of consumption tax hikes (Chart 1). 
For  the  above  scenario  to  materialize,  two  factors  are  of  key  importance.  The  first  is  that 
exports, fuelled by a recovery in overseas economies, start increasing again. The second is 
that domestic demand, which has been driving Japan’s recovery so far, remains firm. Let me 
discuss these two factors in more detail. 
Exports and overseas economies 
The first key factor is developments in exports. Exports have recently remained more or less 
flat and have been lacking momentum despite the correction of the excessive appreciation of 
the yen (Chart 2). These trends in exports are essentially due to cyclical factors, including, 
for example, the sluggishness in emerging economies such as the ASEAN countries. At the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  same  time,  however,  structural  factors  such  as  the  increasing  relocation  of  production 
overseas by Japanese manufacturers have also played a certain role. In addition, temporary 
factors have likely put downward pressure on exports. Examples include the fact that firms 
placed priority on domestic shipments in response to the front-loading of demand prior to the 
consumption tax hike and the effects of the unusually severe  winter weather in the United 
States.  Therefore,  looking  ahead,  exports  are  likely  to  start  increasing  again,  albeit 
moderately,  once  the  effects  of  these  temporary  factors  diminish  and  growth  in  overseas 
economies, including emerging economies, gradually picks up. 
Looking  at  the  current  situation  of  and  outlook  for  overseas  economies  in  more  detail, 
overseas  economies  –  in  particular  advanced  economies  such  as  the  U.S.  and  European 
economies  –  are  recovering,  although  economic  performance  remains  lackluster  in  some 
emerging  economies.  As  for  the  outlook,  overseas  economies  are  likely  to  continue  to 
recover moderately. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) expects global economic growth, 
which  fell  to  3.0 percent  in  2013,  to  accelerate  gradually  to  3.6 percent  in  2014  and 
3.9 percent in 2015 (Chart 3). Looking at individual countries or regions, the U.S. economy 
registered negative GDP growth in the January–March quarter due mainly to the unusually 
severe  winter  weather.  However,  since  March,  a  number  of  economic  indicators  have 
rebounded  as the  severe  winter  weather  waned,  and the  U.S.  economy  has  returned to  a 
moderate recovery trend, led mainly by private demand. Given the accommodative financial 
conditions,  the  pace  of  recovery  is  likely  to  accelerate  gradually  as  improvements  in  the 
employment  and  income  situation  become  more  pronounced.  In  Europe,  the  year-on-year 
rate of change in consumer prices in the euro area, which has been struggling with structural 
problems such as excessive debt, has been less than 1 percent for more than six months, 
giving rise to concern over deflation. That being said, with business and household sentiment 
improving, forces to cyclically elevate economic activity have recently been at work and the 
economy  has  been  recovering  moderately,  with  GDP  in  the  euro  area  registering  positive 
growth for four consecutive quarters. The euro area economy is likely to continue recovering, 
reflecting  not  only  the  recovery  in  domestic  demand,  but  also  expected  moderate 
improvements in external demand. As for the Chinese economy, the deceleration in growth 
observed since the beginning of the year appears to have come to a halt, and the economy 
is expected to continue growing stably at around the current pace due partly to the economic 
stimulus measures implemented by the government. Finally, other emerging economies and 
commodity-exporting  economies  will  likely  continue  to  lack  growth  momentum  for  the  time 
being, but from a somewhat longer-term perspective growth is expected to gradually pick up 
against the background of the recovery in advanced economies. Nevertheless, looking at the 
outlook  for  advanced  economies,  which  are  expected  to  be  the  main  driving  force  in  the 
global economy for the time being, attention should be paid to the pace of recovery in the 
U.S. economy and the prospects for the European debt problem. In addition, it is necessary 
to  keep  an  eye  on  issues  such  as  excess  production  capacity  and  excess  debt  in  China, 
developments in emerging and commodity-exporting countries that face structural problems 
such as a current account deficit or high inflation, and geopolitical risks emanating from some 
countries.  Thus,  there  remain  various  uncertainties  regarding  the  outlook  for  overseas 
economies, which all warrant vigilance. 
Sustainability of domestic demand 
Let me next talk about the sustainability of domestic demand, especially the current situation 
of and outlook for business fixed investment and private consumption (Chart 4). 
As for business fixed investment, while some argue that increases in investment cannot be 
expected due partly to the increased relocation of production overseas, recent figures show 
that  investment  has  grown  moderately.  In  the  GDP  statistics, for  example,  investment  has 
registered  quarter-on-quarter  increases  for  four  consecutive  quarters.  Quarter-on-quarter 
growth  in  the  January–March  quarter  of  this  year,  at  7.6 percent,  was  particularly  high 
reflecting  temporary  upward  momentum  due  to,  for  example,  renewal  demand  stemming 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  from the ending of support for some software programs and to the front-loading of demand 
prior to the strengthening of gas emission regulations. Looking ahead, since corporate profits 
are likely to continue improving, business fixed investment is projected to follow a moderate 
upward trend as firms seek to expand capacity on the back of increased capacity utilization 
and as monetary easing continues to underpin demand for investment. 
With  regard  to  private  consumption,  the  outlook  crucially  depends  on  the  effects  of  the 
consumption tax hike. To consider these effects, they need be divided into two aspects. The 
first aspect is the short-term effects of the decline in demand following the front-loading of 
consumption prior to the tax hike, while the second aspect is the longer-term effects of the 
decline  in  real  incomes  as  a  result  of  the  tax  hike,  which  will  materialize  only  gradually. 
Economic  indicators  released  so  far  indicate  a  clear  decline  following  the  tax  hike  in 
purchases of durable goods such as automobiles, demand for which increased substantially 
prior  to  the  tax  hike.  However,  many  firms  indicate  that  the  magnitude  of  the  decline  in 
consumption following the tax hike has been broadly in line with expectations and that private 
consumption continues to remain resilient as a trend. At this stage, it therefore appears that 
the effect of the decline in consumption due to the front-loading of demand is likely to start 
waning  in  the  coming  few  months.  As  for  the  adverse  effects  through  the  decline  in  real 
incomes,  the  key  will  be  to  what  extent  improvements  in  the  employment  and  income 
situation  can  alleviate  these  effects.  With  labor  market  conditions  continuing  to  improve 
steadily,  employee 
income  is  expected  to  continue  rising  moderately,  and  private 
consumption is likely to remain resilient. How the tax hike affects consumption is something 
we will continue to examine in the coming months. 
Prices 
Let me turn to price developments. The year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price 
index  (CPI,  excluding  fresh  food)  was  plus  1.3 percent  for  four  consecutive  months  from 
December  last  year  to  March  this  year,  and,  after  excluding  the  direct  effects  of  the 
consumption tax hike, accelerated somewhat to plus 1.5 percent in April (Chart 5). Breaking 
down the year-on-year rate of increase shows that price increases have been seen in a wide 
range of items reflecting that Japan’s economy has continued to recover moderately, while 
energy-related goods have stopped pushing up the year-on-year rate of increase. 
With  regard to  the  outlook,  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  after  excluding  the 
direct effects of the consumption tax hike is likely to be around 1¼ percent for some time, as 
upward  pressure  from  import  prices  –  in  particular  energy  prices  –  will  likely  wane,  while 
trend inflationary pressure – due mainly to the improvement in the output gap – will increase. 
Specifically, through the summer, the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI is expected to 
slow  to  around  1 percent.  Subsequently,  as  trend  inflationary  pressure  continues  to 
strengthen,  the  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the  CPI  is  expected  to  follow  an  upward 
trend again from the second half of this fiscal year and reach around 2 percent – the price 
stability target – around the middle of the current projection period from fiscal 2014 through 
fiscal 2016, that is, in or around fiscal 2015. Thereafter, the rate of increase is likely to edge 
up, since medium- to long-term inflation expectations will converge to around 2 percent and 
the output gap is expected to continue expanding in positive territory (Chart 1). 
Hence,  Japan’s  economy  is  likely  to  achieve  an  inflation  rate  of  around  2 percent  and 
thereafter shift to a growth path that sustains such inflation in a stable manner. 
Path toward the price stability target of 2 percent 
II. 
The Bank’s outlook for prices I just outlined is fairly bullish compared to the average view of 
market  participants  and economists. Therefore,  in  the following,  I  would  like  to  explain  the 
mechanisms that, in the Bank’s view, underlie the increase in inflation toward 2 percent in a 
little more depth. To sum up in advance, we are of the view that upward pressure on prices 
will further increase in the future for the following two reasons. First, the output gap is likely to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  improve steadily and, second, medium- to long-term inflation expectations are likely to rise, 
which in turn will influence actual wage and price setting. 
Upward pressure on prices from the output gap 
Let me start with the output gap. A key characteristic of the current economic recovery is that 
it has been led by domestic demand such as public investment and private consumption. As 
a result, the nonmanufacturing sector has been playing a central role in the recovery. Since 
the nonmanufacturing sector is more labor-intensive than the manufacturing sector, this, on 
the  whole,  has  led  to  a  further  tightening  in  labor  market  conditions.  Those  who  are  here 
today  may  be  aware  of  this  in  your  daily  business.  In  terms  of  economic  data,  the 
unemployment  rate  has  been  approaching  the  structural  unemployment  rate,  which  is 
considered  to  be  around  3.5 percent,  and  the  active  job  openings-to-applicants  ratio  has 
risen to 1.08, which is the same level as the peak reached before the global financial crisis 
(Chart 6). This tightening of labor market conditions has started to influence wages, and, in 
the  regular  annual  wage  negotiation  this  spring,  the  number  of  firms  that  raised  not  only 
bonuses  but  also  base  pay  has  increased  substantially.  In  addition  to  this  increase  in  the 
utilization  of  labor,  a  growing  number  of firms,  particularly  in  the  nonmanufacturing  sector, 
are  experiencing  capacity  shortages,  and  the  output  gap  has  been  narrowing  moderately. 
While the level of the output gap is subject to a considerable margin of error, the gap seems 
to have narrowed to close to 0 percent, that is, the long-term average (Chart 7). As for the 
outlook, inflationary pressure from the output gap is likely to strengthen further, given that the 
economy is expected to continue growing at a pace above its potential. 
Upward pressure on prices from inflation expectations 
Let me next outline developments in medium- to long-term inflation expectations. According 
to  various  surveys  and  market  indicators,  inflation  expectations  appear  to  be  rising  on  the 
whole  (Chart  8).  Looking  at  the  mechanism  behind  this  rise,  it  appears  that,  in  the  first 
instance,  the  Bank’s  strong  and  clear  commitment  to  overcome  deflation  through  QQE, 
together with bold monetary easing to underpin this commitment, has affected expectations 
of  economic  entities,  and  inflation  expectations  started  to  rise.  Subsequently,  the  actual 
increase in the inflation rate due to the narrowing of the output gap has then led to a further 
rise  in  inflation  expectations.  As  mentioned  earlier,  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the 
CPI (excluding fresh food) has been above plus 1 percent. Except for the period of the surge 
in global commodity prices around 2008, this is the first time in the two decades since 1993 
that the CPI has risen by more than 1 percent year-on-year for several months in a row. With 
firms  and  households  experiencing  these  price  increases,  their  inflation  expectations  have 
changed  and  have  started  to  influence  wage  and  price  setting.  As  seen  in  the  wage 
negotiations  this  spring,  the  increase  in  inflation  has  been  taken  into  account  in  the  wage 
negotiations  between  management  and  labor.  In  addition,  a  shift  in  firms’  price-setting 
strategies from strategies focusing on low prices to strategies seeking to raise sales prices 
while  increasing  value  added  can  be  observed.  Given  that  the  Bank  continues  to  steadily 
pursue  QQE  and  that  inflation  continues  to  be  above  1 percent,  medium-  to  long-term 
inflation  expectations  will  likely  follow  an  increasing  trend,  which  will  further  reinforce 
inflationary pressure. 
Upward drift of the Phillips curve 
Although  somewhat  technical,  let  me  summarize  this  price  rise  mechanism  by  using  the 
concept of the Phillips curve (Chart 9). The Phillips curve depicts the relationship between 
the output gap and inflation, and illustrates the following mechanism: if economic conditions 
are favorable and the labor market and the market for goods and services are tight, inflation 
will  rise.  In  the  chart,  the  vertical  axis  depicts  the  inflation  rate,  while  the  horizontal  axis 
depicts  the  output  gap.  The  Phillips  curve  is  assumed  to  be  upward-sloping;  that  is,  if 
economic conditions improve and we move to the right along the Phillips curve, the inflation 
rate will increase. Note that the inflation rate here depicts the year-on-year rate of change in 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  the CPI excluding food and energy, both of which are likely to be affected by changes in the 
exchange rate of the yen. 
Let  us  first  look  back  at  the  situation  before  the  introduction  of  QQE.  The  green  curve  is 
based on data up to the first half of the 1990s, while the blue curve is based on data since 
the  second  half  of  the  1990s.  Comparing  these  two,  you  can  see  that  the  Phillips  curve 
shifted  downward  during  the  prolonged  period  of  deflation.  As  a  result,  the  relationship 
between economic activity and prices had become such that even when the output gap is 
zero  –  when  the  economy  is  in  a  normal  state  –  inflation  is  about  0 percent.  Under  these 
circumstances,  the  view  that  prices  will  decline  or  not  rise  had  become  firmly  entrenched 
among firms and households. 
QQE aims at drastically changing this deflationary mindset of firms and households and at 
raising inflation expectations toward 2 percent. In terms of the Phillips curve, this means that 
the Bank aims at shifting the Phillips curve upward, slightly above the green curve, so that 
the relationship between economic activity and prices is such that inflation will be 2 percent 
when the output gap is zero, that is, when the economy is in a normal state. 
Developments in the past year 
In light of this aim, how much progress have we made? Let us next look at changes since the 
introduction of QQE. The red circles in the chart illustrate developments over the past year 
and indicate the following. 
First, with the economy growing at a pace above its potential under QQE, the output gap has 
improved and we have moved to the right. Along with this, there has been upward pressure 
on prices. 
Second, the red circles are located above the blue Phillips curve for the deflation period. This 
suggests that inflation has been higher than can be explained solely by the improvement in 
the output gap. There are likely several reasons behind this. One is that the depreciation of 
the  yen  may  have  affected  items  in  the  CPI  other  than  food  and  energy,  which,  as  I 
mentioned earlier, are already excluded. Another reason is that factors that exerted strong 
downward  pressure  on  wages  and  prices  during  the  deflation  period,  especially  in  the 
mid-2000s,  such  as  the  increase  in  non-regular  workers  and  inflows  of  low-priced  imports 
from  emerging  economies,  are  unlikely  to  put  further  downward  pressure  on  wages  and 
prices. Yet another reason is that, under QQE, inflation expectations seem to have risen and 
the  Phillips  curve  has  started  to  drift  upward.  This  is  confirmed,  as  mentioned  earlier,  by 
developments  in  inflation  expectations  gauged  through  various  surveys  and  market 
indicators as well as recent patterns in wage and price setting. 
It is difficult to clearly disentangle the contributions of these different factors. However, the 
fact  is  that  we  have  seen  inflation  rates  that  are  notably  higher  than  anticipated  by  many 
people at the time of the introduction of QQE in April last year. Moreover, the very least we 
can say is that the relationship between economic activity and prices over the past year has 
been different from that seen previously. At the Bank, we believe that this is because QQE 
has been having its intended effects. Prices so far have been developing almost in line with 
the outlook for prices published by the Bank in April last year, so that in our eyes there has 
been  no  unexpected  inflation.  So  far,  CPI  inflation  has  increased  and  reached  around 
1¼ percent  according  to  the  mechanisms  we  envisaged  at  the  time  of  the  introduction  of 
QQE. 
With  these  mechanisms  continuing  to  work,  inflation  is  likely  to  approach  the  target  of 
2 percent. However, the aim of QQE is not to temporarily achieve 2 percent inflation but to 
maintain  it  at  that  level  in  a  stable  manner.  To  that  end,  it  will  be  necessary  for  inflation 
expectations  to  converge  toward  2 percent  and  to  ensure  that  they  stay  there,  that  is,  to 
anchor them. Put simply, we need to achieve a world in which people engage in economic 
activities based on the assumption that 2 percent inflation is a given. To reach this world, it is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  necessary  to  further  raise  both  actual  inflation  rates  and  inflation  expectations.  This  is  the 
reason why I said earlier that we are only half way there. 
The  Bank  will  therefore  continue  with  QQE,  aiming  to  achieve  the  price  stability  target  of 
2 percent,  as  long  as  it  is  necessary  for  maintaining  that  target  in  a  stable  manner.  If  the 
outlook  changes  due  to  the  manifestation  of  some  risk  factors,  the  Bank  will  make 
adjustments  without  hesitation  if  this  is  judged  necessary  for  achieving  the  price  stability 
target. 
Toward strengthening Japan’s medium- to long-term growth potential 
III. 
As  I  explained,  Japan’s  economy  has  been  recovering  moderately  and  is  on  a  path 
suggesting that the 2 percent price stability target will be achieved as expected. Against this 
backdrop, discussions on labor shortages and supply capacity constraints have increasingly 
come  to  the  forefront.  Although  the  decline  in  the  potential  growth  rate  was  clearly 
recognized as one of the key challenges facing Japan, this was overshadowed by concerns 
over  excess  labor  and  excess  capacity,  which  were  considered  to  be  the  most  immediate 
problems, since demand was weak. However, the situation has changed in the past year or 
so. With the increase in demand thanks to large-scale monetary easing, fiscal spending, and 
the  rejuvenation  of  private-sector  activity,  the  supply  capacity  constraints  that  were  lurking 
below  the  surface  have  now  become  apparent.  In  this  situation,  it seems  to  have  become 
widely  recognized  that  it  is  important to  enhance  supply  capacity  from a  medium-  to  long-
term perspective. In my view, with the supply capacity constraints having surfaced, this is a 
golden opportunity to push ahead with initiatives to address the challenges Japan is facing. 
Therefore, I would like to offer my view on the issue of Japan’s medium- to long-term growth 
potential. 
An  economy’s  medium-  to  long-term  growth  potential,  in  other  words,  the  potential  growth 
rate,  depends  on  the  growth  in  production  factors,  that  is,  capital  and  labor,  as  well  as 
improvements in productivity through innovation and the like. Japan’s potential growth rate 
has been declining as a trend since the 1990s (Chart 10). 
Looking  in  more  detail  at  the  reasons  for  the  decline  in  Japan’s  potential  growth  rate,  the 
deceleration in capital accumulation and in productivity growth in the 1990s played a major 
role.  During  this  period,  Japanese  firms  were  weighed  down  by  the  need  to  resolve  the 
so-called three excesses – excess labor, capital stock, and debt – that had piled up during 
the  preceding  bubble  period  and  could  not  sufficiently  respond  to  changes  such  as 
increasing globalization and the revolution in information and communication technology. In 
addition, the adjustment of excesses itself did not progress smoothly and inefficient parts of 
the economy were preserved. This to some extent led to a slowdown in the metabolism of 
the economy as a whole and a decline in productivity. In addition, the decline in labor input 
as  a  result  of  demographic  trends  and  the  decrease  in  working  hours  as  the  economy 
matured and shorter working hours became more common have put downward pressure on 
the potential growth rate. Protracted deflation and the additional shock of the global financial 
crisis  led  firms  to  defer  fixed  investment,  so  that  growth  in  the  capital  stock  has  been 
subdued.  As  a  result  of  these  various  factors  that  have  successively  exerted  downward 
pressure on the economy, Japan’s potential growth rate has been declining since the 1990s 
and recently seems to have been hovering around 0.5 percent. 
What should be done to raise medium- to long-term growth potential? In short, it is critical to 
promote  initiatives  that  address  the  aforementioned  factors  affecting  the  potential  growth 
rate.  Namely,  it  is  essential  to  (1) encourage  forward-looking  investment  by  firms  and 
increase the capital stock, (2) enhance labor supply capacity by raising the labor participation 
of women and the elderly as well as utilizing high-skilled foreigners, and (3) raise productivity 
through regulatory and institutional reforms. In this regard, the government has formulated a 
growth strategy, the Japan Revitalization Strategy, to stimulate private investment and has 
been  implementing  measures  included  in  the  Strategy.  Taking  into  account  subsequent 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  discussions,  the  government  is  now  in  the  process  of  revising  the  Japan  Revitalization 
Strategy.  The  Bank  strongly  hopes  that  the  government  will  push  ahead  with  the  steady 
implementation of its growth strategy. 
Concluding remarks 
In  concluding,  let  me  briefly  touch  on  the  relationship  between  strengthening  the  growth 
potential  and  monetary  policy  management.  While  initiatives  to  strengthen  the  growth 
potential are critical, these are medium- to long-term challenges. Some time is required for 
such initiatives to bear fruit and growth potential to actually rise. It is of course desirable that 
the potential growth rate increases steadily. However, even if the potential growth rate does 
not  rise,  this  would  not  make  it  any  more  difficult  for  monetary  policy  to  achieve  the  price 
stability target. I believe that by steadily pursuing QQE, the Bank can achieve the target of 
2 percent based on the aforementioned mechanisms, that is, through improvements in the 
output gap and a rise in inflation expectations. The Bank’s mission to ensure price stability 
remains  unchanged  irrespective  of  the  level  of  the  potential  growth  rate.  The  Bank  will 
pursue monetary policy management on its own accord to achieve the price stability target of 
2 percent at the earliest possible time. 
While strengthening the growth potential is mainly the responsibility of the government and 
its  growth  strategy  as  well  as  private  entities  and  their  actions  in  response  to  the  growth 
strategy,  there  may  be  ways  in  which  the  Bank  can  help.  That  is,  in  a  deflationary 
environment,  proactive  initiatives  such  as  conducting  business  fixed  investment  provided 
little reward in terms of the risks and returns for individual firms, and it was rational for firms 
to hoard cash and maintain the status quo. Changing the environment from one of deflation 
to one of 2 percent inflation will change firms’ incentives and can be expected to lead to a 
more  proactive  investment  stance  and  greater  efforts  to  raise  productivity.  Against  this 
background, let me assure you again that the Bank will steadily pursue QQE and achieve the 
price  stability  target  of  2  percent  at the  earliest possible  time. I  would  like to  conclude my 
speech by expressing the hope that the Bank’s policy conduct provides an environment that 
helps your firms to take proactive actions. 
Thank you.  
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
   12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
