  Mugur Isărescu: The regional finance and investment for South East 
Europe 
Keynote address by Mr Mugur Isărescu, Governor of the National Bank of Romania, at the 
Euromoney Regional Finance and Investment Conference for South East Europe, Bucharest, 
12 June 2014. 
 Prime Minister, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is an honour for me to be invited to speak in front of such a distinguished audience. I am 
very glad that, after three years “off”, Euromoney Conferences is re-launching the event in 
Romania. Time has come for Bucharest to host this important event, held for several years in 
Dubrovnik. 
The joy of giving the keynote address at this conference is bigger as I had the opportunity to 
read  the  first  issues  of  Euromoney  magazine  while  being  a  young  research  fellow  at  the 
World Economy Institute in the early ‘70s. For years it was one of my favourite magazines. 
Back in 1978, I also had the opportunity to visit the editorial offices in London. 
I could not help but notice that you have chosen a generous theme: “The Regional Finance 
and Investment for South East Europe” and you have set yourselves to approach themes 
that  I  am  particularly  interested  in,  like:  pro-growth  strategies  in  an  age  of  austerity;  what 
more can policy-makers do?; how will governments incentivise overseas investors?; how can 
the region increase EU fund absorption rates? I wish you fruitful discussions and I am looking 
forward  to  seeing  what  answers  you  might  find  to  address  the  issues  highlighted  in  the 
panels of this conference. 
As the focus of the conference is on economic growth and development in Romania and the 
wider South-East Europe region, allow me to elaborate on this topic. 
I will approach the subject from the perspective of a central banker. Let me start by saying 
that sustainable economic growth of both Romania and the region relies mainly on economic 
policy consistency. The global economic and financial crisis has proved yet again that there 
is  no  valid  substitute  for  consistent  economic  policies.  The  correction  of  economic  policy 
errors is, everywhere and always, painful and, while difficult to comprehend by the public at 
large, it is absolutely necessary. 
The case of Romania is highly illustrative in this respect. Large macroeconomic imbalances 
had been steadily accumulating during the boom years, as a result of sizeable foreign capital 
inflows and credit expansion, the impact of which was augmented by a pro-cyclical stance of 
fiscal  policy,  especially  in  the  last  two  years  before  the  onset  of  the  crisis.  As  a  result, 
Romania  had  large  twin  deficits  at  the  start  of  the  crisis,  specifically  a  sizeable  structural 
fiscal gap (around –8% of GDP in 2008) and a current account deficit in the double-digit area 
(between 2006 and 2008). 
After the crisis hit, Romania had no other choice but to undertake the necessary adjustments 
in  order  to  eliminate  these  imbalances  in  an  orderly  manner.  The  efforts  seem  to  have 
already paid off – the year 2013 marked a turnaround in Romania’s economic development: 
economic growth of 3.5% driven mostly by robust export and industrial output on the supply 
side; a small current account deficit; historically low inflation; while the fiscal deficit was kept 
well below 3%. And I have every reason to believe that Romania will see further growth in 
the years to come. And that, unlike in the pre-crisis period, this time sustainability will be the 
name of the game, as hopefully we all have learned our lessons from our previous mistakes. 
As they say, no one really learns but from his own mistakes… 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  Talking about sustainable economic growth, one needs to put things into perspective in order 
to ascertain whether the economy is on the right track. This means that short-term policies 
must be harmonised with the long-term vision and goals. 
Euro adoption could serve as such a long-term goal. And Romania has chosen to use it as 
an anchor. Let me say a few words about this subject. 
In the post-crisis period, all non-euro area EU countries in Central and Eastern Europe with 
floating exchange rate regimes (Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland and Romania), as well as 
Bulgaria, shifted to a wait-and-see approach as regards euro adoption, even though, in some 
of them, Maastricht criteria were already fulfilled or within reach. 
Nobody disputes that in the long term it is in the best interest of our countries to adopt euro, 
as it heightens the degree of business cycle correlation and market integration. However, the 
benefits  of  euro  adoption  are  not  unconditional;  therefore  it  is  essential  to  make  sure  that 
nominal  convergence  criteria  are  achieved  on  a  sustainable  basis.  Also  it  is  important  to 
attain  a  certain  degree  of  per  capita  income  convergence  before  switching  to  the  euro  (a 
large  convergence  gap  may  complicate  business  cycle  management  in  the  absence  of 
independent monetary policy). Additionally, it is important to demonstrate the effectiveness of 
the  new  institutional  setup  in  preventing  and  dealing  with  pending  imbalances  and  that 
alternative  policy  instruments  exist  in  order  to  take  over  from  monetary  policy  in  case 
corrections are needed. 
This is why recent years’ experience has substantially altered the approach to euro adoption. 
Before the crisis, the opinion prevailed that meeting nominal criteria was enough to prove the 
eligibility for the euro adoption. Some economists even debated the excessive severity of the 
nominal  criteria  and  the  conflict  between  their  fulfilment  and  real  convergence  progress 
(Buitter  and  Grafe,  2002;  Szapary,  2001;  Kopits,  1999;  Rostowski,  2002).  But  during  and 
after  the  crisis,  it  became  obvious  that  the  Maastricht  criteria  are  not  enough  to  ensure 
successful EA membership. Nominal convergence criteria cannot be sustainably met unless 
competitiveness,  financial  stability  and  solid  fiscal  equilibrium  are  ensured.  “The  bigger 
picture”,  meaning  the  Macroeconomic  Imbalance  Procedure,  gained  ground  and  real 
convergence criteria came to the forefront. 
The other side of the story has shown us that during the last couple of years, the euro area 
underwent  extensive  governance  reforms,  designed  to  address  the  flaws  revealed  by  the 
crisis.  However,  their  actual  effectiveness  is  still  to  be  tested  in  practice.  We  are  still  in 
unchartered  waters.  There  have  been  recent  statements  referring  to  the  fact  that  Europe 
might  have  not  exited  the  crisis  yet.  As  Jean  Monnet  used  to  say:  “Europe  would  be  built 
through crises” and would be “the sum of their solutions”. 
Consequently,  non-member  States  from  Eastern  and  South-eastern  Europe  seem  closer 
than ever to complying with the Maastricht criteria, but readiness for successful Euro Area 
membership needs further work. Labour, product market and other structural reforms are still 
required in order to observe convergence not only in letter, but also in spirit. Non-member 
States, on the road towards euro adoption, have to both comply with the Maastricht criteria 
and to choose the right moment for it. Each and every Member State should put their houses 
in  order  as  a  prerequisite  for  a  successful  Euro  Area  enlargement.  Only  this  way  new 
candidates will be able to obtain the opportunities of a single currency, while being in turn a 
valuable contributor to the monetary union. 
Romania has recently reached political consensus, at the highest level, namely the President 
and the Prime Minister, that the target date for euro adoption will be January 1st, 2019. The 
rationale for this decision is that such an objective – feasible, yet ambitious – could act as a 
catalyst for coherent policy action. 
At this point in time, Romania is fulfilling three out of the four Maastricht criteria, namely the 
sustainability  of  the  fiscal  position,  convergence  of  long-term  interest  rates  and  exchange 
rate stability (although we are not technically in ERM II). Meeting the price stability criterion is 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  probably  just  a  matter  of  months,  until  the  recent  low  inflation  numbers  feed  into  the 
12-month average rate used as a reference. 
But, we are fully aware that we still have a long and difficult road ahead, as several years of 
relentless efforts are needed in order to ensure a lasting fulfilment of the Maastricht criteria, 
to make further progress in the catching-up process in the area of real convergence, as well 
as to push forward the structural reforms required for enhancing the resilience and flexibility 
of the domestic economy. 
Closely linked to the euro adoption approach is the decision on participating in the Banking 
Union,  which  is  supposed  to  break  the  negative  feedback  loop  between  sovereigns  and 
banks. Euro adoption automatically implies Banking Union membership and therefore, since 
the  changeover  target  date  has  already  been  set,  joining  the  Banking  Union  is  merely  a 
matter of timing: should it occur on the euro adoption date or as soon as possible? 
In my opinion, there are strong arguments in favour of rapidly joining the Banking Union. First 
and foremost, the project itself is still work in progress and it is always advisable to partake 
from  the  inside  in  the  construction  of  a  mechanism  that  we  will  eventually  have  to  join 
anyway.  Secondly,  with  the  Banking  Union  in  place,  the  domestic  financial  system  will  be 
affected regardless of whether Romania is a member or not, so it is better to have a say in 
the decision-making process that generates such effects, since the latter will impact us one 
way  or  another.  Besides,  Banking  Union  membership  is  expected  to  benefit  participating 
countries through the removal of an incentive for deleveraging on the part of foreign banks, 
more  effective  supervision  by  improving  access  to  information  and  eliminating  the 
possibilities of jurisdictional arbitrage, as well as the creation of a more competitive market by 
reducing  distortions  and  entry  barriers.  Given  the  share  of  foreign  capital  in  Romania’s 
banking system, it makes even more sense to support the project. 
In light of the above, Romania aspires to be part of all three pillars of the Banking Union. It is 
our  view  that  adhering  to  this  European  project  will  strengthen  financial  stability,  further 
increase confidence in the national banking sector (through the harmonisation of supervisory 
practices  and  deposit  guarantee  schemes),  as  well  as  foster  sustainable  lending  and 
economic growth (by reducing the fragmentation of the European financial markets). 
I  shall  stop  here,  thanking  you  for  your  attention.  I  wish  you  a  fruitful  outcome  of  the 
conference, and hope you enjoy your stay in Bucharest! 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
