Ashraf Mahmood Wathra: Risk management framework in banks 
Welcome  address  by  Mr  Ashraf  Mahmood  Wathra,  Acting  Governor  of  the  State  Bank  of 
Pakistan,  at  the  SAARCFINANCE  Regional  Seminar  on  “Risk  Management  Framework  in 
Banks”, Islamabad, 17 March 2014. 
 Good morning, Ladies and Gentlemen. 
I am immensely delighted to welcome you all in Islamabad. It is my pleasure to inaugurate 
this SAARCFINANCE event on the ever important theme of “Risk Management Framework 
for Banks”. I believe the program will facilitate sharing of best practices, latest developments 
in risk management and generate a fruitful discussion on impending challenges in the field of 
risk management while analyzing its different facets. 
An efficient and healthy banking system is a prerequisite for sustainable economic growth of 
a country. In this context, effective risk management practices enable the banking industry to 
build public trust and confidence in the institutions which is necessary for mobilizing private 
savings  for  investment  to  facilitate  economic  growth.  On  the  flip  side,  inadequate  risk 
management practices in the banking industry would result in bank failures leading to erosion 
of  public  confidence  in  the  industry  having  adverse  implications  for  the  economic  growth. 
Therefore,  an  effective  risk  management  framework  is  a  prerequisite  for  banks  to  achieve 
their own business objectives and also play their role in the economic growth of the country. 
Ideally, banks’ risk management framework should strive to cover the full spectrum of risks 
by  analyzing  them  from  both  business  and  enterprise  level  perspectives.  Each  banking 
institution should tailor its risk management program to its need and circumstances. 
I would like to elaborate on the main elements of a risk management framework that apply to 
banking institutions irrespective of their size and complexity of business: 
First and foremost, effective risk management framework demands active involvement of 
the Board of Directors (BoD) and senior management in the formulation and oversight of risk 
management  processes.  Accordingly,  they  should  provide  strategic  direction  and  approve 
the  overall  business  strategies  and  significant  policies  of  their  institutions,  including  those 
related to managing and taking risks, and should also ensure that senior management is fully 
capable of managing the activities that their institutions undertake. 
Second,  adequate  Policies,  Procedures,  and  Limits  need  to  be  defined  by  an  institution’s 
directors and senior management to tailor their risk management policies and procedures to 
the types of risks that arise from the activities the institution conducts. 
Third,  adequate  Risk  Monitoring  and  Management  Information  Systems  need  to  be 
developed  for  effective  risk  monitoring  and  to  identify  and  measure  all  material  risk 
exposures.  Consequently,  risk  monitoring  activities  must  be  supported  by  information 
systems  that  provide  senior  managers  and  directors  with  timely  reports  on  the  financial 
condition, operating performance, and risk exposure of the institution. 
Fourth,  establishing  and  maintaining  an  effective  system  of  controls,  including  the 
enforcement  of  official  lines  of  authority  and  the  appropriate  separation  of  duties  such  as 
trading, custodial, and back-office is one of management’s more important responsibilities. A 
properly  structured  system  of  internal  controls  promote  effective  operations  and  reliable 
financial and regulatory reporting, safeguards assets, and helps to ensure compliance with 
relevant  laws,  regulations,  and  institutional  policies.  Given  the  importance  of  appropriate 
internal  controls,  the  results  of  audits  or  reviews  should  be  adequately  documented,  as 
should management’s responses to them. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Fifth,  the  Risk  Management  Function  should  be  institutionalized  to  supervise  overall  risk 
management at the bank. Ideally, overall risk management function should be independent 
from those who take or accept risk on behalf of the institution. 
Ladies and Gentlemen! 
One  would  assume  that  these  principles  are  fairly  simple  to  understand  and  practice, 
however,  banks  failures  of  the  past  &  the  recent  Global  Financial  Crisis  highlight 
weaknesses/  vulnerabilities  in  the  risk  management  systems/  practices  of  the  financial 
industry. Following are some of the key lessons which should not be overlooked, to ensure 
effective risk management at banks: 
• 
Boards  need  to  be  more  actively  engaged  and  involved  in  risk  policy  setting  and 
governance, and spend more focused, higher-quality time on risk issues. 
The responsibilities and influence of Chief Risk Officers (CROs) need to be elevated 
and strengthened with CROs actively participating in business strategy and planning 
as opposed to having only veto power over decisions that adversely impact risk. The 
risk  function  is  not  in  place  to  manage  risk,  but  to  make  sure  that  risks  are 
managed.” 
Banks need to align pay to risk-adjusted performance 
There  is  a  need  to  institutionalize  an  appropriate  risk  culture  throughout  the 
organization, where risk is everyone’s business from the board to the front line. 
Banks  need  to  improve  the  transparency,  quality,  accuracy  and  timeliness  of 
information to support risk management. 
Institute enterprise wide risk management systems instead of managing the risks in 
silos. 
Use both qualitative and quantitative techniques with varied assumptions instead of 
blindly following the models. 
     Ladies and Gentlemen! 
I  would  now  like  to  give  a  brief  overview  of  some  of  the  main  steps  taken  by  Pakistan  to 
improve  the  soundness  and  stability  of  its  banking  system.  Over  the  years,  our  banking 
sector has witnessed a transformation from an entirely public sector owned industry to the 
now  majority  privately  owned  sector.  This  shift  was  one  of  the  main  factors  which  led  to 
improved performance of the overall banking sector. 
Keeping in view the importance of risk management for banks, SBP has put in place detailed 
guidelines  for  banks  in  the  area  of  Risk  Management  (2003),  Internal  Controls  (2004), 
Country Risk (2004), internal credit rating systems (2007), general policies framework (2007) 
which provides broad guidelines for the formulation of polices in the major risk areas, stress 
testing (2012) and Fraud Risk Management & Reporting (2014). 
In addition, we have constantly been refining our regulatory and supervisory oversight. For 
instance,  we  have  issued  separate  set  of  prudential  regulations  for  corporate/  commercial 
banking, Consumer financing, SME financing, Microfinance & Agriculture financing which are 
updating on an on-going basis. PRs for corporate/ commercial banking cover four areas of 
risk  management,  corporate  governance,  CDD  &  AML  and  banks’  operations.  Likewise, 
stress testing guidelines have been revised extensively in line with BCBS reforms package 
which provide for a bigger role for stress testing in the determination of capital buffers under 
Pillar  2.  Moreover,  as  per  Pillar  2  of  Basel  capital  accord,  risk  management  framework  is 
dealt  under  the  “Internal  Capital  Adequacy  Assessment  Process  (ICAAP)”  of  banks, 
therefore,  in  order  to  make  the  ICAAP  exercise  more  effective  we  have  issued  a 
standardized reporting template for ICAAP in December 2012. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Moreover, a major on-going development is the implementation of Basel III in Pakistan from 
December 2013. Our efforts to keep the banking sector well capitalized and have sufficient 
capital  buffers  to  absorb  minor  to  moderate  shocks  can  be  judged  from  the  fact  that  our 
banking sector has healthy capital adequacy ratio of 16%. I am sure you will hear more about 
the implementation of Basel III in Pakistan during the presentation of country papers. 
As  a  regulator,  SBP  has  established  a  comprehensive  and  well  balanced  regulatory  and 
supervisory set up to ensure that sound risk management practices are being followed within 
the banking sector. 
Ladies and Gentlemen! 
In  the  end,  I  would  like  to  say  that  expanding  business  arenas,  globalization  of  financial 
activities,  emergence  of  new  financial  products  and  increased  level  of  competition  have 
opened  up  opportunities  but  also  increased  the  potential  risks  from  such  developments.  I 
strongly believe that regional forums such as SAARCFINANCE are very helpful in facilitating 
knowledge exchange and ongoing collaboration for region specific issues which may pose 
potential risks for each of our banking sectors. 
I hope you will enjoy your stay at Islamabad and continue deliberations in the forthcoming 
sessions of the seminar. 
Thanks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
