  Michael Gondwe: Women’s access to financial services in Zambia 
Opening remarks by Dr Michael Gondwe, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the “Women’s 
Access  to  Financial  Services  in  Zambia  –  Dissemination  and  Consultation  Conference”, 
Lusaka, 24 June 2014. 
 Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Finance; 
Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Gender and Child Development 
Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Commerce 
Bank of Zambia Board Members 
Your Excellences, High Commissioners and Ambassadors to Zambia present; 
The United Nations Development Programme Country Director, Ms Viola Morgan; 
The African Development Bank Country Representatives; Dr Freddie Kwesiga; 
Representatives from the International labour Organisation (ILO); 
Deputy Governor Administration, Bank of Zambia Dr. Tukiya Kankasa-Mabula 
New Faces, New Voices Representative, Ms Nomsa Daniels 
Chairpersons of the Boards of Commercial Banks, 
Chief Executive Officers of Banks and Other Organisations; 
Senior Staff and Colleagues from Bank of Zambia; 
Members of the Press; 
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen. 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
It is my honour and privilege to welcome  you all to this conference on Women’s Financial 
Inclusion  in  Zambia.  May  I  extend  a  special  welcome  to  delegates  that  have  come  from 
abroad.  I  wish  you  a  good  stay  and  hope  you  will  have  time  to  visit  the  various  places  of 
interest and sample the food that Lusaka offers. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, the Conference is a dissemination and consultation forum aimed at 
presenting  and  reviewing  the  findings  of  a  study  on  “Women’s  Access  to  Financial 
Services in Zambia”. This conference is therefore a platform for reflection and consultation 
among various stakeholders present here today. 
Bank of Zambia recognises that an insight into the Women’s Access to Financial Services is 
critical  to  overcoming  existing  barriers  to  financial  inclusion  and  devising  appropriate 
strategies for empowering the women to realise their full economic potential and contribute to 
as well as benefit from the economic growth that the country is enjoying. It is in this regard 
that  the  Bank  of  Zambia  commissioned  the  study  on  “Women’s  Access  to  Financial 
Services in Zambia”. I invited New Faces New Voices to replicate the study on “Women’s 
Access  to  Financial  Services  in  Mozambique”  that  was  conducted  for  the  Central  Bank  of 
Mozambique in 2013. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  Specifically, 
understanding on the following two perspectives: 
1. 
Understanding  gender  perspectives  on  usage  of  financial  services;  levels  and 
trends,  sources  of  finance;  formal,  semi-formal  and  informal,  financial  products  provided; 
credit,  savings,  insurance,  remittances,  mobile  banking  and  other  financial  products  and 
services.  The  regional  distribution;  rural  versus  urban  and 
the  awareness  versus 
is  expected 
to  provide 
the  study 
in  depth 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  understanding  and  perceptions  of  access  to  finance,  the  constraints,  opportunities  for 
financial education, financial decision making process, and household dynamics that confront 
women. 
2. 
Understanding the types of financial products and services available in terms of; – 
the  types  of  providers,  the  services  which  are  regularly  or  less  frequently  used,  services 
which are paid for and for how much, and challenges in accessing the financial products and 
services. 
As Bank of Zambia, we believe that this study will also contribute to the documentation of 
information  relating  to  financial  inclusion.  The  information  is  important  to  aid  in  policy 
formulation by the government and potentially inform business strategy of financial service 
providers  to  reach  out  to  the  un-banked  citizens.  We  encourage  other  stakeholders  to 
contribute to this necessary body of knowledge in our financial sector. 
Financial inclusion for the majority of our people, especially women, is a corner stone of our 
financial  sector  development.  The  Honourable  Minister  of  Finance  in  his  2014  National 
Budget address, set the stage by emphasising the need to accelerate broad based growth, 
diversification of the economy and the entrenchment of social justice so that all Zambians, 
rural or urban, male or female, young or old and including the differently abled, benefit from 
and contribute to national development. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  it  has  been  reported  at  various  fora  that  our  women  continue  to 
face  challenges  in  accessing  financial  products  and  services.  These  barriers  range  from 
cultural,  legal,  financial  and  sometimes  religious  discrimination  among  others.  However, 
access to finance and financial services in general, has in the recent past been cited as a 
major challenge to the participation of women in economic development. As you are aware, 
finance can be looked at as the oil that lubricates smooth economic growth and therefore any 
impediments  to  accessing this  important  resource  has  an  adverse  impact  on the  country’s 
economic growth prospects. The Study and this Conference have come at an opportune time 
when we are focusing on enabling all Zambians to be empowered financially and ultimately 
economically so that we reduce the high levels of poverty in the country. I have no doubt that 
the  findings  of  the  study,  will  stimulate  profound  discussions  which  will  shape  the  efforts 
going  forward  on  financial  inclusion  and  promulgate  the  financial  inclusion  agenda  to  all 
Zambians. 
Distinguished  Guests,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  It  will,  however,  take  deliberate  policies 
and long-term commitment from all stakeholders beyond the study for us to ensure financial 
inclusion of women. It will further require constant review of the policies, re-assessment of 
priorities, and adequate financial resources to effectively implement interventions to promote 
women’s  access  to  finance.  This  entails  integration  of  gender-specific  perspectives  at  the 
design stage of policies and programmes to provide for inclusion of clauses more equitable 
access to financial assets and services by women. 
In the past few decades, the state of the financial sector in Zambia has been characterised 
by low financial intermediation that witnessed limited access to financial services particularly 
for  the  rural  population  and  the  low-to-middle  income  earners,  high  cost  of  funds  and 
underdeveloped  money  and  capital  markets.  However,  the  improvement  in  the  macro-
economic  environment  and  positive  economic  growth  has  resulted  in  great  strides  in  the 
development of the financial services and financial sector in general. 
The  Government  of  the  Republic  of  Zambia  through  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  Bank  of 
Zambia  has  been  putting  in  place  measures  to  maintain  a  stable  macroeconomic 
environment  which  have  resulted  in  low  inflation  and  a  decline  in  interest  rates  in  recent 
years.  Except  for  the  volatility  of  the  Kwacha  exchange  rate  against  other  currencies 
experienced in recent months, the exchange rate has been fairly stable over the years. We 
remain confident that the economy is on a robust footing and the end year inflation target of 
6.5  per  cent  is  attainable.  The  Bank  of  Zambia  will  continue  to  be  vigilant  and  take 
appropriate measures to support the stability in the macroeconomic environment. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Ladies and Gentlemen, the strong economic performance has culminated in growth in both 
the number of financial services providers and the financial products in the country. However, 
the  level  of  financial  inclusion  still  needs  to  be  broadened  further.  The  evidence  from  the 
FinScope Demand Surveys revealed that as at 2009 only 37 per cent of the adult Zambian 
population  was  financially  included.  This  signified  a  3.6  per  cent  marginal  increase  from 
33.7 per cent in the 2005 survey. The FinScope study further revealed that access to finance 
for  women  was  relatively  poor  in  relation  to  their  male  counterparts.  This  study  being 
presented today is, therefore, a welcome opportunity to reflect on the progress since 2009. 
Financial  institutions  have  a  role  to  play  in  ensuring  financial  services  and  products  are 
available  at  reasonable  terms,  including  fair  and  practical  know  your  customer  (KYC) 
assessments,  the  use  of  alternative  collateral  and  flexible  lines  of  credit  to  mention,  but  a 
few.  To  enhance  income-generating  activities  from  survival  level  to  strong  and  viable 
businesses, in particular for women led enterprises, access to credit, banking and financial 
services and facilities is essential to fully develop small scale to businesses. The firm, robust 
and  sustainable  growth  can  only  be  founded  on  strong  and  viable  Small  and  Medium 
Enterprises hence the need to financially empower enterprises is cardinal through financial 
inclusion. This lack of access to finance by our entrepreneurs is a major concern for both, the 
Bank of Zambia and Government. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  Allow  me  to  outline  some  of  the  measures  the  Bank  has  been 
putting in place to accelerate access to finance for all citizens generally, and in particular for 
women  The  Bank  of  Zambia  is  the  lead  implementer  of the  Financial  Sector  Development 
Plan  on  behalf  of  the  Government  of  the  Republic  of  Zambia.  As  you  may  be  aware,  the 
Zambian  government  formulated  the  FSDP  as  a  comprehensive  strategy  for  addressing 
challenges in the Zambian financial sector. Under the second phase of the FSDP, access to 
finance by the various strata of society, including access based on gender is identified as a 
key challenge to be addressed. 
The development of the FSDP and its implementation, therefore, reflects the priority attached 
by the Government to this important endevour. It’s also worth noting that the Bank of Zambia 
has incorporated Financial Inclusion as one of the key objectives under its Strategic Plan for 
the  period  2012  –  2015,  namely,  to  increase  financial  inclusion  to  50  percent  of  the 
population by 2015. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, the strategies under this objective include the following: 
1. 
Developing  an  index  to  measure  the  depth  and  breadth  of  financial  services  in 
Zambia; 
Promoting agency banking and mobile banking; 
Developing a framework for branchless banking. 
Establishing a unified collateral registry framework; 
Undertaking financial education interventions; 
Revising legal and regulatory framework to promote financial inclusion; and 
Developing  incentive  mechanisms  to  encourage  outreach  of  financial  services  to 
rural areas and other financially excluded citizens. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
The  Financial  Education  Coordinating  Unit  (FECU)  has  been  established  at  the  Bank  to 
spearhead the financial literacy campaign across the country. The Bank of Zambia has also 
facilitated  for  persons  who  are  excluded,  both  in  urban  and  rural  areas  not  to  encounter 
difficulties  in  the  opening  of  bank  accounts  by  simplifying  the  know  your  customer  (KYC) 
procedures for opening and operating bank accounts. The simplified procedures or relaxed 
“KYC”  note  allows  banks  to  use  various  forms  of  reference  documentation  such  as 
community leaders other than the traditional approach that required lawyers, commissioner 
of oaths, government officials and other officials or institutions. The Bank has also licensed a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  credit  reference  bureau  to  help  create  credit  histories  for  financial  market  participants  that 
may serve as alternative to collateral. 
In  addition,  it  has  now  become  easier  to  access  banking  services  through  lower  bank 
account  opening  balance,  improved  payments  systems  through  mobile  banking,  e-money 
and increased numbers of Automated Teller Machines and Point of Sale terminals. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  the  Bank  of  Zambia  has  also  partnered  with  the  International 
Labour Organization (ILO) to promote the use of the FAMOS Check Tool by financial service 
providers  in  order  to  enhance  access  to  finance  by  women  entrepreneurs.  The  tool  is 
intended  to  enable  financial  service  providers  undertake  a  systematic  assessment  of  the 
extent to which these institutions target women entrepreneurs, their needs and potentialities. 
The tool also assists financial service providers to develop appropriate strategies to extend 
their  outreach  to  women  entrepreneurs  as  well  as  develop  products  to  meet  the  needs  of 
women  entrepreneurs.  In  this  collaborative  exercise,  ILO  has  since  facilitated  capacity 
building  within  the  Bank  of  Zambia  and  certified  some  members  of  staff  to  undertake  the 
FAMOS training within the entire financial sector. 
Commercial  Banks  have  been  expected  to  utilize  the  tool  and  use  the  results  to  tailor 
services and products that reach out to women. However progress made in this area could 
be improved. There is an urgent need therefore to reinvigorate the FAMOS check tool. Bank 
of  Zambia  will  continue  to  encourage financial  institutions  to  administer  the  FAMOS  check 
tool and the cooperation of all stakeholders in this regard is vital. 
The  Bank  of  Zambia  will  continue  to  create  an  enabling  environment  through  policies, 
legislation and regulation that facilitate greater financial inclusion of women. You may wish to 
know that the Bank has taken on board gender mainstreaming as part of its strategic plan, 
essentially to have a pluralistic approach that values the diversity among both women and 
men. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, let me remind you that Zambia has affiliated itself to conventions 
and initiatives that have the specific intention of enhancing the welfare of women. The Bank 
of  Zambia  will  continue  to  take  the  role  of  the  provider  of  an  enabling  environment  that 
enhances  access  to  finance  and  financial  services  by  all,  especially  those  that  have  been 
traditionally  excluded  like  the  economically  active  poor  women  whose  entrepreneurial 
prowess  needs  to  be  harnessed  in  order  to  reduce  poverty  and  increase  the  economic 
welfare of our people. 
Bank of Zambia is therefore delighted to be associated with this study and conference which 
provide  a  unique  opportunity  to  listen  to  findings  of  the  study  and  exchange  ideas  on  the 
various outcomes from the study. It is my hope and trust that you will take advantage of this 
forum  to  initiate  dialogue  between  Women  Entrepreneurs  and  women  in  general  and  the 
various other stakeholders to propose mechanisms to accelerate women’s access to finance. 
This  is  an  opportunity  also  for  women  to  discuss  challenges  faced  in  accessing  various 
financial products and services. Equally, it is an opportunity for other stakeholders, especially 
financial services providers to enlighten all of us on financial products and other services on 
offer to mitigate the challenges women face. 
May I take this opportunity to thank the partners who financed and supported the study and 
conference:  Financial  Sector  Deepening  Zambia  Germany  Cooperation/GIZ,  New  Faces 
New  Voices,  and  Making  Finance  Work  for  Africa.  The  Bank  of  Zambia  looks  forward  to 
continued cordial relations and partnership in fostering developments in the area of financial 
inclusion for women and other areas of cooperation. 
Ladies and gentlemen, as I wish you all a successful conference, it is now my honour and 
privilege to declare the conference officially opened. 
I thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
