Norman T L Chan: The future of Asia’s finance 
Welcome  remarks  by  Mr  Norman  T  L  Chan,  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary 
Authority, at the IMF-HKMA Joint Conference, Hong Kong, 28 February 2014. 
 Good  morning,  Deputy  Managing  Director  Zhu  Min,  Counsellor  Jose  Vinal,  Ladies  and 
Gentlemen,  
1. It gives me great pleasure to welcome you to this Conference jointly organised by the IMF 
and the HKMA. The theme of this Conference is “The Future of Asia’s Finance”. In order to 
predict  the  future,  one  must  understand  and  learn  from  the  past.  If  we  don’t  understand 
where we are and what has brought us here, it is very hard to predict where we will be in the 
next 5–10 years.  
2. Asia’s finance is now at a crossroad. We have to decide where we want to go and how to 
get  there.  This  is  not  the  first  time  and  won’t  be  the  last  that  Asia’s  financial  markets  are 
facing this situation.  
3.  The  last  time  Asia  was  at  a  crossroad  was  1997/98  after  the  eruption  of  the  Asian 
Financial Crisis. In the two to three decades before mid-1990s, Asia produced a couple of 
economic miracles: the emergence of the Four Asian Dragons and four Asian Little Tigers, all 
of which went through phenomenal economic growth and significant rise in living standards. 
However,  unlike  the  developed  economies  in  the  West,  Asia’s  growth  in  this  period  was 
propelled mainly by bank finance. Massive amounts of capital, mostly in the form of external 
bank  borrowings,  flew  into  Emerging  Asia  during  this  period.  In  1997,  total  amount  of 
international  bank  lending  to  Asia  amounted  to  US$840bn.  Most  of  these  external  finance 
were denominated in US dollar and  with rather short tenor. Of course we now understand 
this  kind  of  external  finance  is  very  risky  as  it  entails  currency  mismatch  and  maturity 
mismatch.  But  these  risks  were  simply  ignored  or  brushed  aside  while  everybody  was 
enjoying  the  Asian  boom  prior  to  1997.  Then  the  bubble  burst  and  the  crisis-hit  Asian 
economies all learnt very important lessons in a bitter way by paying a heavy price. 
4.  Since  the  Asian  Financial  Crisis  the  Emerging  Asia  has  implemented  many  structural 
reforms and has now re-emerged as stronger and more resilient economies. 
5.  As  a  result,  Asia,  once  again,  has  gained  centre  stage  and,  until  the  last  year  or  so, 
become  the  preferred  destination  of  international  capital  flows.  Unlike  the  1990s,  the 
structure  of  finance  in  Asia  has  changed  because  external  bank  borrowings,  although  still 
quite significant, have been overtaken by bond borrowings. Around 80% of bond issuance in 
the  last  three  years  in  major  Emerging  Asian  economies  was  denominated  in  domestic 
currency, thereby reducing currency mismatch risk for the borrowers. Moreover, the average 
tenor of the newly issued bonds has steadily been lengthened to 6.3 years in 2013, which 
would mitigate the risk of maturity mismatch and short term roll-over risk. 
6. It therefore seems that the Asian banking and financial markets are moving along the right 
track  and  we  should  congratulate  each  other  for  this  accomplishment.  However,  I  am  not 
entirely  sure  if  Asia  can  afford  to  feel  complacent  because  I  believe  Asia’s  finance  is  still 
facing  many  short-run  and  longer  term  challenges.  In  the  interest  of  time,  I  would  just 
highlight two key challenges. 
a. 
Short-run  challenge:  clearly  this  has  to  do  with  the  Fed  tapering  and  the 
normalisation  of  the  US  interest  rates.  The  key  question  is  to  what  extent  the 
unwinding  of  the  dollar  carry  trade,  which  prevailed  for  over  5  years  since  the 
collapse  of  Lehman,  would  lead  to  significant  outflow  of  funds  and  tightening  of 
market  liquidity  across  Asia.  The  risk  of  a  “new  normal”  causing  a  rise  in  interest 
rates,  re-pricing  of  assets  and  a  slow  down  of  economic  growth  would  be  a  big 
challenge for Asia in the next year or two. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
b. 
Longer  term  challenge:  there  are  many  structural  reform  challenges  for  Asia’s 
capital markets, but today I would just focus on infrastructure financing. It is beyond 
doubt that Asia needs heavy investments in infrastructure in the next decade or two. 
Some have estimated the amounts of funding needed for infrastructure financing to 
be  in  the  order  of  US$750  bn  a  year.  At  the  same  time,  Asia  has  accumulated  a 
huge amount of savings, which are more than adequate to finance the infrastructural 
investments  in  the  region.  Unfortunately  in  reality  what  may  seem  to  be  a  perfect 
match  does  not  exist  in  Asia.  A  large  part  of  the  savings  in  Asia  have  been 
channelled  through  the  banking  and  other  financial  market  channels  to  the 
advanced markets and then part of these savings are channelled back to Asia. This 
pattern  of  flows  has  created  several  problems.  Most  importantly,  with  the 
implementation  of  Basel  III,  banks  no  longer  find  it  attractive  to  lend  to  long  term 
infrastructural projects because of the higher capital charge required to hold these 
assets  on  their  books.  More  specifically,  many  European  banks,  which  were  very 
active  in  infrastructural  financing  in  Asia  in  the  past  decade,  have  reduced  their 
exposures  in  this  area  and  will  continue  to  do  so  in  the  future.  So  many 
infrastructural projects in Asia are now finding it increasingly difficult to secure the 
necessary finance. At the same time, many bankers and fund managers have said 
that  there  is  still  ample  supply  of  funds  looking  for  investment  opportunities,  but 
lending  or  investments  in  Asia’s  infrastructure  has  been  greatly  hampered  by  the 
shortage of “bankable” projects. So on the one hand Asia has a huge funding need 
for  infrastructural  projects  but  on  the  other  bankers  and  investors  sitting  on  huge 
amounts  of  savings  complain  that  they  cannot  find  sufficient  “bankable”  projects. 
Clearly  there  is  a  big  gap  here.  There  are  many  reasons  why  such  gap  exists, 
involving  factors  relating  to  legal,  governance  and  political  risks  for  investing  in 
Asia’s infrastructure. Whatever the reasons, we must endeavour to find a workable 
solution to narrow the gap or else it will significantly impair Asia’s growth potential as 
well as constraining the development of Asia’s financial markets. 
7. In conclusion, I would say that today’s Conference is very timely as it will discuss the key 
challenges facing Asia’s finance in the future. Asia is now at a crossroad and we must work 
together to choose the right path. I have no doubt that this Conference will contribute useful 
insights and advice on this very important subject. Thank you.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
