  Takahide Kiuchi: Recent developments in economic activity, prices and 
monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Takahide  Kiuchi,  Member  of  the  Policy  Board  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  a 
meeting with business leaders, Hyogo, 31 July 2014. 
 Economic developments 
I.  
I  would  like  to  start  my  speech  with  a  look  at  developments  in  Japan’s  economy.  It  has 
continued  to  recover  moderately  as  a  trend,  although  a  subsequent  decline  in  demand 
following  the  front-loaded  increase  prior  to  the  consumption  tax  hike  has  been  observed. 
With regard to the outlook, the economy is expected to continue its moderate recovery trend, 
and the effects of the subsequent decline in demand are expected to wane gradually. In the 
Bank of Japan’s interim assessment in July of the April 2014 Outlook for Economic Activity 
and  Prices (hereafter the  Outlook  Report), the forecasts for the  economic  growth  rate  and 
year-on-year rate of increase in the consumer price index (CPI, all items less fresh food, and 
the same hereafter) are broadly in line with the April forecasts. 
Domestic demand 
A.  
Looking  at  domestic  demand,  private  consumption  has  remained  resilient  as  a  trend, 
although  a  subsequent  decline  in  demand  following  the  front-loaded  increase  prior  to  the 
consumption tax hike has recently been observed. For example, sales at department stores 
increased markedly in the January–March quarter of 2014 due to the front-loaded increase in 
demand;  they  fell  back  considerably  in  April  compared  to  that  quarter  as  a  result  of  the 
subsequent  decline  in  demand,  but  a  pick-up  has  been  observed  since  May.  In  addition, 
judging from interviews with firms and other relevant information, there are indications that 
the degree of the subsequent decline in demand has been broadly in line with expectations. 
As  for  the  employment  and  income  situation,  supply  and  demand  conditions  in  the  labor 
market  have  continued  to  improve  steadily,  as  evidenced  by  the  fact  that  the  active  job 
openings-to-applicants ratio for June reached the highest level since June 1992. Supported 
mainly by the improvement in the employment and income situation, private consumption is 
expected to remain resilient, and the effects of the subsequent decline in demand following 
the front-loaded increase are expected to wane gradually. 
The  improving  trend  in  business  fixed  investment  has  become  increasingly  evident. 
According  to  the  second  preliminary  estimates  of  GDP  statistics  for  the  January–March 
quarter  of  2014,  real  business  fixed  investment  showed  a  quarter-on-quarter  increase  of 
7.6 percent;  thus  registering  a  significant  rise  for  the  first  time  in  almost  two  years.  This 
appears to reflect, to a considerable extent, temporary factors such as renewal demand for 
PCs  in  line  with  the  ending  of  support  for  software;  nevertheless,  the  uptrend  in  business 
fixed investment was reaffirmed by the fact that real business fixed investment increased for 
four consecutive quarters. Business fixed investment is likely to fall back temporarily in the 
April–June quarter following the substantial increase in the previous quarter, but is projected 
to follow a moderate increasing trend as corporate profits continue their improving trend. 
B. Exports and overseas economies 
On the other hand, exports have recently leveled off more or less. The slow growth in exports 
is basically due to the weakness in emerging economies, including ASEAN economies that 
have strong ties with Japan’s economy. In addition, a greater-than-expected slowdown in the 
U.S.  economy  in  the  January–March  quarter  of  2014,  mainly  due  to  the  effects  of  the 
unusually  severe  winter  weather,  as  well  as  continued  movements  mainly  by  Japanese 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  automakers  to  expand  their  overseas  production  through  the  year,  may  be  exerting 
downward pressure on exports with a time lag. 
Regarding  the  environment  surrounding  exports,  overseas  economies  –  mainly  advanced 
economies  –  have  been  recovering,  albeit  with  a  lackluster  performance  still  seen  in  part. 
Looking at movements by major region, in the U.S. economy, the moderate recovery – led 
mainly  by  private  demand  –  is  becoming  firm,  aided  in  part  by  improvement  in  the 
employment situation as the effects of the unusually severe winter weather have dissipated. 
The  European  economy  has  been  recovering  moderately,  with  business  and  household 
sentiment  continuing  to  improve,  although  the  employment  and  income  situation  remains 
severe.  The  Chinese  economy  continues  to  see  relatively  stable  growth,  albeit  at  a 
somewhat lower level than before. Meanwhile, some emerging economies apart from China 
and  commodity-exporting  economies  continue  to  lack  momentum  on  the  whole,  although 
signs of improvement have started to be seen in some economies. 
As for the outlook, overseas economies are expected to recover moderately, led mainly by 
advanced  economies  –  the  United  States  in  particular. This  is  expected  to  gradually  exert 
positive effects on Japan’s export environment.  
Prices 
C.  
Next, I would like to talk about price developments in Japan. 
The  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the  CPI  has  been  around  1¼  percent.  The  rate  of 
increase was 1.3 percent for four consecutive months from December 2013 through March 
2014 and, on a basis excluding the direct effects of the tax hike, marked 1.5 percent for April, 
1.4 percent for May, and 1.3 percent for June. The fact that the rate of increase has been 
generally at around the same level even after April suggests that the tax increase has been 
passed on to prices on the whole, on the back of resilient private consumption. 
With regard to the outlook, the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI is likely to be around 
1¼  percent  for  some  time,  as  upward  pressure  from  import  prices  –  in  particular  energy 
prices  –  will  likely  wane,  while  underlying  inflationary  pressure  –  due  mainly  to  the 
improvement in the output gap – will increase. 
II.  
Major points to be considered with regard to the outlook for economic activity 
and prices 
As  I  have  mentioned,  earlier  this  month,  the  Bank  made  an  interim  assessment  of  the 
prospects for  economic activity  and  prices  through fiscal  2016  presented  in  the  April  2014 
Outlook Report. As for the Bank’s baseline scenario regarding economic activity, I personally 
pay attention to the existing risk both on the supply and demand sides that may lead to a 
weaker-than-expected economic growth rate, although the economy is expected to continue 
recovering  moderately.  As  for  prices,  I  also  hold  a  more  cautious  view  of  the  outlook 
compared  with  the  forecasts  in  the  baseline  scenario.  Let  me  share  some  of  my 
considerations regarding the outlook with you. 
Output gap and potential economic growth rate 
A.  
The Bank estimates that the output gap in Japan turned positive for the first time in almost 
six  years  since  2008,  to  0.6  percent  for  the  January–March  quarter  of  2014.  While  such 
estimates  are  subject  to  a  considerable  margin  of  error,  they  have  been  in  line  with 
developments  in  the  weighted  average  of the  diffusion  indices  for  production  capacity  and 
employment conditions in the Bank’s Tankan (Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in 
Japan).  Therefore,  we  can  view  as  confirmed  that  supply  and  demand  conditions  in  the 
economy are gradually tightening further. In particular, a clear tightening trend of supply and 
demand conditions in the labor market has been observed, as evidenced, for example, by 
the fact that the active job openings-to-applicants ratio for June 2014 was at a high level, as I 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  mentioned earlier, and that the unemployment rate – which has been hovering at a low level 
of around 3¾ percent recently – registered 3.7 percent the same month. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  potential  growth  rate  of  the  economy  remains  at  a  low  level,  and 
therefore supply-side constraints are likely to eventually surface if the economy continues to 
grow  at  the  current  pace.  This  suggests  that,  although  such  constraints  will  contribute  to 
pushing  up  wages  and  prices  temporarily,  the  real  economic  growth  rate  might  not  rise 
easily. 
Exports 
B.  
Although exports were expected to increase from April due to an expansion of firms’ spare 
capacity  for  exports  following  the  tax  hike,  they  have  continued  to  lack  momentum  so  far. 
Rather,  from  a  somewhat  longer-term  perspective,  it  seems  that  real  exports  are  not  just 
experiencing temporary weakness, but have been mostly unchanged on average since the 
Lehman shock. This seems to reflect the following developments. Due to the Lehman shock, 
appreciation of the yen, Great East Japan Earthquake, and other factors, risks to the cross-
border supply chain system became apparent, and this triggered changes in the structure of 
production and trade, particularly in Asian economies; in this process, the responsiveness of 
exports  to  overseas  demand  has  declined  significantly.  Moreover,  it  has  been  pointed  out 
that, since the global financial crisis, the pace of increase in trade has been declining relative 
to the pace of growth in the global economy. These developments in Japan’s exports could 
also be associated with such a change in the structure of the global economy. 
As  for  developments  in  overseas  economies  that  are  a  key  determinant  of  Japan’s  export 
environment, I am paying utmost attention to the risk of weaker-than-expected growth for the 
Chinese economy. It seems to be stable recently, mainly due to the stimulus measures, but if 
the growth rate declines due to adjustments in the real estate market, this will have negative 
effects on peripheral Asian economies and in turn on Japan’s export environment. 
Private consumption 
C.  
Although  it  will  still  take  considerable  time  to  accurately  determine  the  effects  of  the 
consumption tax hike on private consumption, it is very likely that the decline in consumption 
following  the  front-loaded  increase  in  demand  prior  to  the  tax  hike  will  be  relatively  short-
lived. It should be noted, however, that the scale of the temporary decline in consumption 
was considerable. On a seasonally adjusted quarter-on-quarter basis, sales at retail stores 
for the January–March quarter of 2014 increased by 3.9 percent, but declined by 7.0 percent 
for  the  April–June  quarter.  Moreover,  according  to  the  Family  Income  and  Expenditure 
Survey, on a quarter-on-quarter basis, real consumption expenditures for the January–March 
quarter increased by 4.6 percent, but declined by 9.4 percent for the April–June quarter. 
Let  us  now  examine  developments  in  income  in  relation  to  those  in  consumption.  For  the 
January–March quarter, the year-on-year rate of change in real compensation of employees 
registered minus 0.6 percent, which was significantly lower than the 3.7 percent increase in 
real private consumption. In a situation where real wages per employee are likely to continue 
declining for the time being, the pace of improvement in real compensation of employees is 
likely  to  be  moderate.  In  such  a  case,  the  uptrend  in  private  consumption  may  weaken, 
leading to a slower rise in the inflation rate. Thus, careful monitoring of future developments 
is required. 
Nevertheless, I personally consider that, even if the uptrend in private consumption weakens 
slightly, this will not necessarily have negative effects on the economy in the long run. This is 
because  a  significant  imbalance  is  currently  observed  among the  paces  of  increase  in the 
variables  of  prices,  wages,  and  private  consumption;  for  example,  real  wages  seem  to  be 
continuing to decline, even on a basis excluding the temporary effects of the tax hike. In such 
a situation, if weaker growth in private consumption restrains the rise in the inflation rate, it is 
expected  that  real  wages  will  increase  and  private  consumption  will  continue  growing 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  moderately at a pace in line with this wage increase. If demand increases in this way at an 
appropriate  pace  in  a  situation  where  supply-side  constraints  are  beginning  to  be 
acknowledged,  a  more  balanced  and  prolonged  economic  recovery,  albeit  moderate,  will 
likely be achieved. 
Outlook for prices 
D.  
As  for  the  outlook  for  prices,  I  take  a  more  cautious  view  than  the  forecast  in  the  Bank’s 
baseline scenario. Therefore, I formulated a proposal to change the expression regarding the 
outlook for prices in the April 2014 Outlook Report, although it was defeated by a majority 
vote during the Monetary Policy Meeting. Specifically, I proposed to change the expression 
that the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI “is likely to be around 1¼ percent for some 
time, follow a rising trend again from the second half of this fiscal year, and reach around 
2 percent around the middle of the projection period” to a new expression that it “is likely to 
remain generally stable around the current level over time”. 
I consider that, for the time being, developments in prices will depend mainly on the balance 
between strengthening of trend inflationary pressure – due mainly to the improvement in the 
output gap – and waning of upward pressure from import prices. On this point, there seems 
to  be  uncertainty  regarding  whether  the  upward  pressure  on  prices  that  reflects  the 
improvement  in  the  output  gap  will  outweigh  the  price  decline  caused  by  a  fall-off  of  the 
effects of the weak yen. This is because (1) it remains uncertain how much the tightening of 
labor  supply  and  demand  conditions  will  contribute  to  pushing  up  overall  wages  and 
(2) consumers might find it difficult to accept firms’ passing on of increases in wages to sales 
prices, unlike in the case of a passing on of increases in materials prices to sales prices. 
Of course, we cannot rule out the possibility that the rates of increase in wages and prices 
will  be  higher  than  expected  against  the  background  of  factors  such  as  stronger-than-
expected tightening of supply and demand conditions. In such a case, however, the rise in 
the inflation rate will likely lack sustainability given that the growth rate of the economy would 
not  rise  easily,  due  to  its  limited  growth  potential,  and  that  the  economy  would  become 
unstable. In addition, it is difficult to expect that medium- to long-term inflation expectations 
will increase in a stable manner in such a case. Therefore, I do not think that such a situation 
will  lead  to  achieving  the  price  stability  target,  whereby  the  Bank  aims  at  maintaining  the 
inflation rate at around 2 percent in a stable manner. 
Conduct of monetary policy 
III.  
In April 2013, the Bank introduced quantitative and qualitative monetary easing (QQE) with a 
view to achieving the price stability target of 2 percent in terms of the year-on-year rate of 
change in the CPI at the earliest possible time, with a time horizon of about two years. In 
aiming to achieve the price stability of 2 percent, the Bank has committed to continuing with 
QQE as long as it is necessary for maintaining the target in a stable manner. 
More than one year has passed since the introduction of QQE. So far, it has been exerting its 
intended effects. Since the introduction of the policy, however, while supporting the concrete 
measures of QQE, I have continued to propose (1) not to restrict the time frame for achieving 
the 2 percent price stability target to about two years, but to aim to achieve it in the medium 
to long term and (2) to designate QQE as an intensive measure with a time frame of about 
two  years,  and  thereafter  to  review  the  monetary  easing  measures  in  a  flexible  manner, 
although my proposal has been repeatedly defeated by a majority vote during the Monetary 
Policy  Meetings.  Let  me  explain  the  background  to  my  proposal,  as  well  as  my  personal 
views on some points of discussion regarding the conduct of monetary policy. 
Developments in three gaps 
A.  
I have supported the concrete measures of QQE because I considered that they would open 
up significant opportunities in terms of three aspects. First, the measures would provide an 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  opportunity  on  the  demand  side  to  create  a  virtuous  cycle  by  stimulating  the  economy. 
Second, they would offer an opportunity on the supply side to encourage the government’s 
growth  strategy  that  contributes  to  strengthening  the  growth  potential  of  Japan’s  economy 
and its fiscal consolidation, as well as positive actions by firms and households. And third, 
the  measures  would  afford  an  opportunity  to  restore  the  effectiveness  of  the  conventional 
interest rate policy, as zero interest rates produce stimulative effects on the economy through 
an improvement in economic and price conditions. In this regard, I consider that QQE has 
already made considerable achievements, judging from developments in the following three 
gaps. 
First, when the economy faces a shortage of demand, it is generally regarded that the role of 
monetary easing measures is to close the negative output gap by stimulating the economy 
from  the  demand  side.  As  I  explained  earlier,  the  negative  output  gap  in  Japan  seems  to 
have closed for the first time in almost six years, according to the Bank’s estimate. 
Second, the gap between the observed inflation rate and the medium- to long-term expected 
rates of inflation has narrowed. Until recently, although the medium- to long-term expected 
rates of inflation had generally been in positive territory as a trend, observed prices had long 
been experiencing a mild decline. Consequently, price stability was not achieved, placing the 
economy in an undesirable situation. However, observed prices have risen markedly since 
2013.  I  personally  take  the  view,  however,  that  rises  in  prices  to  date  have  been  affected 
significantly  by  the  temporary  factor  of  the  weak  yen,  and  that  the  underlying  trend  in  the 
observed inflation rate that mainly reflects improvement in the economic environment is more 
moderate. Still, the gap between the underlying trend in the observed inflation rate – on a 
basis excluding the effects of the weak yen – and the medium- to long-term expected rates of 
inflation seems to have narrowed to a considerable extent. 
Third, it is estimated that (1) reflecting the narrowing of the output gap and the rise in prices, 
the level of the policy interest rate derived from the Taylor rule has recently been on a rising 
trend; and thus (2) the negative gap between the actual short-term interest rates – which are 
virtually at around zero percent – and the derived policy interest rate has turned positive and 
has been widening. This suggests the possibility that the effects of zero interest rates might 
strengthen gradually. 
Price stability target and medium- to long-term inflation expectations 
B.  
As  I  have  explained,  developments  in  economic  activity  and  prices  have  been  on  an 
improving trend. However, to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent, I think that it is 
necessary  that  a  wide  range  of  economic  entities  make  use  of  the  benign  financial 
environment  brought  about  by  QQE  and  make  continuous  efforts  to  strengthen  the 
economy’s  growth  potential.  I  personally  hold  the  view  that,  even  if  such  efforts  proceed 
smoothly, it will require considerable time for the growth potential to increase sufficiently. For 
this reason, since the introduction of QQE, I have continued to propose at Monetary Policy 
Meetings  not  to  restrict  the  time  frame  for  achieving  the  2  percent  price  stability  target  to 
about two years, but to aim to achieve it in the medium to long term. 
The price stability target of 2 percent aims to maintain the 2 percent inflation rate in a stable 
manner,  and  not  to  merely  reach  it  temporarily.  In  order  to  achieve  this,  it  is  a  necessary 
condition that firms’ and households’ medium- to long-term inflation expectations – on which 
basis they carry out their economic activities – increase to about 2 percent and remain stable 
at  that  level.  I  think  that  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  in  Japan  are  mainly 
determined by supply-side factors such as the potential growth rate and the labor productivity 
growth  rate,  rather  than  by  the  level  of  the  Bank’s  price  stability  target,  the  supply  and 
demand balances in the goods, services, and labor markets, and the current developments 
in  the  observed  inflation  rate.  Therefore,  I  think  that  it  is  natural  that  the  level  of  a  price 
stability  target  should  vary  by  country.  At  least  for  now,  I  think  that  the  Bank’s  2  percent 
target – although close to the average among advanced countries – is well above the level 
that is consistent with the growth potential of Japan’s economy. In Japan, as a result of an 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  increase in short-term inflation expectations reflecting the rise in observed prices, financial 
market  data  indicate  that  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  have  also  increased 
moderately.  However,  I think  that  there  is  still  a  substantial  divergence from  the  2  percent 
level. 
On  the  other  hand,  QQE  entails  considerable  potential  risks,  in  my  view;  for  example, 
normalization of the measure will not be an easy process, and speculation that the Bank is 
engaged  in financing fiscal  deficits  could  increase.  My  understanding  is  that the  2  percent 
price  stability  target  can  be  consistent  with  the  growth  potential  of  Japan’s  economy  only 
from a medium- to long-term perspective. I am therefore paying particular attention to the risk 
that, if the current large-scale monetary easing policy were to be protracted or such policy 
strengthened by additional measures, the associated side effects would instead outweigh the 
positive effects, and this would undermine economic stability in the long run.  
In this regard, one cannot rule out the possibility that, under the current policy commitment, if 
financial markets increasingly view achieving the 2 percent price stability target in about two 
years as difficult, the Bank will be obliged to extend or strengthen its monetary easing driven 
by  such  external  factors,  even  in  a  situation  where  it  is  judged  that  side  effects  outweigh 
positive effects on the economy. This is why I have proposed that the Bank aim to achieve 
the price stability target of 2 percent in the medium to long term and designate QQE as an 
intensive measure with a time frame of about two  years. My proposal aims at securing an 
opportunity for the Bank to thoroughly examine, after a certain period of time, whether the 
side effects of QQE are not outweighing the positive effects and review the easing measures 
in a flexible manner depending on economic and financial conditions at the time. 
Strengthening growth potential and monetary policy 
C.  
Strengthening the growth potential of Japan’s economy has long been recognized as a key 
issue,  and  its  necessity  has  been  acknowledged  more  strongly  of  late,  reflecting  recent 
discussion that the economy might face supply-side constraints as the supply and demand 
balance continues to improve steadily. 
In  order  to  raise  the  growth  potential  of  the  economy,  it  is  necessary  for  firms  to  make 
technological innovations, as well as active fixed investment, so that such innovations lead to 
increased productivity. It is important that the government, for its part, make efforts to take 
measures, for example, to increase labor supply and proceed with regulatory reforms that will 
lead  to  tapping  of  potential  demand  and  increasing  value-added.  In  addition,  in  order  to 
encourage  firms  to  make  active  fixed  investment  in  Japan  and  increase  the  economy’s 
growth potential through accumulation of capital stock, it is necessary to take measures to 
increase firms’ medium- to long-term expectations for the growth rate of domestic demand. 
From such a viewpoint, it is also important to address structural issues such as (1) population 
decline, which can hinder expansion of domestic demand in the medium to long term; and 
(2) massive  government  debt.  Efforts  toward  achieving  fiscal  consolidation  are  extremely 
important  not  only  in  terms  of  increasing  firms’  medium-  to  long-term  expectations  for  the 
growth rate of domestic demand, but also in terms of improving the environment in which the 
effects of QQE will be maximized and of enabling smooth normalization of QQE in the future. 
Basically,  such  improvements  on the  supply  side  of the  economy  are  to  be  made  through 
efforts  by  the  government  and  firms.  On  the  other  hand,  monetary  policy  –  for  which  the 
intrinsic  function  is  to  work  on  the  demand  side  of  the  economy  –  can  provide  indirect 
support  for  such  efforts  by  providing  a  benign  financial  environment.  In  this  regard,  in  a 
situation where supply-side constraints are likely to become increasingly binding as a trend, I 
consider it also necessary to carefully monitor, from the viewpoint of maintaining the stability 
of  the  economy,  whether  there  will  be  concern  over  overheating.  In  light  of  the  Bank’s 
principle that monetary policy shall be “aimed at achieving price stability, thereby contributing 
to  the  sound  development  of  the  national  economy”,  I  think  that  achieving  prolonged 
economic recovery, albeit moderate, while at the same time increasing the labor productivity 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  growth  rate  and  the  potential  growth  rate,  will  lead  to  an  increase  in  real  income  and 
improvement in the quality of people’s lives. 
Meanwhile, it should be noted that, in the course of proceeding with structural reforms, the 
growth potential of the economy will increase and the general price level that is stable and 
consistent with the growth potential will rise in the medium term. In the short term, however, 
prices might face downward pressure, for example, when those in certain industries decline 
due to deregulation. Bearing this in mind, I think that the conduct of monetary policy with a 
price stability target has to be very flexible. 
Price stability target and two perspectives 
D.  
Under  QQE,  the  Bank  purchases  assets  on  an  unprecedented  scale.  Therefore,  it  is 
necessary  to  be  particularly  vigilant  against  various  potential  risks;  for  example,  the 
possibility of such purchases leading to a buildup of financial imbalances. 
In  this  regard,  the  Bank  conducts  monetary  policy,  based  on  the  framework  of  assessing 
economic activity and prices from two perspectives, in the context of the price stability target. 
The first perspective is examining, as regards economic activity and prices over the next two 
years  or  so,  whether  the  outlook  deemed  most  likely  by  the  Bank  follows  a  path  of 
sustainable  growth  under  price  stability.  The  second  perspective  is  examining,  in  a  longer 
term,  various  risks  that  are  most  relevant  to  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  aimed  at 
achieving  sustainable  economic  growth  under  price  stability.  In  particular,  financial 
imbalances  will  be  examined  as  a  risk  that  will  significantly  impact  economic  activity  and 
prices when they materialize, although the probability of their emergence is not necessarily 
high. 
It is fair to say that this framework was formulated in light of the lessons learned regarding 
the monetary policy conduct during the bubble period of the latter half of the 1980s. That was 
when policy action to address the accumulation of financial imbalances had been delayed in 
a  situation  where  attention  was  focused  on  stable  general  prices  at  the  time,  and  policy 
measures  to  achieve  economic  stability  in  the  medium  to  long  term  were  not  sufficiently 
implemented.  I  think  that  the  assessment  of  economic  activity  and  prices  based  on  this 
framework has become increasingly important as the Bank pursues QQE. 
Communication with the markets 
E.  
Monetary policy produces positive effects through changes in market developments and in 
financial  institutions’  behavior.  Accordingly,  in  order  to  enhance  the  effectiveness  of 
monetary  policy,  communication  with  the  markets  is  very  important.  In  particular,  as many 
central banks in advanced economies are currently conducting unconventional policy, better 
communication with the markets has become the common challenge facing each economy. 
In relation to this, a notable example has recently been observed in the United States, where 
the  process  of  normalizing  monetary  policy  has  already  been  initiated,  and  in  the  United 
Kingdom, where normalization is starting to be considered. Specifically, the central banks in 
both countries were forced in a short period of time to make modifications in their forward 
guidance that seemed to aim at avoiding a large increase in the long-term interest rate, as 
such  an  increase  could  cause  instability  in  the  economy  and  the  financial  system.  In  the 
United  Kingdom,  the  unemployment  threshold  for  future  policy  interest  rate  hikes  was 
maintained,  but  its  significance  was  reduced  substantially.  In  the  United  States,  the 
unemployment  threshold  was  abandoned.  What  is  common  in  both  countries  is  that 
monetary  policy  has  shifted  toward  referring  to  many  economic  indicators.  This  can  be 
interpreted  as  meaning  that  the  intrinsic  feature  of  the  forward  guidance  of  “strongly 
influencing  expectations”  has  weakened,  and  that  there  has  been  a  move  to  return  to  the 
conventional policy measure of “comprehensive assessment” that emphasizes the degree of 
freedom and flexibility in the conduct of policy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  As illustrated, central banks in advanced economies that conduct unconventional policy are 
still finding a way to achieve better communication with the markets. The Bank, for its part, 
needs  to  continue  to  facilitate  effective  communication  while  paying  close  attention  to  the 
experiences of the other economies. 
Combined use of two policy tools 
F.  
It  is  my  understanding  that  an  unconventional  policy  such  as  the  asset  purchase  policy 
implemented under QQE is effective as a temporary tool to generate upward momentum in 
economic activity and prices and affect the direction of such momentum under the zero lower 
bound on nominal interest rates. On the other hand, a conventional interest rate policy can 
be regarded as a usual, fine-tuning tool that is used when it is time to encourage economic 
activity and prices to reach desirable levels. 
In  a  situation  where  the  unconventional  policy  has  already  been  effective  to  a  reasonable 
extent, accommodative financial conditions are starting to further strengthen as policy effects 
generated by maintained zero interest rates are gradually added to the effects of QQE. 
On the other hand, precisely because the unconventional policy is a new policy measure with 
a short history, its side effects in general could have many unknown parts. Moreover, it would 
probably take considerable time for monetary policy to be normalized with the unwinding of 
the unconventional policy – the main component of which is the asset purchase policy. Thus, 
a forward-looking policy stance is required to achieve the smooth normalization of monetary 
policy while maintaining financial market stability.  
Taking these factors into account, if developments in economic activity and prices continue 
to steadily follow an improving trend, I think that it will be necessary in the future to examine 
the option of gradually starting to shift the focus of monetary policy conduct from the asset 
purchase policy to the zero interest rate policy, in view of the role of the two policy tools as 
well as the balance of their positive effects and side effects. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
