  Jens Weidmann: A long-term regulatory framework for the euro area 
Speech  by  Dr  Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the  Economic 
Conference  (Wirtschaftstag)  of  the  Economic  Council  of  the  Christian  Democratic  Union 
(Wirtschaftsrat der CDU e.V.), Berlin, 3 July 2014. 
 Welcome 
1. 
Professor Lauk, ladies and gentlemen 
I am delighted to be here at this year’s Economic Conference and would like to thank the 
Economic Council of the CDU for their invitation. 
The  crisis  has  thrust  monetary  policy  into  the  spotlight.  The  fact  that  not  one,  but  two 
monetary policymakers have been invited to today’s event reflects the growing importance 
attached to monetary policy. 
Monetary  policymakers  nowadays  are  sometimes  cast  as  superheroes.  Some  are  dubbed 
“rock stars”, others hailed as “alchemists”, and there has even been mention of “new masters 
of the universe”. Others, meanwhile, want to abolish central banking as a public institution 
altogether given their mistrust of what they see as an overabundance of power, supporting 
instead competition between private currencies. 
An  op-ed  piece  in  the  Austrian  newspaper  Die  Presse  once  put  forward  the  view  that 
monetary policy was “a kind of soap opera – and a boring one at that. At least it was for the 
occasional  viewer”.  On  the  other  hand,  the  writer  went  on  to  say,  monetary  policy  was 
“probably the world’s most important soap opera”. After all, it decided “the fate of the world 
economy”. 
Wikipedia  defines  soap  operas  as  serial  dramas  in  which  the  protagonists  are  usually  in 
constant  interaction  with  each  other.  And  that  is  undoubtedly  true  for  monetary  policy  – 
protagonists in the world of European monetary policymaking get together once a fortnight, 
most  recently  earlier  today  in  the  ECB  Governing  Council,  as  well  as  at  many  other  joint 
occasions. 
According to Wikipedia, other typical features of soaps are their trivial storylines, the fact that 
the  protagonists  are  often  more  important  than  the  events  themselves,  and  that  the  roles 
offer sufficient potential for conflict. Judging by what the media says sometimes, it’s easy to 
think that things are much the same in the world of monetary policy. 
But  I  don’t  see  myself  as  a  protagonist  in  a  soap  opera,  and  I  think  my  colleagues  would 
certainly agree with me that monetary policy isn’t designed to offer shallow entertainment. Its 
job is to safeguard price stability – in good times and in bad. 
Crisis country in the euro area 
2. 
Before I move on to talk about the future regulatory framework of the euro area, I would first 
like to quote the head of state of a crisis country in the euro area: 
“Our country is facing gigantic challenges. Our future and that of our children are at stake. 
Millions  of  people  are  unemployed;  many  already  have  been  for  years.  The  (federal  and 
state) budgets ... are in an unprecedented critical condition.” 
Have you got any idea who that head of state might be? The Spanish king, perhaps, or the 
president of Greece or Spain? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  No,  it  was  in  fact  Germany’s  federal  president.  Or,  to  be  more  specific,  it  was  federal 
president Horst Köhler in his televised address on 21 July 2005, in which he announced early 
elections in Germany. 
Seen  from  today’s  perspective,  it  might  appear  absurd  to  categorise  Germany  as  a  “crisis 
country”. But a decade ago, this assessment was certainly not out of the ordinary. 
The  Economist magazine  ran  an  article  on Germany  in  1999  under  the  heading  “The  sick 
man of the euro”. The article made the following point: “... the biggest economic problem for 
Europe today is how to revive the German economy”. 
And the situation was to worsen still further in the early years of the new millenium. For many 
years, Germany recorded some of the worst growth rates in the euro area. Unemployment 
climbed to nearly five million in 2005. 
It was only later that the economy emerged from its malaise, and it did so with a vengeance. 
The  improvement  in  Germany’s  labour  market  –  which  was  also  dubbed  “the  German 
miracle” – was anything but a wondrous occurrence. In fact, it was the outcome of shrewd 
entrepreneurial decisions, moderate wage policy, greater flexibility in pay policy conditions, 
and not least fundamental labour market and social reform. 
You don’t need me to tell you that the title of “sick man of Europe” is an award which often 
changes  hands.  Other  countries  are  currently  the  reigning  champions  in  this  discipline. 
Germany,  meanwhile,  is  seen  as  an  economic  powerhouse  at  the  heart  of  the  euro  area, 
making it one of the cornerstones of efforts to rescue the euro. 
And this solidarity is not entirely a selfless act – after all, Germany has a vested interest in 
preserving the long-term stability of the euro area. 
Press ahead with reform efforts 
3. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
It is crucial that we maintain the euro area as a union of stability. If the crisis countries fail to 
rectify the imbalances that have emerged, the euro area will remain vulnerable to crises. And 
if that happens, another comparison with a soap opera – this time by the Financial Times’ 
Martin Wolf – might turn out to be true. He wrote: “The crisis of the eurozone is likely to be a 
very long-running soap opera”. 
If  the  euro  area  is  to  quickly  put  the  crisis  behind  it,  the  sluggish  and  highly  indebted 
countries  will  need  to  press  ahead  with  their  efforts  to  place  their  economies  and  public 
finances on solid ground. 
Their  endeavours  have  indisputably  borne  some  fruit.  Structural  budget  deficits  have 
contracted sharply, as have current account deficits. Aggregate unit labour costs have fallen 
substantially,  with  the  exception  of  Italy,  not  to  mention  France.  This  has  sent  price 
competitiveness sharply higher in many countries, boosting their exports. 
Greece, to name but one example, is attracting an increasing number of tourists. 2013 was 
Greece’s  most  successful  year  as  a  tourist  destination,  and  the  country  is  heading  for 
another  record  number  of  tourists  in  2014.  In  Spain,  meanwhile,  exports  are  back  on  an 
upward trajectory, growing by 8% over the past 12 months. Intermediate and industrial goods 
are  some  of  the  country’s  most  important  exports.  Thus,  exports  have  made  an  important 
contribution towards overcoming the recession. 
That’s the good news. But it should not mask the fact that the adjustment process is still far 
from over. Simply put, it’s more of a marathon than a sprint. Tenacity and perseverance are 
called for, particularly in the second half of the course. 
Yet a glance at the sovereign debt markets would suggest that the finishing line has already 
been  crossed.  Risk  premiums  on  sovereign  bonds  issued  by  crisis  countries  have 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  plummeted  to  such  an  extent  that  it  has  never  been  cheaper  for  Spain  and  Italy  to  raise 
capital. 
Disregarding  the  fact  that  bond  yields  are  being  depressed  by  the  loose  monetary  policy 
stance  worldwide,  the  markets  are  “pricing  in”  the  progress  which  the  crisis  countries  will 
make  in  future  in  adjusting  their  economies.  That  is  not  without  risk.  First,  there  is  real 
potential  for  a  setback  if  this  advance  expression  of  confidence  proves  to  be  unfounded. 
Second, the relaxation in the markets and the expansionary monetary policy are dulling the 
enthusiasm for reform in the ailing countries. 
That’s why it’s all the more important that expectations are met and that further reforms are 
not just announced but actually put into practice. 
Germany as a role model 
4. 
Germany is an important role model in this respect. What Germany has accomplished offers 
a vivid demonstration for its partner countries in the euro area that structural reforms pay off. 
At the same time, I would like Germany’s current economic and social policy to set more of 
an example. I’m thinking particularly of the option allowing individuals who have paid into the 
pension insurance system for a long period of time to draw a full pension at the age of 63. 
After  all,  the  decision  made  just  a  few  years  ago  to  progressively  raise  the  standard 
retirement  age  to  67  served  as  a  model  for  countries  in  which  the  pension  systems  were 
likewise feeling the strain of an ageing population. Logically, raising the retirement age was 
part of the agreed stabilisation programme in three of the four programme countries. 
So  the  signalling  effect  of  retirement  at  67  was  blurred  to  a  certain  degree,  and  pension 
policy seems akin to the famous dancing procession of Echternach – two steps forward, one 
step back. 
“Retirement at 63” offers a financial incentive to take early retirement – there is a financial 
upside  of  up  to  €40,000  for  an  average  wage  or  salary  earner,  while  higher  earners  reap 
even greater benefits. 
“Retirement  at  63”  is  something  which  favours  age  groups  that  are  currently  close  to 
retirement and punishes younger generations. That reminds me of Groucho Marx, who once 
said: “Why should I care about posterity? What’s posterity ever done for me?”. 
It’s  true  that  the  increase  in  pension  payments  will  not  directly  raise  contribution  rates  on 
account of the high level of reserves. But from a medium-term perspective, it  will drive up 
non-wage labour costs as well. 
Another  outcome  of  “retirement  at  63”  is  that  workers  that  are  still  needed  in  the  labour 
market  will  cease  to  be  available.  According  to  our  calculations,  “retirement  at  63”  will 
diminish the labour force potential by around 165,000 people by 2016. 
Germany  does  not  have  enough  workers  going  forward.  In  2020,  the  number  of  workers 
available to the labour market will probably have shrunk by 1½ million compared with today’s 
figures.  In  2020,  this  demographic  effect  will  have  depressed  economic  output  by  nearly 
€70 billion. 
If Germany is going to address this problem, it will need more and better qualified workers in 
the  future.  One  way  of  dealing  with  this  challenge  is  to  develop  a  systematic  policy  for 
attracting qualified foreign labour with the skills needed in the German economy. 
Female participation in the labour force also needs to be boosted. Non-contributory inclusion 
in  the  statutory  health  insurance  scheme,  for  instance,  sets  the  wrong  incentives  here. 
Second, we need a policy aimed at raising employee productivity. Investment in pre-school 
education in particular promises to yield substantial rewards. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Yet “retirement at 63” is not the only initiative which poses a risk to the overall economy; the 
introduction of a statutory minimum wage – which was decided today by the Bundestag – is 
also problematic. 
Even if experiences in other countries do not support the view that a minimum wage directly 
increases unemployment, it might nonetheless place a strain on employment trends. There is 
a risk that enterprises will take on fewer new staff in periods of economic upturn. 
At the current juncture, 12% of workers in Germany earn less than €8.50 per hour; in eastern 
Germany  that  figure  is  as  much  as  17%.  Many  of  them  are  low-skilled  workers  whose 
prospects in the labour market look set to deteriorate in the future. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
The need for reform in the sluggish countries should not blind us to the fact that there is a 
need  for  economic  policy  action  here  in  Germany,  too.  A  few  months  ago  the Wall  Street 
Journal ran a story entitled “Euro Zone’s Next Reform Candidate: Germany”. 
A saying we know from the world of sport is equally pertinent in other walks of life: don’t rest 
on your laurels. We have seen that there is truth in this saying at the World Cup in Brazil, 
where some of the favourites have already come in for quite a nasty surprise. 
Reform the euro-area framework 
5. 
Unlike the World Cup, the euro area is not a knockout competition that can only be won by 
one team; it is about winning as a team and achieving success for everyone involved. But 
one thing that football and monetary union do have in common is that they both need a clear 
set of sensible rules. 
Football is such a popular sport because its rules are relatively easy to understand. On the 
whole, the basic rules have not changed much, although the finer details have been refined 
from time to time. For instance, the current World Cup is the first to use goal-line technology. 
The euro area, too, has a set of rules, an institutional framework. This framework needs to be 
reformed in order to make monetary union more crisis-resistant. It is not sufficiently stable as 
it stands. 
While it is true that fiscal stabilisation programmes and effective assistance on the part of the 
Eurosystem have succeeded in preventing the crisis from flaring up, it was this very policy 
which  brought  about  a  precarious  situation:  liability  for  the  crisis  countries’  debt  has 
essentially been communitised while fiscal policy remains a matter for national policymakers. 
That doesn’t augur well for the future. 
Liability  is  a  core  element  of  our  economic  system.  That’s  something  every  entrepreneur 
knows – after all, doing business means picking up the tab if things go wrong. 
That’s  why  I  think  the  euro  area  has  reached  a  kind  of  crossroads:  either  we  proceed 
towards  a  fiscal  union  in  the  sense  of  establishing  joint  liability  with  centralised  rights  to 
intervene in fiscal matters at the European level, or we turn back to the original framework as 
specified  in  the  Maastricht  Treaty  and  reinforce  the  principle  of  individual  national 
responsibility. 
Both  paths  can  put  liability  and  control  back  on  an  even  keel  and  bring  risks  and 
opportunities into alignment. Which path is the right one to take is a matter for policymakers 
to decide. 
I believe that governments and the public at large are currently less than willing to take the 
step  towards  a  bona  fide  fiscal  union,  seeing  as  this  would  mean  ceding  a  great  deal  of 
national sovereignty in fiscal policy matters. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Those calling for greater mutual liability are often the very ones who reject recommendations 
from  Brussels  as  meddling  in  national  matters.  Italian  prime  minister  Matteo  Renzi,  for 
instance, likens the EU to an “old boring aunt telling us what to do”. 
It was a long-held belief, above all in Germany, that monetary union would, out of necessity 
as it were, culminate in political union. Addressing the Bundestag in November 1991, Helmut 
Kohl remarked that “the idea of sustaining economic and monetary union over time without 
political union is a fallacy”. 
The  Bundesbank  likewise  stressed  at  the  time  that  political  union  was  crucial  if  monetary 
union was to prove durable. Viewed with hindsight, I would qualify that statement somewhat 
to say that monetary union can also function without political union provided that the principle 
of individual national responsibility is adhered to. 
This view is supported by Udo Di Fabio, a former judge at the Federal Constitutional Court, 
who said that monetary union  was only feasible if the prevailing principle of each member 
state  bearing  individual  responsibility  for  its  own  fiscal  policy  was  not  undermined  by 
collective liability. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
In  a  monetary  union,  there  are  negative  repercussions  for  all  other  member  states  if  one 
country has excessive debt – even if they are responsible for their own budgets. A monetary 
union therefore requires fiscal guidelines. 
That is why the decision, taken in connection with the euro rescue measures, to tighten fiscal 
rules in a bid to promote individual responsibility was a step in the right direction. Ultimately, 
however, applying the rules is what counts, or, to put it in the words of a footballer ahead of 
tomorrow’s important World Cup match: “It’s what happens on the pitch that matters.” You 
cannot put it more succinctly than Germany’s football legend Adi Preissler. 
As regards the proper application of the rules, some doubts are justified, as is evident from 
the current debate surrounding a flexible interpretation of the Stability and Growth Pact. 
The Pact, which was reformed less than three years ago, allows much scope for discretion. 
Moreover, there is a risk that last week’s decisions of the European Council will provide even 
more of a pretext for a lax interpretation. However, an excessively generous interpretation of 
this leeway would certainly undermine the credibility of the Stability and Growth Pact. 
And let us not forget: in the medium term, the Pact stipulates balanced or close to balance 
budgets. The 3% mark that is frequently used as a yardstick is therefore a ceiling and is not 
intended as a regular target. This is, incidentally, also true of the 60% debt ratio that almost 
all euro countries breach. 
The Commission should therefore apply a narrow interpretation to the rules, and the German 
government should lend it its decisive support. That, too, is part and parcel of being a role 
model. 
Nor is consolidation a growth brake, but rather a precondition for sustainable growth. More 
debt is no precondition for successful structural reform. 
Binding debt rules are a necessary, but by no means sufficient, condition for strengthening 
the  principle  of  individual  responsibility  in  a  monetary  union.  To  this  end,  the  no  bail-out 
principle would have to be more credible, amongst other things. Ultimately, that would mean 
allowing governments to become insolvent. 
That,  in  turn,  requires  robust  banks:  going  forward,  neither  a  sovereign  default  nor  the 
insolvency of a major bank must threaten the stability of the financial system. 
Progress has doubtless been made on the road to a more resilient financial system: banks’ 
capitalisation  is  better  now  than  before  the  crisis,  preparations  for  the  Single  Supervisory 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Mechanism  are  in  full  swing,  and  a  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  for  banks  has  been 
agreed. 
Nonetheless, further regulatory  measures  are required to  loosen  the  “doom  loop”  between 
sovereigns and banks. In future, banks should have to provide capital backing for loans to 
governments. And there should be ceilings for lending to governments, as there are for loans 
to the private sector. 
Moreover, rapid regulation of the shadow banking sector is needed to stop regulation of the 
banking sector from leading to financial business increasingly being moved to unregulated 
market segments. 
Bertolt Brecht said it all in the Threepenny Opera when he wrote: 
“There are some who are in darkness, 
and the others are in the light, 
and you see the ones in brightness, 
those in darkness drop from sight.” 
More  light therefore needs to be shone into the financial system. And that is precisely the 
objective  of  many  current  regulatory  initiatives.  The  Bundesbank  and  the  German  finance 
minister are pulling together to make them happen. 
Easing the burden on the Eurosystem 
6. 
A  stable  regulatory  framework  for  the  monetary  union  would  also  protect  the  Eurosystem 
from permanently acting as crisis manager. 
The Eurosystem’s crisis measures have helped prevent the crisis from escalating. However, 
some of these measures have, as I have repeatedly pointed out, taken the Eurosystem to the 
outer edge of its mandate. 
Meanwhile,  the  comprehensive  measures  agreed  by  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  at 
the beginning of June cannot, in my opinion, be compared with the crisis measures taken two 
or three years ago. The current measures do not provide for individual countries’ liability risks 
to be taken onto the Eurosystem’s balance sheet. The task now is to prevent too prolonged a 
period of low inflation. For that could paralyse the euro-area’s economy. 
Savers are understandably angry at extremely low interest rates that are more than eaten up 
by inflation. However, interest rates on savings have been lower than the rate of inflation on 
numerous occasions, even during the D-Mark era. 
The  June  decision  was  preceded  by  much  soul-searching  as  to  how  best  to  proceed.  For 
these measures too are associated with risks and side-effects, which we would be wrong to 
play down. 
In the long term, the ultra-loose monetary policy poses risks to financial stability. There is a 
danger of exaggerations on the asset and real estate markets – just think of the search for 
yield. Life insurers are finding it difficult to generate guaranteed returns. 
I  am  also  worried  that  the  low  interest  rates  will  reduce  the  pressure  on  governments  to 
tackle their countries’ problems energetically. There is a danger that the low interest rates will 
be used not to consolidate budgets, but to finance additional spending. 
And so it is particularly important to make it quite clear now that the Eurosystem will not put 
off  a  necessary  normalisation  of  monetary  policy  out  of  consideration  for  public  finances. 
Looking  at  the  euro  area,  I  therefore  say  that  monetary  policy  has  done  its  bit  towards 
maintaining price stability. 
We will observe very closely what impact the measures have, and it will be a while before 
they  take  full  effect.  I  therefore  believed  it  was  wrong  to  speculate  on  further  measures 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  immediately  after  the  decisions  were  taken.  This  is  unnecessary  and  undermines  the 
measures we have only just adopted. 
Allow me to return to the comparison with soap operas: unlike soaps, monetary policy does 
not need cliffhangers to tempt the viewer to tune into the next episode. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
With  Lithuania’s  accession  to  the  euro  area,  the  number  of  member  states  will  swell  to 
19 next  year.  As  a  result,  the  rotation  system,  as  it  is  known,  will  automatically  come  into 
force in the Governing Council of the ECB, which has met with some criticism in Germany. 
Allow me to say only this much: 
The best way of dispelling these concerns is to operate within the core area of our mandate 
and not to redistribute liability risks between the taxpayers of the individual countries on a 
large scale. 
7. 
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Erhardt  once  said:  “Pessimists  are  people  who  wear  sunglasses  when  they  look  into  the 
future.” 
The comedian Heinz Erhardt, that is, not the politician Ludwig Erhard. 
I hope you will not consider me a pessimist when I say that the crisis in the euro area is not 
over yet. Much more needs to be done to overcome it permanently. 
The  member  states  must  adapt  better  to  the  requirements  of  a  monetary  union.  The 
institutional framework of the monetary union, too, must be improved in order to make it less 
susceptible to crises. Liability and control must be aligned. 
Monetary policy must not allow itself to be misappropriated for fiscal policy purposes. In the 
long term, this would jeopardise the independence of the central bank. Yet the central bank’s 
independence is a key precondition for keeping the value of the currency stable. And that is 
something we all benefit from. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
