  Benoît Cœuré: Policy coordination in a multipolar world 
Remarks by Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the ECB, at the 5th annual 
Cusco  conference  organised  by  the  Central  Reserve  Bank  of  Peru  and  the  Reinventing 
Bretton Woods Committee: “70 years after Bretton Woods: Managing the interconnectedness 
of the world economy”, Cusco, 22 July 2014 
 I  would  like  to  thank  Michele Ca’ Zorzi  and  G. Georgiadis  for  contributing  to  these  remarks.  I  remain  solely 
responsible for the opinions expressed herein. 
Dear Governor Velarde, dear Marc Uzan, ladies and gentlemen, 
I would like to thank the organisers for giving me the opportunity to share some thoughts with 
you  on  the  changes  in  the  international  monetary  system  (IMS)  and  the  role  of  monetary 
policy coordination. 
History casts a long shadow over the IMS. Over the past three decades, however, the global 
economy  has  changed  in  decisive  ways.  Three  aspects  are  particularly  striking.  First, 
financial factors have become an increasingly relevant source of cross-country interlinkages, 
with  some  evidence  of  cross-country  de-linkages  since  the  global  financial  crisis.  Second, 
emerging  economies  have  raised  their  clout,  as  reflected  by  the  impact  of  their  business 
cycles  on  global  growth  and  the  growing  use  of  their  currencies:  the  global  economy  has 
become multipolar. And third, monetary policy in advanced economies has – more recently – 
entered new territory by resorting to unconventional measures. 
I would like to outline these shifts in the global economic landscape, and then elaborate on 
the implications for the IMS and monetary policy coordination. 
Three structural shifts in the global economy 
Globalisation, home bias and regionalisation 
Clearly, the defining feature of the last three decades has been the dramatic strengthening of 
globalisation in both trade and finance. Cross-border trade in goods and services as well as 
investment has soared, driven by trade-liberalising policies, the lifting of capital controls as 
well as innovations in transport and information technologies. 
The global financial crisis has led to a halt in this trend, perhaps only temporarily. But there is 
also  the  possibility  of  a step  backwards,  i.e.  a re-emergence  of financial  home  bias  and  a 
stronger  drive  towards  regionalisation.  Early  evidence  of  this  is  the  resurgence  of  the 
so-called “Feldstein-Horioka puzzle”, that is, a sharp rise in the correlation between savings 
and investments.1 European banks have retreated from dollar-denominated lending.2 Banks 
from emerging economies also have a stronger regional orientation, in particular in South-
East Asia, Central America and the Commonwealth of Independent States.3 Regulators have 
been tempted to ring-fence their domestic financial systems. Restrictions on intra-European 
                                                
1  For euro area countries the cross-country correlation between the savings and investment-to-GDP ratios fell 
continuously  from  0.6  in  the  early  1990s  to  essentially  zero  in  2005;  similarly,  for  non-euro  area  OECD 
countries  it  even  fell from  almost  one  to  zero  over  the  same  time  span.  After  the  global  financial  crisis  the 
correlation rose sharply to 0.6 for the euro area and 0.75 for non-euro area OECD countries.  
2  See  Ivashina,  V.,  Scharfstein,  D.S.,  Stein  J.C.  (2012),  “Dollar  Funding  and  the  Lending Behavior  of  Global 
Banks”, NBER Working Paper No 18528, November.  
3  See  Bank  for  International  Settlements  (2014),  “EME  Banking  Systems  and  regional  financial  integration”, 
CGFS Papers, No 51. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  cross-border liquidity flows or the US rules for foreign banking organisations may be seen as 
examples. 
Such  a  “de-globalisation”  scenario,  if  confirmed,  could  become  self-validating  and  have 
profound  effects  on  the  degree  of  international  risk-sharing,  spillovers  and  the  global 
allocation of savings, and therefore on global long-term growth. 
Shifting economic centre of gravity 
Since  the  early  2000s  the  world  has  also  witnessed  impressive  growth  rates  in  emerging 
economies,  which  have  exceeded  those  in  the  advanced  world.  In  particular  the  BRICS 
(Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa) have more than doubled their share of global 
GDP  from  less  than  10%  in  2000  to  21%  in  2013;  similarly,  other  low  and  middle-income 
economies  have  seen  their  share  increase  from  7%  in  2000  to  12%  in  2013.  The  rise  of 
emerging economies is also illustrated by the eastward shift of the world’s economic centre 
of gravity, which is occurring at a faster speed than ever before in human history. And the 
shift towards a multipolar world is in turn reflected in changes to global institutions and fora, 
as  evidenced  by  the  switch  in  relative  importance  between  the  G7  and  the  G20,  and  the 
ongoing governance reforms at the IMF. 
In line with the shift in economic centre of gravity, the currency constellation in the IMS may 
also  be  gradually  changing.  In  particular  in  light  of  the  remarkable  growth  of  China’s 
economy and recent policy measures adopted by its authorities, the international use of the 
renminbi has gained momentum.4 And China’s plans to liberalise its capital account as well 
as to increase exchange rate flexibility and develop domestic financial markets will enhance 
the  role  of  the  renminbi  as  an  international  reserve  currency.  Some  analysts  believe  that, 
over time, it can reach international currency status, alongside the US dollar and the euro.5 
We would then enter an era of a tri-polar IMS. 
Unconventional monetary policy 
Before the global financial crisis the widespread adoption of explicit price stability objectives 
had been conducive to prolonged low inflation outcomes alongside economic growth. Major 
central banks were content to invoke the Tinbergen principle, aiming to achieve their primary 
objective  of  price  stability  through  a  single  monetary  policy  instrument:  short-term  interest 
rates.  The  global  financial  crisis  changed  this  setting  abruptly.  Pursuing  central  bank 
mandates  in  a  zero  lower-bound  environment  has  meant  that  monetary  policy  needed  to 
broaden the set of policy instruments at its disposal, including forward guidance and asset 
purchases by central banks. As a result of the latter, the balance sheets of all major central 
banks have increased significantly. 
One  of  the  major  challenges  in  the  years  ahead  will  be  the  differentiated  normalisation  of 
unconventional  monetary  policies  in  advanced  economies.  Many  have  argued  that  in  this 
process central banks in advanced economies should be mindful of the spillovers to the rest 
of the world.6 There have even been calls for a fundamental strengthening of international 
                                                
4  This  has  been  particularly  visible  in  the  rise  of  the  renminbi  as  an  invoicing  and  settlement  currency  for 
China’s international trade: while in 2010 almost none of China’s trade in goods and services was invoiced in 
renminbi, in 2014 this figure has risen to almost 25%. Similarly, the issuance of renminbi-denominated (“dim 
sum”) bonds has grown by a factor of about 30, albeit from a very low level. 
5  For a discussion of the international role of the renminbi, see Eichengreen, B., and Kawai M. (2014), “Issues 
for  renminbi  internationalization:  an  overview”,  Asian  Development  Bank  Institute  Working  Paper,  No  454, 
January.  On  recent  trends  in  the  IMS,  see  the  latest  ECB  Report  on  the  International  Role  of  the  Euro, 
Frankfurt am Main, 16 July 2014.  
6  See Rajan, R. (2013), “A step in the dark: unconventional monetary policy after the crisis”, Andrew Crockett 
Memorial Lecture, BIS. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  monetary policy coordination. I would like to take this opportunity to elaborate on my views 
on this discussion. 
The debate on international monetary policy coordination 
There are different proposals on how the IMS should change. In particular, there have been 
several calls to establish a more formal framework of monetary policy coordination, or some 
kind of revised Bretton Woods system. Overall, I will argue that the forces which are at play 
today in the IMS, as described above, call for a strengthening of some of its features rather 
than an overhaul. 
Theory 
First,  while  the  literature  suggests  that  international  monetary  policy  coordination  may  be 
instrumental  in  achieving  a  globally  optimal  solution,  it  generally  concludes  that  the  gains 
from  coordination  are  small  relative  to  an  environment  in  which  national  policy-makers 
pursue optimal domestic policies.7  
Second,  it  is  not  clear  that  the  benefits  from  coordination  increase  monotonically  with 
economic  and  financial  integration.8  On  the  one  hand,  financial  integration  intensifies  the 
impact  of  foreign  shocks  on  the  domestic  economy.  On  the  other  hand,  it  also  improves 
diversification and insurance opportunities, hence mitigating the impact of foreign shocks. It 
is difficult to know ex ante which of these effects will dominate both in “normal” and “crisis” 
times.  My  suggestion  would  be  that  while  the  diversification  effect  dominates  in  “normal” 
times, in “crisis” times the effects from large adverse spillovers prevail. I will come back to 
this issue later. 
Practical obstacles 
There  are  also  several  practical  challenges  that  make  more  explicit  and  binding  forms  of 
monetary policy coordination difficult. The first stems from political economy. Central banks 
operate  under  different  mandates, 
time  horizons,  objectives  and  accountability 
arrangements.  They  are  ultimately  backed  by  their  domestic  fiscal  authority  and  report  to 
their domestic parliament (the euro area is no exception to this rule, even if sovereignty is 
shared locally). As a consequence, they cannot act as lenders of last resort other than in a 
discretionary way beyond the boundaries of their political constituencies. 
In addition, economic cycles do not always coincide across countries, which creates tensions 
between  what  is  needed  for  domestic  purposes  and  what  is  optimal  from  an  international 
perspective (the demise of the Louvre Accord is a classic example). 
Finally, given that uncertainty is pervasive in economic policy-making, developing a common 
assessment  of  global  risks  and  spillovers  will  always  be  difficult.  This  considerably 
complicates  consensus-building  concerning  the  design  and  enforcement  of  policies  that 
countries should implement. 
Take, for example, the pre-crisis debate on the risks stemming from global imbalances. The 
current  account  deficit  in  the  United  States  was  seen  by  some  as  problematic,  as  they 
believed  it  would  eventually  trigger  a  balance  of  payments  crisis  or  a  sudden  and  strong 
depreciation of the US dollar with global ramifications. Others instead argued that the current 
                                                
7  See in particular the seminal paper by Obstfeld, M., and Rogoff, K. (2002), “Global implications of self-oriented 
national monetary rules”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 117, No 2, pp. 503–35.  
8  This may partly also depend on the model set-up characterised by limited policy trade-offs. See also B. Cœuré 
(2014),  keynote  address  at  the  ECB-IMF  conference  on  the  “International  dimension  of  conventional  and 
unconventional  monetary  policy”,  Frankfurt  am  Main,  30  April  2014,  forthcoming  in  a  special  issue  of  the 
Journal of International Money and Finance.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  account deficit was not of concern given the international status of the US dollar; the positive 
valuation effects and the positive net foreign income balance were seen as evidence that the 
current account deficit in the US was sustainable. As a matter of fact, we did not experience 
a  US  balance  of  payments  crisis,  even  though  we  did  experience  a  spectacular  global 
financial crisis.9 What was the connection between global imbalances and the global financial 
crisis?  What  were  the  drivers  of  those  global  imbalances?  The  debate  has  still  not  been 
settled. Similarly, I would claim that the main obstacle today to international monetary policy 
coordination is the lack of consensus on (and maybe even of understanding of) the degree of 
slack in the labour and product markets of the major economies. 
Reaching a consensus on the nature of spillovers is not straightforward either. Most models 
of international monetary policy coordination assume that policy-makers are able to identify 
the types of shock and how they are transmitted to the domestic and global economy. But 
this is often not the case in practice. 
For  instance,  there  have  been  marked  differences  in  the  views  on  the  global  impact  of 
Federal  Reserve  announcements.  On  the  one  hand,  some  have  argued  that  the  Fed’s 
monetary policy is driving a global financial cycle.10 On the other hand, others have argued 
that the key driving forces of capital flows are global risk and uncertainty, with a much looser 
connection  to  US  monetary  policy.11  Another  example  of  diverging  views  concerns  the 
question  of  whether  emerging  economies  have  the  tools  to  neutralise  the  spillovers 
originating from other parts of the global economy. 
As  a  result  of  our  poor  understanding  of  the  types  of  shock  and  their  transmission, 
establishing which policy responses are the best for each country seems to be rather difficult. 
Internalising the effects of one’s monetary policy on other jurisdictions would be even more 
challenging. Suppose the Fed had a mandate to internalise the global impact of its decisions, 
which  it  does  not  have,  would  the  financial  stability  impact  of  cheap  dollar  funding  in 
emerging  market  economies  have  called  for  a  later,  or  for  an  earlier,  normalisation  of  US 
monetary  policy?  Ultimately,  there  is  necessarily  a  high  degree  of  subjective  judgement 
involved. As I already suggested, crisis times such as 2008–2009 are the exception, since 
the spillovers are at the same time less ambiguous and more visible. 
The scope of coordination 
This does not imply that regular dialogues between central banks as well as exchanges of 
views during meetings at the IMF, the BIS, the G20 and at regional level, are not useful. In 
fact, I believe that it is quite the contrary. Global institutions and fora play an essential role for 
three reasons. 
First, they achieve a better understanding and a common assessment of the global spillovers 
from  domestic  policy  actions  and  the  potential  policy  trade-offs.  The  discussion  on  capital 
flow  management  measures  is  a  good  example.12  The  IMF  should  continue  to  lend  its 
analytical and impartial voice to this effort. 
Second, even if the scope for coordination is limited in good times, they make coordination 
possible in bad times. Consider, for example, the establishment of a system of bilateral swap 
agreements  among  major  advanced  economy  central  banks,  or  the  recent  decision  to 
establish such an agreement between the ECB and the People’s Bank of China. 
                                                
9  See B. Eichengreen (2014), “A Requiem for Global Imbalances”, Project Syndicate.  
10  See H. Rey (2013), “Dilemma not trilemma: the global cycle and monetary policy independence”, Proceedings 
– Economic Policy Symposium – Jackson Hole, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, pp. 1–2. 
11  See Forbes, K. and Warnock, F. (2012), “Capital flow waves: Surges, stops, flight, and retrenchment”, Journal 
of International Economics, vol. 88(2), pp. 235–251.  
12  See IMF (2012), “The liberalisation and management of capital flows: An institutional view”, IMF Policy Paper. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Third, they prompt work at bodies such as the Basel Committee for Banking Supervision, the 
International  Organization  of  Securities  Commission  or  the  Committee  on  Payments  and 
Settlement Systems, to establish the standards and infrastructures and create a level playing 
field,  which  are  necessary  for global  markets  to  function  in  a  smooth  and  safe  way.  In  so 
doing,  they  foster  risk-sharing  through  decentralised  markets,  avoiding  the  need  to 
coordinate in the first place. Against the background of the possible “deglobalisation” forces 
that  I  mentioned  earlier,  and  given  the  ongoing  transition  to  a  more  multipolar  currency 
system, this work may become even more crucial. 
To summarise, I am not convinced that the existing approach to monetary policy coordination 
should  be  fundamentally  overhauled  at  the  current  juncture.  Due  to  knowledge  and 
legitimacy gaps, we should not believe that there can be a “global planner” which sets the 
rules or prescribes the monetary, prudential, fiscal and structural policies that each country 
shall pursue. However, countries can and should maintain the foundations for coordination to 
make global markets a safer place and allow for joint action in times of crises. 
The evolution of the IMS 
The  IMS  during  the  Bretton Woods  era  was  strictly  rules-based  with  fixed  exchange  rates 
and a gold standard. While appropriate in a world with capital controls and relatively modest 
trade flows, it proved to be too inflexible in the presence of large idiosyncratic shocks and 
growing internationalisation. The end of the Bretton Woods era gave rise to an IMS that is 
mostly based on principles, which are discussed in fora such as the G7, G20 or the OECD 
and  BIS.  In  particular,  one  principle  holds  that  multilateral  financial  safety  nets  should  be 
available  to  countries  facing  large  financial  market  disruptions  caused  by  major  external 
shocks. 
Like  any  insurance-providing  scheme,  the  IMS  is  incentives-based.  The  incentives  for  any 
economy to access the IMF’s credit lines, bilateral swap agreements or regional balance of 
payment  support  facilities  depend  on  the  conditionality  embedded  in  each  of  these 
mechanisms,  as  well  as  on  the  degree  of  self-insurance  acquired  by  this  economy,  e.g. 
through  foreign  exchange  reserves.  The  problem  here  is  that  conditionality  is  not  always 
explicit,  nor  is  it  consistent  across  instruments,  providing  a  fuzzy  set  of  incentives  –  and 
therefore  a  bias  towards  self-insurance.  This  may  create  arbitrage  opportunities  across 
facilities (in other words, a “race to the bottom” of conditionality, encouraging moral hazard) 
and, ultimately, a bias towards self-insurance, a sub-optimal way to deliver global stability. 
There  is  scope  for  improving  the  consistency  of  these  facilities  both  horizontally  across 
institutions and vertically between the global and regional level. 
A  different  set  of  incentives  stems  from  the  surveillance  carried  out  by  the  IMF  and  other 
institutions and fora. This has taken place since the demise of the Bretton Woods system at 
the  bilateral  level  in  the  context  of  the  IMF’s  Article  IV  consultations  and  it  has  expanded 
recently at the multilateral level with the IMF’s Spillover and External Sector Reports as well 
as the G20 Mutual Assessment Process, not to mention regional exercises. 
The resulting recommendations are however not binding and therefore constitute only a light 
form  of  multilateralism.  Clearly,  countries  may  be  reluctant  to  submit  to  closer  scrutiny, 
fearing  that  the  recommended  policies  may  not  be  in  their  national  interest.  Thus,  better 
awareness  and  maintaining  a  spirit  of  multilateralism  will  be  a  crucial  element  in 
strengthening  the  effectiveness  of  surveillance  and  contributing  to  global  stability.  This 
requires  institutions  that  are  both  legitimate  and  effective.  In  particular,  lack  of  progress  in 
global governance reform (reflecting the shift towards a multipolar world) would fuel a lack of 
trust  in  the  IMS.  It  would  encourage  the  ring-fencing  of  national  systems  and  the 
re-nationalisation of savings, harming growth and jobs in all economies. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Conclusion 
Let me conclude. The belief that the comfortable pre-crisis world could return is long gone. 
And I also believe that we should not aspire to turn the clock back. The global economy has 
changed  fundamentally,  and  there  is  clearly  a  greater  understanding  of  the  role  of  cross-
border  linkages.  The  current  IMS  leaves  countries  with  more  domestic  policy  options  to 
counter adverse idiosyncratic shocks than the inflexible system of the Bretton Woods era. 
At the same time, in a highly interlinked global economy consensus-building concerning the 
transmission of spillovers is crucial for dealing with shocks that affect substantial parts of the 
global  economy.  Moreover,  the  IMS  should  also  provide  incentives  to  foster  appropriate 
preventive  action  that  renders  economies  more  resilient  to  shocks,  and  provide  the 
necessary standards and infrastructures to make global markets work better as well as make 
coordination possible when warranted. This is already a robust policy agenda.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
