Ashraf Mahmood Wathra: Promoting innovative rural and agriculture 
finance in Pakistan 
Welcome  address  by  Mr  Ashraf  Mahmood  Wathra,  Acting  Governor  of  the  State  Bank  of 
Pakistan,  at 
Innovation  Challenge  Fund 
2nd Challenge Round on “Promoting Innovative Rural and Agriculture Finance in Pakistan”, 
Islamabad, 6 March 2014. 
launching  ceremony  of 
the  Financial 
the 
 Hon’ble Federal Minister for Finance, Revenue, Economic Affairs and Privatization, 
Senator Muhammad Ishaq Dar, 
His Excellency UK High Commissioner, Mr. Philip Barton, 
Head of DFID Pakistan, Mr. Richard Montgomery, 
Distinguished Guests, Speakers, Colleagues, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Assalamu alaikum and very good morning! 
I  would  like  to  express  my  gratitude  to  all  the  distinguished  guests:  the  Chief  Guest, 
Honorable  Finance  Minister  Senator  Ishaq  Dar,  representatives  from  the  diplomatic 
community, development partners and agencies, government officials, agriculture chambers, 
representative  of  all  Banks,  non-governmental  organizations  and  agriculture  sector 
stakeholders for joining us today. 
It  is  my  great  pleasure  to  extend  a  very  warm  welcome  to  all  of  you  to  this  auspicious 
ceremony  held  to  commence  the  launch  of  2nd  challenge  round  of  Financial  Innovation 
Challenge  Fund,  aiming  to  promote  financial  innovation  for  development  of  rural  and 
agriculture sectors in Pakistan. 
Ladies and gentlemen! 
To quote Thomas Edison “There’s a way to do it better – find it” 
While defining innovation, this quotation clearly emphasizes on doing things in a unique and 
better way. Therefore, tackling poverty also demands fundamental rethinking and innovation. 
The alleviation of poverty is a universal goal, to ensure prosperity, we as a society need to 
focus  on  inclusive  growth,  which  requires  fundamental  innovation  in  designing  financial 
models aimed at the poor segment of the society. 
Distinguished guests! 
Improving  financial  access  to  alleviate  poverty  is  a  global  challenge.  More  than  2  billion 
adults  in  the  world  do  not  have  access  to  formal  or  semi-formal  financial  services.  At  the 
same time, one billion people with mobile phones do not have even a basic bank account. As 
the costs of information and communications technology have now shrunk, the time is ripe 
for using technology to address financial exclusion. Therefore, financial inclusion is one of 
the key pillars of the G- 20’s development agenda. The G20 leaders at their Korea Summit in 
2010  included  “innovation”  as  one  of  the  key  principles  for  promoting  financial  inclusion. 
While urging the developing countries to cultivate a broad based government commitment to 
financial  inclusion  to  help  alleviate  poverty,  the  G20  Principles  urge  them  to  promote 
technological and institutional innovation as a means to expand financial system access and 
usage. Since financial exclusion is particularly pronounced in Pakistan, both the Government 
and  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan  are  addressing  this  challenge  using  innovative  policy 
approaches  and  actions.  There  is  a  full  commitment  of  the  government  to  provide 
sustainable  financial  access  to  the  under-served  economic  and  geographic  segments 
including  youth,  women,  and  SMEs.  In  this  effort,  the  role  of  multilateral  institutions  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
bilateral donors particularly the UK’s Department for International Development (DFID) has 
been critical. 
Ladies and gentlemen! 
In Pakistan rural population is above 60% and most people living in rural areas drive their 
income directly or indirectly from agriculture. It employs around 45 percent of our total labor 
force.  If  we  were  to  develop  any  logical  linkage  between  the  economic  development  of 
Pakistan with any of the sectors, that sector would most probably be agriculture. 
Agriculture  plays  a  strategic  role  in  ensuring  food  security,  generating  economic  growth, 
reducing poverty & inequality. To combat poverty in rural sector, financial innovation needs to 
be targeted towards the productivity of the agriculture sector specifically to the productivity of 
“small farmers”, improvement in farmer’s education, and better availability of fertilizers, and 
agriculture  equipments.  Financial  services  outreach  in  the  rural  sector  can  play  the  most 
indispensable role in this regard. 
Ladies and Gentlemen! 
Promoting financial inclusion by developing agri credit market, rural SMEs and microfinance 
sector is one of the top priorities at SBP. Over the past few weeks, State Bank has taken 
some  ground-breaking  initiatives  to  uplift  financing  to  the  farmers  and  small  and  medium 
entrepreneurs: 
 
State  Bank  has  revamped  Prudential  Banks  for  Agricultural  Financing  whereby 
banks have been advised to formulate all-inclusive agri. finance policies and set up 
dedicated  agri  divisions  within  banks.  Under  the  revised  PRs,  the  scope  of  agri. 
financing has been widened to include value chain financing and Islamic mode of 
financing. 
We  have  just  revised  the  per  acre  Credit  Limits  for  crops,  orchards  and  forestry 
which  were  previously  set  in  2008.  This  was  done  to  meet  the  enhanced  credit 
requirements of farmers and also increase the agri credit portfolio of banks manifold. 
Farming community and banks have been overwhelmed by this initiative. 
We all know the significance of livestock that accounts for 55 percent of agri. GDP. 
However, the share of credit to livestock is disproportionately small due to high risk 
perception.  Therefore,  to  address  this  issue,  SBP  has  introduced  a  Livestock 
Insurance Scheme for borrowers to mitigate risk of loss of livestock due to disease, 
natural calamities & accidents. 
To  ensure  diversity  of  agri.  financing  institutions,  SBP  has  included  Microfinance 
Banks and Islamic Banks into the agri. Indicative Target scheme of SBP. 
The Agricultural Credit Advisory Committee (ACAC), which is the apex consultative 
forum for agri financing with representation from all the relevant federal & provincial 
departments, farming community, banks and experts, has been re-activated. 
The  ACAC  met  on  17th  February  2014  which  supported  my  six-point  agenda  to 
boost agri financing. This includes: 
– 
Launching  of  the  2nd  Round  of  Financial  Innovation  Challenge  Fund  (FICF) 
under 
to  promote 
innovative techniques in agri and rural financing (for which we have gathered 
today). 
Further, the ACAC approved my proposal of upward revision in the agri credit 
disbursement target from Rs. 360 billion to Rs.380 billion for the current year, 
which is 13 percent higher than the actual disbursement  of Rs.336 billion in 
last year. 
the  UKAID-sponsored  Financial 
Inclusion  Program, 
      2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
    SBP  is  going  to  launch  a  country-wide  Internship  Program  for  100  top 
graduates  in  agriculture  to  be  funded  under  the  ADB’s  Improving  Access  to 
Financial Services Endowment Fund. 
Banks  have  been  assigned  targets  for  outstanding  agriculture  portfolio  and 
number of borrowers to have high impact of financing at grass roots level from 
the current year. 
SBP  has  made  agricultural  finance  a  key  indicator  of  performance  of  banks 
which will be reflected in their supervisory ratings. 
And, finally a working group of ACAC has been formed to review the state of 
affairs  of  small  farmers  financing  and  make  recommendations  for  improving 
financial access to small farmers. 
Recognizing the economic significance of rural SMEs, State Bank has revised the 
Prudential Regulations for SME financing to put focus on ‘S’ part of SMEs. Further, 
following incentives for SME exporters have been introduced in the Export Finance 
Scheme (EFS). 
– 
– 
Banks will allocate at least 10% of their EFS limits for SMEs. 
For SMEs availing Export Finance under the Performance-based System, the 
mark-up rebate has been increased by 0.5 percentage point. 
Further, to incentivize banks to provide more financing to SMEs their spread 
has been increased from 1% to 2% for SME borrowers WITHOUT changing 
prevailing end user rate for exporters. 
 SBP  has  also  provided  regulatory  support  in  designing  and  launching  of  Prime 
Minister  Youth  Business  Loans.  SBP  has  issued  instructions  to  the  banks  for 
participation in PM’s Youth Business Loans and report financing under the scheme 
in their Annual Reports under CSR initiatives. 
For  successful  implementation  of  the  PM  Scheme,  SBP  is  closely  monitoring  the 
progress  of  participating  banks.  SBP  has  also  conducted  twelve  (12)  training 
workshops  on  the  Program  across  Pakistan  and  AJK  to  sensitize  banks  for  their 
active participation in the PM Scheme. 
   Ladies and Gentlemen! 
Now, SBP under the flagship ‘Financial Inclusion Program’, funded by the UK Aid, is about to 
unveil  the  Financial  Innovation  Challenge  Fund  round  on  innovative  rural  and  agricultural 
financial  services.  The  successful  implementation  of  this  challenge  round  requires  utmost 
commitment and support from everyone who is present here. Our Deputy Governor and my 
colleague Mr. Saeed Ahmad will share with you the objectives and modalities of this Fund 
and the SBP-managed FIP in more details. 
I  thank  and  welcome  you  all  once again  and  hope  that  the  stakeholders  will  join  hands  in 
getting behind this latest initiative to further enhance rural financial inclusion in Pakistan. 
Thank you! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
