Yves Mersch: Reviving growth in the euro area 
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the Institute of International European Affairs, Dublin, 7 February 2014. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Thank  you  very  much for  inviting me to  speak to  you  today.  It  is  a  pleasure to  be  here  in 
Ireland  at  this  time  when  the  country  has  newly  exited  its  adjustment  programme  and 
restored its economic autonomy. While the challenges are not over, the Irish people have set 
an example to the rest of the euro area about how to face a period of economic difficulty – 
that is, to face it head on, to take the necessary measures, and in doing so to bounce back 
as quickly as possible. 
The good news is that recovery also appears to be taking hold in the rest of the euro area. 
The latest data suggest that economic growth has continued to pick up, with activity being 
supported  not  only  by  net  exports,  but  also  by  internal  consumption.  Nevertheless,  the 
recovery remains relatively weak and uneven, and there is a long way to go to bring down 
the  very  high  levels  of  unemployment.  This  raises  the  question  of  how  we  can  revive 
sustainable growth across the euro area. 
In my view, there are limits to how much we can expect from demand stimulus. Monetary 
policy will remain accommodative for as long as necessary, but it cannot solve all problems; 
it merely buys time. Fiscal policy is necessarily constrained by high debt levels. And while the 
private sector undergoes a period of deleveraging, we cannot – and should not – expect to 
see a return to the debt-fuelled aggregate demand growth of the past. 
This  means  that  to  revive  growth  we  have  to  look  mainly  to  the  supply  capacity  of  the 
economy – that is, its potential growth. And here the situation is not encouraging. According 
to  the  European  Commission,  potential  growth  in  the  euro  area  has  fallen  from  2.2%  in 
2000–07  to  0.9%  in  2008–12.  We  need  to  do  everything  in  our  power  to  reverse  this 
situation, and what I would like to discuss in my remarks today is how we can achieve this.  
Why has potential growth fallen?  
Let me start by briefly reviewing why potential growth has contracted during the crisis and the 
challenges this creates for policy makers. In doing so, I will use a broad definition of potential 
growth,  namely  the  economic  activity  that  can  be  sustained  by  means  of  the  available 
production  factors  –  capital,  labour  and  technology  –  without  engendering  inflationary 
pressures and/or fuelling asset price boom-busts. 
Starting with capital, investment has been one of the main casualties of the crisis, with total 
investment shrinking by more than 15% in the euro area since its peak in 2008. This is of 
course to some extent cyclical, as well as reflecting a necessary correction of previous over-
investment  in  the  construction  sector.  Yet  we  have  also  seen  a  strong  and,  thus  far, 
persistent contraction in business investment, which may weigh on future productivity growth 
as such investment tends to raise the technology content of capital. A prolonged period of 
below-trend  investment  could  also  lead  to  an  excess  of  savings  over  investment,  and 
therefore a fall in the natural interest rate. 
Developments  in  labour  supply  have  also  been  weak.  One  positive  factor  has  been  the 
increase  in  the  labour  participation  rate  in  the  euro  area  by  around  1  pp  during  the  crisis, 
whereas in the U.S. participation has fallen by more than 3 pp. However, this has to be set 
against an increase in euro area long-term unemployment from 3% to 6%, which creates a 
risk  of  workers’  skills  being  eroded  and  skill  mismatches  emerging.  This  is  particularly 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
relevant because unemployment is concentrated among those with lower skills: around 20% 
of low skilled workers are unemployed, compared with only about 7% of high skilled workers. 
Total factor productivity – which principally captures long-term technological progress – has 
fallen only marginally during the crisis, most likely reflecting the underutilised capacity in the 
inputs to production. However, this is no cause for comfort as TFP was on a declining trend 
in  the  euro  area  well  before  the  crisis,  and  has  recovered  less  quickly  than  in  the  United 
States.1  
These developments create two interrelated challenges for policymakers. The first is how to 
prevent  the  fall  in  observed  growth  from  feeding  back  into  potential  growth.  Here  the  key 
issue is to avoid that rising long-term unemployment and structurally low investment create 
hysteresis effects. 
The second challenge is how to raise potential growth in a durable way. In line with my broad 
definition  of  potential  growth,  recent research  has  suggested that  pre-crisis  estimates may 
have  been  overstated  by  effects  linked  to  the  financial  cycle.2  In  other  words,  after 
incorporating  information  on  the  unsustainable  developments  in  real  interest  rates,  credit 
growth and property prices that characterised the 2003–08 period, potential output may have 
been lower than we thought. A return to the status quo ante may not therefore be enough to 
restore high levels of sustainable employment. 
These challenges are interrelated because, to the extent that we can achieve an upward shift 
in the future growth potential, it will affect growth expectations today. This might induce firms 
and households to frontload consumption and investment decisions, thus helping lower the 
risk of hysteresis effects. And vice versa, if there is no prospect of higher growth in the future, 
we could fall victim to self-fulfilling negative expectations. 
For this reason, I see policy action on both fronts as urgent. And there are three policy areas 
that  I  see  as  relevant:  monetary  policy;  financial  sector  repair;  and,  most  importantly, 
structural reforms.  
How can we raise potential growth? 
Monetary policy 
We know  that  monetary  policy  can  help  buy  time  for  necessary  structural  measures  to  be 
implemented.  Going  beyond  that,  it  may  seem  strange  to  include  monetary  policy  in  a 
discussion  of  potential  growth.  The  pre-crisis  consensus  was  clearly  that  monetary  policy 
could not affect the supply side of the economy – while it could help stabilise output around 
its trend, it could not affect that trend.  
However,  there  has  been  some  discussion  recently  among  central  bankers  as  to  whether 
monetary  policy  can  have  more  lasting  effects.  For  example,  if  an  extended  period  of  low 
demand is creating hysteresis effects, a more accommodative monetary policy that boosts 
the economy may prevent a permanent downward shift in productivity. That is, it can for a 
time prevent a cyclical fall in growth from becoming structural too quickly. 
The jury is still out on this discussion. It is clear that the supply capacity of the economy is 
determined  by  its  structural  features,  and  monetary  policy  cannot  substitute  for  this. 
Nevertheless,  some  see  that  monetary  policy  can  play  a  “defensive”  role  in  a  period  of 
                                                
1 
“Potential  output,  economic  slack  and  the  link  to  nominal  developments  since  the  start  of  the  crisis”,  ECB 
Monthly Bulletin, November 2013. 
2  Claudio  Borio,  Piti  Disyatat and  Mikael  Juselius,  “Rethinking  potential  output:  Embedding  information  about 
the financial cycle”, BIS Working Papers, February 2013. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
economic weakness. In our case, by delivering our price stability mandate, while we cannot 
raise growth potential, we can perhaps limit or delay the degree to which it falls. 
The effectiveness of monetary policy in the euro area has unfortunately been hindered during 
the crisis by financial fragmentation – and in the countries where low interest rates are most 
needed.  But  we  are  now  seeing  signs  that  monetary  policy  is  once  more  gaining  traction 
across the euro area, in particular via the bank lending channel.  
On  the  funding  side,  bank  funding  conditions  have  eased  considerably  since  mid-2012. 
Interbank  counterparty  risk  has  fallen,  as  evidenced  in  the  sharp  decline  in  the  spread 
between  secured  and  unsecured  money  market  lending.  And  benchmark  interest  rates, 
notably  sovereign  yields,  have  been  responding  much  more  homogenously  to  our  rate 
reductions. 
On the lending side, the transmission of our interest rate decisions to bank lending rates is 
still uneven across euro area countries, but the dispersion has narrowed considerably. Our 
latest  Bank  Lending  Survey  also  confirmed  a  stabilisation  in  lending  conditions,  with 
improvements highly concentrated in stressed countries. 
In short, we have reason to be optimistic that our accommodative monetary policy is feeding 
through  to  the  real  economy  and,  as  such,  can  help  prevent  damage  to  potential  growth 
caused  by  a  prolonged period  of  economic  weakness.  Yet  it  is  also  clear  that  low  interest 
rates cannot raise growth on a structural basis. What is crucial to actually lift productivity is 
credit being allocated where it is most productive.  
Let me therefore turn to the issue of financial sector repair. 
Financial sector repair  
There  is  considerable  empirical  evidence  that  a  strong  driver  of  aggregate  productivity 
growth is “churn” between firms – less productive firms exiting the market and new innovative 
firms entering, or existing firms reallocating resources to more productive sectors.3 The job of 
the financial sector is to ensure that credit allocation supports this process. 
However, what seems to have happened, at least in parts of the euro area, is that banks with 
weak balance sheets have retarded this process. One recent study found that larger banks 
have reallocated credit away from riskier firms, preventing new entrants, while smaller banks 
have engaged in so-called ever-greening of loans, inhibiting firm exits.4  
Weak  banks  also  appear  to  have  slowed  down  sectoral  reallocation.  To  give  just  one 
example, despite the recent improvements in cost and price competitiveness in Greece, the 
sectoral allocation of credits has not substantially shifted towards export-oriented firms.5 This 
suggests  that  banks  in  certain  euro  area  countries  are  not  facilitating  sufficiently  the  shift 
towards more productive sectors. 
Financial sector repair therefore has to be at the core of any policy to raise euro area growth 
potential. And to ensure that lending is directed towards productive activity, in my view there 
are two policy priorities. 
The  first  is  to  strengthen  bank  balance  sheets  –  that  is,  for  losses  to  be  properly 
acknowledged  and  for  adequate  recapitalisation  to  follow.  This  is  why  our  ongoing 
                                                
3  See for example Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger, and Chad Syverson (2008), “Reallocation, Firm Turnover, 
and Efficiency: Selection on Productivity or Profitability?” American Economic Review, 98(1): 394–425. 
4  Albertazzi,  U.  and  Marchetti, D.  J.  (2010),  “Credit  crunch,  flight  to  quality  and  evergreening:  an  analysis  of 
bank-firm relationships after Lehman”, Working paper, Banca d’Italia. 
5  OECD Economic Surveys: Greece 2013 (November 2013). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
comprehensive assessment of banks is so important. It will not only restore confidence in the 
sector, but also create the conditions for potential growth to recover more quickly. 
The assessment has a further benefit as well: it ensures the ECB’s low interest rates do not 
encourage  banks  and firms to  delay  restructuring.  In  this  way,  it  allows  us  to maintain the 
monetary  policy  stance  that  is  appropriate for  the  euro  area,  while  mitigating  any  possible 
negative effects linked to misallocation of resources. 
The  second  priority  is  to  encourage  alternative  funding  sources  in  the  euro  area  and  to 
develop capital market financing, so that long run productivity growth is not so dependent on 
the  health  of  banks.  To  some  extent  this  is  happening  organically:  corporates  in  large 
countries  are  already  substituting  bank  lending  for  security  and  equity  issuance.  But  this 
option is largely not available for SMEs, making them very sensitive to banking sector stress. 
This is why I have been vocal in supporting the revitalisation of the securitisation market in 
Europe, which has virtually dried up in recent years. I see this as an important tool to help 
banks manage the credit risk associated with lending to SMEs. However, for it to recover it is 
critical that the regulatory treatment of asset-backed securities (ABS) is based on real data 
and not the legacy of the US sub-prime disaster. We have a very different experience with 
ABS here in Europe: between mid-2007 and the first quarter of 2013 the default rate on ABS 
in the EU was only around 1.4%, whereas it was 17.4% in the United States.6  
Structural reforms 
While financial sector repair can help ensure that credit flows to the most productive firms, 
we also have to ask the question: where will those firms come from? The incentive for firms 
to  exploit  economies  of  scale,  invest  and  innovate  –  that  is,  to  be  productive  –  depends 
critically on the business environment. We therefore need to ensure we have the economic 
framework conditions that encourage this.  
This  brings  me  to  the  key  topic  of  structural  reforms.  Put  simply,  there  is  no  way  we  can 
achieve  higher  potential  growth  in  the  euro  area  without  them.  Structural  reforms  are 
essential to raise the trend components of the inputs to production (investment and labour) 
and the efficiency with which they are used (total factor productivity).  
Let me explain why. 
First, while investment in the euro area may pick up as the uncertainty caused by the crisis 
recedes, to raise trend investment there needs to be fresh opportunities for firms to develop 
new business models and grow. For euro area economies, the main area where that can be 
achieved  is  through  addressing  regulatory  barriers  –  for  example,  planning  laws  that  limit 
retail expansion or transport regulations that hinder cross-border projects.  
A  recent  report  by  a  consultancy  found  that  45%  of  fixed  investment  in  Europe  was 
concentrated  in  sectors  where  governments  have  significant  regulatory  influence,  implying 
that structural reforms in these areas could provide a significant boost to investment.7 And as 
many investment projects benefit from returns over decades, they could be made viable with 
regulatory changes even in a relatively weak economy.  
Second, given weak demographic trends in Europe, raising trend labour supply is only really 
possible  through  further  reform  measures. We know  that  these  can  work.  The  increase  in 
labour participation during the crisis has been largely driven by previous reforms to increase 
                                                
6  Standard & Poor’s, “Transition Study: Less Than 1.5% Of European Structured Finance Has Defaulted Since 
Mid-2007”,  11  June  2013.  See  also  Moody’s  Investors  Service,  “Structured  Finance  Rating  Transitions:  
1983–2013”, 7 June 2013, as well as Fitch Ratings, “The Credit Crisis Four Years On … Structured Finance 
Research Compendium”, June 2012, and “EMEA Structured Finance Losses”, August 2011. 
Investing in Growth: Europe’s Next Challenge, McKinsey Global Institute, December 2012. 
7 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
female participation rates, as well as reforms related to early retirement and pensions that 
have raised the participation of older workers.  
The challenge now is to extend this activism to groups that have suffered during the crisis, in 
particular  younger  people  and  the  low  skilled.  Key  measures  here  include  reducing  labour 
market  duality  and  shifting  from  passive  labour  market  policies,  such  as  unemployment 
benefits de-linked from incentives to find a job, to active ones, such as job search assistance 
and training.  
Improving the conditions for cross-border labour mobility will also be key, especially in those 
countries that are ageing more rapidly. For example, the OECD projects German potential 
growth  to  decline  to  below  1%  soon  after  2020  on  account  of  skill  shortages.8  In  addition, 
higher immigration may imply stronger private demand dynamics, including higher demand 
for investment spending. 
Third,  total  factor  productivity  is  unlikely  to  reverse  its  downward  trend  without  structural 
reforms  to  improve  resource  allocation.  By  fostering  competition  and  reducing  economic 
rents, such reforms ensure that resources – and rewards – flow to high productivity sectors, 
which  in  turn  supports  innovation  and  technological  progress.  A  recent  study  found  that 
increasing competition in tradable and non-tradable sectors in Italy could increase output by 
4.0% in 5 years and 7.7% in the long run.9  
Moreover,  one  explanation  for  the  low  TFP  growth  before  the  crisis  was  that  structural 
barriers  were  slowing  down  the  adoption  and  diffusion  of  information  and  communication 
technology (ICT), in particular in the services sector.10 Reforms to deepen market integration 
between  euro  area  countries  –  such  as  implementing  the  Service  Directive  in  full  –  could 
therefore provide a boost to productivity through this channel. 
These may seem like theoretical arguments. Yet Ireland is a very concrete working example. 
Thanks to prior structural reforms, relative prices in this country adjusted almost immediately 
after  the  2008–09  recession,  allowing  the  economy  to  quickly  begin  regaining  its 
competitiveness.  The  unemployment  rate  started  declining  in  2012,  falling  from  14%  in 
December that year to 12% a year later. By contrast, in other programme countries with less 
flexible economies the recovery started much later. 
While we need to be cautious attributing causation, the significant decline in investment in 
Ireland  over  the  last  five  years  now  appears  to  have  ended.  Capital  formation  in  the  first 
three quarters of 2013 declined in annual terms, but stripping out the impact from a fall in 
aircraft purchases there appears to be stronger underlying recovery in investment. 
All  this  suggests  that  Ireland  is  implementing  the  right  kind  of  policies  to  raise  its  growth 
potential in the future – and in a sustainable way that is not linked to the financial cycle. The 
current level of Irish government bonds spreads implies that this is a view widely shared by 
financial markets.  
However, I trust that this good news will not give rise to complacency, as Ireland continues to 
face  considerable  challenges  on  several fronts.  These  include further repair  of  both  public 
and  private  sector  balance  sheets.  They 
the  still  high  rates  of 
unemployment for the long-term unemployed and the young. And they include restoring the 
functionality  of  the  banking  sector,  so  that  it  supports  rather  than  hinders  the  domestic 
economy as it emerges from the crisis. 
include  reducing 
                                                
8  OECD Economic Surveys: Germany 2012 (February 2012). 
9  Lusine  Lusinyan  and  Dirk  Muir,  “Assessing  the  Macroeconomic  Impact of  Structural  Reforms:  The  Case  of 
Italy”, IMF Working Paper, January 2013. 
10  Ramon  Gomez-Salvador,  Alberto  Musso,  Marc  Stocker  and  Jarkko  Turunen,  “Labour  Productivity 
Developments in the Euro Area”, ECB Occasional Paper, No. 53, October 2006. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
The challenges the euro area is facing today to raise its growth potential are not new. Since 
the 1990s we have known that supply conditions in the euro area needed to be reformed. 
This was the aim of the failed Lisbon Agenda. And indeed, it was the context for a famous 
quote about the apparent inconsistency between reform and re-election. 
What is new today, however, is the urgency for action. We are facing the risk of a structural 
set back in growth. We can therefore no longer afford to delay, nor should we over-burden 
monetary policy. Structural reforms are a must.  
For  this  reason,  the  apparent  contradiction  between  reforms  and  re-election  may  now  be 
moot, simply because citizens want growth, and without reforms it will not materialise. There 
is no country in the euro area that has delayed reforms and achieved economic outcomes 
with which their citizens are content. 
When I think of the euro area today, I am reminded of Winston Churchill’s line about “always 
doing  the  right  thing…  after  exhausting  all  the  alternatives”.  We  have  spent  two  decades 
exhausting all the alternatives in Europe – and so now I trust that the only path left to us is 
the right one. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
