  Cyril Roux: The new regulatory and supervisory roadmap for Europe 
Address  by  Mr  Cyril  Roux,  Deputy  Governor  (Financial  Regulation)  of the  Central  Bank  of 
Ireland, at the Banking Union Conference, Dublin, 23 June 2014. 
 Good  morning.  My  thanks  to  the  Irish  Banking  Federation  for  inviting  me  to  address  this 
distinguished audience. It is my pleasure to be here with you.  
The last few decades have seen countries going back and forth between conducting banking 
supervision within or without central banks. But one thing remained constant: the domestic 
nature of supervision. To coordinate supervision within the EU, we have established in the 
past two main mechanisms: home host arrangements, and colleges of supervisors, in charge 
of  Joint  Risk  Assessment  Decisions.  The  SSM  is  a  very  big  step  beyond  these  two 
mechanisms  for  cooperation:  as  the  name  implies,  we  are  now  putting  in  place  a  unified 
banking supervisor in the eurozone. Creating an international banking supervisor spanning 
18 countries and trillions of assets is unprecedented. It is the most significant change ever 
made in European banking supervision. As the other two pillars fall into place, it forms the 
basis of the European Banking Union, which is arguably the main European project of our 
time. 
We  have  just  heard  from  Danièle  Nouy  the  operational  challenges  and  opportunities 
presented by the Single Supervisory Mechanism as seen from the ECB, so I will share with 
you how we at the Central Bank prepare for the implementation of SSM on 4 November this 
year. 
I will provide you with an update on the work we are doing to transition to this new regime of 
supervision, how it impacts upon the way we will organise ourselves and what it means for 
Irish banks. 
Our transition to SSM 
We  have  established  a  programme  of  work  to  prepare  for  implementation  of  SSM  in  the 
Central Bank – this project is called Project Europe. 
This the most significant project currently in progress in the Central Bank. 
It involves eleven divisions across the bank, from HR to Banking Supervision and IT to Legal 
and  Enforcement,  among  others.  They  work  together  under  23  separate  work  streams  to 
ensure that we are prepared for 4 November. 
So what are we working on precisely? 
We revise our internal governance, reporting and decision making processes. 
We develop a Supervisory Board briefing process akin to that of the Governing Council. 
We are preparing to change our divisional structure in banking supervision 
We plan, devise and roll out training for all staff involved in SSM 
We update all our publicly available material on banking supervision and enforcement. 
We upgrade the receipt, validation and transmission tools of supervisory and statistical data 
We revise our fitness and probity regulations and our internal workflow around same. 
We support the Department of Finance in its drafting of transposing legislation. 
In so doing, the establishment of the SSM provides us with the opportunity to improve and 
strengthen our tools and procedures so that we can be an even better supervisor. Our aim is 
not only to ensure that we will have completed all preparatory tasks in support of the ECB’s 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  preparations but also to make the necessary organisational changes to allow us to deliver on 
our supervisory mandate ever more effectively. 
In doing so we seek to ensure that we are giving full expression to the aims and objectives of 
the SSM – not the mere implementation of the minimum required to be compliant with SSM 
methodologies and structures. 
But of course, we cannot do this in isolation. 
We have recently had the pleasure of hosting a series of visits by senior management of the 
SSM in recent weeks, and we are also looking forward to the visit of Danièle this afternoon. 
In April, we were visited by Dr Korbinian Ibel who is the Director General in charge of DG IV 
of  the  SSM,  which,  among  other  tasks,  is  in  charge  of  developing  the  SSM  policies  and 
methodologies and ensuring that all national supervisory authorities apply the SSM rules and 
procedures consistently, for significant and less significant institutions alike. 
We  held  a  series  of  meetings  with  colleagues  from  different  divisions,  including  our  risk 
division. Our risk based approach to supervision which was introduced by the Central Bank 
in 2011 has been considered in detail when devising the SSM approach of judgment based, 
forward looking supervision that Danièle has described. As she already indicated, the system 
which will be used by the SSM will be based on the PRISM system that we currently use. 
This software will be adapted to the SSM methodology. 
More  recently,  in  early  June,  we  welcomed  Stefan Walter  and  Ramon Quintana,  Directors 
General  of  DG  I  and  DG  II  of  the  SSM,  with  their  Deputies,  for  another  fruitful  day  of 
meetings and engagement which some of you will recall being involved in. 
This afternoon, we  will introduce Danièle to the Banking Supervision team and also to the 
wider Project team which includes colleagues from a variety of divisions including our policy 
and risk divisions, HR, IT, Statistics, Enforcement and Legal. We will host a town hall style 
meeting  with  all  staff  affected  by  the  changes  brought  about  by  SSM.  This  is  a  fantastic 
opportunity for our staff to ask questions directly to the Chair. 
The Central Bank of Ireland has made and continues to make a significant contribution to the 
SSM, at every level. 
Like  my  fellow  eurozone  peers,  I  take  part  every  fortnight  in  supervisory  board  meetings 
chaired  by  Danièle,  with  Patrick  Brady  as  my  alternate,  while  Derville  Rowland  and  Joe 
Gavin represent us in the Legal Committee of the ECB when it meets in SSM composition. 
Other  ECB  committees  address  IT,  data,  HR  and  Communication  issues  for  the  SSM.  In 
banking supervision matters, we also contribute to many more technical meetings that take 
place in Frankfurt and around Europe at an ever increasing pace. 
We also contribute to the staffing of the SSM. 200 staff from authorities all over Europe have 
been seconded to the SSM to date; 11 are from the Central Bank of Ireland and we hope to 
increase  that  figure.  This  is  indicative  of  our  commitment  to  the  success  of  the  single 
supervisory mechanism. 
Comprehensive assessment – update 
Of course, in parallel with all of these change projects, is the Comprehensive Assessment. 
You will all be more than aware that the ECB launched the Comprehensive Assessment in 
November of last year. In fact, some of you here today are heavily engaged in the exercise. 
This  project,  which  is  a  kind  of  entrance  examination  for  all  significant  credit  institutions, 
includes an Asset Quality Review (AQR), Stress Test and Supervisory Risk Assessment. 
The AQR is a point-in-time examination of a bank’s assets and will result in the determination 
of provision adequacy and, as the case may be, identification of capital requirements. The 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Stress  Test  builds  on  the  AQR  by  providing  a  forward-looking  view  of  banks’  shock-
absorption capacity under prescribed macro-economic scenarios and constraints. 
We are well advanced for the AQR exercise. This has involved the examination of credit and 
market exposures, for both on and off-balance sheet exposures, covering all material asset 
classes.  It  will  result  in  more than  50  per  cent of  assets  by  risk  weight  being  reviewed  by 
national competent authority teams. For us, this means having engaged auditors to review 
over 4,000 credit files and resultant collateral valuations. We have covered not only the three 
largest Irish  banking groups  but  also  large  subsidiaries  of foreign  banking groups,  be  they 
headquartered elsewhere in the eurozone, in the UK or in the US. 
The  AQR  has  also  resulted  in  completion  by  the  Central  Bank  of  Processes,  Policies  & 
Accounting Reviews, Level 3 Fair Value Asset Revaluations and Collective Model Reviews. 
The project organisation ensures a high level of quality assurance and it is intended that the 
results  of  the  AQR  will  be  fully  integrated  with  the  results  of  the  stress  test.  Our  recent 
Balance Sheet Assessment, conducted last year, is taken into account in the AQR and the 
determination of the results. 
The approach to the stress test is as per the EBA methodology that was published in April 
and will be performed by the EBA and ECB in close co-operation. We are expecting the first 
submission of the constrained bottom-up results at the end of the month. 
Why not publish the results now, or afford you a sneak preview? Because the first sets of 
preliminary  results  may  well  turn  out  to  require  a  lot  of  validation,  consistency  checking, 
supervisory dialogue, integration and rework before we can all stand behind them. 
The  next  four  months  will  see  a  period  of  challenge,  quality  assurance,  integration  of  the 
AQR results and finalisation. The results will then be published by the EBA for all banks in 
their sample. For those banks that are also part of the SSM, it is expected that results of the 
Comprehensive Assessment will be published thereafter – recognising the unique integration 
of AQR results into the forward-looking stress test capital requirements. 
Significant credit institutions and the “Joint Supervisory Team” 
Danièle has taken us through, in some detail, the operational challenges and opportunities 
which go hand in hand with the SSM. One of focus point of supervision in the SSM of the 
significant  institutions  are  the  Joint  supervisory  teams  or  JSTs,  that  is  to  say  teams 
comprising  ECB  and  national  central  bank  staff  who  will  work  together  in  the  ongoing 
supervision of each significant institution. 
A JST Coordinator will lead the JST and will be based in the ECB. The JST co-ordinator will 
be supported by our current team leaders and the line supervisors working with them 
The  JST  coordinators  will  be  responsible  for  the  planning  and  execution  of  the  annual 
supervisory programmes and the coordination of communication with their institutions. They 
will  also  make  proposals  for  formal  decisions  to  the  Supervisory  Board,  and  monitor  the 
implementation of such decisions. 
This will apply to the banks currently subject to the Comprehensive Assessment (AIB, BOI, 
PTSB, UBIL, BOAML). As these banks differ in size and complexity, they will be supervised 
in 4 different divisions in the SSM; two of these divisions are in DG I and two in DG II. 
Except for the JST coordinator in Frankfurt, JST members for these banks will be from our 
Banking  supervision  directorate  led  by  Sharon  Donnery  and  working  here  at  the  Central 
Bank. The day to day work, the on-site inspections and most of the supervisory engagement 
will continue to be performed by Sharon’s teams. 
For  the  JSTs  to  become  effective  and  operational  there  will  obviously  have  to  be  much 
dialogue,  cooperation  and  information  sharing.  Some  of  this  information  sharing  has 
commenced but the process is at its infancy and JSTs are only now becoming formed. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  JST coordinators for Irish banks will come soon to Dublin to meet with Central Bank staff, 
learn about these institutions, their risk profiles and current issues. They will also meet with 
the institutions that they will be directly responsible for. 
You can expect to hear from your new supervisory team shortly. 
Less significant institutions 
While the significant institutions undergo this change to their supervisory personnel, the other 
less  significant  institutions,  or  “LSIs”,  which  we  supervise  will  continue  to  be  supervised 
directly with us here in Dublin. We will not adopt this JST structure for them. 
When  we  talk  of  less  significant  institutions  I  would  like  to  make the  point  that  it  does  not 
mean lower risk or, less important. In fact, very often smaller institutions may carry more risk 
insofar  as  systems,  controls  and  governance  are  concerned  but  the  impact  of  that  risk 
crystallising  is  not  as significant  on the  EU  wide financial  landscape.  Yet these  institutions 
are often essential to the provision of services to the economy, consumers, business or to 
other sectors. 
We will continue our direct supervision of these less significant institutions. We will retain the 
responsibility for supervision but the ECB will have oversight, through DG III led by Mr Jukka 
Vesala. This will ensure a harmonised approach and consistency of quality. 
What  will  change  is  that,  just  like  for  significant  institutions,  we  will  move  away  from  our 
current  PRISM  engagement  model  as  we  will  now  supervise  in  accordance  with  the  SSM 
Supervisory  Manual.  The  IMF,  in  its  Report  on  the  Observance  of  Standards  and  Codes 
(ROSC),  issued  in  the  beginning  of  this  year,  invited  the  Central  Bank  to  review  its 
supervisory engagement and its mix of onsite and offsite supervision for Medium Low and 
Low Impact banks. The fund recommended that the analysis of regulatory returns should be 
strengthened  as  well  as  greater  focus  on  testing  and  sampling  of  risk  management 
processes. 
It is very important for us that we continue to supervise to the highest international standards 
of best practice. We will therefore be reviewing our supervisory engagement model for these 
banks in tandem with the ECB this year in order to address these findings and take action as 
necessary. 
Let me also mention that, while there will be no JST for these banks, we expect that SSM 
staff or staff from other supervisory authorities may join us on inspections or as part of our 
supervisory work. 
Organisational change at the Central Bank 
The  Central  Bank  will  make  organisational  changes  to  reflect  the  SSM  operations  and  to 
align with what you will experience in terms of interaction and communications. 
As  you  all  know  the  SSM  has  four  Directorates,  to  which  I  have  already  referred:  two  for 
Significant Institutions, one for Less Significant Institutions and one for what are referred to 
as Horizontal Functions. The Horizontal directorate includes 11 different divisions containing 
functions  that  provide  services  across  all  supervisory  directorates  and  one  of  these  is  the 
centralised management of on-site inspections. 
We have  given  some  consideration  to  how  we  should  organise  ourselves  in  the  SSM  and 
held discussions with SSM management and with other national supervisors. It is clear to us 
that we need to change our structure to accommodate the SSM structure: 
• 
• 
to create a very clear distinction between on site and off site activities; 
to  facilitate  the  creation  of  clear  linkages  and  relationships  between  the  Central 
Bank and the SSM; 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  to respond to quantitative analysis that are to become ever more prevalent 
to build reporting capability; 
to  build  the  skills  and  capabilities  of  our  staff  and  ensure  their  development  and 
retention. 
 This implies a three way split, involving the creation of specific on-site inspection teams on 
the one hand, and on the other hand teams focused on the ongoing, off-site supervision of all 
banks. The introduction of separate on-site inspection teams that will be tasked with discrete 
inspection  mandates  and  will  be  independent  from  the  on-going  supervisory  work  with  an 
institution is new territory for the Central Bank. Currently we incorporate on-site work into our 
on-going supervisory work and do not have independent teams performing this work. 
Combined  with  this,  and  in  mirroring the  SSM  structure,  we  recognise  the  need  also for a 
third horizontal division, which would comprise specialised teams on liquidity, credit, internal 
models, and the like. 
We expect to change structurally in the coming months. We shall ensure that we build the 
necessary skills and capabilities of our staff so that we continue to deliver on our supervisory 
mandate post November. 
Transition to SSM for institutions 
What will this mean to you in terms of the engagement you will have with the SSM and with 
my teams at the Central Bank? 
What will you need to do differently? 
Obviously banks will now be part of a eurozone system of supervision, with the coordinator of 
the JST based in Frankfurt. Therefore, stakeholder engagement will be very important and 
increasingly demanding on institutions supervised by the ECB. 
At a high-level, the individual risk elements of a risk assessment are largely consistent with 
the approach that we currently take to assessing the risks. However, many finer elements will 
change.  The  supervisory  manual  is  more  prescriptive  than  our  current  processes,  and  it 
provides greater linkage between individual risks and a quantitative outcome. 
Final SREP decisions – including taking account of the Comprehensive  Assessment – will 
likely be taken shortly after SSM commencement and within the construct of the new Joint 
Supervisory Teams. 
Altogether  the  SSM  approach  will  probably  be  more  formal,  with  greater  emphasis  on  a 
commonality of approach and treatment and on peer reviews. However I am sure I will not 
disappoint when I tell you it will not be less intensive! 
The on-site inspections will be more prominent and more formalised with different aspects of 
the engagement led by different functional experts and possibly led by Heads of mission from 
a different national supervisory authority. 
The horizontal functions in SSM will be providing special expertise to JSTs – identifying early 
focus points and trends by sector-wide analysis, ensuring consistency, adequacy and best 
practices;  and,  focusing  supervisory  action.  To  do  this  successfully  the  ECB  will  probably 
want to leverage the specialist capabilities of horizontal functions of NCAs. You may find that 
you will be engaging with teams from multiple supervisory authorities. 
There will be a significant increase in the volume of data required to complete assessments, 
the use of key risk indicators, and the level of prescription within the assessment themselves 
(e.g.  use  of  questionnaires  in  each  of  the  risk  categories).  In  general  you  can  expect  the 
requests  for  data  to  increase  and  therefore  banks  must  continue  to  develop  their  data 
warehousing  and  analytics  capabilities.  There  is  a  wide  movement  towards  more  granular 
data requests as this allows the supervisors to conduct their own analytics. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Non SSM tasks 
While it is clear that a lot will change in the Irish Central Bank over the coming months, the 
supervisory priorities remain. 
We  will  continue  to  focus  on  our  overall  strategic  and  statutory  objectives  –  safeguarding 
stability, protecting consumers. 
We will continue to supervise all credit institutions with respect to their compliance with non-
prudential rules, including consumer protection and anti-money laundering, that fall outside 
the remit of the ECB and the SSM. 
We  will  continue  to  strengthen  our  coverage  of  Anti  Money  laundering  and  to  monitor 
compliance  with  the  Criminal  Justice  Act  through  our  specifically  focused  Anti  Money 
Laundering Division. 
We  will  also  continue  to  be  solely  responsible  for  conduct  supervision.  Enforcing  proper 
behaviour  will  continue  to  be  a  key  focus  for  us  at  the  central  Bank,  in  particular  the 
adherence to our Code of Conduct on mortgage arrears. 
On  that  note,  post  programme  monitoring  of  the  Troika  will  continue  throughout  2014  and 
beyond in relation to Ireland’s progress in fixing its mortgage arrears crisis. It shall continue 
to be a top priority. 
The high level of arrears weighs on Ireland’s banking, acting as a drag on the economy, new 
lending and profitability. 
Banks and borrowers need closure. 
The targets that we set need to be achieved and banks must continue to progress resolutely 
to resolve this issue. 
Conclusion 
In conclusion let me emphasise that the successful implementation of SSM is a key priority 
for us at the Central Bank of Ireland. It is also an extremely exciting challenge. 
Work  is  well  advanced  under  Project  Europe  at  this  stage  and  I  am  confident  that  we  will 
effectively accomplish the transition to SSM in time. 
We  look  forward  to  working  with  our  colleagues  in  the  SSM  and  in  the  other  supervisory 
authorities around Europe as we converge to a single mechanism of supervision, where we 
become  one  team  of  supervisors.  This  combination  of  skills  and  experience  cannot  but 
succeed. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
