Mark Carney: The economics of currency unions 
Speech  by  Mr  Mark  Carney,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  at  a  lunch  hosted  by  the 
Scottish Council for Development & Industry, Edinburgh, 29 January 2014. 
 It  is  a  pleasure  to  be  in  Scotland  today  and  to  have  the  opportunity  to  hear  directly  from 
businesses about the economy. The recovery that began in Scotland has now taken hold in the 
UK with the economy growing at its fastest rate since 2007. 
Although a few quarters of above-trend growth driven by household spending represent a good 
start, they aren’t sufficient. Even though employment is growing and unemployment has fallen 
– particularly so recently in Scotland – the recovery has some way to run before it would be 
appropriate  to  consider  moving  away  from  the  emergency  setting  of  monetary  policy.  The 
Monetary  Policy  Committee  has  noted  that,  when  the  time  eventually  comes  to  increase 
interest rates, any such move would be gradual. That should help to reassure businesses in 
Scotland and all around the UK that the path of interest rates will be consistent with achieving a 
sustained and balanced recovery in the face of the remaining headwinds stemming from the 
financial crisis.  
Scotland is a land rich in history and ideas, and one to which I owe a great debt. Scots built the 
very foundations of my native land, Canada, whose first Prime Minister Sir John A. Macdonald 
was  born  in  Glasgow.  Scots  have  shaped  the  modern  world  through  their  contributions  to 
culture  and  science.  The  pioneering  work  of  Scottish  economists  from  Adam  Smith  to 
Sir James  Mirrlees  has  had  great  influence  on  my  profession.  Among  them  is  David  Hume, 
born  just  a  short  walk  from  here  and  a  great  friend  and  collaborator  of  Smith.  While  better 
known  as  a  philosopher,  Hume’s  essay  “Of  the  balance  of  trade”  set  out  the  theory  of  how 
trade  imbalances  between  nations  sharing  a  currency  (gold)  would  self-correct  as  inflows  of 
money to surplus countries raised their prices and reduced their competitiveness.  
As an empiricist, Hume would doubtless admit that recent euro area experience of persistent 
current  account  deficits  leading  not  to  self-correction  but  instead  to  crisis  requires  a  more 
elaborate  explanation.  Fortunately  economists  have  over  the  years  obliged  with  substantial 
work on the economics of currency unions.  
Given the recent focus here on the currency and the fundamental role of the Bank of England 
in maintaining monetary and financial stability across the United Kingdom, I want to draw on 
that  body  of  economics  today  to  review  some  of  the  most  important  issues  with  respect  to 
monetary union. 
I will stick rigidly to what Thomas Carlyle described as the dismal science. Any arrangement to 
retain  sterling  in  an  independent  Scotland  would  need  to  be  negotiated  between  the 
Westminster  and  Scottish  Parliaments.  The  Bank  of  England  would  implement  whatever 
monetary arrangements were put in place.  
What follows is not an assessment of whether Scotland will be overall better or worse off under 
independence  –  that  is  a  multi-faceted  judgement  for  the  Scottish  people.  It  does  not  pass 
judgement on the relative merits of the different currency options for an independent Scotland, 
but instead draws attention to the key issues. This is a technocratic assessment of what makes 
an effective currency union between independent nations.  
The costs and benefits of currency areas 
Let me begin by outlining the basic rationale for sharing a currency. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Economist  Robert  Mundell  first  wrote  about  what  determined  an  “optimum  currency  area”1 
Spurred by the breakdown of the Bretton Woods system and the move to floating exchange 
rates as well as by the formation of the European Monetary Union, others have elaborated and 
extended his  work. We now have a fairly comprehensive sense of the costs and benefits of 
sharing a currency. 
For  Mundell,  the  main  benefit  was  that  it  eliminates  the  transactions  costs  associated  with 
using, and switching between, different currencies. The European Commission estimated the 
size of these direct benefits for Europe to be almost 0.5% of GDP every year.2  
Sharing  a  currency  can  promote  investment  by  reducing  uncertainty  about  currency 
movements and giving businesses access to deeper, more liquid financial markets.3 It can also 
reduce borrowing costs for countries with a history of high inflation and currency devaluation. 
By tying themselves to the mast of the monetary policy of others they can import credibility. 
This is exactly what the UK and other European countries aimed to do in joining the Exchange 
Rate Mechanism.  
Sharing a currency also helps promote integration. It does so by eliminating one of the barriers 
between  markets,  improving  transparency  of  pricing  and  increasing  competition.  Sharing  a 
currency can also help to increase the mobility of labour and capital, raise trade in goods and 
services,  and  improve  the  flow  of  technology  and  ideas.4  In  these  ways,  members  of  a 
currency  union  can  exploit  more  fully  comparative  advantage  and  ensure  greater  dynamic 
efficiency.  
Set against these benefits are the potentially large costs of giving up an independent monetary 
policy  tailored  to  the  needs  of the  region  and  a  flexible  exchange  rate that  can  help  absorb 
shocks. 
A flexible exchange rate acts as a valuable shock absorber when domestic wages and prices 
are  sticky.5  For  example,  suppose  demand  for  a  country’s  exports  falls.  All  else  equal,  its 
output will fall, unemployment increase and current account deteriorate. With an independent 
currency, exchange rate depreciation can dampen these effects by improving competitiveness, 
and monetary policy can become more accommodative, supporting demand and employment. 
However, if the country were part of a currency area with its foreign market, its exchange rate 
would  by  definition  not  change,  putting  the  full  weight  of  adjustment  on  wages  and 
unemployment  –  a  significantly  more  protracted  and  painful  process.  In  addition,  the 
responsiveness  of  monetary  policy  to  weak  demand  in  that  country  would  be  diluted  by  the 
needs of the broader membership. 
Being  in  a  currency  union  can  amplify  fiscal  stress,  and  increase  both  the  risks  and 
consequences of financial instability. In the situation just described, fiscal policy would ideally 
help smooth adjustment to the external shock. But its ability to do so could be limited by the 
budgetary impact of the falls in output, prices and wages. To maintain credibility, fiscal policy 
                                                
1  Mundell (1961). 
2  Commission of the European Communities (1990). 
3  The elimination of currency risk within the area reduces uncertainty over future prices for firms and consumers, 
helping  them  to  make better decisions  about  how  much  to  produce,  invest  and  consume.  These benefits  are 
hard  to  quantify,  but  probably  important.  It  also  avoids  inefficiencies  that  can  arise  when  the  exchange  rate 
fluctuates for non-fundamental reasons (Mundell 1973, Buiter 2000).  
4  A substantial literature has sought to measure the impact of currency unions on trade flows, starting with Rose’s 
(2000)  surprising  estimate  that  they  are  associated  with  a  tripling  in  trade  flows.  Subsequent  work  suggests 
smaller impacts. In relation to the Eurozone, a survey by  Rose (2009) concludes that “EMU has raised trade 
inside the Eurozone by at least 8% and perhaps 23%”. De Grauwe and Mongelli (2005) survey the broader ways 
in which currency unions promote integration.  
If  wages  and  prices  can  adjust  instantaneously  then  the  adjustment  to  shocks  can  happen  costlessly  via 
movements in prices and wages, so there is no cost to losing exchange rate flexibility. 
5 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
may  even  become  pro-cyclical,  with  the  resulting  austerity  exacerbating  the  initial  fall  in 
demand.  In  the  extreme,  adverse  fiscal  dynamics  could  call  into  question  a  country’s 
membership of the union, creating the possibility of self-fulfilling “runs” on bank and sovereign 
debt  absent  central  bank  support.6  Such  adverse  feedback  loops  turned  recessions  into 
depressions in several European countries in recent years. 
What makes a successful currency union? 
The success of a currency area hinges on whether its features mitigate the costs of losing the 
flexibility that comes from an independent monetary policy. These features generally promote 
the alignment of economic cycles, and the maintenance of price and financial stability within 
the union. 
The  most  obvious  feature  is  the  degree  of  similarity  amongst  members.  Similar  economies 
won’t suffer from a “one size fits all” monetary policy.7 Surprisingly, a review of major currency 
areas suggests that similarity is neither necessary nor sufficient for success. For example, the 
industrial structures of the core and periphery of the euro area are more similar than those of 
the constituents of Canada or the US (table 1). Yet few would argue that the euro area is the 
most  effective  currency union  of the three.  Conversely,  the  Canadian  monetary  union  works 
well despite having substantially larger industrial variation than even the US.8 
The similarity of the industrial structure of Scotland and the rest of the UK depends on how 
offshore oil is allocated. With oil split on a per capita basis Scotland and the rest of the UK look 
about as similar as the core and periphery of the euro area; but with oil split on a geographic 
basis they look about as diverse as the United States (table 1). Despite any differences, the 
close  integration  of  the  Scottish  and  rest  of  UK  economies  has  helped  ensure  that  their 
economic  performance  has  been  very  similar  over  a  long  period  –  output  growth  is  highly 
correlated (chart 1).9  
So theory notwithstanding, being similar doesn’t necessarily help and being different doesn’t 
necessarily hinder. This suggests we should look elsewhere for the ingredients of a successful 
union: to the mobility of labour, capital and goods; to institutional structures promoting financial 
stability; and to institutions that mutualise risks and pool fiscal resources.  
An economic union with free movement of labour, capital and goods 
The “five tests” formulated by the UK Government to analyse the merits of joining the euro in 
2003 were crafted in large part around the degree of integration of the UK and the euro area.10 
That is because greater openness and integration within a currency union not only enhances 
                                                
6  These dynamics were in operation in the recent euro area crisis, until the announcement of the ECB’s Outright 
Monetary Transactions. 
7  Members are similar when they experience similar shocks and respond to the same shock in similar ways. That 
reduces the likelihood of a shock affecting one part of the currency union, and hence reduces the need for the 
exchange rate to adjust. Kenen (1969) argued that more diversified economies were better candidates to join 
currency unions because industry-specific shocks were less likely to have macroeconomic effects, reducing the 
need for exchange rate adjustment.  
8  See Carney (2013). 
9  Moreover unit labour costs in Scotland and the UK as a whole have moved closely together (chart 2), whereas 
large relative movements in the Eurozone imply divergences in competitiveness (chart 3). 
10  The  five  tests  focused  on  the  degree  of convergence  between  the  UK  and  the  rest of  Europe, the  degree  of 
flexibility  to  adjust  without  moves  in  the  exchange  rate,  and  on  whether  joining  would  promote  investment, 
financial services, and growth, stability and employment (HM Treasury 2003). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
the  benefits  of  a  shared  currency  but  can  also  mitigate  the  cost  of  losing  exchange  rate 
flexibility.11 
Mundell  originally  argued  that  currency  areas  should  coincide  with  regions  which  had  high 
internal factor mobility.12 The idea was that by moving from areas where demand has fallen to 
those where it has risen, workers help moderate changes in wages and unemployment.13  
There  are  clear  practical  impediments  to  labour  mobility  within  the  euro  area  including 
language  and  culture.  As  a  consequence,  it  has  the  lowest  cross-border  mobility  of  the  five 
currency unions in table 2.14 This has contributed to the need for painful internal devaluation for 
some countries in the euro area to restore competitiveness. 
Given that more than 700,000 Scots live in the rest of the United Kingdom and over 500,000 
from the rest of the UK live in Scotland, one would be tempted to assume that labour mobility 
between the two is high.15 In fact gross migration flows between Scotland and the rest of the 
UK are lower than in the constituent parts of some other currency areas (table 2).  
That probably in part reflects the fact that economic conditions in Scotland and the rest of the 
UK  have  been  very  similar,  such  that  the  incentive  for  migration  is  relatively  limited.  It  is 
reasonable  to  think  that  the  similarities  between  Scotland  and  the  rest  of  the  UK  mean  that 
there  is  the  potential  for  higher  labour  mobility  should  that  become  necessary.  Given 
differences in industrial structure, this would put a premium on ensuring barriers to mobility are 
not allowed to develop if monetary arrangements were to change.  
It  is  not  just  an  integrated  labour  market  that  helps  adjustment  within  a  currency  union. 
Openness to trade and free movement of goods also assists in diluting the effect of shocks by 
spreading  them  across  the  union.  If  one  part  of  the  union  imports  a  large  share  of  what  it 
consumes from other parts, changes in demand will be quickly transmitted. This helps to align 
economic cycles and makes a common monetary policy more appropriate. 16, 17  
                                                
11  The classic early contribution on this point was made by McKinnon (1963), who argued that the more open the 
economy, the more flexible would be domestic prices and wages so that movements in the exchange rate would 
have little impact on competitiveness, and would be less effective as a stabiliser. In that case moving to a fixed 
exchange rate would be less costly.  
12  Mundell (1961). 
13  Some, including Bean (1992), have expressed scepticism that factors of production could in fact move over a 
shorter timescale than that over which prices and wages adjust.  
14  This  is  consistent  with  evidence  that labour moves  less  in Europe  in  response to  regional shocks  than is  the 
case in the US – see Blanchard and Katz (1992) for the US, and Decressin and Fatas (1995) who apply the 
same methodology to Europe. The latter find that participation reacts by more to a labour demand shock, and 
migration by less in Europe than the US.  
15  Office for National Statistics, 2011 Census. 
16  Frankel  and  Rose  (1998)  found  that  countries  with  closer  trade  links  tend  to  have  more  tightly  correlated 
business  cycles.  Since  joining  a  currency  area  promotes  trade  integration,  it  also  is  also  likely  to  help  align 
international business cycles. That means one of the key optimum currency area criteria is endogenous to the 
decision  to  join.  Rose’s  (2009)  more  recent  meta-analysis  also  finds  a  significant  effect  of  trade  on  the 
synchronisation of business cycles.  
  De  Grauwe  (2000)  provides  a  discussion  of  how  closer  integration  may  affect  the  likelihood  that  countries 
experience asymmetric shocks. On the one hand closer trade links could result in greater specialisation, leaving 
currency union members more prone to asymmetric shocks. On the other, it could result in more intra-industry 
trade,  increasing  the  likelihood  that  countries  will  experience  similar  shocks,  and  thereby  helping  to  align 
business cycles.  
17  A high degree of openness also means that the adjustment required to boost net exports is somewhat lower. A 
much weaker adjustment in prices and wages is necessary to raise net exports by a given share of GDP if both 
exports and imports are a large share of GDP than if they are a small share, Krugman (1992).  However Adrian 
and Gros (2004) observe that open economies are correspondingly more vulnerable to external shocks.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Scotland and the rest of the UK are highly integrated. 70% of Scottish exports are destined for, 
and 74% of imports into Scotland come from, the rest of the UK (table 3). A word of caution 
applies here. There is a body of evidence that national borders can influence trade flows, even 
between  otherwise  highly  integrated  economies.18  The  high  degree  of  integration  between 
Scotland and the rest of the UK may in part depend on their being part of the same sovereign 
nation. 
Mobility  of  capital  can  also  promote  necessary  adjustment  to  shocks.  Moreover,  if  capital  in 
one  part  of  a  union  is  owned  by  those  in  other  parts,  the  effect  of  a  given  shock  is  diluted 
across the union. Simply put, risks and rewards are shared. Similarly, the ability to borrow from 
other parts of the currency union in deep and liquid cross-union credit markets or integrated 
banking systems allows one part of a union to smooth out temporary falls in incomes.19  
However, free movement of capital can be a mixed blessing. If the funds provided by one part 
of a union to another can be withdrawn easily, these outflows can – if the right structures are 
not in place – undermine financial and economic stability of all members.  
This brings me to the second feature of a successful currency union – banking union. 
Common supervisory standards, 
Access to central bank liquidity and lender of last resort facilities, 
Common resolution mechanisms, and 
A credible deposit guarantee scheme. 
Banking union 
Effective  currency  unions  need  a  wide  range  of  institutions  to  support  an  integrated  and 
efficient financial sector. These are often referred to as a “banking union” and include:  
• 
• 
• 
• 
Without  a  banking  union,  cross-border  capital  flows  can  be  restricted,  the  effectiveness  of 
monetary policy impaired and, in the extreme, the viability of the union itself undermined.  
It  is  as  difficult  to  separate  the  institutions  that  support  banking  union  from  national  fiscal 
arrangements  as  it  is  to  separate  the  creditworthiness  of  banks  and  sovereigns.  Let  me 
explain. 
In  recent  years,  doubts  about  the  resilience  of  major  financial  institutions  have  created 
expectations of sovereign support. The scale of these potential liabilities can in turn generate 
doubts about public finances undermining the resilience of both banks and sovereigns.  
When  such  concerns  emerge,  the  consequences  can  be  dramatic.  The  banking  systems  of 
peripheral European countries experienced outflows of between 10% and 85% of total deposits 
from elsewhere in the euro area in the three years following June 2010 (chart 4). Bank funding 
spreads in those countries ballooned by 5 percentage points from the beginning of 2010 to the 
                                                
18  Borders seem to matter. Trade between countries tends to be much more limited than trade within countries, as 
shown  for  Canada  and  the  US  by  McCallum  (1995).  There  is  also  evidence  for  a  border  effect  for  financial 
integration – there is more risk sharing through financial markets within countries than between countries (see 
e.g.  Crucini  1999).  Rose  and  van Wincoop  (2001)  assess  to  what  extent  national  currencies  are  a  barrier  to 
trade, and find that trade barriers associated with national borders are halved when countries join a currency 
union.  
19  Mundell (1973). Asdrubali et al (1996) estimate that for the US risk-sharing in private markets is quantitatively 
important in stabilising output at the state level.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
middle  of  2012  (chart  5).  Bank  lending  to  the  real  economy  collapsed  and  credit  conditions 
tightened massively (see charts 6–7).20, 21  
Clearly something must be done. 
It is in the interests of all countries to sever the link between banks and sovereigns by ending 
too  big  to  fail.  Governments  must  put  in  place  regimes  that  impose  losses  on  bank 
management,  shareholders  and  creditors  rather  than  taxpayers.  That  is  exactly  what  is 
established by the UK’s recent Banking Reform Act, and the recently agreed European Bank 
Resolution  and  Recovery  Directive.  The  Bank  of  England  is  at  the  forefront  of  efforts  to 
establish the common global requirement that is needed to finish the job.  
While ending too big to fail should mean that taxpayers no longer have to bail out banks, it will 
not fully break the bank-sovereign loop, for three reasons.  
First, banks hold substantial amounts of their national government’s debt in order to manage 
liquidity, meet collateral obligations and hedge exposures – European banks hold more than 
€1trn of home country sovereign debt amounting to 5% of total assets. 
Second,  confidence  in  deposit  guarantee  schemes  relies  on  a  national  backstop.22  The 
European  process  illustrates  the  difficulty  of  building  the  institutional  arrangements  for  a 
common  insurance  scheme  across  sovereign  states.  This  is  unsurprising  since  mutualised 
deposit guarantee schemes imply a pooling of risk and loss of sovereignty. All member states 
must be persuaded that they won’t simply be left with the bill for the mistakes of others.  
Third, a currency union requires a common fiscal backstop for its central bank. Central banks 
must be able to act as Lender of Last Resort, both to financial institutions that are solvent but 
experiencing an unwarranted loss of confidence and to provide bridging finance to institutions 
that  are  being  recapitalised  using  new  resolution  regimes.  Under  the  current  governance 
arrangements in the UK, these operations require an indemnity from, and the approval of, the 
Chancellor, because they would put substantial public funds at risk.  
The existing banking union between Scotland and the rest of the United Kingdom has proved 
durable  and  efficient.  Its  foundations  include  a  single  prudential  supervisor  maintaining 
consistent standards of resilience, a single deposit guarantee scheme backed by the central 
government,  and  a  common  central  bank,  able  to  act  as  Lender  of  Last  Resort  across  the 
union,  and  also  backed  by  the  central  government.  These  arrangements  help  ensure  that 
Scotland can sustain a banking system whose collective balance sheet is substantially larger 
than its GDP.  
The  euro  area  has  shown  the  dangers  of  not  having  such  arrangements,  as  well  as  the 
difficulties  of  the  necessary  pooling  of  sovereignty  to  build  them.  An  independent  Scotland 
would  need  to  consider  carefully  how  to  develop  arrangements  with  the  continuing  United 
Kingdom  that  are  both  consistent  with  its  sovereignty  and  sufficient  to  maintain  financial 
stability. 
                                                
20  That in turn contributed to the divergence in output growth between core and periphery (chart 8). In the UK the 
share of mortgage lending in Scotland has been essentially flat through the crisis period (chart 9), suggesting 
that there has been little if any divergence in credit conditions between the UK and Scotland. 
21  This downward spiral of confidence can be most acute in countries with large banking sectors relative to their 
economies – Iceland, Ireland and Cyprus all had banking sectors exceeding 600% of GDP in 2007 (table 4). In 
the extreme, doubts about the sustainability of a nation’s membership of the currency union can only be relieved 
by massive external support. 
22  In theory these could be pre-funded. For small countries with large, concentrated banking systems, pre-funded 
schemes are unlikely to be realistic in the short-term. Protected Scottish retail bank deposits are over 100% of 
GDP, compared to around 50% for the rest of the UK. New European rules mandate deposit guarantee funds to 
be built up only slowly over a decade and even then only to less than one per cent of insured deposits. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Fiscal arrangements 
While banking union requires common fiscal backing, there are two broader justifications for 
shared fiscal arrangements within a currency area. 
The  first  is  that  deeper  fiscal  integration  between  members  can  play  an  important  role  in 
smoothing shocks that affect only part of the currency area.23  
It  is  no  coincidence  that  effective  currency  unions  tend  to  have  centralised  fiscal  authorities 
whose spending is a sizeable share of GDP – averaging over a quarter of GDP for advanced 
countries  outside  the  euro  area  (table  5).  That  offers  scope  for  a  significant  degree  of 
stabilisation,  much  of  it  happening  automatically  as  slowing  growth  in  one  part  of  the  union 
causes  tax  revenues  there  to  fall  and  welfare  spending  to  increase.  Those  automatic  fiscal 
stabilisers are important within the UK – it is estimated that for every £1 that output falls the 
reduction in taxes and increases in transfers are together worth about 50 pence.24  
What matters for individuals is the extent to which this risk sharing insulates their disposable 
income  from  shocks.  In  the  UK  there  is  evidence  that  around  a  fifth  of  variation  in  regional 
personal income relative to the national average is stabilised by central government transfers. 
That  is  probably  an  important  factor  in  accounting  for  the  close  harmonisation  of  economic 
performance within the UK. The degree of stabilisation in France and the US is similar, with a 
slightly lower figure for Canada.25 
Fiscal  stabilisation  is  particularly  important  in  a currency  union  because  it  helps  mitigate the 
loss  of  exchange  rate  flexibility.  But  being  in  a  currency  union  can  amplify  fiscal  stress  for 
individual nations, limiting their ability to perform this valuable role just when it is most needed. 
So it makes sense to share fiscal risks across the whole currency area. A localised shock is 
less likely to stretch the fiscal position in a larger more diversified currency area, especially if it 
shifts demand between different parts of the area. That makes a given shock to Nova Scotia 
less severe than the equivalent to Portugal. 
The second justification for shared fiscal arrangements is that problems in one country are very 
likely to spill over to others. For example, the threat of default by one country may trigger a 
generalised  crisis,  particularly  if  the  liabilities  of  the  crisis  country  are  held  by  the  banking 
system of the broader currency area. It will be in the interests of other countries in the union to 
bail out a country in crisis, and that reduces the incentives for countries to run their finances 
prudently in the first place. At a minimum, this “moral hazard” problem suggests the need for 
tight fiscal rules, to enforce prudent behaviour for all in the union, although credible sanctions 
for breaking those rules are hard to develop.26  
There  is  an  obvious  tension  between  using  robust  fiscal  rules  to  solve  this  problem,  and 
allowing national fiscal policy to act as a shock absorber. This reinforces the need for fiscal risk 
sharing between nations.  
As the Presidents of the European Council, European Commission, Eurogroup and European 
Central Bank argued in their report, European monetary union, which has so far relied on fiscal 
rules,  will  not  be  complete  until  it  builds  mechanisms  to  share  fiscal  sovereignty.27  Possible 
                                                
23  Kenen (1969).  
24  This refers to a fall in output relative to potential output. See Chamberlin et al (2013). 
25   These estimates are reported in Melitz and Zumer (2002).  
26   The Delors Committee (1989) report, which provided the foundation for monetary union in Europe, recognised 
that market discipline would not be sufficient to ensure that participating countries followed sound fiscal policies, 
and that fiscal constraints would therefore be required. Beetsma and Uhlig (1999) provide a formal motivation for 
the resulting stability and growth pact as a device to internalise the costs of inflation that might otherwise result 
from imprudent  fiscal policies.  See  also  Chari  and  Kehoe  (2007).  Recent experience  demonstrates  that over-
indebtedness can also have costly spillovers through financial crises.  
27   See Barroso et al (2012). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
options range from a transfer union to a pooled employment insurance mechanism. Whatever 
is ultimately chosen, the degree of fiscal risk sharing will likely have to be significant. 
Similarly, in a monetary union between an independent Scotland and the rest of the UK the two 
Parliaments would have to agree on whether fiscal rules were sufficient or whether similar risk-
sharing mechanisms were necessary. 
Conclusion 
The Scottish government has stated that in the event of independence it would seek to retain 
sterling as part of a formal currency union. All aspects of any such arrangement would be a 
matter for the  Scottish  and  UK  Parliaments. If  such  deliberations  ever were  to  happen,  they 
would  need  to  consider  carefully  what  the  economics  of  currency  unions  suggest  are  the 
necessary foundations for a durable union, particularly given the clear risks if these foundations 
are not in place.  
Those risks have been demonstrated clearly in the euro area over recent years, with sovereign 
debt crises, financial fragmentation and large divergences in economic performance. The euro 
area is now beginning to rectify its institutional shortcomings, but further, very significant steps 
must  be  taken  to  expand  the  sharing  of  risks  and  pooling  of  fiscal  resources.  In  short,  a 
durable, successful currency union requires some ceding of national sovereignty.  
It  is  likely  that  similar  institutional  arrangements  would  be  necessary  to  support  a  monetary 
union between an independent Scotland and the rest of the UK.  
I suspect you have reached your limits of endurance of the dismal science, so you’ll be relieved 
to  know  that  economics  can  take  us  no  further.  Decisions  that  cede  sovereignty  and  limit 
autonomy are rightly choices for elected governments and involve considerations beyond mere 
economics. For those considerations, others are better placed to comment. 
 
 8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
and 
union”, 
available 
monetary 
References 
Adrian, T., and D. Gros (2004), “The degree of openness and the cost of fixing exchange rate”, 
Economics Letters, Vol. 83, Issue 1, Apr, pp 141–146. 
Asdrubali, P., B. Sorensen and O. Yosha (1996), “Channels of Interstate Risk Sharing: United 
States 1963-1990”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXI, Nov: pp 1081–1110. 
Barroso,  J.,  M.  Draghi,  J-C.  Juncker  and  H.  Van  Rompuy  (2012),  “Towards  a  genuine 
economic 
at 
http://www.consilium.europa.eu/uedocs/cms_Data/docs/pressdata/en/ec/134069.pdf.  
Bean,  C.  (1992),  “Economic  and  Monetary  Union  in  Europe”,  The  Journal  of  Economic 
Perspectives, Vol. 6, No. 4 (Autumn), pp 31–52. 
Beetsma,  R.  and  H.  Uhlig  (1999),  “An  Analysis  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact”,  The 
Economic Journal, Vol. 109, No. 458 (Oct.), pp 546–571. 
Blanchard,  O.  and  L.  Katz  (1992),  “Regional  Evolutions”,  Brookings  Papers  on  Economic 
Activity, 1: 1–77. 
Buiter, W. (2000), “Optimal currency areas: why does the exchange rate regime matter? (with 
an application to UK membership in EMU)”. CEP Discussion Paper 462. 
Carney,  M.  (2013),  “Canada  Works”,  remarks  at  Board  of  Trade  of  Metropolitan  Montreal, 
available at http://www.bankofcanada.ca/wp-content/uploads/2013/05/remarks-210513.pdf. 
Chamberlin,  G.,  Dhami,  P.,  Farrington,  S.,  Helgadottir,  T.  and  Robins,  J.  (2012),  “Cyclically 
adjusting  the  public  finances”,  Office  for  Budget  Responsibility  Working  Paper  No.  3, 
http://budgetresponsibility.org.uk/pubs/Working-paper-No3.pdf. 
Chari,  V.,  and  P.  Kehoe  (2007),  “On  the  need  for  fiscal  constraints  in  a  monetary  union”, 
Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 54, Issue 8, Nov. 2007, pp. 2399–2408 
Commission of the European Communities (1990), “One market, one money: an evaluation of 
the  potential  benefits  and  costs  of  forming  an  economic  and  monetary  union”,  European 
Economy, No. 44, Oct. 
Crucini,  M.  (1999),  “On  International  and  National  Dimensions  of  Risk  Sharing”,  Review  of 
Economics and Statistics, LXXXI, 1, Feb., pp. 73–84. 
Decressin, J. and A. Fatas (1995), “Regional Labour Market Dynamics in Europe”, European 
Economic Review, Vol. 39: pp. 1627–1655 
De Grauwe, P. (2000), “The Economics of Monetary Union”, 4th ed., Oxford University Press, 
Oxford. 
De  Grauwe,  P.  and  F.  Mongelli  (2005),  “Endogeneities  of  Optimum  Currency  Areas:  What 
Brings Countries Sharing a Single Currency Closer Together?”, ECB Working Paper No.468, 
Apr. 
Delors Committee: Committee for the Study of Economic and Monetary Union (1989), “Report 
on  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  in  the  European  Community”,  Luxembourg:  Office  for 
Official Publications of the European Communities. 
Frankel,  J.  (2008),  “The  Estimated  Effects  of  the  Euro  on  Trade:  Why  Are  They  Below 
Historical  Effects  of  Monetary  Unions  Among  Smaller  Countries?”,  NBER  working  paper 
14542. 
Frankel, J. and Rose, A. (1998), “The Endogeneity of Optimum Currency Areas Criteria”, The 
Economic Journal, Vol. 108, Jul, pp. 1009–1025. 
Frankel, J. and Rose, A. (2002), “An Estimate of the Effect of Common Currencies on Trade 
and Income”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117, pp. 437–466. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
HM  Treasury  (2003),  “UK  membership  of  the  single  currency  –  an  assessment  of  the  five 
economic tests”, CM 5776, London, HMSO, Jun. 
Kenen,  P  (1969),  “The  Theory  of  Optimum  Currency  Areas:  An  Eclectic  View,”  in  Robert 
Mundell  and  Alexander  Swoboda  (eds),  Monetary  Problems  of  the  International  Economy, 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp.41–60. 
Krugman, Paul R. (1992) “Policy Problems of a Monetary Union”, pp. 185 – 203 in Krugman, 
Paul R. (1992) Currencies and Crises (Cambridge Ma, and London: MIT Press).  
Melitz,  J.  and  Zumer,  F.  (2002).  “Regional  Redistribution  and  Stabilization  by  the  Center  in 
Canada,  France,  the  UK  and  the  US:  A  Reassessment  and  New  Tests”.  Journal  of  Public 
Economic, 86, pp. 263–286. 
McCallum,  J.  (1995),  “National  borders  matter:  Canada-US  regional  trade  patterns”,  The 
American Economic Review, 85 (3), 615–623. 
McKinnon, R., (1963), “Optimum currency areas”, American Economic Review, Vol. 53, Sep, 
pp. 717–25. 
McKinnon, R., (2004), “Optimum Currency Areas and Key Currencies: Mundell I vs. Mundell II”, 
Journal of Common Market Studies, Vol. 42. Number 4. pp. 689–715. 
Mundell,  R.  (1961),  “A  theory  of  optimum  currency  areas”,  American  Economic  Review, 
Vol. 51, Sep. 
Mundell,  R.  (1973),  “Uncommon  Arguments  for  Common  Currencies”,  in  Johnson,  H.G.  and 
Swoboda, A.K. (eds). 
Persson,  T.  and  G.  Tabellini  (1996),  “Federal  Fiscal  Constitutions:  Risk  Sharing  and  Moral 
Hazard”, Econometrica 64(3): pp. 623–646. 
Rose,  A.  (2000),  “One  money,  one  market:  estimating  the  effect  of  common  currencies  on 
trade”, Economic Policy, Vol. 15, April, pp. 7–45. 
Rose, A. and van Wincoop, E. (2001), “National money as a barrier to international trade: The 
real case for currency union”, American Economic Review 91(2), pp.386–390. 
Rose, A., (2009), “Is EMU becoming an optimum currency area? The evidence on trade and 
business cycle synchronization”, mimeo. 
 
 10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
TABLE AND CHART ANNEX(i) 
Table 1: Similarity of industrial structures 
EA (Core vs 
VEAPs)(a) 
EA (17 
countries)(b) 
rUK and 
Scotland(c) 
 
Energy 
Construction 
Manufacturing 
 
Finance and  
insurance 
Other 
 
Sum 
 0.1 
0.6 
1.3 
0.3 
0.3 
2.6 
1.0 
1.3 
6.1 
2.5 
5.6 
 16.4 
rUK and 
Scotland (oil on 
geographic 
basis)(d) 
10.0 
0.7 
0.5 
1.4 
7.4 
20.1 
1.8 
0.1 
0.7 
0.8 
1.5 
  4.7 
 
 
Canada (13 
provinces and 
territories) 
11.5 
1.3 
4.8 
2.2 
8.5 
28.3 
 US (50 states 
+ DC) 
3.1 
0.6 
4.5 
3.2 
5.2 
 16.6 
Sources: Bank calculations; Statistics Canada; US Bureau of Economic Analysis; Eurostat; ONS Regional Gross Value 
Added. rUK and Scotland data are for 2011; Euro Area (EA), US and Canada data are for 2012. Industrial 
classifications in the US and Canada are NAICS, in the UK SIC, and in the Euro Area they are NACE Rev2. These were 
consolidated into the five broader industrial classifications to ensure consistency. 
 
Notes: The table shows absolute differences between output industry shares in each region and the monetary union as 
a whole, which are then averaged for each industry in each monetary union. The sum of each column is the 
Krugman Specialisation Index (multiplied by a factor of 100) and is a measure of dispersion of industrial structure. A 
value of 0 indicates all regions within a monetary union have an identical industrial structure. The higher the index, the 
more diverse the industrial structure across regions. A more detailed description of different indexation measures of 
specialisation can be found in Appendix B of EMU and business sectors (HM Treasury). 
(a) Based on data for Vulnerable Euro Area Periphery economies (VEAPS) (Ireland, Portugal, Spain, Greece, Italy) and 
core (all other EA countries). 
(b) Based on data for 17 Euro Area (EA) countries (all EA countries excluding Malta). 
(c) Estimates for rUK and Scotland exclude the 'extra-regio' contribution from North Sea mining & extraction. 
(d) The contribution from 'extra-regio' mining & extraction is allocated on a ‘geographical’ basis. This assumes that 
around 90% is allocated to Scotland and 10% to the rest of the UK. This is in line with estimates proposed by 
Professor Kemp and used by the Scottish Government. Used here for illustrative purposes. 
    (i) Throughout this annex the abbreviation ‘rUK’ refers to the UK excluding Scotland. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
Chart 1: UK and Scottish onshore GDP per capita 
UK
Scotland
1964
1972
1980
 Percentage changes on  
a year earlier 
10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8
2012
1996
2004
 1988
 
Source: Bank calculations; Scottish Government GDP statistical bulletin (2010Q1 and 2013Q3); ONS UK real GVA ex 
oil and gas extraction (KLS2 & UIZY); ONS mid-year population estimates; General Register Office Scotland; OECD. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chart 2: Unit wage costs in the UK and Scotland 
UK
Scotland
Indices: 2000 = 100 
   150
140
130
120
110
100
90
80
1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012
  
Sources: Bank calculations; ONS Gross weekly earnings by region (EARN05); ONS real GDP (ABMI); Scottish 
Government GDP statistical bulletin 2013Q3; Labour Force Survey. Gross weekly earnings seasonally adjusted 
in-house. 
 
Notes: Unit wage costs calculated as gross weekly earnings divided by real output per worker for the UK and Scotland. 
 12 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Chart 3: Unit labour costs in the Euro area(a) 
 240
220
200
180
160
140
120
100
80
Euro area
Belgium
Germany
Estonia
Ireland
Spain
France
Italy
Cyprus
Latvia
Luxembourg
Malta
Netherlands
Austria
Portugal
Slovenia
Slovakia
Finland
Greece
 Indices: 2000Q1 = 100 
2000Q1 2003Q1 2006Q1 2009Q1 2012Q1
Sources: DataStream, Eurostat and Bank Calculations. 
 
Notes: Greek data seasonally adjusted by Bank of England. 
 
 
   Table 2: Labour mobility estimates, 2010 
            Regions 
US: between 50 states 
Australia: between 8 states/territories 
Canada: between 10 provinces/territories 
Scotland/rUK 
EU27: between 27 countries 
 Annual gross migration 
flows/population, % 
2.4 
1.5 
1.0 
0.6 
0.3 
 
Sources: OECD; Bank calculations using General Register Office Scotland Migration Statistics and ONS mid-year 
population estimates. All data are for 2010. 
Notes: Population mobility estimates are shown for the UK, Australia, Canada and the Unites States and labour force 
mobility for the EU. 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
Table 3: Nominal export and import shares in 2013 
 Export Shares 
rUK (to Scotland) 
Scotland (to rUK) 
 Import Shares 
rUK (from Scotland) 
Scotland (from rUK) 
  2013 Q1 & Q2 
14% 
70% 
 
8% 
74% 
Sources: Bank calculations; ONS Quarterly National Accounts (2013Q3); Quarterly National Accounts Scotland (2013Q2) 
  Chart 4: Cumulative change in MFI deposits from other euro-area countries (all sectors) 
Italy
Portugal
 
Spain
Ireland
Greece
Cyprus
Cumulative change since January 2010 
60
40
20
0
-20
-40
-60
-80
2010
2011
Sources: ECB and Bank calculations. 
2013
-100
 2012
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Chart 5: Cost of default protection for euro area core and periphery banking systems 
 Periphery
Core
Basis points 
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
  
Sources: Markit Group Limited, SNL Financial,Thomson Reuters Datastream and Bank calculations. 
 
Notes: Asset-weighted five-year senior CDS premia for major banks in each country. 'Periphery' covers Greece, Ireland, 
Italy, Portugal and Spain. 'Core' covers Austria, Belgium, France, Germany and the Netherlands. 
 
 
 
 
 
Chart 6: Real economy lending growth – core/periphery divergence 
Core
Periphery
Percentage changes 
on a year earlier 
30
20
10
0
-10
    2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
 
Sources: ECB and Bank calculations. 
 
Notes: Periphery includes Greece, Ireland, Portugal and Spain. Core includes Austria, Finland, France, Germany, Luxemburg 
and the Netherlands. Lending to non-MFIs excluding general government (adjusted for sales and securitisation). Weighted using 
2012 GDP weights. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
Chart 7: Euro area non-financial corporations loan rates – core/periphery divergence 
 €A 
Periphery
Core
Interest Rate, per cent 
2003
2005
2007
2011
2013
2009
 
Sources: ECB and Bank calculations. 
 
Notes: Average interest rate on new lending to NFCs (excluding revolving loans and overdrafts, convenience and 
extended credit card debt). Core: Austria, Belgium, Germany, Finland, France and Netherlands. Periphery: Italy, 
Portugal, Spain and Ireland. Weighted using shares in 2012 nominal GDP. 
 
 
 
 
Chart 8: Euro area core/periphery output growth 
Periphery
Core
Percentage changes 
on a year earlier 
6
8
6
4
2
0
 4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8
     1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012
Sources: Eurostat and Bank calculations. 
 
Notes: Based on data for Vulnerable Euro Area Periphery economies (VEAPS) (Ireland, Portugal, Spain, Greece, Italy) 
and core (all other EA countries excluding Malta). Data up to 2013Q3. 
16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Chart 9: Scottish mortgage loans as a share of the UK total 
 12%
10%
8%
6%
4%
2%
0%
 2005
2007
2009
2011
2013
 
Source CML. 
 
Note: Number of Scottish regulated mortgage loans as a share of the UK total. 
 
 
 
 
Table 4: Banking sector size as multiple of GDP(a) 
 Scotland 
rUK 
  
2012 
2007 
12.5 
4.3 
  
Ireland 
Iceland(b) 
Cyprus 
Spain 
UK(c) 
US(d) 
7.1 
7.4 
6.6 
3.2 
5.1 
1.2 
 
Sources: Bank of England, ECB, Central Bank of Iceland, Datastream, Federal Reserve and Bank of England calculations. 
 
(a) Banking assets of euro area countries are recorded in the country where the parent entity is domiciled and includes all 
EU assets. Assets reflect gross derivative positions. 
(b) Iceland data reflects net derivative positions and includes resident banks’ domestic and foreign assets. 
(c) 2012 UK data taken from the HMT’s 'Scotland analysis: Financial services and banking', for methodology see 
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/206166/banking_assets_vs_gdp_explanatio
n.pdf.  2007 UK data use the same methodology.   
(d) US data is based on US GAAP accounting principles. 2007 US data is break-adjusted by Bank of England staff to 
include assets of several large bank holding companies (BHCs) that became BHCs in 2009, and so were previously 
excluded from the data. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 17 
Table 5: General and central government expenditure as % GDP 
General government expenditure, 
% of GDP(a)(b) 
36 
53 
53 
44 
44 
58 
40 
56 
57 
48 
51 
50 
52 
65 
45 
50 
41 
30 
44 
23 
51 
45 
45 
51 
40 
49 
46 
52 
34 
40 
50 
43 
Central government expenditure, % 
of GDP(a)(b) 
26 
27 
30 
17 
30 
42 
30 
28 
24 
16 
40 
33 
40 
58 
39 
29 
18 
20 
31 
19 
31 
36 
27 
39 
23 
31 
19 
30 
11 
29 
46 
26 
   
Source: OECD 
 
Notes: Table shows ratios of nominal government expenditure to nominal GDP for 2010. 
 Australia 
Austria 
Belgium 
Canada 
Czech Republic 
Denmark 
Estonia 
Finland 
France 
Germany 
Greece 
Hungary 
Iceland 
Ireland 
Israel 
Italy 
Japan 
Korea 
Luxembourg 
Mexico 
Netherlands 
Norway 
Poland 
Portugal 
Slovak Republic 
Slovenia 
Spain 
Sweden 
Switzerland 
Turkey 
United Kingdom 
United States 
  18 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
