  Karnit Flug: The formulation of monetary policy in uncertain conditions 
Remarks by Dr Karnit Flug, Governor of the Bank of Israel, at the 14th Herzliya Conference 
“Israel and the Future of the Middle East”, Herzliya, 9 June 2014. 
 We have recently been dealing with a murky picture regarding the real economy, in view of 
the fact that various data do not always reconcile with each other, creating different pictures 
of the state of the economy. This situation is obviously challenging for setting policy. With this 
background,  in  the  last  interest  rate  announcement,  the  Monetary  Committee  placed  a 
greater than usual emphasis on the uncertainty regarding the state of the economy. In view 
of  this,  I  decided  to  concentrate  today  on  how  monetary  policy  decisions  are  made  in 
uncertain conditions. 
According  to  the  Bank  of  Israel  Law,  the  objectives  of  monetary  policy  are  first  of  all  to 
maintain price stability over time, and subject to that, to support the government’s economic 
policy,  and  particularly  growth,  employment  and  reducing  social  gaps,  and  also  to  support 
financial stability. The Bank of Israel uses the policy tools available to it for this purpose: the 
Bank  of  Israel  interest  rate,  intervening  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  according  to 
circumstances,  and  prudential  tools  in  the  form  of  various  restrictions  in  the  mortgage 
market.  The  use  of  all  the  tools,  to  various  extents  according  to  circumstances,  helps  to 
achieve  the  various  objectives  and  to  minimize  the  negative  effects  of  various  tools  on 
various  other  objectives.  The  following  are  the  main  data  that  we  consider  when  making 
decisions. 
Inflation  and  inflation  expectations  are  within  the  target  range,  in  the  lower  portion  of  the 
range, and inflation is expected to decline to below the target range in the coming months. 
GDP growth data provide a picture of a slowdown in growth during the first quarter of 2014, 
with  growth  of  2.1  percent,  and  a  sharp  slowdown  in  the  growth  of  business  product 
(0.4 percent).  It  is  important  to  emphasize  that  the  data  are  obtained  with  a  lag.  The  “first 
vintage” is obtained 6 weeks after the end of the quarter, and 2 updates are obtained in the 
months following, until the initial publication of data for the next quarter. 
In  contrast,  labor  market  data  point  to  continued  improvement.  The  unemployment  rate 
declined and is at an historically low level of 5.1 percent, with an increase in the participation 
rate  and  in  the  employment  rate.  A  similar  picture  emerges  from  data  on  wages  per 
employee post. 
The  development  of  the  exchange  rate  affects  both  inflation  –  despite  the  fact  that  the 
transmission from the exchange rate to inflation is lower today than it was in the past – and 
economic activity, due to the exchange rate’s effect on the tradable sector. The exchange 
rate is obviously something we know in real time, and as opposed to other data that I will 
mention, it is not updated. 
The housing market is obviously part of the picture that we deal with in determining monetary 
policy, both on the inflation side – where most of the emphasis is on the rental index, which 
reflects the price of housing services – and on the financial stability side. We know that the 
volume  of  housing  credit  is  constantly  increasing,  and  that  its  share  of  total  bank  credit  is 
also increasing. In this context, the increase in housing process and the rapid increase in the 
volume  of  mortgages  made  it  necessary  for  the  Supervisor  of  Banks  to  adopt  a  series  of 
measures  to  reduce  the  risk  inherent  to  housing  loans,  as  part  of  maintaining  financial 
stability and – first and foremost – the ability of borrowers to meet the commitments they take 
upon themselves. 
Later on, I will illustrate the uncertainty surrounding the real economic situation when making 
decisions. It is important to emphasize that this uncertainty is built into managing policy by 
the very fact that data on economic activity at any given moment are obtained with a lag and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  updated later. With that, there are periods, such as the current period, where various data 
provide  a  contradicting  picture  of  the  situation,  leading  to  a  particularly  high  level  of 
uncertainty. 
The main figure that we track is obviously the National Accounts data, which outlines growth 
of GDP and its components. The intensity of the updates in the data is shown by the gap 
between the initial estimate of growth in a given quarter and the estimate published a year 
later.  For  instance,  in  the  third  quarter  of  2008,  the  initial  estimate  pointed  to  growth  of 
2.3 percent,  and  a  year  later  it  became  clear  that  growth  was  just  0.8  percent.  Likewise, 
growth in the second quarter of 2010, according to the initial estimate, was 3.3 percent, and 
a  year  later  it  was  5.2  percent.  With  that,  we  can  also  see  that  the  updates  do  not 
systematically tend toward one direction or another. The average of the updates is close to 
zero. It should also be noted that the updates in Israel are not exceptional by international 
comparison, and are even relatively low. As such, the challenge of dealing with uncertainty is 
one we share with other countries, and is not the result of poor performance by our Central 
Bureau  of  Statistics,  but  of  the  attempt  to  provide  data  that  is  as  good  as  possible  in  real 
time. We can also see that the level of uncertainty is particularly high regarding estimates of 
the various components of GDP, such as exports, investments, and so forth, while it is lower 
for GDP itself. For instance, we can see that the updates in the quarterly GDP growth data in 
2013 in Israel are not unusual relative to the US or the UK, and the update that was made 
just a few days ago in the first quarter GDP data in the US was very significant. 
In view of this, we also need more “rapid” data, and we use a mix of data and indicators that 
help us in trying to understand developments in real time, or with a relatively small lag. I note 
that the fact that the Labor Force Survey has become monthly is very helpful. In this context, 
it is worth mentioning the Composite State of the Economy Index, the Business Tendency 
Survey,  the  Google  Search  Index,  and  internal  models  developed  by  the  Bank  for 
nowcasting,  which  are  intended  to  provide  a  clearer  picture  of  the  current  situation  when 
statistical data have not yet been published. 
Monetary policy is intended to affect future developments: Policy has channels of relatively 
rapid effect (the exchange rate), and some of the others have a slower effect (for instance, 
the price of credit). In any case, an important component in the formulation of policy is the 
forecast, since monetary policy is, of course, forward looking. It is therefore very important 
that the monetary policy decisions that are made each month rely on a forecast that is as up-
to-date as possible. Such a forecast relies on the most up-to-date information regarding the 
state  of  the  Israeli  economy  –  based  on  a  broad  set  of  indicators  from  the  labor  market, 
various  indices  of  economic  activity,  consumer  confidence  indices  and  business  tendency 
surveys  –  and  on  the most  up-to-date  forecast  regarding  the  state  of  the  global economy, 
and particularly global trade, which is an indicator of demand for Israeli exports. We can see 
that in the forecasts and estimates regarding global trade and GDP, there are also regular 
updates, some of which are of considerable size. 
Therefore, the forecast is updated on the basis of updated National Accounts data and other 
recent  data,  and  on  the  basis  of  the  updated  global  picture.  Since  the  beginning  of  the 
Monetary Committee’s operation, the Bank of Israel has operated a framework in which the 
forecast is updated on a regular basis each quarter, so that policy operates on the basis of 
the most up-to-date picture and forecast. 
In retrospect, despite the need to compile the picture and forecast on the basis of partial and 
delayed data, policy decisions have been made in a timely manner such that they assist the 
economy in dealing with shocks. This was the case in the rapid response of the interest rate 
to the beginning of the global crisis, and this was the case with the renewal of the crisis due 
to the slowdown that resulted from the European debt crisis. 
In summation, monetary policy relies on a picture compiled on the basis of partial data, which 
are  received  with  a  lag,  which  are  updated,  and  which  change.  It  also  relies  on  a  global 
picture that is constantly changing. The challenge faced by policy makers is to formulate a 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  picture and forecast based on these data by using models and experience and accumulated 
professional  knowledge.  The  challenge  in  making  policy  decisions  is  the  need  to  remain 
ahead of the curve in achieving balance between the effects, in view of the lags in the effect 
of monetary policy, and the measured response to real developments rather than the “noise” 
in the data. 
Despite the challenge in making policy decisions in conditions of uncertainty, an assessment 
of  the  policy  measures  in  retrospect  shows  that  the  professional  tools  and  accumulated 
experience  make  it  possible  for  the  monetary  committee  to  formulate  a  picture  and  make 
decisions in real time to attain the objectives of policy for the good of the economy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
