  Mario Draghi: ECB press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank, 
Frankfurt am Main, 3 July 2014. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Vice-President  and  I  are  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  our 
press conference. We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing 
Council. 
Based on our regular economic and monetary analyses, we decided to keep the key ECB 
interest  rates  unchanged.  The  latest  information  signals  that  the  euro  area  economy 
continued  its  moderate  recovery  in  the  second  quarter,  with  low  rates  of  inflation  and 
subdued monetary and credit growth. At the same time, inflation expectations for the euro 
area  over  the  medium  to  long  term  continue  to  be  firmly  anchored  in  line  with  our  aim  of 
maintaining  inflation  rates  below,  but  close  to,  2%.  The  combination  of  monetary  policy 
measures  decided  last  month  has  already  led  to  a  further  easing  of  the  monetary  policy 
stance.  The  monetary  operations  to  take  place  over  the  coming  months  will  add  to  this 
accommodation and will support bank lending. As our measures work their way through to 
the  economy,  they  will  contribute  to  a  return  of  inflation  rates  to  levels  closer  to  2%. 
Concerning our forward guidance, the key ECB interest rates will remain at present levels for 
an  extended  period  of  time  in  view  of  the  current  outlook  for  inflation.  Moreover,  the 
Governing Council is unanimous in its commitment to also using unconventional instruments 
within its mandate, should it become necessary to further address risks of too prolonged a 
period of low inflation. We are strongly determined to safeguard the firm anchoring of inflation 
expectations over the medium to long term.  
As  a  follow-up  to  the  decisions  taken  in  early  June,  the  Governing  Council  today  also 
decided  on  specific  modalities  for  the  targeted  longer-term  refinancing  operations 
(TLTROs).  The  aim  of  the  TLTROs  is  to  enhance  the  functioning  of  the  monetary  policy 
transmission mechanism by supporting lending to the real economy. A press release on the 
modalities for the TLTROs will be published today at 3.30 p.m. As announced last month, we 
have  also  started  to  intensify  preparatory  work  related  to  outright  purchases  in  the  ABS 
market to enhance the functioning of the monetary policy transmission mechanism. 
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. 
Real GDP in the euro area rose by 0.2%, quarter on quarter, in the first quarter of this year. 
Economic indicators, including survey results available up to June, signal a continuation of 
the very gradual recovery in the second quarter of 2014. Looking ahead, domestic demand 
should  be  supported  by  a  number  of  factors,  including  the  further  accommodation  in  the 
monetary policy stance  and the ongoing improvements in financing conditions. In addition, 
the  progress  made  in  fiscal  consolidation  and  structural  reforms,  as  well  as  gains  in  real 
disposable  income,  should  make  a  positive  contribution  to  economic  growth.  Furthermore, 
demand  for  exports  should  benefit  from  the  ongoing  global  recovery.  However,  although 
labour markets have shown some further signs of improvement, unemployment remains high 
in  the  euro  area  and,  overall,  unutilised  capacity  continues  to  be  sizeable.  Moreover,  the 
annual rate of change of MFI loans to the private sector remained negative in May and the 
necessary balance sheet adjustments in the public and private sectors are likely to continue 
to dampen the pace of the economic recovery. 
The  risks  surrounding the  economic  outlook for  the  euro  area remain  on  the  downside.  In 
particular,  geopolitical  risks,  as  well  as  developments  in  emerging  market  economies  and 
global  financial  markets,  may  have  the  potential  to  affect  economic  conditions  negatively, 
including  through  effects  on  energy  prices  and  global  demand  for  euro  area  products.  A 
further downside risk relates to insufficient structural reforms in euro area countries, as well 
as weaker than expected domestic demand. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  According  to  Eurostat’s  flash  estimate,  euro  area  annual  HICP  inflation  was  0.5%  in  June 
2014, unchanged from May. Among the main components, services price inflation increased 
from 1.1% in May to 1.3% in June, while food price inflation fell from 0.1% to –0.2%. On the 
basis of current information, annual HICP inflation is expected to remain at low levels over 
the coming months, before increasing gradually during 2015 and 2016. Meanwhile, inflation 
expectations for the euro area over the medium to long term continue to be firmly anchored 
in line with our aim of maintaining inflation rates below, but close to, 2%. 
The  Governing  Council  sees  both  upside  and  downside  risks  to  the  outlook  for  price 
developments as limited and broadly balanced over the medium term. In this context, we will 
closely  monitor  the  possible  repercussions  of  geopolitical  risks  and  exchange  rate 
developments. 
Turning  to  the  monetary  analysis,  data  for  May  2014  continue  to  point  to  subdued 
underlying growth in broad money (M3). Annual growth in M3 was 1.0% in May, compared 
with 0.7% in April. The growth of the narrow monetary aggregate M1 moderated to 5.0 % in 
May, after 5.2% in April. The increase in the MFI net external asset position, reflecting in part 
the  continued  interest  of  international  investors  in  euro  area  assets,  has  recently  been  an 
important factor supporting annual M3 growth. 
The annual rate of change of loans to non-financial corporations (adjusted for loan sales and 
securitisation)  was  –2.5%  in  May  2014,  compared  with  –2.8%  in  April.  Lending  to 
non-financial corporations continues to be  weak, reflecting the lagged relationship  with the 
business cycle, credit risk, credit supply factors and the ongoing adjustment of financial and 
non-financial sector balance sheets. The annual growth rate of loans to households (adjusted 
for  loan  sales  and  securitisation)  was  0.5%  in  May  2014,  broadly  unchanged  since  the 
beginning of 2013. 
Against the background of weak credit growth, the ongoing comprehensive assessment of 
banks’  balance  sheets  is  of  key  importance.  Banks  should  take  full  advantage  of  this 
exercise  to  improve  their  capital  and  solvency  position,  thereby  supporting  the  scope  for 
credit expansion during the next stages of the recovery. 
To sum up, the economic analysis indicates that the current low level of inflation should be 
followed by a gradual upward movement in HICP inflation rates towards levels closer to 2%. 
A cross-check with the signals from the monetary analysis confirms this picture. 
As regards fiscal policies, substantial fiscal consolidation in recent years has contributed to 
reducing  budgetary 
increased 
competitiveness  and  the  adjustment  capacity  of  countries’  labour  and  product  markets. 
However,  significant  challenges  remain.  To  strengthen  the  foundations  for  sustainable 
growth and sound public finances, euro area countries should not unravel the progress made 
with fiscal consolidation, in line with the Stability and Growth Pact, and should proceed with 
structural  reforms  in  the  coming  years.  Fiscal  consolidation  should  be  designed  in  a 
growth-friendly manner, and structural reforms should focus on fostering private investment 
and job creation. A full and consistent implementation of the euro area’s existing fiscal and 
macroeconomic  surveillance  framework  is  key  to  bringing  down  high  public  debt  ratios,  to 
raising potential growth and to increasing the euro area’s resilience to shocks. 
Finally, I wish to inform you that the Governing Council today announces that the frequency 
of  our  monetary  policy  meetings  will  change  to  a  six-week  cycle,  from  January  2015.  The 
reserve  maintenance  periods  will  be  extended  to  six  weeks  to  match  the  new  schedule. 
Moreover, we announce our commitment to publish regular accounts of the monetary policy 
meetings,  which  is  intended  to  start  with  the  January  2015  meeting.  A  press  release 
providing more details will be published today at 3.30 p.m. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
reforms  have 
imbalances. 
Important 
structural 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
