Charles I Plosser: Perspectives on the economy and monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Charles  I  Plosser,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  Philadelphia,  at  The  School  of  Business  at  La  Salle  University,  Union 
League of Philadelphia Business Network, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 14 January 2014. 
 The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. 
Introduction 
I  want  to  thank  La  Salle  University  and  the  Union  League  for  inviting  me  to  speak  at  this 
annual economic event. The new year always seems like a good time to reflect on the past 
and refresh our outlook for the future, and I will try to do a bit of both today. 
This is a particularly noteworthy time in the history of the Federal Reserve. On December 23, 
1913, President Woodrow Wilson signed into law the act that created the Federal Reserve 
System. Thus, the Fed’s official 100th anniversary occurred just three weeks ago. 
So, I thought I would begin by sharing a brief history of our nation’s central bank with you 
before discussing my views on economic conditions and monetary policy. 
Before I begin, though, I should note that my views are not necessarily those of the Federal 
Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). 
A historical look at a decentralized Fed 
What better place to share a little history of our central bank than here in Philadelphia and in 
this historic venue of the Union League. Just a few blocks from where the Philadelphia Fed 
stands on Independence Mall, you will find vestiges of two earlier attempts to create a central 
bank  for  the  United  States,  dating  back  to  the  time  Philadelphia  was  the  nation’s  major 
financial and political center. 
The first institution was the brainchild of our first Treasury secretary, Alexander Hamilton. His 
efforts  led  to  the  creation  of  the  First  Bank  of  the  United  States,  which  was  awarded  a 
20-year charter by Congress in 1791. 
Although the First Bank’s charter was not renewed, the War of 1812 and the ensuing inflation 
and  economic  turmoil  convinced  Congress  to  establish  the  Second  Bank  of  the  United 
States. It was also given a 20–year charter and operated from 1816 to 1836. However, its 
charter  was  not  renewed  –  Congress  could  not  override  the  veto  of  President  Andrew 
Jackson, who led the opposition to the central bank. Public distrust of centralized power was 
an important factor in the demise of both banks. Both became entangled in politics, and both 
failed to gain the public’s confidence and establish the independence necessary to serve our 
vast and diverse country of bakers and bankers, farmers and financiers, and manufacturers 
and merchants. 
It took Congress nearly 80 years to try again to establish a central bank. This time Congress 
and  President  Wilson  agreed  upon  a  uniquely  American  governance  structure  –  a 
decentralized, central bank. 
To  balance  political,  economic,  and  geographic  interests,  Congress  created  the  Federal 
Reserve System made up of regional Reserve Banks with oversight provided by a Board of 
Governors in Washington, D.C. 
This structure helped to overcome political and public opposition stemming from fears that a 
central  bank  would  be  dominated  either  by  political  interests  in Washington  or  by financial 
interests on Wall Street. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The  Federal  Reserve  Act  formed  a  Reserve  Bank  Organization  Committee  to  divide  the 
country into no fewer than eight and no more than 12 Federal Reserve Districts. 
Almost immediately after the law  was enacted, the committee started receiving letters and 
telegrams from local business owners, bankers, farmers, and others, who were all making a 
case for where they wanted a Reserve Bank to be located. 
The  committee  held  meetings  in  18  cities  before  submitting  a  report  to  Congress  in  April 
1914, naming the final 12 cities and districts. The Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia was 
designated  as  the  regional  Reserve  Bank  for  the  Third  District,  an  area  that  includes 
Delaware, the eastern two-thirds of Pennsylvania, and the southern half of New Jersey. 
These Reserve Banks distribute currency, act as a bankers’ bank, and generally perform the 
functions of a central bank, which includes serving as the bank for the U.S. Treasury. 
The 12 regional Reserve Banks are deeply rooted in our nation’s communities, which ensure 
that  the  Federal  Reserve  stays  in  touch  with  Main  Street.  The  Reserve  Banks  all  have 
boards of directors, many also have Branch boards, and all have advisory councils and other 
mechanisms  to  keep  abreast  of  conditions  in  their  regional  economies.  This  rich  array  of 
information  and  the  diverse  views  from  around  the  country  contribute  to  a  mosaic  of  the 
economy that is essential as we formulate national monetary policy. 
Of course, most people associate the Fed with the determination of monetary policy. Within 
the  Federal  Reserve,  the  body  that  makes monetary  policy  decisions  is  the  Federal  Open 
Market  Committee,  or  the  FOMC.  Here  again,  Congress  has  designed  the  system  with  a 
number of checks and balances. Since 1935, the composition of the FOMC has included the 
seven Governors in Washington, the president of the New York Fed, and the presidents of 
four other Reserve Banks who serve one-year terms as members on a rotating basis. 
One  important  role  of  the  independent  regional  Reserve  Banks  is  to  ensure  that  diverse 
views  are  represented. The  Reserve  Banks  each  have  economic  research  departments  to 
guarantee  that  a  wide  variety  of  perspectives  are  brought  to  the  table.  In  this  way,  the 
institution  avoids  groupthink.  By  being  open  and 
these  various 
perspectives,  the  decentralized  model  for  the  Federal  Reserve  helps  strengthen  public 
confidence and preserve its independence. 
Whether we vote or not, all Reserve Bank presidents attend the FOMC meetings, participate 
in the discussions, and contribute to the Committee’s assessment of the economy and policy 
options. The FOMC has eight regularly scheduled meetings a year to set monetary policy. It 
discusses  economic  conditions  and,  in  normal  times,  adjusts  short-term  interest  rates  to 
achieve the goals of monetary policy that Congress has set for us in the Federal Reserve 
Act. 
Congress  established  the  current  set  of  monetary  policy  goals  in  1978.  The  amended 
Federal  Reserve  Act  specifies  that  the  FOMC  “shall  maintain  long  run  growth  of  the 
monetary  and  credit  aggregates  commensurate  with  the  economy’s  long  run  potential  to 
increase production, so as to promote effectively the goals of maximum employment, stable 
prices,  and  moderate  long-term  interest  rates.”  Since  moderate  long-term  interest  rates 
generally  result  when  prices  are  stable  and  the  economy  is  operating  at  full  employment, 
many have interpreted these instructions as being a dual mandate to manage fluctuations in 
employment in the short run while preserving price stability in the long run. 
transparent  about 
Economic conditions 
In  order  to  determine  the  appropriate  monetary  policy  to  promote  these  goals,  the  FOMC 
must monitor economic developments. So, let me turn to an assessment of our economy. As 
we  enter  2014,  I  think  the  bottom  line  is  that  the  economy  is  on  firmer footing  than  it  has 
been for the past several years. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Real output grew at a 4.1 percent annual pace in the third quarter of last year, the strongest 
gain in nearly two years and a marked acceleration from the first half of 2013. Some of this 
growth came in the form of inventory investment, which is volatile and is less likely to have 
contributed  as  much  to  growth  in  the  fourth  quarter.  Still,  personal  consumption  and  fixed 
investment provided positive contributions, and economic prospects at the end of last year 
and the beginning of this year are positive. 
Personal consumption, which accounts more than two-thirds of GDP, advanced at an annual 
rate of 2 percent in the third quarter. Some observers have lamented at the lack of stronger 
growth  in  consumption.  But  I  would  note  that  consumption  growth  has  not  fluctuated  that 
much over the course of the recovery. I am encouraged by the U.S. consumers’ persistence 
in  the  face  of  many  challenges,  including  a  payroll  tax  hike  last  January,  a  government 
shutdown, significant uncertainties about future tax policy, and the implications of health-care 
reform. 
Consistent job growth has added to wage and salary growth, which has supported spending. 
The  December  employment  report  released  last  Friday,  which  showed  payroll  gains  of 
74,000 jobs, came in below many analysts’ expectations. Yet, I caution you not to read too 
much into one month’s number. December’s number was likely affected by the unseasonably 
cold  and  snowy  weather,  although  it  is  not  yet  clear  by  how  much.  The  number  is  also 
subject to revision, and such revisions can be significant. 
Because of the month-to-month volatility and data revisions, I prefer not to read too much 
into the most recent number but, instead, look at averages over several months, and here 
the  news  remains  positive.  Firms  added  an  average  of  182,000  jobs  per  month  last  year, 
comparable to the pace in 2012. This consistent pace of job growth was enough to drop the 
unemployment rate to 6.7 percent in December. This means that the unemployment rate fell 
1.2  percentage  points  last  year,  and,  importantly,  it  is  at  a  lower  level  than  the  FOMC 
anticipated it would be at this point when we started the current asset purchase program in 
September 2012. That is, the labor market has performed noticeably better than expected, 
according to the unemployment rate measure. 
Some people, however, feel that the decline in the unemployment rate overstates the degree 
of  progress  being  made  in  labor  markets  because  it  reflects  declines  in  labor  force 
participation  as  well  as  increases  in  employment.  There  is  even  concern  that  the 
unemployment  rate  will  move  back  up  significantly  when  discouraged  workers  reenter  the 
labor force. Based on research by my staff, I am less concerned about this possibility.1  
First, it is important to realize that labor force participation rates have been declining since 
2000. The  declines  are driven  mostly  by  demographic  changes,  including the  aging  of the 
baby boomers. This trend is ongoing and was expected to accelerate. 
Second, detailed analysis of the Current Population Survey’s micro data indicates that much 
of  the  decline  in  participation  since  the  start  of  the  recovery  can  be  accounted  for  by 
increased retirements and disability. Some of these increases might have been driven by the 
state  of  the  economy  as  some  baby  boomers  perhaps  moved  their  retirement  decision 
forward after losing a job. Nevertheless, few of these former individuals are likely to reenter 
the labor force. In addition, there has been an increase in the number of people out of the 
workforce  who  are  going  to  school,  which  means  there  is  less  concern  about  skill 
depreciation for these people. So while I do expect some discouraged workers to reenter the 
labor force as the expansion picks up and while they search for a job there could be upward 
pressure on the unemployment rate, I would not overinterpret the decline in participation as a 
lack  of  progress  made  in  labor  market  conditions  or  as  a  problem that must  be  corrected. 
                                                
1  Shigeru  Fujita,  “On  the  Causes  of  Declines  in  the  Labor  Force  Participation  Rate,”  Research  Rap  Special 
Report, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, November 19, 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
There are fundamental changes in the structure of the labor market that are likely real and 
sustained. 
The  progress  in  the  labor  market  has  led  to  growth  in  household  income.  In  addition  to 
income  growth,  household  balance  sheets  have  strengthened  as  well.  Overall  household 
wealth, in nominal terms, advanced 11 percent year over year through the third quarter. The 
improving  housing  market  has  been  an  important  contributor  to  that  growth,  with  owners’ 
equity  in  real  estate  surging  29  percent  in  2013  over  2012.  House  prices  are  rising;  the 
number  of  homeowners  with  underwater  mortgages  and  the  number  of  mortgage 
delinquencies  are  down.  I  expect  these  improvements  will  help  to  support  consumer 
spending going forward. 
Business  balance  sheets  are  also  healthy.  Industrial  production  was  very  encouraging  in 
November, when it advanced 1.1 percent on gains in all major categories. That growth was 
the most rapid in 12 months and brought the overall index higher than its prerecession peak 
for the first time. The Philadelphia Fed’s Business Outlook Survey of regional manufacturing, 
which  is  a  reliable  indicator  of  national  manufacturing  trends,  has  also  been  in  positive 
territory  for  seven  months,  and  our  firms  expect  continued  expansion  in  manufacturing 
activity over the next six months. This gives me some hope that business fixed investment, 
which has been generally lackluster during the course of the recovery, will pick up somewhat 
this year. 
Inflation has been running below the FOMC’s long-run goal of 2 percent. The year-over-year 
change  in  the  price  index  for  personal  consumption  expenditures,  or  PCE  inflation,  is  the 
Fed’s preferred measure. It has drifted downward over the past year to about 0.9 percent in 
November.  Core  PCE,  a  measure  that  removes  food  and  energy  prices  that  tend  to  be 
volatile,  was  a  bit  higher  at  1.1  percent.  I  believe  we  must  defend  our  2-percent  inflation 
target from below and above. However, I believe inflation is likely to firm up as some of the 
factors  that  have  held  it  down,  such  as  the  cut  in  payments  to  Medicare  providers  and 
generally  weak medical costs, are likely to abate over time. I am encouraged that inflation 
expectations  remain  near  their  longer-term  averages  and  consistent  with  our  2-percent 
target. So, I anticipate, as the FOMC indicated in its most recent statement, that inflation will 
move  back  toward  our  target  over  time.  Indeed,  given  the  large  amount  of  monetary 
accommodation  we  have  added  and  continue  to  add  to  the  economy,  I  think  that  there  is 
some upside risk to inflation in the longer term. 
I  anticipate  overall  economic  growth  of  around  3  percent  this  year,  a  pace  that  is  slightly 
above trend. This is far from the robust growth that many would like to see; nevertheless, it 
does  represent  steady  progress  and  an  improving  economy.  My  forecast  is  largely  in  line 
with  those  of  my  colleagues  on  the  FOMC,  whose  most  recent  projections  had  a  central 
tendency of growth of 2.2 to 2.3 percent for 2013, and accelerating to 2.8 to 3.2 percent in 
2014. 
I believe this growth will continue to lead to declines in the unemployment rate over the next 
year and should result in an unemployment rate of about 6.2 percent by the end of 2014. 
This makes me somewhat more optimistic than most of my FOMC colleagues, who reported 
a central tendency of 6.3 to 6.6 percent by the end of 2014. 
Monetary policy 
So, let me turn to some observations about monetary policy. Over the past five years, the 
Federal Reserve has taken extraordinary actions to support the economic recovery. The Fed 
has lowered its policy rate – the federal funds rate – to essentially zero, where it has been for 
more than five years. Since the policy rate cannot go any lower, the Fed has attempted to 
provide  additional  accommodation  through  large-scale  asset  purchases,  or  quantitative 
easing. We are now in our third round of these purchases, or QE3. These purchases have 
greatly expanded the size and lengthened the maturity of the assets on the Fed’s balance 
sheet. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The  Fed  is  also  using  forward  guidance  as  a  policy  tool,  which  is  intended  to  inform  the 
public  about  the  way  monetary  policy  is  likely  to  evolve  in  the  future.  In  its  December 
statement, the FOMC indicated that it intends to leave the policy rate near zero well past the 
time  that  the  unemployment  rate  falls  below  6.5  percent,  especially  if  projected  inflation 
continues to run below the FOMC’s 2-percent target. 
On  asset  purchases,  the  FOMC  has  indicated  that  it  will  continue  the  purchases  until  the 
outlook for the labor market has improved substantially in the context of price stability. The 
Fed  has  structured  its  latest  round  of  asset  purchases  as  a  flow-based  program,  with  the 
idea that policymakers could fine-tune the rate of purchases in response to the economy. 
The FOMC decided in December to reduce the purchases from $85 billion to $75 billion per 
month.  Thus,  we  are  still  adding  monetary  accommodation  but  at  a  slightly  slower  pace. 
Asset  purchases  are  not  on  a  preset  course  and  will  continue  to  be  contingent  on  the 
FOMC’s economic outlook. However, the FOMC did indicate in December that if economic 
conditions evolve as expected, with improved labor market conditions and inflation moving 
back  toward  its  goal,  then  the  FOMC  will  likely  reduce  the  pace  of  asset  purchases  in 
measured  steps  at  future  meetings.  Chairman  Ben  Bernanke  indicated  in  his  December 
press conference that if we are making progress in terms of inflation and continued job gains, 
then the program would be concluded late in 2014. The December employment report has 
not  changed  my  belief  that  the  economy  has  already  met  the  criteria  of  substantial 
improvement in labor market conditions. So my preference would be that we conclude the 
purchases sooner than this, but I am glad that we have taken the first step on the path to 
ending the program. 
Eventually, monetary policy will be normalized, but the way in which that is done will depend 
on what operating framework we plan to use in the normalized environment. I believe that the 
exit strategy principles laid out by the FOMC in June 2011 still apply. More specifically, we 
need  to  return  to  an  operating  framework  in  which  a  market  interest  rate  is  our  policy 
instrument.  We  also  should  shrink  the  size  of  our  balance  sheet,  which  is  now  about 
$4 trillion, and return to an all-Treasuries portfolio as part of the normalization process. 
This sounds easy in principle, but I believe the size and composition of our balance sheet will 
make it challenging to execute smoothly. 
There  are  now  more  than  $2.4  trillion  of  excess  reserves  in  the  banking  system.  These 
reserves  are  not  inflationary  until  they  are  converted  to  money  and  flow  out  into  the 
economy. 
But as market rates rise in an improving economy, banks will find it advantageous to begin to 
increase  lending  or  acquire  assets  using  their  reserves.  The  challenge  for  the  Fed  is  to 
control  the  flow  of  reserves  so  that  we  can  successfully  maintain  our  2-percent  inflation 
target.  This  may  require  raising  interest  rates  more  quickly  than  currently  anticipated.  We 
have the tools that would enable us to raise rates if we chose to do so. However, the Fed 
may be subject to political pressures or pushback from various interest-sensitive sectors that 
could result in a more measured response than required. 
One of the consequences would be higher inflation. History suggests that the Fed tends to 
be  behind  the  curve  when  it  comes  time  to  tighten  monetary  policy,  and  in  the  current 
environment,  that  delay  could  prove  to  be  more  costly  than  when  reserves  are  in  limited 
supply. Thus, it’s a matter of our will rather than our ability. 
Conclusion  
In summary, I believe that the economy is continuing to improve at a moderate pace. We are 
likely to see growth of around 3 percent in 2014. Prospects for labor markets will continue to 
improve  gradually,  and  I  expect  the  unemployment  rate  will  continue  its  decline  to 
6.2 percent  by  the  end  of  2014.  I  also  believe  that  inflation  expectations  will  be  relatively 
stable and that inflation will move up toward our goal of 2 percent over the next year. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
On monetary policy, the reduction in asset purchases from $85 billion a month to $75 billion 
a  month  is  a  step  in  the  right  direction.  I  believe  the  economy  has  met  the  criteria  of 
significant  improvement in  labor  market conditions for  ending  the  program  and that further 
increases in the balance sheet are unlikely to provide appreciable benefits for recovery. Even 
after  the  asset  purchase  program  has  ended,  monetary  policy  will  still  be  highly 
accommodative. 
The  work  of  the  Fed,  however,  is  far  from  over.  Monetary  policy  still  faces  considerable 
challenges as we seek to normalize policy. The task should be to return to a framework in 
which a market rate is our primary policy tool, to reduce the size of our balance sheet, and to 
restore our portfolio to all Treasuries. The challenge will be to do so in a way that ensures 
that inflation remains close to our target, that the economy continues to grow, and that we 
avoid sowing the seeds of another financial crisis. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
