Amando M Tetangco, Jr: The Philippine economy – gearing up for the 
challenges ahead 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central bank of the Philippines), at the Philippine Retail Investment Conference, hosted by 
the Chartered Financial Analyst (CFA) Society of the Philippines, Taguig City, 28 May 2014. 
 To the organizers of the Retail Investment Conference, led by Ms. April Lynn Tan, President 
of  the  Chartered  Financial  Analyst  (CFA)  Society  of  the  Philippines,  guests,  ladies  and 
gentlemen, good morning. 
I am delighted to welcome you to the CFA’s first Retail Investment Conference. Coming after 
the country’s successful hosting of the World Economic Forum last week, and before that the 
country’s receipt of the one-notch further credit rating upgrade from Standard and Poor’s, this 
conference dedicated to the Filipino retail investor could not have come at a more opportune 
time.  With  the  WEF  and  the  rating  upgrade,  we  could  expect  greater  interest  from  foreign 
investors  in  the  country‘s  potential  as  an  investment  destination.  That  being  the  case,  we 
should not allow the domestic retail investor to be left “too far behind”. 
The CFA Institute, which organized this conference, is often thought of as an organization of 
math  wizards  and  nerds  who  dabble  in  the  rocket  science  that  is  called  finance.  Looking 
around the room, I think there are quite a few of you who are also investment geniuses. But 
to  the  majority  of  us,  “commoners”,  who  are  not  as  “gifted”,  it  is  the  discipline  in  informed 
decision-making that evens out the equation. 
Whether you are in the former group, or in the latter, the fact that you are here indicates to 
me that you have interest in the Philippine economic story. I hope that at the end of the day, 
you  will  find  yourselves  armed  with  the  correct  information  and  able  to  make  the  right 
decisions to suit your personal financial objectives. 
I’ve structured my remarks this morning, following this outline. 
I’ll start with the developments and outlook in the Philippines, go through some challenges 
–  from  both  the  domestic  and  global  fronts  –  that  face  us  and  how  the  BSP  is  helping  to 
address these challenges. 
I would like you to focus on the top chart – this is the country’s quarterly GDP performance. 
This  chart  tells  us  that  since  1999  (or  nearly  15  years  ago),  the  Philippines  has  posted 
60 quarters of consecutive, positive economic growth. Not even at the height of the Global 
Financial Crisis in 2008/9 did we register negative GDP growth. 
What is even more noteworthy is the fact that in the last 8 quarters, GDP has consistently 
grown above 6 percent (with an average of 7 percent). This has led many during the WEF to 
call  the  Philippines  a  country  turning  the  tide  from  being  the  sick  man  of  Asia  to  the  next 
Asian miracle. To be perfectly frank though, I do not relish that we are called a miracle. The 
evidence will show that we are where we are now because of hard-fought reforms. 
Analysts  have  described  the  Philippine  economy  as  being  in  the  “pink  of  health”.  And  this 
rosy picture is expected to continue through 2014–2015. 
The  charts  in  the  bottom  half  of  the  screenshow  that  domestic  aggregate  demand  
– consumption and capital formation – continue to be the main drivers of growth. 
Our growth story has been underpinned by solid anchors – low and stable inflation due to 
credible  monetary  policy  and  a  sound  banking  system  maintained  through  responsive 
regulation.  Inflation  has  remained  within  target  for  5  consecutive  years.  Meanwhile, 
Philippine banks continue to be well-capitalized. On both solo and consolidated bases, the 
capital  adequacy  ratio  of  our  banks  remains  well-above  the  BSP’s  standard  of  10  percent 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
and the BIS’s standard of 8 percent. Likewise the adoption of Basel 3 in 2014 is expected to 
strengthen further the financial system. 
The country’s external sector position and payments dynamics have continued to help shield 
the  economy  and  the  domestic  financial  market  amid  recent  financial  market  volatilities 
following the start of the Fed tapering. 
The  favorable  external  sector  dynamics  is  also  manifested  through  improvements  in  the 
country’s external liability management. The country’s current account has been in surplus 
for 11 consecutive years now. Our gross international reserves remain more than adequate 
to meet the country’s foreign exchange requirements. The country’s external debt has been 
on the decline from around 60 percent in 2004 to just over 20 percent in 2013. 
The strong macroeconomic fundamentals of the country have also been reflected in strong 
positive sentiment among retail investors. 
As  we  all  know,  favourable  sentiment  is  a  positive  multiplier.  Both  consumers  and 
businesses  continue  to  express  upbeat  views  about  the  Philippine  economy’s  growth 
trajectory. The positive sentiments of both consumers and businesses are indicative of the 
broad support to the general direction of economic policies, and this is expected to fuel the 
momentum of reforms moving forward. 
With the sustained positive developments in almost all sectors of the economy, the outlook in 
2014 remains upbeat. We are optimistic that GDP growth will reach the government’s growth 
target of 6.5 to 7.5 percent for the year. We also expect inflation to settle within the target of 
3–5  percent  for  2014.  In  2015,  the  inflation  target  is  lowered  to  2–4  percent,  which  is 
consistent with our desired disinflation path. External sector dynamics will remain favorable, 
as trade is expected to rebound in light of expected global turnaround while remittances are 
seen to remain on a steady growth path. 
Let  me  now  go  to  the  second  part  of  my  presentation:  macroeconomic  issues.  Actual 
developments and prospects all look and sound like it is all good, doesn’t it? Yes, so far… All 
positive trends. But just like any shrewd investor, the BSP is mindful about the pockets of 
risks  that  could  impinge  on  the  country’s  economic  growth  momentum.  As  they  say,  “the 
trend is your friend until it bends.” 
Let me focus on three issues: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
Risks to price stability; 
Impact of the gradual tightening of US monetary policy; and 
Concerns  raised  on  the  rapid  growth  in  domestic  liquidity  and  credit  which, 
nevertheless, remain consistent with fundamentals. 
The first issue is: what are the risks to price stability? 
We’ve  been  able  to  keep  inflation  within  the  government’s  target  for  5  consecutive  years 
now. Is that a trend we can keep? 
I know many of you are used to looking at charts and trends. The chart on the right side of 
the  screen  is  something  which  you  may  not  be  that  familiar  with.  It’s  called  a  fan  chart.  It 
shows the projected path of inflation and the likely area this can stray about, given certain 
levels of confidence. 
Inflation  is  seen  to  be  manageable  over  the  policy  horizon,  even  as  the  inflation  path  has 
somewhat moved higher. 
The left hand side of the screen lists the potential price risks. 
 
Potential  price  pressures  are  still  coming  mostly  from  the  supply  side,  notably 
potential increases in power rates and higher food prices resulting from an expected 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
El Niño episode in the second half of 2014. These factors highlight the continued 
risk of second-round effects, which are thus far, not yet evident. 
The downside risks to inflation are associated with the potential growth slowdown in 
key emerging markets and risk of deflation in some advanced economies. 
 Going  forward,  to  help  ensure  that  the  BSP  is  able  to  sustain  the  “trend”  of  meeting  the 
inflation  target,  we  will  continue  to  watch  developments.  We  will  deploy  appropriate 
measures as needed to ensure sustainable, non-inflationary, and inclusive economic growth. 
I know that many of you are aching to find out, “when is the BSP going to raise its policy 
rates?” No one has a crystal ball, even Nostradamus missed. Instead of giving you a day and 
date, let me give you principles. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
The BSP is focused on inflation. 
We will not hesitate to act pre-emptively if we believe the inflation target is at risk. 
We are not wedded to a pre-set course of action. We will use available tools in our 
enhanced tool kit, as appropriate…. 
Now does that answer the burning question in your mind? 
A second issue is the Fed taper. As sanguine as the future of the country may sound, we 
remain watchful of potential risks that could arise from the Fed’s actions. I am sure you have 
been following the issue of the Fed taper quite closely. As shown in the charts, movements 
of  domestic  financial  instruments  in  May  2013,  Q4  2013  and  Q1  2014  exhibited  volatility. 
Nonetheless,  the  spill-over  effect  of  the  US  monetary  policy  normalization  has  gradually 
tapered  off.  In  particular,  we  could  see  that  portfolio  investments  are  now  posting  inflows 
following outflows registered during the latter part of 2013 to the first three months of 2014. 
With the Fed taper of asset purchases in place, markets are now watching developments in 
growth and unemployment in the US, to see if the Fed will change the perceived path of the 
taper, and when the “lift-off” (or when Fed would raise rates) would be. 
In this period of uncertainty and market volatility, good surveillance is key. The BSP will not 
hesitate to deploy contingency measures in response to sharp volatility in capital flows. With 
an expanded monetary policy toolkit and a broad-range of macroprudential measures to help 
ensure financial stability, we are optimistic that we are equipped to deal with potential market 
volatility. 
I  can  sense  in  the  room,  a  second  burning  question  at  the  back  of  your  minds.  –  will  the 
exchange  rate  go  below  P43?  Will  it  go  past  P45  again?  When?  Again,  I  do  not  have  a 
crystal ball. But let me describe to you our policy. The BSP will continue to allow the FX rate 
to be broadly determined by the market… But because market participants often go ahead of 
themselves, we will be present in the market if needed to help keep a lid on these excesses. 
This  policy  has  worked  well,  and  we  observe  this  whether  the  exchange  rate  is  on  an 
appreciation or a depreciation trend. 
The country’s external sector remains robust, and we are confident we will be able to absorb 
significant shocks originating from external sources. 
The movements in the domestic financial assets – including the stock market and exchange 
rate  –  will  continue  to  be  dominated,  in  the  near-term,  by  changes  in  the  global  investor 
sentiment. The global investor is hard-wired to be binary – he is either risk ON or risk OFF. 
Depending on the balance of risks between AEs and EMEs, funds can move across markets 
swiftly and in surges. 
It is these shifts in global sentiment that we are mindful of… because often, it is the retail 
investor who is the most at risk when the larger investment houses go in or out of specific 
markets. 
This is why good, credible, timely information to retail investors is critical. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
The slide lists some of these risks. 
Risks coming from advanced economies include: 
a)  
b)  
weak domestic activity amid sustained ultra-low inflation/deflation; 
sustainability  of  key  reform  measures  in  the  euro  area  amid  improving  growth 
prospects; and 
a faster than expected pace of US monetary policy normalization. 
protracted weak growth in certain EMEs; 
economic slowdown in China; and 
geopolitical risks. 
c)  
Possible risks emanating from emerging market economies (EMEs) include: 
a)  
b)  
c)  
A third risk is the build-up of financial stability pressures from high liquidity and credit growth 
that could lead to potential asset bubbles. 
To backtrack, in 2010–12, the country experienced strong surges of capital inflows, as the 
country became a magnet for capital that was looking for a home that had both good yield 
and excellent growth potential. As the dollars were converted to buy domestic assets, peso 
liquidity in the system grew. Since 2011, we have been instituting a series of macroprudential 
measures – including adjustments in the capital risk weights on NDF, refinements in our SDA 
facility and increases in reserve requirements. All these have been calibrated so that while 
we try and limit speculative activity, we do not stifle legitimate inflows to the economy. 
The use of macroprudential measures has so far been effective. By and large, volatilities in 
the financial markets have been contained. We can use our enhanced tool kit to ensure that 
volatility in financial and real asset prices is kept at manageable levels. 
Before I move on to the next slide, I know some of you may have this nagging question – are 
we in an asset bubble? The indicators, as of now, show that we are not in one – but because 
it is our job to worry, we are mindful that pressures from excessive market exuberance can 
lead to a bubble. Thus, we have been more closely monitoring the real estate sector (e.g., 
through the expanded definition of real estate exposures, stress testing on REE.) 
Earlier, I had alluded to the phenomenon that when global asset managers move, there is a 
risk that the retail investor could bear the “heat” of the shifts. Global asset managers often 
move  in  herd  –  partly  because  they  use  the  same  benchmarks,  have  similar  risk 
management systems, and are very competitive. Also, partly because the retail investor does 
not  necessarily  have  the  same  set  of  information  that  global  asset  managers  have.  The 
classic dilemma of information asymmetry. Hence, the saying “It is better to be incorrect and 
be with the herd, than to be correct and be trampled upon by the market.” 
In  order  to  help  reduce  that  “risk”  to  the  retail  investors,  the  BSP  is  ardent  in  pursuing 
measures to promote further the development of our country’s capital market by broadening 
available investment alternatives for you. 
 
Amended guidelines on rules governing Long-Term Negotiable Certificates of Time 
Deposits  (LTNCTDs).More  liberal  rules  on  issuance  and  trading  of  LTNCDs  in  an 
exchange to enhance transparency and price discovery. 
Liberalized  the  framework  for  the  cross-selling  of  financial  products  by  banks. 
Allowing  banks  to  use  their  premises  to  market  and  sell  the  financial  products  of 
their related parties under a banking group or a financial conglomerate provides a 
broader array of financial products using the existing branch network of the banking 
system. 
Created the environment to encourage availability of derivative products for banks 
and clients. We continue to enhance the regulatory environment [e.g., refinement of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches
  4 
 benchmarks, trading rules] so that banks can offer instruments to help hedge risk 
and  provide  ways  of  portfolio  diversification  [e.g.,  FX  options,  swaps,  credit 
derivatives, IRS] 
Also contributing to efforts to deepen the country’s capital market is the BSP’s Economic and 
Financial  Learning  Program  (EFLP)  which  brings  together  under  one  flagship  program  the 
key economic and financial learning programs of the BSP. 
It embodies the BSP’s thrust to promote economic and financial education among the public. 
Increasing  awareness  about  the  financial  system  and  the  financial  services  it  offers  will 
certainly increase retail investor participation. 
As much as we are committed to promoting financial services and products, and providing 
financial  education,  we  are  also  equally  keen  on  ensuring  that  consumer  rights  are  being 
protected. 
This is something we take seriously in the BSP. Just two weeks ago, the Monetary Board 
(MB) approved the adoption of the Financial Consumer Protection Framework of the BSP to 
institutionalize consumer protection as an integral component of banking supervision in the 
country.  Banks  should  no  longer  see  consumer  protection  as  a  “nice  to  have”  CSR  or 
advocacy, but we will be rating banks in terms of the systems and procedures they have for 
consumer protection. 
Much earlier on, the BSP already “put its money where its mouth is”, so to speak. In the BSP, 
we institutionalized consumer protection by creating one department which sole function is to 
be  a  redress  mechanism  for  consumer  grievances  and  complaints.  Being  in  the  BSP’s 
Financial Consumer Affairs Group (FCAG) is not an easy day job, as you can imagine. But it 
is  something  that  we  believe  has  been  effective  in  giving  reprieve  to  consumers  and  also 
bringing  complaints  to  banks  so  they  could  make  appropriate  changes  in  their  own 
processes. 
Part of consumer protection is also giving them information. So, in addition to the EFLP of 
the  BSP,  we  have  worked  with  other  members  of  the  Financial  Sector  Forum  (FSF),  i.e., 
SEC, PDIC, IC, to develop “Protect Your Money” (PYM) and other advisories to raise public 
awareness  on  financial  products  and  services,  the  basic  responsibilities  of  depositors  and 
investors, and the things to look out for when depositing or investing. 
Consumer protection, financial education, and developing the domestic capital markets are 
all part of the BSP’s strategy to help ensure that the retail investor is equipped and protected. 
But more broadly and to the rest of the economy, the BSP works towards creating a stable 
macroeconomic  environment  where  you  can  plan,  participate,  and  help  propagate  the 
creation and enlargement of wealth, not just for yourselves, but for the greater majority. 
In particular, 
 
The BSP remains committed to staying the course:(a) sustain appropriate monetary 
policy  stance  to  maintain  and  promote  price  stability;  (b)  continue  to  initiate  key 
reforms  to  promote  financial  stability,  including  financial  inclusion  advocacies;  and 
(c) pursue measures (e.g., maintaining a market-determined exchange rate, keeping 
an  adequate  level  of  FX  reserves,  and  managing  our  external  debt  profile)  to 
strengthen resilience against external shocks. 
The  BSP  will  remain  as  a  catalyst  for  further  development  of  sustainable  and 
inclusive  growth:  We  will  continue  to  adopt  purposeful  reforms,  aligning  our  own 
processes  with  international  benchmarks,  while  making  sure  these  reforms  are 
relevant to our own domestic needs. 
 As  you  may  have  heard  me  say  on  numerous  occasions  in  the  past  weeks,…“So  far,  so 
good.”…. We have weathered the GFC, the Fed taper tantrum, the onset of the Fed taper, 
Yolanda and a host of other natural calamities…. We have even weathered geopolitical risks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
But this should not lead us to be complacent. The situation could, as they say, “turn on a 
dime”. Which is why you and the BSP have to remain vigilant. I mentioned our buffers, I also 
mentioned the risks. But I want to end these remarks by saying, the BSP will continue to be 
watchful,  implement  appropriate  and  timely  reforms  and  draw  from  our  strengths  in 
confronting the challenges ahead. Our support for the development of the country’s financial 
market  will  not  waver…  We  will  continue  to  be  guided  by  a  framework  that  will  not  stifle 
innovation but rather promote market discipline. 
This is our word, and to borrow investors’ dictum: “Our word is our bond.” 
Thank you. 
 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
