  
 
Patrick Honohan: Progress and developments in relation to implementing 
the mortgage arrears resolution targets 
Speech  by  Mr  Patrick  Honohan,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland,  to  the  Joint 
Committee on Finance, Public Expenditure and Reform, Dublin, 30 April 2014. 
 Accompanying data tables can be found on the Central Bank of Ireland website. 
Thank  you  for  inviting  me  to  discuss  the  progress  and  developments  in  relation  to 
implementing the mortgage arrears resolution targets. I welcome the opportunity to discuss 
the issue and I am also happy to discuss other matters the Committee may wish to raise. 
When I was last before the Committee in September I noted that there were indications the 
mortgage arrears resolution process was working and, while there was still some way to go, 
momentum  was  building.  Based  on  the  evidence  of  recent  months  it  is  evident  that  the 
momentum has been established and we are starting to see progress by all banks in working 
to  address  mortgage  arrears  issues.  Although  it  is  still  fair  to  say  that  the  full  resolution 
across the system will take a significant amount of time. 
As you are aware under the Mortgage Arrears Resolution Targets imposed by the Central 
Bank last year the banks are required to meet quarterly targets on the resolution of mortgage 
arrears. To date we have received returns from the banks for three quarters and we reported 
the outcomes of our first assessment in November. 
We have recently concluded our audit and assessment of a sample of the banks’ end 2013 
target  returns,  which  you  discussed  recently  with  the  various  institutions.  Based  on  the 
information submitted the banks have proposed sufficient numbers of solutions to meet the 
targets of proposing solutions to 50 per cent of those in arrears and concluding 15 per cent of 
these cases. 
The audit effort this time was channelled towards what we viewed as the highest risk areas. 
We focused  on  examining the  areas  and  issues  which  have  caused  us  most  concern  and 
areas  which  the  banks  must  address  now  if  they  are  to  build  a  sustainable,  long-term 
process to deal with arrears. The audit process involved examinations of individual loan files, 
based on institution-specific samples, distinguishing for example between situations where a 
bank could be perceived as still relying on short-term solutions, and where a bank seemed to 
be  relying  on  what  might  be  called  “bulk  campaigns”  (offering  similar  solutions  across  the 
board to a range of cases). 
All  in  all,  I  would  summarise  our  findings  by  saying  that  although  we  have  noted,  in  the 
course of the audit, a number of areas of deficiency (as I will mention below), by and large, 
the evidence is consistent with a process which is working more or less to target. 
A number of key issues emerged in our latest audit, all of which have been communicated to 
the banks to address. The main issues include: 
• 
In some banks, communications with borrowers on proposed sustainable solutions 
were  too  frequently  verbal  in  nature,  and  they  did  not  provide  sufficient  clarity  to 
borrowers on what the ultimate solution proposed was. 
There  is  evidence  that  despite  the  requirements  for  proposed  solutions  to  be 
sustainable in the long-term, short-term loan modifications are still too prevalent in 
some banks. 
Affordability assessments were often not evident on files reported as sustainable. 
In a limited number of cases, we found issues of potential breaches of the Code of 
Conduct on Mortgage Arrears (CCMA) relating to the timing of the letters in advance 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  of  legal  proceedings  for  repossessions  commencing.  The  Central  Bank  will 
commence a review of CCMA compliance in the second half of the year and these 
findings will be taken into account as part of this review. 
We are communicating the specific issues and actions identified for each bank, including the 
actions  arising  in  from  our  wider  insights  into  the  effectiveness  of  the  specific  banks’ 
strategies to resolve mortgage arrears. 
While these issues are significant, and it is important that action is taken to address them, 
they  should  not  impede  progress  on  dealing  with  arrears  cases.  We  expect  the  banks  to 
continue to progress cases to sustainable and long-term solutions. 
We  will  continue  to  review  the  banks’  operations  and  strategies  and  where  there  are 
deficiencies or we think things should be done better we will let them know. 
Addressing  mortgage  arrears  was  never  going  to  be  a  short-term  issue.  We  have  always 
believed it was going to take time to tackle the issues and take a number of years to work 
out. We are now at a point were progress is evident and, notwithstanding specific areas for 
improvement  by  banks,  we  are  moving  along  the  right  path.  Mortgage  arrears  remain  a 
significant  priority  for  the  Central  Bank  and  we  will  continue  our  programme  of  intensive 
oversight of the banks’ progress.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
