Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Contribution and development of 
Uganda’s private sector 
Remarks  by  Mr  Emmanuel  Tumusiime-Mutebile,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda,  at  late 
Professor James Mulwana Open Business Symposium, Kampala, 26 February 2014. 
 Honourable Minister for Trade, Industry and Cooperatives 
Chairman, Private Sector Foundation 
Chairman Uganda Manufacturers Association 
Executive Director, Private Sector Foundation 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
I would like to begin by thanking the Board of Directors and the Management of the Private 
Sector Foundation for graciously inviting me to speak at this occasion, when we remember 
the life and career of Professor James Mulwana and the immense contribution, in multiple 
fields, which he made to this country. I want to commend the Private Sector Foundation for 
the initiative to celebrate the legacy of a man, who rose from humble beginnings to become 
one of Uganda’s leading entrepreneurs and most probably its greatest industrialist through 
hard work and talent for business, combined at all times with honesty and humility. 
James  Mulwana  served  on  many  boards  of  directors  and  committees  of  various  national, 
regional  and  international  organisations  as  Chairman,  Member,  Trustee  and  Patron,  in 
addition to being Thailand’s Honorary Consul General to Uganda. He received many awards 
in recognition of the leading role which he played in building the private sector in Uganda. 
Few would doubt that both the nature of his success and the way in which it was achieved 
are an inspiration to Ugandans, and especially to those who seek to pursue careers in the 
world of commerce and industry. 
James Mulwana was, first and foremost, an industrialist who established and built up several 
successful industrial enterprises. There may be people in this country who had never heard 
of his name, but it would be very hard to find anyone who has not purchased or used one of 
the products from his businesses: the Nice pens; plastic products in our homes; batteries for 
vehicles; and dairy products. 
It  was  as  an  industrialist  that  James  Mulwana  made  his  most  profound  contribution  to  the 
growth of the Ugandan economy and it is on the lessons we must learn from his endeavours 
in this sector that I would like to dwell this afternoon. Unfortunately, the success which James 
achieved in manufacturing and agro-processing stands out because it is so unusual. Formal 
sector  manufacturing  in  Uganda,  which  includes  agro-processing,  accounted  for  only 
6.1 percent of GDP in 2012/13, a share which has only slightly risen since the start of the 
millennium when it stood at 4.9 percent of GDP. 
The  formal  manufacturing  sector’s  failure  to  generate  much  faster  growth  over  the  last 
decade is a major cause for concern, because in developing economies this sector plays a 
crucial role in driving productivity growth and the structural transformation of the economy. 
Average real growth of formal sector manufacturing over the last 13 years was a respectable 
6.9 percent, but that is still far lower than the growth rates of the sector which are needed to 
propel structural transformation. 
The failure of the manufacturing sector to become the engine of growth of our economy can 
be  attributed,  I  believe,  to  both  weaknesses  which  are  internal  to  many  businesses  in 
Uganda  and  to  constraints  in  the  business  environment.  I  will  briefly  elaborate  on  these 
problems. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Let me start with the way in which businesses are managed, because it is in this area that we 
can learn so much from the career of James Mulwana. His businesses were successful over 
the  long  term  because  he  understood  and  put  into  practice  the  fundamental  principles  of 
managing a successful commercial business in a competitive market economy. A successful 
business must first and foremost, have sustainable profitability as its priority objective. It must 
also re-invest the bulk of its profits in improving efficiency; if it does not it will lose out to more 
efficient competitors. No business will remain viable if profits are instead taken out to fund 
the  conspicuous  consumption  of  its  owners.  Most  businesses  need  to  borrow  money  from 
banks or other lenders, but borrowing should be prudent and should only be used to fund 
expenditures  which  benefit  the  business  and  can  be  repaid  from  the  cash  flow  of  the 
business without disrupting its operations. 
No  business  will  be  successful  in  a  competitive  market  unless  it  employs  modern 
professional management, with the requisite qualifications and experience. A business which 
is  used  to  provide  employment  for  the  relatives  of  the  owners  will  lack  the  necessary 
expertise  to  survive.  Finally,  the  sustainable  success  of  a  business  requires  building  a 
reputation among its customers for high quality and reliable products. 
These  principles  are  important  for  businesses  in  all  sectors  of  the  economy,  but  they  are 
particularly important for those in the manufacturing sector. This is because manufacturing 
products are tradeable across borders, so markets for these products are very competitive. 
In  competitive  markets,  firms  cannot  afford  to  stand  still.  To  thrive  they  must  continuously 
improve  their  efficiency  which  is  only  possible  if  they  generate  profits  and  then  re-invest 
these profits in the business. 
Unfortunately these principles of modern business management are not universally applied 
in  the  private  sector  in  Uganda,  which  is  one  of  the  reasons  why  many  companies  fail  to 
generate  sustainable  profits,  struggle  to  repay  their  loans,  suffer  from  low  levels  of 
productivity and cannot increase their market share. It is also one of the reasons why foreign 
owned  companies  are  more  successful  than  many  domestically  owned  companies.  To  be 
successful on a sustainable basis, Ugandan entrepreneurs must learn from the success of 
James  Mulwana  and  adopt  a  modern  professional  approach  to  the  management  of  their 
businesses. 
I would now like to turn to the overall business environment in Uganda. There is no shortage 
of independent evidence of the shortcomings of the business environment in Uganda. The 
World Bank’s Doing Business Indicators for 2014 ranks Uganda against other countries in 
the world on several different features of the business environment. Overall, Uganda ranks 
132nd out of 189 countries, a fall of 6 places from 126th in the previous year. Uganda ranks 
very  poorly  in  several  important  facets  of  the  business  environment  including  getting  the 
relevant permits to start a business, the lack of reliable power supplies, registering property, 
dealing with construction permits and trading across borders. The World Economic Forum’s 
2012  Executive  Opinion  Survey,  which  is  reported  in  The  Africa  Competitiveness  Report 
2013,  sheds  further  light  on  the  problems  facing  the  business  sector  in  Uganda.  The 
Executive Opinion Survey asked respondents to select and rank the most problematic factors 
for doing business. The respondents in Uganda ranked corruption as the most problematic 
factor for business. 
The  quality  of  the  institutional  environment  for  business  plays  a  critical  role  in  determining 
private investment rates. A poor business environment increases both the costs and the risks 
of doing business. Weaknesses in the business environment are a serious impediment to the 
mobilisation of private investment, an impediment which cannot be mitigated by offering tax 
holidays.  Uganda’s  private  investment  rates  remain  fairly  modest  at  only  18.5  percent  of 
GDP  in  2012/13,  which  is  less  than  half  of  the  private  investment  rates  achieved  by  fast 
growing  developing  economies  in  Asia.  If  Uganda  is  to  mobilise  the  much  higher  levels  of 
private investment which are necessary if its vision of becoming a middle income country is 
to  be  attained,  the  institutional  weaknesses  in  the  business  environment  and  the  other 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
constraints which raise the cost of doing business, such as the poor quality of infrastructure, 
must be rectified. 
The  long  term  development  of  the  Ugandan  economy  will  only  be  possible  if  the  private 
sector is the engine of economic growth and if the manufacturing sector plays a prominent 
role  in  the  economy.  The  business  career  of  James  Mulwana  demonstrates  that  the 
Ugandan private sector can succeed, provided that it follows his example of applying modern 
commercial principles to the management of business. The public sector must also play its 
part in reforming the business environment in Uganda, so that it becomes more attractive to 
private investment. 
James Mulwana was an inspiration to Ugandans. May His soul rest in eternal peace. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
