Charles L Evans: Thoughts on accommodative monetary policy, inflation 
and financial instability 
Speech by Mr Charles L Evans, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, at the 
Credit Suisse Asian Investment Conference, Hong Kong, 28 March 2014. 
 Introduction 
Thank  you,  Mr.  Naqvi.  It  is  truly  a  pleasure  to  be  here  today  at  the  Credit  Suisse  Asian 
Investment  Conference,  and  I  thank  the  organizers  for  including  me  in  this  impressive 
program. 
Today, I would like to make three points concerning the U.S. economy and accommodative 
monetary  policy.  First,  the  U.S.  economy  continues  to  improve,  and  accommodative 
monetary policy will remain a strong support for this recovery for quite some time. Second, 
although highly accommodative monetary policy can lead to increasing inflation risks today, 
inflation in the United States is too low. And this is true throughout much of the world. Third, 
while low interest rates could lead to financial exuberance in principle, monetary policy is not 
the best tool to mitigate this risk. Instead, macroprudential policies are more appropriate tools 
to address the risk of financial instability. 
Before  turning  to  the  details  of  these  three  points,  I  need  to  note  that,  as  always,  the 
standard  Fed  disclaimer  applies:  I  will  be  giving  my  personal  perspective,  and  that  is  not 
necessarily shared by my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or in 
the Federal Reserve System. 
Recent Monetary Policy Actions 
As  you  all  know,  in  response  to  the  unusual  economic  circumstances  generated  by  the 
financial crisis and the Great Recession, the FOMC lowered our traditional policy tool – the 
target federal funds rate – to near-zero levels in December 2008 and has kept it there since. 
With the fed funds rate constrained at this lower bound, and economic conditions requiring 
additional policy accommodation, the Committee also deployed nontraditional policy tools to 
stimulate activity. We embarked upon large-scale purchases of long-term Treasury securities 
and agency mortgage-backed securities. We also used new communications tools to provide 
forward  guidance  about  how  long  short-term  interest  rates  will  essentially  remain  at  their 
lower bound of zero. 
While  large-scale  asset  purchases  and  forward  guidance  are  unconventional  tools,  their 
effect on interest rates and real economic activity is quite conventional. Both tools are aimed 
at stimulating economic activity through lower long-term interest rates. Through arbitrage and 
portfolio rebalancing, lower rates in one market are transmitted to other interest rates faced 
by investors, nonfinancial firms and consumers. Lower rates are also transmitted across the 
asset  and  maturity  spectrum.  There  is  significant  evidence  that  the  FOMC’s  policies  have 
been  helpful  in  reducing  financing  costs  rates  paid  by  firms  and  consumers  and,  more 
generally,  in  supporting aggregate  demand  in  the  face  of  substantial  economic  headwinds 
over the past six years. 
It should be noted that economic activity picked up momentum in the second half of 2013. 
Overall, real gross domestic product (GDP) grew at a bit under a 3-1/2 percent rate in the 
second half, up from an average pace of growth of about 2 percent over the previous three 
years.  Moreover,  we’ve  seen  some  more  solid  consumer  spending,  which  should  provide 
further impetus to overall growth this year. In the labor market, job growth has been solid and 
the unemployment rate is down to 6.7 percent. That is well below the 8.1 percent rate that 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
prevailed when we instituted the latest round of large-scale asset purchases in September 
2012. 
However, we aren’t out of the woods yet. The harsh weather of this past winter – by which I 
mean  the  North  American  polar  vortex  –  makes  the  recent  data  difficult  to  interpret.  That 
said, some of them have been on the soft side. Balance sheet scars from the financial crisis 
are  still  weighing  on  the  economy.  Fiscal  policy  is  a  restraint  on  economic  growth.  And 
economic activity abroad is not robust. The good news is that all of these headwinds appear 
to be dissipating. But risks remain. And we still have large resource gaps. For example, the 
unemployment rate is still well above the 5-1/4 percent rate I think it should be in the long 
run. At the same time, inflation is only 1 percent – well below the FOMC’s longer-run target of 
2 percent. Accordingly, monetary policy is highly accommodative, and needs to remain so for 
some time. 
Given these developments, the FOMC began adjusting the mix of its tools in December. The 
Committee, however, is maintaining the overall highly accommodative stance of policy. The 
Committee modestly reduced the pace of its monthly asset purchases from $85 billion to $55 
billion  in  three  separate  $10  billion  steps.  In  addition,  with  the  unemployment  rate 
approaching  the  6-1/2  percent  threshold  that  was  established  in  December  2012,  the 
Committee decided it was time to update its forward guidance on the future path of short-
term  interest  rates.  Our  policy  statement  now  emphasizes  that  when  deciding  how  long 
short-term  rates  will  remain  at  their  current  level,  the  Committee  will  use  a  wide  range  of 
information to assess the realized and expected progress toward our dual mandate goals of 
maximum  employment  and  price  stability.  The  statement  also  indicates  that  given  the 
Committee’s current assessment of these factors, it likely will be appropriate to keep the fed 
funds  rate  at  its  current  level  for  a  considerable  period  after  the  asset  purchase  program 
ends. Furthermore, even after the economy lifts off and employment and inflation are near 
mandate-consistent levels, economic conditions likely  will  warrant keeping short-term rates 
below their typical long-run level for some time. 
The  various  asset  purchases  the  Fed  has  undertaken  since  2008  have  expanded  our 
balance  sheet  more  than  fourfold,  to  over  $4  trillion  dollars.  Moreover,  according  to  the 
FOMC’s projections and the latest market expectations, by the time the policy rate increases, 
it  will  have  been  near  zero  for  about  seven  years.  These  are  startling  facts  and  should 
certainly  get  your  attention!  As  prudent  policymakers,  we  would  be  remiss  if  we  failed  to 
carefully  assess  potential  risks  that  might  arise  from  these  unusual  and  extraordinary 
policies. 
As  the  FOMC’s  communications  indicate,  the  Committee  has  fully  reviewed  the  potential 
costs of its policies and it reassesses them regularly. I think that the benefits of our policy 
choices continue to far outweigh the potential risks. However, we must repeatedly think long 
and  hard  about  two  risks  that  are  mentioned  often  –  namely,  that  our  expanded  balance 
sheet and the prolonged period of low rates raise 1) the risk of higher inflation; and 2) the risk 
of financial  instability. What  can go  wrong?  Do we  have  the  appropriate  infrastructure  and 
tools to adequately assess and manage these risks? To address these questions, we must 
evaluate these risks within the context of the goals of monetary policy and the current state 
of the economy and financial markets. 
Inflation risks 
Let me start with the risk of high inflation. As far back as mid-2009, Fed critics warned that 
our near-zero policy rate and trillions of dollars in asset purchases risk generating very high 
inflation. On several occasions, to underscore this risk, I have been presented with a gift of a 
Zimbabwe 100 trillion dollar note. As someone who is subject to a 20 U.S. dollar limit on gifts, 
I can assure you it is within the guidelines to accept one of these notes. 
The monetary policy mandates of the Federal Reserve are clear: We must foster monetary 
and financial conditions that support maximum employment and price stability. Since January 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
2012, the Fed has set an explicit goal for inflation of 2 percent, as measured by the price 
index  for  total  personal  consumption  expenditures,  or  PCE.  So,  how  are  we  doing  with 
respect to this 2 percent target and our Zimbabwean risks? 
Despite many earlier predictions of unacceptably high inflation, total PCE inflation has been 
hovering around just 1 percent since early 2013. Other inflation measures, notably, the well-
known  Consumer  Price  Index  (CPI),  are  also  well  below  their  related  benchmarks.1 
Forecasters  often  look  at  core  inflation,  which  excludes  volatile  food  and  energy  prices, 
because it is a better predictor of where overall prices are headed than is total inflation. Our 
progress toward the inflation target is not noticeably faster by this metric either. Core PCE 
inflation was just 1.1 percent over the past year and has been at this rate since last spring. 
Most private sector forecasts and survey measures of inflation expectations have remained 
well anchored and do not ring any alarms of high inflation. Expectations embedded in asset 
prices  tell  a  similar  story.  Sophisticated  models  that  extract  inflation  expectations  from  the 
yield  curve  show  that  investors’  inflation  expectations  at  the  three-year  horizon  are  below 
2 percent and will be below 2 percent for several years. 
All told, the risk of high inflation seems very low. In fact, I am concerned that inflation will not 
pick  up  quickly  enough.  As  I  noted,  we  have  been  stuck  at  1  percent  inflation  since  early 
2013,  and  there  is  little  indication  of  a  pickup  in  the  recent  data.  Low  inflation  is  just  as 
economically costly as high inflation. When we set an inflation target of 2 percent, we need to 
hit our target without too much delay. Simply put, we need to average 2 percent inflation over 
the medium term. 
Accordingly, 
for  extended  policy 
accommodation.  If  the  Fed  embarked  prematurely  on  more  restrictive  monetary  policy 
conditions, these adverse actions would work to reduce inflation to further unacceptably low 
levels. That’s going in the wrong direction.2  
the  current  1  percent 
inflation  situation  calls 
Financial stability and monetary policy 
It is easy and most natural for a Fed policymaker to talk about inflation. Price stability is one 
of the explicit goals of monetary policy as mandated by the U.S. Congress. Financial stability 
risks  are  more  complicated.  How  does  financial  stability  dovetail  with  the  Fed’s  dual 
mandate? There is clearly an interdependent relationship between them. A strong economy 
with  low  inflation  provides  a  key  stabilizing  force  for  beneficial  credit  intermediation  and 
robust  financial  market  functioning.  At  the  same  time,  stable  and  well-functioning  financial 
markets  are  essential  for  achieving  maximum  employment  and  price  stability.  The  global 
experience  since  2008  reinforces  this  critical  interplay  between  monetary  and  financial 
conditions. 
However, beyond these basic principles, what is the appropriate monetary policy stance for 
achieving both financial stability and the dual mandate of maximum employment and price 
stability? 
With inflation running well below our 2 percent longer-run target and the unemployment rate 
still well above its normal long-term level, appropriate monetary policy dictates that low real 
interest  rates  should  prevail  until  the  economy  is  further  along  a  sustainable  path  to  its 
potential  level  and  inflation  is  closer  to  target.  Nonetheless,  it  is  common  to  hear  the 
                                                
1   Because of some differences in product coverage and statistical methodologies, total CPI inflation tends to 
average 1/4 to 1/2 percentage points higher than total PCE inflation. Hence, the FOMC’s 2 percent target on 
total PCE inflation would translate to a 2.3 percent to 2.5 percent target for total CPI inflation. 
I recently discussed the costs of too-low inflation and the implications of having a 2 percent inflation target in a 
January 15 speech; see Evans (2014). 
2  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
argument  that  these  highly  accommodative  monetary  policies  might  sow  the  seeds  of 
financial instability. 
The fear is that excessive and persistently low  interest rates would lead to excessive risk-
taking by some investors. For instance, some firms, such as life insurance companies and 
pension funds, are under pressure to meet a stream of fixed liabilities incurred when interest 
rates were higher.3 (And perhaps these liabilities were offered at somewhat generous terms 
to begin with.) To meet commitments like these in the current low interest rate environment, 
some  firms  have  an  incentive  to  reach  for  yield  by  investing  in  excessively  risky  assets. 
Furthermore,  with  the  costs  of  borrowing  at  historically  low  levels,  other  investors  might 
simply decide that this is a good time to cheaply amplify the risk and return in their portfolios 
by taking on more leverage. 
One could reach the conclusion that historically low and stable interest rates pose a threat to 
financial stability. This creates a seeming paradox for policymakers. On the one hand, the 
existing  large  shortfalls  in  aggregate  demand  call  for  highly  accommodative  monetary 
policies and historically low interest rates. On the other hand, such policies have the potential 
to raise the likelihood of financial instability in the future. 
So,  the  questions  that  I’m  often  asked  regarding  these  matters  are  as  follows:  Do  the 
regulators and the Fed have adequate safeguards in place to mitigate this potential financial 
risk? If not, should the FOMC step away from what we thought was the best monetary policy 
with respect to our dual mandate? Should we discard our nonconventional tools and raise 
the fed funds rate in order to reduce the possibility of undesirable financial imbalances in the 
future? 
I  don’t  believe  that  such  monetary  policy  adjustment  is  the  right  approach.  I  think  the 
inference that persistently low interest rates pose a danger to financial stability is based on a 
narrow view of the economy. This narrow view is unlikely to survive a broader analysis that 
takes into account all the interactions between financial markets and real economic activity. 
If  more  restrictive  monetary  policies  were  pursued  to  generate  higher  interest  rates,  they 
would likely result in higher unemployment and a sharp decline in asset prices, choking the 
moderate  recovery.  Such  an  adverse  economic  outcome  is  unlikely  to  set  a  favorable 
foundation for financial stability. Moreover, our short-term interest rate tools are too blunt to 
have a significant effect only on those pockets of the financial system that are most prone to 
inappropriate risk-taking. At the same time, these blunt tools could significantly damage other 
markets, as well as the growth prospects for the economy as a whole. Therefore, stepping 
away  from  otherwise  appropriate  monetary  policy  to  address  potential  financial  instability 
risks  would  degrade  progress  toward  maximum  employment  and  price  stability.  This 
approach would be a particularly poor choice when other tools are available, at lower social 
costs, to address the risk of financial instability. 
Let  me  be  clear.  I  am  not  saying  that  financial  stability  concerns  are  not  relevant  for  the 
economy  or  that  policymakers  should  not  take  decisive  action  against  developments  that 
threaten  financial  stability.  Rather,  I  am  saying  that  the  macroprudential  tools  available  to 
policymakers  are  better-suited  safeguards  to  addressing  financial  risks  directly.  These 
macroprudential actions can be dialed up or down given the appropriate setting of monetary 
policy  tools;  so,  undesirable  macroeconomic  outcomes  are  less  likely  than  if  we  were  to 
resort  to  premature  monetary  tightening.  Indeed,  any  decision  to  instead  rely  on  more-
restrictive  interest  rate  policies  to  achieve  financial  stability  at  the  expense  of  poorer 
macroeconomic  outcomes  must  pass  a  cost–benefit  test.  And  such  a  test  would  have  to 
clearly  illustrate  that  the  adverse  economic  outcomes  from  more-restrictive  interest  rate 
                                                
3  
I  should  note  that  increases  in  interest  rates  since  last  spring  have  increased  discount  factors  and  thus 
lowered the present value of pension fund and other fixed nominal liabilities. For instance, see Fitch Ratings 
(2013). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
policies  would  be  better  and  more  acceptable  to  society  than  the  outcomes  that  can  be 
achieved  by  using  enhanced  supervisory  tools  alone  to  address  financial  stability  risks.  I 
have yet to see this argued convincingly. 
Macroprudential tools 
Let’s discuss some of these macroprudential tools. 
One simple but important tool is enhanced monitoring. Even before the recent financial crisis, 
central  bankers  were  well  aware  of  the  key  role  played  by  stable  financial  markets  in 
economic  activity.  Since  the  crisis,  however,  the  analysis  of  financial  stability  issues  has 
been greatly  expanded  and  given  a more  prominent  role  in  the  FOMC’s  deliberations. We 
comb through reams of data looking for evidence of incipient risks to financial stability. 
The  Federal  Reserve  also  has  revamped  its  approach to  bank  supervision  substantially  to 
expand the focus on macrofinancial risks. Traditional bank supervisory tools are being used 
more intensively, and new tools have been developed. Bank capital stress tests are one well-
known  addition  to  our  supervisory  toolkit.  Another  is  the  augmentation  of  traditional 
microprudential supervisory work that analyzes individual institutions with efforts that take a 
wide-angle view of the banking industry. Supervisors look to identify common trends across 
institutions  and  emerging  concentrations  of  risks  that  might  pose  systemic  threats  to  the 
financial system. This broad view also allows supervisors to better identify sound practices 
among  firms  and  incorporate  them  into  supervisory  reviews  and  the  feedback  provided  in 
them. 
The Federal Reserve also has greatly expanded its surveillance efforts to financial markets 
outside of the traditional banking sector, such as the insurance industry and financial market 
utilities. These efforts are not confined to financial institutions per se, and reach a range of 
activities that might pose a potential threat to financial stability. For instance, staff members 
from  the  Chicago  Fed  are  actively  engaged  in  assessing  the  role  of  high-frequency 
computerized  trading  in  securities  and  derivatives  markets  and  associated  risks  that might 
arise with it. 
These are just a few examples of regulatory tools available to monitor and promote financial 
stability. And there are a host of other instruments in our toolkit, such as resolution plans, 
liquidity requirements and single counterparty credit limits. All are examples of improvements 
in  supervisory  practices  aimed  at  reducing  the  likelihood  of  systemic  disruptions  and 
containing the impact should such disruptions occur. 
Conclusion 
To reiterate, I currently expect that low inflation and still-high unemployment will mean that 
the  short-term  policy  rate  will  remain  near  zero  well  into  2015.  In  this  environment,  some 
have  questioned  the  ability  of  our  supervisory  and  regulatory  tools  to  adequately  address 
potential financial instability risks. They argue that a broad tightening of interest rate policy 
might  be  more  effective  in  catching  incipient  risks  that  might  fall  through  the  cracks.  It  is 
certainly true that higher interest rates would permeate the entire financial system. But this is 
just  another  way  of  saying  that  raising  interest  rates  is  a  blunt  tool.  Higher  interest  rates 
would  reduce  risk-taking  where  it  is  excessive;  but  they  also  would  result  in  a  pullback  in 
economic activity in sectors where risk-taking might already be overly restrained. That’s how 
a blunt tool works. 
If  you  believe  that  financial  stability  can  only  be  achieved  through  higher  interest  rates  
–  interest rates  that  would  do  immediate  damage to meeting  our  dual mandate goals  at  a 
time when unemployment is still unacceptably high – then we ought to at least ask ourselves 
if the financial system has become too big and too complex. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Think  about  how  problematic  the  cost-benefit  calculus  becomes  if  the  only  way  we  can 
achieve  financial  stability  is  to  raise  interest  rates  above  the  level  where  the  forces  of 
demand and supply in the real economy put them. The possible benefit of such a restrictive 
rate  move  would  be  to  reduce  risks  that  might  be  forming  in  the  nooks  and  crannies  of  a 
highly complex financial system. But the costs would be 1) higher unemployment; 2) a risk of 
choking  off  the  economic  recovery;  3)  even  lower  inflation  below  our  objective;  and, 
somewhat paradoxically, 4) the introduction of new financial risks by reducing asset values 
and credit quality. Given such cost-benefit trade-offs, I would have to question whether the 
financial system has become too complex – perhaps complex enough to generate negative 
social  value.  Rather  than  degrading  our  macroeconomic  performance  through  suboptimal 
monetary policies, I would have to consider whether we should contemplate big changes to 
the  financial  system  –  a  lot  more  rules,  substantially  higher  capital  requirements  for  all 
institutions and maybe even fewer financial products. 
However, I have a more favorable view of the social value of our financial system and the 
efficacy  of  supervision  and  regulation.  Since  the  financial  crisis,  the  Federal  Reserve  has 
expanded its macroprudential toolkit and enhanced its microprudential tools. We have also 
reoriented  our  approach  to  supervision  to  take  full  advantage  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
System’s wide-ranging expertise on macroeconomic and financial developments and risks. 
I believe that these regulatory efforts can effectively minimize the risks of another crisis and 
increase  the  resiliency  of  the  financial  system.  We  can  achieve  these  objectives  without 
having  to  resort  to  wholesale  changes  to  the  financial  system  and  without  degrading  our 
monetary  policy  goals.  Maintaining  the  effectiveness  of the financial  system for generating 
more-robust economic growth continues to be a crucial objective for public policy. Thank you 
for your time, and I would be happy to take your questions. 
References 
Evans,  Charles,  2014,  “Recurring  themes  for  the  New  Year,”  speech,  Corridor  Economic 
Forecast Luncheon, Coralville, IA, January 15. 
Federal Open Market Committee, 2013, meeting minutes (external), December 17–18. 
Fitch  Ratings,  2013,  “Fitch:  U.S.  corporate  pension  plans  underfunded  status  improves,” 
press release (external), New York, August 15. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
