Jens Weidmann: Stable banks for a stable Europe 
Speech by Dr Jens Weidmann, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the 20th German 
Banking Congress, Berlin, 7 April 2014. 
 Welcome 
1. 
Mr Fitschen, ladies and gentlemen 
I am honoured to have been asked to speak to you this evening at the 20th German Banking 
Congress. 
The  film  we  have  just  seen  illustrates  that  German  Banking  Congresses,  or  bankers’ 
congresses as they used to be called, have always mirrored our country’s colourful history. 
I would like to take the opportunity today to talk about the importance of stable and healthy 
banks for a stable currency union. 
Dissecting the financial crisis 
2. 
Do you remember the Agatha Christie film “Murder on the Orient Express”? 
The US businessman Mr Ratchett is murdered on the train from Istanbul to Calais. Detective 
Hercule  Poirot,  who  happens  to  be  on  the  same  train  and  is  asked  to  investigate  by  the 
director of the train company, a fellow traveller, discovers that the murder victim has twelve 
stab  wounds  and  is,  in  reality,  the  criminal  Cassetti.  After  questioning  the  witnesses,  he 
ascertains  that  a  number  of  passengers  had  a  motive  to  murder  Cassetti.  He  therefore 
comes to the conclusion that there is not one culprit for Cassetti’s murder, but twelve. 
I am telling you this because the chief economist of the BIS, Claudio Borio, recently said that 
the search for the culprit for the financial crisis brought to mind the search for the culprit in 
“Murder on the Orient Express”. As with Cassetti’s brutal murder, for which there is no one 
culprit, there is no monocausal explanation for the financial crisis. 
In fact, the contrary is true: an analysis of the root causes of the global financial crisis, as well 
as the European debt crisis, shows that many are to blame, or should we say responsible. 
I believe that no one here in this room will deny that there were serious aberrations in the 
banking  sector,  which  contributed  to  the  crisis.  However,  central  banks  and  the  regulatory 
authorities also made mistakes. 
Although  the  central  banks  successfully  combatted  inflation,  they  provided  incentives  for 
risky investor behaviour. Regulatory authorities underestimated the resulting dangers, as did 
the financial markets, where risk premiums were long at extraordinarily low levels. Politicians 
trusted in the efficiency of the financial markets and pursued a policy of market liberalisation 
and deregulation and did not see, or did not wish to see, the risk potential this entailed. 
Most  economists  were  equally  blind  to  the  risks  in  the  financial  system,  with  just  a  few 
issuing warnings to the political decision-makers. Claudio Borio, whom I mentioned earlier, 
and his colleagues at the BIS were among the few to point to the potential for a setback as a 
result of the rapid growth in the credit securitisation and credit derivatives segments. 
If financial market economists did not see the dangers, how were small investors and savers 
supposed to have been aware of the risks involved in some of their investments, say Lehman 
certificates? However, even what are referred to as “retail clients” cannot be absolved from 
all responsibility, when, for instance, they made deposits with virtually unknown banks and 
turned a blind eye to potential risks in the search for higher yields. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The  financial  crisis  has  shown  just  how  fragile  the  financial  system  is.  And  it  has  become 
apparent  that  the  financial  system  is  the  Achilles  heel,  as  it  were,  of  European  monetary 
union. 
A stable currency union requires a stable financial system. Banks have a central role to play 
in  the  euro  area’s  financial  system.  The  sovereign-bank  nexus  is  a  huge  obstacle  to 
permanently overcoming the crisis in the euro area. 
In some countries, banks and governments have manoeuvred themselves into a position of 
mutual  dependence  that  is  a  downright  vicious  circle:  if  the  banks  run  into  difficulties,  this 
raises  the  risks  for  the  government  budget.  Where  this  gives  rise  to  doubts  about  the 
solvency of sovereigns, this in turn impacts banks, not only because they then lack a last line 
of defence, but because they also have large holdings of government bonds on their balance 
sheets and display a pronounced home bias. 
During the crisis, and encouraged by crisis measures, many banks, especially in the crisis 
countries,  even  upped  their  holdings  of  high-yield  bonds  issued  by  their  home  state.  The 
logic is sound as seen from the individual bank’s perspective: if all goes well, the bank will 
pocket  a  sizeable  yield  premium,  and  if  the  state  becomes  insolvent,  the  survival  of  most 
banks in this country will be doubtful anyway. 
Deleveraging unavoidable 
3. 
In order to return to balance sheet structures that are sustainable in the long term, I believe 
deleveraging  is  unavoidable.  This  is  because  banks  themselves  are  responsible,  first  and 
foremost, for resolving the structural problems in the European banking sector. 
Euro-area banks’ total assets more than doubled between 1999 and mid-2012, due in large 
part to the exaggerations in the run-up to the financial crisis; they swelled from more than 
14 trillion euro to almost 35 trillion euro. 
In the euro area as a whole, banks are now reducing their assets, though this process has 
not yet been concluded. While the decline observed since mid-2012 is considerable, at just 
over 4 trillion euro to date, it reverses just a fifth of the preceding expansion. 
The  high  level  of  non-performing  loans  as  well  as  the  losses  the  banks  are  reporting  are 
additional  indications  that  there  is  still  considerable  need  for  adjustment,  especially  in  the 
periphery countries of the euro area. Moreover, looking at the experiences with debt crises in 
Scandinavia and Japan in the 1990s, there is much to be said for not putting off the balance 
sheet repair process. 
Bank regulation as a response to the crisis 
4. 
History teaches us that banking crises and financial crises are recurring phenomena; in other 
words such crises can never wholly be avoided. Nonetheless, the utmost should be done to 
prevent such serious crises as those witnessed in recent years. Above all, we need sensible 
and intelligent financial market regulation. 
On  the  subject  of  the  lessons  to  be  learnt  from  the  financial  crisis,  there  are  remarkable 
differences in perception between representatives of the financial industry and the general 
public:  while  the  prevailing  impression  among  the  public  is  that  next  to  nothing  has 
happened,  industry  representatives  are  already  complaining  of  an  excess  of  regulation. 
There has even been talk of a “tsunami of regulation”. 
In  my  opinion,  neither  is  true.  Regulation  has  been  materially  tightened  in  numerous 
instances, but there can be no question of overregulation. 
Nor have all points on the regulatory agenda been put into practice. What is key is that the 
steps taken by regulators should always be effective and designed to combat the underlying 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
issues and that the interplay between the various regulatory measures should also be taken 
into consideration. 
The stricter capital requirements and new liquidity rules under Basel III, which will be phased 
in  by  2019,  have  already  significantly  enhanced  financial  institutions’  internal  capital 
adequacy.  On  the  whole,  the  regulatory  measures  have  made  the  financial  system  more 
secure and robust. Whether it is now sufficiently secure and robust is a different question. 
According to the Basel Committee’s latest Basel III impact study, the 102 large international 
banks that were examined had, on average, a common equity tier 1 ratio of 9.5% and the 
125 other banks had a ratio of 9.1% in mid-2013. The target for 2019 of 7% common equity 
tier 1 capital is therefore already more than met, on average. 
Of course, that does not mean that all banks have already achieved the target of 7% plus 
potential  surcharges  for  global  systemically  important  banks.  However,  the  cumulative 
shortfall of the large international banks halved in the first half of 2013. 
The  eight  large  German  banks  with  an  international  focus  that  the  Bundesbank  examined 
had an average ratio of 8.3% as at the 30 June cut-off date, while the 40 smaller banks even 
had  a  ratio  of  12.8%.  Large  banks’  capital  requirements  also  almost  halved,  from  9  billion 
euro to 5 billion euro. 
The 7% target ratio includes a new capital conservation buffer of 2.5 percentage points. This 
buffer will allow losses to be absorbed effectively. It thus goes some way towards resolving 
the problem which the British economist Charles Goodhart has described as the “regulatory 
paradox”. 
Imagine you arrive at an unknown railway station late at night and there is exactly one taxi at 
the station’s taxi rank, which you wish to take to your hotel. The taxi driver tells you that he is 
sorry but he cannot take you because the city authorities demand that there must always be 
at least one taxi waiting in front of the station. 
Metaphorically  speaking,  the  traditional  minimum  requirements  guarantee  that  there  is 
exactly one taxi at the taxi rank. However, this capital cannot be used to absorb losses, as 
hard-hitting supervisory sanctions would be imposed if capital falls below requirements. 
The new rules ensure that there are at least two taxis waiting. Now, taxi drivers will counter 
that the more taxis there are waiting for customers, the longer they stand idle, and that is 
expensive. 
Bank representatives use a very similar argument when they say that  capital is expensive 
and  conclude  that  a  bank’s  assets  should  be  funded  with  as  little  capital  as  possible. 
However, the argument should really be that debt capital is cheaper as it currently enjoys tax 
privileges, which makes equity financing comparatively unattractive. 
And there is, I may add, a considerable difference between whether the worst case is having 
to wait for a taxi or facing stability risks in the financial system. I therefore believe that it is 
right to create greater capital reserves than regulators are currently demanding in order to 
make the financial system more robust. 
A problem that German and other banks have been experiencing not just since the financial 
crisis is weak profitability; the current low-interest-rate environment just adds to the burden. 
Poor profitability limits banks’ ability to retain earnings and thus their ability to build capital. 
Measures  to  improve  earnings  in  the  banking  sector  therefore  indirectly  also  facilitate 
measures to improve risk absorption. 
Critics  of  the  Basel  capital  rules  such  as  Martin  Hellwig  complain  that  the  risk-based 
approach of the Basel framework serves primarily to artificially lower capital requirements. In 
actual  fact,  the  leverage  ratio,  ie  the  unweighted  capital  ratio,  of  the  eight  large  German 
banks with an international focus that participated in the Basel III monitoring was just 2.2% in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
mid-2013, which translates into 45 euro of debt per euro of capital. Smaller banks’ leverage 
ratio was as much as 4.3%. 
The planned introduction of a leverage ratio – the target ratio according to Basel III is 3.0% – 
is doubtless a sensible addition to the risk-weighted capital rules. The risk-based approach 
must, however, remain a key element of the capital rules. Having a leverage ratio as the sole 
rule would offer banks problematic incentives to take greater risks. 
I therefore agree with my colleague Mark Carney of the Bank of England who has said, in 
this context, that it is sometimes good to wear a belt and suspenders to prevent your trousers 
from slipping. 
Making failure an option 
5. 
Ladies and gentlemen, the journalist and professor for banking Wolfram Engels once wrote: 
“Bankruptcy  is  a  part  of  the  market  economy.”  This  self-evident  truth  has,  to  date,  been 
inadequately implemented in the banking sector, however. 
Large and very interconnected banks especially were, to date, able to count on their survival 
being systemically relevant and thus guaranteed. However, “too big to fail” is not compatible 
with the principles of a market economy, nor is “too interconnected to fail”. 
In  extremis,  banks  must  be  able  to  fail.  For  only  the  possibility  of  failure  guarantees  the 
implementation  of  the  principle  of  liability.  And  only  the  principle  of  liability  ensures  that 
economic agents take responsible decisions. 
This is not intended to be a plea for “small is beautiful”. Large international banks definitely 
have  a  place  in  our  economic  framework.  Nor  does  the  sensible  ringfencing  of  risky, 
speculative  business  from  normal  customer  business,  as  proposed  by  the  Liikanen  Group 
and taken up by the European Commission, change this. 
However, incentives to expand to ever greater size should be reduced. Systemic risk buffers 
and higher capital requirements for systemically important institutions are instruments which 
counter this incentive. Their introduction is therefore welcome. 
In other words, there should be at least three, not just two, taxis waiting at the taxi ranks of 
large stations, to return to the image I used earlier. 
However,  capital  buffers  are  only  a  first  line  of  defence  to  help  banks  weather  adversity 
better.  This is  particularly  important  for  banks  that  would  be  especially difficult  to  wind  up. 
Further measures are necessary to ensure that it is, in extremis, possible for large and very 
interconnected banks, too, to fail. 
6. 
Banking union 
Single Resolution Mechanism 
6.1 
A vital building block in the process of making the banking system more stable is creating the 
regulatory  framework  for  the  orderly  resolution  of  failed  banks.  To  achieve  this  aim, 
procedures need to be put in place which allow the principle of liability to be implemented 
effectively. 
The  EU  has  made  crucial  progress  recently,  with  the  adoption  of  a  harmonised  bank 
resolution regime (the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive) and the decision to create a 
Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM). Essentially, the new rules are designed to ensure that 
banks  that  run  into  difficulties  in  future  can  be  wound  up,  with  their  owners  and  creditors 
being first in line to foot the bill. 
The SRM provides expressly for a bank-financed resolution fund only being second in line, 
while public funds would only be used as a last resort. Despite a number of exceptions in the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
fine print, which are part and parcel of the process of compromise, the resolution mechanism 
agreed upon allows a fundamental principle of market economics to be enforced. 
The  Bundesbank  welcomes  this  agreement  as  an  important  complement  to  common 
European supervision. But we still believe that a treaty change will be needed, all the more 
so as the decision-making processes seem to be as complex as ever. The aim must be to 
set up a European resolution agency equipped with clear decision-making structures. 
A matter which has yet to be decided conclusively, but one that will be of particular interest to 
you, is the question of which banks will need to pay into the single resolution fund, and how 
much.  An  appropriate  approach  would  be  to  have  different  contributions  depending  on  an 
institution’s size and its specific risk profile. 
Banks will be asked to bring the fund up to its target volume of 55 billion euro over a period 
of  eight  years,  beginning  in  the  year  2016  –  an  adequate  timeframe,  in  my  opinion,  for 
mobilising these funds. It would also be right, in my view, to use the option granted by the 
SRM  Regulation  of  also  counting  amounts  which  banks  have  already  paid  into  national 
resolution funds towards their contributions. 
A European deposit guarantee scheme is not being regarded as a matter of priority at the 
moment, and rightly so. After all, a joint deposit guarantee scheme would necessarily mean 
joint  liability.  But  joint  European  liability  would  necessitate  joint  European  control,  which 
would require more than the creation of a Single Supervisory Mechanism. 
Single Supervisory Mechanism 
6.2 
The  ECB  is  aiming  to  be  ready  to  launch  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM)  on 
4 November. This will require a mammoth effort by all the parties involved. It is a project that 
is comparable to the creation of monetary union, but is to be rolled out at seven times the 
speed. 
At the current juncture, the ECB together with the national supervisors is comprehensively 
assessing the balance sheets of 128 banks which, as things stand today, are candidates for 
direct ECB supervision. 
If  the  asset  quality  review  and  the  subsequent  stress  test  reveal  that  banks  need  to  be 
recapitalised, the need for capital will have occurred on the watch of the national supervisors 
– so you could say it is a legacy issue. It is therefore down to the member states in question 
to repair these legacy issues before responsibility shifts to the ECB. Private funds should be 
first in line to address any capital shortfalls. Failing that, it should be up to the member state 
to recapitalise the bank in question, assuming the latter runs a viable business model. 
This asset quality review is a major undertaking for supervisors and the banks in question. 
Yet at the same time, it is crucial for ensuring that the Single Supervisory Mechanism gets off 
to a credible start in its mission to restore confidence in banks and revitalise lending in the 
euro area. Hence the strict and demanding standards set by the asset quality review and the 
subsequent stress test. 
The assessment represents a huge administrative burden for the banks, so their misgivings 
are  understandable.  But  if  you  are  looking  to  paint  a  complete  picture,  there’s  simply  no 
getting round a thorough assessment. The procedure is even being likened to a full physical 
examination for banks. 
Before a football club signs a new player, it first subjects him to a thorough medical – and 
that is more than just a quick once-over. 
Of  course  there  are  some  physicians  who  carry  out  needless  examinations,  but  a  good 
medical  practitioner  is  mindful  of  the  proportionality  of  the  treatment  administered. 
Proportionality is also the watchword in the asset quality review, though we should not forget 
that this is the first time such a comprehensive assessment has been conducted. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Stop the preferential treatment of government bonds 
7. 
The  banking  union  closes  a  vulnerable  gap  in  monetary  union  by  contributing  to 
strengthening the financial system. It also helps to loosen the toxic links between sovereigns 
and banks to some degree. 
But in my view, further steps will be needed if we are to permanently and effectively sever 
this nexus. In particular, the preferential regulatory treatment afforded to government bonds 
and other exposures to the public sector needs to be brought to an end. 
If government bonds had to be backed by an amount of capital that adequately reflects the 
inherent  risk,  and  limits  were  defined  for  public  sector  exposures,  as  is  commonplace  for 
loans  to  private  debtors,  banks  would  have  much  less  of  an  incentive  to  increase  their 
leverage  by  investing  in  sovereign  debt.  That  would  also  play  a  key  part  in  improving  the 
stability of our banking system because it would remove an incentive for taking on excessive 
leverage. 
It is gratifying and encouraging to hear that Martin Blessing, a leading figure in the German 
banking industry, recently put forward a similar suggestion, because it indicates that support 
is on the increase. Finance Minister Wolfgang Schäuble recently also called for this issue to 
be added to the political agenda. 
It goes without saying that like Basel III, the appropriate legal framework would need to be 
phased in incrementally over an extended period of time. 
The role of central banks 
8. 
As I highlighted at the beginning of today’s speech, only structural measures can overcome 
the structural problems afflicting Europe’s banking sector. 
Monetary policy – and this is something I would like to be quite clear about – cannot resolve 
these  structural  problems  in  the  financial  sector,  for  we  have  neither  the  tools  nor  the 
mandate to do so. 
Being a central bank we cannot rectify the solvency problems of distressed institutions. But 
what we can do is combat temporary liquidity shortages. 
Back in November 2013, the ECB Governing Council, of which I am a member, agreed to 
continue the full allotment policy at least until the middle of 2015. What this means is that for 
the time being, banks can continue to draw as much liquidity as they wish, provided they can 
furnish sufficient collateral. After all, we should not forget that Europe’s financial system is 
centred around banks, and that state of affairs is not about to change any time soon. 
Successful monetary policy is based on preconditions which it cannot entirely create on its 
own. A functioning banking system is one of them; sound public finances another. 
Ladies and gentlemen, the euro area is currently experiencing very low inflation rates that 
are  well  below  our  definition  of  price  stability,  which  is  below,  but  close  to  2%.  Our 
projections  suggest  that  the  spell  of  low  inflation  rates  will  persist  for  a  time  before  rates 
gradually head back towards 2%. 
Given the low inflation pressure, the expansionary monetary policy stance is appropriate. 
At the same time, I would like to stress that the risk of a self-reinforcing deflationary spiral 
driven by shrinking wages and prices – a scenario which some people are prophesying – is 
equally remote, despite the current very low inflation rates in the euro area. These are largely 
explained by diminishing energy prices and the adjustment processes in the crisis countries. 
As  the  crisis  countries  gradually  return  to  economic  health,  price  pressures  there  are  also 
likely to see renewed momentum. 
The ECB Governing Council, expecting inflation rates to rise gradually, decided not to loosen 
the  monetary  policy  reins  any  further  at  its  last  meeting.  We  are,  however,  monitoring 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
developments very closely and are potentially prepared to take further measures in order to 
cope effectively with risks of a too-prolonged period of low inflation. 
Consideration should also be given to the fact that all the monetary policy measures that are 
currently on the table would set us on a course into uncharted waters. This raises questions 
as to the effectiveness of such measures and to the risks and side-effects they might entail. 
Moreover, the Governing Council members need to respect the boundaries of our monetary 
policy mandate and the provisions of the European treaties. 
Another  issue  about  which  I  have  no  doubt  is  that  the  longer  the  low-interest-rate  policy 
persists, the greater the risk and the less effective its positive stimulus. This point was also 
raised by the Association of German Banks recently, and rightly so. 
Sticking  to  the  low-interest-rate  policy  for  longer  than  would  be  needed  to  safeguard  price 
stability – something which the German Institute for Economic Research inter alia called for 
recently as a way of making the sovereign debt burden in the euro area more sustainable – 
should  not  be  an  option  for  us.  This  would  get  us  into  the  realm  of  fiscal  dominance  and 
breach our mandate. 
Above all, we would run the risk of losing the general public’s confidence in central banks. 
They  rely  on  monetary  policymakers  to  focus  unswervingly  on  achieving  and  maintaining 
price  stability.  At  the  end  of  the  day,  we  would  throw  away  our  most  valuable  asset,  for 
money without trust is not worth the paper it is printed on. 
Conclusion 
9. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  began  my  speech  today  by  drawing  your  attention  to  the  film 
“Murder on the Orient Express”. And as I have already mentioned, Hercule Poirot discovered 
that there was not one culprit but twelve. It was a case of lynching – the dead man was guilty 
of killing a small girl, and each of the twelve was connected to the girl in some way. 
But Poirot also came up with another possible explanation – that a stranger had boarded the 
train,  committed  the  crime  and  then  escaped  unnoticed.  This  was  the  account  which  the 
director of the company operating the Orient Express presented to the police, meaning that 
the true culprits ultimately escaped punishment. 
Turning to the financial and debt crisis, it would be wrong to put the blame on an ominous 
stranger. The objective should be to learn the right lessons from the crisis and make sure 
that similar crises can be avoided in the future. 
The lessons that need to be learnt for the financial sector are substantial ones, but much has 
already been achieved. 
Without stable and healthy banks, there cannot be a stable monetary union. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
