Javier Guzmán Calafell: Level and volatility of food prices: challenges 
and prospects 
Remarks  by  Mr  Javier  Guzmán  Calafell,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mexico,  at  the 
panel on “Level and volatility of food prices: challenges and prospects” at the “Food security 
in  a  context  of  high  food  price  volatility  and  low  productivity  in  Latin  America  and  the 
Caribbean:  challenges  and  opportunities”  international  seminar,  Guadalajara,  27  March 
2014. 
 First of all I would like to thank our three speakers, for having accepted the invitation to share 
with us their perspectives on the key aspects related to the high level and volatility shown by 
food prices in the last years. Given the importance of the topic, not only to Mexico but at the 
global  level,  and  the  quality  and  experience  of  our  speakers,  I  have  no  doubt  that  this 
session will be of great interest to all of us. 
After  having  shown  a  pronounced  decline  for  several  decades,  international  food  prices 
started to increase at the beginning of this century, abruptly spiking in 2007–2008. Prices for 
these products fell at the end of 2008 within the context of the global economic crisis, but 
rose again to hit levels in 2011 that were even  higher than those posted before the crisis. 
Although in the wake of this spike food prices have diminished, they still remain at very high 
levels.  In  addition,  forecasts  for  the  next  few  years  suggest  a  complex  scenario.  For 
example, the OECD and the FAO estimate that food prices for the period 2013–2022 will be 
above, in real terms, those seen on average in 2003–2012.1 
The increase in food prices in the last few years has been accompanied by great volatility. 
According  to  calculations  of  International  Monetary  Fund  staff,  long-term  volatility  of  food 
prices reached in 2009 its highest level in almost 30 years.2 Naturally, price fluctuations for 
these  products  heighten  challenges  for  economic  policy  and  complicate  significantly 
consumption  and  investment  decisions  by  families  and  businesses.  Some  analysts  have 
even emphasized that, viewed from a very long-term perspective, challenges stemming from 
the volatility of food prices could be more acute than those related to their level.3 
The  level  as  much  as  the  volatility  of  food  prices  have  significant  repercussions  for  all 
economies,  advanced  or  not,  by  affecting  economic  growth,  inflation,  public  finances,  the 
balance of payments, income distribution, poverty, and in some cases even political stability. 
However, the magnitude of the corresponding challenges has an inverse relationship with the 
level of development. Allow me to provide some additional information in this regard: 
• 
The  International  Monetary  Fund  estimates  that  the  median  food  share  in  total 
spending  in  advanced  economies  is  17  percent,  compared  to  31  percent  in 
emerging and developing countries.4 In addition, it is important to keep in mind that 
in  a  number  of  these  countries,  or  in  specific  sectors  of  the  population,  the 
corresponding figure is much higher.5 
                                                
1  OECD-FAO Agricultural Outlook 2013. 
2  Shaun K. Roache, “What Explains the Rise in Food Price Volatiliy?”, IMF Working Paper, WP/10/129, May 
2010. 
3  S.K. Roache, Op. Cit. 
4 
5  K. Anderson, M. Ivanovic and W. Martin, “Food Price Spikes, Price Insulation and Poverty”, Policy Research 
International Monetary Fund, World Economic Outlook, September 2011. 
Working Paper, WPS6535, The World Bank, July 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  In this context, it is not surprising that, according to World Bank calculations, the rise 
in food prices in 2010–2011 resulted in a net increase of 44 million in the number of 
people living in extreme poverty in developing nations.6 
Additionally, some recent studies conclude that increases in international food prices 
may give rise to a significant deterioration of democratic institutions, and to a higher 
number of internal conflicts, in poorer countries.7 
This underlines the importance of clearly understanding the factors that affect both the level 
and the volatility of food prices, as well as the challenges that public policy must confront in 
this respect. 
Clearly,  fluctuations  in  food  prices  are  largely  determined  by  supply  and  demand  factors 
inherent  to  these  markets,  such  as  the  pace  of  world  economic  activity,  demographic 
changes, the implications of higher income levels in some countries for eating habits, climate 
related factors, and the availability of water and arable land, among others. 
However,  the  analysis  becomes  more  complicated  given  that  there  are events  outside  the 
strict  sphere  of  food  markets  which  are  affecting  food  price  developments.  It  is  worth  to 
highlight  in  this  regard  that  developments  in  energy  markets  affect  food  prices  through  a 
more  intense  use  of  energy  in  the  production,  processing,  storage,  and  transportation  of 
these commodities, as well as through the more widespread production of biofuels and the 
resulting rise in the use of food and agricultural inputs for this purpose. Second, a growing 
interconnection  is  being  observed  between financial  and food markets, as  reflected  by  the 
larger  number  of  financial  investors  in  primary  product  markets  and  the  proliferation  of 
financial derivatives tied to these products. It is likely that this also has had an impact on food 
price trends.8 
In this context, it is clear that the design of policies oriented toward moderating increases in 
the level and volatility of agricultural and food prices, and dealing with their consequences 
when they are inevitable, faces significant challenges. I would like to highlight four of them, 
which from my point of view are particularly relevant. First, the design and implementation of 
the  policies  required  to  deal  with  the  macroeconomic  impact  and  the  social  costs  of  food 
price  fluctuations.  Second,  the  setting  in  motion  of  actions  oriented  toward  overcoming 
structural  difficulties  that  are  affecting  food  production,  such  as  low  investment  levels, 
infrastructure deficiencies, modest storage facilities, and the high concentration in brokerage 
markets. Third, the need to take into consideration that some of the policies that have been 
adopted to attenuate the effects of food price increases, such as export restrictions or tariff 
reductions in several countries simultaneously, price controls and subsidies, frequently end 
up having the opposite effect. Fourth, the importance of taking actions focused on improving 
transparency,  the  availability  of  information,  and  in  general  the  functioning  of  markets  for 
these products, in such a way as to provide adequate incentives for the adoption of schemes 
that stimulate productivity and competitiveness in this sector, contributing in this manner to a 
lower disparity in food prices, both across countries and regions, as well as through time. 
                                                
6  World Bank, Food Price Watch, February 2011. 
7  R. Arezki and M. Brückner, “Food Prices and Political Instability”, IMF Working Paper, WP/11/62, March 2011. 
8  Nakaso, Hiroshi et al., “Report of the G20 Study Group on Commodities”, November 2011. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
