K C Chakrabarty: Transforming credit information into action – issues 
and challenges 
Keynote address by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at 
the  Sixth  Annual  Credit  Information  Conference,  organized  by  CIBIL  –  Credit  Information 
Bureau (India) Ltd –, Mumbai, 20 March 2014. 
 Assistance  provided  by  Shri  Rajesh  Jai  Kanth  and  Ms.  Jayanthi  N.  in  preparation  of  this  address  is  gratefully 
acknowledged. 
1.  Shri  M.V.Nair,  Chairman,  CIBIL;  Shri  R.V.Verma,  CMD,  National  Housing  Bank;  Shri 
M.V.Tanksale, Chief Executive, Indian Banks’ Association; Shri Rajiv Sabharwal, Executive 
Director, ICICI Bank; Shri Arun Thukral, Managing Director, CIBIL; Shri Satish Pillai, Chief 
Operating  Officer,  CIBIL;  delegates  to  the  Conference;  friends  from  the  media  fraternity; 
ladies and gentlemen! It is a pleasure for me to be present here this morning to deliver the 
keynote address at the Sixth Annual Credit Information Conference organized by CIBIL. It is 
heartening  to  note  that  CIBIL  has  completed  10  years  of  successful  operations  of  its 
Consumer Bureau in India. While I congratulate the entire team of CIBIL on this occasion, I 
must also sound a word of caution amidst the euphoria that this occasion brings in. It is a 
time for CIBIL and indeed for all the credit information companies in the country to introspect 
and reflect on what the industry has achieved over the last decade and whither to from here? 
The  spurt  in  the  stressed  assets  in  the  banking  system  has  put  a  spotlight  on  the 
effectiveness of the Credit Information Companies in the country. With huge increase in the 
data / information availability, could they have sounded a timely warning about the impending 
deterioration in the quality of assets in the banking system? 
2. As the pioneer of the credit Information services in the country and as the most dominant 
player in the industry, CIBIL has a very critical role in how industry responds to the current 
challenges  and  adapts  itself  to  remain  relevant.  In  the  financial  services  industry,  the 
dominant  player  has  to  be  much  more  resilient,  much  more  responsive  and  much  more 
restrained than others. These are the qualities you must develop. CIBIL has a tremendous 
responsibility,  a  responsibility  to  not  only  propagate  the  usage  of  credit  information  by  the 
lenders but, at the same time, of ensuring that the consumers see merits in maintaining a 
clean  credit  history.  I  observe  that  the  theme  of  the  Conference  “Transforming  Credit 
Information  into  action:  powering  growth  through  data,  analytics  and  decisioning”  is  very 
topical  as  it  reflects  a  vision  of  taking  the  industry  forward.  In  my  address  today,  I  would 
outline  the  essential  pre-requisites  of  a  good  credit  information  system  and  how  this 
information  can  be  used  for  improving  the  efficiency  of  the  credit  delivery  system  in  the 
country. I would also share my perspectives on some of the issues and challenges facing this 
sector and the regulatory / supervisory measures taken by RBI in this area. However, before 
I get into those issues, let me begin by giving a brief historical perspective of the functioning 
of Credit Information Companies in India. 
Historical perspective 
3.  With  a  view  to  facilitating  the  distribution  of  credit  to  all  sectors  of  the  economy,  RBI 
observed  a  need  for  establishing  a  Credit  Information  Bureau  for  the  collection  of  credit 
information  relating  to  borrowers  fromlending  institutions  and  for  the  provision  of  such 
information to the financial system. Accordingly, a Working Group (Chairman: N.H. Siddiqui) 
was set up in 1999 to explore the possibilities of setting up a Credit Information Bureau in 
India. The Group, in its report of November 1999, affirmed the urgent need for establishment 
of  a  credit  bureau  and  accordingly,  Credit  Information  Bureau  (India)  Ltd.  (CIBIL)  was 
incorporated in August 2000. CIBIL launched its credit bureau operations in April 2004 and 
its commercial bureau operations in May 2006. Following enactment of the Credit Information 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Companies  (Regulation)  Act  (CICRA)  in  2005,  three  other  Credit  Information  Companies 
(CICs) have also been set up. 
4. At the level of a regulator, credit registries can play a pivotal role in providing insights that 
can drive effective policy changes. They can also provide important inputs for the banking 
supervisors  in  monitoring  systemic  risks.  A  further  use  at  a  regulatory  level  may  be  to 
analyze appropriate capital and provisioning strategies for banks and, in particular, to assess 
whether  current  capital  and  provisioning  regulations  match  up  to  actual  risks.  For  the 
CICs/credit  registries  to  be  effective,  the  integrity  and  completeness  of  data  is  one  of  the 
essential pre-requisites. However, as I alluded to a little bit earlier, even after more than 10 
years  of  their  existence,  the  credit  information  companies/bureaus  have  not  been  able  to 
penetrate  the  market  in  a  meaningful  way.  There  are  a  whole  host  of  issues  which  have 
impeded the growth and acceptance of the CICs in India with quality of data submitted by the 
lenders, multiplicity of CICs, use of alternate data and consumer protection being the major 
ones. With a view to overcome these issues and challenges, RBI had set up a Committee 
(Chairman: Shri Aditya Puri, MD, HDFC Bank Limited) to examine the above issues and to 
also  recommend  a  data  format  for  furnishing  of  credit  information  to  CICs  by  Credit 
Institutions. The Committee was also mandated to suggest best practices for the guidance of 
Credit Institutions in respect of usage of credit information as a part of their credit appraisal 
process. The final report of the Committee is awaited. 
Information into action: the essential pre-requisites 
5. Let me now turn to the theme of the Conference “Information into action.” What do you 
need for putting ‘information into action’? In the context of the Conference, this essentially 
means that available credit information has to be extensively used for drawing inferences for 
making lending decisions. Some of you might know that I have been a student of statistics; 
hence, I would use an analogy from that discipline to explain under what conditions can the 
information  be  used  for  decision  making.  In  statistics,  if  any  sample  data  is  to  be  used  to 
draw  some  inference  about  the  population  parameters,  the  estimates  should  satisfy  four 
basic characteristics. These are “unbiasedness”, “consistency”, “efficiency” and “sufficiency”. 
Similarly, if the credit information has to be used for facilitating effective lending decisions, 
the information should also satisfy the above four important characteristics. Let me explain 
them one by one. 
(a) 
Unbiasedness:  When  I  say  that  the  information  should  be  unbiased,  it  basically 
means  that  the  information  gathered  should  not  be  biased  in  favour  or  against  a 
consumer, lender or a borrower. The CIC should not say that an inaccurate rating 
was  arrived  due  to  wrong  data  provided  by  a  bank.  The  onus  is  on  the  CICs  to 
ensure that the data that they gather is error-free and they are able to give unbiased 
information to their customers. 
Consistency:  The  credit  worthiness  of  a  borrower  should  be  consistent  and 
accurate. If one CIC rates a borrower as good and the other one rates him bad, this 
means that the credit information system is not consistent. Likewise, the rating of a 
borrower should not vary from one loan product to the other. 
Efficiency: An efficient information system should ensure that the CICs are able to 
provide reliable, accurate and unbiased information at the least possible cost. 
Sufficiency: The credit information system can be considered sufficient if it contains 
all required credit and payment related information about the borrower and no other 
CIC  can  give  any  additional  material  information  on  the  credit  history  of  that 
particular borrower. 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Completeness of information 
6.  While  I  agree  that  at  this  stage  we  may  not  be  close  to  meeting  the  four  essential 
constituents of a robust information system, I would like to emphasize that unless we strive to 
meet  them,  we  would  not  be  able  to  transform  information  into  action.  A  very  important 
consideration  for  meaningful  transformation  of  credit  information  into  action  is  the 
completeness  of  data.  Around  90%  of  our  population  has  never  borrowed  from the formal 
financial system and hence does not have any credit history. Under the circumstances, they 
are quite likely to be denied credit by the lending institutions. How the completeness of data 
can be achieved in such cases? I will return to this aspect in a little while. 
Quality of data 
7. A central strand of completeness of information is the quality of data. The efficiency and 
effectiveness  of  a  credit  bureau  is  largely  dependent  on the quality  of data  collected  in  its 
database. RBI has issued guidelines for submission of timely, accurate and error free data to 
the bureau. However, our observation is that the data furnished by banks to CICs in many 
instances continue to be incomplete / inaccurate. As we all know, the quality of the product 
can  only  be  as  good  or  as  bad  as  the  inputs.  The  data  containing  junk  values,  incorrect 
information and incomplete identifier fields fed by the lenders to the CICs would only lead to 
half-baked  outputs  and  eventually  contribute  to  creating  information  asymmetries  between 
borrowers  and  lenders.  While,  I  understand  that  the  quality  of  data  held  by  microfinance 
institutions about their borrowers is comparatively better, the quality and consistency of data 
of  the  banking  system  is  not  very  reliable  and  hence,  poses  significant  challenges  to  the 
effectiveness of credit information system. The CICs in India are trying to address the issue 
by  taking  recourse  to  proven  best  practices  and  supporting  technology  to  ensure  that  the 
credit  information  rendered  by  them  are  accurate,  complete  and  updated.  They  have  also 
started  undertaking  quality  checks  while  receiving  and  uploading  of  members’  data  while 
returning the records rejected during the validation process back to the members along with 
reasons thereof, for correction and re-submission. 
8. It is heartening to note that the results of efforts taken by CICs to clean the data have been 
positive  as  reflected  in  the  improving  ‘hit  rate’  of  the  CICs.  I  understand  that  even  in 
developed economies like the US, where credit bureaus have been in existence for over a 
century and where there are well evolved identification and verification systems, the bureau 
hit  rate  has  been  around  85%.  So,  while  the  hit  rate  of  around  75%  in  the  case  of Indian 
CICs in the face of significant roadblocks like lack of unique identifiers and geographic and 
cultural diversities can be considered good, there definitely is scope for further improvement. 
Alternate data sources 
9. Let me now come to another strand of completeness. As I mentioned a little while back, a 
sizeable number of individuals/small business owners may not have a prior credit history. So, 
how the completeness of data can be ensured in such cases? Certain World Bank studies 
have  indicated  that  inclusion  of  reporting  of  non-financial  payment  data  (alternative  data) 
proves  extremely  beneficial  for  making  lending  decisions,  specifically  for  the  segment  not 
having access to credit. The financially excluded consumers who have  a positive payment 
record  in  non-financial  obligations,  can  have  access  to  affordable  credit.  CICs  have 
requested  RBI  to  permit  them  to  collaborate  with  sectors  like  Telecom,  Utility  and  Trade 
credit for inclusion of their data in the credit bureau database. They have stated that inclusion 
of these data sources in the bureaus database will not only benefit financial sector but also 
be useful for the Telecom, Utility and Trade credit sector. The Committee on Comprehensive 
Financial  Services  for  Small  Business  and  Low  Income  Households  (Dr.  Nachiket  Mor, 
Chairman, December 2013) has suggested inter alia, the need to develop a robust legal and 
regulatory  framework  around  customer  data  generated  in  various  transactions  (credit  and 
payments,  digital  and  off-line),  with  the  objective  of  customer  ownership  of  their  own 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
transactions data and its use, among others, for signaling credit-worthiness. In this regard, 
the Committee has recommended that RBI should constitute a Working Group comprising of 
TRAI, CERC, and Credit Information Companies to develop a framework for sharing of data 
between 
bureaus.  The 
suggestions/recommendations of the Committee are being presently examined by RBI. 
companies, 
electrical 
telecom 
utilities, 
credit 
and 
Single v/s multiple CICs 
10.  There  is  a  view  that  the  existence  of  multiple  credit  bureaus  in  an  economy  ensures 
competition and creates a cost advantage for the users. However, where consumers as well 
as financial institutions do not have complete understanding of the benefits of bureaus, this 
could lead to disaster. Due to the functioning of multiple bureaus, only a fragmented view of 
the borrower can be obtained and a holistic financial picture may be hard to achieve. It has 
been suggested in several quarters that in an environment where such infrastructure does 
not exist at all, the initial impetus may have to come from the Government/regulator. In such 
a  model,  initially  there  could  be  a  single  CIC;  and  later  on,  a  model  with  multiple  players 
could  evolve  to  avoid  a  monopolistic  environment.  In  addition,  besides  setting  up  the 
bureaus, the government/regulator may also need to work towards education and awareness 
of both, the financial institutions as also the consumers. 
11. In India, while setting up of CIBIL heralded the beginning of the credit information system 
about  a  decade  ago,  the  Credit  Information  Companies  (Regulation)  Act,  2005  (CICRA) 
provided for an increase in the total number of CICs which may be granted the certificate of 
registration  for  carrying  on  such  business.  Thus,  with  the  realisation  that  competition  will 
bring better technology and efficiency in the system, three other companies were issued ‘in-
principle’ approval to set up CICs in April 2009. 
12.  With  at  least  3  years  of  multi-CIC  environment  behind  us,  the  problems  of  data 
fragmentation are coming to the fore. CICs collect credit information from banks and financial 
institutions, Non Banking Financial Companies, Housing Finance Companies, Micro Finance 
Institutions, credit card companies, etc. today. In terms of Section 15 of CICRA, every credit 
institution has to become a member of at least one CIC. Since four CICs are functional, there 
is the consequent issue of data existing in silos. As of now, when enquiry is made with one 
CIC  about  a  certain  borrower  or  prospective  borrower,  only  the  information  that  has  been 
provided to the CIC by its own members would be available at that CIC. The information from 
the credit institutions from whom the borrower may have availed a credit facility but who are 
not  members  of  that  particular  CIC,  may  not  be  included  in  the  credit  information  report 
provided by it. This is another challenge with regard to the completeness of data. 
Data on commercial accounts 
13. The database in the CICs has been primarily used in the retail segment, especially while 
approving  credit  cards,  personal  loans,  home  loans  and  auto  loans.  Anectodotal  evidence 
shows that a major chunk of this has been accounted for by the private banks and foreign 
banks with the public sector banks only recently starting to use them in a significant way. In 
the commercial segment, the use of the bureaus has not been to the same extent. SMEs are 
a  big  growth  driver  of  any  economy,  accounting  for  a  majority  of  jobs  and  exports. 
Inadequate  credit  flow  has  been  one  of  the  factors  constraining  the  growth  of  the  SME 
sector. One of the reasons for banks’ reluctance to lend to this group is the unavailability of 
reliable  information  for  banks  to  assess  the  creditworthiness  of  SME  units.  There  is  a 
significant role for the CICs in building an information base on SMEs and assisting banks in 
their  credit  decision  making.  This  will  facilitate  the  free  flow  of  credit  to  SMEs  and  would 
provide  an  impetus  to  overall  economic  growth.  The  CICs  would  progressively  need  to 
enlarge their information database by bringing more sectors under their fold. 
14. As I mentioned earlier, the Committee headed by Shri Aditya Puri is also looking into the 
issue of low usage of credit information by member institutions. We understand that some of 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
the  banks  have  complained  about  the  high  cost  of  obtaining  a  report  as  one  of  the 
considerations for low usage of credit information. On the contrary, the CICs are of the view 
that prices would come down with increased usage. In this context, the Committee has felt 
that workshops for creating awareness about Credit Information Reports (CIRs) and their use 
in credit appraisal by lenders would be more meaningful and these could be held regularly, in 
association with industry-level bodies like IBA or MFIN. 
Unique identifiers 
15.  A  study  in  August  2005  on  “The  Evolution  of  Credit  bureaus  in  Asia-Pacific”  had 
recognised  that  there  are  challenges  relating  to  data  quality  and  consumer  identification 
issues that CICs in India (at that point only CIBIL was in existence) will need to overcome. 
Sadly, these challenges continue to plague the system. As banks in India have inadequate 
electronic data capture systems and inadequate networking facilities, problems encountered 
in  data-collection  may  be  magnified  multi-fold.  Notwithstanding  the  massive  numbers  of 
unique  identities  generated  by  the  UIDAI,  the  country  as  a  whole  does  not  have  a  single 
official  national  identification  registry  for  uniquely  identifying  an  individual.  On  our  part  as 
banking  supervisors,  despite  our  continuous  persuasion,  the  Indian  banks  have  not  been 
able  to  assign  a  unique  identification  number  of  their  customers.  CICs  have  tried  to  work 
around  this  problem  by  sometimes  using  the  Ration  Card  number,  Voters  Id,  PAN  and 
Aadhaar  Number  or  a  combination  of  these.  However,  the  results  have  much  scope  for 
improvement since mix-up of credit information results in customer grievance. 
Customer grievance redressal mechanism 
16.  The  Credit  Reporting  Knowledge  guide  recognises  that  “a  challenge  to  data  accuracy 
and validation is the lack of uniform identification schemes. Issuing national unique identity 
numbers  is  usually  within  the  prerogative  of  the  government.  Adopting  an  identification 
system at the initial phases of establishing a credit reporting system would be ideal, but is not 
always realistic.” In such a scenario, both Credit Institutions and CICs must have customer 
friendly policies in place. Credit institutions should ensure that the records submitted to CICs 
are updated regularly. Customer grievance redressal should be given top priority especially 
in  respect  of  complaints  relating  to  updation/alteration  of  credit  information.  CICs,  at  their 
end, should have a structured and systemic process for redressing grievances. They should 
abide  by  the  period  stipulated  under  the  CICRA  in  respect  of  updation, alteration  of  credit 
information, resolution of disputes etc. 
Summing up 
17. I quite agree that there are significant hurdles to achieving completeness of information in 
terms of meeting the four fundamental criteria of unbiasedness, consistency, efficiency and 
sufficiency that I mentioned in the beginning. Some of the deficiencies of completeness of 
data/information can be overcome through use of better analytical tools by the CICs. In this 
regard,  CIBIL  could  leverage  upon  its  association  with  global  leaders  like  TransUnion  for 
providing  much  better  solutions  to  their  member  institutions.  A  robust  customer  redressal 
system  would  also  go  a  long  way  in  improving  the  quality  of  information,  by  making  the 
lenders  aware  about  the  importance  of  providing  accurate  data.  The  CICs  need  to  be 
sensitive to the grievances of the customers and provide redressal in a timely manner. This 
would not only improve the quality of data but also lend credence to the utility of the credit 
information system in the country. 
18. Notwithstanding the data quality and completeness issues, the lending institution should 
start using these information into their decision making process as unless the institutions use 
the data/information from the CICs in their decision making process and for pricing of their 
loan products, the completeness of information cannot be expected to improve. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Sharing of information and the individual’s privacy rights / sharing of personal 
information 
19.  Having  dwelt  upon  the  essential  pre-requisites  for  transformation  of  information  into 
action let me highlight the issues of protecting the individuals’ privacy rights insofar as CICs 
business is concerned. As per FSLRC report, personal information means any information 
that  relates  to  a  person  or  permits  the  inference  of  a  person’s  identity.  This  includes 
demographic  information  such  as  the  person’s  name  and  contact  information;  biometric 
information; and transactional information about holdings and dealings in financial products 
and services. The draft Code provides for the following protections for personal information: 
• 
A  prohibition  on  collection  of  personal  information  beyond  what  is  required  for 
providing the relevant financial service. 
A  requirement  to  maintain  confidentiality  of  personal  information,  unless  the 
consumer has consented to the disclosure or it is otherwise permitted by law. 
An  obligation  to  maintain  accurate,  up-to-date  and  complete  personal  information, 
and to allow consumers reasonable access to their personal information. 
Powers  given  to  the  regulator  to  specify  additional  requirements,  exempt  some 
financial  service  providers  from  application  of  this  protection  and  establish 
mechanisms to ensure that consumers can access their personal information 
   20.  The  activities  of  credit  bureaus  are  regulated  almost  everywhere  so  as  to  prevent 
violation of privacy and civil liberties. Privacy laws effect a wide range of issues that affect 
the  individual,  viz.,  limits  on  access  to  credit  information  by  specified  users  (i.e.  credit 
institutions  and  other  entities  allowed  to  use  such  information),  setting  time  limits  for  how 
long  such  information  can  be  maintained  at  the  CICs,  and  the  right  to  access,  check  and 
correct one’s own credit information. 
21.  In  India,  the  various  provisions  of  CICRA  cover  the  regulation  of  credit  information 
business and also include responsibilities of the bureaus, rights and obligations of the credit 
institutions  and  safeguarding  privacy  rights  of  the  individual.  We  can  understand  credit 
information  about  an  individual  at  the  CICs  as  a  reflection  of  how  he  or  she  behaves  with 
relation to his lender/s. If he/she is a good borrower, there is a record of such repayments; 
else a record of defaults is built up. This is akin to reputational collateral which is used by 
CICs to provide a picture of the individual to a prospective lender. In some cases, existing 
lenders  themselves  may  like  to  review  their  portfolio  to  evaluate  the  functioning  of  such 
individual  borrowers  post  disbursal  of  credits  and  also  determine  if  the  payment-
performances  have  taken  a  turn for  the  worse.  It  may  be  emphasised  here  that  the  credit 
information report which is built up from such stored credit information does not by itself say 
whether the borrower or the prospective borrower is a good credit risk or bad credit risk. It 
only  provides  lenders  with  the  data  which  allows  them  to  take  the  decision  themselves, 
depending  on  their  risk-reward  trade-off  and  their  internal  policies.  This  gives  them  the 
comfort of taking an informed decision based on the credit information available  within the 
system. 
22. It is not uncommon for questions such as “Why should my information be passed around 
in  the  system?”  to  be  raised,  even  today  in  our  context. The  provisions  of  CICRA  seek to 
strike a balance between the dual objective of putting in place an efficient system of sharing 
of credit information in the larger interest of financial system on one hand, and maintaining 
the  privacy  of  such  information,  on  the  other.  As  part  of  their  customer  education  and 
awareness efforts, the CICs should be able to effectively communicate the benefits of lower 
interest rates that the consumers may derive if they are perceived as ‘good borrowers’. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Recent regulatory / supervisory measures 
Let me now turn my attention to few of the recent regulatory/supervisory measures we have 
initiated in this area. 
Central Repository of Information on Large Credits(CRILC) 
(i)  
23. As you all know, Dr. Raghuram Rajan on assuming charge as Governor, RBI announced 
that RBI proposed to collect credit data and examine large common exposures across banks 
which will enable the creation of a central repository on large credits, which may be shared 
with  the  banks.  This  is  expected  to  enable  banks  themselves  to  be  aware  of  building 
leverage  and  common  exposures.  The  CRILC  is  expected  to  act  as  a  repository  of  large 
credits  containing  system-wide  exposure  of  individuals  and  entities  having  exposure  (both 
fund and non-fund based) of more than Rs. 50 million. Thus, the basic purpose of CRILC is 
to collect, store and disseminate large credit data to banks. The underlying objective of the 
creation of the CRILC is to tackle the menace of rising NPAs in the Indian banking system. I 
would like to urge the banks and the CICs to also put in place a system to collect credit data 
of exposures which are even below Rs.50 million, so that they could have reliable information 
about all the borrowers in the financial system. 
Investment in credit information companies 
(ii)  
24. RBI has issued a revised directive on November 29, 2013, allowing higher FDI limits to 
entities which have an established track record of running a Credit Information Bureau in a 
well  regulated  environment.  This  regulatory  measure  is  aimed  not  only  at  bringing  in  the 
much needed foreign equity support but also to keep intact competition in this sector. As a 
result  of  this  measure,  the  foreign  partners  of  the  CICs  are  taking  steps  to  increase  their 
equity stakes in the CICs and thereby continue to bring in foreign technology support to this 
long gestation capital intensive industry. 
Conclusion 
25.  Before  I  conclude,  let  me  revisit  the  reasons  for  why  the  credit  information  bureaus 
including CIBIL, have not received the level of success they would have expected, even after 
a decade of their existence. In essence, the two users of the credit information, the lending 
institutions as well the consumers are still wary of the outputs generated by the CICs. While 
on the one hand, the lenders do not see compelling reasons to subscribe to the CIC reports 
for  want  of  appropriate  information  or  analytics,  the  consumers  on  the  other  hand  are  still 
sceptical  about  the  authenticity  of  the  CIRs. There  have  been  numerous  complaints  about 
the CICs handing out incorrect reports to the consumers who have to then run from pillar to 
post  to  get  these  corrected.  The  grievance  redressal  system  in  this  area,  in  fact,  needs  a 
thorough overhaul. Thus, going forward, the challenge for the CICs and indeed, for CIBIL, 
which has a virtual monopoly over this business is to address the twin concerns that I have 
mentioned. The purpose of having CICs in the system would be best served when the credit 
needs of deserving people are met in a timely manner and at a reasonable cost. 
26. I am sure that the Conference would throw up some ‘actionable’ ideas which would go a 
long way in not only spreading awareness about the credit information system in the country 
but also improving it. I once again congratulate CIBIL for reaching a significant milestone in 
their journey and thank them for inviting me to be a part of this Conference. I wish you all a 
very fruitful deliberation ahead. 
Thank you! 
References: 
The  Evolution  of  Credit  Bureaus  in  Asia-Pacific-  Dr.  Rita  Chakravarti  and  Beng-Hai  Chea 
(August 2005) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
Role  and  Effects  of  Credit  Information  Sharing-  –  Tulli  Jappelli  and  Marco  Pagano  (April 
2005) 
Credit Reporting Knowledge Guide, International Finance Corporation (2012) 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
