  Mario Draghi: Central bank communication 
Opinion  piece  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  of  the  edited 
transcript of his speech at the PR Manager of the Year Award (15 July 2014), published in 
Handelsblatt, 4 August 2014. 
 Today, central bank communication is right at the heart of monetary policy. It is actually a 
monetary policy tool in itself. Even for those with little interest in central banking, it is difficult 
to  avoid  the  pronouncements  of  one  or  other  of  us  in  the  newspaper.  Those  people  may 
even  end  up  reading the  articles,  if  only  because  central  bank  communication  can  have  a 
major impact on financial markets – and hence on their savings. 
Central bank communication was not always so extensive. Think back to the days when the 
most  important  central  bank  in  the  world  –  the  Federal  Reserve  (Fed)  –  would  not  even 
publish its interest rate decisions; rather, it would let the outside world derive them from the 
market  reaction.  Today,  this  sounds  unbelievable.  But  it  was  only  in  1994  that  the  Fed 
decided to make its interest rate decisions public in real time. 
Designed between 1994 and 1998, the European Central Bank (ECB) was born at the start 
of a new era for central banking. Two developments during this period raised the importance 
of  communication.  First,  the  increasing  independence  of  central  banks  made  it  more 
important to communicate with and be accountable to the public. Second, against a backdrop 
of liberalising financial markets, the effectiveness of monetary policy became more and more 
dependent on steering expectations of future interest rate policy. 
In the first case, the main challenge for the ECB was to reconcile three attributes of central 
banks  that  do  not  immediately  fit  together:  being  very  powerful  and  independent  yet 
unelected. The best example of a country that had done this successfully was Germany. Its 
answer was to uphold the Deutsche Bundesbank’s independence but to constrain its powers 
within a narrow mandate. And the contours of that mandate were not set by the central bank 
itself, but by legislators, who themselves were democratically elected. 
This  model  has  worked  because,  by  sticking  closely  to  its  mandate,  the  Bundesbank  has 
gained  the  trust  of  the  people.  It  has  cultivated  this  trust  by  actively  communicating  the 
rationale for its mandate and its plans to achieve it. This inspired the ECB’s founding fathers 
to give the ECB an equally clear and narrow mandate oriented towards price stability. And 
we have established trust by clearly communicating that mandate and, of course, delivering 
it. 
This task is more complex for the ECB, however, than it was for the Bundesbank in the past 
or the Fed today. Building trust among the 335 million citizens of the euro area is a major 
communication  challenge.  We  are  communicating  in  18  countries  using  15  different 
languages.  In  all  these  countries,  citizens’  expectations  are  different.  For  example,  my 
predecessor as ECB President would tell me that if he took a walk in Frankfurt, people would 
often ask him “when are you finally going to raise interest rates?” But if he took a walk in 
another major city just a few days later, people would ask him “when are you going to lower 
interest rates?” We deal with this plurality by making use of the inherent advantage of having 
a Eurosystem of 18 national central banks – that is, having communications departments in 
each country that make our messages heard and understood in the local context. But this 
remains a continuous challenge. 
The ECB also plays its part in building trust by opening up to the public. From the outset, we 
have taken a lead on transparency: for example, we were the first major central bank to offer 
monthly  press  conferences.  But  in  these  challenging  times,  when  monetary  policy  has 
become more unconventional, we cannot stand still. That is why we have taken another step 
forward:  from  the  start  of  next  year  we  will  publish  summaries  of  the  monetary  policy 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  meetings of the Governing Council. This will be an additional way to explain our actions and 
the discussions that inspired them. 
We  are  currently  working  on  finding  the  right  format  by  conducting  test  runs.  After  all,  we 
want these summaries to be understandable to interested members of the public. Only that 
way can they be fully effective. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
