Jens Weidmann: Of dentists and economists – the importance of a 
consistent economic policy framework 
Speech  by  Dr  Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  before  the 
Juristische Studiengesellschaft, Karlsruhe, 11 February 2014. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Paul Samuelson once said, “I don’t care who writes a nation’s laws, or crafts its treatises, if I 
can write its economics textbooks.” 
Paul Samuelson wasn’t just one of the foremost economists of the last century, he was also 
a master of the punch line. And I can well imagine that this knack made him a firm favourite 
among fellow economists. 
Yet in my opinion, this viewpoint fails to consider important links between economic theory 
and legislation. The economic analysis of law provides a large number of examples of the 
extent  to  which  legislation  affects  economic  life.  And  a  good  proportion  of  legal  rules  are 
ultimately based, among other things, on economic insights such as that independent central 
banks  are  the  best  guarantors  of  price  stability,  or  that  the  monetary  financing  of 
governments undermines a stability-oriented economic order. 
Thus, economists ignore the consequences of legislation and jurisdiction at their own peril. I 
would say that a lively exchange of ideas between lawyers and economists not only makes 
sense: it is absolutely imperative. I am therefore delighted to be able to carry this dialogue 
forward with you here today, and I thank you for your invitation. 
Economic policy: regulations or leeway? 
2. 
Just how fruitful an exchange of ideas between economists and lawyers can be is illustrated 
by a concept that has had a lasting influence on German economic policy: that of regulatory 
policy. 
It  was  a  most  odd  coincidence,  as  the  legal  scholar  Franz  Böhm  later  put  it,  that  brought 
himself, his colleague Hans Grossmann-Doerth and the economist Walter Eucken together in 
1933 at the Faculty of Law and Political Science at the University of Freiburg. It is here that 
the three set about researching and teaching, and that was when German ordoliberalism, the 
“Freiburg School”, was born. 
Shaped  by  the  experiences  of  the  global  economic  crisis  and  of  a  totalitarian  command 
economy, the core element of ordoliberalism is competition, yet no longer competition in the 
classic – unbridled – sense, but a protected, orderly competition. Or, as Federal President 
Joachim Gauck described it in his speech at the Walter Eucken Institute a few weeks ago: 
“Neither is it an order that subjects the individual to state paternalism, nor is it a market in 
which the strong can become so big that they themselves dictate the rules.” 
Ordoliberalism,  then,  is  about  more  than  striving  for  economic  efficiency.  As  the  Federal 
President  also  pointed  out:  “By  breaking  long-standing  privileges  and  cemented  power 
structures, competition offers scope for more participation, more inclusion.” 
What is crucial with regard to ordoliberalism is an appropriate framework within which orderly 
competition can take place. According to Walter Eucken, such a framework can be described 
as what he called “constitutive and regulative principles of a competitive order”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Of  central  importance  in  this  respect  is  a  smoothly  functioning  pricing  system.  This  is 
because,  in  a  market  economy,  prices  play  a  decisive  information  and  steering  function, 
regardless of whether they are the prices for goods, services or assets. 
Walter  Eucken  adds  to  this  fundamental  principle  six  other  principles  which  together 
characterise a competitive order: open markets, freedom of contract, constancy (in the sense 
of  consistency  or  reliability)  of  economic  policy,  liability  for  one’s  own  actions,  private 
ownership and the primacy of monetary policy, the latter being of particular interest to me as 
a monetary policy maker. 
Thus, economic policy must fulfil two tasks. First, it has to spell out these principles in the 
form of suitable rules to ensure that they become operable – which in some circumstances 
may  also  mean  justiciable  –,  that  they  can  be  set  in  relation  to  each  other,  and  that  they 
actually develop a binding force. Second, economic policy must align the requirements of a 
competitive order with other political ends, for example if the results of market processes are 
undesirable from a social-political perspective. 
Keeping an eye on the social consequences of market processes is an important supplement 
to regulatory policy and the hallmark of a social market economy. The relationship between 
market forces, their social consequences and interventions to correct them is often complex. 
This means that obvious measures aren’t always the best ones, and sometimes they aren’t 
even effective: it is indeed true that good intentions do not always produce good results. 
It’s  for  policy-makers  to  weigh  up  different  objectives,  and  economists  cannot  take  that 
responsibility from them. But economists can and should point out the economic costs and 
side-effects of the different courses of action available. 
A cursory consideration of this job description perhaps seems to suggest that the Keynesian 
ideal of the economist as a dentist might become reality. To quote Keynes: “If economists 
could  manage  to  get  themselves  thought  of  as  humble,  competent  people  on  a  level  with 
dentists, that would be splendid.” 
I am afraid, however, that this notion of the economist’s role will remain a pious hope. Most 
economists are indeed humble or competent people – and sometimes they are both. 
But  in  the  past  few  years,  insights  gained  in  the  field  of  economics  have  probably 
experienced  more  ardent  debate  than  the  latest  findings  on  dentistry.  For  given  the 
complexity  of  reality,  the  dynamics  of  an  increasingly  interlinked  global  economy  and  the 
uncertainty that upheavals like the financial and economic crisis in particular generate, there 
are often no simple answers to economic policy questions. What is more, these answers may 
change with time. 
On the one hand, the specific set-up of an efficient competitive order is subject to constant 
change. As the framework conditions shift, so the regulatory principles I have just mentioned 
may  have  to  be  re-operationalised.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  important  to  weigh  other  social 
policy objectives anew against the requirements of a competitive order, if necessary. On the 
other hand, not even a rule-bound, regulatory policy-driven economic set-up can do without 
discretionary decisions. 
Generally speaking, therefore, rules are needed to give validity to regulatory principles such 
as  the  principles  of  competition  and  liability.  They  have  to  narrow  the  scope  for  action  of 
participants  in  the  economic  process  in  such  a  way  that  market  forces  produce  better 
economic results – results which are also more sustainable and more socially just than those 
of unbridled competition or of a centrally planned economy. 
To  this  end,  the  appropriateness  of  a  given  regulatory  framework  must  be  constantly 
reviewed, and adjustments made where necessary. 
One  such  example  is  Agenda  2010.  At  that  time,  the  rules  laid  down  in  employment  and 
social  welfare  laws  had  shown  themselves  to  be  major  obstacles  to  labour  market  entry, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
even  in  times  of  an  economic  upswing.  In  consequence,  unemployment  continued  to  rise 
across the business cycles until it reached a level that was no longer sustainable. 
The measures that were then taken boosted flexibility, lowering the barriers to entering the 
labour market. For example, the liberalisation of temporary employment makes it easier for 
employers  to  hire  job-seekers.  Moreover,  the  amalgamation  of  unemployment  assistance 
and  social  assistance  and  the  shortening  of  the  period  of  entitlement  to  unemployment 
benefits increased the incentive to take up employment. 
Competition on the labour market has tended to become stiffer as a result, and no doubt also 
tougher  for  some.  But  it  has  also  helped  the  labour  force  in  Germany  to  swell  to  around 
42 million  –  more  than  ever  before.  Moreover,  the  number  of  persons  registered  as 
unemployed has dropped from a high of more than 5 million to just under 3 million at present, 
and the chances of an unemployed person finding a new job are far greater than they were 
before the reform. 
Further evidence of the success of the reforms is that, in the wake of the upturn, not only 
atypical jobs were created. For instance, from 2003 to shortly before the crisis, the number of 
temporary workers advanced by almost 400,000. At the same time, however, the number of 
jobs subject to social security contributions posted an increase of around 1,250,000. Nor has 
this picture changed since the economic slump. 
But this outcome also owed a great deal to the fact that the social partners could respond to 
the  shift  in  the  economic  setting  with  a  degree  of  leeway,  notably  by  concluding  more 
employment-friendly  wage  agreements  as  well  as  the  liberalisation  clauses  designed  to 
safeguard  employment  which  have  been  a  standard  feature  of  collective  agreements  ever 
since  the  “Pforzheim  agreement”  back  in  2004.  Research  findings  suggest  that  these 
measures  were  key  contributory  factors  in  restoring  competitiveness1  and  in  keeping  the 
increase in unemployment2 to a minimum during the economic downturn brought about by 
the financial crisis. 
The financial crisis likewise showed us just how important it is to have the right setting for a 
functioning competitive framework. The central regulatory tenet – that those who enjoy the 
benefits  must  also  bear  the  costs  –  was  neutralised  for  major  banks  who  could  count  on 
being rescued by the taxpayer because of their importance for the economy. 
Keeping profits in the private realm, but expecting taxpayers to foot the bill if a crisis arises 
undermines responsible behaviour. Rules that are consistent with the principle of liability and 
which ensure that banks, say, take a leaf out of the business community’s book and shoulder 
their losses themselves in future without jeopardising financial stability, are vitally important 
for a functioning economic order. 
This is a prime example of the tensions I was referring to earlier on in my speech between 
the  regulatory  framework  and  discretionary  economic  policy  intervention.  Principles-driven 
policy  action  and  a  set  of  clearly  defined  rules  which  limit  the  scope  for  economic  policy 
discretion  make  economic  policymaking  more  predictable  and  can  help  to  defuse  many 
problems  such  as  that  of  time  inconsistency,  which  is  a  topic  I  shall  return  to  later  in  my 
speech.  Questions  were  even  raised  during  the  crisis  as  to  whether  complying  with  this 
regulatory framework was always necessary or even possible in the first place. 
Insolvency law fleshes out the principle of liability. But had it been rigorously applied, without 
exception,  to  systemically  important  financial  institutions,  many  fear  that  this  would  have 
                                                
1   C Dustmann, B Fitzenberger, U Schönberg and A Spitz-Oener (2014), From Sick Man of Europe to Economic 
28(1),  
Perspectives 
Economy, 
Economic 
Journal 
of 
Superstar:  Germany’s  Resurgent 
pp 167–188. 
2   M C Burda, and J Hunt (2011), What explains the German Labor Market Miracle during the Great Recession? 
In: Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, pp 273–319. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
come at a prohibitively high cost as a result of the risk of contagion to other financial market 
participants and the escalation of the crisis. 
If I may, I would now like to look into a number of selected policy spheres to give you a rough 
idea  of  how  rules-based  and  ad  hoc  decision-making  ought  to  interact  in  principles-driven 
policymaking – and where the strict limits of discretionary policymaking need to lie. 
Monetary policy 
2.1 
I  will  kick  off  with  a  policy  area  which  is  especially  close  to  my  heart,  and  not  just  for 
professional reasons – monetary policy. 
Walter  Eucken  believed  that  monetary  policy  was  crucially  important:  “All  endeavours  to 
realise a competitive framework are in vain unless a certain level of monetary stability can be 
assured.  Monetary  policy  thus  has  primacy  for  the  competitive  order,”  he  wrote  in  his 
Principles  of  Economic  Policy.  You  won’t  be  surprised  to  hear  that  as  a  central  banker,  I 
share Eucken’s views on the importance of monetary policy. 
A key problem in the sphere of monetary policy – one which is a factor in many other areas 
of economic policy as well – is that of time inconsistency. Let me illustrate this phenomenon 
using an example originally created by the US economist Professor Alan Blinder. 
Imagine a professor who is pursuing two goals. First, he wants his students to study as hard 
as  possible;  second,  he  wants  to  spend  as  little  time  as  possible  marking  examination 
papers, say. The professor then announces that he intends to set an examination at the end 
of  the  semester. This,  he  hopes,  will  provide  the  students  with  an  incentive  to  acquire the 
necessary knowledge. 
However, once the students have studied for the end-of-semester examination, the professor 
has an incentive not to set an examination after all because he does not want to mark the 
examination papers. But because the students are aware of the professor’s incentive, they 
will study insufficiently or not at all. 
How  can  this  problem  be  solved?  By  stating  in  the  examination  regulations  that  an 
examination  will  be  set  at  the  end  of  the  semester,  come  what  may.  In  other  words,  the 
university binds itself in advance to a fixed rule. 
In their renowned paper “Rules, discretion and reputation in a model of monetary policy”, the 
US economists Robert Barro and David Gordon3 explain why the time-inconsistency problem 
gives rise to an inherent inflation bias. 
In  the  short  term,  monetary  policy  can  impact  not  just  on  inflation  but  also  on  economic 
activity and hence on employment, although the monetary policy I am talking about here is 
not mandate-consistent expansionary monetary policy in times of weak economic growth and 
low inflation rates, but additional monetary policy stimulus. 
Expansionary  monetary  policy  surprises  drive  inflation  higher  but  real  wages  decrease, 
prompting  enterprises  to  hire  more  staff,  and  briefly  boost  employment  and  growth. 
Politically,  this  can  be  quite  an  attractive  outcome  that  will  initially  be  welcomed  by  the 
general public. 
Yet the macroeconomic outcome looks quite different if employees are expecting this kind of 
monetary policy move – inflation again begins to climb, but real wages remain static because 
employees  –  anticipating  a  more  expansionary  monetary  policy  stance  –  have  already 
managed to secure higher wages. 
                                                
3   Barro and Gordon. 1983. Rules, discretion, and reputation in a model of monetary policy. Journal of Monetary 
Economics 12: pp 101–121. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
And that’s the worst of all possible worlds – higher inflation but no stimulus for the economy. 
This phenomenon, otherwise known as stagflation, plagued many industrialised countries in 
the 1970s. 
Now  the  crux  of  the  matter  is  that  precisely  this  poor  outcome  will  transpire  as  long  as 
monetary  policymakers  gear  their  stance  towards  short-term  sentiment  about  their  policy. 
Because economic agents will always expect an expansionary policy measure and factor it 
into their expectations – just like students who anticipate that no examination paper will be 
set and give up studying. 
As  a  consequence,  the  only  way  to  resolve  this  dilemma  is  for  monetary  policymakers  to 
make a credible commitment to a stability strategy – and thus to credibly forgo the option of 
using expansionary monetary policy surprises to give the economy a short-lived shot in the 
arm. 
Tying central banks to a very strict set of rules, that is, to an automatic system for regulating 
the money supply, was something that Milton Friedman had in mind. True to his belief that 
“money is too important to be left to central bankers”, Friedman put forward a proposal back 
in  the  1960s  that  central  banks  should  be  required  to  increase  the  money  supply  by  a 
constant  percentage  so  as  to  counteract  the  inherent  incentives  to  pursue  an  inflationary 
monetary policy. 
But  this  would  only  work  if  there  was  a  stable  correlation  between  monetary  growth  and 
inflation,  and  the  central  bank  had  a  sufficiently  reliable  degree  of  control  over  the  money 
supply. But the correlation between the money supply and inflation is not always sufficiently 
stable over time, least of all in times of crisis, so one of the key prerequisites for managing 
the money supply is lacking. 
This  is  why  Barro  and  Gordon  saw  central  bank  independence  and  a  commitment  by 
monetary policymakers to maintaining price stability as a suitable means of achieving price 
stability while at the same time granting the central bank a degree of monetary policy leeway. 
And so it was. A host of empirical surveys including those by Alesina and Summers4 and by 
Grilli,  Masciandaro  and  Tabellini5  confirm  the  success  of  independent  central  banks  which 
are mandated to maintain price stability. 
And to get an idea of just how beneficial it can be to incorporate a degree of flexibility into a 
clear  commitment  to  the  primary  goal  of  price  stability,  we  only  need  to  look  at  the  role 
played by central banks in stabilising the global economy when the financial crisis was at its 
worst in the autumn and winter of 2008. 
But how can we make sure that a degree of monetary policy leeway does not distract us from 
the goal of price stability? In two ways: by embracing the primary goal of price stability and 
central  bank  independence;  and  by  fostering  public  confidence  and  thus  underpinning  the 
credibility of the central bank’s stability strategy. 
Central banks can build up credibility in two ways. First, by successfully safeguarding price 
stability for years. A track record like that also protects their independence. As Harold James 
once put it, confidence is the hard-won “core working capital of central banks” which it would 
be very costly to jeopardise. 
Another way in which central banks can bolster the credibility of their stability strategy is by 
committing  to  an  appropriate  monetary  policy  strategy  and  interpreting  their  mandate 
                                                
4   Alberto  Alesina  and  Lawrence  H  Summers  (1993),  Central  Bank  Independence  and  Macroeconomic 
Performance: Some Comparative Evidence Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol 25, No 2, pp 151–162. 
5   Vittorio Grilli, Donato Masciandaro and Guido Tabellini (1991), Political and Monetary Institutions and Public 
Finance Policies in the Industrial Countries, Economic Policy 13, pp 341–392. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
narrowly. Indeed, what the Economist wrote back in 1990 remains true to this very day: “The 
only good central bank is one that can say no to politicians”. 
Independent  central  banks  need  strict  limits  to  their  flexibility,  such  as  a  ban  on  monetary 
financing, so that their independence is not ultimately called into question, especially so in a 
framework that is as complex as the European Monetary Union. Only this will ensure that the 
goal of price stability does not take a back seat to preserving government solvency, even in 
times of crisis. 
Fiscal policy 
2.2 
Both theoretical analyses and historical experience show that sound public finances are key 
to a successful, stability-oriented monetary policy – especially in a monetary union. This is 
one reason why it also makes sense to create rules for fiscal policy. 
However, it is clear, too, that these need to be different to monetary policy rules, because 
fiscal  policy  involves  a  much  greater  degree  of  redistribution,  which  requires  democratic 
legitimacy. Because the parliaments have fiscal sovereignty, an independent staff is hardly 
possible, though limits on the room for fiscal policy manoeuvre are – through a debt brake, 
for instance. 
Of  course,  this  also  depends  on  how  the  rule  is  structured.  An  effective  rule  should  leave 
enough  room  for  policy  makers  to  accommodate  the  economic  situation  or  extraordinary 
events  such  as  natural  disasters.  In  the  conflict  between  binding  force  and  flexibility,  the 
actual binding effect of the rule should be the deciding factor. 
On the one hand, a nominal debt ceiling such as in the United States appears to be binding if 
it can be used time and again to push the government to the brink of insolvency in political 
power  struggles  stemming  from  a  lack  of  consensus  on  a  medium-term  consolidation 
strategy. On the other, the ceiling has so far always been raised at the last minute following 
difficult political negotiations, which implies that it must be possible to design a more effective 
fiscal rule that is binding in the long term. 
We  have  had  similar  experiences  in  Germany  –  under  Article  115  of  the  Basic  Law,  the 
government has usually been able to extend the limits on new borrowing – which were, in 
any  case,  fairly  generous  –  simply  by  diagnosing  a  “disruption  of  the  macroeconomic 
equilibrium”. 
The lessons from the European debt crisis have also taught us that, in practice, the binding 
effect of our rules was not very strong. Since the start of monetary union, Germany, France 
and  Italy  have  exceeded  the  deficit  limit  of  3%  in  seven,  eight  and  even  nine  years 
respectively. 
Whether  the  reforms  will  put  real  teeth  into  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  and  the  Fiscal 
Compact in this respect depends heavily on the European Commission and how it uses its 
extra scope for discretion. 
The  first  time  the  Commission  applied  the  new  rules,  it  showed  itself  to  be  very  flexible, 
granting  Spain,  France,  Slovenia  and  Cyprus  longer  deadlines  to  make  adjustments  than 
those actually envisaged in the Stability and Growth Pact. 
I believe that such exemptions should be made only in well-founded exceptional cases, for 
this ultimately weakens the structural consolidation requirements and postpones them until a 
later date. Making exceptions for a large number of countries simultaneously undermines the 
disciplining effect of the fiscal rules. 
In view of past experience with fiscal rules, in particular, I strongly believe that the euro area 
can  only  be  maintained  as  a  stability  union  in  the  long  run  if  its  framework  sufficiently 
embodies a key principle of regulatory policy: the principle of liability. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
In  the  context  of  public  finances,  this  means  that  those  who  make  decisions  on  spending 
must  also  take  responsibility  for  them.  In  other  words,  there  must  be  a  balance  between 
control and liability. 
In  principle,  the  Maastricht  framework  assigned  both  liability  and  control  to  national 
governments. During the crisis, the EFSF and ESM bailout funds stabilised the euro area but 
also increased the mutualisation of liability for previous national errors. 
To restore the balance between control and liability, I only see two plausible options: either 
we shift powers to monitor and intervene to European level by creating a fiscal union, or we 
strengthen  the  member  states’  individual  liability  and  responsibility  in  a  return  to  the 
Maastricht framework. This also ultimately means that sovereign insolvencies cannot – and 
must not – be ruled out. They must be possible without also causing the financial system to 
collapse. 
The current balancing act between individual responsibility and mutualised liability is likely to 
lead to new strains in the long run. To exaggerate slightly, as Adorn said, “there is no right 
life in the wrong one”. 
Financial market regulation 
2.3 
In  order  to  make  the  financial  system  more  resilient  to  crisis,  and  thus  to  restore  greater 
validity  to  the  principles  of  competition  and  liability,  changes  will  also  need  to  be  made  to 
financial market regulation. 
A particularly severe problem which arose during the crisis was one I mentioned earlier, the 
“too-big-to-fail” problem: whenever banks become too large or interconnected to be would up 
without  jeopardising  financial  stability,  this  undermines  the  liability  principle  and  ultimately 
disrupts competition, and represents an invitation to act irresponsibly. That has to change! 
Recent  developments  in  the  financial  sector,  such  as  increased  indebtedness  and  the 
burgeoning  growth  of  the  shadow  banking  sector,  require  new  rules  as  well.  There  must 
three primary objectives behind these new rules. First, banks have to become more resilient; 
in  other  words,  they  have  to  acquire  a  higher  quantity  of  higher-quality  capital  to  protect 
themselves  against  potential  losses.  Second,  we  need  effective  resolution  mechanisms  so 
that,  in  a  worst-case  scenario,  banks  can  exit  the  market  without  endangering  financial 
stability.  Third,  we  need  to  ensure  that  these  rules  cannot  be  circumvented  by  taking 
business elsewhere, such as, for instance, to the shadow banking sector. The rules of the 
game have to apply to all alike. 
I would like initially to discuss in more detail the objective of improved capital buffers. The 
new international rules, generally referred to as Basel III, have already taken us a great deal 
further in this respect. Banks now have to hold more capital and higher-quality capital. 
However, there are some who believe the Basel III risk-based approach to be fundamentally 
wrong. The discussion is ultimately about whether capital adequacy rules should be simple 
or  complex.  Thus  far,  capital  rules  have  been  complex  rules:  the  capital  to  be  held  is 
determined according to the risk profile of each individual bank’s assets. 
Critics such as University of Bonn economist Martin Hell wig, however, assert that “material 
risks  are  not  captured  at  all”  by  the  risk  weighting.  And  he  adds  that  “banks  use  the  risk 
weighting to expand their business to, in some cases, one hundred times their capital.” 
And  yet  the  fundamental  theory  behind  risk  weighting  is  quite  plausible:  if  the  same 
percentage  of  capital  is  to  be  held  for  all  assets  across  the  board,  this  gives  banks  an 
incentive to invest particularly in riskier assets in order to increase their return on equity. That 
will do no favours to financial stability, either. 
Mark  Carney,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  therefore  favours  a  pragmatic  approach, 
saying that sometimes both a belt and suspenders are needed to keep one’s trousers from 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
slipping. Therefore, in his view, a one-size-fits-all rule, in the form of a uniform debt ceiling, 
should coexist with the current risk-weighting rules. 
I think this approach makes sense: where there is a threat of major losses that could bring 
the financial markets even to the brink of meltdown, there is justification – or even a need – 
for  installing  multiple  security  systems.  What’s  needed  for  nuclear  reactors,  for  instance, 
does not seem like a bad idea for the financial system, either. 
It is also important, though, that these security systems cannot be circumvented by moving 
assets to less regulated areas such as the shadow banking sector. Much remains to be done 
in this regard, starting with the enforcement of extensive reporting requirements. 
To strengthen the liability principle, it is crucial, too, that a bank which, for instance, does not 
have  a  sustainable  business  model  be  able  to  exit  the  market  without  putting  financial 
stability at risk. Otherwise, competition in the banking sector will be undermined. 
The  implications  are  shown  by  a  study  published  as  a  Bundesbank  Discussion  Paper6 
Absent  an  effective  bank  resolution  mechanism,  banks  could  become  overly  generous  in 
their lending decisions and efforts in terms of ongoing loan monitoring could fall short. Capital 
would then no longer be allocated to its most productive use; instead, there is a danger that 
particularly risky lending would tend to be overfunded for too long. And that would weaken 
the forces of macroeconomic growth. 
An  effective  resolution  mechanism  thus  strengthens  not  only  financial  stability,  but  also 
economic  growth.  The  decisive  factor  here  is  not  to  make  the  taxpayer  foot  the  bill  for 
resolution – indeed both shareholders and providers of loan capital should bear the losses 
incurred. 
This  is  exactly  the  approach  underlying  the  work  conducted  at  European  level  on  a  new 
Banking Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD). However, there may also be reasons 
why the BRRD, adopted at the end of last year, gives countries the option of departing from 
the directive’s strict liability cascade in cases where financial stability is under threat. This is 
possible, for instance, by exempting certain liabilities or by permitting the use of public funds 
in the context of a “Government Financial Stabilisation Tool” as a last-resort measure. 
However,  the  market  can  only  impose  discipline  on  the  banks  in  full  measure  if  such 
exemptions are tightly restricted. 
Conclusion 
3. 
This foray through various areas of the economy has shown that the economists’ toolkit is 
more likely to be the topic of contentious public debate in the future than the dentist’s drill. 
Keynes’ hope is therefore unlikely to come to pass, too. 
Although economists are not dentists, they are seen by many as the economy’s doctors, as 
has  been  recently  noted  by  Dennis  Snowier,  President  of  the  Kiel  Institute  for  the  World 
Economy.  At the  core, what  this  means  is  that,  if  a  new  crisis  emerges,  the  best  possible 
therapy needs to be found quickly. 
In full keeping with evidence-based medicine, we should therefore not lose sight of principles 
which  have  withstood  the  test  of  time  in  economics  and  have  been  proven  by  empirical 
evidence  –  including,  above  all,  the  concept  of  an  independent  central  bank  committed  to 
monetary stability. 
I now look forward to our discussion! 
                                                
6   Joseph Korte (2013): Catharsis − The real effects of bank insolvency and resolution. Deutsche Bundesbank 
Discussion Paper No 21/2013. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
