  Andreas Dombret: What is “good regulation”? 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the Bundesbank symposium on “Banking supervision in dialogue”, Frankfurt 
am Main, 9 July 2014. 
 1.  
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Welcome to the Bundesbank’s 18th banking symposium. I’m delighted to see that we have a 
full house again and that our programme has attracted participants from all across Germany. 
I  would  also  like  to  welcome  my  colleagues  on  the  Bundesbank’s  Executive  Board:  Mr 
Böhmler, Mr Nagel and Mr Thiele. Deputy President Buch and President Weidmann would 
like  to  have  joined  us  here  today,  but  have  prior  engagements;  they  pass  on  their  best 
wishes.  As you  can  tell,  the  Executive  Board  members  are  of  one  mind  when  it comes  to 
banking supervision. 
This symposium is something of a debut for me, as it’s the first time that I’ve participated in 
this  event  in  my  new  role  as  the  Executive  Board  member  responsible  for  banking 
supervision. And this comes in a crucial year for banking supervision. Before I go any further, 
I  would  like  to  give  a  special  mention  to  my  colleague  on  the  Executive  Board,  Joachim 
Nagel.  As  you  may  well  know,  Mr  Nagel  stood  in  as  the  board  member  responsible  for 
banking supervision for several months after our Deputy President, Ms Lautenschläger, left 
to  join  the  ECB  in  January.  Mr  Nagel,  we  would  all  like  to  thank  you  very  much  for  the 
extremely valuable work you have done in the sphere of banking supervision. 
As  you  may  know,  I  myself  worked  at  commercial  banks  for  many  years  before  taking  up 
office  at  the  Bundesbank  in  2010,  which  means  that  I  have  experienced  supervision  from 
both sides of the fence. And I know that all of us – supervisors and supervised alike – have 
the same goal: a stable banking system for a strong economy. Yet we can only succeed if we 
work together. So I propose that we use this event as an opportunity to share our views and 
experiences. 
Dialogue  is  vital  to  banking  supervision.  That  is  always  true,  but  never  more  so  than  in 
periods of major upheaval. And I’m sure you’ll all agree that we are currently experiencing 
precisely  such  a  phase.  So  I’m  especially  pleased  that  Danièle  Nouy,  the  Chair  of  the 
Supervisory Board of the new Single Supervisory Mechanism, will be sharing her thoughts 
with us today. But first, I’d like to give you my perspective on the situation. My speech will 
centre  around  two  key  questions:  “what  is  ‘good  regulation’?”  and  “what  is  ‘good 
supervision’?” 
What is “good regulation”? 
2. 
Banks and savings institutions play a vital role in any modern economy and, indeed, in our 
everyday  lives.  We  simply  could  not  manage  without  them.  Entrepreneurs,  bankers  and 
individuals alike: we all benefit from a stable banking and financial system. Financial stability 
is therefore a public good, not just nationally but on a global scale too. At the same time, 
banking can sometimes be associated with external effects. It doesn’t just affect banks and 
their business associates; it also has an impact on third parties with no stake in the game. 
And during the financial crisis, those third parties were the taxpayers. 
Regulators  and  supervisors  can  rectify  a  market  failure  of  this  kind,  and  it  is  in  the  public 
interest for them to do just that. It isn’t a question of whether but of how to regulate. And it is 
this matter of how to regulate that I would like to discuss now – not by focusing on specific 
legal provisions, but by outlining certain principles which I consider particularly important. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  To  clear  up  any  misunderstandings  right  from  the  outset,  I  would  like  to  emphasise  that it 
isn’t  the  job  of  regulators  and  supervisors  to  keep  each  and  every  bank  in  business.  In  a 
market economy, it has to be possible for banks without a workable business model to fail – 
however large, interconnected or significant they may be. The task of regulators is to create 
a framework in which market forces can take effect without destabilising the entire financial 
system. 
Yet  it  is  vital  to  ensure  that  this  framework  is  not  overly  rigid;  we  should  not  confuse 
stagnation with stability. The financial system is in constant flux, and regulation has to keep 
pace  with  it.  Tradable  asset  backed  securities  are  a  case  in  point.  Introducing  timely  and 
adequate regulation on this innovation might have prevented the financial crisis from taking 
such a dramatic course. The regulatory framework therefore needs to be just as adaptable 
as the financial system itself. 
It  is  now  widely  accepted  that  innovations  rarely  make  the  financial  system  simpler  and 
usually  make  it  more  complex.  The  key  financial  innovation  in  the  ancient  Phoenician 
civilisation  was  the  forward  transaction  –  a  financial  instrument  that  you  will  all  be  familiar 
with  today.  Since  then,  financial  innovations  have  become  increasingly  complex  –  to  the 
point where the instruments used today are often understood by only a handful of experts. 
But does that mean that we need increasingly complex regulation too? Or could it be that we 
need only a few simple rules to ensure effective supervision and safeguard financial stability? 
One  current  example  of  this  debate  concerning  simple  and  complex  regulation  is  the 
leverage ratio. The advocates of a simple leverage ratio for banks want to replace the current 
risk-based  capital  rules  with  a  “blanket”  capital  requirement.  They  believe  that  the  same 
percentage  of  capital  should  be  held  against  all  assets,  regardless  of  their  risk.  I  have  to 
admit that the idea appears appealingly simple at first sight. And it would avoid the mistakes 
and manipulation that can arise during the complex process of calculating risk weights. 
Yet a leverage ratio would also create the wrong incentives. If banks had to hold the same 
percentage of capital against all assets, any institution wanting to maximise its profits would 
probably  invest  in  high-risk  assets,  as  they  produce  particularly  high  returns.  This  would 
eradicate the corrective influence of capital cover in reducing risk. 
Weighing  up  the  advantages  and  disadvantages  of  simple  and  complex  regulation,  it  is 
probably better in this instance to use risk weightings in combination with the leverage ratio – 
which  is  precisely  what  the  new  rules  envisage.  Consequently,  my  answer  to  the  first 
question is that regulation must be as simple as possible and as complex as necessary. 
Yet sometimes a certain set of circumstances can make regulation needlessly complex. One 
example of this is the leverage ratio. The calculation of this ratio, which is essentially quite 
simple,  is  complicated  by  the  fact  that  accounting  standards  vary  from  country  to  country. 
Intricate  conversion  calculations  are  needed  to  make  leverage  ratios  based  on  US 
accounting  principles  comparable  to  those  based  on  the  standards  used  in  Europe.  If 
accounting standards were harmonised at a global level, the applicable regulation would be 
simpler. 
However,  the  more  complex  the  regulation,  the  more  important  it  is  to  adhere  to  another 
principle: coherence. I believe that regulation must be coherent on at least three levels. 
First, regulation has to be coherent across borders and regions. We have a global financial 
system, and it therefore requires global regulation. Where regulation varies from country to 
country,  there  is  a  danger  of  regulatory  arbitrage  –  of  banks  moving  their  business  to 
countries with the lightest-touch regulation. The problem with this behaviour is that the risks 
stemming from these transactions could potentially affect the entire financial system. This is 
why  the  G20  have  made  the  issue  of  financial  market  regulation  a  priority.  In  cooperation 
with the Financial Stability Board and the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, they are 
working  to  develop  a  coherent  regulatory  framework  at  the  global  level.  Even  so,  I’m 
concerned  to  see  that  some  countries  outside  Europe  are  adopting  their  own  regulatory 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  initiatives which breach the principle of cross-border coherence. I believe that the danger of 
banking regulation one day returning to the principle of “every man for himself” needs to be 
taken seriously. 
Yet  regulation  not  only  needs  to  be  coherent  across  borders  and  regions  but  also  across 
different  sectors.  Here,  too,  the  central  issue  is  the  danger  of  regulatory  arbitrage.  One 
current example is the  growth of the shadow  banking industry, where  financial enterprises 
conduct business which creates bank-like risks but is either regulated insufficiently or not at 
all. In many cases, these risks are not even recorded. Yet the shadow banking industry may 
become a source of systemic risk. We therefore need to expand the regulatory framework in 
this area to ensure that it is coherent. 
Third, it goes without saying that the content of regulation also needs to be coherent. The 
capital rules are a case in point. Unlike for all other forms of credit, banks do not have to hold 
capital against government bonds in line with the risks that they carry, and this inconsistency 
has dangerous side-effects. Since the euro-area sovereign debt crisis – if not before – it has 
become clear that government bonds are anything but risk-free. In this area too, we should 
work to restore the coherence of regulation in the medium term. 
As  crucial  as  coherence  is,  however,  regulation  also  has  to  be  guided  by  the  principle  of 
proportionality. It is appropriate to apply strict regulation to large institutions which are closely 
interconnected  within  the  financial  system:  the  entities  we  call  “systemically  important 
institutions”. Equally, however, we must take care not to overburden small and medium-sized 
institutions;  they  should  be  governed  by  simpler  regulation.  The  standardised  approaches 
applied in supervision and de minimis thresholds such as those used in reporting can help us 
to achieve this proportionality. 
Ladies and gentlemen, I’ve outlined four different principles for ensuring good regulation. 
 
First, regulation has to be flexible and able to keep pace with developments in the 
financial system. 
Second, regulation must be as simple as possible and as complex as necessary. 
Third,  regulation  has  to  be  coherent  in  terms  of  its  content,  as  well  as  across 
borders, regions and sectors. 
Fourth, regulation must be guided by the principle of proportionality. 
 
Abiding  by  these  principles  will  not,  of  course,  allow  us  to  solve  every  single  regulatory 
problem. Yet they do provide us with a yardstick for assessing regulatory provisions. And I do 
believe that is very valuable. 
 What is “good supervision”? 
3.  
All in all, though, even the best regulation is useless if nobody is overseeing compliance. And 
that  is  precisely  the  job  of  supervisors.  Supervisors  have  to  make  sure  that,  in  the  banks’ 
search for profit, they follow the rules and do not lose sight of the public interest. 
Do supervisors have to be the “better bankers”? No, absolutely not. Business decisions must 
be  left  to  those  being  paid  to  make  them.  However,  supervisors  have  to  know  –  and 
understand  –  how  banking  works.  Against  this  background,  I  personally  would  very  much 
welcome  an  increase  in  the  migration  of  staff  between  the  banking  industry  and  the 
supervisory agencies. I therefore consider it a good sign that a large number of bankers have 
been  applying  to  join  the  ECB’s  new  European  supervisory  mechanism.  And  at  the 
Bundesbank we are also noting a rise in the number of bankers showing an interest in and 
applying for vacancies in our banking supervision units. 
It is also important for supervisors to always remain aware of their true objective: to uphold 
the  public  interest.  They  must  not  allow  themselves  to  succumb  to  a  sort  of  “Stockholm 
Syndrome for supervisors” and confuse the public good with that of the supervised banks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  The new European supervisory mechanism ... 
3.1  
This  is  an  area  where  the  new  European  supervisory  mechanism  can  make  a  key 
contribution. By adding a European perspective to the national view, it will put more distance 
between  the  supervisor  and  the  supervised  entity.  This  will  minimise  the  danger  of 
supervisors getting all-too-close to their banks and thus treating them with “kid gloves” out of 
national interest. 
All  in  all,  European-level  supervision  is  the  most  important  step  towards  financial  market 
integration in the euro area since the launch of our single currency. It is a logical step, too, 
since a single monetary policy also requires integrated financial markets – which includes, 
without doubt, European-level supervision. 
An  in-depth  examination  of  all  banks  which  will  later  be  supervised  directly  by  the  ECB  is 
now underway. The objective of this comprehensive assessment is to ensure that the new 
European supervisory authority has a smooth launch. We therefore view all measures that 
will strengthen the capital of German banks very positively. Over the past few months, many 
banks have begun to move in the right direction. 
Clear  communication  is  essential  to  both  the  asset  quality  review  and  the  stress  test.  I 
believe  that  the  process  should  be  as  transparent  as  possible  and  the  banks  should  be 
involved at the earliest possible stage as far as the law allows. 
Transparency will be especially important in the join-up of the results of the stress test and 
the asset quality review. In my view, we should work from the bottom up wherever possible – 
in other words, on the basis of specific data provided by the banks. Generalised assumptions 
should be used as little as possible. 
The creation of the new Single Supervisory Mechanism, or SSM, based at the ECB is surely 
the single greatest challenge we are currently facing. I am therefore particularly pleased that 
Danièle Nouy will be giving us a first-hand progress report today. The Bundesbank, for its 
part, is doing all it can to assist in the creation of the SSM. 
... and its repercussions for supervision in Germany 
3.2 
At this juncture, some of you might be asking whether German supervisors are digging their 
own grave. Once supervision is transferred to the European level, where will that leave the 
Bundesbank and BaFin? There are three points I would like to make on that subject. 
First,  we  Germans,  of  all  people,  should  not  succumb  to  the  illusion  that  European-level 
supervision spells the end of national supervision. After all, from 4 November of this year, out 
of around 2,000 German credit institutions, only 21 will actually be supervised directly by the 
ECB. Our BaFin and Bundesbank supervisors will remain responsible for all other German 
institutions. 
Second,  institutions  under  the  ECB’s  supervisory  responsibility  will  be  supervised  by  “joint 
supervisory  teams”  in  the  future,  to  which  the  Bundesbank  and  BaFin  staff  members  will 
contribute  their  expertise.  In  addition,  they  will  support  supervision  in  other  countries.  Put 
simply, we’re ceding, in whole or in part, responsibility for supervising 21 German institutions, 
but becoming involved in the supervision of 99 foreign institutions. 
The Bundesbank’s role in this area will build on our expertise and experience, as well as our 
nationwide presence. Over many years, we have built a close working relationship with you, 
ladies and gentlemen. 
The  separation  between  supervisors  and  decision-makers  has  proved  to  be  an  efficient 
system. That is precisely why we should make similar arrangements for the new European 
supervisory mechanism, with the Bundesbank performing ongoing supervision, and the ECB 
taking the decisions. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  It just so happens that, at the same time as we are holding this forum, Germany’s Federal 
Cabinet is discussing amendments to the German Banking Act (Kreditwesengesetz) today. 
The cabinet will consider whether changing this division of tasks and interrupting the direct 
reporting channel from the Bundesbank to the ECB constitutes “good regulation”. I doubt it. I 
believe that the Bundesbank has to be on an equal footing with the other supervisors. That is 
the only way to ensure effective European-level supervision. 
Conclusion and outlook 
4. 
Ladies and gentlemen, the French writer François Fénelon once claimed that, “the more you 
say, the less people remember”. As this obviously isn’t my aim, I would like to conclude my 
remarks by taking a peek into the future. 
The  past  history  of  regulation  has  been  one  of  constant  ups  and  downs.  Periods  of 
deregulation  have  usually  been  followed  by  a  crisis,  then  followed  by  a  period  of  re-
regulation, and  again  by  a  period of  deregulation.  It is  precisely  in  phases  of  re-regulation 
that banks tend to complain about the time and money it costs – and the present period is no 
exception. But are we really overregulating? If we look at the benefits to society of a stable 
banking system and the social costs of a banking crisis, I believe the costs of regulation are 
justifiable. 
However, for the future I would like regulation to evolve somewhat more steadily and adapt 
more quickly to new challenges: the low-interest-rate phase, high-frequency trading, charges 
of manipulating the LIBOR or the setting of forex rates and gold prices, to name just a few 
examples. We should not wait until the aftermath of the next crisis to come up with ways of 
responding to these challenges. 
I do not believe, however, that regulators and supervisors are all-knowing and all-powerful. 
As I noted at the beginning of this speech, we can only maintain financial stability if we work 
together. You, the bankers, are just as responsible as us, the supervisors and regulators. I 
am  well  aware  that  the  number  of  “bad  apples”  is  very  small.  However,  their  behaviour 
causes all of us to suffer: the public, when a crisis breaks out, and the bankers, when the 
public tar them all with the same brush. 
Yet we should be aware that the value of the financial system is measurable against one key 
criterion: your reliability, ladies and gentlemen, as a service provider to the real economy. So 
let’s use this understanding to work together to make the financial system more stable – the 
ECB, BaFin, the Bundesbank and the banks. This symposium is a magnificent opportunity to 
exchange views and develop ideas. Let’s use it. 
Thank you very much. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
