  Hiroshi Nakaso: What the lost decades left for the future 
Keynote speech by Mr Hiroshi Nakaso, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the 2014 
International  Conference,  held  by  the  International  Association  of  Deposit  Insurers, 
Asia-Pacific Regional Committee, Tokyo, 23 April 2014. 
 Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech or on the Bank of Japan’s website 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen, it is my pleasure to address the distinguished audience attending the 
International Association of Deposit Insurers (IADI) Asia-Pacific Regional Committee (APRC) 
International Conference held here in the historic city of Kyoto. 
Today, I want to trace history a little bit in an attempt to find out what can be learned from the 
so-called Lost Two Decades in Japan. 
The ordeal that Japan’s economy has undergone since the bursting of the asset bubbles in 
the  early  1990s  was  initially  dismissed  as  a  uniquely  Japanese  experience  with  limited 
implication  for  the  rest  of  the  world.  But  the  subsequent  global  economic  and  financial 
development  suggests  it  was,  in  fact,  in  no  way  unique.  The  challenges  that  the  Bank  of 
Japan  faced  during  the  Lost  Decades  in  endeavoring  to  restore  financial  stability  and 
overcome  deflation  have  provided  significant  lessons,  some  of  which  have  created  the 
guideposts for the future. Among the insights obtained, I want to pick up on three issues that 
I think are of particular relevance in the current context and for the audience in this room. 
These are the mission to overcome deflation, the mechanism to contain a financial crisis, and 
the role of a central bank as the Lender of Last Resort. 
I. 
Overcoming deflation 
Zero lower bound on nominal interest rates and deflationary equilibrium 
The first issue is the mission to overcome deflation. Since the financial crisis in the 1990s, 
Japan’s economy is said to have fallen into deflationary equilibrium, in which prices decline 
gradually and persistently. Let me start with a look at this deflationary equilibrium. 
Prices continued to decline principally because a large shock brought by the financial crisis 
affected  Japan’s  economy  and  the  output  gap  widened.  Nowadays,  there  is  no  need  to 
explain  how  a  financial  crisis  damages  the  real  economy  through  erosion  of  financial 
intermediation.  However,  at  the  time,  this  mechanism  seems  to  have  been  grossly 
underestimated.  After  entering  the  2000s,  the  downward  pressure  was  compounded  by  a 
new shock of a declining labor force, and this has been putting further downward pressure on 
the economy. 
However, deflation ought not to continue if a central bank is able to sufficiently lower nominal 
interest rates in the face of such large shocks. In this regard, the critically important factor is 
whether a central bank faces the zero lower bound or not. Chart 1, which I borrowed from a 
paper  by  President  Bullard  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  St.  Louis,  shows  this  in  a 
simplistic manner.1 In the chart, the nominal interest rate and the inflation rate in a steady 
state  will  be  determined  when  the  line  describing  the  Fisher  relation  –  which  shows  the 
relation  among  nominal  interest  rates,  real  interest  rates,  and  inflation  rates  –  crosses  the 
                                                
1  Bullard,  J.  (2010):  “Seven  Faces  of 
September/October, pp.339–352. 
‘The  Peril’,”  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  St.  Louis  Review, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  line representing the central bank’s policy reaction function. A central bank’s policy reaction 
function would have a positive slope as the central bank would react to a declining inflation 
rate by lowering interest rates. However, as the central bank cannot lower nominal interest 
rates below 0 percent, the reaction function becomes horizontal when nominal interest rates 
are at 0 percent, as shown in the chart. Then, the two lines cross twice, creating inflationary 
equilibrium on the right side of the chart and deflationary equilibrium on the left side. When 
strong downward pressure is added to the economy, an inflationary equilibrium might shift 
down  toward  a  deflationary  equilibrium.  If  actual  figures  for  Japan,  the  United  States,  and 
Europe  are  plotted  on  the  chart,  one  can  see  that  Japan’s  economy  has  been  hovering 
around deflationary equilibrium (Chart 2). 
These topics of the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates and deflationary equilibrium 
were initially considered unique to Japan and taken up as the subject of intellectual curiosity 
by only a fraction of academics. However, since the Lehman crisis, as central banks in major 
advanced economies have come to face similar problems, these issues have prompted the 
policymakers to refocus on Japan’s experiences, from which they sought to draw practical 
lessons. 
Escaping from deflationary equilibrium 
Another lesson is that, once the economy falls into deflationary equilibrium, it is difficult to 
overcome  that  situation.  In  order  to  get  out  of  deflationary  equilibrium,  a  sufficient  escape 
velocity needs to be provided to the economy. What is extremely important in this regard is to 
employ  all  policy  measures  in  the  arsenal.  As  for  monetary  policy,  the  Bank  of  Japan 
introduced  a  decisive  measure  of quantitative  and  qualitative  monetary  easing  in  April  last 
year. At the same time, as for fiscal policy, the government launched an expansionary policy 
partly  through  a  supplementary  budget  while  taking  due  account  of  long-term  fiscal 
sustainability.  In  escaping  from  deflationary  equilibrium,  in  my  view,  monetary  and  fiscal 
policies that were independently conducted under inflationary equilibrium need to be pursued 
with a different approach. In this regard, the joint statement of the Bank and the government 
announced in January last year may have been playing an important role as a coordination 
device that enables the collective conduct of monetary and fiscal policies. Thanks to these 
measures taken, the latest figures in Chart 2 suggest that Japan’s economy has gradually 
but steadily been escaping from deflationary equilibrium. 
Having said that, we are only halfway to achieving the 2 percent inflationary equilibrium. In 
view of this, what warrants attention are effects of the consumption tax hike from this April. 
While there are some goods, like automobiles, that seem to face a larger increase in demand 
ahead  of  the  tax  hike  compared  with  the  previous  consumption  tax  increase  in  1997,  we 
would  like  to  wait  for  an  accumulation  of  data  to  judge  the  overall  effects  on  private 
consumption  (Chart  3).  Personally,  I  believe  that  Japan’s  economy  as  a  whole  is  resilient 
enough  to  absorb  the  effects  of  the  consumption  tax  hike.  The  major  reasons  for  this  are 
continued improvement in employment and income conditions and the absence of problems 
that existed in the previous 1997 tax hike. In particular, the critical difference is that, while the 
financial  intermediation  function  that  supports  economic  activity  was  broken  due  to  the 
domestic  financial  crisis,  which  was  at  its  peak  in  1997,  the  financial  system  is  in  sound, 
robust  shape  this  time  around.  Put  differently,  the  absence  of  a  financial  system  problem 
corresponds to the fact that problems such as debt overhang, excess capacity, and excess 
employment  that  had  haunted  the  economy  at  that  time  have  been  resolved  thanks  to 
subsequent efforts by firms (Chart 4). 
The Bank will steadily pursue quantitative and qualitative monetary easing to make sure we 
put  an  end  to this  deflation.  As  we  have  said  repeatedly,  should  the  outlook for  economic 
activity  and  prices  change  due  to  some  risk  factors,  the  Bank  will  make  adjustments  as 
necessary. 
While overcoming this deflation is the Bank’s manifest mission, for Japan’s economy to move 
to  a  sustainable  growth  path, 
inspire  private  economic  entities’ 
is  crucial 
to 
it 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  entrepreneurship and dynamism in order to reinforce the growth potential of the economy. In 
this  regard,  I  strongly  expect  that  the  government’s  growth  strategy  will  be  steadily 
implemented. 
Now let me bring you to the second issue: the mechanism to contain a financial crisis. 
II. 
Mechanism to contain a financial crisis 
Financial system stability and the role of a central bank 
Smooth  financial  intermediation  under  a  stable  financial  system  is  a  prerequisite  for 
achieving sustainable economic growth with price stability. Stability of the financial system is 
also  needed  to  secure  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy.  This  is  because  the  financial 
system is a major policy transmission channel, in that monetary policy is carried out through 
measures  such  as  open  market  operations  that  have  financial  institutions  as  their 
counterparts. 
In the Bank of Japan Act, contributing to the maintenance of stability of the financial system 
is  stipulated  as  the  Bank  of  Japan’s  purpose,  along  with  achieving  price  stability.  Against 
such a backdrop, through its on-site examinations and off-site monitoring, the Bank has been 
striving  toward  accurately  gauging  the  business  conditions  of  financial  institutions.  In 
addition,  while  utilizing  the  information  of  individual  financial  institutions  obtained  through 
such  processes,  the  Bank  seeks  to  gain  a  holistic  view  on  the  soundness  of  the  entire 
financial  system.  The  points  to  be  checked  include  whether  there  is  a  widespread 
accumulation of financial imbalances such as an excessive expansion in credit aggregates or 
leverage  as  well  as  an  excessive  rise  in  asset  prices,  which  are  assessed  from  a 
macroprudential perspective.2 The examination of financial imbalances has become one of 
the important exercises under the current monetary policy framework in Japan. 
Lessons learned from Japan’s experience 
The efforts to secure financial system stability from the micro- and macro-perspectives I have 
just mentioned aim at early detection of a source of crisis and preempting its materialization. 
Despite such efforts, we cannot eliminate the probability of a crisis. Therefore, it is critical to 
establish an effective mechanism that can minimize the spread of damage in case a crisis 
occurs.  In  this  regard,  Japan’s  experience  of  the  financial  crisis  of  the 1990s  may  provide 
many lessons, because it was a painful case that allowed seeds of problems to grow into a 
full-scale  systemic  crisis,  during  which  about  180  depositary  institutions failed.  There  were 
multiple reasons why this had to be the case. In what follows, I want to point to three basic 
causes, acknowledging the fact that wisdom came only after the event. Hopefully, these will 
provide those countries that are in the process of designing and establishing a mechanism to 
contain a financial crisis with valuable insights. 
a. 
The first cause was a delay in authorities’ recognition of the situation. In 1992, the size of 
nonperforming loans announced by the government was 8 trillion  yen  in total for 21 major 
banks.  At  the  time,  the  effects  of  nonperforming  loans  on  the  financial  system  were  not 
considered  to  be  so  serious.  For  example,  a  1992  Economic  White  Paper  stated  that 
nonperforming loans were not a critical problem for banks’ management as those were only 
a part of banks’ total loan amount of 351 trillion yen and accounted for a small portion of their 
total assets, and as banks had about 17 trillion yen of unrealized gains on securities. This 
Delay in authorities’ recognition of the situation 
                                                
2  The  Bank  of  Japan  publishes 
the  objective  of 
comprehensively  analyzing  and  assessing  the  stability  of  Japan’s  financial  system  and  facilitating 
communication with concerned parties in order to ensure such stability. 
the  Financial  System  Report  semiannually,  with 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Lack of recognition of the nature of systemic risk 
institutions.  However,  macroeconomic  consequences  of  eroded 
statement  ultimately  diverged  significantly  from  the  actual  figure  of  the  banking  sector’s 
cumulative  losses  in the  ensuing  10  years,  which  turned  out to  be  as much  as  100  trillion 
yen,  or  about  20  percent  of  GDP  (Chart  5).  This  example  was  not  limited  to  Japan. 
Concerning losses associated with the U.S. subprime mortgage problem, which triggered the 
recent financial crisis, the U.S. authorities initially announced that these totaled about 50 to 
100 billion dollars. Ultimately, the amount bloated to several hundred billions. Amid the vortex 
of a crisis, authorities tend to yield to  wishful thinking. We need to bear in mind again the 
need to expect the worst and plan for the best when the financial system faces preliminary 
tremors. 
A delay in recognition also held true in terms of the gravity of the effects that nonperforming 
loan  problems  had  on  the  economy.  After  the  bursting  of  the  bubble,  the  authorities  were 
aware of the possible impact of a decline in real estate prices on management of individual 
financial 
financial 
intermediation  and  the  resultant  tighter  monetary  condition  –  in  recent  terminology,  a 
negative  feedback  loop  between  the  financial  system  and  the  real  economy  –  had  been 
underestimated, if not disregarded. 
b. 
The second cause was a lack of recognition regarding the nature of systemic risk. Japan’s 
financial  crisis  in  the  1990s  took  hold  with  the  resolution  of  two  Tokyo-based  credit 
cooperatives  in  December  1994.  At  the  time,  a  wide  range  of  financial  institutions  were 
perceived  to  be  facing  the  common  problem  of  mounting  nonperforming  loans.  Therefore, 
even though these two credit cooperatives were small in size, there was a risk that the failure 
could drive the entire financial system into turmoil, as the problems with the failed institutions 
were easily associated with those faced by the surviving ones – for example, people would 
ask themselves, “if those credit cooperatives failed, why can’t others?” Then came November 
1997.  In  a  single  month,  now  remembered  as  Dark  November,  as  many  as  four  financial 
institutions  including  internationally  active  ones  failed  in  succession.  Sanyo  Securities,  a 
middle-ranking securities firm, was among those that failed. It defaulted on borrowing from 
the  call  market,  the  core  of  the  interbank  market.  The  amount  of  the  default  by  this  non-
depositary financial institution was only about 8.3 billion yen – a fraction compared with the 
market  size.  But  as  that  was  the  first-ever  default  in  the  call  market,  it  sent  a  shockwave 
through market participants, and every one of them had a gnawing suspicion that those to 
whom they lent money might fail anytime. As a result, the call market contracted sharply and 
the market intermediation function was lost. 
When  there  is  increased  vulnerability  of  the  financial  system,  even  the  failure  of  a  small 
financial  institution  or  non-depositary financial  institution can  induce  a  contagious  systemic 
shock.  At  the  time,  there  was  a  general  lack  of  recognition  about  the  mechanism  through 
which a shock develops into a systemic crisis. 
c. 
The third cause was a lack of effective safety nets. It would have been more desirable if an 
effective framework had been in place in normal times that could both contain moral hazard 
and  avoid  systemic  risk  in  a  balanced  manner. However,  in  reality,  the  creation  of  such  a 
framework  lagged  behind  the  unfolding  crisis.  This  delayed  the  resolution  of  problem 
financial institutions and resulted in an escalation of the crisis. 
In Japan’s financial crisis of the 1990s, policy responses were based on the principle that all 
depositors,  including  uninsured  ones,  should  be  fully  protected  in  order  to  preclude  a 
depositors’ run. To  cover  the  cost  of the  deposit  protection,  the failed financial  institution’s 
capital would first be used. The residual amount was supposed to be covered by financial 
assistance  from  the  Deposit  Insurance  Corporation  of  Japan  (DICJ).  However,  under  the 
primitive legal framework of that time, the amount of available financial assistance in a bank 
failure was limited to covering only the insured. Therefore, to collect the cost needed for full 
deposit protection including uninsured deposits, the only option left was to rely on voluntary 
Lack of effective safety nets 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  contributions  from  financial  institutions  –  a  method  later  called  the  consortium  method. 
Although this method worked for a while, it soon reached a limit, as the number of failures 
soared and the cost of deposit protection consequently bloated. This led to legislation that 
removed the ceiling of financial assistance from the DICJ. But the source of the enhanced 
support was deposit insurance premiums collected from the financial industry. This was little 
different from the consortium method, in the sense that it was the financial industry that had 
to bear the burden anyway. With the financial strength largely exhausted, there was naturally 
a limit to what the industry could bear. In other words, the crisis had escalated to the extent 
that injection of public funds, the only remaining financial resource, was considered imminent 
and necessary. But political difficulties prevented that from taking place in a timely manner. 
Indeed, the discussion on public funds injection was not unsealed3 until Japan experienced 
the so-called Dark November of 1997, at which point the crisis became visible in the eyes of 
everyone.  This  finally  paved  the  way  for  the  use  of  public  funds.4  However,  establishing 
safety nets amid escalation of the crisis was a painful process. It was only after May 2003,5 
almost  six  years  after  Dark  November,  when  we  finally  felt  that  the  crisis  was  gradually 
waning. 
Japan’s safety nets that evolved while coping with the crisis 
As a member of the policy authorities at the time, I sometimes wonder what could have been 
different if public funds had been injected a little earlier. At the same time, however, it should 
be  appreciated that the safety  nets for Japan’s financial  system  have  developed  into  solid 
ones as a result of a series of evolving steps taken while coping with the actual crisis. 
The  current  safety  nets  in  Japan  are  equipped  with  a  framework  of  investor  protection  for 
each business category. As for depositary financial institutions, a framework is now in place 
that  allows,  if  a  case  is  judged  to  be  systemic,  for  exceptional  measures  to  be  taken  to 
reinforce the capital position of a bank, including an option for temporary nationalization. In 
addition,  a  piece  of  legislation  last  year  introduced  a  framework  intended  to  cope  with 
market-induced-type systemic risk that could be triggered by such non-bank institutions as 
securities firms and insurance companies. Thus, I think I can say that Japan’s safety nets 
have evolved to become comprehensive ones that cover a wide range of financial institutions 
and  can  be  considered  to  represent  the  culmination  of  past  actual  financial  crisis 
management measures. In that regard, our safety net arrangements have a lot to offer, and 
to  which  countries  overseas  can  make  reference.  Of  course,  Japan’s  system  as  it  stands 
does not fit every country exactly. Needless to  say, it is desirable to establish frameworks 
that  suit  the  financial  and  legal  systems  of  respective  countries  while  utilizing  universal 
elements underlying Japan’s system. 
4 
                                                
3  The discussion on public funds injection in Japan was sealed in 1995 after an episode of injecting taxpayers’ 
money  amounting  to  685  billion  yen  to  resolve  the  housing  loan  corporation  (HLC)  problem  in  1995  –  the 
so-called Jusen Problem. HLCs were non-bank financial institutions. 
In Japan’s financial crisis, there were two major cases of capital injection using public funds. The first case 
was in March 1998, when capital of 1.8 trillion yen was injected to 21 major banks based on the former Act on 
Emergency  Measures  for  Financial  Functions  Stabilization.  The  second  injection  took  place  in  March  1999 
based on the Act on Emergency Measures for Early Strengthening of Financial Functions. Based on the asset 
quality assessment, a total of 7.5 trillion yen in capital was injected into 15 banks. 
In  May  2003,  public  funds  were  injected  into  Resona  Bank  based  on  Article  102  of  the  revised  Deposit 
Insurance Act and, triggered by this, stock prices that had long been stagnant gradually started to rise. 
5 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  III. 
Central bank as the Lender of Last Resort 
Scope of the Lender of Last Resort and the safety nets 
The third and final issue I will address today is the role of a central bank as the Lender of 
Last Resort. In coping with financial crises, a central bank’s Lender of Last Resort function 
has also played an important role. This is a function in which a central bank provides funds to 
a financial institution facing a temporary liquidity shortage in order to prevent systemic risk 
from materializing. In carrying out this function – through the so-called special loans – the 
Bank of Japan has required, including during the crisis period, that four conditions be fulfilled. 
Specifically, first, there must be a strong likelihood that systemic risk will materialize. Second, 
there  must  be  no  alternative  to  the  provision  of  central  bank  funds.  Third,  all  responsible 
parties  are  required  to  take  clear  responsibility  to  avoid  moral  hazard.  And  fourth,  the 
financial soundness of the Bank of Japan should not be impaired. 
Of these, the fourth principle entails an inherently difficult problem. As was the case with the 
failure of Sanyo Securities and many other cases, a financial crisis typically surfaces in the 
form  of  liquidity  shortage  with  a  solvency  problem  lurking  in  the  background.  What  is 
troubling is that, at an early stage of the crisis, it is quite difficult to differentiate the liquidity 
problem from the solvency problem. The traditional wisdom is that the Lender of Last Resort 
support should be confined to “illiquid but solvent” institutions, but in practice this is not easy. 
This is why a central bank serving as a Lender of Last Resort runs the risk of credit losses. If 
the central bank’s funds become unrecoverable, its financial soundness will be impaired. If, 
as  a  result,  speculation  arises  that  the  central  bank’s  policy  judgment  might  be  affected, 
policy effectiveness could be undermined. Furthermore, losses incurred by the central bank 
might ultimately lead to taxpayer burden through reduced transfers to the government. 
The  problems  that  I  have  just  mentioned  will  be  even  more  acute  when  safety  nets  are 
underdeveloped. A central bank will be forced to make the decision of whether to dare take 
risk  and  exercise  its  Lender  of  Last  Resort  function  in  order  to  avoid  a  crisis  despite  the 
possibility of incurring losses. In Japan, during the 1990s, in the absence of frameworks to 
cope with systemic risk triggered by non-bank securities firms and with capital shortage of 
depositary institutions, the Bank of Japan intentionally took on the risk and provided special 
loans to fulfill its mission to secure stability of the financial system. However, this ended in 
the painful result of incurring credit losses of more than 200 billion yen. 
Today, as mentioned earlier, comprehensive safety nets are installed, and the DICJ has a 
broadened capacity to provide funds including capital injection. Accordingly, the scope of the 
Bank of Japan’s role has become substantially narrower relative to that in the 1990s, and is 
basically confined to back financing toward the DICJ. Going forward, it will become important 
to  strengthen  coordination  among  related  parties  under  the  new  framework  so  that  crisis 
management measures can be activated promptly in the event of crisis outbreaks. 
Market Maker of Last Resort 
New dimensions of the Lender of Last Resort 
a. 
The  central  bank’s  Lender  of  Last  Resort  function  seems  to  have  reached  a  new  stage. 
During  the  recent  global  financial  crisis,  it  has  become  clear  that  systemic  risk  can  be 
magnified  through  mutually  reinforcing  declines  in  funding  and  market  liquidity  in  light  of 
increasingly deepening and interconnected financial markets. After the market turmoil in the 
summer  of  2007,  heightened  counterparty  concerns  among  market  participants  drove  the 
markets to become dysfunctional. In response, central banks embarked on restoring market 
function  by  providing  liquidity  to  the  markets  as  a  whole  through  open  market  operations. 
Specifically, after the collapse of Lehman Brothers in September 2008, the Federal Reserve 
(Fed)  provided  funds  to  issuers  of  CP  and  holders  of  asset-backed  securities  (ABS). 
Meanwhile, in Japan, the corporate sector was directly hit by the crisis because the market 
liquidity of their funding sources dried up. To address the adverse market condition, the Bank 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Global Lender of Last Resort 
of  Japan  took  the  exceptional  steps  of  making  outright  purchases  of  CP,  asset-backed 
commercial paper, and corporate bonds. More recently, in response to market fragmentation 
that  became  serious  in  the  euro  area  on  the  back  of  the  sovereign  debt  problem,  the 
European Central Bank (ECB) carried out a large-scale fund provisioning through its three-
year  Longer-term  Refinancing  Operations  (LTROs)  on  a  full  allotment  basis,  aiming  at 
restoring market function. As these measures substitute for the intermediation function of the 
markets,  we  can  probably  say  that  a  central  bank’s  Lender  of  Last  Resort  function  has 
evolved to encompass the role of Market Maker of Last Resort. 
b. 
The  recent  global  financial  crisis  demonstrated  that  systemic  risk  can  spill  over  across 
national borders and have a global dimension. The deepening of globalization had prompted 
financial institutions to broaden their intermediation activities into non-home currencies. This 
suggests that home central banks may have to confront the challenges arising from liquidity 
crises in non-home currencies. In the first place, provision of liquidity in non-home currencies 
is in no way an easy task for the home central bank to implement in a timely manner given 
the  potential  size  needed,  time  difference,  and  other  operational  constraints.  During  the 
recent  financial  crisis,  U.S.  dollar  liquidity  shortage  became  an  acute  concern,  especially 
among  European  banks,  which  had  expanded  their  dollar  intermediation  activities.  In 
response, the ECB and Swiss National Bank each entered into swap arrangements with the 
Fed at the end of 2007 to obtain dollars to be fed through to financial institutions operating in 
respective markets. Other major banks, including Japanese ones, had also expanded dollar 
intermediation. Therefore, the Bank of Japan, the Bank of England, and the Bank of Canada 
joined the swap arrangements with the Fed after the collapse of Lehman Brothers. Triggered 
by  the  sovereign  debt  problem  in  Europe,  this  arrangement  was  reinforced  in  2011  to 
become a network of bilateral swap arrangements that provides the six participating central 
banks  with  access  to  the  yen  and  major  currencies  other  than  the  US  dollar,6  should  a 
liquidity  crunch  occur  in  these  currencies  (Chart  6).  The  arrangement  has  now  become  a 
permanent measure. This provision of non-home currencies under central bank cooperation 
embodies the role of Global Lender of Last Resort. 
As  I  have  described,  while  the  essential  nature  of  a  central  bank’s  Lender  of  Last  Resort 
function remains unchanged, specific ways of exerting the function have evolved, and new 
dimensions  have  been  added  to  it.  More  than  ever,  central  banks  now  face  the  need  to 
enhance  collective  efforts  to  improve  crisis  management  skills  in  order  to  better  withstand 
future shocks. 
Concluding remarks 
Ladies and gentlemen, let me now conclude. 
The Japanese experience tells us that a negative feedback between the real economy would 
come into play once financial stability is undermined, and that, for this reason, we need to 
have  a  good  set  of  crisis  prevention  and  crisis  management  measures  in  place.  Today,  I 
have focused on the latter, but let me reiterate that crisis prevention tools such as financial 
regulation  and  macroprudential  policies  are  no  less  important.  In  dealing  with  the financial 
crises  of  the  recent  past,  we  also  have  recognized  that  a  central  bank’s  Lender  of  Last 
Resort  function  remains  an  important  tool  that  needs  to  be  constantly  refined  to  meet  the 
potential challenges arising from globalization. 
Two decades may seem a mere instant in history for a city like Kyoto that has survived more 
than one thousand years with a myriad of historic events. But the past two decades were so 
                                                
6  These six banks are the Bank of Japan, the Fed, the ECB, the Bank of England, the Bank of Canada, and the 
Swiss National Bank. So far, the arrangements have not been used to provide funds other than in U.S. dollars. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  eventful that I am sure it will long be remembered in the history of economy and finance. We 
have  learned  a  lot  and  may  have  become  a  little  wiser,  but  so  many  things  remain  to  be 
explored. 
We can never regain the two decades that have elapsed. But we can make full use of the 
insights obtained during the period in fulfilling our mission of bringing the economy back on 
track  toward  sustained  growth  and  in  contributing  to  building  up  effective  safety  nets  to 
underpin financial stability in Japan as well as in other countries. Only when these tasks are 
done can we probably say, perhaps with a little bit of relief, that the spell the Lost Decades 
cast on us is at last broken, and that not everything was lost after all. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
 
  8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
       BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
   10 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
