  Daniel Mminele: South Africa – challenges and opportunities in the 
monetary policy environment and the new financial services regulatory 
regime 
Address by Mr Daniel Mminele, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 
South  African  Chamber  of  Commerce  and 
(SACCI)  Breakfast  Briefing, 
Johannesburg, 13 August 2014. 
Industry 
 Good morning, Ladies and Gentlemen. 
It  is  indeed  a  pleasure  to  address  you  today  on  some  of  the  issues  that  monetary  policy 
makers and regulators both internationally and domestically are currently grappling with. I am 
very grateful to SACCI for creating this opportunity for us to interact at this forum, which I 
gather is part of SACCI’s policy programme of engagement with policy makers, political and 
business  leaders.  Fortunately,  the  difficult  task  of  choosing  a  topic  for  this  address  was 
solved  for  me,  as  the  organisers  have  specifically  requested me  to focus  on  three  issues, 
namely, international monetary policy trends, challenges and opportunities in South Africa’s 
monetary  policy  environment  and  the  new  financial  services  regulatory  regime  in  South 
Africa. My address is structured accordingly. 
International monetary policy trends 
1.  
As you are aware, in many countries growth considerations dominate policy concerns, both 
on  the  fiscal  and  monetary  policy  fronts.  According  to  the  IMF’s  latest  World  Economic 
Outlook (WEO) Update released last month, the global recovery is expected to continue but 
at an uneven pace and with the outlook being characterised by downside risks. While global 
growth  is  projected  to  rise  from  3,2  per  cent  in  2013  to  3,4  per  cent  in  this  year  and 
4,0 per cent in 2015, the most recent forecast is weaker for 2014 than what was envisaged in 
the April 2014 WEO. Growth outcomes for advanced countries and emerging economies for 
this  year  have  been  revised  downwards  by  0,4  and  0,2  percentage  points,  respectively. 
Despite  this  downward  revision,  it  is  generally  accepted  that  the  growth  momentum  will 
continue,  albeit  at  a  lower  and  uneven  pace.  Thus,  raising  actual  and  potential  output  will 
remain a priority in policy circles in many economies for the foreseeable future.  
Growth  in  the  advanced  world  has  become  dependent  on  monetary  stimulus.  Financial 
market  developments,  particularly  asset  price  movements  have  reflected  this  stimulus 
injection. In general this has taken the form of equity purchases rather than green-field type 
investments, which has in effect limited the impetus to the economic growth momentum. An 
additional concern has been that debt levels in many countries have continued to rise against 
the  backdrop  of  subdued  long-term  growth  prospects.  Debt-to-GDP  ratios  now  average 
around 275 per cent in the advanced economies and approximately 175 in EMEs.1 As Jaime 
Caruana, the General Manager of the Bank for International Settlements, has recently noted, 
the surge in debt may have supported current demand, but its impact on future income and 
future  demand  is  still  very  uncertain.2  The  rise  in  debt  makes  borrowers more  sensitive  to 
tightening in the interest rate cycle. 
Despite  the  current  concerns  about  global  growth  outcomes,  there  is  evidence  of 
self-sustaining  recoveries  in  some  of  the  major  economies  like  the  United  States  and  the 
                                                
1  See BIS, 2014. 84th annual report, BIS (page 10). 
2  See Jaime Caruana, 2014. “Stepping out of the shadow of the crisis: three transitions for the world economy”, 
BIS (July). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  United Kingdom. It is now accepted that as growth recovers, policy makers in the advanced 
countries  will  start  to  unwind  the  exceptional  monetary  accommodation  that  is  currently  in 
place in these countries. This will inevitably lead to a tightening of financial conditions and 
higher  global  interest  rates  in  the  coming  years.  Swings  in  capital  inflows  could  result  in 
renewed bouts of turbulence in financial markets with consequent exchange rate pressures 
having  significant  adverse  implications  for  economic  outcomes  in  EMEs  and  the  global 
economy.  For  example,  the  IMF  in  the  most  recent  “2014  Spillover  Report”  released  on 
27 July 2014, estimates that an environment of sharply tighter financial conditions alongside 
a  further  weakening  of  emerging  market  growth  could  reduce  global  output  by  about 
2 per cent. 
This  has  brought  into  sharper  focus  the  future  role  of  monetary  policy.  While  there  is  no 
doubt that in the medium- to long-term price stability will remain the primary goal of monetary 
policy, lessons learnt from the crisis clearly point to the need to give broader financial stability 
more  prominence.  Policy  makers  around the  world  are grappling  with  finding  ways  of  how 
best  to  define  the  future  relationship  between  price  stability,  macro  and  micro-prudential 
policies. Recently, there has also been a renewed interest in policy coordination at the global 
level as a means of reducing or containing the potential adverse spillover effects of changes 
in  the  monetary  policy  stance  of  advanced  economies.  Governor  Raghuram  Rajan  of  the 
Reserve Bank of India has been at the forefront of such calls, suggesting that central banks 
in advanced countries should reinterpret their mandate to consider the international spillover 
effects of their domestic policy actions. His argument is that in the absence of global policy 
coordination and cooperation, EMEs may have to resort to less optimal policy options, which 
include  implementing  macro-prudential  measures  such  as  capital  controls,  and  excessive 
reserve accumulation. The IMF has also acknowledged that national policies alone may not 
be sufficient to address the adverse spillover effects in the global economy.3 However, the 
nature  and  timing  of  such  policy  coordination  is  very  much  still  an  open  question.  This,  in 
effect means that, while exogenous shocks are a distinct possibility, the nature and extent of 
these  shocks  are  difficult  to  estimate  and  discern.  International  policy  coordination,  while 
clearly desirable, gets complicated by asynchronous monetary policies, which are informed 
by differing economic cycles. This is a challenge confronting monetary policy formulation and 
implementation in many EMEs currently, and is a reality we also face in South Africa. 
Challenges and opportunities in South Africa’s monetary policy environment 
2.  
As you are aware, the SARB’s monetary policy mandate is executed within a flexible inflation 
targeting  framework.  In  essence,  this  implies  that  when  inflation  expectations  are  under 
control the SARB will tolerate temporary breaches of the upper target band of 6 per cent in 
the  interests  of  containing  short-term  fluctuations  in  economic  growth.  The  0,6 per cent 
contraction of the economy in the first quarter provided strong evidence of the impact of the 
protracted labour strike in the mining sector. While the end to the strike in the manufacturing 
sector which was announced at the end of July is to be welcomed, the impact of these strikes 
on the second quarter growth figures and over the longer-term are still to be ascertained. 
The recent Quarterly Labour Force Survey (QLFS) released by Statistics South Africa shows 
that  the  official  unemployment  rate  has  increased  to  25,5  per  cent  from  the  25,2  per  cent 
registered for the first quarter of 2014. Of particular concern is the decline of 24 000 formal 
sector jobs and the increase in the number of unemployed to 5,2 million people which is the 
highest level since the inception of the QLFS in 2008. There is little doubt that job creation 
and  reducing  unemployment  remains  the  single  most  important  economic  challenge 
confronting South African policy makers.  
                                                
3 
IMF, 2014. Imf Multilateral Policy Report: 2014 Spillover Report, IMF, Washington (July 2014) 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The  prospects  for  employment  creation  have  also  been  adversely  affected  by  the 
deterioration in the growth outlook. The Bank’s most recent forecast, published at the time of 
our last MPC meeting, is that economic growth will average 1,7 per cent for 2014. This is 
approximately  1  percentage  point  lower  than  what  was  envisaged  at  the  beginning  of  the 
year.  The  growth  forecasts  for  the  next  two  years  was  also  revised  downwards  by 
0,2 percentage points to 3,1 per cent (2015) and 3,2 per cent (2016). 
There is little doubt that the envisaged growth outcomes of around 3 per cent over the next 
two years are insufficient to make meaningful inroads into the unemployment problem that 
we face in South Africa. The policy challenge is to enhance the growth potential of the South 
African  economy.  In  this  regard,  attention  needs  to  be  given  to  removing  the  structural 
impediments  in  the  economy,  many  of  which  have  been  identified  in  the  National 
Development  Plan.  Government’s  infrastructure  plans  and  other  measures  such  as  those 
directed at enhancing education and skills, and supporting small and medium enterprises are 
some  of  the  proposed  initiatives  that  need  to  gain  traction  to  enhance  the  growth  and 
employment potential of the South African economy. 
It should also be pointed out that the South African economy can ill-afford a fractured labour 
relations environment, which increased the tensions that resulted in protracted strikes in the 
mining  and  manufacturing  sectors.  Both  business  and  labour,  with  government  facilitation, 
have  a  vital  role  to  play  to  improve  the  labour  relations  environment  in  South  Africa.  The 
challenge  remains  for  organisations  like  SACCI  and  other  business  associations  together 
with  labour,  to  find  means  and  mechanisms  to  urgently  and  adequately  address  their 
concerns  in  such  a  way  that  the  competitiveness  of  South  African  products  on  the 
international market is not compromised. 
It is important to bear in mind that monetary policy cannot address structural deficiencies in 
the  economy  and  influence  long-term  growth.  At  best,  monetary  policy  can  smooth  out 
fluctuations  in  growth  over  the  short-term.  Currently,  the  MPC’s  policy  dilemma  has  been 
compounded by CPI inflation breaching the upper end of the target range in the wake of a 
weak growth performance. CPI inflation on a year-on-year basis measured 6,6 per cent over 
the  last  two  months.  The  food  and  transport  components  accounted  for  approximately 
41 per cent of the headline inflation rate. 
The  SARB’s  forecast  as  contained  in  the  MPC  statement  released  in  July  2014  shows 
inflation  peaking  at  an  average  rate  of  6,6  per  cent  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  this  year  and 
returning to within the target band during the second quarter of 2015. Inflation is expected to 
average 6,3 per cent in 2014 and 5,9 per cent in 2015. There are indications that exchange 
rate impacts – particularly the lagged impacts from past depreciations – are starting to feed 
through into consumer price inflation. 
The  MPC  is  of  the  view  that  the  risks  to  the  inflation  forecast  are  skewed  to  the  upside. 
Underlying  inflationary  pressures  have  increased.  Core  inflation,  measured  as  headline 
inflation less food, petrol and energy, has increased to 5,6 per cent in June from an average 
rate of 5,1 per cent for the 2013 calendar year. The Bank’s projection is that core inflation will 
remain at elevated levels averaging around 5,7 per cent over the next year. This does not 
include the impact of the recent decision by the National Energy Regulator of South Africa 
(Nersa) to allow Eskom to recoup R7.8bn for the under-recoveries for the Multi-Year Price 
Determination period, 2010–2013. The impact of this decision on headline and core inflation 
will become clearer once Eskom announces how this amount will be recouped. 
Inflation  expectations  as  reflected  in  the  survey  conducted  by  the  Bureau  for  Economic 
Research at Stellenbosch University have been anchored at the upper end of the target band 
for some time now. The average expectations of financial analysts, the trade union officials 
and businesses are that inflation will average 6,1 per cent in 2014 and 2015 before declining 
to 5,9 per cent in 2016. However, trade union officials expect inflation to increase from an 
average  6,0  per  cent  in  2014  to  6,1  per  cent  in  2015  and  2016.  On  the  other  hand, 
businesses are of the view that inflation will average 6,2 per cent in 2014 and increase by an 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  average  0,1  per  cent  in  each  of the  next  two  years. With  regard  to  expectations for  wage 
settlements  trade  union  officials  indicated  7.6  per  cent  for  both  years,  whereas  business 
people expect 7.8 per cent for 2014 and 8% for 2015. Thus, the expectations of labour and 
business,  the  price-setting  agents  in  the  economy,  are  of  concern  –  they  are  not  only  at 
uncomfortably high levels but, also outside the upper-end of the target band over the forecast 
horizon. A wage-price spiral would severely compromise South Africa’s inflation and growth 
outcomes. Thus, while inflationary pressures may not be of a demand-pull nature, second-
round price effects from supply-side shocks need to be contained.  
The  MPC  has  indicated  that  we  are  in  a tightening  phase  of  the  interest  rate  cycle. While 
price stability remains the primary focus of monetary policy, the Bank has indicated that this 
objective  will  be  pursued  in  a  manner  so  that  economic  growth  outcomes  are  not  unduly 
undermined. As we explained in the July MPC statement, monetary policy is on a “gradual 
normalisation path”, which will be highly data-dependent. The SARB remains committed to 
its  mandate  of  maintaining  price  stability  in  the  interest  of  balanced  and  sustainable 
economic  growth  in  South  Africa.  In  this  regard,  it  is  important  to  note  that  despite  the 
75 basis point increase in the repo rate since the beginning of the year, the real repurchase 
rate is still marginally negative thus ensuring that monetary policy remains supportive of the 
domestic economy. 
insurers, 
financial  conglomerates  and  key 
The new financial services regulatory regime in South Africa 
3.  
The great recession, which began in 2008 has shown that imbalances between the real and 
financial sectors of the economy could increase the vulnerability of the financial system. In 
addition,  with  hindsight,  we  now  know  that  such  vulnerabilities  may  not  become  evident 
solely  through  the  supervision  of  individual  institutions.  For  this  reason,  macro-prudential 
aspects  of  financial  stability  have  gained  traction  in  policy  circles  around  the  globe.  South 
African  policymakers  have  also  engaged  in  a  process  of  reviewing  and  revamping  the 
regulation of the financial sector. 
In February 2011, the Minister of Finance announced that South Africa would be shifting to a 
“Twin  Peaks”  model  of  financial  regulation.  At  the  end  of  last  year,  the  National  Treasury 
published the draft Financial Sector Regulation Bill (Twin Peaks Bill), which provides some 
detail around the architecture of the Twin Peaks model. In terms of the Twin Peaks model, a 
Prudential  Authority  (PA)  will  be  established  within  the  SARB  to  oversee  the  safety  and 
soundness  of  banks, 
financial  market 
infrastructures. The FSB will become the Market Conduct Authority (MCA) and will promote 
integrity  and  efficiency  of  financial  markets  in  order  to  safeguard  the  interests  of  South 
African consumers of financial services. It goes without saying that co-ordination between the 
two  regulators  will  be  crucial  to  ensure  the  overall  stability  and  robustness  of  the  South 
African financial system. 
The exact date of Twin Peaks implementation will be finalised once the necessary legislative 
processes  have  taken  place.  It  is  envisaged  that  the  Twin  Peaks  model  of  regulation  will 
come into effect by the end of 2014 although this is dependent on the parliamentary process 
and the final enactment of the bill. 
While the enabling legislation for “Twin Peaks” is still in the process of being finalised, some 
of the support measures recently announced by the SARB for African Bank were informed by 
the  principles  contained  in  the  G20/FSB  Key  Attributes  for  Effective  Resolution  Regimes, 
which  are  expected  to  feature  in  the  new  legislation.  Allow  me  to  make  a  brief  comment 
about the measures announced by the SARB last Sunday. The legal structure of curatorship 
will facilitate an orderly, structured, and fair approach to addressing the current challenges at 
African  Bank  in  an  effort  to secure  a  viable  future  on  the  basis  of  a  transformed  business 
model, while ensuring minimum disruption to our financial and credit markets. The proposed 
solutions were developed in a collaborative process between the public and private sector. 
The leadership and commitment shown by South African commercial banks and the PIC in 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  underwriting the capital raising for the envisaged “good bank” bears testimony to the strong 
underpinnings of our banking and financial system, the resilience of which will be enhanced 
by these measures. 
Once the necessary legislation has been enacted, the current Financial Stability Committee 
(FSC) of the Bank, will be replaced by the Financial Stability Oversight Committee (FSOC). 
This  committee  will  be  chaired  by  the  Governor  with  the  membership  of  this  committee 
comprising  the  SARB,  the  Financial  Services  Board  (FSB)  and  National  Treasury  as  an 
observer. The primary mandate of the FSOC will be to monitor and assess systemic risks to 
financial stability and make recommendations on how to counter or eliminate these risks. In 
the  execution  of  its  financial  stability  mandate,  the  Bank  relies  as  far  as  possible  on  the 
efficient functioning of market forces to ensure the stability of the financial system. Thus, the 
Bank’s action will be guided by the principle of the containment of systemic risk. 
Given the large representation from the insurance industry in the audience today, I would like 
to briefly outline some of the regulatory changes confronting the insurance industry. As you 
are  aware,  some  four  years  ago,  the  FSB  and  the  South  African  insurance  industry 
embarked  on  the  Solvency  Assessment  and  Management  (SAM)  project.  This  project  is 
directed at establishing a risk-based supervisory regime for the prudential regulation of both 
long-term and short-term insurers in South Africa. In essence, the objective is to enhance the 
monitoring  and  management  of  risk  so  as  to  ensure  that  the  capital  requirements  are 
appropriately aligned with the underlying risks of an insurer. 
Under the Twin Peaks regulatory regime, insurance regulation and supervision will be split 
between the Prudential Authority in the SARB and the MCA (FSB). The Prudential Authority 
will  supervise  financial  soundness  and  the  MCA  will  oversee  the  business  conduct  of 
insurers. The SARB is currently busy with undertaking the necessary preparations for taking 
over  the  prudential  regulation  of  insurers  and  insurance  groups.  A  Prudential  Authority 
Implementation Working Group (PAIWG) has been established to guide the implementation 
process  of the  organisational  structure  of  the  Prudential  Authority  as  well  as  to  facilitate  a 
smooth  integration  of  supervisory  staff  from  the  FSB  and  the  SARB  into  the  Prudential 
Authority  in  due  course.  The  intention  is  that  the  Prudential  Authority  will  be  able  to 
effectively assume its responsibilities once the Twin Peaks legislation has been passed by 
parliament.  
Conclusion 
4.  
Challenges  abound  for  South  African  policymakers.  An  uncertain  international  economic 
environment, with the possibility of adverse exogenous shocks may very well, be par for the 
course. While there may be little that can be done to insulate the economy from uncertain 
exogenous  shocks,  there  are  important  domestic  impediments  that  warrant  attention. 
Government,  business  and  labour  have  an  important  role  to  play  in  addressing  these 
problems.  These  challenges  become  a  little  easier  to  address  against  the  backdrop  of  a 
stable macro-economic environment characterised by price and financial stability. The SARB 
remains committed to playing a constructive role in this regard within its mandate.  
Thank you.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
