Sabine Lautenschläger: Interview in The Wall Street Journal 
Interview with Ms Sabine Lautenschläger, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central Bank, in The Wall Street Journal, conducted by Mr Brian Blackstone, Mr Christopher 
Lawton and Mr Hans Bentzien on 7 March 2014 and published on 10 March 2014. 
 WSJ: The financial markets interpreted Thursday’s ECB decision to keep policy 
unchanged as suggesting the bar is high to additional stimulus. Is that an accurate 
assessment? 
The correct interpretation is: We’ll act if it is necessary. But there was no strong reason to 
act: Last week we, the Governing Council, found our baseline scenario broadly confirmed. 
We’re receiving some positive signals from incoming data, for example economically with a 
modest recovery trend and financially with improving funding conditions for banks. Moreover, 
inflation expectations are still firmly anchored in the medium term. 
WSJ: But inflation is way below the ECB’s target. 
When  assessing  the  current  inflation  rate  you  always  have  to  take  into  consideration  all 
underlying reasons. There are some global factors to take into account. The drop in energy 
prices has a very strong impact, for example. Structural reforms that are being implemented 
in member states of the euro area influence prices too. The output gap we acknowledge by 
our forward guidance: Interest rates will remain at the present level, or even lower, over a 
longer period of time and well into the recovery. 
WSJ: The U.S. central bank has reacted more aggressively to disinflation risks. Is the 
ECB being complacent? Even by your own forecasts inflation will only be 1.7% by the 
end of 2016. 
I reject it if someone says we are complacent. We will act should we observe rising concerns 
about  medium-term  price  stability.  And  we  were  not  complacent  in  the  past.  We  used 
standard and non-standard measures to implement a very accommodative monetary policy 
stance. We not only cut rates and moved to a fix rate full allotment mode but also introduced 
LTROs  and  changed  the  collateral  requirements,  so  that  a  wider  range  of  assets  became 
acceptable in our portfolio. 
Beyond that, I don’t think you should compare the situation in the euro area with the U.S. or 
Japan because the underlying factors are different. 
WSJ: Mario Draghi mentioned Thursday a catalogue of options including facilitating 
the ABS market, funding for lending and quantitative easing. 
We  really  need  to  work  on  the  ABS  case.  Going  back  to  2010,  the  decision  taken  by  the 
Basel  Committee  to  strengthen  capital  requirements  for  asset  backed  securities  was  the 
correct  one.  But  I  would  like  to  go  back  and  see  if  the  decision  had  unintended 
consequences with respect to the market of transparent, simple, so called plain vanilla ABS. 
We could check whether the capital requirements are justified or too high. 
WSJ: What can the ECB do? 
We can talk to the people in different international regulatory committees such as the Basel 
Committee and the Financial Stability Board and ask them to revisit the issue. I plan to do 
that. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
WSJ: What about using collateral rules from the ECB or going out and buying ABS to 
get that market going? 
One  can  only  address  problems  with  well-defined,  targeted  measures.  Which  measure  is 
appropriate very much depends on the concrete circumstances. Acting just for the sake of 
acting makes no sense. In any case, it would be necessary to ensure that, with respect to our 
risk management framework, we do have the necessary protection. 
WSJ: Analysts say the ABS market can’t get the start it needs in Europe unless the 
ECB buys them. 
I  don’t  think  so.  It  all  depends  on  the  costs:  the  capital  costs  connected  to  simple,  plain 
vanilla  ABS.  Should  the  banks’  costs for  these  instruments  decrease  after  a fair  and  strict 
review of the capital requirements by the international standard setter, the ABS market could 
be revived and lending supported. When the regulatory cost goes down, they will be bought. 
WSJ: Is there more room on interest rates? The refinancing rate is 0.25% and deposit 
rate is zero. 
Yes,  we  have  room  left to  act. The  deposit  rate  could  be  negative,  for  example.  That’s  at 
least a possibility depending on whether the underlying factors we observe would call for this 
sort  of  measure.  Different  instrument  are  available  to  us.  They  include,  for  example,  the 
suspension  of  the  sterilization  of  the  Securities  Market  Program  or  an  LTRO  with  a  more 
targeted approach. You could think about the collateral framework, too. 
WSJ: What about quantitative easing? Is that a legitimate tool? 
It depends on the conditions around it. For example: guarantees, etc. 
WSJ: Your predecessor, Joerg Asmussen, favored the OMT. The institution you 
worked for until a couple months ago, the Bundesbank, vigorously opposed it. What’s 
your position? 
Without  knowing  the  future  concrete  circumstances  underlying  a  decision  on  the  potential 
activation  of  the  OMT,  it  is  difficult  to  answer  this  question.  Overall  I  am  a  little  bit  critical 
about the incentives structure offered by the OMT. I do see some legal questions coming up. 
But to get the concrete answers on those questions you need concrete circumstances: the 
economic  conditions;  what  you  buy;  how  much  you  buy,  mitigating  factors  like  the 
conditionality etc. 
WSJ: How important is it that monetary policy decisions are not influenced by the 
state of the banking system? 
What is important is that you have to make sure that the decisions in the banking supervisory 
arm are not influenced by your monetary policy task and vice versa, and that you can do. But 
you cannot have a Chinese wall in your head. As a central banker, you should be very well 
familiar with what is happening to banks within in the euro area, after all they constitute one 
of  the  biggest  monetary  policy  transmission  channels.  But  rest  assured  we  will  implement 
strict  rules  and  practices  to  ensure  separation  between  both  tasks.  Currently,  we  are 
examining best practices of other central banks around the world, which are also tasked with 
banking  supervision.  The  decision  making  procedure  for  supervisory  decision  is  a  very 
special  one:  The  Supervisory  Board  of  the  SSM  will  draft  the  decision  and  the  Governing 
Council, the ultimate decision making body, adopts it through a non-objection procedure. 
WSJ: Does there need to be a response from the European Union to the Federal 
Reserve’s new rules for international banks? 
We  have  an  agreement  between  the  U.S.  and  Europe  that  there  is  a  certain  kind  of 
reciprocity in accepting the regulatory regime as equal. The next half year should be a period 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
where  we  ask  our  colleagues  from  the  Fed,  how  they  want  to  implement  the  new  foreign 
bank  rules.  And  then  we  need  to  talk  in  the  European  arena  how  we  want  to  react  in 
particular when we are talking about reciprocity. 
WSJ: Isn’t the asset quality review process for euro-zone banks too late? The U.S. 
addressed problems with its banks several years ago. 
No,  it  is  not  too  late.  The  AQR  and  the  stress  test  will  be  tough.  They  will  be  credible, 
stringent  and  consistent.  It’s  the  last  chance  to  clean  up. We  are  a  little  bit  late,  but  then 
again, the situation in the U.S. was a different one. The U.S. banks had many problems in 
the beginning, in 2008, because of the huge amount of toxic assets on their balance sheets. 
The problems some European banks had to face, the perceptions we are fighting against, 
are stemming from 2008 and from the sovereign crisis of 2012. 
WSJ: Do you think a lot of banks will fail as a result of the AQR and the stress test? 
Shall we define fail? Fail means for me not to meet the targets of 5.5% capital in the adverse 
scenario or the 8% on the baseline scenario of the stress test. Well, I think there will be some 
banks, which will need to improve their capital situation. I won’t tell you a number because I 
do not know a number. But what is the objective of the exercise? It is to boost confidence. If 
we do this correctly and confidence in the system improves, then I am pretty sure that these 
banks will not have many problems to improve their capital situation. 
WSJ: There is a perception that the Bundesbank and the ECB are constantly in 
conflict. You have been at the Bundesbank. You are now at the ECB. What’s your 
experience? 
There  are  sometimes  different  opinions,  quite  normal  when  important  topics  with  a  lot  of 
consequences  are  discussed.  And  journalists  do  not  like  to  write  about  decision  taken  in 
agreement.  And  I  do  remember  many  instances  where  Bundesbank  was  supportive  of 
measures taken by the Eurosystem. 
WSJ: You are the only woman on the ECB Governing Council. Why haven’t women 
been more represented on the ECB board and do you see that changing? 
Well, there were 24 men and now there are 23 men and one woman, so it has changed. I 
think central banking in Europe is an area where women have been underrepresented, that 
was certainly the case in the 1970s. And even though today there are more women, it will 
take several years to get them to the top. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
