Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Providing better access to banking in 
Uganda 
Speech by Mr Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile, Governor of the Bank of Uganda, at the official 
opening of Imperial Bank Uganda Limited, Acacia Mall Branch, Kampala, 10 March 2014. 
 The Shareholders of Imperial Bank Uganda Limited 
Members of the Board of Directors;  
Senior Management and staff;  
Distinguished Customers; 
Invited Guests; 
Ladies and Gentlemen. 
I am greatly honoured to be invited as chief guest at this official opening of a new branch of 
Imperial  Bank  at  Acacia  Mall.  Let  me  begin  by  congratulating  the  Directors  and  the 
Management of Imperial Bank for the progress they have made in expanding the bank’s foot 
print in the Ugandan banking market. This is the fifth branch that the bank has opened since 
it  began  its  operations  in  Uganda  three  years  ago.  It  will  provide  better  access  to  premier 
banking services for the bank’s customers in this vibrant business location in the city.  
Uganda currently has 25 commercial banks in operation, compared to only 15 at the end of 
2007.  In  the  last  six  years,  12  new  banks  have  entered  the  market  in  Uganda,  of  which 
Imperial Bank is one of the most recent. It is pertinent to ask what benefits has the almost 
doubling  of  the  number  of  commercial  banks  operating  in  Uganda  delivered  to  bank 
customers in this country. I would like to spend a few minutes addressing this question.  
For many years, during the colonial period and in the three decades after independence, our 
banking  markets  were  dominated  by  a  relatively  small  number  of  banks,  mostly  foreign  or 
publicly owned. Competition was not very vigorous and access to banking services was very 
limited for the majority of the Ugandan population. This began to change in the 1990s, with 
new  privately  owned  banks  entering  the  market.  Since  the  mid  2000s,  new  entry  into  the 
banking  market  has  gathered  pace,  comprising  for  the  most  part  banks  which  are 
subsidiaries of African banks, especially banks from Nigeria and Kenya. Imperial Bank is part 
of this trend; its parent bank is Kenyan.  
The  new  entry  into  our  banking  market  has  spurred  a  dramatic  expansion  of  the  physical 
presence of banks in Uganda. The number of commercial bank branches has expanded from 
194  in  2007  to the  current  level  of  544. The  12  new  entrants to  our  market  in the  last  six 
years contributed 152 of these new branches. The expansion of banking has also brought 
many new customers into the banking system. In 2007 there were 2.2 million bank accounts 
held in commercial banks. This number has now risen to 5.5 million.  
But  perhaps  what  is  more  important than the  increase  in the  number  of  branches  or  bank 
accounts is the fact that many of the new entrants into the banking market, all owned by the 
private sector and predominantly from other African countries, are bringing unique attributes 
to  banking  in  Uganda.  In  particular,  they  are  able  to  draw  upon  expertise  in  serving  the 
specific needs of businesses and households which has been gained in the markets of their 
parent  banks,  particularly  with  regard  to  new  products  or  innovative  ways  of  delivering 
services  to  customers.  For  example,  Imperial  Bank  offers  banking  products  such  as 
structured warehouse financing, supply chain financing and asset financing to a wide range 
of its clients in the Small and Medium Size Enterprise and Mid-Corporate segments of the 
business sector.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Competition  within  the  banking  market  takes  many  different  forms.  If  new  banks  are  to 
expand their market share, they must be able to carve out a viable niche in the market and 
offer  their  customers  financial  products  and  services  which  cannot  be  obtained  from  their 
competitors.  New  entrants  must  grow  in  order  to  survive  in  the  banking  market,  because 
there are important economies of scale to be realised in banking. With the implementation of 
the common market in the East African Community, competition will intensify and efficiency 
and quality of service will be paramount for success in the market place. To survive, banks 
will  have  to  find  ways  of  reducing  their  costs  and  passing  these  reductions  onto  their 
customers and seek to develop innovative quality products for the market.  
With  these  remarks,  I  once  again  thank  the  Shareholders,  the  Board  of  Directors  and 
Management  of  Imperial  Bank  for  demonstrating  their  commitment  to  serve  the  people  of 
Uganda through the expansion of the branch network. This will also contribute to advancing 
the Bank of Uganda’s financial inclusion agenda, which involves spreading access to formal 
financial services to those sections of the population which currently lack access.  
It is now my honor and great pleasure to declare the Imperial Bank’s Acacia Mall Kampala 
Branch officially inaugurated.  
Thank you for listening.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
