  H R Khan: Regulating capital account – some thoughts 
Inaugural address by Mr H R Khan, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
9th Annual  Conference  of  the  Foreign  Exchange  Dealers  Association  of  India  (FEDAI), 
Cape Town, 12 April 2014. 
 Contributions of Shri H S Mohanty & Shri Surajit Bose of Reserve Bank of India are gratefully acknowledged by 
the speaker. 
1.  
It gives me great pleasure to be with you in this beautiful city of Cape Town for the 
9th Annual Conference of the Foreign Exchange Dealers Association of India (FEDAI). Cape 
Town is a celebrated tourist destination, particularly at this time of the year. The place and 
time are ideal for mixing business with pleasure. For me, speaking to you, the pleasure is 
mixed  with  some  trepidation  because  we  are  living  in  times  when  there  is  uncertainty  all 
round not only in the unfolding of events but also in the way we think about them. You may 
be  aware  that  close  to  this  place is  a  great  tourist  attraction  which  is  called  “The Cape  of 
Good Hope” for as many as 300 years because it provided a sea–route to India and the East 
Indies. But, only till opening of the Suez Canal in 1869 when the complexion of East-West 
sea  faring  changed.  There  are  thus  many  events  in  the  course  of  human  history  which 
change dramatically our approach to issues and problems. The events of the past few years 
–  both  in  the  domestic  as  well  as  in  the  global  arena  –  have  made  us  think  afresh  about 
many of our approaches to public policy relating to regulation. I intend to discuss some of the 
current issues relating to our approach to capital account management as it has evolved over 
time and I beg your indulgence if some questions come up to which answers are not yet as 
clear as we would wish them to be. 
2.  
The  FEDAI,  set  up  in  1958  as  a  section  25  company,  has  been  a  multi-faceted 
organization, playing an important role in each of its functional domain. It has had immense 
contribution  in  development  of  the  interbank  forex  market,  promoting  uniform  bank-client 
business  practices,  training  bank  personnel  working  in  foreign  exchange  desks,  and  most 
importantly, acting as an interface between the Reserve Bank and the Authorised Dealers. 
During  the  last  56  years  of  its  existence  it  has  seen,  rather  played  a  major  role  in,  the 
transition  from  a  fixed  exchange  rate  regime  to  almost  floating  exchange  rate  one;  from  a 
non-existent  or  at  best  a  shallow  interbank  forex  market  to  one  whose  activity  not 
infrequently causes the regulator to sit up and take notice, and sometimes act; and from an 
era  when  every  non-trade  forex  transaction  with  a  client  required  a  “Exchange  Control 
Permit” to a time when the Authorised Dealers (ADs) have  more power and freedom than 
they are perhaps willing to exercise. 
Capital controls: old paradigms & new realities 
3.  
The  evolution  of  the  foreign  exchange  market  in  India  has  been  shaped  by  the 
exchange  rate  regime  and  the  changing  degrees  of  control.  With  full  convertibility  on  the 
current  account  since  1994  and  enactment  of  Foreign  Exchange  Management  Act,  1999 
(FEMA), controls on the capital account have been the principal theme of foreign exchange 
management  during  the  last  two  decades.  The  motivation  for  imposing  controls  and 
restraining the freedom of the residents to transact with non-residents stems from one major 
concern:  addressing  the  structural  imbalances  in  the  balance  of  payments.  But  the 
philosophy and the form of controls have evolved over time. Let me give an example. India 
has had two major devaluations following severe balance of payment crisis: in 1966 and in 
1991. Post 1966 devaluation, we had moved in an inward looking direction with the help of a 
very stringent exchange control regime. Post 1991 devaluation, however, we moved in the 
exactly opposite direction: towards more openness on current and capital account and in due 
course, a legislation with a different objective and a different orientation. This approach has 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  in a sense stood us in good stead. Counterintuitive as it may seem, is it then that greater 
external openness, particularly capital account openness, provides a more stable solution to 
balance of payments problems? As Robert Aumann says, though in a different context, in his 
Nobel  Prize  Lecture:  “You  want  to  prevent  war.  To  do  that,  obviously  you  should  disarm, 
lower the level of armaments. Right? No, wrong. You might want to do the exact opposite.” 
Let me give another instance of how the thinking changes. In the 1990’s it was a widely held 
normative belief, though not uncontested, that capital controls ought to be avoided and free 
flow  of  capital  promoted.  In  the  aftermath  of  the  Asian  crisis  of  the  late  1990’s,  the 
substantive argument did not undergo any change, but was only tempered to the extent that 
removal of capital controls has to keep pace with strengthening of domestic financial sector. 
Post  the  global  financial  crisis, capital  controls have  come  to  be  seen as  an  active  tool  of 
macro-prudential policy albeit in difficult situations. 
4.  
Why have any controls on capital account? The history of capital account openness 
has  been  chequered.  It  may  be  recalled  that  capital  controls  were  a  part  of  international 
milieu  throughout  the  Bretton  Woods  era  and  it  was  only  in  the  1970’s  that  the  advanced 
economies  started  dismantling  them.  This  was  followed  by  several  emerging  economies, 
particularly  in  Latin  America  and  East  Asia.  The  argument  in  favour  of  opening  up  of  the 
capital account was mainly based on “allocative efficiency”: the capital-scarce but projects-
rich developing countries can surely improve their welfare and better their lot with the help of 
capital inflows. The crisis in several Latin American countries and the East Asian countries in 
the late 1990’s pointed out the destabilizing effect of capital account openness and raised 
many question about its desirability. Subsequent literature has shown, on the one hand, that 
capital  account  openness  by  itself  may  not  induce  growth  in  absence  of  appropriate 
institutions and on the other, capital controls can indeed be used as a macro-prudential tool 
to restore or promote stability. In the Indian context, we have had two committees – at a gap 
of  about  a  decade  –  look  into  the  issues  relating  to  a  possible  roadmap  for  fuller  capital 
account convertibility.1 The macroeconomic preconditions emphasized by these Committees, 
viz.,  sustained,  low  inflation  and  strong  fiscal  position  have  not  yet  materialized.  As 
mentioned earlier, the issue of free capital flows versus capital controls have evoked a wide 
range  of  response  over  time  and  the  academic  literature  does  not  provide  clear  and 
consensus view in the matter except some stylized themes, such as, need for capital inflows 
for  augmenting  domestic  investment,  possible destabilizing  impacts  of free  capital/financial 
flows,  improvement  in  domestic  conditions  to  enable  better  utilization  of  capital  flows  and 
lessen the possibility of instability, need for capital controls in extreme situations, and need 
for  coordinated  capital  flows  management  policy  across  nations.  Considering  our  state  of 
affairs  and  realizing  that  there  is  no  certainty  on  the  consequence  of  full  CAC,  we  have 
committed  to  progressive  opening  up  of  the  capital  account  in  a  calibrated  manner  for 
several reasons including greater integration with the global economy, need to finance the 
persistent  current  account  deficit,  and  above  all  to  mobilize  resources  for  the  investment 
needs  of  a  growing  economy,  particularly  the  infrastructure  sector.  At  the  same  time,  the 
vulnerabilities  of  an  open  emerging  economy  and  the  problems  of  extreme  volatility  in  the 
exchange rate informs and guides our approach. 
Stability in exchange rates: means & mechanics 
5.  
The proximate problem that a central bank faces is maintaining a reasonably stable 
exchange rate, a variable that captures not only the external sector imbalances but also the 
future  expectations  of  the  relevant  fundamentals.  Empirical  studies  show  that,  in  the  short 
run, exchange rates behave as asset prices and follow a “random walk”. Even so, any sharp 
                                                 
1   Unfortunately,  both  these  Committees’  report  preceded  financial  crises,  the  East-Asian  and  the  Global 
Financial Crisis, and hence their recommendations were not pursued as seriously as they would have been 
otherwise. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  depreciation in the exchange rate is likely to see large scale capital exodus by the short-term 
investors before the value of their investment is further eroded. At the same time, through the 
instrument  of  derivatives,  it  is  possible  for  exporters,  importers  and  others  to  adjust  their 
inter-temporal  demand  for  foreign  currency:  to  either  postpone  the  present  demand  to  a 
future time or advance the future demand to the present time. Like any other asset price, a 
sharply falling exchange rate has the tendency to gather quick momentum. The problem of 
an  appreciating  currency  in  the  face  of  surging  capital  inflows  poses  a  separate  set  of 
problems, principal amongst which is loss of export competitiveness. 
6.  
The question then is that whether such situations should invite regulatory response? 
An influential line of thought in this context is to solve the problem of the impossible trinity by 
leaving  the  exchange  rate  out  of  reckoning:  letting  the  exchange  rate  find  its  own  level 
depending  on  the  market  process.  Though  the  merit  in  this  position  cannot  be  logically 
denied, it may not be an optimal solution in real life because though exchange rate behaves 
as an asset price, it is an important macroeconomic variable that influences optimal decision 
making of a large number of economic agents in an economy progressively integrating with 
the rest of the world. Secondly, sharp movements in the currency capture as well as breed 
expectations for future, often in a self-fulfilling spiral, and perhaps need to be addressed in 
the same spirit as sharp and persistent rise in the general price level needs to be addressed 
lest it entrenches inflationary expectations. 
7.  
The most obvious and immediate tool for dealing with heightened volatility or sharp 
movement either way is the central bank’s intervention operations. For instance, in the face 
of sharp appreciation, the intervention is directed at mopping up the excess supply of foreign 
currency  in  order  to  preserve  export  competitiveness.  Such  operations  obviously  do  have 
monetary  implications  and  steps  to  neutralize  these  involve  a  cost.  On  the  other  hand, 
intervention  in  the  face  of  sharp  depreciation  is  a  difficult  choice  for  several  reasons, 
including loss of reserves, particularly in a country like India where the external liabilities far 
exceed the official reserves. 
8.  
As  an  aside,  let  me  add  that  the  importance  of  a  sufficiently  large  kitty  of  official 
reserves to deal with sudden flow reversals has been underscored time and again. In fact, 
the large reserves that many emerging market economies have built up post Asian-crisis is 
often  viewed  as  a  bulwark  against  contagion  effects  of  global  crises  and  risk  aversion. 
Therefore,  accumulation  of  reserves  as  an  objective  by  itself  rather  than  a  byproduct  of 
market actions of the central bank to stabilize the exchange rate is a theme that cannot be 
dismissed out of hand, more so when there is no assured and easy access to any collective 
insurance for the EMEs like India. 
9.  
Coming  back  to  our  discussion,  given  the  problems  with  sustained  or  aggressive 
intervention in the face of sharp movements in exchange rate– leaving aside its optimality or 
desirability  –  what  tools  do  we  have  to  deal  with  it?  Mainly  two:  modulate  capital  controls 
appropriately  and  restrain  the  freedom  of  market  participants  to  carry  out  derivative 
transactions which can be used to speculate on the currency and camouflage capital flows. 
During the periodic bouts of volatility in the Rupee since late-2011, we have used a mix both 
tools, to which I now turn. You will recall that the Rupee had exhibited relative stability after 
the  post-Lehman  volatility  of  2009  and  traded  in  a  narrow  band  during  most  of  2010  and 
2011.  The  volatility  started  in  the  second  half  of  2011  on  the  wake  of  US  downgrade  and 
related problems. Since then we have had three different spates of volatility: end-July 2011 
to mid-December 2011 (about 18% depreciation of INR against USD), end-February 2012 to 
end-June 2012 (about 12%) and end-April to end-August 2013 (about 19%).2 Most emerging 
market currencies also fell in value during the period and this elicited varying response from 
                                                 
2   Source: Bloomberg. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  the  respective  authorities  which  included  capital  controls  on  the  one  hand  and  taking 
measures to attract relatively longer term flows on the other. 
Capital inflows & outflows: hierarchy of choices 
10.  
Let  me  now  make  some  comments  on  capital  controls.  Our  framework  of  capital 
account management, has been more inclined towards capital inflows than capital outflows. 
In  a,  capital  scarce  growing  economy  with  large  investment  needs,  it  has  been  our  long-
standing  policy  to  encourage  capital  inflows  to  augment  domestic  savings  with  a  bias 
towards flows that are stable, long term and those that are least prone to sudden stoppages 
and reversals. Here I would like to highlight our approach to some of the critical elements of 
capital flows. 
Foreign Direct Investments 
11.  
Foreign Direct Investment (FDI), characterized by lasting interest and some degree 
of management control by the investor, is positioned high in the hierarchy of capital inflows 
not  only  because  of  it  is  resource  augmenting  but  also  because  it  usually  brings  in  better 
technology and more efficient management and business practices. The framework for FDI, 
which gets legal sanctity under the regulations notified by the Reserve Bank under FEMA, is 
set by the Government of India in consultation with the Reserve Bank of India, and the only 
restriction on FDI pertains to sectoral investment limits – the degree of control that can be 
ceded to a non-resident- motivated by strategic or socio-economic considerations. The rest 
of the regulatory framework is a matter of procedural detail, and we have been continuously 
trying to rationalize and streamline the regime to make it as investor friendly as possible. To 
illustrate the point, one can cite some of our recent measures, such as, doing away with the 
regulatory prescription of pricing methodology, introduction of optionality in inward FDI, etc. 
Foreign Portfolio Investors 
12.  
There is a tendency to see inflows on account of foreign portfolio investment as “hot 
money” which can cause sudden stoppages or reversals. Over two decades of experience as 
well as recent studies show that this fear is perhaps exaggerated. Portfolio investment flows 
do  exhibit  some  volatility  and  surge  either  way,  but  at  an  aggregate  level  there  is  a  fair 
degree  of  stability.  Since  its  introduction  in  1992,  the  regulatory  regime  for  portfolio 
investment  has  evolved  over  time.  You  are  all  aware  of  the  recent  simplifications  and 
liberalizations brought about in the scheme in sync with regulations notified by the Securities 
and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) wherein the FIIs and QFIs have  been merged into a 
single class of investors known as Foreign Portfolio Investors (FPI) and simplified the KYC 
verification  norms  have  been  prescribed  for  opening  of  bank  accounts  for  the  portfolio 
investors.  Foreign  portfolio  investors  were  granted  access  to  the  Government  securities 
segment of the domestic debt market in 1999. Over the years the scope of their investment 
has been expanded to include corporate debt and the limits for investments in Government 
securities and corporate bonds have also been progressively increased. As we have seen, 
our  cautious  approach  is  based  on  perception  of  potential  risk  of  sudden  stops  &  swift 
reversals  during  periods  of  uncertainty.  The  investor  appetite  in  this  segment  has  been 
biased towards the securities of short term maturity: treasury bills, commercial papers, and 
bonds maturing in less than a year. Both with  a view to developing the market as well as 
encouraging long term flows, the current policy priority is to encourage investment in bonds 
of  relatively  longer  duration.  Accordingly,  we  had  created,  and  subsequently  expanded,  a 
separate window for long-term foreign investors. We have recently moved towards restricting 
incremental  access  to  treasury  bills  and  government  securities  with  less  than  one  year 
residual  maturity  segments  to  the  foreign  portfolio  investors.  The  less  than  expected 
response of the foreign investors to the debt instruments even in relation to relatively small 
limits available to them has presumably also to do with the lack of liquidity in this segment. 
This  is  an  important  goal  for  us  and  several  steps  have  been  taken  and  are  being 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  contemplated to deal with this problem, particularly in the light of the recommendation of the 
Working  Group  on  Enhancing  Liquidity  in  the  Government  Securities  and  Interest  Rate 
Derivatives Markets (Chairman: Shri. R. Gandhi). 
(ECBs)  are  bi-partite 
External Commercial Borrowings 
In contrast with foreign investment in rupee-denominated marketable domestic debt 
13.  
securities,  External  Commercial  Borrowings 
loan  contracts 
denominated in foreign currency and initiated by the domestic borrowers. The approach here 
has  been  that  since  the  external  liability  of  the economy  should  not  be  allowed  to expand 
excessively, the ECBs need to be allocated, as it were, to their most productive use. This 
objective  is  sought  to  be  achieved  through  a  regulatory  regime  comprising  restrictions  in 
regard  to  quantum  of  loan,  end  use,  tenor,  lender  credentials,  and  cost  of  borrowing.  The 
last, the ceiling on cost of borrowing, may seem to be superfluous in view of the restriction on 
the quantum of borrowing. But it has to be appreciated that there is an automatic route for 
ECB, and it is necessary to address the adverse selection problem so that ECBs do not flow 
into risky projects. In recent years, keeping in view the need for capital inflows as well as the 
investment  needs, particularly for those in the infrastructure sector and those having forex 
earning capabilities to service ECBs, we have relaxed the regulatory framework for ECB in 
several respects. 
14.  
In this context, let us examine the motivation for firms resorting to ECB. If a firm has 
a foreign currency revenue stream it is optimal for it to borrow in foreign currency as well so 
that its balance sheet does not carry any currency risk. But if its revenue is all in Rupees, it 
ought  to  fully  hedge  its  foreign  currency  liability  and  a  fully  hedged  ECB  should  offer  no 
arbitrage  in  ideal  market  conditions.  Unhedged  foreign  currency  liability  poses  a  currency 
risk,  potentially  explosive  in  volatile  times,  and  also  a  risk  to  its  other  stake-holders, 
particularly the domestic lenders. Individual corporate vulnerability could easily aggregate to 
systemic stability risks. The issue then is: do the domestic lenders assess this risk price it 
appropriately while granting various facilities to the firms concerned? We are not sure. Hence 
the  regulatory  prescription  for  incremental  provisioning  and  capital  requirements  has  been 
introduced for bank exposures to firms with unhedged foreign currency liability. 
Non-Resident Deposits 
15.  
Incentivised deposit accounts for diaspora Indians was one of the earliest measures 
to strengthen capital inflows. It has served us well when the other forms of capital flows were 
either non-existent or at best, weak. Though the importance of NRI deposits has relatively 
declined over time, we still have a fairly friendly set of schemes to encourage the diaspora to 
use  the  Indian  banking  system  for  their  banking  as  well  as  savings  needs.  In  fact,  in  the 
recent periods of currency volatility, more incentives were offered to such NRI depositors to 
attract long-term flows. 
Rupee bonds abroad 
16.  
So far, because of non-convertibility of the Rupee on the capital account, we had 
been  averse  to  the  idea  of  Rupee-denominated  bonds  in  overseas  markets.  Such  an 
instrument, to replicate a Rupee-pay-off, will need an onshore Indian asset and further, the 
investor will require access to the onshore derivative market to hedge her currency risk. Both 
of  these  were  restricted.  Approached  by  the  International  Finance  Corporation  (IFC),  and 
recognizing that there are keen offshore investors with Indian interest which can be tapped, 
we have permitted Rupee-linked bond to be floated abroad for US$ one billion and proceeds 
invested in Indian assets. This is a pilot project and the experience, including market impact, 
will guide us in further expanding such issuances. In fact, some other multilateral institutions 
are also now evaluating the option of similar bond issuances. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  Regulations on capital outflows 
17.  
In a capital scarce economy like ours, it is perhaps logical that there should be close 
monitoring of out-bound investments. The case for overseas direct investment (ODI) rests on 
permitting Indian entrepreneurs to exploit avenues for profitable investment abroad. With this 
in view, we have progressively liberalized the regulatory regime for ODI. But as in case of 
any investment, ODI must also yield returns over time. Notwithstanding not very satisfactory 
experience  so  far  in  respect  of  inflow  of  income  from  our  investments  abroad,  an  investor 
friendly regulatory regime continues in place. Recent changes in the ODI regulations no way 
seeks  to  dent  globalization  efforts  of  Indian  investors  but  only  that  under  extraordinary 
circumstances  investments  beyond  a  threshold,  other  than  financing  by  ECBs,  have  been 
moved  to  the  approval  route.  Going  forward,  as  stability  in  forex  markets  becomes  well 
established, we shall be unwinding them partially or fully. The case for portfolio investment 
by individuals rests on affording an opportunity to Indian residents to diversify their portfolio. 
We have been progressively liberalizing the facility till the last bout of Rupee volatility when 
we  had  to  take  steps  to  moderate  it.  It  may  be  recalled  that  it  was  raised  substantially  to 
US$ 200,000  per  annum  when  we  had  massive  inflows.  Such  limit  under  the  Liberalised 
Remittance  Scheme  (LRS),  used  widely  for  current  account  transactions  and  also  some 
capital  account  transactions,  including  acquisition  of  property  abroad,  was  brought  down 
when there were apprehensions of large scale transfers in the face of currency volatility. It 
must be noted that as a measure of further liberalization setting up of companies abroad by 
resident individuals now has been permitted under the revised LRS. 
18.  
This  brings  me  to  an  important  issue  in  foreign  exchange  regulation,  or  any 
regulation for that matter. Any regulatory framework first and foremost has to be predictable 
and time-consistent. Investment and business is a matter of trust and investors and firms can 
plan  and  execute  their  strategies  only  if  they  believe  that  the  regulatory  regime  will  not 
change in the midway. Since the external factors in the today’s world change rapidly, there 
will be great temptation to adjust the regulatory framework as well. Let me give an example. 
During 2007–08, we faced an unprecedented surge in capital inflows. Sharp appreciation of 
the  Rupee,  Reserve  Bank’s  market  operations,  consequent  liquidity  impact  and  the  fiscal 
cost  of  sterilization  are  all  in  recent  memory.  Several  measures  were  taken  in  this  milieu, 
such as, increase in the limits for LRS, allowing foreign companies to raise capital in India 
through Indian Depository Receipt (IDR), introduction of currency futures, etc. The situation 
changed rapidly post onset of the Global Financial Crisis (GFC), and, after some lull during 
2010–11,  again  post  US  downgrade,  EU  crisis,  etc.  Do  we  unwind  all  the  decisions  and 
measure  taken  during  times  of  plenty?  This,  in  a  way,  justifies  the  approach  of  cautious 
gradualism that we have been adopting so far. 
Regulating derivative contracts: onshore & offshore 
Now  I  come  to  the  other  tool  I  mentioned  about  for  controlling  Rupee  volatility: 
19.  
restriction  on  derivatives.  Our  view  of  derivatives  has  been  to  treat  them  as  a  tool  of  risk 
management and as an instrument of hedging foreign exchange risk. This is reflected in the 
regulatory  regime  for  forex  derivatives  in  the  OTC  market  which  has  the  following  two 
distinguishing characteristics. First, the ability of a firm or an individual to execute a derivative 
contract  is  based  on  an  underlying  exposure  embodying  risk.  Second,  these  contracts,  at 
least those involving Rupee, are predominantly to be executed by physical delivery. Over the 
years,  to  enable  the  firms  to  manage  their  foreign  exchange  risk  flexibly  and  efficiently, 
several  relaxations  have  been  introduced,  such  as,  carrying  out  derivative  transactions  on 
the  basis  of  past  performance  rather  than  on  the  basis  of  individual  underlying  contracts, 
cancelling  derivative  contracts  even  as  the  underlying  exposure  exists  (and  getting  the 
benefit  or  bearing  the  loss  thereof)  with  scope  to  rebook  the  contract  against  the  same 
exposure, etc. These relaxations can potentially be used to take a view on the Rupee when 
expectation  of  sharp  depreciation  (or  appreciation),  rightly  or  wrongly,  is  strong.  This 
aggravates the market conditions. We have often resorted to curtailing the freedom of market 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  participants  in  respect  of  booking  derivative  transactions  both  to  curb  panic  as  well  as  to 
stem speculative view taking on the Rupee. 
Non-Deliverable Forward markets 
20.  
The issue of forex derivatives has become complex because of two reasons. First, 
there has come to exists a large offshore market in Rupee. Rupee futures are now traded in 
some  of  the  international  exchanges.  There  is  a  sizeable  Non-Deliverable  Forward  (NDF) 
market  in  Rupee  in  several  international  financial  centers.  This  market  is  opaque  and  the 
exact  size  or  details  of  participants  is  not  known.  Our  interaction  with  market  participants 
tend to indicate that the figures published by the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) in 
the  last  two  triennial  surveys  may  have  been  over-estimated,  but  surely  they  are  large 
enough  to  impact  the  domestic  market,  particularly  during  periods  of  heightened  volatility. 
Notwithstanding  absence  of  any  clear  link  between  the  onshore  and  offshore  markets,  it 
cannot be ruled out that some arbitrage may be happening. 
21.  
What is the reason for an NDF market to exist? The increasing global linkage of the 
Indian markets on the trade, capital and financial account on the one hand and inadequate or 
cumbersome access of international agents with Rupee exposure to the onshore domestic 
market  on  the  other  seems  to  be  the  obvious  answer.  There  are  many  investors  –  mostly 
portfolio investors – who hold Rupee assets but are either not allowed to hedge their risk in 
the  onshore  market,  or  if  allowed,  the  regime,  with  restrictions  on  rebooking  of  cancelled 
contracts, may not suit their hedging strategy. There may also be a large home country bias 
inasmuch  as  they  would  prefer  an  entity  in  their  place  or  jurisdiction  of  residence  as 
counterparty rather than an AD in an alien place. The same set of logic holds also for many 
multinational firms in India who use transfer pricing and/or have centralized treasury. There is 
also the question of economic/potential exposures in a rapidly globalizing world, where one 
without  explicit  foreign  exchange  exposure,  could  still  be  affected  by  exchange  rate 
movements. Be that as it may, NDF has now warranted closer attention of the regulators. 
Exchange Traded Derivatives 
22.  
The second issue relates to the on-shore Exchange Traded Derivative (ETD) market 
introduced  in  2008  when  the  external  situation  was  quite  different.  The  objective  was  to 
afford  real  sector  agents  –  particularly  the  small  entities  –  an  easy,  safe,  transparent  and 
cost-effective instrument to hedge their currency risk. This market is very different from the 
OTC  segment  in  respect  of  the  two  characteristics  we  mentioned  earlier:  (a)  there  is  no 
requirement of underlying exposure for accessing this market and as such, entry as well as 
exit  is  unrestricted  and  (b)  contracts  are  cash  settled.  In  other  words,  it  may  be  used  for 
hedging, but it is also a perfect instrument for speculation for it makes trading in exchange 
rate just like trading in any other financial asset. The question that arises is: how can the two 
markets  –  the  OTC  with  the  regulatory  restrictions  and  the  ETD  without  –  coexist?  More 
importantly, will the restrictive measures in the OTC market to control rupee volatility not be 
rendered  completely  ineffective  if  market  participants  are  free  to  migrate  to  the  ETD 
segment?  With  this  perspective,  at  the  height  of  Rupee  volatility,  we,  and,  at  our  request 
SEBI, were constrained to take several measures in respect of the ETD segment including 
putting  a  ceiling  on individual  positions/open  interest,  restricting  arbitrage  between  the  two 
markets through banks and increasing the margin requirements. Here I would like to add that 
with return of stability in the exchange rate, we have already unwound some of the restrictive 
measures in the OTC/ETD market and, in fact, gone further for hedging in the OTC markets 
(e.g.  permitting  hedging  up  to  US$  250,000  without  any  documentation  requirements). 
Similarly  some  more  relaxations  in  the  ETD  segment,  including  permitting  participation  of 
foreign investors are under consideration. 
23.  
The  emergence  and  growth  of  NDF  market  as  well  as  its  possible  impact  on  the 
domestic market poses two important questions. Should attempts not be made to bring the 
offshore market in Rupee onshore and thereby add depth to our markets and also possibly, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
  income  and  employment?  Secondly,  since  NDF  market  is  often  seen  to  be  affecting  the 
domestic  markets,  implying  thereby  the  possibility  of  arbitrage,  should  domestic  banks  be 
allowed  to  participate  in  this  market?  Let  me  add  here  that  in  some  countries,  the  central 
banks are reported to have intervened in the NDF market of their respective currencies to 
curb the volatility at its root. 
24.  
If the answer to both questions is positive, it requires some fundamental rethinking 
on the regulatory framework for foreign exchange derivatives. Already, as mentioned above, 
we  are  committed  to  allowing  foreign  investors  access  to  the  ETD  segment  with  minimal 
restrictions. But will this access be inviting enough to the investors if the futures prices are 
not  tightly  linked  with  the  spot  prices?  But  this  is  possible  only  by  permitting  frictionless 
arbitrage  between  the  two  markets.  Secondly,  if  we  are  to  allow  access  to  the  offshore 
markets to domestic entities, it may not serve any purpose if arbitrage between the offshore 
and onshore markets is blocked. If we are to pursue it to its logical end, this leads us to a 
situation  where  there  is  no  restriction  on  forex  derivative  transactions  in  domestic  markets 
and across the borders – either on eligibility, entry and exit of participants or on settlement. 
25.  
Here, what tempers our thinking is the principle I mentioned earlier: the imperative of 
regulatory consistency and irreversibility over time. Do we have the appetite and wherewithal 
to  tide  over  any  possible  future  spate  of  volatility  without  undoing  any  relaxations  we 
contemplate bringing about? This consideration argues in favour of moderation, gradualism 
and  pacing  our  steps.  The  challenge  is  to  hit  an  optimal  middle  path  between  throwing 
caution to the wind and allowing excessive caution to prevent any forward movement. 
Concluding thoughts 
26.  
Having outlined some of our policy dilemmas in respect of capital controls and forex 
market development and regulations, let me now in conclusion turn to the role FEDAI and its 
member  foreign  exchange  dealers  can  play  in  appreciating  the  challenges  and  actively 
engaging with the regulators. Between the world where they just had to execute a transaction 
according to an RBI permit and the world where a foreign exchange transaction will be like 
any other inland rupee transaction except the currency risk falls a large territory where the 
foreign  exchange  dealers  will  have  to  facilitate  external  trade  and  investment  related 
transactions keeping in view the genuine needs of the real sector without losing sight of the 
prudential requirements. Authorised Dealers will have to constructively engage themselves in 
appreciation of the evolving regulatory dispensation and, more importantly, provide a friendly, 
efficient and transparent interface with the end-users. Regulatory framework, of course, has 
to evolve, amongst others, keeping pace with the way business is done and it is important for 
Authorized  Dealers  to  be  conversant  with  the  purpose  and  principle  behind  change  in 
regulatory  regime  not  only  for  effective  implementation  but  also  for  providing  a  conducive 
atmosphere for doing business. We find many violations of regulations occur not intentionally 
but  due  to  ignorance  or  lack  of  appreciation.  There  is  surely  enough  scope  for  bringing  in 
improvement in this regard. The well thought out sessions planned for this conference, in a 
sense, will provide many insights to our understanding of some of the current issues relating 
to  our  financial  markets.  Lastly,  I  wish  to  emphasize  that  there  is  a  need  for  establishing 
highest standard of code and ethics of doing business and guarding against temptations of 
perverse incentives, particularly in the financial sector. The financial markets and institutions 
survive and thrive on trust and it must be our constant endeavor to continue to deserve that 
trust. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
