H R Khan: Regulation of Indian debt & derivatives markets – some 
perspectives on post-crisis paradigm 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  H  R  Khan,  Deputy  Governor  of the  Reserve  Bank  of India,  at  the 
15th FIMMDA-PDAI Annual Conference, Jaipur, 8 March 2014. 
 The  speaker  acknowledges  the  contribution  of  Shri  N.R.V.V.M.K  Rajendra  Kumar,  Shri  Sudarsana  Sahoo  and 
Shri Surajit Bose of the Reserve Bank of India. 
1.  Shri.  N.  S.  Venkatesh,  Chairman,  Fixed  Income  Money  Market  Derivatives  Association 
(FIMMDA),  Shri  B.  Prasanna,  Chairman,  Primary  Dealers  Association  of  India  (PDAI),  Sri. 
C.E.S.  Azariah,  outgoing  Chief  Executive  Officer  and  Shri  Prasad,  incoming  CEO  of  the 
FIMMDA, distinguished speakers and panellists and delegates to the conference. It gives me 
immense pleasure to be amidst you all for the 15th annual meeting of the FIMMDA and the 
PDAI in this beautiful, historic city of Jaipur. After holding meeting overseas for some years, 
holding  the  meeting  here  is  like  home  coming.  Jaipur  with  its  majestic  forts  and  palaces, 
archaeological  monuments  and  beautiful  gardens  provides  appropriate  ambience  for  the 
bond and derivatives dealers to reflect on the very topical subject of the conference:  Risk, 
Regulation & Opportunities in Globalised Markets. I would like to compliment the organizers 
for very thoughtfully choosing the session themes covering dynamics of Impossible Trinity in 
the context of the EMEs, liquidity risk and capital requirements under the Basel framework, 
regulations  relating  to  Financial  Market  Infrastructures  (FMIs)  and  current  issues  and 
challenges  in  the  financial  market  development  and  the  eminent  panellists.  By  way  of 
background to some of the issues that would be discussed in these sessions, I would like to 
share some perspectives on regulations of Indian debt and derivatives markets in the recent 
times in the context of post-crisis paradigm. 
I.  
Why do we need regulation? 
Importance of regulation for markets 
I.I  
2.  Wayne  Byres,  Secretary  General,  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (BCBS) 
described  financial  market  participants  as  “glass  half  full”  people,  and  regulators  as  their 
“glass half empty” counterparts. The reason for such description is that market participants 
will first see opportunity for reward whereas regulators will first see exposure to risk. The two 
perspectives  are  different  sides  of  the  same  coin  and  are  essential  for  development  of 
financial markets and, by extension, development of the real economy. The operation of an 
efficient  financial  sector  is  dependent  on  efficient  financial  regulation.  The  recent  financial 
crisis has amply demonstrated the need for effective regulation. 
3. The financial crisis has been triggered by actions of financial firms motivated by incentives 
which  were misaligned with the requirements of financial stability. The regulators were not 
able to accurately gauge the impact of the actions of financial firms, whether they are sub-
prime lenders or dealers in complex derivatives, leading to a crisis of humongous magnitude. 
The “free markets paradigm”, which emphasized the efficiency and self-correcting nature of 
markets,  has  been  found  inadequate.  The  build-up  of  systemic  vulnerabilities  arising  from 
excess  liquidity,  leverage,  risk-taking  and  interconnectedness  across  the  financial  system 
was  not  detected  by  regulators.  The  crisis  has  in  a  sense  changed  the  global  regulatory 
landscape dramatically. 
4. Besides taking monetary and fiscal steps intended to restore market confidence and help 
economic  recovery  from  the  crisis,  the  policy  makers  have  also  shown  determination  to 
introduce  new  financial  regulations  in  an  attempt  to  mitigate  the  impact  of  such  crisis  in 
future.  The  regulatory  reform  is  therefore  focused  on  strengthening  micro-prudential  and 
market-conduct regulation supplemented with focus on build-up of systemic risks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
that  promote  prudent 
5.  As  the  crisis  spread  to  the  developed  countries,  interconnectedness  of  global  finance 
highlighted need for coordination of regulation at the global level, prompting G-20 countries 
to launch a coordinated and concerted regulatory reform initiative. G-20 also emphasized on 
effective  enforcement  of  regulation  which  should  be  coordinated  internationally  so  that 
national authorities and international standard setters work together and assist each other in 
strengthening  financial  regulatory  and  oversight  frameworks.  G-20  has  recognised  that 
regulatory reform requires enhancements to a range of supporting policies and infrastructure, 
including  compensation  practices 
the  greater 
standardization  of  derivatives  contracts  and  the  use  of  risk-proofed  central  counterparties 
(CCPs);  improved  accounting  standards  that  better  recognize  loan-loss  provisions  and 
dampen  adverse  dynamics  associated  with  fair-value  accounting.  At  the  global  level,  strict 
new rules on capital, liquidity and leverage have been designed so as to ensure that there 
are sizable buffers available in the system as cushion against event of failure and the risks 
assumed by the financial firms are limited. 
6. In the advanced economies, comprehensive regulatory reforms have been ushered in key 
areas through legislation (e.g. passage of Dodd-Frank Act in US) and comprehensive review 
(e.g. Vickers review of banking system in United Kingdom). The global scale of crisis and the 
complex  financial  system  with  entities  straddling  across  national  jurisdictions  necessitated 
coordinated  regulatory  action  through  international  agencies,  and  the  G20  has  therefore 
taken an enhanced role in shaping international financial regulatory arrangements. 
taking; 
risk 
Global Initiatives on regulation 
I.II  
7. The new regulatory initiatives are intended to be both more intrusive in their impact on the 
financial sector than the “light touch” approach to regulation and supervision that prevailed – 
particularly in some jurisdictions – before the crisis, and they are also designed to be much 
broader in scope. They cover not only capital and liquidity required by financial institutions 
(e.g.  Basel  III),  but  also  market  activities,  financial  instruments,  infrastructure,  and 
benchmarks [e.g. Markets in Financial Instruments Directive (MiFID-II), Markets in Financial 
Instruments  Regulation  (MiFIR),  European  Market 
Infrastructure  Regulation  (EMIR), 
European  Commission’s  proposed  Regulation  on  indices  used  as  benchmarks  in  financial 
instruments and financial contracts]. The cost to the industry for complying with these new 
regulations  is  certain  to  be  high,  but  it  is  outweighed  by  the  potential  benefit  of  a  stable 
financial system. 
Financial market regulation – the Indian perspective 
I.III  
8. Reserve Bank of India is the regulator of Money, G-Sec and OTC credit, foreign exchange 
and  interest  rate  derivatives  including  Repo.  In  pursuit  of  the  regulatory  mandate,  the 
Reserve  Bank  has  been  endeavouring  to  develop  broad  and  deep  markets.  Deeper  and 
broader financial markets serve important public policy objectives in terms of improving the 
efficiency of capital allocation and absorbing the risks entailed in financing growth. As sound 
regulation  is  an  essential  institutional  factor  to ensure  market  development,  Reserve  Bank 
has been focussing on prudent regulations for furthering the development of Money, G-Sec 
and OTC derivatives markets. Reforms in the G-Sec market carried out since the early 90s 
have  ensured  that  the  G-Sec  market  is  a  well-organized  and  regulated  market  with  world 
class market infrastructure for trading and settlement. 
9. Reserve Bank of India’s approach to regulation and development of the financial markets 
has been guided by three broad principles. 
i. 
First, the menu of financial products available to enable economic agents to hedge 
emergent risks and meet their funding requirements should be widened. 
Second, the introduction of new products should follow a graduated process guided 
by the acceptance of the product by market participants. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
ii. 
2 
 iii. 
Lastly,  the  robustness  of  the  market  infrastructure  for  trading,  settlement  and 
reporting of existing as well as new financial products should be improved. 
From the outset, India has resolved to attain standards of international best practice but the 
endeavour  has  been  to  fine  tune  the  process  keeping  in  view  the  underlying  structural, 
institutional and operational issues. 
10.  The  philosophy  behind  such  policy  action  is  preference  for  safety  and  stability  of  the 
financial  system  over  the  considerations  of  short  term  market  activity.  This  was  well 
articulated by Governor Dr. Raghuram Rajan that Reserve Bank of India’s policy focus is to 
broaden and deepen financial markets and increase their liquidity and resilience so that they 
can help allocate and absorb the risks entailed in financing India’s growth. Efforts of Reserve 
Bank has been to strike a balance between market development and financial stability. 
11.  We  can  describe  our  regulatory  and  developmental  measures  for  the  debt  and 
derivatives  markets  under  two  broad  focus  areas  –  building  resilience  and  increasing 
liquidity. 
Building resilience of debt & derivatives markets 
II.  
12. Safe and sound markets ensure financial stability and orderly market development. The 
resilience  of  financial  markets  is  ensured  by  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  mandating 
requirements for registration and reporting, requirements for capital and collateral and orderly 
market rules. 
Requirements for registration & reporting 
II.I  
13.  The  requirements  of  registration  ensure  that  safe  and  financially  strong  entities  have 
access to the financial system. For instance, Reserve Bank’s guidelines for authorization of 
Primary  Dealers  (PDs)  prescribe  that  besides  financials,  experience  in  the  financial  sector 
and commitment to serve the market including retail/mid-segment participants are required 
for becoming a PD. The reporting requirements foster transparency, market integrity as well 
as discipline. Lack of transparency has often been cited as a major reason for global financial 
crisis.  In  India,  Reserve  Bank  has  taken  several  steps  to  improve  transparency  through 
mandated  reporting  requirements.  G-Sec  trades  are  captured  by  the  anonymous  trading 
platform  owned  by  the  Reserve  Bank  (Negotiated  Dealing  System-  Order  Matching  [NDS-
OM]).  All  OTC  outright  and  repo  transactions  in  G-sec  and  Call/Notice/Term  money 
transactions  are  reported  to  CCIL.  Commercial  Paper/Certificate  of  Deposit  trades  are 
reported on FIMMDA’s reporting platform. Comprehensive OTC Derivative trade reporting is 
in place. 
Requirements for capital and collateral 
II.II  
14. Requirements of capital and collateral are prudential in nature and ensure that the market 
participants  do  not  take  undue  counterparty  risks  while  trading  in  the  market.  Capital 
requirements  act  as  buffer  against  various  risks  including  credit  and  market  risks.  Indian 
banks  have  been  well  capitalised  and  have  been  conforming  to  the  international  best 
practices  with  regard  to  bank  capital  as  delineated  by  the  Basel  prescriptions.  We  have 
announced  migration  to  Basel  III  to  strengthen  the  banks’  capital  base  and  improve  their 
ability to withstand systemic shocks. The norms would come into effect in a phased manner. 
We  are  in  the  process  of  revamping  capital  adequacy  standards  of  standalone  primary 
dealers on lines of Basel III framework. Collateral requirements reduce counterparty risk in 
market transactions. The international consensus on sound regulation for OTC derivatives as 
articulated by G20 declaration for moving these derivatives to central clearing and mandatory 
posting  of  margins  emphasizes  the  importance  attached  to  collateral.  In  India  collateral 
protocols  are  available  for  G-sec,  repo  and  equity  markets.  We  are  in  the  process  of 
operationalising similar dispensation in OTC derivatives markets. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Orderly market rules 
II.III  
15.  In  order  to  protect  the  integrity  of  market  prices  so  that  they  provide  credible  price 
information and encourage wider market participation, orderly market rules are put in place 
by  the  regulators.  These  rules  need  not  necessarily  be  prescribed  by  the  regulator  itself 
rather they could evolve through consensus among market participants. FIMMDA’s Code of 
Conduct  is  an  example  in  this  regard.  FIMMDA  has  also  constituted  a  Dispute  Resolution 
Committee  recently  with  wider  representation  of  varied  market  participants  to  resolve  the 
disputes arising out of erroneous trades in the government securities market. Wherever gaps 
are seen, the market regulator steps in to ensure orderly conduct. Financial stability concerns 
have  been  the  prime  motive  behind  such  actions.  Rules  prescribed  by  the  Reserve  Bank, 
such as, the users of CDS to buy them only with underlying exposure; placing appropriate 
limits on short selling; ensuring consumer protection by measures that would curb mis-selling 
with  emphasis  on  “appropriateness  &  suitability”;  placing  appropriate  limits  on  interest  rate 
futures positions, etc. must be seen in this perspective. One can say that the approach has 
served  Indian  financial  markets  well  as  India  was  relatively  unscathed  from  the  contagion 
effects of global financial crisis. 
touching  over 
Enhancing liquidity in debt & derivatives markets 
III.  
16.  Liquid  debt  markets  are  essential  for  both  issuers  and  investors.  In  the  recent  years 
concerted  efforts  have  been  made  to  improve  liquidity  in  debt  markets.  There  have  been 
regular  issuances  across  yield  curve,  which  spans  up  to  30  years,  safe  and  efficient 
settlement system with world class infrastructure, a state of art trading system that enables 
anonymous order matching and a liquid repo market that offers funding options. Hedging and 
trading instrument are available to enable market participants to freely express their views. 
Investor  base  of  domestic  and  foreign  investors  is  expanding  and  various  instruments  are 
being  offered  to  cater  to  the  needs  of  investors.  Though  liquidity  has  improved  in  G-sec 
market, the number of securities traded continues to be low. Liquidity is patchy and bonds 
are traded at a few points, especially at 10 year maturity. The concentration has increased 
during recent years even though issuances have been spread across the curve and critical 
mass required for liquidity is built through re-issuances. Liquidity remains a function of bear 
and bull phases and we see exuberance during bull runs and freezes during a bear phase. 
We  have  seen  volumes 
to  
10,000–15,000 crore. 
17. In the recent period, implementing recommendations of the Working Group on Enhancing 
Liquidity in the Government Securities and Interest Rate Derivatives Markets (Chairman: Shri 
R. Gandhi) (Gandhi Working Group) has been the priority of the Reserve Bank. Action has 
been  initiated/completed  in  nearly  70%  of  the  recommendations.  The  recommendations, 
such  as,  truncating  the  time  window  for  bidding  in  the  primary  auction;  changing  the 
settlement cycle of primary auctions in Treasury Bills (T-Bills) from T+2 to T+1; conduct of 
primary auctions in G-Sec as a mix of both uniform-price and multiple price formats and re-
issuances of existing securities in state development loans; standardizing interest rate swap 
(IRS)  contracts  to  facilitate  centralized  clearing  and  settlement  of  these  contracts;  and 
migration of secondary market reporting of over-the-counter (OTC) trades in G-Sec (outright 
and repo) from PDO-NDS to NDS-OM and CROMS, respectively, have been implemented. 
18. Further measures include issuance of Inflation Indexed bonds for institutional as well as 
retail/  individual  investors  and,  introduction  of  cash  settled  10-year  Interest  Rate  Futures. 
Steps  towards  active  debt  management  have  been  taken  by  undertaking  debt  switch  of 
securities 
face  value  of  about  
27,000  crore to  longer  tenor  security.  All  such  initiatives  have  been  taken  after  extensive 
market consultations and taking into account the feedback received. 
from  2014–15  and  2015–16  maturity  buckets 
lakh  crore  and  plummeting 
  one 
for 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
19. It is our expectation that market participants would actively participate in the debt markets 
and  improve  liquidity.  In  this  regard,  I  would  discuss  about  two  issues  that  would  have  a 
bearing on liquidity viz. market making and short selling. 
Market making 
III.I  
20. Primary Dealers are mandated to make markets in G-sec and provide liquidity. There is 
scope  for  improvement  in  market  making  efforts  of  PDs.  Gandhi  Working  Group  has 
recommended that one of the ways for improving liquidity is to consider allocating specific 
securities to each PD for market making in them and if required, rotate the stock of securities 
among  the  PDs,  by  turn,  at  periodic  intervals.  This  would  ensure  continuous  availability  of 
prices for a select group of securities. Reserve Bank is in consultation with the PDAI and the 
Government to operationalise this recommendation. It is expected that vigorous efforts will 
be made by the PDs to provide two way quotes for sufficiently high number of securities to 
develop liquidity in the market. We plan to operationalise the market making scheme in the 
next fiscal and expect significant improvement in liquidity. In this context, the present annual 
minimum  turnover  ratios  of  5  times  for  Government  dated  securities  and  10  times  for 
T-Bills/CMBs of the average month-end stocks need to reviewed and suitably revised to a 
higher level. 
Short selling 
III.II  
21. The  Reserve  Bank has  allowed  short  selling  in G-sec  to  enable  market  participants  to 
express interest rate views. Best practice in regulation demands that short selling should be 
subject  to  appropriate  controls  so  as  to  reduce  or  minimise  the  potential  risks  that  could 
affect the orderly and efficient functioning and stability of financial markets and be subject to 
a  reporting  regime  that  provides  timely  information  to  the  regulators.  Short  selling  was 
permitted in a sequential manner to enable market participants to take positions based on 
emergent  interest  rate  scenarios  and  cap  risks  that  could  emanate  from  increased  short 
selling. Intraday short selling in G-Sec was permitted in 2006; it was extended to five days in 
2007 and then to three months in 2011. Participant-level quantitative limits (0.25 per cent and 
0.50 per cent of the outstanding amount respectively for illiquid and liquid securities) have 
also been prescribed on the short positions to obviate risk of “squeeze” in the securities and 
cap  the  overall  risk  in  the  market  due  to  short  selling.  Appropriate  reporting  requirements 
have  been  prescribed  to  enable  regulators  to  monitor  the  build-up  of  risks  in  the  market. 
Some market participants expressed view that these regulations are limiting the freedom to 
express  interest rate  views  and  sought  a much more  liberal  regime. The  recent regulatory 
action  on  limiting  short sale  in  American  and  European  markets  underscores  the  need for 
appropriate  regulation  of  short  selling.  Reserve  Bank  is,  however,  constantly  reviewing  its 
policy  and  would  consider  further  relaxations  keeping  in  view  the  needs  of  market 
participants and imperatives of financial stability. 
22. In the context of liquidity, I would like to make a broader point which market bodies like 
FIMMDA  &  the  market  participants  need  to  ponder  over.  Liquidity,  like  many  other  market 
concepts, is a self-fulfilling one. An instrument is as liquid as the participants believe it to be. 
If  more  participants  believe  that  an  instrument  is  liquid  and  evince  buying  interest,  it 
“becomes” liquid. While the product design, trading systems, regulatory dispensations, etc. 
do have an impact on the liquidity of an instrument, more importantly, it is the activity by the 
participants that makes the instrument liquid. All it requires is a few participants taking the 
first  step. While  we  have  certain  market  segments  which  boast  of  sizeable  trading  volume 
and  wider  participation,  there  is  a  significant  skewness  in  other  market  segments.  It  is 
everybody’s  interest  that  we  make the  markets  broad  and  deep.  Just  to  remind  –  it  is  the 
market-participants that make markets and regulators can only play a facilitator’s role. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Recent measures 
IV.  
23. I would briefly summarize recent developments with regard to G-Sec, Corporate Bond, 
money and derivatives markets. 
Interest rate futures 
IV.I  
24. As announced in the Second Quarter Review of Monetary Policy 2013–14, the Reserve 
Bank  permitted  cash  settled  Interest  Rate  Futures  (IRF)  on  10-year  Government  of  India 
security  after  extensive  consultations  with  stakeholders.  The  IRF  is  unique  in  design  as 
settlement price is based on a single benchmark bond. The instrument is currently trading on 
three exchanges. The trading volume, which was very encouraging on the first few days of 
the  introduction,  has  tapered  thereafter.  The  participation  is  also  subdued  as  many  of  the 
banks are yet to start using the product. The product helps in better management of interest 
rate risks and market participants can make use of the same. Going forward, based on the 
experience  gained  and  assessment  of  the  market  demand,  we  can  consider  similar  cash 
settled interest rate futures on benchmark securities, money market futures, etc. 
Term repo 
IV.II  
25.  Reserve  Bank  introduced  variable  rate  term  repo  facility  in  October  2013  to  provide 
market  participants  with  additional  access  to  primary  liquidity  as  well  as  impart  greater 
flexibility in managing their reserve requirements. The reduced reliance on overnight funds 
by the banks would hopefully encourage them to actively transact in the term money market, 
paving  the  way  for  development  of  a  liquid  term  money  market.  The  term  repo  is  now 
available up to 28 day tenor. Keeping in view the overall liquidity conditions in the banking 
system, going forward, Reserve Bank may appropriately extend the tenor and nature of term 
repos. 
IV.III   CP CD markets 
26. Reserve Bank of India has introduced DvP-I based settlement of all OTC transactions in 
Certificates of Deposit (CDs) and Commercial Papers (CPs) on the lines of the arrangement 
already  existing  in  case  of  settlement  of  OTC  trades  in  corporate  bonds  to  eliminate  the 
settlement  risk.  Guidelines  on  CPs  have  been  comprehensively  reviewed.  Changes 
introduced includes changing minimum rating requirement for CP issuance to A3, allowing 
buy-back  of  CP  through  the  secondary  market  and  at  prevailing  market  price,  etc.  With 
regard to CDs, I would like to mention a rather disturbing phenomenon, which I would term 
as “March Rush”. It has been observed for some time that banks raise deposits at exorbitant 
cost to inflate balance sheets. While this may spruce up appearance of bank’s financials, it 
would have a deleterious impact on money market rates, creating avoidable stress. I suggest 
that FIMMDA may engage with banks and take steps to avoid such stress. 
IV.IV  Repo in corporate debt 
27.  To  widen  the  participant  base  in  corporate  bond  repo  market,  Scheduled  Urban 
Cooperative  banks  have  been  permitted  to  participate  in  the  instrument.  To  encourage 
activity in corporate bond repo, eligible category of collateral has been expanded to include 
short term instruments like CPs, CDs and NCDs and minimum haircut requirement has been 
further reduced. There is, however, no activity in the corporate bond repo markets. Progress 
in signing Global Market Repo Agreement (GMRA) is slow. I request FIMMDA to advise its 
members  to  sign  GMRA  to  enable  trading  in  corporate  bond  repo.  In  case  the  progress 
continues  to  be  slow,  Reserve  Bank  would  examine  the  option  of  mandating  signing  of 
GMRA as a market development measure. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Emerging issues 
V.  
28. I would like to share my thoughts on some of the emerging issues that require deeper 
deliberations  as  this  is  the  right  forum  to  exercise  our  minds  on  these  issues  as  they  are 
likely to have financial system wide impact. It could be very informative to have the market 
participants’  views  on  these  issues.  The  issues  include  enhancing  investment  limit  for 
foreigners  in  our  debt  markets,  debate  over  appropriate  benchmarks  and  their  regulation, 
issues emerging out of G-20 declaration on OTC derivatives, legal issues relating to bilateral 
netting, and extraterritorial application of certain laws enacted in developed countries. 
Enhancing foreign investment limits in G-Sec and corporate bonds 
V.I  
29. Pursuing our policy of enhancing foreign investment in domestic financial markets in a 
calibrated and gradual manner, the total limit for foreign investment in Government Securities 
has been increased over a period of time to the current limit of USD 30 billion. While being 
sensitive  to  the  demand for  opening markets to foreign  investors,  the  risk-reward trade off 
needs to be carefully examined. The imperatives of widening and diversifying investor base 
leading  to  higher  demands  for  debt  instruments  need  to  be  kept  in  view  along  with  the 
considerations about financial stability and insulation from sudden-stop risks. Going forward 
our focus would be on encouraging participation of long term investors in our debt markets 
and  reducing  the  availability  of  short-term  debt instruments for foreign  investors  who  often 
act as “investment tourists”, particularly during period of stress. 
Financial benchmarks 
V.II  
30. The benchmark rates/indices in the financial markets are in the nature of “public goods”. 
They serve as common reference points for pricing of financial instruments. Any attempted 
manipulation of the benchmarks not only erodes their credibility but also poses serious threat 
to stability of the financial system as large volume of financial contracts are referenced to the 
widely used benchmarks. The benchmark rate setting process, therefore, has to be robust 
with  strong  governance  standards  for  maintaining  the  credibility  and  reliability  of  the 
benchmarks. The recent scandals relating to manipulation of several key global benchmarks, 
viz. LIBOR, EURIBOR, TIBOR, London 4 PM FX fixing, etc., have severely impaired the trust 
of the international community on the financial benchmarks. Regulators and public authorities 
in  several  jurisdictions  have  conducted  wide  ranging  probes  involving  many  major 
benchmarks  and  have  penalised  several  banks  and  brokerage  firms  for  their  misconduct. 
The probes are still on. 
31.  Meanwhile,  various  international  standard  setting  bodies,  central  banks  and  market 
regulators have undertaken comprehensive review of the existing benchmark setting system 
and  recommended  several  reform  measures  for  restoring  the  credibility  of  the  financial 
benchmarks. Such reform measures have been undertaken/underway in many jurisdictions. 
To  mention  a  few  major  ones;  the  LIBOR  has  been  notified  as  a  regulated  activity  under 
FSMA  (Financial  Services  and  Markets  Act  2000)  since  April  2,  2013  with  provisions  for 
criminal  sanctions  for  manipulation  of  the  benchmark.  The  administration  of  LIBOR  has 
recently  been  transferred  to  the  Intercontinental  Exchange  Group  (ICE)  Benchmark 
Administration  Limited.  The  European  Commission  has  issued  the  draft  legislation  for 
regulation of financial benchmarks in the Euro region. The Administrator of EURIBOR, viz. 
EURIBOR-European  Banking  Federation,  has  taken  several  measures  to  strengthen  the 
governance  framework  including  reducing  the  representation  of  the  panel  banks  in  the 
steering  committee  to  minority.  The  Japanese  Banking  Association,  the  administrator  of 
TIBOR, has announced forming a new entity for calculation and publication of TIBOR. The 
Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore  (MAS)  has  issued  proposed  regulations  of  the  financial 
benchmarks  containing  stringent  provisions,  such  as,  licensing  of  administrators  and 
submitters,  designation  of  key  benchmarks,  criminal  and  civil  sanction  for  benchmark 
manipulations, etc. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
32.  We  have  initiated  similar  action  in  India  also.  As  you  all  know,  the  Reserve  Bank  of 
India’s  Committee  on  Financial  Benchmarks  (Chairman:  Shri  P  Vijaya  Bhaskar)  (Vijaya 
Bhaskar Committee) have submitted its final Report recently. It has recommended several 
measures  for  strengthening  the  governance  framework  and  setting  methodology  of  major 
Indian Rupee interest rate and foreign exchange benchmarks. Although methodologies used 
for  determination  of  major  Indian  benchmarks  were  found  generally  satisfactory  by  the 
Committee,  it  has  recommended  for  bringing  in  several  improvements  on  the  lines  of 
international developments. Wherever possible, the benchmark calculation is to be based on 
observable  transactions  subject  to  appropriate  threshold.  Overnight  MIBOR  fixing  is  to  be 
shifted from the existing polling method to volume weighted average of call trades. On the 
governance  of  the  benchmarks,  the  Committee  has  recommended  several  measures  for 
strengthening  the  governance  frameworks  with  the  benchmark  administrators,  calculation 
agents  as  well  as  the  submitters.  Governance  structure  of  FIMMDA  and  FEDAI  with  their 
Boards comprising directors from their member institutions could entail conflicts of interest in 
the  context  of  benchmark  settings.  As  recommended  by  the  Committee,  it  would  be 
appropriate for the FIMMDA and FEDAI to create a separate independent structure, either 
jointly  or  separately,  for  administration  of  the  benchmarks.  Further,  I  would  like  to  urge 
FIMMDA and FEDAI to complete the reality self-check of their governance framework vis-à-
vis the recommended principles within timeline of three months suggested by the Committee 
and inform the Reserve Bank for further consideration. They should also initiate necessary 
actions to strengthen the benchmark setting methodologies. I may also make a mention that 
it  would  be  highly  desirable  to  enforce  some  degree  of  supervisory  oversight  over  the 
benchmarks as recommended by the Committee. Reserve Bank is currently examining the 
recommendations of the Committee for implementation. 
Valuation of state development loans 
V.III  
33. While on the subject of valuation and benchmarks, I would like to briefly discuss pricing 
and  valuation  of  State  Development  Loans  (SDLs).  Historically,  the  SDLs  are  valued  at 
25 basis points over similar tenor Government of India security. This heuristic yardstick is not 
in  line  with  best  practice  and Gandhi Working Group  has  recommended  that the  valuation 
methodology  for  SDLs  may  be  reviewed.  Subsequently,  Vijaya  Bhaskar  Committee  has 
reiterated the suggestion. While examination of these recommendations is underway and no 
policy  decision  is  taken  as  yet,  I  would  like  to  highlight  that  pricing  of  SDL  by  market 
participants  does  not  seem  to  be  in  line  with  the  nature  of  the  instrument.  How  can  one 
explain  the  pricing  of  SDL  at  spreads  higher  than  those  of  highest  rated  corporate  bonds 
when  state  governments  are  sovereigns  and  carry  absolutely  no  default  risk?  SDLs  are 
eligible  investment  for  SLR  requirement  of  the  banks  and  carry  Zero  risk  weight. 
Furthermore,  SDLs  are  eligible  investment  for  institutional  investors,  such  as,  insurance 
companies and pension funds as per the investment guidelines laid down by their respective 
regulators.  The  states  have  initiated  fiscal  reforms  and  all  of  them  have  enacted  fiscal 
responsibility  legislation.  Their  fiscal  health  has  been  relatively  better  than  the  Central 
Government  as  States,  at  the  aggregate  level,  have  recorded  revenue  surplus.  During  
2012–13, twenty three states recorded revenue surplus. Reserve Bank of India is the banker 
and  debt  manager for  the  states.  It  has  been  taking  steps  to  improve  liquidity  in  SDLs  by 
announcing quarterly indicative quantum, limited re-issuances, etc. SDLs have been made 
LAF/market  repo  eligible.  In  view  of  the  above,  it  seems  odd  for  the  market  to  charge  for 
large risk premium while pricing SDLs. The pricing anomaly needs to be looked at seriously. 
For market integrity, the price must reflect true value of the bond and valuation must reflect 
the market reality. 
V.IV   OTC derivatives market reforms 
34.  In  September  2009,  G-20  leaders  declared  in  Pittsburgh  that  all  standardised  OTC 
derivative  contracts  should  be  traded  on  exchanges  or  electronic  trading  platforms,  where 
appropriate,  and  cleared  through  central  counterparties  (CCPs)  by  end-2012  at  the  latest; 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
OTC derivative contracts should be reported to trade repositories and non-centrally cleared 
contracts should be subject to higher capital requirements. In 2011, the G20 Leaders agreed 
to  add margin requirements  on  non-centrally-cleared  derivatives  to  the  reform  programme. 
Some  progress  has  been  achieved  in  accomplishment  of  regulatory  reform.  The  Financial 
Stability Board (FSB) estimated that approximately 10 per cent of outstanding credit default 
swaps and approximately 40 per cent of outstanding interest rate derivatives were centrally 
cleared as of end-August 2012. It also estimated that well over 90 per cent of OTC interest 
rate and credit derivative contracts are being reported to Trade Repositories (TRs) whereas 
around 50 per cent of foreign exchange derivatives transactions are being reported to TRs. 
35. India is committed to achieve the G-20 reform agenda for OTC derivatives. In order to 
guide the process of implementation of the key reform measures, an implementation group 
for OTC derivatives was constituted on the directions of the Sub Committee of the Financial 
Stability  and  Development  Council  (FSDC)  with  representatives  from the  Reserve  Bank  of 
India and market participants with Shri R. Gandhi, Executive Director, Reserve Bank of India 
as  Chairman.  The  Implementation  Group  has  submitted  its  report  with  a  roadmap  for 
implementation  of  reform  measures  with  regard  to  OTC  derivatives  in  India  with  timelines. 
We  have  made  reasonable  progress  in  implementation  of  G-20  recommendations  in  this 
regard and would work towards taking the process forward. Here, I would like to comment on 
a few major issues. 
V.IV.I   Trade reporting 
36. To ensure transparency in Interest Rate Swaps (IRS) trades, banks and PDs have been 
mandated  to  report  the  inter-bank/PD  IRS  trade  data  since  August  2007.  Forex  forwards, 
swaps and options are mandatorily reported with phased roll-out of trade reporting since July 
2012. The last phase was rolled out recently on December 30, 2013 mandating reporting of 
Inter-bank  and client  transactions  in  Currency  Swaps,  Inter-bank  and  client  transactions  in 
FCY  FRA/IRS  and  Client  transactions  in  INR  FRA/IRS.  CCIL  has  developed  the 
confidentiality protocols for reporting of client transactions in consultation with FIMMDA and 
other market representative bodies. The reporting platform for Credit Default Swaps (CDS) 
was put in place from the date of introduction of the instrument itself. Thus, in compliance 
with  the  G-20  commitments,  trade  reporting  arrangement  for  various  OTC  interest  rate, 
foreign exchange and credit derivatives have since been completed. Reserve Bank of India 
will  periodically  assess  the  extent  of  use  of  various  OTC  derivative  instruments  and  will 
introduce  reporting  for  other  derivative  instruments  as  and  when  market  participants  start 
actively  using  these  instruments.  Going  forward,  the  reported  OTC  derivative  transactions 
will  be  used  for  strengthening  Reserve  Bank  of  India’s  conduct  of  surveillance  of  OTC 
derivative markets, financial stability assessments and, micro-prudential supervision of banks 
and  PDs  apart  from  disseminating  the  price  and  volume  information  (anonymised)  for 
enhancing transparency of the Indian OTC derivative markets. 
V.IV.II   Standardisation 
37.  Gandhi  Working  Group  has  recommended  that  IRS  contracts  should  be  standardized 
and Swap Execution Facility (SEF) may be introduced for IRS trades. Against the backdrop 
of  G-20  commitment  and  in  order  to  improve  tradability  and  facilitate  migration  of  IRS 
contracts to centralized clearing and settlement in future, it has been decided to standardise 
inter  –bank  IRS  contracts.  The  IRS  contracts  shall  be  standardized  in  terms  of  minimum 
notional  principal  amount,  tenors,  trading  hours,  settlement  calculations  etc.  which  will  be 
prescribed  by  FIMMDA  in  consultation  with  the  market  participants.  To  begin  with, 
standardisation has been made mandatory for Rupee Overnight Index Swap (OIS) contracts 
from April 1, 2013 and will be extended to other benchmarks in due course. Forex derivatives 
are currently non-standardised as they are primarily driven by customised client needs. With 
regard  to  CDS,  the  product  is  standardised  since  inception.  It  has  been  decided  that  the 
option  of  CCP  for  settlement  could  be  examined  once  volumes  improve  and  reach  critical 
mass. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
V.IV.III   Swap execution facility 
38. With regard to introduction of SEF, a trading system for IRS is expected to be operational 
in the second half of 2014. A related issue is whether these derivative trades can be moved 
to exchanges. The SEF cannot be compared to exchanges as they are mainly accessed by 
institutional  investors  (including  dealers-brokers)  for  trading  in  specialized  products  and  in 
large  amounts.  It  is  essential  to  maintain  the  distinction  between  exchanges  and  SEF 
because  exchanges  are  meant to  provide  access  to  retail  investors  whereas  SEFs  are for 
institutional investors who access the market to provide liquidity and/or manage their balance 
sheets. Exchange traded IRS may not cater to the needs of institutional traders who trade in 
large lots. The long tenor contracts and management of cash-flows for extended periods of 
time (e.g. 5, 10, 20 years) are uncommon in exchange traded instruments which are possible 
in OTC trades (e.g., OIS up to 5 year tenor are very active in Indian market). Hence, globally 
attempts  at  trading  of  IRS  on  exchanges  met  with  little  success.  For  instance,  exchange 
trading  of  interest  rate  swaps  launched  on  the  Chicago  Mercantile  Exchange  (CME) 
witnessed minuscule trading volumes. Further, validity of OTC derivatives under Indian laws 
necessitates that one of the counterparties to the transaction has to be a Reserve Bank of 
India regulated entity. It is extremely difficult to ensure this condition in an exchange-traded 
environment. 
V.IV.IV   Migration to central clearing/CCPs 
39.  Globally  broad  objective  for  regulatory  reform  is  that  OTC  derivative  products  have  to 
migrate 
to  central  clearing.  Only  products  meeting  certain  conditions,  such  as, 
standardisation; relative lack of complexity in contract terms; sufficient market liquidity; and 
readily available pricing information can migrate to central clearing. Regulators are exploring 
the  possibility  of  mandating  the  migration  to  central  clearing  and  /or  incentivising.  For 
example  Basel  III  capital  rules  create  an  incentive  to  move  to  central  clearing  because 
exposures  to  a  CCP  will  generally  attract  a  lower  capital  charge  than  other  bilateral 
exposures. 
40.  A  large  number  of  legal/operational  issues,  such  as,  inter-operability  across  different 
CCPs, legal complexity, regulatory uncertainties, applicability of insolvency regimes, default 
management  processes  of  CCPs  and  potential  increase  in  collateral  requirements  are 
engaging regulators’ attention. 
41. In India, guaranteed clearing exists for USD/INR forward transactions. Rupee IRS and 
Forward Rate Agreements (FRA), which form the bulk of interest rate derivative transactions, 
are currently being centrally cleared in a non-guaranteed mode. An “in principle” decision to 
bring IRS and FRA transactions in the Indian rupee within the ambit of guaranteed settlement 
has  been  taken.  Though,  it  is  not  mandatory  for  market  participants  to  clear  their  trades 
through  CCIL,  more  than  90  per  cent  of  IRS  trades  are  cleared  through  CCIL’s  non-
guaranteed settlement system. Therefore moving IRS to central clearing is expected to be 
smooth. 
42.  Recently,  Reserve  Bank  has  issued  guidelines  on  capital  requirements  for  bank 
exposures  to  central  counterparties.  The  guidelines  prescribe  the  capital  requirements  for 
banks’ exposure to qualified CCPs (QCCPs) and non-qualified CCPs. One of the significant 
aspects in the guidelines is that it has been proposed to treat the exposures to the Clearing 
Corporation of India Ltd (CCIL) on net basis. In cases, where the CCIL provides guaranteed 
settlement, banks may reckon their total replacement cost (MTM) on net basis, i.e., on net 
replacement  cost  as  part  of  trade  exposure  determination.  This  would  provide  significant 
capital relief to banks. 
43. In this context, an issue that is receiving close attention of policy makers is increase in 
concentration risks of the CCPs. It is imperative that the risk management system of the CCP 
is very robust and compliant with best global standards. In India, it has been our endeavour 
to  benchmark  our  institutions  and  practices  with  international  standards.  In  pursuit  of  this 
objective,  the  CCP  in  India  (viz.  CCIL)  has  been  evaluated  for  governance  and  risk 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
management by domestic and international asessors. Further, Financial Sector Assessment 
Programme  (FSAP)  has  also  evaluated  the  CCP  and  found  the  system  to  be  robust.  The 
CCP  has  also  done  a  self-assessment  of  “Principles  for  Financial  Market  Infrastructures” 
(PFMI)  published  by  CPSS-IOSCO.  The  self-assessment  is  being  evaluated  by  us.  It  is 
essential  that  periodic  assessments  may  be  conducted  in  view  of  importance  of  these 
institutions for systemic stability. 
V.IV.V   Margining 
44. G-20 leaders have added margin requirements for non-centrally cleared derivatives as a 
reform  measure  in  2011  and  advised  BCBS  and  IOSCO  to  develop  consistent  global 
standards  for  these  margin  requirements.  These  margin  requirements  have  been  finalised 
and would be implemented. There are, however, concerns that the greater collateralisation of 
transactions may, in turn, lead to new credit and liquidity risks which  would have systemic 
implications, such as, increased asset encumbrances and possible shortage of safe assets. 
The regulators are deliberating on these issues. In case of IRS in Indian derivatives market, 
margins  are  not  posted  as  per  market  practice.  This  practice  engenders  elevated 
counterparty risks and systemic risks. Reserve Bank would shortly initiate steps to mandate 
margin requirements for IRS. This would make IRS regulation consistent with CDS regulation 
which  mandates  margin  posting.  The  mandatory  requirements  would,  however,  be 
introduced after consultations with market participants and implemented in phased manner. 
V.IV.VI   Bilateral netting 
45. The imposition of margins brings us to the issue of bilateral netting with regard to margins 
posted  for  derivatives  trades  and  netting  of  Mark-to-Market  (MTM)  positions  for  capital 
adequacy purpose. While it is universally accepted that close-out netting improves financial 
market  efficiency,  legal  provisions  regarding  enforcement  of  netting  arrangements  differ 
across jurisdictions. For close-out netting to work, it needs to be legally enforceable in the 
jurisdiction in which the defaulting party is incorporated. Reserve Bank is examining the issue 
and would explore all the possible options including changing the legal framework to resolve 
the issue. 
Extraterritorial application of laws and harmonising global regulatory effort 
V.V  
46. Laws like Dodd Frank Act, EMIR, etc. enacted in the wake of financial crisis. have certain 
provisions  that  have  extraterritorial  implications  on  foreign  jurisdictions  as  they  impose 
registration/recognition,  reporting  requirements,  etc.  with  potential  to  increase  complexity, 
introduce  uncertainty  through  overlapping  and  conflicting  rules  and  impose  large  costs  on 
global  OTC  derivatives  markets.  Such  provisions  have 
for  regulatory 
independence  and  authority  of  other  countries  and  have  raised  concerns  regarding  the 
primacy of home country regulators. Though there is recognition of substituted compliance, 
there  is  lack  of  clarity  on  the  implementation  of  such  regime.  Convergence  of  regulatory 
standards  prescribed  by  G-20  and  those  of  the  US,  Europe  &  other  advance  countries  is 
required so as to limit regulatory arbitrage and at the same time impose lesser cost on the 
market  participants.  Regulatory  reform  initiatives  through  a  globally  agreed  mechanism  of 
substituted  compliance  could  address  such  regulatory  arbitrage  more  effectively  than 
extraterritorial legislation. Substituted compliance assessment should be based the individual 
jurisdiction’s  compliance  with  applicable  global  standards  set  by  international  standard-
setting bodies like the CPSS, IOSCO and the BCBS. As responsible member of committee of 
supervisors,  Reserve  Bank  along  with  Government  of India  and  other  regulators,  such  as, 
SEBI and the Indian CCP have been constantly engaging with regulators in developed and 
emerging markets to resolve these issues. 
implications 
V.VI   Regulator-market body interactions & consultations 
47.  The  relation  between  the  regulator  and  the  regulated  market  participants  is  very 
important as both need to work towards the same goal, i.e., safe and sound financial market 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
for  economic  development.  Hence,  it  is  imperative  that  there  should  be  effective 
communication  between  them.  Such  communication  would  aid  regulation  as  the  intent  of 
regulatory  action  and  incentives  that  should  guide  market  behaviour  must  be  clearly 
understood  by  the  market  so  that  the  actions  can  be  suitably  modified.  In  addition  to  the 
communication which generally happens through official channels, Reserve Bank undertakes 
structured interactions to put forth its point of view and elicit market participants’ response. 
For example, pre-monetary policy meetings, bi-monthly meetings with FIMMDA and monthly 
meetings with PDAI provide opportunity for such interactions. All of us have gained a lot of 
insights from such meetings. The consultations between Reserve Bank and the FIMMDA on 
various  issues  of  policy  have  not  only  helped  us  in  understanding the  point  of  view  of  the 
participants but have also led to giving greater responsibility on FIMMDA as a market body. 
48. Today, apart from coming out with price valuations for G-Sec and non-G-Sec securities 
such  as  corporate  bonds,  FIMMDA  has  been  given  added  responsibilities  such  as 
accrediting brokers in the OTC interest rate derivatives market, publishing daily CDS curve 
for valuation of open position, constitution and working of the Determination Committee, etc. 
FIMMDA has played a pivotal role in several other areas, such as, documentation of CDS, 
repos,  commercial  paper  (CP)  and  certificates  of  deposit  (CDs),  and  codifying  market 
practices through “Handbook of Market Practices”. FIMMDA has been proactive and started 
review  of  the  efficacy  of  benchmarks  like  MIBOR  in  wake  of  the  LIBOR  controversy. 
Likewise,  PDAI  has  also  been  playing  a  very  important  role  in  making  our  G-Sec  market 
more  liquid  and  in  the  successful  completion  of  the  Government’s  market  borrowing 
programme every year. The activities of FIMMDA and its role in the underlying market clearly 
indicate  its  important  self-regulatory  role  in  the  concerned  markets.  In  line  with,  the 
Committee on Financial Benchmarks recommendations on governance, I would like to urge 
FIMMDA  to  strengthen  their  technological  and  administrative  capabilities  to  discharge  the 
challenging  responsibilities.  I  would  also  urge  FIMMDA  and  PDAI  to  continuously  engage 
with  the  regulator  in  a  proactive  manner  drawing  upon  intensive  consultations  with  their 
members, other important stakeholders (e.g., the IBA, corporates, retail investors) and cross-
country  developments  and  make  constructive  suggestions  for  improvement  of  the  markets 
and  also  appreciate  the  concerns  of  regulators  and  communicate  them  to  their  members 
appropriately. 
49.  In  addition  to  regular  interactions  with  market  bodies,  Reserve  Bank  has  consistently 
followed a consultative process while framing guidelines. Draft regulations are placed on the 
Reserve  Bank’s  website  for  public  comments;  and  expertise  of  market  participants  is 
regularly sourced by making them members in various committees appointed by the Reserve 
Bank to examine issues relating to market development and regulation. Markets are dynamic 
and  evolutionary  and  call  for  continuous  improvisations.  Here  I  would  like  to  highlight  that 
one  cannot  wait  to  design  a  perfect  product,  as  the  waiting  may  be  endless.  While  it  is 
reasonable  that  the  participants’  view  primarily  emanate  from  their  own  “book”  (their 
positions, their experience, etc.), it is expected that the suggestions would also be given from 
the  macro  perspectives  leveraging  on  the  experience.  Further  feedback/suggestions  are 
required not only from participants whose immediate interests are affected but also from all 
players including the India Banks Association (IBA) who have a stake in the improvisation of 
the system. 
Concluding thoughts 
VI.  
50.  Deep  and  liquid  debt  and  derivatives  markets  are  essential  to  ensure  a  robust  and 
efficient  financial  system  which  aids  economic  development.  In  India,  there  exists  a  very 
large Government securities market, which needs to be regulated efficiently & effectively to 
ensure financial stability. The need for such regulation has been underscored by the global 
financial  crisis.  Regulation  may  act  as  a  guiding  force  in  such  times  by  prescribing 
appropriate  rules,  or  by  creating  incentives  for  appropriate  behaviour.  We  in  India  were 
reasonably insulated from the global financial crisis, but have been facing challenges. Our 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
regulatory  approach  has  been  cautious  and  calibrated  with  focus  on  financial  stability  and 
market  development.  Reforms  in  the  G-Sec  market  carried  out  since  the  early  ‘90s  have 
ensured  that  the  market  is  a  well-organized  and  appropriately  regulated  with  world  class 
market infrastructure for trading and settlement. Our endeavour has been to promote market 
transparency, financial soundness of institutions by prudential regulation and orderly market 
conduct.  FIMMDA  and  PDAI  have  been  playing  a  pivotal  role  in  such  endeavours  by 
providing  valuable  support  and  inputs.  Our  approach  to  regulation  has  been  appreciated 
globally  and  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  was  awarded  the  2012  Dufrenoy  Prize  for  its 
approach  to  the  regulation  of  derivatives  market,  thus  facilitating  financial  innovation  in  a 
responsible manner. The global financial reform initiatives have become more onerous. The 
G-20 reform agenda, which we have committed to implement has significant implications for 
domestic  markets.  The  proposals  to  shift  OTC  derivatives  to  trading  platforms,  creation  of 
trade repositories, migration to central clearing and, mandated margining regime will change 
the business models and market practices. Issues relating to market integrity (e.g. fixing of 
benchmarks like MIBOR) and, accounting dispensations (e.g. requirement of HTM) need to 
be resolved in non-disruptive manner. 
51. To conclude, no country can be an “island” and we need to comply with international best 
practices in regulation. We will adopt the regulations in a calibrated manner keeping in view 
domestic circumstances and market dynamics. The markets should, however, be prepared 
for the transition. This would not only help financial sector but also the real sector. Market 
bodies  like  FIMMDA  and  PDAI  along  with  the  IBA  have  to  play  a  more  active  and 
collaborative role with the regulators to take this process forward. I wish the conference great 
success. I also wish the conference participants all the best for exciting business with serious 
fun. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
