  Andrew G Haldane: The age of asset management? 
Speech by Mr Andrew G Haldane, Executive Director, Financial Stability, Bank of England, at 
the London Business School, London, 4 April 2014. 
 I  would  like  to  thank  Sarah  Breeden,  Antonia  Brown,  Edd  Denbee,  Ronnie  Driver,  Ronan  Hodge,  Tamara  Li, 
Pippa  Lowe,  Varun  Paul,  Jonathan  Rand,  Martin  Taylor,  Lewis  Webber  and  Jack  Worlidge  for  their  help  and 
comments. 
It is a great pleasure to be speaking at this London Business School conference on asset 
management.  Given  the  topic  and  my  area  of  responsibility,  I  thought  I  would  discuss  the 
links between asset management and financial stability.  
This issue is not new. But it has become topical recently as the asset management industry 
has grown and changed shape. Partly in response, regulators globally have begun to explore 
the  risks  to  the  financial  system  that  might  be  posed  by  non-banks  of  various  stripes, 
including asset managers. I want to discuss those risks and their potential policy implications. 
I  want  also,  however,  to  discuss  some  of  the  opportunities  asset management  offers. The 
industry is a key bridge between end-savers and end-borrowers, between the financial and 
real  parts  of  the  economy.  As  the  banking  system  continues  to  de-risk,  strengthening  that 
bridge could well strengthen both the financial system and wider economy.  
The evolution in asset management 
Let  me  start  with  some  facts  on  the  evolution  of  the  industry.  Asset  management  is,  of 
course,  an  agency  activity.  Assets  are  managed  on  behalf  of  end-investors,  whether 
institutional  (such  as  pension  funds  and  life  insurance  companies)  or  retail,  the  former 
typically  through  Separately  Managed  Accounts,  the  latter  through  Collective  Investment 
Schemes.  
The  industry’s  Assets  Under  Management  (AUM)  are  currently  estimated  at  around 
$87 trillion globally (TheCityUK (2013)).1 This is large. It is equal to around one year’s global 
GDP or around three quarters of the assets of the global banking industry. It has also grown 
fairly rapidly, with AUM roughly doubling over the past decade in dollar terms. 
The  longer-term  picture is  more  striking  still.  In the  United  States,  AUM  have  risen  almost 
fivefold  relative  to  GDP  since  1946,  from  around  50%  of  GDP  to  around  240%  of  GDP 
(Chart 1). In the United Kingdom this pattern has been replicated, but over a much shorter 
time  period  since  around  1980  (Chart  2).  Across  most  OECD  countries,  the  patterns  are 
similar. The asset management industry has, it appears, come of age. 
The  drivers  of  this  growth  are  reasonably  well-understood.  The  pool  of  prospective  global 
savers has become larger, older and richer, each of which tends to be a boon for the asset 
management industry. Since 1950, average life expectancy has risen by nearly 50%, world 
population has risen by a factor of three and world GDP per capita has risen by a factor of 
nearly  40.  There  is  a  strong  cross-country  correlation  between  GDP  per  capita  and  AUM 
relative to GDP (Chart 3). 
Accompanying  this  has  been  a  sharp  rise  in  the  ratio  of  global  wealth  to  income.  Among 
Western  economies,  this  ratio  has  roughly  doubled  since  1950  from  around  200–300%  of 
GDP  to  around  400–600%  of  GDP  (Piketty  (2014)).  Among  other  things,  this  has  been 
attributed to post-war capital market liberalisation causing an upward shift in asset prices.  
                                                
1   Estimate based on aggregate assets of insurers, pension funds and mutual funds. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Looking  forward,  none  of  these  global  forces  –  population,  ageing,  incomes,  wealth  –  are 
likely  to  go  into  reverse  in  the  near  future.  Between  now  and  2050,  life  expectancy  is 
expected to increase 9% (to 77 years), global population to rise by a further 30% and real 
GDP per capita to rise almost threefold. Wealth-to-income ratios, while high, remain below 
their peaks in the 18th and 19th centuries and so could rise further (Piketty (2014)). 
These trends will be given impetus by changes in the pattern of global growth. The fastest 
growing  economies  globally  will  be  those  where  penetration  of  the  asset  management 
industry is lowest. Developing markets currently represent less than 20% of global personal 
financial  assets,  but  represent  40%  of  global  GDP.2  By  2050,  developing  countries  will 
represent 60% of global GDP. In China and India, personal financial assets have grown at a 
rate of 25% per year for the past 20 years. 
All  of  this  suggests  that  the  global  asset  management  industry  is  likely  to  continue  its 
upwards march, absolutely and relative to the economy. For example, PWC recently forecast 
that AUM would top $100 trillion by 2020 (PWC (2014)). Simply extrapolating GDP per capita 
trends forward using the relationship in Chart 3, AUM could reach $400 trillion by 2050. If 
these trends are even roughly right, asset management may not only have come of age – we 
may be about to enter the Age of Asset Management. 
As important as the absolute scale of the asset management sector is its composition. On 
the  assets  side,  a  number  of  important  trends  are  at  play.  One  is  the  rapid  growth  in 
specialist funds, often investing in less liquid asset classes. This is evident in the growth of 
so-called  alternatives,  such  as  hedge,  private  equity,  real  estate,  infrastructure  and 
commodity funds. These have risen from under $2 trillion AUM in 2003 to over $6 trillion by 
2012, or from 5% to 10% of global AUM (Boston Consulting Group (2013)). 
Accompanying that, there has been strong growth in funds active in specialist, often illiquid, 
markets – for example, high yield bond funds and emerging market funds. Since 2008, these 
funds have grown at an annual rate of around 40% per year, outpacing growth in the global 
mutual fund industry by a factor of four (Chart 4).3 Also rising rapidly have been flows into US 
mutual  loan  funds,  which  spiked  to  $63  billion  in  2013  having  averaged  $15  billion  in  the 
preceding three years.  
A second striking feature has been the rise in the importance of passively managed funds, 
including Exchange Traded Funds (ETFs) and other index-tracking strategies. These passive 
or tracking funds have risen from $2 trillion  in 2003 to almost $8 trillion by 2012, a rise in 
global market share from 5% to 13%. Within this, ETFs have been growing at an annual rate 
of around 30% for the past decade with AUM currently standing at $2 trillion. 
A third trend – the mirror image of the first two  – has been the declining share of actively 
managed funds operating in large-cap equity and government fixed income markets. Their 
slice of the global AUM pie has fallen sharply over the past decade, from two-thirds to around 
a  half.  For  some  institutional  investors,  this  is  part  of  a  longer-term  trend  towards  “de-
equitisation” – a dreadful word – to which I will return. 
The  reasons  for  these  shifts  in  portfolio  allocation  are  not  difficult  to  fathom.  Like  many 
advanced  economies,  the  asset  management  industry  is  facing  its  own  version  of  the 
“squeezed  middle”.  Active  funds  operating  in  core markets,  in  the middle  of the risk/return 
distribution,  are  feeling  the  pinch:  from  above,  due  to  the  rise  of  alternative  funds  and 
strategies seeking higher return in a low yield environment – the search for yield; from below, 
due to the rise of passive funds and tracking strategies delivering lower cost to investors – 
the quest for cost. 
                                                
2   Personal Financial Assets are defined as financial assets that are held by households, rather than companies 
or other institutions 
3   The growth in AUM may be overstated by increased coverage of the source data over the period. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  From  an  end-investor  perspective,  both  of  these  trends  are  understandable.  Yet  they  also 
potentially  carry  risk  implications,  both  for  end-investors  and  for  the  financial  system  as  a 
whole. For example, the shift towards illiquid assets heightens market risk for investors. And 
the move into passive and tracking strategies increases the potential for investor herding and 
correlated  market  movements  (Bolognesi  and  Zuccher  (2008)).  Both  potentially  have 
implications for financial markets dynamics and systemic risk.  
Turning to the liabilities side of the balance sheet, here again some important trends are at 
play. Among the most important is the progressively greater share of investment risk being 
put  back  to  end-investors,  with  commensurately  less  being  borne  by  intermediaries  and 
companies.  One  clear  example  is  found  in  the  pensions  industry,  with  the  structural  shift 
away from Defined Benefit (DB) and towards Defined Contribution (DC) pensions. 
Here in the UK, the proportion of DB schemes offered to new members has fallen from 31% 
to 14% since 2008. Contributions to DC funds have been roughly twice as large as those to 
DB funds since the early part of the century. And the picture is similar on the life insurance 
side, with virtually all of the growth in UK life insurers’ balance sheets since the early part of 
this  century  coming  from  unit-linked  products  where  the  investment  risk  is  borne  by  end-
investors (Chart 5).4  
The measures announced in the UK Budget a couple of weeks ago will add momentum to 
these trends. These will remove the effective requirement on most retirees to purchase an 
annuity with DC pension pots once retirement age is reached. This will increase the flexibility 
of  investors’  portfolio  choice.  But  it  will  also  tend  to  place  a  greater  onus  on  these  end-
investors to manage the associated investment risk. 
These trends in the contractual structure of liabilities have risk implications for end-investors 
and the financial system as a whole. A key question, here, is how household behaviour is 
likely  to  respond  to  bearing  these  additional  risks,  especially  in  situations  of  stress.  Will 
investors ride them out or run to the hills, stick or twist? It is impossible to know for certain. 
But experience during the crisis is revealing. 
Then, households in a number of countries exhibited acute risk-sensitivity and risk-aversion. 
For example, UK households responded to heightened market risk by reducing contributions 
to  long-term  savings  products,  such  as  life  insurance  and  DC  pensions.  Household  net 
contributions to life insurance and pension funds fell from £54 billion in 2006 to £11 billion in 
2008.  This  suggests  some  skittishness  on  the  part  of  retail  investors  when  faced  with 
investment risk. 
In summary, over the course of the past decade or so, the asset management industry has 
fundamentally  changed  shape.  It  is  now  large  and  is  set  to  get  larger  still.  The  assets  it 
manages are increasingly being allocated into illiquid assets or indexed strategies. And the 
risks on these asset allocations are increasingly being borne by (perhaps trigger-happy) end-
investors. 
Too-big-to-fail 
Given  this  evolving  structure,  what  risks  to  financial  stability  might  the  asset  management 
industry pose? The financial crisis alerted us to the perils of banks that are “too-big-to-fail”. 
During  the  crisis,  the  collateral  damage  from  big  bank  failure  necessitated  state  bail-outs. 
These nourished the beast that had already eaten the farm. A variety of regulatory reforms 
are being put in place in an attempt to house-train this beast (Haldane (2012a)).  
                                                
4   Some of this is a mirror-image of trends in the pensions industry, but the pattern is also evident for non-
pension savings products. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  One natural question, then, is whether the asset management industry has spawned similar 
such behemoths. Two relevant factors here are, first, the relative degree of concentration in 
the industry and, second, the scale of its largest players. Table 1 shows the world’s top 10 
largest asset managers and banks by asset size. 
The degree of concentration across the two industries is broadly similar. The top 10 asset 
managers account for just less than 30% of the sector, the top 10 banks a little more than 
20%.  Their  balance  sheets  are  also  similarly-sized.  In  aggregate,  the  top  ten  banks  and 
asset managers total $20 trillion and $25 trillion in assets respectively. The world’s largest 
asset manager (Blackrock) is around a third larger than the biggest bank (ICBC). But, on the 
other side, nine of the top 10 banks are larger than their asset management equivalents. 
On the face of it, then, the structure of banking and asset management is not too dissimilar. 
But the risks to these balance sheets are also quite different. As an agency function, asset 
managers do not bear credit, market and liquidity risk on their portfolios. Currently, Blackrock 
has over $4 trillion of assets under management, but has only $9 billion of assets of its own.5 
Fluctuations  in  asset  values  do  not  threaten  the  insolvency  of  an  asset  manager  as  they 
would a bank. Asset managers are, to a large extent, insolvency-remote.  
They  are  not,  however,  insolvency-immune.  An  individual  manager  or  fund  does  face 
operational  and  reputational  risk  –  for  example,  arising  from  a  Maxwell  Pensioners-sized 
fraud or an Arthur Andersen-shaped reputational hit. We have seen examples of this in the 
past – the large outflows from Gartmore’s funds following the departure of key staff prior to 
its  acquisition  by  Henderson;  or  the  outflows  from  Axa  Rosenberg  in  2011  following  an 
alleged fraud. 
Nonetheless, if these are the sources of insolvency, then failure of an asset manager is likely 
to be different than for banks. Fraud and reputational risk tend be idiosyncratic. Keynes said 
of sound bankers that they were ruined in a conventional way along with their fellows so that 
no-one could be blamed (Keynes (1932)). If Keynes was right, then asset managers may be 
a different breed. 
Yet even if the “fail” element of too-big-to-fail is a red-herring, the “big” is not. Distress at an 
asset manager may aggravate frictions in financial markets, in particular frictions in market 
liquidity. One example would be an asset fire-sale. This might arise if assets from a failing 
fund  were  offloaded  at  a  pace  and  scale  that  caused  indigestion  in  the  underlying  market 
(Office of Financial Research (2013), Hau and Lai (2012)). If so, asset prices would be driven 
south, possibly to well below their long-term or fundamental value. Put differently, illiquidity 
risk premia in those markets could be driven to sub-optimally high levels.  
This fire-sale friction might  be fanned  by the  actions  of  investors  or  counterparties.  Falling 
asset prices may be the prompt for withdrawal (in the case of open-ended funds) or sales (in 
the  case  of  closed-end  funds).  In  some  respects,  this  would  mimic  a  banking  “run”,  albeit 
operating through non-conventional channels (Chen et al (2010)). This could itself induce a 
further round of asset fire sales in an amplifying loop.  
The good news here is that, unlike in banking, history is not littered with examples of failing 
funds  wreaking  havoc  in  financial  markets.  The  historical  examples  we  have  tend  to  be 
confined to small and isolated corners of the financial system.  
But, as any self-respecting asset manager would tell us, past performance is no guide to the 
future.  This  is  especially  true  in  an  industry  as  large  and  as  rapidly  changing  as  asset 
management,  with  asset  portfolios  becoming  less  liquid  and  more  correlated  and  investor 
behaviour  becoming  more  fickle  and  run-prone.  Future  illiquidity  pressures  in  financial 
markets, generated by asset management distress or wholesale portfolio reallocation, may 
                                                
5   Figure  represents  total  assets,  adjusted  for  equal  and  offsetting  liabilities  and  non-controlling  interests  and 
excluding intangible assets and goodwill, as of June 2013. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  be larger and more potent. In other words, Black Swan risk in asset management may be 
real and rising (Taleb (2007)). 
Pro-cyclicality 
In  practice,  such  adverse  financial  market  dynamics  are  more  likely  to  arise  from  asset 
managers  behaving  in  a  correlated  fashion,  perhaps  because  they  face  a  common  set  of 
constraints or sources of stress. In this respect, it is possible to identify a set of market-wide 
conventions  or  regulatory  practices  which  have  the  potential  to  drive  common  behaviour 
among asset managers and their institutional client base. These have the potential to turn 
idiosyncratic market frictions into systemic market failures.  
Around a year ago, the Bank began working with some academics and industry practitioners 
to  explore  these  dynamics.  In  particular,  it  focussed  on  evidence  of  pro-cyclicality  among 
insurance  companies  and  pension  funds  (ICPFs)  –  their  potential  to  amplify,  rather  than 
damp, the risk cycle through their portfolio choices. A report from this group will be published 
later in the year. 
Academic  and  industry  evidence  points  to  at  least  three  channels  through  which  ICPF 
behaviour could generate pro-cyclicality: 
Market  Conventions:  Investors  face  an  acute  information  problem  when  judging  the 
performance of their fund manager (Rajan (2005)). One way of mitigating that problem is by 
benchmarking fund performance, either to others in the industry or to an industry-wide index. 
That  is  an  important  reason  why  relative  return  benchmarking  and  index-tracking  is 
commonplace.  There  is  also  evidence  that  investors  adjust  their  portfolios  on  the  basis  of 
these  relative  metrics  –  for  example,  with  stronger  inflows  into  funds  whose  relative 
performance has been superior (Chevalier and Ellison (1997), Feroli et al (2014)). 
These market conventions have the potential to amplify pro-cyclical swings in asset prices 
and  investor  flows.  For  example,  in  market  upswings  fund  managers  are  likely  to  try  and 
juice-up  returns  by  searching  for  yield  in  an  attempt  to  outperform  their  benchmark.  The 
reverse occurs in the downswing when there will be a quest for safety to boost relative return 
rankings.  
But if everyone is playing this game, the result will be pro-cyclical pressures on asset prices, 
adding  exuberance  to  the  upswing  and  pessimism  to  the  downswing.  This  increases  the 
potential for mis-pricing in asset markets – by turns, risk premia becoming first too thin and 
then too fat. Relative return benchmarking creates, in effect, a Red Queen Race for the asset 
management industry (Ridley (1993), Haldane (2012b)).  
Other asset management conventions may also generate pro-cyclical swings. For example, 
index-tracking strategies, including through ETFs, will tend to increase asset correlations and 
herding in investment flows (Bolognesi and Zuccher (2008)). The use by asset holders of a 
small pool of consultancies for investment advice may also generate correlated investment 
strategies. And the use of short-term performance mandates for fund managers is also likely 
to amplify pro-cyclical swings in asset allocation and asset prices. 
Accounting Rules: The 2000s saw the introduction of Financial Reporting Standard (FRS) 
17  in  the  UK  and  Statement  of  Financial  Accounting  Standard  (SFAS)  158  in  the  United 
States.  This  fundamentally  changed  companies’  accounting  practices  in  respect  of  their 
pension  obligations.  In particular,  companies  were  required  to  value  pension  assets  at fair 
(that  is,  mark-to-market)  values,  with  liabilities  typically  discounted  using  a  corporate  bond 
rate. Pension surpluses and deficits then needed to be recorded on balance sheet.  
This  change  in  accounting  rules  reshaped  company  and  pension  fund  behaviour.  For 
example,  in  a  downswing,  risky  asset  prices  and  safe  rates  tend  to  fall,  raising  measured 
deficits.  Faced  with  this,  pension  funds  will  have  an  incentive  to  sell  risky  assets  and 
purchase bonds to better match their assets and liabilities (Amir et al (2010)). But this will 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  itself  tend  to  drive  down  yields  further,  boosting  market-valued  liabilities  and  thereby 
encouraging further matched bond purchases in a pro-cyclical spiral (Plantin et al (2008)). 
A  similar  dynamic  affects  insurance  companies.  Between  them,  FRS  26  and  27  specify 
valuation  conventions  for  measuring  insurers’  assets  and  liabilities.  Some  of  these  involve 
marking  assets  to  market  and  discounting  liabilities  at  a  risk-free  rate.  This,  too,  has  the 
potential to generate pro-cyclical loops, with sales of risky assets whose prices are already 
falling and purchases of risk-free assets which in turn increases the market value of liabilities 
and the incentives to hedge further.  
Regulatory Rules:  Risk-based  regulatory  rules  can  contribute further to  these  pro-cyclical 
tendencies. For example, consider a pension fund or insurance company operating close to 
its  risk-based  capital  or  funding requirement  and  whose  bond  portfolio  is  downgraded  and 
suffers  a  drop  in  price.  This  has  the  effect  of  both  reducing  measured  solvency  due  to 
marking to market and raising required risk-based capital requirements – a double whammy. 
In response to this, ICPFs may have an incentive to sell their downgraded assets to de-risk 
their portfolio. But this will tend to depress further asset prices in a pro-cyclical spiral. Merrill 
et  al  (2012)  provide  evidence  of  just  this  dynamic  at  work.  Following  downgrades  of  non-
agency  RMBS  in  the  US,  insurance  companies  had  an  incentive  to  sell  their  downgraded 
securities to reduce their capital requirements. Merrill et al show that this selling occurred at 
lower prices among those insurance companies marking-to-market. 
What additional evidence do we have of such pro-cyclicality? One piece comes from looking 
at investment allocations by institutional investors over time. As an example, Chart 6 plots 
growth in the S&P 500 against the change in the portfolio allocation to equities among US life 
insurers  between  1996  and  2012.  It  shows  a  high  correlation,  with  rises  in  equity  prices 
inducing reallocations into equities.  
This  suggests  a  potentially  significantly  pro-cyclical  swing  in  portfolio  behaviour.  For 
example, a 10% rise in the S&P on average increases the equity portfolio share by over one 
percentage point – or around $70 billion given the scale of US life insurers’ balance sheets.6 
If  done  quickly,  this  could  be  a  potent  procyclical  amplifier.  Similar  patterns  are  evident 
among life insurers in other countries.  
A  second  piece  of  indirect  evidence  comes  from  the  behaviour  of  regulators.  There  have 
been several incidences over recent years of regulators loosening regulatory constraints to 
forestall concerns about pro-cyclical behaviour in a downswing. For example, UK regulators 
loosened  regulatory  constraints  on  insurance  companies  in  the  early  2000s  following  the 
bursting of the dotcom bubble. This was due to fears of selling pressure on equities being 
amplified  as  insurance  companies  de-risked  their  portfolios  as  they  neared  regulatory 
constraints. Pension fund regulators have taken similarly-motivated actions recently due to 
depressed real yields boosting the market value of liabilities.  
A third piece of evidence comes from analysing the impact of ICPF asset allocation decisions 
on asset prices. In particular, at the Bank we have analysed the impact of purchases of long-
term UK indexed-linked debt by UK ICPFs since the early 1990s (Zinna (2014)). Over this 
period, the combination of accounting and regulatory rules led to large cumulative purchases 
of  long-term  government  debt  by  ICPFs.  At  the  same  time,  long-term  real  yields  fell  from 
around 4% to around –1%.  
Controlling for other factors, such as the supply of government debt, research at the Bank 
has sought to identify the impact of ICPF purchases on the yield curve. It finds the impact to 
be material, especially at the longer end of the yield curve. Over the period 1990 to 2010, it 
finds that pension funds purchases lowered the two-year real yield by around 70 basis points 
                                                
6   Data are adjusted to remove impact from re-valuation effects. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  and  20-year  real  yields  by  around  165  basis  points,  with  the  price  pressures  most  acute 
during the period 1996 to 2004.  
For insurance companies, the bulk of the buying pressure comes somewhat later (2006 to 
2010) and the impact is somewhat smaller (30 basis points and 75 basis points respectively). 
Nonetheless, if these ready-reckoners are even roughly right, they suggest a very significant 
impact of ICPF portfolio allocation on yields, and hence on incentives to hedge further, in a 
pro-cyclical spiral.  
This  evidence,  while  far  from  conclusive,  provides  some  important  clues.  There  are 
indications of correlated, pro-cyclical swings in asset allocation and asset prices induced by 
asset managers’ and their clients’ behaviour. Like bankers, institutional investors have risen 
and fallen with the herd. Keynes’ bankers and today’s asset managers may not after all be 
such different beasts. 
Patient capital 
There is a second, long-term, set of risks and opportunities posed by the asset management 
industry. Perhaps the defining feature of the sector is the long-term nature of its liabilities, 
especially for institutional investors like ICPFs. This makes the sector a potentially important 
source of long-term financing to households, companies and governments – for example, in 
the form of equity and long-term debt. 
Yet the data tell a different tale. Chart 7 plots the portfolio allocation of UK ICPFs over the 
past quarter-century. The most striking trend is the erosion in ICPFs’ direct holdings of UK 
equities, where the portfolio share has fallen from around 50% in the late 1980s to less than 
10% today. Their shares of the UK stock market have mimicked this path. There has been a 
huge  “de-equitisation”  of  portfolios.  Although  this  pattern  is  not  found  universally  across 
countries, it is also evident in, for example, Japan and France.7 
There is no single cause of these portfolio trends in the ICPF sector. Some explanations are 
benign. For example, as the population ages and a larger chunk near or reach retirement, 
pension liabilities mature. We would then expect to see pension funds switching into lower-
risk,  shorter-duration  assets, such  as fixed  income  securities.  And  this  is  indeed  what  has 
occurred.  
But this seems unlikely to have been the sole explanation for de-equitisation. In particular, 
regulation and accounting appear to have played a significant role. Take the UK. In 1995, the 
Pensions  Act  introduced  a  Minimum  Funding  Requirement  (MFR)  –  the  ratio  of  assets  to 
liabilities  –  of  90%.8  The  discount  rates  on  liabilities  were  linked  to  UK  government  bond 
(“gilt”) yields. This drew trustees to gilts, and away from equities, as a matching asset to their 
liabilities. 
The Pensions Act 2004 abolished the MFR and replaced it with a scheme-specific funding 
requirement that further embedded the market-value approach to liability valuation. At around 
the same time, FRS 17 required publication of corporates’ pension fund surpluses or deficits. 
This  also  had  the  effect  of  encouraging  companies  and  fund  managers  to  avoid  volatile 
assets,  such  as  equities,  and  purchase  low  volatility  government  securities  to  avoid  large 
published swings in pension surpluses and deficits. 
These  changes  in  regulatory  and  accounting  rules  are  not  unique  to  the  UK.  There  have 
been  a  number  of  empirical  studies  of  their  consequences  in  other  countries  which  point 
                                                
7   This trend towards “de-equitisation” has been analysed, in a broader context, by McKinsey Global Institute 
(2011). 
If  a  scheme’s  solvency  dropped  below  90%,  the  employer  had  to  restore  it  to  90%  within  one  year;  if  a 
scheme’s solvency was between 90 and 100%, it had to be restored to 100% within five years.  
8  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  clearly  to  them  having  encouraged  a  secular  switch from  equities  into  lower-duration fixed 
income  securities,  in  particular  government  securities  (Greenwood  and  Vayanos  (2010)), 
Amir el al (2010), Andonov et al (2013)).  
Yet  the  consequences  of  de-equitisation,  for  the  financial  system  and  the  wider  economy, 
may be just as dreadful as the word itself (Furse (2014)). Equity does a much better job than 
debt of sharing risk between borrowers and lenders as repayment terms adjust automatically 
with  servicing  capacity.  Equity  is  also  better  able  to  support  the  financing  of  long-term 
investment projects because it is perpetual. So a world without equity is likely to be one with 
poorer risk-sharing and weaker long-term investment.  
To  illustrate  these  costs,  consider  the  portfolio  behaviour  of  pension  funds  around  the 
financial crisis. At this time, global equity prices fell sharply and risk appetites evaporated. 
These are precisely the circumstances in which pension funds, as long-term investors, could 
play  a  stabilising,  counter-cyclical  role.  In  particular,  those  pension  funds  with  stronger 
balance sheets might be expected to bear greater risk when its price is cheap – for example, 
by buying equities.  
In fact, the evidence suggests quite the opposite happened. We have looked at the portfolio 
behaviour of over 2000 corporate pension funds between 2006 and 2012, splitting them into 
those  with  “strongest”  and  “weakest”  balance  sheets.  Strongest  is  defined  here  by  the  net 
funding position (ratio of assets to liabilities) of the pension fund. Chart 8 shows the changes 
in equity portfolio allocations of the strongest and weakest pension funds, together with the 
FTSE All-Share index, over that period.9  
Both  the  strongest  and  the  weakest  pension  funds  began  the  period  with  a  similar  equity 
allocation. As equity prices started to fall in 2008, however, the allocations of strongest and 
weakest  funds  diverged  sharply.  The  strongest  pension  funds  reduced  significantly  their 
allocation,  effectively  cutting  it  in  half,  while  weak  funds  maintained  or  increased  their 
allocation. By the end of the period, the strongest funds had half the equity allocation of the 
weakest.  
At  one  level,  these  portfolio  reallocations  made  sense  –  the  strongest  protecting  their 
surpluses  by  de-risking,  the  weakest  trying  to close  their  deficits  by  re-risking.  Yet, from a 
longer-term  or  societal  perspective,  these  reallocations  are  troubling.  To  cushion  the  risk 
cycle, we would wish to see stronger long-term investors purchasing risk when it was cheap. 
That  would  benefit  both  investors  and  the  economy.  Capital  that  can  afford  to  be  patient 
should be patient.  
But those funds with the strongest shoulders appear instead to have ducked for cover, while 
the weakest appear to have engaged in a gamble for resurrection. In the longer-term, this 
type  of  behaviour  is  likely  to  worsen  returns  to  investors.  It  will  also  amplify  cycles  in  the 
financial system and economy by draining risk-taking when it is already weak. Patient capital 
ought to part of the solution to the long-term financing puzzle. In practice, it may have been 
part of the problem.  
Regulatory policy 
That  naturally  begs  the  question  of  what,  if  any,  policy  response  might  best  deal  with  the 
risks and opportunities asset management poses. From a potentially long list, I will focus on 
three areas. 
First,  Too-Big-to-Fail.  Here, the  jury  is  still  sitting.  In  January,  the  Financial  Stability  Board 
(FSB) published a consultation paper on its proposed methodology for identifying non-bank, 
non-insurer globally systemically important financial institutions – or, in what may represent a 
                                                
9  Data are adjusted to remove impact from re-valuation effects. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  new  high-water  mark  for  impenetrable  financial  acronyms,  NBNI  G-SIFIs.  Asset  managers 
are being considered among this class. Based on the consultation results, the FSB will report 
to the G20 later this year. 
Views on that consultation will be interesting and I am sure at least some of you here will be 
offering  some.  We  are  in  the  intellectual  foothills  when  understanding  and  scaling  the 
transmission  channels  through  which  asset  managers  could  generate  systemic  risk.  And 
given the recent changes in the scale and structure of the industry – a world of less liquid 
assets and runnier liabilities – these channels may be more potent tomorrow than they were 
yesterday. Against this backdrop it may be premature, and probably imprudent, to be ruling 
out future sightings of asset management Black Swans. 
At the same time, as regulators we should avoid tarring all birds with the same brush. For 
example, even if the financial market externalities associated with asset management failure 
were  found  to  be  potentially  large  and  damaging,  some  of  the  conventional  too-big-to-fail 
solutions may not be the right ones. For example, because asset managers are essentially 
unlevered, leverage or capital-based tools may be the wrong tool to tackle market failures. 
Tools which act on liquidity risk – minimum liquid asset requirements, restrictions or gates on 
liability redemptions – may be more suitable. 
Second,  procyclicality.  Asset management  has  at  least the  potential  to  amplify  pro-cyclical 
swings in the financial system and wider economy. If so, it may contribute to the mis-pricing 
of  risk  with  risk  premia  undergoing  cycles  of  feast  and  famine.  That  still  leaves  some  big 
questions begging. How large are these mis-pricing cycles? How do they affect risk-taking in 
the financial system and activity in the wider economy? And, if so, how best can public policy 
modulate those cycles?  
At present, we do not have good empirical answers to any of those questions. Jeremy Stein 
at the Federal Reserve Board has recently offered some answers (Stein (2014)), drawing on 
work by Feroli et al (2014). He notes that portfolio adjustments by asset managers can cause 
abrupt and asymmetric adjustments in risk premia which may have a significant impact on 
economic  activity  and  systemic  risk.  On  that  basis,  he  makes  a  case  for  monetary  policy 
leaning against financial market vulnerabilities, even when they are not sourced in leverage.  
The  evidence  here  is  fully  consistent  with  Stein’s  and  Feroli  et  al’s:  the  behaviour  of 
unlevered asset managers may have the potential to induce pro-cyclical swings in portfolio 
allocation and in risk premia, with damaging consequences for systemic risk and economic 
activity.  But  whereas  Stein  discusses  the  role  of  monetary  policy,  a  natural  first  line  of 
defence against such swings is so-called macro-prudential policy.  
It  is  early  days  for  macro-prudential  policy.  It  marks  a  radical  departure  from  the  past 
because it gives prudential tools an explicit role in managing the risk-taking cycle and activity 
in  the  wider  economy  (Haldane  (2014)). To  date,  the focus  of  macro-prudential  policy  has 
been on the risks arising from leverage on the balance sheet of banks – the quantity of risk. 
That is why existing macro-prudential tools have tended to focus on bank capital and other 
bank balance sheet ratios. 
Yet if risk in the financial system, and activity in the wider economy, are shaped importantly 
by asset management behaviour and associated pro-cyclical swings in risk premia, then this 
focus may be too narrow. Macro-prudential action may be justified even when leverage is not 
present and when banks are not at the scene of the crime. Modulating the price of risk, when 
this is materially mis-priced, could be every bit as important as controlling its quantity.  
This  is  the  next  frontier  for  macro-prudential  policy  –  whether,  and  if  so  how  best,  to 
moderate excessive swings in risk premia across financial markets which risk damaging the 
financial system or wider economy. This will require new analytical techniques to measure 
risk premia and their impact. And it will require fresh thinking on new policy tools to moderate 
movements in these risk premia. This is, in effect, an agenda for the second-generation of 
macro-prudential policy frameworks.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  Third, portfolio allocation. Over the past few years, there has been increasing interest in the 
financing  of  long-term  investment.  In  2013,  the  G30  produced  a  report  on  “Long-term 
Finance and Economic Growth” and the European Commission produced a Green Paper on 
“Long-term Finance of the European Economy”. Most recently, the G20 has this year taken 
as one of its signature projects stimulating longer-term investment.  
All  of  this  has  a  direct  link  to  the  portfolio  choices  of  long-term  savings  institutions.  Their 
behaviour  over  recent  years,  de-equitisation  and  all,  jars  uncomfortably  with  this  emerging 
agenda. Financial capital, even among long-term institutional investors, has become restless 
at just the time the economy requires patience.  
In response, a number of fledgling initiatives are underway which could begin to turn the tide. 
For  example,  a  week  ago  the  European  Commission  issued  a  second  communication  on 
long-term financing. Among the ideas in there are a reconsideration of the regulatory rules 
for  banking  (the  Capital  Requirements  Regulation)  to  ensure  they  are  not  serving  as  a 
disincentive to long-term financing. 
A second set of initiatives concern securitisation. The very word securitisation has become 
tainted  by  the  crisis.  Pre-crisis,  there  were  too  many  examples  of  over-opaque,  over-
complex,  under-collateralised  products  delivering  nasty  surprises  to  end-investors.  But, 
slowly,  the  market  is  being  rehabilitated  and  reconstructed  in  a  different  image,  helped  by 
public and private sector initiatives to improve transparency. 
One  element  of  this  would  be  the  creation  of  a  new  class  of  securitisations  which  clearly 
differentiate themselves from the mistakes of the past. A “high-quality” securitisation product 
might  comprise  much  simpler  structuring  of  payoffs  and  high  and  transparent  underwriting 
standards.  So-designed,  such  a  lower  risk  securitisation  might  benefit  from  preferential 
regulatory treatment. Work is underway both internationally and in Europe to design criteria 
for high-quality securitisations fitting this bill. With international colleagues, the Bank intends 
to support actively these important initiatives.  
If  successful,  the  prize  for  regulators  and  asset  managers  is  a  big  one.  For  regulators,  it 
would  enable  non-bank  investors  to  do  more  of the  heavy  lifting  when  financing  the  wider 
economy.  This  is  particularly  important  in  Europe  where,  at  present,  companies  are  very 
bank-reliant for their financing. For asset managers, it would have the potential to offer both 
duration and yield, thereby helping them meet the needs of end-investors.  
Conclusion 
It  is  often  said  that  banks  are  special.  Compared  to  banks,  asset  managers  generate  a 
completely different risk and opportunity set. But they, too, are special both for the financial 
system and the wider economy. As they grow in scale and importance, that specialness is 
likely to increase further. The Age of Asset Management may be upon us. 
Academics,  practitioners  and  regulators  have  been  studying  banks,  their  behaviour  and 
failure, for several centuries. Analysing and managing the behaviour of asset managers is, 
by  contrast,  a greenfield  site. The  risks  and  opportunities  asset management  poses,  while 
different, could be every bit as important. To avoid the pitfalls of the banks, this greenfield 
site will need to be cultivated carefully.  
 
 10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Chart 1 Total AUM of US insurance 
companies, pension funds, mutual funds 
and other funds, 1946 – 2013 
Chart 2 Total AUM of UK insurance 
companies, pension funds and mutual 
funds, 1980 – 2012 
ICPFs
Mutual funds
Other non-property funds
(a)
Per cent of GDP
46 51 56 61 66 71 76 81 86 91 96 01 06 11
Source: US flow of funds 
(a) Other non-property funds include closed-end funds, 
exchange-traded funds and money market mutual funds 
 
Chart 3 Relationship between GDP per 
capita and managed assets  
ICPFs Mutual funds
Per cent of GDP
80 83 86 89 92 95 98 01 04 07 10
250
200
150
100
50
0
250
200
150
100
50
0
 Source: OECD, ONS, Investment Management Association 
and Bank calculations 
 Chart 4 Global assets under management 
in selected specialised mutual fund 
types(a) 
  GDP per capita, US$, current prices
60,000
50,000
40,000
30,000
20,000
10,000
0
300
0
AUM of ICPFs and mutual funds as per cent of GDP
100
200
Source: OECD Statistical database and Bank calculations. 
 
  Emerging market
Corporate bond
High Yield
Mortgage-backed
Total Return
US$ billions
900
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14
 
Source: Emerging Portfolio Fund Research Global and Bank 
calculations. 
(a) Changes in assets under management may partly reflect 
changes in sample coverage.  
 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
 8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
  Chart 5 UK life insurance liabilities by 
type(a) 
Chart 6 Change in equity allocation of US 
and French life insurers over time(a) 
Non-profit non-linked
With-profit
Unit-linked
£ billion
£ billion
85
88
91
94
97
00
03
06
09
12
(a) Technical reserves net of reinsurance 
Source: S&P SynThesys (regulatory returns) and Bank 
calculations. 
  40
30
20
10
0
-10
-20
-30
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
 Smoothed annual 
growth, per cent
8Q cumulative change
to equity allocation,
percentage points
96
99
02
05
08
11
US (right-hand scale)
France (right-hand scale)
S&P 500 (left-hand scale)
Source: National flow of funds 
(a) The 8Q cumulative change to equity allocation is calculated 
using an 8 quarter moving-sum. Reallocation into equities is 
calculated as the difference between the allocation in equities at 
time t and allocation into equities at time t-1, measured in 
percentage points. Thus a negative number indicates a reduction 
in percentage allocation to equities, and may not indicate a 
reduction in total exposure to equities (if total flows have been 
large). Reallocation is calculated using data on quarterly flows into 
(or out of) equities in order to adjust for the impact of revaluation 
effects. 
The S&P 500 is smoothed by taking the growth of the 8 quarter 
average on the 8 quarter average a year earlier. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Chart 7 Asset allocation of UK insurance 
companies and pensions funds 
 
 
Chart 8 Portfolio share of equity of the UK 
DB PFs split by funding strength(a) 
Per cent
100
80
60
40
20
87 89 91 93 95 97 99 01 03 05 07 09 11 13
Overseas equities
UK government bonds
Mutual funds' shares
Other
UK equities
UK corporate bonds
Overseas bonds
Derivatives
0
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
 Index; Dec 2005=100
Portfolio share of equities
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
 Strongest funded (right-hand scale)
Weakest funded (right-hand scale)
FTSE All-share, annual average (left-hand scale)
06
07
08
09
10
11
12
Source: ONS and Bank calculations 
(a) Bonds includes money market instruments, medium and 
long term bonds. The split of overseas bonds by issuer is not 
available. 
(b) Other includes currency, deposits, loans, other accounts 
receivable and insurance technical reserves. 
(c) Derivatives data begin in 2004, but prior to 1997 are 
included in corporate bonds. 
 
Source: Pension Protection Fund and Bank calculations  
(a) The chart plots top 25% and bottom 25% funds each year given 
the strength of their funding positions. The funding position is 
calculated as a percentage of assets relative to liabilities, with 
higher percentage indicating a stronger funding position. The 
allocation to equities is taken as a proxy for the riskiness of a 
scheme (i.e. a higher allocation to equities indicating a more risky 
investment strategy). The sample includes all observations from the 
PPF dataset, for which the asset allocation reported was calculated 
in the reporting year or no earlier than 13 months prior to that. The 
values of asset holdings have been deflated using appropriate price 
indices for each asset class to illustrate the changes in asset 
allocation due to active re-allocation decisions rather than valuation 
changes 
 
 
Table 1 Largest banks (by assets) and asset managers (by assets under management), end 
2012 
Bank
ICBC 
Mitsubishi UFJ Financial 
HSBC Holdings 
Deutsche Bank 
Credit Agricole 
BNP Paribas 
JP Morgan Chase & Co 
Barclays 
China Construction Bank
Bank of America 
TOP 10
Country Assets ($bn) % of total Manager
BlackRock
China 
Allianz
Japan 
UK 
Vanguard
State Street
Germany 
Fidelity
France 
AXA
France 
JPMorgan Chase
US 
UK 
Bank of New York Mellon
BNP Paribas
China 
Deutsche Bank
US 
TOP 10
Country AUM ($bn) % of total
5.6%
US
3.6%
Germany
US
3.3%
3.1%
US
2.8%
US
2.2%
France
2.1%
US
US
2.0%
1.9%
France
1.8%
Germany
28.3%
3,792
2,448
2,215
2,086
1,888
1,475
1,431
1,385
1,303
1,247
19,270
2,789
2,709
2,693
2,655
2,649
2,516
2,359
2,351
2,221
2,212
25,154
 2.5%
2.4%
2.4%
2.4%
2.4%
2.2%
2.1%
2.1%
2.0%
2.0%
22.4%
 Sources: The Banker Database “Top 1000 World Banks ranking” (2013), Towers Watson "The World's 500 Largest Asset Managers" 
(2012) and Bank calculations 
 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
   References 
Andonov,  A.,  Bauer,  R.  and  Cremers,  M.  (2013),  “Pension  Fund  Asset  Allocation  and 
Liability Discount Rates: Camouflage and Reckless Risk Taking by U.S. Public Plans?” 
Adrian, T. and Shin, H. S. (2010), “Liquidity and Leverage”, Staff Report, Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York, No. 328. 
Amir, E., Guan, Y. and Oswald, D. (2010), “The Effect of Pension Accounting on Corporate 
Pension Asset Allocation”, Review of Accounting Studies, 15(2), p.345–366. 
Barberis,  N.,  Shleifer,  A.  and  Wurgler,  J.  (2005),  “Comovement”,  Journal  of  Financial 
Economics, vol. 75, no. 2 (February):283–317. 
Blackrock  (2013),  “RE:  Feedback  on  OFR  Study  on  Asset  Management  and  Financial 
Stability”, letter to the US Securities and Exchange Commission 1, November 2013. 
Blake,  D.,  Sarno,  L.  and  Zinna,  G.  (2014)  “The  Market  for  Lemmings:  Is  the  Investment 
Behavior of Pension Funds Stabilizing or Destabilizing?”, Bank of England mimeo.  
Bolognesi, E. and Zuccheri, A. (2008), “On the Efficiency of Benchmarks Composition: a 
Behavioural Perspective”, Italian Association of Scholars of Economics and Management of 
Financial Institutions and Markets (ADEIMF). 
Boston  Consulting  Group  (2013),  “Global  Asset  Management  2013:  Capitalizing  on  the 
Recovery”. 
Chen,  Q.,  Goldstein,  I.  and  Jiang,  W.  (2010),  “Payoff  Complementarities  and  Financial 
Fragility: Evidence from Mutual Fund Outflows” Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 97. 
Chevalier,  J.  and  Ellison,  G.  (1997),  “Risk  Taking  by  Mutual  Funds  as  a  Response  to 
Incentives”, The Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 105, No. 6. (Dec., 1997), pp. 1167–1200. 
Feroli,  M.,  Kashyap,  A.,  Schoenholtz,  K.  and Shin,  H.  S.  (2014)  “Market  Tantrums  and 
Monetary Policy", Report for the 2014 US monetary policy forum.  
Financial  Stability  Board  and 
International  Organization  of  Securities 
Commissions  (2014),  “Assessment  Methodologies  for  Identifying  Non-Bank  Non-Insurer 
Global  Systemically  Important  Financial  Institutions”,  Proposed  High-Level  Framework  and 
Specific Methodologies 
Furse,  C.  (2014),  “Taking  the  long  view:  how  market-based  finance  can  support  stability”, 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2014/speech718.pdf 
Greenwood, R. and Vayanos, D. (2010), “Price Pressure in the Government Bond Market”, 
American Economic Review, P&P, 2010, 585–590. 
Haldane, A. G. (2012a), “On Being the Right Size”, 
http://bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2012/speech615.pdf 
Haldane, A. G. (2012b), “Financial Arms Races”: 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2012/speech565.pdf  
Haldane,  A.  G.  (2014)  “Ambidexterity”,  speech  delivered  at  the  American  Economic 
Association Annual Meeting, Philadelphia on 3 January 2014  
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2014/speech713.pdf  
Hau, H. and Lai, S. (2012), “The Role of Equity Funds in the Financial Crisis Propagation.” 
Research Paper No. 11–35, Geneva: Swiss Finance Institute. 
Keynes, J. M. (1932), “Essays in Persuasion”, New York: Harcourt, Brace, and Company. 
Martin,  R.,  Casson,  P.  and  Nisar,  T.  (2007),  “Investor  Engagement:  Investors  and 
Management Practice under Shareholder Value”, Oxford University Press. 
the 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
McKinsey Global Institute (2011), “The Emerging Equity Gap: Growth and Stability in the 
New Investor Landscape”, December.  
Merrill  C.  B.,  Nadauld  T.  D.,  Stulz  R.  M.  and  Sherlund  S.  M.  (2012),  “Did  Capital 
Requirement  and  Fair  Value  Accounting  Spark  Fire  Sales  in  Distressed  Mortgage-Backed 
Securities?”, Working Paper, Ohio State University. 
Office of Financial Research (2013), “Asset Management and Financial Stability”. 
Piketty, T. (2014), “Capital in the Twenty-First Century”, Harvard University Press. 
Plantin,  G.  Sapra,  H.  and  Shin,  H.  S.  (2008),  “Marking-to-Market:  Panacea  or  Pandora’s 
Box?”, Journal of Accounting Research, Vol 46, Issue 2, pp 435–460.  
PWC (2014), “Asset Management 2020: A Brave New World”. 
Rajan, R. G. (2005), "Has Financial Development Made the World Riskier?", NBER Working 
Paper No. 11728. 
Ridley,  M.  (1993),  “The  Red  Queen:  Sex  and  the  Evolution  of  Human  Nature”,  Harper 
Collins. 
Stein,  J.  (2014),  “Incorporating  Financial  Stability  Considerations  into  a  Monetary  Policy 
Framework”, http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/stein20140321a.htm 
Taleb,  N.  (2007),  “The  Black  Swan:  the  Impact  of  the  Highly  Improbable”,  New  York: 
Random House. 
TheCityUK (2013), “Fund Management”, available at: http://www.thecityuk.com/research/our-
work/reports-list/fund-management-2013/ 
Zinna,  G.  (2014)  “Price  Pressures  in  the  UK  Index-Linked  Gilt  Market:  An  Empirical 
Investigation”, Bank of England mimeo. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
