  Øystein Olsen: The conduct of monetary policy 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Øystein  Olsen,  Governor  of  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of 
Norway), at the hearing before the Standing Committee on Finance and Economic Affairs of 
the Storting (Norwegian parliament), Oslo, 15 May 2014. 
 Accompanying charts can be found on the Central Bank of Norway’s website: Charts (PDF). 
Please note that the text below may differ from the actual presentation. 
I  would  like  to  thank  the  Chairman  of  the  Committee  for  this  opportunity  to  report  on  the 
conduct  of  monetary  policy.  My  statement  here  today  is  based  on  Norges  Bank’s  Annual 
Report for 2013 and has been updated based on new information and assessments up to the 
monetary policy meeting last week. 
Norges  Bank’s  operational  conduct  of  monetary  policy  is  oriented  towards  low  and  stable 
inflation.  The  operational  target  is  annual  consumer  price  inflation  of  close  to  2.5  percent 
over  time.  Monetary  policy  shall  also  contribute  to  smoothing  fluctuations  in  output  and 
employment. The key policy rate is the main instrument of monetary policy. 
Chart: Inflation and capacity utilisation 
In 2001, an inflation target was assigned to Norges Bank. The experience has been positive. 
Over the past ten years, consumer price inflation has on average been somewhat below, but 
close to 2.5 percent. The world economy has to a large extent been marked by imbalances 
through this period. Growth in the Norwegian economy slowed in the wake of the financial 
crisis, but has since been close to a normal level. Unemployment has remained low. 
Chart2: Norges Bank’s key policy rate 
The key policy rate is lower than what can be considered to be a normal level. Norway is a 
small, open economy. Exceptionally low interest rates abroad influence the key policy rate in 
Norway. At the same time, there is still a considerable difference between the key policy rate 
and  the  interest  rates  facing  households  and  enterprises.  Banks’  lending  margins  are  not 
particularly low as their lending margins are high. 
Chart3: Key rates abroad 
Low interest rates and unconventional monetary policy internationally reflect a continued low 
activity levels and high unemployment. In some countries, particularly in Europe, inflation has 
also shown a considerably decline. Policy rates are still close to zero in many countries and 
both the European Central Bank (ECB) and Sveriges Riksbank cut rates last year. 
Leading central banks have taken new steps to provide markets with forward guidance, with 
the  aim  of  signalling  low  interest  rates  for  a  long  period  ahead.  In  today’s  situation,  the 
forward guidance  is  intended  to  signal  low  interest rates for  an  extended  period  of  time  in 
order to sustain inflation and boost growth. 
Other  unconventional  monetary  policy  actions  are  also  in  use.  With  large-scale  securities 
purchases, the central banks in the US, the UK and Japan have sought to reduce long-term 
interest rates and thereby funding costs for firms and households. The provision of liquidity 
has also led to higher equity and securities prices. The US Federal Reserve started tapering 
asset purchases last year, resulting in a slight, renewed increase in long-term interest rates. 
Chart 4: GDP for trading partners 
Growth among our trading partners picked up in the latter half of 2013, particularly in the US. 
Although  euro-area  growth  has  also  improved,  unemployment  and  debt  levels  remain 
elevated.  Emerging  economies  are  growing  at  a  clearly  faster  pace  than  advanced 
economies, but the pace has slackened somewhat. A number of emerging economies have 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  been affected by capital outflows and currency depreciation. The tapering of asset purchases 
by the US Federal Reserve has likely also contributed to these developments. Countries with 
large current account deficits are particularly hard hit. 
Chart 5: Consumer prices abroad 
Inflation has fallen in many countries over that past few years. Euro area inflation fell to a 
very low level in 2013, fuelling fears of deflation. However, a portion of the decline in inflation 
is  related  to  developments  in  food  and  energy  prices.  Furthermore,  the  decline  has  been 
most pronounced in periphery countries. In those countries, negative or very low price growth 
reflects a need for improving competitiveness. In the core countries, such as Germany and 
France, inflation has remained on a steadier course. Long-term inflation expectations seem 
to be firmly anchored in most advanced economies. 
Chart 6: GDP for Mainland Norway 
Growth  in  the  Norwegian  economy  slowed  through  2013.  The  slowdown  was  most 
pronounced in the construction and oil supplier industries. Some export industries were also 
affected by weak demand in Europe and high cost levels. Growth in household demand was 
moderate in 2013. Household saving increased further and is now at a historically high level. 
Unemployment edged up through 2013. Capacity utilisation in the economy is still assessed 
to be close to a normal a level. 
Chart7: The krone exchange rate 
After appreciating over a longer period, the krone showed a pronounced weakening in 2013. 
Both domestic and international conditions contributed to the depreciation. Signs of weaker 
growth in the Norwegian economy probably had an impact. An improvement in the economic 
situation  in  the  euro  area  may  also  have  contributed.  Although  the  krone  has  appreciated 
somewhat thus far in 2014, it is still clearly weaker than at the beginning of 2013. 
Chart 8: Consumer prices in Norway 
Inflation has increased. As measured by the CPI-ATE, inflation averaged 2.5 percent in the 
first  quarter  of  2014.  The  krone  depreciation  has  contributed  to  a  faster  rise  in  prices  for 
imported consumer goods. Prices for domestically produced goods and services also rose at 
a faster pace in 2013, at just below 3 percent in the latter half of the year. The rise in house 
rents  and  food  prices  through  2013  partly  reflects  a  revision  of  the  calculation  method  for 
these goods items in the CPI. 
In the coming months, inflation is projected to edge down, partly reflecting the unwinding of 
temporary  effects.  Underlying  inflation  is  now  estimated  to  be  between  2  percent  and  2½ 
percent, which is one percentage point higher than one year earlier. 
Chart 9: Norges Bank’s key policy rate projections 
Saving, investment and spending decisions are influenced by expectations concerning future 
interest  rates.  Communication  on  the  future  course  of  monetary  policy,  including  the 
publication  of key  policy forecasts, therefore  plays  an  important  role.  Even  though  the key 
policy rate has been kept unchanged, Norges Bank’s forecasts for the key policy rate ahead 
were revised down through 2013. 
The  downward  revision  of  the  key  policy  rate  forecasts  primarily  reflects  lower  growth 
forecasts  for  the  Norwegian  economy.  There  are  also  prospects  that  wage  growth  will  be 
somewhat  lower  than  envisaged  earlier.  Growth  among  our  trading  partners  and  interest 
rates abroad have been somewhat lower than projected one year earlier. At the same time, 
banks’ lending margins are somewhat higher than expected. 
Chart 10: Inflation and capacity utilisation 
The analyses in the latest Monetary Policy Report published in March suggested that the key 
policy  rate  should  be  held  at  today’s  level  in  the  period  to  summer  2015,  followed  by  a 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  gradual increase. With such a path for the key policy rate, there are prospects that inflation 
will  be  slightly  below,  but  close  to  2.5  percent  throughout  the  projection  period.  Capacity 
utilisation may edge down over the next year and thereafter move up to close to a normal 
level. 
Chart 11: Household debt and house prices 
Monetary policy aims to be robust by, among other things, taking into account the uncertainty 
associated with economic driving forces and the functioning of the economy. In addition, in 
the conduct of monetary policy we seek to take into account the risk of a build-up of financial 
imbalances.  After  rising  sharply  over  many  years,  house  prices  flattened  through  2013.  In 
recent months, house prices have shown a renewed rise. Household debt has increased at a 
faster pace than household income over several years. 
A  robust  monetary  policy  aims  to  provide  an  improved  path  for  inflation,  output  and 
employment over time. A lower key policy rate can push up both inflation and demand for 
goods, services and labour in the short run. On the other hand, a lower key policy rate would 
have  augmented  the  risk  of  a  further  build-up  of  financial  imbalances.  A  persistently 
pronounced increase in house prices and debt may lead to a build-up of financial imbalances 
that may trigger or amplify an economic downturn – with high unemployment as a result. This 
suggests a gradual approach in interest-rate setting. 
Robust  banks  and  financial  sector  regulation  are  crucial  for  financial  stability.  Increased 
capital  requirements  for  banks  are  now  being  phased  in.  In  2013,  the  Ministry  of  Finance 
assigned  Norges  Bank  the  task  of  providing  advice  on  a  countercyclical  capital  buffer  for 
banks.  In  December,  the  Ministry  set  the  buffer  rate  at  1  percent,  in  line  with  the  advice 
issued by Norges Bank. The requirement will apply from 30 June 2015. 
The purpose of the countercyclical capital buffer is to enhance banks’ resilience to periods of 
large  losses.  The  buffer  rate  will  be  increased  when  financial  balances  are  building  up  or 
have built up over a period. In the event of an economic downturn and large bank losses, the 
buffer rate can be reduced, with a view to mitigating the procyclical effects of an undesired 
tightening of bank lending. 
The buffer is not an instrument in the ordinary management of business cycles. Changes in 
capital  requirements  may  nonetheless  influence  banking  behaviour  and  hence  economic 
developments. Banks can satisfy increased capital requirements in several ways. They can 
raise equity from their owners and some banks have already done so. Should banks choose 
to increase their lending margins or restrict lending by other means, this will have an impact 
on  economic  activity  and  inflation.  New  capital  requirements  may  therefore  influence  the 
conduct of monetary policy. 
While  increased  capital  requirements  will  strengthen  banks’  solidity  and  may  mitigate  the 
build-up of imbalances, we cannot proceed under the assumption that new regulations will 
eliminate the risk of financial instability. A robust monetary policy  will therefore continue to 
take into account the risk of a build-up of financial imbalances. At the same time, monetary 
policy  must  not  be  overburdened.  When  assessing  the  monetary  policy  trade-offs,  the 
primary  objective  of  monetary  policy  must  remain  low  and  stable  inflation.  We  will  not 
lose sight of the inflation target. Should the outlook for inflation or economic activity show a 
pronounced change, we still have monetary policy leeway – in both directions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
