Paul Fisher: Inflation, interest rates and forward guidance 
Speech by Mr Paul Fisher, Executive Director for Markets of the Bank of England, at State 
Street  Global  Advisors  London  Pensions  and  Investments  Breakfast  Briefing,  London, 
23 January 2014. 
 The speaker is also chair of the ifs University College. Any views aired in this speech are 
given in his capacity as a member of the Monetary Policy Committee of the Bank of England. 
The speaker is grateful to Geoff Coppins for helping to prepare this talk and many colleagues 
for comments, but any blame for the content is for the speaker alone. 
This morning I would like to discuss some of the important issues currently influencing the 
setting of monetary and financial policy by the Bank of England. Those policies may have a 
direct bearing on pension funds; most obviously you might think via the yields on financial 
assets but perhaps more importantly via the stability of the real economy. 
Developments in inflation 
First of all I want to note the importance the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) attaches to 
CPI inflation being close to its target of 2%. Indeed it is currently at exactly its target of two 
point zero per cent for the first time since April 2006! (Although it did drop below 2% for a 
time in 2007 and 2009). Although we can’t expect inflation to be exactly 2.0% very often (just 
four times since  it  was  announced  as  the  target  variable  in  December 2003),  inflation  has 
been above target for most of the past six years. Both the extent of the overshoot and its 
persistence were greater than the MPC initially expected. The pain of that experience of high 
inflation  over  the  past  few  years  should  remind  us  all  why  the  UK  attaches  so  much 
importance  to  keeping  inflationary  pressure  under  control  and  why  we  have  an  inflation 
target. 
Inflation is costly in all sorts of ways.1 It can destroy real incomes, for example by acting as a 
hidden tax2, and destroy wealth through a misallocation of resources. Those on fixed nominal 
incomes  or  who  depend  on  savings  income  may  be  badly  affected  whereas  it  can  inflate 
away the debts of others. And it generates a variety of other economic costs and distortions 
as  changes  in  the  general  level  of  prices  start  to  dominate  the  information  contained  in 
relative or “real” prices. Many of these costs are pernicious by being implicit; for example in 
businesses having to change price lists, or consumers having to spend more time looking for 
real value. 
The MPC could have set a tighter monetary policy to try and limit the rise in inflation. Why 
didn’t  we? First, because  we  were pretty sure that the factors driving inflation higher were 
going  to  cause  changes  in  the  price  level  rather  than  being  consistent  with,  say,  excess 
demand  generating  persistently  higher  inflation.  We  expected  inflation  to  fall  back,  once 
those  changes  had  passed  through.  And,  second,  to  prevent  even  a  temporary  rise  in 
inflation consequent to those price level shifts, the MPC would have had to try to depress the 
economy  even  further,  by  consciously  pushing  down  on  output,  employment  and  nominal 
wage growth – so real wage growth would have been weaker, not stronger – at a time when 
the  economy  was  already  very  weak.  So,  despite  the  costs  of  the  inflation  which  were 
                                                
1  For  a  comprehensive  review  of  the  costs  associated  with  anticipated  and  unanticipated  inflation,  
see  Briault,  C  (1995)  “The  costs  of  inflation”,  Bank  of  England  Quarterly  Bulletin:  February  1995 
(http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/archive/Documents/historicpubs/qb/1995/qb950102.pdf) 
2  Because no interest is paid on bank notes and coins. Also because of nominal rigidities in the tax system like 
fixed personal allowances. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
experienced, the costs of the policy needed to counteract it would have been even greater in 
this  specific  circumstance  of  one-off  shocks  and  left  the  UK  economy  in  a  much  worse 
position now. 
I want to stress that these calculations would not lead to the same conclusion were inflation 
being driven by pressure arising from excess demand or if inflation had led to expectations of 
above-target inflation in the medium-term. In those circumstances, where inflation would be 
more persistent and hence much more costly, the benefits of bringing inflation back to target 
would outweigh the short-run costs of doing so. The recognition of these different short-run 
trade-offs, depending on the forces driving inflation, lie right behind the specification of the 
Remit we have been given by the Government. 
The fact that inflation has now returned to target confirms to me that we were broadly correct 
in  our  underlying  assessment  that the factors  pushing  up  on  inflation  would  be  temporary, 
although  the  near-term  path  for  inflation  hasn’t  always  been  what  we  expected.  It  is  very 
difficult  to  anticipate  the  precise  trajectory  of  prices  and  we  have  certainly  learned  more 
about the dynamics of inflation during this difficult period: the effects of the 25% depreciation 
in  the  sterling  effective  exchange  rate  between  mid-2007  and  early  2009  were  larger  and 
longer-lasting than we anticipated for example3. But tightening policy in response would have 
been a major mistake: a tighter policy then and we could now be facing the threat of deflation 
and depression, rather than inflation around target and the prospect of real recovery. 
The MPC’s policy has been to keep short-term interest rates low, by setting Bank Rate at 
0.5%,  and  to  stimulate  the  economy  through  asset  purchases  and  latterly  through forward 
guidance. Although asset purchases work through several channels, I want to spend a little 
time on their contribution to depressing longer-term interest rates. Low interest rates – at all 
maturities – have been necessary to help stimulate spending and so help set the conditions 
for a recovery in the economy. But for many investors, such a policy generates low financial 
returns which are difficult to cope with. Pension funds, for example, need relatively long-term, 
low  credit  risk  investments  –  such  as  gilts  –  and  those  have  been  generating  lower  than 
normal returns for some years. In fact, the search for yield has tended to depress all financial 
returns.  But  I  want  to  reflect  on  the  relationship  between  rates  of  return  and  the  real 
economy. As a general proposition, one cannot expect to earn high risk-adjusted real returns 
from financial investments if the underlying real economy is not growing. For example, it is 
business  profitability  which  drives  equity  dividends  and  prices.  The  real  “risk-free”  interest 
rate is also associated with real growth. Slow economic growth and low financial yields have 
been a feature of most of the developed world in recent years because of the global nature of 
the  recessionary  forces  at  work.  Once  a  recovery  in  the  UK  economy  has  been  firmly 
established then one would naturally expect real financial returns to be higher, and the real 
policy rate (i.e. Bank Rate minus expected inflation) can start to normalise. 
We can express this thought in a different way. Would it have helped financial investors to 
have had higher nominal interest rates over the past few years? If that had meant a deeper 
recession,  deflation  and  an  even  longer-lasting  malaise  in  the  economy,  then  very  few 
UK-based medium-term investors would have been better off as demand and activity would 
have dropped off further, credit risk crystallised and a range of credit investments went bad. 
Those with longer term investment horizons – such as everyone in this room should have – 
will appreciate that the best outcome for UK monetary policy  is for it to be set at the right 
level to lay the foundations for a stable economy. 
In that regard, we should bear in mind that the economy will always be subject to unforeseen 
shocks which tend to push it away from stability for a period of time. The job of the MPC is to 
                                                
3  With such a large change in the nominal exchange rate, one only needs to be slightly out in estimating the 
marginal impact to generate large errors in the total impact. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
react  to  those  shocks  by  bringing  inflation  back  to  target  and,  subject  to  that  primary 
objective, in a manner which helps sustain output and employment. 
As well as inflation back around target, we have also seen a resurgence in growth over the 
past  year.  It  was  difficult  to  explain  the  suddenness  of  the  change  in  sentiment  which 
accompanied  the  recovery  during  2013  but  growth  in  itself  should  not  be  regarded  as 
surprising. It is the near stagnation from 2010–12 which was harder to understand. We have 
been stimulating the economy with historically extreme levels of monetary policy for a long 
time  and  a  variety  of  headwinds  (including  the  problems  in  the  euro  area,  a  tightening  of 
credit conditions, the drag on activity from fiscal consolidation, and a squeeze in household 
real incomes resulting from the fall in productivity and higher energy and commodity prices) 
have all contributed to limit the effect of that stimulus. What seems to have happened in 2013 
is  that  at  least  some  of those  headwinds  were  perceived  to  have  diminished,  allowing  the 
policy  stimulus  to  come  through  and  the  resulting  growth  has  generated  the  renewed 
consumer and business confidence which reinforces demand. 
We are very conscious that the headwinds have not gone away: much of Europe and some 
other parts of the world continue to struggle for sustained growth; fiscal consolidation in the 
UK  (and  elsewhere)  is  likely  to  continue  for  a  while  to  come;  and  the  financial  sector  still 
needs some rebuilding. Indeed, the official production and construction data released earlier 
this month were rather disappointing, reminding us that strong growth from here on is by no 
means  guaranteed.  But  to  varying  degrees  perhaps  the  very  worst  of  the  storms  may  be 
behind us. Just a tailing off in some of their negative impacts may have been sufficient to 
allow the economy to start growing again. 
Interest rates and forward guidance 
So why aren’t we moving to tighten policy straight away, why did we issue forward guidance 
around  monetary  policy?  The  answer  is  in  the  levels  of  output  and  employment,  not  their 
growth  rates.  After  nearly  6  years  since  the  start  of  the  crisis,  the  level  of  output  in  the 
economy  is  still  2%  below  its  peak  in  2008.  A  conservative  extrapolation  of  the  pre-crisis 
trend  would  suggest  that  UK  output  is  some  15–20%  below  where  it  would  have  been 
expected to be by this time in the absence of the crisis. It seems unlikely that we will recover 
much of that gap and in any case the calculation is getting less precise and less relevant. 
Eventually,  economic  historians  may  work  out  what  happened  to  potential  output  and  we 
should establish a new reference point. As things stand today, it is difficult to know precisely 
where the new sustainable growth path of the economy lies (especially as data for the past 
few years are still likely to undergo significant revision by the ONS). But with unemployment 
still  elevated,  and  diminishing  signs  of  inflationary  pressure  in  both  goods  and  labour 
markets, we can be reasonably confident that the economy needs to grow strongly for some 
time to come, to regain a stable and sustainable medium-term trajectory. 
The challenge for the MPC is to assess when inflationary pressures will be building and thus 
when  we need to start withdrawing stimulus, so that once we have eliminated slack in the 
economy,  monetary  policy  is  consistent  with  stable,  sustainable  growth  and  hence  stable 
inflation around the target (subject of course to the other forces acting on the economy at the 
time). That’s an extremely optimistic expectation of what policy can achieve, so let me put it 
slightly  differently.  The  realistic  challenge  for  the  MPC  is  to  avoid  a  big  mistake  either  by 
choking  off  the  recovery  too  soon,  leaving  the  economy  in  a  quagmire,  or  by  allowing 
inflationary pressures to build excessively, requiring a sharp tightening in interest rates (and 
the potential for another recession) to bring inflation back under control. 
Forward guidance is a policy framework designed, amongst other things, to help avoid big 
mistakes. We can encourage and probe growth in the economy by committing not to tighten 
policy until the economy has used up more of its spare capacity. On one view the policy is 
simple – we must give the economy plenty of time to establish the recovery before we start to 
raise interest rates or unwind asset purchases. At another level, some critical judgements are 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
going  to  be  needed  because  the  timing  is  inevitably  uncertain.  Given  those  uncertainties, 
forward  guidance  delivers  a  framework  within  which  the  MPC  can  explore  the  scope  for 
economic expansion without putting price and financial stability at risk. That guidance should 
help to give confidence to businesses and households and help to support demand growth. 
By  reducing  uncertainty  about  our  reaction  function,  guidance  should  also  have  helped  to 
counteract  the  pressure  in  financial  markets  to  price  in  the  chance  of  a  rapid  increase  in 
Bank Rate. 
We chose unemployment as the threshold indicator not because it was ideal – far from it – 
but  because  other  indicators  were  all  less  attractive.  Of  course,  no  sooner  had  we 
announced  a  policy  linked  to  the  unemployment  rate  than  it  began  to  fall  unusually 
precipitously.  But  what  is  there  not  to  like  about  sharply  falling  unemployment?  After  all, 
getting the economy back to a medium-term path quickly, allowing policy to normalise, would 
be a good thing? Right? 
Well, falling unemployment is undoubtedly a good thing for the individuals who are back in 
work and on many other social counts. It could only be a purveyor of the dismal science who 
found rapidly falling unemployment disappointing! Yet, in order to see rising living standards 
on  average,  it  is  crucial  to  see  rising  output  per  head  (i.e.  rising  productivity)  –  which 
ultimately drives real national income per head and hence how well off we are as a country. 
So we need to see rising employment accompanied by even faster growth in output. 
The  implied  productivity  performance  of  the  UK  economy  has,  in  fact,  remained  poor  – 
according to the official statistics, output simply doesn’t appear to be growing fast enough to 
support the employment growth recorded as well as generate the rapidly rising real incomes 
one would like to see. Something has to give. I hope that it will be that output grows faster – 
either through upwards revisions to recent growth rates or faster growth in future. If, on the 
other hand, the UK economy uses up all its spare capacity, without having had a substantial 
rise in real national income, then we should all be disappointed. 
The  weakness  in  productivity  growth  has  been  well  documented,  but  a  convincing 
explanation remains elusive. There are many plausible explanations of factors which could 
have contributed to the weakness, but each explains only a small part of the whole puzzle. I 
don’t  have  time  to  get  into  that  debate  today,  but  we  do  offer  a  variety  of  candidate 
explanations in recent Inflation Reports. 
One better feature of the current situation is that price pressures seem to be subsiding, not 
growing. Despite good rates of employment growth, there is no sign of nominal wages over-
reacting to general tightness in the labour market. Other price pressures also appear to be 
easing somewhat. Month by month there have been a series of small downside surprises in 
the  inflation  rate  as  oil  prices  have  been  relatively  stable;  the  effects  of  administered  and 
officially  regulated  prices  now  seem  to  be  a  bit  less  than  previously  expected;  inflation 
expectations remain well anchored and the exchange rate has been rising which may help 
keep a lid on imported costs for a while (but importantly, at the cost of less balanced growth 
which is a separate problem). Taking the inflationary news together, it would appear that we 
have a favourable situation in which to explore how much more capacity the economy has, 
before inflationary pressures begin to build. 
Another positive factor supporting our probing strategy is the emergence of macro-prudential 
policy.  Monetary  policy  has  a  difficult  challenge  ahead,  as  I  have  outlined.  It  will  help 
enormously if financial policies can help deal with, or at least mitigate the risks from, some of 
the imbalances that are arising in the economy while the MPC aims to restore medium-term 
stability in the economy as a whole. The housing market is an example of where monetary 
and  macro-prudential  policies  can  helpfully  interact  and  the  November  2013  Financial 
Stability Report sets out some of the policy measures that are underway or could be called 
on if necessary. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Funding for Lending Scheme 
One decision that has been implemented is in relation to the Funding for Lending Scheme 
(the  FLS).  The  FLS  contributed  to  a  substantial  fall  in  bank  funding  costs  after  it  was 
launched  in  July  2012.  This  fed  through  to  a  significant  improvement  in  household  credit 
conditions. Rates on new household lending have fallen markedly since mid-2012, with falls 
of more than 100 basis points in some representative mortgage rates. Both gross secured 
lending  and  repayments  have  picked  up  strongly.  And  the  number  of  approvals  for  house 
purchase has risen significantly, indicating higher mortgage lending in future. The Scheme 
has  probably  been  one  of  the  driving  influences  behind  the  resurgence  of  business  and 
consumer confidence – although there are many other factors behind the sort of swing we 
have seen. 
Partly because of its own success, there is no longer a need for the FLS to provide broad 
support to household lending. It is not the case that net lending for mortgages by UK banks 
is,  as  yet,  excessive.  Indeed,  the  annual  rate  of  growth  in  the  stock  of secured  lending  to 
individuals was under 1% in November 2013. But sharply rising house prices are a potential 
source  of  instability  and  we  should  not  risk  adding  policy  oil  to  that  particular  fire.  Credit 
conditions for smaller businesses have also improved, but to a lesser extent, and lending to 
businesses  overall  remains  muted.  The  FLS  extension  will  therefore  provide  continued 
substantial support for lending to businesses, with incentives in the scheme skewed heavily 
towards  lending  to  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises  (SMEs).  As  the  MPC  noted  in  the 
minutes  of  its  December  2013  meeting,  the  changes  to  the  FLS  provided  support  to  the 
MPC’s policy guidance by reducing the risk of triggering the financial stability knockout. 
Conclusion 
Yesterday,  the  Labour  Force  Survey  headline  unemployment  rate  for  the  three  months  to 
November was published at 7.1%, after another large fall. But even if the 7% unemployment 
rate threshold were to be reached in the near future, I see no immediate need for a tightening 
of  policy. The  MPC  has  been  clear  all  along, that  upon  reaching the  7%  threshold  we  will 
have  to  consider  what  the  medium-term  pressures  on  the  economy  are  and  make  an 
appropriate judgement about the direction and pace of policy, and any further guidance that 
we may choose to issue in future. It is probably best to think about that in the context of our 
medium-term inflation projections published in the Inflation Report. 
Overall, the macroeconomic outlook is much more comfortable than it was – but we still have 
much to do and much to concern us. There is no room for complacency. Can the UK keep 
growing  at  the  sort  of  rate  consistent  with  recovery  if  our  key  European  export  markets 
remain so sluggish? How much more adjustment is needed in the financial sector and in the 
fiscal  position?  Have  households  sufficiently  rebuilt  their  balance  sheets  to  be  able  to 
withstand a normalisation of policy? Many of these considerations argue against being hasty 
in tightening monetary policy. But the inflation target remains our primary objective and we 
will have to be careful not to allow pressures to build up from excess demand. It would be a 
relief, probably for both you as investors and for us as policy makers, to get back to more 
normal policy conditions, but my own judgement is that we are still some way off the point 
where  it  is  appropriate  to  start  raising  Bank  Rate  and  that  when  it  is  time,  it  would  be 
appropriate to do so only gradually. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
