  Pongpen Ruengvirayudh: The current economic situation and recent 
monetary policy developments 
Opening remarks by Ms Pongpen Ruengvirayudh, Deputy Governor for Monetary Stability of 
the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the  Joint  Foreign  Chamber  of  Commerce  in  Thailand  (JFCCT), 
Bangkok, 21 May 2014. 
 Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
1. 
It  is  my  pleasure  to  be  back  here  at  the  Joint  Foreign  Chambers  of  Commerce 
(JFCCT). First of all, I would like to thank JFCCT for inviting me and would also like to thank 
all  the  members  of  JFCCT  for  your  continuing  contribution  to  the  economic  development 
here in Thailand. 
Economic outlook 
2. 
A  great  deal  has  changed  both  domestically  and  externally  since  I  was  here  last 
year.  With  respect  to  domestic  economy,  the  prolonged  political  stalemate  has  weighed 
considerably  on  confidence,  exacerbating  the  already  fragile  economy.  Externally,  the 
announcement of the US Fed to scale down its Quantitative Easing program since May 2013 
has led to turmoil in financial markets across emerging economies. Today, I therefore would 
like to take this opportunity to share briefly with you my thoughts on the country’s economic 
outlook, the medium-term challenges we face and monetary policy of the Bank of Thailand. 
3. 
When it comes to current economic assessment, the slowdown of the Thai economy 
over  the  last  year,  in  combination  with  uncertainty  over  the  ongoing  political  conflict,  is  a 
growing concern for many. The NESDB two days ago announced that GDP growth in 1Q14 
contracted  by  0.6% (YOY),  compared to  same period  last  year.  Signs of  moderation  were 
witnessed in various economic activities, such as consumption and investment, as well as in 
government  spending,  despite  signs  of  a  rise  in  some  exports.  As  the  political  deadlock 
lingers,  tourism  has  begun  to  feel  the  impact.  In  the  last  MPC  meeting  of  April  23rd,  the 
committee  projected  that  the  Thai  economy  in  will  grow  less  in  2014  than  the  previously 
assessed  at  2.7  percent.  This  will  be  mainly  due  to  the  weaker-than-expected  economic 
momentum in the first quarter of the year and the political impasse posing downside risks to 
domestic  demand  and  tourism.  However,  the  economy  is  expected  to  resume  its  normal 
growth in 2015. 
4. 
Notwithstanding  the  short-term  headwinds,  there  are  also  causes  for  optimism. 
Global economic activity has been firming up. Growth has gathered momentum in the US, 
the  Euro  area  and  Japan.  Recent  government’s  attempts  in  China  to  reform  the  financial 
sector should support sustained growth in the longer term, although with some impacts on 
short-term  growth.  In  emerging  economies,  the  turbulence  in  financial  markets  has 
somewhat receded following these economies’ attempts to address vulnerabilities and also in 
Thailand,  the  financial  market  has  stabilized.  Volatilities  in  foreign  exchange  market  have 
been contained. The IMF, in their April report, projected that the global economy will grow at 
3.6 per cent this year, which is an improvement from 3.0 percent growth last year. This more 
favorable external environment should benefit export-reliant countries such as Thailand. 
Medium-term challenges 
5. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, looking at the more medium-term prospects, I am convinced 
that the underlying fundamentals that have been attracting international investors to Thailand 
over the years are still in place. The country’s overall macroeconomic fundamentals remain 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  sound against the back-drop of a healthy banking system, low and well-anchored inflation, 
and  the  government’s  relatively  strong  financial  position.  A  flexible  exchange  rate  and  our 
strong  position  in  terms  of  international  reserves  provide  ample  cushioning  for  the  central 
bank to be able to manage capital flow volatility. These solid fundamentals command trust 
from  investors  and  credit  rating  agencies.  Recently,  Moody  reaffirmed  Thailand’s  stable 
credit outlook citing that “in many respects, Thailand’s credit metrics remain well positioned 
compared with its immediate rating peers”. 
6. 
Having  said  this,  we  cannot  take  things  for  granted.  In  fact,  many  problems  point 
toward a need for structural reform. The MPC, in its last meeting, expressed concern over a 
number  of  structural  issues,  which,  if  not  addressed,  could  restrain  the  country’s  potential 
growth  in  the  long  run.  These  problems  include  fiscal  sustainability,  inequality  in  terms  of 
both  income  distribution  and  access  to  education  and  health  care,  as  well  as  supply 
bottlenecks such as a labor shortage. These problems cannot be solved by monetary policy, 
but require a concerted effort from all stakeholders. 
7. 
In addition, as we are all aware, the prospect of the Thai economy is largely clouded 
by political uncertainty, which continues to impair the ability of the government to steer the 
economy  forward.  Public  investment  in  infrastructure,  as  a  source  of potential  growth,  has 
been put on hold. I do hope that the political instability will not drag on for a long time and 
that an acceptable solution will be reached among all stakeholders in society soon. 
Monetary policy 
Ladies and Gentlemen, let me turn to my last subject, that of monetary policy. 
8. 
The  MPC’s  ultimate  mandate  is  to  safeguard  the  macroeconomic  and  financial 
stability  of  the  country.  In  the  last  few  years,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  has  maintained  an 
accommodative monetary policy stance. Mindful of imminent downside risks to growth, the 
policy rate was cut three times in the MPC meetings of May and November 2013, and again 
in  March  2014.  In  these  three  meetings,  the  MPC  were  of  the  view  that  the  reductions  of 
policy  interest  rate  were  necessary  to  ensure  sufficient  support  to  the  domestic  economy. 
The current real policy interest rate, which is now in a negative territory, aims to help alleviate 
the financial burden on households and corporations, allowing them to withstand short-term 
shocks. 
9. 
However, as the current policy interest rate is already low, further easing would not 
be  without  concerns.  In  the  last  meeting  in  April  2014,  the  MPC  decided  to  maintain  the 
policy  at  2.00  percent.  The  rationales  behind  this  decision  were  that  the  current  monetary 
policy stance was accommodative enough to support the economy as the prolonged political 
uncertainties were the main cause for risk to growth, not the financial conditions. Meanwhile, 
room  for  further  policy  accommodation  was  diminishing,  and  any  possible  side  effects  of 
keeping the interest rate low for a protracted period, needed to be taken into account. 
10. 
I would like to end my remarks by thanking you all again for your contributions to the 
Thai economy and let me assure you that the Bank of Thailand will continue our works to 
ensure  a  stable  and  resilient  financial  and  economic  environment,  conducive  to  economic 
growth of the country. 
Thank you very much. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
