Takehiro Sato: Maximizing the potential of Japanese government bonds 
(JGBs) as global financial assets – recent initiatives to improve the 
market infrastructure for JGB settlement 
Speech  by  Mr  Takehiro  Sato,  Member  of  the  Policy  Board  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the 
International Bankers Association of Japan, Tokyo, 27 February 2014. 
 Introduction 
It is a great honor to have this opportunity to speak at the International Bankers Association 
(IBA)  of  Japan.  As  an  association  of  international  financial  institutions  serving  Japan’s 
financial markets, IBA has an impressive track record in facilitating exchange of views among 
member  financial  institutions  and  fostering  dialogue  with  the  relevant  authorities.  Through 
those activities, IBA greatly contributes to Japan’s economy as well as the development of 
financial markets in Japan. I pay my respect and extend my gratitude for constant efforts by 
the IBA members. 
Today, I will talk about the payment and settlement services provided by the Bank of Japan. 
In particular, I will focus on the future services for the settlement of Japanese government 
bonds (JGBs). The Bank has long put a great deal of effort into the development of payment 
and settlement systems. Currently, we are carrying out a major project to renew the Bank of 
Japan Financial Network System or the BOJ-NET, which forms an essential part of Japan’s 
payment  and  settlement  systems.  I  will  talk  about  this  project  in  more  detail  later  on.  To 
leverage  a  new  capability  in  the  new  BOJ-NET,  we  are  discussing  with  the  market 
participants, including several IBA  members of course, the possible extension of the BOJ-
NET operating hours. After those payment and settlement issues, I will close my speech with 
some remarks about the Bank’s recent conduct of monetary policy. 
Role of the Bank of Japan in payment and settlement systems 
I.  
The  Bank  of  Japan  plays  a  multi-faceted  role  in  Japan’s  economy.  It  is  responsible  for 
monetary policy and, at the same time, as a bank for banks, it provides banking services and 
maintains the stability in the settlement of funds and securities in Japan. The Bank plays a 
multi-faceted  role  in  the  field  of  payments  and  settlements,  too.  First,  the  Bank  provides 
account  and  settlement  services  for  the  Japanese  yen  and  JGBs.  Second,  the  Bank 
encourages the operators of private-sector payment and settlement systems to maintain and 
enhance the safety of their services, an important activity which is commonly called “central 
bank  oversight.”1  Third,  the  Bank  cooperates  with  market  participants  and  supports  your 
initiatives to review and improve market practices related to trading, payment, clearing and 
settlement. Here I will focus on our role as an operator of the JGB settlement system and talk 
about what has been done to date and what will be done in the future. 
                                                 
1   Central bank oversight of Financial Market Infrastructures (FMIs) is defined as the central bank’s activities to 
monitor the design, risk management, and operations of FMIs; to assess them against established safety and 
efficiency objectives; and to induce changes where necessary. In its oversight of FMIs, a central bank seeks to 
establish  a  common  understanding  with  FMI  operators  and  other  stakeholders  on  ways  to  maintain  and 
improve the safety and efficiency of FMIs, and support their efforts for improvements. Through those activities, 
the central bank aims to ensure the safety and efficiency not only in individual FMIs but also in the overall FMI 
in an economy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Initiatives to improve the safety of JGB settlement 
II.  
The Bank of Japan implemented online processing of JGB settlement back in 1990 (Chart 1). 
For  the  past  quarter  century,  the  Bank  has  been  working  with  the  JGB  market  players  on 
various  initiatives  aimed  at  improving  the  safety  of  JGB  settlement.  Those  include  the 
introduction  of  a  delivery-versus-payment  (DVP)  mechanism2  for  JGB  transactions and  the 
changeover  from  deferred  net  settlements  (DNS)  to  real-time  gross  settlements  (RTGS).3 
Meanwhile,  market  participants  and  the  Bank  worked  together  to  achieve  a  new  market 
practice  of  the  rolling  settlement  of  JGBs,  in  which  settlements  take  place  every  business 
day.  Before  the  introduction  of  the  rolling  settlements,  settlements  took  place  only  several 
times a month. In addition, the Bank encouraged market participants to introduce a central 
counterparty, or CCP in short, for JGB transactions and subsequently supported the CCP’s 
efforts to strengthen its risk management. Those efforts by market participants over the years 
helped prevent the failure of Lehman Brothers from causing devastating ripple effects across 
the whole financial market in Japan.4 
It  is  also  true,  however,  that  the  experience  of  the  recent  financial  crisis  revealed  a  few 
challenges of making the clearing and settlement of JGBs more robust. That has led market 
participants to make constant efforts to improve the safety of JGB settlement. I will illustrate 
two major examples of such market initiatives. One is to shorten the JGB settlement cycle, 
which  is  aimed  at  shortening  the  time-lag  between  the  execution  of  JGB  trading  and  their 
settlement.  The  other  is  to  widen  the  use  of  a  CCP  and  the  reinforcement  of  its  risk 
management that is commensurate with the wider use. 
Shortening of JGB settlement cycle 
A.  
First,  let  me  talk  about  the  issue  of  a  settlement  cycle  of  JGBs  (Chart  2).  Since  the  late 
1990s, a shorter settlement cycle for JGB transactions has been a major goal in the reform of 
Japan’s  securities  settlement  systems.  The  longer  the  time-lag  between  trading  and 
settlement, the more unsettled positions, leading to a build-up of settlement risk. Actually, the 
risk  became  imminent  in  the  financial  crisis  of  autumn  2008,  when  the  failure  of  Lehman 
Brothers  resulted  in  a  significant  amount  of  settlement  failures  in  the  delivery  of  JGBs. 
Market participants who had entered JGB trading with the failed financial institution had to go 
through  time-consuming  procedures  for  terminating  unsettled  transactions  and  replacing 
them with new ones in the markets. Those events highlighted the importance of reducing the 
time-lag between trading and settlement and led market participants to establish a working 
group under the Japan Securities Dealers Association in order to identify and examine the 
issues related to a shorter settlement cycle for JGB transactions. Based on the study by the 
working group, the JGB market moved to the shorter settlement cycle, from T+3 to T+2, in 
April 2012. 
There are on-going efforts by market participants toward a shorter settlement cycle with an 
aim  of  achieving  T+1  for  JGB  transactions  by  the  earliest  possible  time  after  2017.  The 
issues  currently  being  reviewed  include  possible  changes  to  trading  practices  and  the 
creation  of  a  market-wide  infrastructure  for  collateral  management.  In  addition  to  the 
                                                 
2   DVP is a mechanism which ensures that “a delivery of securities occurs if, and only if, payment occurs.” DVP 
mechanism eliminates the principal risk associated with settlement of a securities transaction, which 
sometimes results in a large-scale loss. 
3   Compared  with  DNS,  RTGS  substantially  reduces  systemic  risk.  Systemic  risk  materializes  when  one 
participant fails to settle its transactions, especially in a DNS system. DNS is a settlement mode which effects 
settlement of transactions among counterparties on a net basis at designated times. 
In conjunction with those improvements in the safety of JGB settlement, a number of improvements have been 
made  in  terms  of  the  efficiency  of  JGB  trading  and  settlement,  including  (1)  the  introduction  of  market 
practices  on  the  bilateral  netting  and  fails-to-deliver  when  the  changeover  to  RTGS  was  done  and  (2)  the 
creation of the JGB repo market when the rolling settlement was introduced. 
4  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
expected benefit of reducing settlement risk, the shorter settlement cycle is expected to help 
increase the market liquidity in that it makes it easier to quickly convert financial assets into 
cash. The Bank is providing active support for the project. 
The wider use of a CCP for JGBs and the reinforcement of its functions 
B.  
Let me now turn to the second example of a market initiative, which is the wider use of a 
CCP and reinforcement of its functions (Chart 3). During the financial crisis, the JGB market, 
and Japan’s financial market more broadly, were able to avoid the contagion of disruptions 
thanks to the clearing function of Japan Government Bond Clearing Corporation (JGBCC), 
which is today’s Japan Securities Clearing Corporation or JSCC in short. As you know, JSCC 
is a CCP for over-the-counter (OTC) JGB transactions and plays the role of a buyer to every 
seller and the role of a seller to every buyer, and provides guarantee for settlements even in 
the case of the default of a buyer  or seller. That experience highlighted the importance of 
central  clearing  and  led  market  participants  to  promote  the  wider  use  of  JSCC  in  JGB 
transactions. Against that background, trust banks, which are major providers of funds in the 
JGB repo market, are expected to use JSCC in the form of so-called “repo trust” in the first 
half of 2014. 
Benefiting from the lessons during the financial crisis, JSCC is reviewing and strengthening 
its  risk  management  including  loss-sharing  arrangements,  contingent  liquidity  lines  and 
participant default procedures so that its risk management remains robust enough in light of 
the growing clearing volume with new users. I am sure those measures will greatly enhance 
the  JGB  settlement  infrastructure  and  the  Bank  will  continue  encouraging  JSCC’s  efforts 
through daily activities of the central bank oversight. 
Initiatives to increase the efficiency of JGB settlement 
III.  
For payment and settlement systems, striking a balance between safety on one  hand and 
efficiency  and  convenience  on  the  other  hand  is  the  key.  A  settlement  service  that  is 
convenient but less safe may attract users for a short period of time, but it is likely to lose 
them in the long run. On the contrary, a safe but inconvenient service cannot fully fulfill the 
potential of its safety, because settlement demand moves away from such an inconvenient 
service.  Since  the  latest  financial  crisis,  a  series  of  new  regulations  have  been  introduced 
and that certainly has contributed to greater safety of payment, clearing and settlement, and 
the  global  financial  system.  A  flip  side  to  this,  in  my  view,  is  that  the  enhancement  of 
efficiency and convenience is somewhat left behind. So, while there is no doubt we need to 
implement the on-going measures for greater safety as planned, it is essential that we now 
make more efforts to improve the efficiency of JGB settlement so that we can better meet the 
existing  and  emerging  needs  of  the  industry  and  financial  markets.  I  am  sure  such 
improvement  in  efficiency  will  support  Japanese  companies  and  financial  institutions  in 
expanding their businesses, make JGBs as well as Japan’s financial markets more attractive 
and competitive, and ultimately stimulate the Japanese economic growth. 
Enhancement of cross-border settlement 
A.  
In that regard, I emphasize that cross-border activities should be one of our primary targets 
in  enhancing  the  efficiency  and  convenience  of  payment  and  settlement  systems.  For 
example,  Japanese  companies  are  expanding  their  businesses  in  the  overseas  markets, 
especially  in  Asia,  and  consequently  their  traffic  of  cross-border  funds  transfer  in  the 
Japanese  yen  is  growing  (Charts  4  and  5).  Naturally,  Japanese  financial  institutions  are 
increasing their overseas lending in line with the growing foreign business of their customers, 
and  therefore  it  is  becoming  very  important  for  them  to  have  stable  sources  of  funding  in 
foreign  currencies,  for  example,  by  making  use  of  financial  assets  denominated  in  the 
Japanese yen that they have abundantly on their balance sheets. In addition, as more and 
more non-residents are investing in JGBs, there are growing business opportunities to offer 
JGB custody services to foreign customers. Furthermore, there is an increasing awareness 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
among market participants that the new regulations related to OTC derivatives, for instance, 
are  likely  to  increase  the  importance  of  market  infrastructures  that  support  flexible 
mobilization of JGBs and other high-quality collateral assets. 
How  could  Japan’s  future  settlement  infrastructure  address  those  environmental  changes 
that  I  just  mentioned?  In  my  eyes,  the  future  settlement  infrastructure  should  offer  an 
environment that facilitates the smooth delivery of the Japanese yen and JGBs anywhere, 
anytime,  which  I  would  call  the  ubiquity  of  the  Japanese  yen  and  JGBs.  To  increase  the 
usability of JGBs as high-quality financial assets will benefit not only financial institutions in 
Japan but also broader financial markets around the world. The outstanding balance of JGBs 
is fairly close to that of the U.S. Treasuries, but the U.S. Treasuries are currently used as 
collateral much more widely in global financial markets. If we look at the bright side of this, 
JGBs have much room for expanded use as collateral in global financial markets. 
More  broadly,  various  initiatives  are  already  underway  to  achieve  more  efficient  and 
convenient settlement systems, in particular with respect to cross-border settlements. In the 
ASEAN+3  region,  market  participants  and  the  authorities,  including  central  banks,  are 
working  to  improve  cross-border  securities  settlement  infrastructure  in  their  efforts  to 
stimulate cross-border securities transactions in the region. In Europe, international central 
securities depositories are upgrading their global collateral management services that help 
mobilize  collateral  assets  across  borders.  In  Japan,  as  I  mentioned  earlier,  market 
participants are reviewing the case of developing a collateral management infrastructure that 
will  support  the  achievement  of  the  shorter  settlement  cycle  for  JGBs.  Such  a  collateral 
management infrastructure, if established, will also provide leverage in the improvement of 
cross-border  settlements  of  JGBs  in  the  future.  Combining  those  initiatives  in  Japan  and 
abroad, the Bank of Japan’s efforts to improve its payment and settlement systems will be 
one piece of the puzzle to make global settlement infrastructure safer and more efficient, and 
hopefully contribute to the growth of the Japanese and global economies. 
Central bank cross-border collateral arrangements 
B.  
Now,  let  me  talk  about  another  example  of  the  enhancement  of  cross-border  settlement 
infrastructure, which is a cross-border collateral arrangement for JGBs among central banks. 
The  Bank  of  Japan  has  been  collaborating  with  other  central  banks  to  establish  such 
arrangements,  where  a  foreign  central  bank  provides  liquidity  in  its  local  currency  against 
JGBs  to  its  counterparty  financial  institutions,  using  the  Bank  of  Japan  as  a  custodian  for 
receiving  JGB  collateral  from  those  financial  institutions.  The  Bank  has  been  working  with 
Asian central banks to establish such cross-border collateral arrangements. For example, we 
worked with the Bank of Thailand to establish an arrangement for providing the Thai Baht 
liquidity  against  JGBs,  which  has  been  put  into  effect  since  November  2011  (Chart  6).  In 
addition,  we  have  made  an  agreement  with  the  Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore  and 
separately with the Bank Indonesia to establish similar arrangements.5 
With those arrangements, Japanese banks and other financial institutions will have additional 
sources of local currencies from local central banks in stressed funding conditions in local 
financial  markets.  That  backstop  will  enable  global  financial  institutions  to  manage  their 
liquidity in each local currency more stably, which will in turn facilitate their stable lending to 
corporate customers in local currencies. 
                                                 
5  
In addition, six central banks, namely the Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, the European Central Bank, 
the Federal Reserve, the National Bank of Switzerland, and the Bank of Japan, have set up foreign exchange 
swap arrangements as a liquidity backstop. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Toward the regional securities settlement infrastructure in Asia 
C.  
The cross-border collateral arrangements that I just mentioned provide a liquidity backstop in 
times  of  stress.  In  that  respect,  market-based  solutions  for  stable  daily  funding  in  foreign 
currencies  are  just  as  important  as,  or  possibly  more  important  than,  those  central  bank 
arrangements. 
As part of the response to such market needs, the ASEAN+3 countries established a forum 
to explore the possibility of establishing cross-border settlement infrastructure in the region 
(Chart 7). This forum discusses several possible models for such infrastructure. One idea is 
to link a securities settlement system in one country with a central-bank-operated payment 
system in another country. Another idea is to set up a cross-border link between securities 
settlement systems. With such cross-border links, market participants will be able to settle 
foreign-currency  funding  transactions  against  domestic  collateral  assets,  known  as  cross-
currency repos, in safe central bank money on a DVP basis. Further, with such links, local 
investors will have easier access through their local securities settlement system to foreign 
securities, which will help increase intra-regional securities investment in the long run. Given 
that market participants and central banks are undertaking similar initiatives in Europe with 
an  aim  of  improving  securities  settlement  across  borders  in  the  region,  it  would  be 
conceivable  that  market  participants  in  Asia  will  start  dialogue  with  their  counterparties  in 
regions  outside  Asia  to  review  the  possibility  of  a  cross-border  link  between  settlement 
infrastructures. 
Development of the new BOJ-NET and extension of its operating hours 
IV.  
Now, let me move on to the new BOJ-NET. Here I will talk about the possible extension of 
the  BOJ-NET  operating  hours,  which  the  Bank  of  Japan  and  market  participants  are 
intensively discussing, and the new features that will become available with the completion of 
the new BOJ-NET. I will try to put those points in the context of the enhancement of cross-
border settlements. 
The development of the New BOJ-NET 
A.  
We have been developing the new BOJ-NET to replace the whole IT platform of the current 
BOJ-NET. The main purpose is to develop a flexible system that can respond to on-going 
and  future  market  developments  such  as  the  globalization  of  financial  markets  and 
increasing interconnectedness among market infrastructures. 
The  new  BOJ-NET  is  built  upon  an  IT  platform  equipped  with  a  technical  capacity  of 
operating substantially longer hours so that it can respond to user demand for settlements 
early in the morning and late at night. The possible extension of BOJ-NET operating hours 
will create a larger overlap between the operating hours of the BOJ-NET and those of the 
overseas  payment  and  settlement  systems,  which  will  provide  a  solid  foundation  for  the 
possible future enhancement of cross-border settlements that I talked about earlier. 
The new BOJ-NET employs the latest information technology for improved convenience for 
users.  For  example,  the  new  BOJ-NET  adopts  a  new  technology  which  facilitates  the 
acceptance of different data formats and communication protocols. It also adopts ISO20022, 
internationally accepted message formats. Those new features will be introduced in order to 
enhance the accessibility to the BOJ-NET by  other domestic or foreign infrastructures and 
financial institutions. As those new capabilities will be widely utilized, the new BOJ-NET will 
demonstrate  a  greater  ability  to  support  financial  institutions  that  seek  to  achieve  a  higher 
level  of  straight-through  processing  and  to  address  the  future  increase  in  cross-border 
settlements. 
The new BOJ-NET is being developed in two phases in order to make a smooth transition to 
the  new  system  (Chart  8).  In  January  this  year,  the  first  phase  of  the  new  BOJ-NET  was 
launched, as originally planned, with the services related to the auction for JGB issuance and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
those  related  to  the  monetary  policy  operations.  The  new  BOJ-NET  has  been  operating 
smoothly  since  its  introduction,  and  I  am  grateful  to  all  IBA  members  and  other  market 
participants  for  making  this  happen.  In  the  second  phase,  all  the  remaining  services, 
including core services related to the settlement of funds and JGBs, will migrate to the new 
BOJ-NET.  The  second  phase  is  currently  planned  to  be  launched  sometime  between  the 
autumn of 2015 and the beginning of 2016. 
The operating hours of the BOJ-NET 
B.  
The Bank of Japan made an announcement that, with the launch of the second phase, the 
BOJ-NET  Funds  Transfer  System  and  JGB  Services  would  start  their  daily  operation  at 
8:30 a.m., which is 30 minutes earlier than the present, and close the operation at 7:00 p.m., 
which is two and a half hours later than the present with respect to JGB services. In addition, 
the Bank formed an industry forum in August last year to discuss the possibility of extending 
the operating hours of the BOJ-NET further beyond 7:00 p.m. The forum consists of major 
market  players  and  industry  representatives  including  of  course  the  IBA  secretariat  and 
several  member  institutions  of  the  association.  I  am  very  much  grateful  for  your  active 
involvement in this important work. 
I hear that this industry forum will be soon delivering a report with the results of their reviews 
and  that  the  discussion has  demonstrated  that a  great  majority  of  participants  see  a  huge 
advantage in extending the operating hours up to 9:00 p.m. as an initial step in maximizing 
the  use  of  JGBs  as  collateral  in  global  financial  markets  and  providing  their  customers 
outside Japan with improved Japanese yen remittance services (Chart 9). In response to the 
forthcoming report by the forum, the Bank will make its decision on the operating hours and 
related issues in due course. 
The  extension  of  the  operating  hours  will  conceivably  open  up  a  new  opportunity  for  the 
greater use of JGBs in global financial markets (Chart 10). For example, as the discussion of 
the  forum  has  made  clear,  market  participants  in  Japan  would  be  able  to  deliver  JGBs  to 
CCPs  and  trading  counterparties  overseas  in  response  to  a  margin  call  for  derivatives 
transactions  and  get  back  excess  collateral  immediately  when  it  becomes  available  for 
return. In addition, market participants would be able to obtain liquidity in overseas markets 
more  conveniently  with  the  same-day  cross-currency  repo  against  JGBs.  Further,  financial 
institutions with a large amount of JGBs in their portfolios would see a greater opportunity for 
transactions in global securities lending markets for high-quality collateral assets. 
The future of JGB settlement 
C.  
As I said earlier, in the future of JGB settlement, the smooth delivery of JGBs and associated 
payments  in  the  Japanese  yen  across  borders  and  across  time  zones  will  no  longer  be  a 
luxury that may be unaffordable today. The Bank will strive toward such future vision in close 
cooperation  with  market  participants.  In  doing  so,  we  will  be  making  Japanese  financial 
markets more attractive to diverse sources of investment. As part of those efforts, the Bank 
will continue to review a range of possibilities for improving the accessibility of the BOJ-NET 
such as the possible extension of the BOJ-NET operating hours as I mentioned earlier. It is 
not  an  easy  task  to  develop  market  infrastructure  that  will  form  the  backbone  of  market’s 
trading  and  settlement  activities,  not  least  because  it  will  involve  many  actors  and  a 
considerable amount of time and cost. It is therefore crucial that market players including the 
IBA  members,  as  well  as  the  operators  of  settlement  infrastructures  including  the  Bank  of 
Japan,  keep  a  long-term  perspective  and  cooperate  steadily  to  achieve  better  market 
infrastructure. For that reason, I would like to ask for your continued support and cooperation 
in the area of payment, clearing and settlement. 
Conduct of monetary policy 
V.  
Lastly, let me touch on the recent conduct of monetary policy. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
It has been almost a year since the Bank introduced quantitative and qualitative monetary 
easing  (QQE)  last  April.  Economic  activity  and  prices  have  been  broadly  in  line  with  the 
baseline scenario presented in the Outlook Reports and interim assessments. Accordingly, 
the  Bank’s  policy  board  has  judged  it  appropriate  to  steadily  pursue  the  QQE  under  its 
current guidelines of asset purchases. 
Meanwhile, I acknowledge that there is a wide range of views in financial markets concerning 
how  long  the  QQE  will  last  and  whether  or  not  the  Bank  needs  to  take  further  easing 
measures. Those views are based on a belief that it is not easy, or at least takes more time, 
to  achieve  the  outlook  –  particularly  that  for  prices  –  presented  in  the  Bank’s  baseline 
scenario. As a policymaker, I am somewhat hesitant to comment on those views, but let me 
provide my thoughts specifically on the policy duration of the QQE, as communication with 
the market is a matter of significant importance to us. 
First  of  all,  let  me  stress  that  the  Bank,  in  its  conduct  of  the  QQE,  has  made  a  firm 
commitment. That is, to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent in terms of the year-on-
year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI) at the earliest possible time, with a 
time  horizon  of  about  two  years.  At  the  same  time,  the  Bank  has  made  it  clear  that  it  will 
continue with the QQE, aiming to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent, as long as it 
is necessary for maintaining that target in a stable manner. 
In my understanding, there are three things about the policy duration of the QQE. 
First, the QQE does not automatically end in two years. It does not imply that the Bank can 
step back, no matter how small, from the commitment to achieve the 2 percent price stability 
target at the earliest possible time, with the time horizon of about two years. 
Second,  the  commitment  to  achieve  the  2  percent  target  in  about  two  years  does  not 
contradict the policy to continue with the QQE as long as it is necessary for maintaining that 
target in a stable manner. In my view, the phrase “as long as it is necessary for maintaining 
that target in a stable manner” embodies the Bank’s forecast targeting. If, for example, the 
Bank judges that the inflation rate of 2 percent can be achieved on a sustainable basis after 
taking account of various conditions, it will exit from the current policy before the actual rate 
of  inflation  reaches  2  percent,  taking  the  lagged  effects  of  monetary  policy  actions  into 
consideration. Conversely, the Bank will continue with the QQE even after the actual rate of 
inflation reaches 2 percent, if it judges that the inflation rate of 2 percent is not sustainable. 
“As long as it is necessary” is a notion that enables the Bank to act flexibly in response to 
uncertainties  that  may  arise  in  the  future,  and  complementary  to  the  strong  and  bold 
commitment that I described earlier. 
Third, the price stability target of 2 percent constitutes part of a flexible policy framework akin 
to  those  frameworks  adopted  by  major  central  banks  overseas.  Put  differently,  monetary 
policy  requires  long  and  variable  time  lags  before  its  effects  permeate  the  economy,  and 
thereafter prices. From the perspective of achieving a sustainable growth path in the context 
of  price  stability,  monetary  policy  needs  to  be  flexible  by  examining  the  current  conditions 
and the outlook for economic activity and prices, as well as various risk factors including the 
accumulation  of  financial  imbalances.  Such  an  idea  of  flexible  monetary  policy  has  been 
widely shared with other countries. Particularly in the aftermath of the global financial crisis, 
major overseas economies have become increasingly attentive to the flexibility of monetary 
policymaking  by  laying  out  the  importance  of  paying  due  attention  to  the  stability  of  the 
financial system.  From  that  viewpoint,  the  price  stability  target  is  by  no  means  a  rigid  and 
superficial framework which calls for the inflation rate to touch 2 percent temporarily. It is a 
flexible  and  practical  framework  which  accommodates  the  needs  arising  from  economic 
developments.  As  described  in  the  minutes  of  the  Monetary  Policy  Meeting  held  on 
October 31, 2013, my own view on the outlook for prices is somewhat more cautious than 
the  majority  view  of  the  Bank’s  Policy  Board  members.  That  does  not  mean  that  I  am 
skeptical  of  the  QQE’s  effects,  nor  does  it  mean  that  I  deny  the  ability  of  the  QQE’s 
transmission mechanism – envisaged by the Policy Board – to shift people’s expectations. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
My understanding is that the price stability target is not to be aimed at with surgical precision, 
but rather that it represents a flexible policy framework in which some margins – both upside 
and downside – should be accommodated. Based on this understanding, I see some latitude 
with regard to the achievement of the 2 percent price stability target. 
On that point, what the price stability target aims to achieve after all is not simply a rise in 
prices. Rather, it aims to achieve a situation in which a rise in prices is accompanied by a 
rise in wages, coupled with an improvement in the overall economy. Down the road, people 
will become increasingly more sensitive to a rise in prices as Japan sees the consumption 
tax  hike  occur  this  coming  April.  Under  such  circumstances,  we  have  to  avoid  leaving  an 
impression that the Bank has been solely pursuing a pick-up in prices without due attention 
to the economy. It is for that reason that I emphasize once again the flexible nature of the 
policy framework to achieve the 2 percent price stability target. 
Thank you. 
 
 8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   9
  10 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   11
   12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   13
