  Njuguna Ndung’u: Increasing the level of financial inclusion in Kenya 
Remarks by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the African 
Rural  and  Agricultural  Credit  Association  (AFRACA)  International  Exposure  Visit to  Kenya, 
Kenya School of Monetary Studies, Nairobi, 5 May 2014. 
 Mr. Saleh Usman Gashua, the Secretary General, AFRACA; 
Mr. Isaac Awuondo, Group CEO, Commercial Bank of Africa; 
Distinguished Participants; 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
It  is  my  honour  to  extend  a  warm  welcome  to  all  of  you  to  Nairobi  and  specifically  to  the 
Kenya School of Monetary Studies (KSMS). I note with satisfaction the continued partnership 
that  the  African  Rural  and  Agricultural  Credit  Association  (AFRACA)  and  KSMS  have 
established.  As  AFRACA  aspires  to  promote  quality  financial  services  to  the  rural  and 
agricultural  communities  in  Africa,  it  is  complemented  by  KSMS’s  vision  of  being  a  world 
class research based capacity building institution for the financial sector in Africa. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  In  an  effort  to  confront  poverty,  that  currently  afflicts  more  than 
1 billion  people  in  the  World,  most  of  whom  are  in  the  developing  countries,  financial 
inclusion  has  been  seen  as  one  of  the  channels  that  can  significantly  reduce  poverty 
sustainably. This is because access to financial services by the poor provides a safe haven 
for their savings and widens their economic opportunities through savings-investment cycles. 
However,  in  Africa  and  other  developing  countries  in  Asia  and  Latin  America,  90%  of  the 
population  do  not  have  access  to  financial  services.  Closer  home,  80%  of  the  adult 
population in Sub-Saharan Africa do not have access to financial services (CGAP, 2011). In 
this  regard, for  the World  and  Africa  in  particular  to  catapult  the  efforts to  reduce  poverty, 
concerted action to increase access, uptake and use of financial services should be rolled 
out. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: Several reasons have been put forward to account for the low level 
of financial inclusion in Africa. Key among these reasons are poverty, irregular income flows, 
high  levels  of  financial  illiteracy,  high  financial  costs,  social  and  cultural  beliefs,  and 
underdeveloped financial markets. Acknowledging the important role that financial inclusion 
plays  in  economic  development,  none  of  the  cited  barriers  to  financial  inclusion  is 
insurmountable. What is required is for financial service providers, the Government and its 
agencies as well as the consumers to jointly contribute in eliminating the barriers to financial 
inclusion that are within their purview. 
I  note  with  appreciation  the  continued  role  of  AFRACA  in  promoting  capacity  building  and 
knowledge  exchanges  among  its  members  as  one  of  the  avenues  of  promoting  financial 
inclusion in the rural and agricultural sectors in Africa. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: The efforts to increase the level of financial inclusion in Africa have 
started to bear fruit. This is largely attributed to advancements in mobile phone technology. 
Rollout of Mobile Phone Financial Services (MFS) has proved a very useful tool in enhancing 
financial inclusion. Africa has over the last few years, experienced one of the highest mobile 
phone  penetration  rates.  Mobile  phone  technology  provides  an  effective  and  convenient 
communication channel. As a result, leveraging on mobile phone technology as a channel for 
financial services not only overcomes the distance barrier but also presents convenience as 
well as cost effective platforms for financial services. 
Africa has continued to witness increased competition and diversity in the MFS space. More 
mobile phone operators are launching mobile money products whereas financial institutions 
are increasingly partnering and integrating with the telecommunication companies’ platforms 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  to  offer  financial  services.  The  number  of  MFS  products  as  well  as  the  increasing  rate  of 
adoption  has  significantly  lowered  unit  costs  of  financial  services.  A  good  example  for  the 
poor is operating bank accounts via mobile phones like the M-Shwari product. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: Agency banking is the other initiative adopted to overcome some of 
the  barriers  to  financial  inclusion.  Agency  banking  involves  use  of  third  party  agents  by 
financial service players to provide financial services. Agency banking was introduced to take 
financial  services  to  the  populace  in  areas  deemed  uneconomical  for  brick  and  mortar 
branches to be established. Agency banking complements mobile phone financial services 
since most of the agents use mobile phones in executing transactions for their clients. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: Allow me now to share with you the outcomes of Kenya’s adoption 
of mobile phone financial services platform and completed by agency banking. According to 
the  FinAccess  Survey,  2013,  11.5  million  adult  Kenyans  use  mobile  financial  services  as 
compared to only 5.4 million who use banks. This confirms the unprecedented opportunity to 
enhance  formal  financial  inclusion  through  mobile  financial  services  as  compared  to  other 
channels. 
Following  rollout  of  MFS  in  Kenya  in  2007,  the  level  of  the  population  which  is  financially 
excluded has declined from 38% in 2006 to 33% in 2009 and now 25% in 2013. Similarly, the 
size  of  the  population  using  informal  financial  services  had  dropped  from  35%  in  2006  to 
27% in 2009 and now stands at 8% in 2013. More significantly, 2 in 3 Kenyans have access 
to formal financial services. This is an impressive trend, which if replicated across Africa will 
poise the continent for unprecedented growth. 
As regards agency banking, which was rolled out in 2010, 14 Kenyan commercial banks and 
one microfinance bank have established agency networks. As at March 2014, the 14 banks 
had appointed 24,645 agents, who have executed over 92.61 million transactions valued at 
over Kshs 498.97 billion (USD 5.77 billion) since 2010. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: In 2013, Geospatial Surveys to map financial access points were 
undertaken in Kenya, Nigeria, Uganda and Tanzania. The survey results indicate that Kenya 
is  ahead  of  the  other  countries  in  terms  of  financial  access.  This  is  evident  through  the 
following indicators: 
• 
76.7%  of  the  Kenyan  population  is  now  within  5  kilometres  of  a  financial  service 
touch  point  as  compared  to  47.3%,  42.7%  and  35.1%  in  Nigeria,  Uganda  and 
Tanzania respectively. 
Kenya has 65,353 financial service touch points as compared to 21,206; 20,229 and 
17,212 financial touch points in Uganda, Tanzania and Nigeria respectively. 
Kenya has 161.9 financial access touch points serving 100,000 people as compared 
to  63.1,  48.9  and  11.4  financial  access  touch  points  serving  100,000  people  in 
Uganda, Tanzania and Nigeria respectively. 
  Kenya’s  leadership  position  in  financial  access  is  mainly  attributable  to  the  positive 
development  in  the  financial  sector,  introduction  of  mobile  financial  services  and  agency 
banking, which have taken financial services to the door steps of most Kenyans. In addition, 
completing the financial infrastructure no doubt has driven its growth and dynamism. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  Having  appreciated  the  important  role  that  financial  sector 
development has on the economy, it is worth noting that the financial sector can live up to its 
expectation  only  when  regulators  assume  more  than  a  regulatory  role.  Regulating  an 
underdeveloped financial market will not contribute its fair share to economic development. 
As a result, regulators must balance their regulatory role with a developmental role. It is with 
this in mind that the concept of smart and better regulation as opposed to more regulation 
was coined. Smart and better regulation is flexible and accommodative to innovative financial 
products, through which financial development is registered. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Ladies and Gentlemen: Having seen the diversity of activities in the agenda of your visit, I 
note that you will not only gain extensive knowledge on how Kenya has utilised both Mobile 
Financial Services and Agency Banking in addition to credit reference for information capital 
to enhance financial inclusion but you will also be able to sample, from your field visits, how 
Kenya is promoting rural and agricultural finance. This will be insightful as examples that can 
be replicated anywhere in Africa. 
To conclude, Ladies and Gentlemen, I would like to reassure AFRACA of CBK’s continued 
support  and  commitment.  It  is  now  my  pleasure  and  honour  to  officially  declare  the  2014 
Technical  Cooperation  among  Developing  Countries  Programme  on  Mobile  and  Agency 
Banking officially opened. I wish you all fruitful deliberations. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
