  Manuel Sánchez: An economic outlook and policy update on Mexico 
Remarks  by  Mr  Manuel  Sánchez,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mexico,  at  the  United 
States-Mexico Chamber of Commerce, New York City, 26 September 2014. 
 I am honored by the invitation to be here again in the vibrant city of New York. Thank you for 
the opportunity to share my thoughts with you on the economic outlook and policy challenges 
we face in Mexico. A few things have changed since the last time we were together, and I 
hope to bring you up to date on the most important developments. 
I  would  like  to  talk  first,  about  the  current  rebound  in  the  Mexican  economy  and  how  the 
financial markets are performing; then, give you some perspective on inflation and monetary 
policy; and finally, describe the most recent progress on Mexico’s structural reform agenda. 
As usual, my comments are entirely my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Bank 
of Mexico or its Governing Board. 
The current economic rebound 
At this time last year, Mexico’s economy was deteriorating. Today, an incipient upswing is 
underway.  Specifically,  in  the  second  quarter,  Mexico’s  economy  posted  vigorous  growth, 
similar in annualized terms to that of the United States. Data for the third quarter, including 
the GDP monthly proxy for July, suggest that momentum continues. 
Improvement in the industrial sector has included a strong push from manufactured products, 
with  transportation  equipment  doing  particularly  well.  After  six  consecutive  quarters  of 
contraction or stagnation, construction has seen some rebound. 
External  demand  has  played  a  predominant  role  in  the  recovery  due  to  greater 
manufacturing  exports,  particularly  to  the  United  States.  Within  that  category,  automobile 
exports  stand  out.  In  addition,  the  expansion  of  services  continued,  especially  those  most 
associated with external demand. 
On the domestic side, consumption in the second quarter picked up, and recent sales data 
suggest  that  the  pace  continues.  Formal  employment  is  expanding,  as  has  been the  case 
since 2010. However, total employment has been stagnant this year. The previous two facts 
are consistent with a slight decline in informality. More formal-sector jobs may have provided 
support for higher consumption. Yet, consumer confidence remains relatively low, indicating 
some fragility there. 
Furthermore, investment in the second quarter kept up a revival, driven by the private sector, 
and could strengthen even further in the near term. Indeed, this is suggested by the business 
community’s more positive answer to the survey question of whether or not this is the right 
moment to invest.1 
The Bank of Mexico estimates that GDP will grow between 2 and 2.8 percent in 2014 and 
between 3.2 and 4.2 percent in 2015. Consensus analysts’ point forecasts fall within these 
intervals.2 
The balance of risks for the growth scenario is to the upside. The possibility of higher-than-
anticipated  economic  expansion  in  the  United  States,  as  well  as  more  constructive 
                                                 
1   See  INEGI  and  Banco  de  México  (2014),  Encuesta  Mensual  de  Opinión  Empresarial  del  Sector 
Manufacturero, September. 
2   See  Banco  de  México  (2014),  Quarterly  Report,  April  –  June  2014,  Summary,  August;  and  Blue  Chip 
Economic Indicators, September 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  investment  sentiment  stemming  from  progress  in  the  implementation  of  structural  reforms, 
contributes to this assessment. 
Financial market developments 
Since  February,  international  financial  market  volatility  has  declined  considerably  due  to 
expectations  that  the  normalization  of  U.S.  monetary  policy  will  take  place  later  than 
previously  thought,  and  in  a  gradual  way.  A  return  to  the  search  for  yield  has  implied 
downward shifts for Mexico’s yield curve, together with the long end of the U.S. curve. 
Intermittent  breaks  in  the  calm  since  the  end  of  July  reflect  the  swinging  of  market 
expectations for the start of U.S. monetary tightening back toward an earlier timeframe, and 
heightened geopolitical pressures. In this context, the dollar has appreciated, and the prices 
of some emerging-market financial assets have fallen somewhat. 
In Mexico, the recent increase in global risk aversion has fueled a higher term premium for 
government  bonds  and  along  with  it,  a  steeper  yield  curve.  However,  the  peso  has 
depreciated  less  than  the  currencies  of  many  other  emerging-market  economies.  Both 
markets have behaved in an orderly manner, with traded volumes high and bid-ask spreads 
tight. 
Going  forward,  greater  financial  volatility  and  further  downward  pressure  in  asset  prices 
cannot  be  ruled  out.  Interest  rates  on  a  wide  variety  of  securities  in  advanced  countries, 
including  high-yield  bonds,  remain  close  to  all-time  lows  amid  market  uncertainty  and 
speculative conditions, suggesting that these levels are not sustainable. 
In the monetary policy meeting of last July, the U.S. Federal Reserve said that it was within 
closer  reach  of  its  medium-term  targets.  Also,  many  FOMC  members  noted  that  if 
convergence  to  these  targets  accelerates,  it  would  be  appropriate  to  begin  the  tightening 
phase sooner than previously foreseen. In the most recent meeting in September, forecasts 
by FOMC  members for the fed funds rate seem to suggest a faster pace of normalization 
than previously expected. 
In a similar way, the Bank of England has noted that it is nearer to reaching its long-term 
objectives. Futures markets predict that U.S. and British policy rates will begin to rise next 
year, although uncertainty still reigns over the exact timing and pace of the tighter policies. 
Adding to the mix of unknown factors the markets must consider, the Eurozone and Japan 
are  likely  poised  to  loosen  their  monetary  stances  further  in  the  face  of  disappointing 
economic  performance.  Although  the  net  effect  in  world  financial  markets  is  still  in  the 
balance, the markets currently appear to give more weight to probable tighter polices in the 
United States and the United Kingdom. 
Inflation, minimum wages and monetary policy 
Since last July, Mexico’s annual headline inflation breached the upper limit of the variability 
interval around the central bank’s permanent target of 3 percent. This development, which 
has surpassed market expectations, reflected pressures in the core component, especially 
goods prices, as well as the noncore component, driven particularly by livestock prices. The 
possible persistence of these adverse factors makes it likely that inflation will remain above 
or near 4 percent during the second half of the year. 
Some conditions should contribute to a decrease in inflation next year, such as base effects 
from the 2014 fiscal reform, lower rises in government-administered gasoline prices, and a 
possible  drop  in  some  telephony  charges  due  to  new  regulations.  However,  the  impact 
should be properly assessed. For example, the new gasoline price policy does not mean the 
absence of annual pressure from this front during the year. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  The  balance  of  inflation  risks  appears  to  be  to  the  upside  due  to  the  following.  First, 
proposals  are  being  considered  for  substantial  rises  in  minimum  wages,  which  could 
generate inertia in inflation and second-round effects in the price-formation process. 
Second,  the  possibility  of  unforeseen  additional  pressures  in  agricultural  prices  persists. 
Historically, this component has posted a higher average and more volatile annual change 
than  that  of  energy  and  government-administered  prices.  Third,  the  risk  of  bouts  of  high 
financial  volatility  remains,  and  this  could  push  prices  higher  through  the  exchange  rate 
channel. 
The upside risks are especially significant as annual headline inflation will probably surpass 
4 percent  most  of  this  year,  and  analysts’  inflation  expectations  for  all  time  frames  remain 
above the permanent target. These challenges merit careful monitoring. 
I would like to add a few comments on possible minimum wage hikes in Mexico. Minimum 
wages are a feature common to most countries, and Mexico is no exception, with the level 
set by a national commission for all jurisdictions. What is particular to our country is a notable 
deterioration of this indicator in the 1980s and 1990s due to high and unstable inflation. This 
process yielded lower purchasing power for all salaries and underscores the vital necessity 
of protecting the significant ground gained in the last decade in the battle to control inflation, 
and of consolidating this progress. 
What  effects  would  minimum  wage  hikes  have  in  Mexico?  The  economic  literature  on 
competitive labor markets suggests that rises in real minimum wages can hurt employment 
and training, especially of young and unskilled laborers, and promote informality. Also, there 
may be some pass-through from these increases to prices of final goods and services. The 
degree of these and other impacts remains an empirical issue.3 
In  the  case  of  Mexico,  these  effects  could  be  material,  for  at  least  two  reasons.  First, 
negotiations of private-sector contractual salaries have tended to take into account minimum-
wage revisions as a floor reference, although the two are not automatically tied. The wage 
contagion  could  reflect  partly  a  substitution  effect  away  from  less-skilled  workers,  a 
phenomenon observed in many countries.4 
Second, the minimum wage serves as an index for myriad legal purposes, including fines, 
tax  exemptions,  public  pensions,  government-sponsored  mortgages,  and  many  private 
contracts. 
Wage  contagion  and  indexation  would  broaden  the  possible  negative  real  effects  on  the 
economy.  Furthermore,  significant  minimum  wage  hikes  may  contaminate  the  process  of 
price formation. These adjustments could trigger a chain reaction on inflation expectations, 
complicating  the  challenges  for  the  Bank  of  Mexico  in  getting  inflation  to  converge  to  its 
permanent  target.  To  handle  the  risk  from  indexation,  complicated  legal  changes  and 
cumbersome contract revisions would be called for.5 
                                                 
3   For empirical evidence on the possible effects of minimum wage increases, see, for example, Neumark, D. 
and  W.  Wascher  (2008),  Minimum  Wages.  Cambridge,  MA:  The  MIT  Press;  Neumark,  et  al.  (2013), 
“Revisiting  the  Minimum  Wage-Employment  Debate:  Throwing  Out  the  Baby  with  the  Bathwater?”  NBER 
Working  Paper  18681;  and  Meer,  J.  and  J.  West  (2013),  “Effects  of  the  Minimum  Wage  on  Employment 
Dynamics.” NBER Working Paper No. 19262. 
4   See, for example, Maloney, W. and J. Mendez (2004), “Measuring the Impact of Minimum Wages: Evidence 
from  Latin  America.”  In  Heckman,  J.J.  and  C.  Pagés  (2004),  Law  and  Employment:  Lessons  from  Latin 
American and the Caribbean. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
5  There is evidence that the decline in real  minimum  wages in Mexico increased employment for less-skilled 
female  workers.  See  Feliciano,  Z.M.  (1998),  “Does  the  Minimum  Wage  Affect  Employment  in  Mexico?” 
Eastern Economic Journal, 24(2). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  An update on structural reforms 
As  you  all  know,  Mexico  has  embarked  on  an  ambitious  structural  reform  agenda, 
encompassing  many  sectors  of  the  economy,  including  the  labor  market,  education,  the 
financial  sector,  telecommunications,  and  energy.  Already  this  year,  the  laws  that  cement 
and put the finishing touches on the reforms have been finalized. 
But  the  devil,  indeed,  is  in  the  details.  The  quality  of  implementation  is  of  the  utmost 
importance for the transformations to yield their expected benefits. 
Reforms  are  currently  in  the  implementation  stage.  Some  of  the  changes  have  come  into 
effect with the mere publication of the new laws, such as the prohibition of bundled sales of 
products in the financial sector. 
Others  imply  specific  actions  already  contemplated.  For  example,  in  education,  the  first 
generalized  test  is  in  place  to  qualify  a  teacher  to  receive  an  elementary  school  post, 
breaking  with  a  long  tradition  in  which  new  graduates  from  teaching  schools  were 
automatically hired. In the financial sector, a newly established resolution scheme is being 
applied to the case of a small bank without incident. 
In telecommunications, the arrival of new competitors, drawn by a changed set of rules and 
conditions in the marketplace, sets the stage for a possible shakeup. Auctions for nationwide 
television licenses are in the offing. 
Much  interest  is  focused  on  the  energy  reform.  Geographical  areas  for  oil  and  gas 
exploration  and  production  have  already  been  allocated  to  Pemex,  and  the  first  round  of 
auctions for the private sector will take place early next year. 
These  opportunities  are  generating  enthusiasm  in  the  private  sector  and  should  draw 
significant  investment  from  both  domestic  and  foreign  companies.  Greater  competition,  in 
turn, should boost total factor productivity and potential GDP growth in the medium term. 
To  take  full  advantage  of  this  situation,  Mexico  needs  to  complement  the  already  enacted 
reforms  with  changes  that  would  improve  the  environment  for  conducting  business.  These 
measures  should  include  strengthening  the  rule  of  law,  investing  further  in  physical 
infrastructure, and enhancing public security. 
Concluding remarks 
Mexico has seen an incipient economic upturn this year, driven by stronger external demand 
and  higher  domestic  spending.  The  panorama  is  favorable  given  more  consistent  U.S. 
economic performance and Mexican structural reforms in the first stages of implementation. 
Mexico’s  economy  has  benefited  from  the  continuation  of  portfolio  capital  inflows  amid 
benign  financial  conditions,  notwithstanding  some  recent  volatility.  However,  a  change  in 
market sentiment could trigger a reversal of this relative financial bonanza at any moment. 
Although Mexico enjoys strong macroeconomic fundamentals, financial risks should continue 
to be monitored. 
Continuation  of  recent  upward  trends  in  inflation  as  well  as  factors  that  may  generate 
additional  price  pressures  are  risks  that  must  be  carefully  watched  in  order  to  make 
convergence  to  the  permanent  inflation  target  a  reality.  Current  discussions  on  recovering 
the real value of the minimum wage underscore the need to keep the upper hand in the fight 
against  inflation.  Finally,  progress  on  structural  reform  is  encouraging,  but  implementation 
over time must be adequate for expected benefits to fully materialize. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
