  Raghuram Rajan: Competitive monetary easing – is it yesterday once 
more? 
Remarks by Dr Raghuram Rajan, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Brookings 
Institution, Washington DC, 10 April 2014. 
 These  are  my  personal  views.  I  acknowledge  very  useful  comments  from  Joshua  Felman,  Prachi  Mishra, 
Jonathan Ostry, Michael Patra, Eswar Prasad, and Tharman Shanmugharatnam. 
Good morning. As the world seems to be struggling back to its feet after the great financial 
crisis, I want to draw attention to an area we need to be concerned about: the conduct of 
monetary policy in this integrated world. A good way to describe the current environment is 
one  of  extreme  monetary  easing  through  unconventional  policies.  In  a  world  where  debt 
overhangs and the need for structural change constrain domestic demand, a sizeable portion 
of  the  effects  of  such  policies  spillover  across  borders,  sometimes  through  a  weaker 
exchange rate. More worryingly, it prompts a reaction. Such competitive easing occurs both 
simultaneously  and  sequentially,  as  I  will  argue,  and  both  advanced  economies  and 
emerging  economies  engage  in  it.  Aggregate  world  demand  may  be  weaker  and  more 
distorted  than  it  should  be,  and  financial  risks  higher.  To  ensure  stable  and  sustainable 
growth, the international rules of the game need to be revisited. Both advanced economies 
and emerging economies need to adapt, else I fear we are about to embark on the next leg 
of a wearisome cycle. 
Central bankers are usually reluctant to air their concerns in public. But because the needed 
change  has  political  elements  to  it,  I  take  my  cue  from  speeches  by  two  central  bankers 
whom I respect greatly, Ben Bernanke in his 2005 “Global Savings Glut” speech, and Jaime 
Caruana in his 2012 speech at Jackson Hole, both of whom have raised similar concerns to 
mine, although from different perspectives. 
Before starting, I should disclose my interests in this era of transparency. For the last few 
months  India  has  experienced  large  inflows  of  capital,  not  outflows,  and  is  seen  by  the 
markets as an emerging economy that has made some of the necessary policy adjustments.1 
We are well buffered with substantial reserves, though no country can be de-coupled from 
the  international  system.  My  remarks  are  motivated  by  the  desire  for  a  more  stable 
international system, a system that works equally for rich and poor, large and small, and not 
the specifics of our situation. 
Unconventional policy 
I want to focus on unconventional monetary policies (UMP), by which I mean both policies 
that  hold  interest  rates  at  near  zero  for  long,  as  well  as  balance  sheet  policies  such  as 
quantitative  easing  or  exchange  intervention,  that  involve  altering  central  bank  balance 
sheets in order to affect certain market prices.2 The key point that I will emphasize throughout 
this talk is that quantitative easing and sustained exchange intervention are in an economic 
equivalence class, though the channels they work through may be somewhat different. Our 
attitudes towards them should be conditioned by the size of their spillover effects rather than 
by any innate legitimacy of either form of intervention. 
                                                 
1   Mishra et al. (2014). 
2   Borio and Disyatat (2009) for an excellent early comprehensive taxonomy and assessment of balance sheet 
policies. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Let  me  also  add  there is  a  role  for unconventional  policies  –  when  markets  are broken  or 
grossly dysfunctional, central bankers do have to think innovatively. Fortunately for the world, 
much of what they did immediately  after the fall of Lehman was exactly right, though they 
were  making  it  up  as  they  went  in  the  face  of  extreme  uncertainty.  They  eased access  to 
liquidity  through  innovative  programs  such  as  TALF,  TAF,  TARP,  SMP,  and  LTRO.  By 
lending  long  term  without  asking  too  many  questions  of  the  collateral  they  received,  by 
buying  assets  beyond  usual  limits,  and  by  focusing  on  repairing  markets,  they  restored 
liquidity  to  a  world  financial  system  that  would  otherwise  have  been  insolvent  based  on 
prevailing market asset prices. In this matter, central bankers are deservedly heroes.3  
The key question is what happens when these policies are prolonged long beyond repairing 
markets – and there the benefits are much less clear. Let me list 4 concerns: 
1. 
Is unconventional monetary policy the right tool once the immediate crisis is over? 
Does  it  distort  behavior  and  activity  so  as  to  stand  in  the  way  of  recovery?  Is 
accommodative  monetary  policy  the  way  to  fix  a  crisis  that  was  partly  caused  by 
excessively lax policy? 
Do  such  policies  buy  time  or  does  the  belief  that  the  central  bank  is  taking 
responsibility prevent other, more appropriate, policies from being implemented? Put 
differently,  when  central  bankers  say,  however  reluctantly,  that  they  are  the  only 
game in town, do they become the only game in town? 
Will exit from unconventional policies be easy? 
What are the spillovers from such policies to other countries? 
3. 
4. 
Since I have dwelt at length on the first two concerns in an earlier speech, let me focus on 
the last two.4  
2. 
Exit 
The macroeconomic argument for prolonged unconventional policy in industrial countries is 
that it has low costs, provided inflation stays quiescent. Hence it is worth pursuing, even if 
the benefits are uncertain. A number of economists have, however, raised concerns about 
financial  sector  risks  that  may  build  with  prolonged  use  of  unconventional  policy.5  Asset 
prices may not just revert to earlier levels on exit, but they may overshoot on the downside, 
and exit can cause significant collateral damage. 
One reason is that leverage may increase both in the financial sector and amongst borrowers 
as  policy  stays  accommodative.6  One  channel  seems  to  be  that  a  boost  to  asset  liquidity 
leads  lenders  to  believe  that  asset  sales  will  backstop  loan  recovery,  leading  them  to 
increase loan to value ratios. When liquidity tightens, though, too many lenders rely on asset 
sales, causing asset prices and loan recovery to plummet. Because lenders do not account 
for the effects of their lending on the “fire sale” price, and subsequently on lending by others, 
                                                 
3  
4   A  step  in  the  dark:  unconventional  monetary  policy  after  the  crisis”,  Raghuram  Rajan,  Andrew  Crockett 
I was not a member of the fraternity at that time, so I do not feel a conflict in doling out praise! 
Memorial Lecture delivered at the BIS on 23 June 2013. 
5   See  Borio  (2014),  Borio  and  Disyatat  (2009),  Stein  (2013),  though  see  Chodorow-Reich  (2014)  for  an 
alternative viewpoint. One question about Chodorow-Reich’s assessment that quantitative easing does not, by 
and  large,  prompt  risk  taking  is  that  he  uses  market  prices  to  estimate  effects,  even  though  these  prices 
themselves could be distorted by risk taking. 
6   For evidence, see for example Becker and Ivashina (2013), Bruno and Shin (2014 a,b), Ioannidou, Ongena 
and Peydró (2009), Maddaloni and Peydró (2010). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
they may have an excessive incentive to build leverage.7 These effects are exacerbated if, 
over time, lenders become reliant on asset sales for recovery, rather than on upfront project 
evaluation  and  due  diligence.  Another  possible  channel  is  that  banks  themselves  become 
more levered, or equivalently, acquire more illiquid balance sheets, if the central bank signals 
it will intervene in a sustained way when times are tough because unemployment is high.8  
Leverage  need  not  be  the  sole  reason  why  exit  may  be  volatile  after  prolonged 
unconventional  policy.  Investment  managers  may  fear  underperforming  relative  to  others. 
This means they will hold a risky asset only if it promises a risk premium (over safe assets) 
that makes them confident they will not underperform holding it.9 A lower path of expected 
returns  on  the  safe  asset  makes  it  easier  for  the  risky  asset  to  meet  the  required  risk 
premium,  and  indeed  draws  more  investment  managers  to  buy  it  –  the  more  credible  the 
forward  guidance  on  “low  for  long”,  the  more  the  risk  taking.  However,  as  investment 
managers  crowd  into  the  risky  asset,  the  risky  asset  is  more  finely  priced  so  that  the 
likelihood  of  possible  fire  sales  increases  if  the  interest  rate  environment  turns.  Every 
manager dumps the risky asset at that point in order to avoid being the last one holding it. 
Leverage and investor crowding may therefore exacerbate the consequences of exit. When 
monetary policy is ultra-accommodative, prudential regulation, either of the macro or micro 
kind, is probably not a sufficient defence. In part, this is because, as Fed Governor Stein so 
succinctly put it, monetary policy “gets into every crack”, including the unregulated part of the 
financial  system.10  In  part,  ultra  accommodative  monetary  policy  creates  enormously 
powerful  incentive  distortions  whose  consequences  are  typically  understood  only  after  the 
fact.  The  consequences  of  exit,  however,  are  not  just  felt  domestically,  they  could  be 
experienced internationally. 
in 
large  countries 
the  border.  When  monetary  policy 
Spillovers 
Perhaps most vulnerable to the increased risk-taking in this integrated world are countries 
across 
is  extremely  and 
unconventionally accommodative, capital flows into recipient countries tend to increase local 
leverage; this is not just due to the direct effect of cross-border banking flows but also the 
indirect effect, as the appreciating exchange rate and rising asset prices, especially of real 
estate, make it seem that borrowers have more equity than they really have.11  
Exchange  rate 
these  circumstances  sometimes 
exacerbates  booms  rather  than  equilibrates.  Indeed,  in  the  recent  episode  of  emerging 
market volatility after the Fed started discussing taper in May 2013, countries that allowed 
the real exchange rate to appreciate the most during the prior period of quantitative easing 
suffered  the  greatest  adverse  impact  to  financial  conditions.12  Countries  that  undertake 
textbook  policies  of  financial  sector  liberalization  are  not  immune  to  the  inflows  –  indeed, 
in  recipient  countries 
flexibility 
in 
                                                 
7   Stein, Jeremy. 2012. Monetary Policy as Financial-Stability Regulation. Quarterly Journal of Economics 127, 
no. 1: 57–95. 
8   See  Diamond  and  Rajan  (2012),  Farhi  and  Tirole  (2012)  and  Acharya,  Pagano  and  Volpin  (2013).  The 
problem is exacerbated if unemployment is driven by factors that move to a different cycle and pace than the 
financial cycle. 
9   See Feroli , Kashyap, Schoenholtz, and Shin (2014) for details. 
10   See Stein (2013). 
11   See Bruno and Shin (2014 a, b), Calvo, Leiderman, and Reinhart (1996), Obstfeld (2012), Rey (2013), and 
Schularick and Taylor (2012) for example. 
12   See Eichengreen and Gupta (2013) and Mishra, Moriyama, N’Diaye, and Nguyen (2014). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  their deeper markets may draw more flows in, and these liquid markets may be where selling 
takes place when conditions in advanced economies turn.13  
Macro-prudential measures have little traction against the deluge of inflows – Spain had a 
housing boom despite its countercyclical provisioning. Recipient countries should adjust, of 
course,  but  credit  and  flows  mask  the  magnitude  and  timing  of  needed  adjustment.  For 
instance, higher collections from property taxes on new houses, sales taxes on new sales, 
capital  gains  taxes  on  financial  asset  sales,  and  income  taxes  on  a  more  prosperous 
financial sector may suggest a country’s fiscal house is in order, even while low risk premia 
on  sovereign  debt  add  to  the  sense  of  calm.  At  the  same  time,  an  appreciating  nominal 
exchange rate may also keep down inflation. 
The  difficulty  of  distinguishing  the  cyclical  from  the  structural  is  exacerbated  in  some 
emerging  markets  where  policy  commitment  is  weaker,  and  the  willingness  to  succumb  to 
the siren calls of populist policy greater. But it would be a mistake to think that pro-cyclical 
policy  in  the  face  of  capital  inflows  is  primarily  a  disease  of  the  poor;  Even  rich  recipient 
countries  with  strong  institutions,  such  as  Ireland  and  Spain,  have  not  been  immune  to 
capital-flow-induced fragility. 
Ideally, recipient countries would wish for stable capital inflows, and not flows pushed in by 
unconventional  policy.  Once  unconventional  policies  are  in  place,  however,  they  do 
recognize the problems stemming from prolonged easy money, and thus the need for source 
countries  to  exit.  But  when  source  countries  move  to  exit  unconventional  policies,  some 
recipient countries are leveraged, imbalanced, and vulnerable to capital outflows. Given that 
investment  managers  anticipate  the  consequences  of  the  future  policy  path,  even  a 
measured pace of exit may cause severe market turbulence and collateral damage.14 Indeed, 
the  more  transparent  and  well-communicated  the  exit  is,  the  more  certain  the  foreign 
investment managers may be of changed conditions, and the more rapid their exit from risky 
positions. 
Recipient  countries  are  not  being  irrational  when  they  protest  both  the  initiation  of 
unconventional  policy  as  well  as  an  exit  whose  pace  is  driven  solely  by  conditions  in  the 
source  country.  Having  become  more  vulnerable  because  of  leverage  and  crowding, 
recipient countries may call for an exit whose pace and timing is responsive, at least in part, 
to conditions they face. 
The case for international monetary policy coordination 
Hence,  my  call  is  for  more  coordination  in  monetary  policy  because  I  think it  would  be  an 
immense  improvement  over  the  current  international  non-system.  International  monetary 
policy coordination, of course, is unpopular among central bankers, and I therefore have to 
say why I reiterate the call and what I mean by it. 
I do not mean that central bankers sit around a table and make policy collectively, nor do I 
mean that they call each other regularly and coordinate actions. In its strong form, I propose 
that  large  country  central  banks,  both  in  advanced  countries  and  emerging  markets, 
internalize more of the spillovers from their policies in their mandate, and are forced by new 
conventions on the “rules of the game” to avoid unconventional policies with large adverse 
spillovers and questionable domestic benefits.15 Given the difficulties of operationalizing the 
strong  form,  I  suggest  that,  at  the  very  least,  central  banks  reinterpret  their  domestic 
                                                 
13   See Prasad (2014, p 198) and Eichengreen and Gupta (2013). 
14   See Feroli et al. (2014). 
15   Though see Caruana (2012), Eichengreen et al. (2011), Jeanne (2014), and Taylor (2013) for proposals by 
current and former policy makers and monetary economists. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  mandate to take into account other country reactions over time (and not just the immediate 
feedback  effects),  and  thus  become  more  sensitive  to  spillovers.  This  weak  “coordination” 
could be supplemented with a re-examination of global safety nets. 
The gains from coordination 
Economists generally converged on the view that the gains to policy coordination were small 
provided each country optimized its own policies keeping in mind the policies of others. The 
“Nash equilibrium” was not that far from the global optimum, hence the “own house in order” 
doctrine was dominant in the international monetary field.16 National macroeconomic stability 
was  seen  as  sufficient  for  international  macroeconomic  stability.  The  domestic  and 
international aspects were essentially regarded as two sides of the same coin. 
Two  factors  have  led  to  a  rethinking  of  the  doctrine.  First,  domestic  constraints  including 
political imperatives of bringing unemployment down and the economic constraint of the zero 
lower bound may lead monetary policy to be set at levels different from the unconstrained 
domestic optimal. Dysfunctional domestic politics could also contribute in moving monetary 
policy further from the unconstrained optimal. In other words, the central bank, responding to 
a variety of political pressures and weaknesses, may stray away from even the constrained 
optimal – towards third best policies rather than second best policies. Second, cross-border 
capital  flows  can  lead  to  a  more  dramatic  transmission  of  policies,  driven  by  agency  (and 
other) considerations that do not necessarily relate to economic conditions in the recipient 
countries. 
One  argument  along  these  lines  is  that  if  some  large  country  adopts  unconventional  and 
highly  accommodative  sub  optimal  policies,  other  countries  may  follow  suit  to  avoid 
exchange rate appreciation in a world with weak demand.17 As a result, the policy equilibrium 
may  establish  at  rates  that  are  too  low  compared  to  that  warranted  by  the  global  optimal. 
Another  argument  is  that  when  the  sending  country  is  at  the  zero  lower  bound,  and  the 
receiving country responds to capital inflows with aggressive reserve accumulation, both may 
be  better  off  with  more  moderate  policies.18  Indeed,  it  may  well  be  that  coordination  may 
allow  policy  makers  political  room  to  move  away  from  sub  optimal  policies.  If  political 
paralysis and consequent fiscal tightening forces a source country to a sub-optimal reliance 
on monetary stimulus, policy coordination that allows for expanded demand elsewhere could 
allow the source country to cut back on its dependence on monetary stimulus.19  
Domestic optimal is close to the global optimal 
Despite  these  arguments,  official  statements  by  multilateral  institutions  such  as  the  IMF 
continue  to  endorse  unconventional  monetary  policies  while  downplaying  the  adverse 
spillover  effects  to  other  countries.  Indeed,  in  an  excellent  analysis  of  the  obstacles  to 
international policy coordination, the IMF’s own Jonathan Ostry and Atish Ghosh argue that 
“impartial”  international  policy  assessments  by  multilateral  entities  could  be  suspected  of 
bias.20 
“…if there were a systematic tendency of the assessor to identify a change in policy (tighter 
fiscal policy; looser monetary policy; structural reform) as always yielding welfare gains at the 
national and global levels. This would breed suspicion because the base case should be that 
                                                 
16   See Eichengreen et al. (2011). For an articulation of the doctrine, see Rose (2007) or Taylor (2013). 
17   See Taylor (2013). 
18   See Jeanne (2014). 
19   See Ostry and Ghosh (2013). 
20   See Ostry and Ghosh (2013, p23). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  countries do not fail to exploit available welfare gains…it is implausible that welfare gains at 
the national and global levels should always be positively correlated…” 
By downplaying the adverse effects of cross-border monetary transmission of unconventional 
policies,  we  are  overlooking  the  elephant  in  the  post-crisis  room.  I  see  two  dangers  here. 
One is that any remaining rules of the game are breaking down. Our collective endorsement 
of unconventional monetary policies essentially says it is ok to distort asset prices if there are 
other  domestic  constraints  to  reviving  growth,  such  as  the  zero-lower  bound.  But  net 
spillovers, rather than fancy acronyms, should determine internationally acceptable policy. 
Otherwise,  countries  could  legitimately  practice  what  they  might  call  quantitative  external 
easing  or  QEE,  whereby  they  intervene  to  keep  their  exchange  rate  down  and  build  huge 
reserves. The reason we frowned on QEE in the past is because we believed the adverse 
spillover  effects  for  the  rest  of  the  world  were  significant.  If  we  are  unwilling,  however,  to 
evaluate  all  policies  based  on  their  spillover  effects,  there  is  no  legitimate  way  multilateral 
institutions can declare that QEE contravenes the rules of the game. Indeed, some advanced 
economy  central  bankers  have  privately  expressed  their  worry  to  me  that  QE  “works” 
primarily by altering exchange rates, which makes it different from QEE only in degree rather 
than in kind. 
The second danger is a mismanaged exit will prompt fresh distortionary behaviour. Even as 
source  country  central  banks  go  to  great  pains  to  communicate  how  their  removal  of 
accommodation will be contingent on domestic activity, they have been silent on how they 
will  respond  to  foreign  turmoil.  Market  participants  conclude  that  recipient  countries, 
especially those that do not belong to large reserve currency blocks, are on their own, and 
crowd devastatingly through the exit. 
Indeed, the lesson some emerging markets will take away from the recent episode of turmoil 
is  (i)  don’t  expand  domestic  demand  and  run  large  deficits  (ii)  maintain  a  competitive 
exchange rate (iii) build large reserves, because when trouble comes, you are on your own. 
In a world with deficient aggregate demand, is this the message the international community 
wants to send? 
For this is not the first episode in which capital has been pushed first in one direction and 
then in another, each time with devastating effect. In the early 1990s, rates were held low in 
the  United  States,  and  capital  flowed  to  emerging  markets.  The  wave  of  emerging  market 
crises  starting  with  Mexico  in  1994  and  ending  with  Argentina  in  2001,  sweeping  through 
East  Asia  and  Russia  in  between,  was  partially  caused  by  a  reversal  of  these  flows  as 
interest  rates  rose  in  industrial  countries.  The  subsequent  reserve  build  up  in  emerging 
markets, including China, contributed to weak global demand and excess spending by some 
industrial countries, culminating in the global financial crisis of 2007–09. Once again, though, 
post-crisis unconventional monetary policy has pushed capital to emerging markets, with the 
associated  build  up  in  fragility.  Are  we  setting  the  stage  for  a  resumption  of  the  “global 
savings glut” as emerging markets build reserves once again? 
Two obvious remedies suggest themselves; Less extreme monetary policies on all sides with 
some thought given to adverse spillover effects when setting policy, and better global safety 
nets to mitigate the need for countries to self-insure through reserve buffers. 
More moderate policy 
Even though we live in a world where monetary transmission is global, policy focus is local. 
Central banks mount a number of defences as to why they should not take full account of 
spillovers.  One  way  to  demonstrate  the  weaknesses  in  the  usual  arguments  that  are  put 
forward to defend the status quo is to see how they would sound if they were used to defend 
QEE,  that  is,  sustained  intervention  in  the  exchange  market  to  keep  the  exchange  rate 
competitive. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Defense 1:  We  are  a  developing  country  and  we  are  mandated  to  support  growth. 
Institutional  constraints  in  enhancing  productivity,  and  our  vulnerability  to  sudden  stops, 
means  that  a  competitive  exchange  rate,  and  thus  QEE,  is  essential  to  fulfilling  our 
mandate.21 
Defense 2: Would the world not be better off if we grew  strongly? QEE is essential to our 
growth. 
Defense 3: We take into account feedback effects to our economy from the rest of the world 
while setting policy. Therefore, we are not oblivious to the consequences of QEE on other 
countries. 
Defense 4: Monetary policy with a domestic focus is already very complicated and hard to 
communicate. It would be impossibly complex if we were additionally burdened with having 
to think about the effects of QEE on other countries. 
There  are  many  problems  with  these  defenses  that  those  who  have  complained  about 
currency manipulation will recognize. Currency manipulation may help growth in the short run 
(even this is debatable), but creates long-run distortions that hurts the manipulating country. 
There are more sensible policies to foster growth. And even if a central bank has a purely 
domestic  mandate,  the  country’s  international  responsibilities  do  not  allow  it  to  arbitrarily 
impose costs on the rest of the world. The net spillover effects need to be estimated, and it 
cannot  be  taken  for  granted  that  the  positive  spillovers  from  the  initiating  country’s  growth 
(say  through  greater  trade)  more  than  offset  the  adverse  spillovers  to  other  countries. 
Feedback  effects  to  the  source  country  represent  only  a  small  part  of  the  spillover  effects 
experienced  by  the  world,  and  a  central  bank  will  be  far  from  implementing  the  globally 
optimal policy if it is solely domestically-oriented, even if it takes these feedback effects into 
account. Countries are required to pay attention to the effects of their policies on others, no 
matter how much the added complication, because we all have international responsibilities. 
Of  course,  the  reader  will  recognize  that  each  one  of  these  arguments  has  been  made 
defending  unconventional  monetary  policy.  Yet  multilateral  institutions  treat  sustained 
currency  intervention  with  great  opprobrium  while  giving  unconventional  monetary  policy  a 
clean chit. Should the cleanliness of the chit not depend on the size of the net spillovers and 
the competitive response it engenders? Without estimating them carefully, how can we tell? 
Operationalizing coordination: some suggestions 
We need to break away from this cycle of unconventional policies and competitive monetary 
easing.  Already,  the  events  of  recent  months  have  set  the  stage  for  renewed  reserve 
accumulation  by  the  emerging  markets.  And  this  time,  it  will  be  harder  for  advanced 
economies to complain if they downplay their own spillover effects while they are pushing for 
recovery. 
An independent assessor 
In an ideal world, unconventional monetary policies such as QE or QEE should be vetted by 
an independent assessor for their spillover effects.22 The assessment procedure is easy to 
visualize;  Perhaps  following  a  complaint  by  an  impacted  country  (as  in  the  WTO),  the 
independent assessor could analyse the effects of such policies and come to a judgment on 
whether they follow the rules of the game. Policies where the benefits are largely domestic, 
while  the  costs  fall  largely  abroad,  would  be  especially  carefully  scrutinized.  And  if  the 
                                                 
21   See Rodrik (2008) on why exchange undervaluation may be essential for emerging economies. 
22   See Ostry and Ghosh (2013) for the idea of an independent assessor. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  assessor deems the policy reduces global welfare, international pressure should be applied 
to stop such policies. 
The problems with such an idealistic process are easy to see. Where is such an impartial 
assessor to be found? The staff at multilateral institutions is excellent, and well capable of 
independent judgment. But political pressure subsequent to the initial assessment operates 
unevenly. Initial assessments typically remain unaltered when a small country complains (no 
country likes independent assessments), but are often toned down when a large economy 
protests. There are many exceptions to this, but more work is needed to build trust in the 
impartiality of assessments of multilateral institutions. 
Even if multilateral organizations become immune to power politics, they are not immune to 
cognitive capture. Their staff has been persuaded by the same models and frameworks as 
the staff of industrial country central banks – models where monetary policy is an extremely 
powerful  tool  to  elevate  activity,  and  exchange  rate  flexibility  does  wonders  in  insulating 
countries  from  the  most  debilitating  spillovers.  “Decoupling”  is  always  possible  in  such 
models, even though the evidence is that the models typically underestimate the extent of 
“coupling”.  Indeed,  many  of  these  models  do  not  have  realistic  models  of  credit,  or  of 
monetary  transmission  in  an  economy  with  debt  overhang,  which  reduces  their  value 
considerably. Progress is being made but it will take time. 
And, of course, even if a truly independent assessment came to the conclusion that certain 
policies were in violation, how would such a judgment be enforced? 
The reality is that the rules of the game were framed in a different era to deter competitive 
devaluations  and  currency  manipulation.  They  have  not  been  updated  for  today’s  world  of 
more varied competitive easing. But it is unclear that even if they were updated, they could 
be assessed and enforced in the current environment. 
A more modest proposal 
Perhaps then, it would be better to settle for a more modest proposal. Central banks should 
assess spillover effects from their own actions, not just in terms of immediate feedback, but 
also in terms of medium term feedback as other countries alter their policies. In other words, 
the  source  country  should  not  just  worry  about  the  immediate  flows  of  capital  to  other 
countries  from  its  policies,  but  the  longer  run  reaction  such  as  sustained  exchange 
intervention that this would bring about. This would allow central banks to pay more attention 
to spillovers even while staying within their domestic mandate. 
For example, this would mean that while exiting from unconventional policies, central banks 
would  pay  attention  to  conditions  in  emerging  markets  also  while  deciding  the  timing  of 
moves, while keeping the overall direction of moves tied to domestic conditions. Their policy 
statements should acknowledge such concerns. To be concrete in a specific case, the Fed 
postponing  tapering  in  September  2013  allowed  emerging  economies  more  time  to  adjust 
after the initial warning in May 2013. Whatever the underlying rationale for postponement, it 
helped  tapering  start  smoothly  in  December  2013,  without  disrupting  markets.  In  contrast, 
with volatility hitting emerging markets after the Argentinian problems in January 2014, the 
Fed  policy  statement  in  January  2014,  with  no  mention  of  concern  about  the  emerging 
market situation, and with no indication Fed policy would be sensitive to conditions in those 
markets  in  the  future,  sent  the  probably  unintended  message  that  those  markets  were  on 
their own. Speeches by Regional Fed Presidents emphasizing the Fed’s domestic mandate 
did  not  help.  Since  then,  Fed  communication  has  been  more  nuanced,  though  the  real 
challenge in communication lies ahead when policy rates have to move up.23  
                                                 
23   For a recent nuanced view from a key Fed President, see Dudley (2014). 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  International safety nets 
Emerging economies have to work to reduce vulnerabilities in their economies, to get to the 
point  where,  like  Australia,  they  can  allow  exchange  rate  flexibility  to  do  much  of  the 
adjustment for them to capital inflows. But the needed institutions take time to develop. In the 
meantime, the difficulty for emerging markets in absorbing large amounts of capital quickly 
and in a stable way should be seen as a constraint, much like the zero lower bound, rather 
than something that can be altered quickly. Even while resisting the temptation of absorbing 
flows, they will look to safety nets. 
So another way to prevent a repeat of substantial reserve accumulation is to build stronger 
international  safety  nets.24  As  the  financial  crisis  suggested,  this  is  not  just  an  emerging 
economy concern. In a world where international liquidity can dry up quickly, the world needs 
bilateral,  regional,  and multilateral arrangements  for  liquidity.  Multilateral  arrangements  are 
tried and tested, and are available more widely, and without some of the possible political 
pressures  that  could  arise  from  bilateral  and  regional  arrangements.  Indeed  swap 
arrangements can be channelled through multilateral institutions like the IMF instead of being 
conducted on a bilateral basis, so that the multilateral institution bears any (small) credit risk, 
and  the  source  central  bank  does  not  have  to  justify  the  arrangements  to  its  political 
authorities. 
Perhaps  equally  valuable  would  be  a  liquidity  line  from  the  IMF,  where  countries  are  pre-
qualified by the IMF and told (perhaps privately) how much of a line they would qualify for 
under  current  policy  –  with  access  limits  revised  every  Article  IV  and  any  curtailment 
becoming effective 6 months later.25 Access to the line would get activated by the IMF Board 
in  a  situation  of  generalized  liquidity  shortage  (as,  for  example,  when  policy  tightening  in 
source  countries  after  an  extended  period  of  low  rates  causes  investment  managers  to 
become risk averse). The IMF has suggested such arrangements in a discussion paper, and 
they should be explored because they allow countries access to liquidity without the stigma 
of  approaching  the  Fund,  and  without  the  conditionality  that  accompanies  most  Fund 
arrangements.26  
Clearly, the Fund’s resources will be safe only if the situation is one of genuine temporary 
illiquidity rather than one where countries need significant reforms to regain market access. 
Equally  clearly,  access  will  vary  across  countries,  and  prolonged  use  after  the  liquidity 
emergency  is  declared  over  will  necessitate  an  IMF  program.  Nevertheless,  the  twin 
proposals of the Global Stability Mechanism and Short-term Liquidity Line that the IMF Board 
has  examined  in  the  past  deserve  close  examination  for  they  come  closest  to  genuinely 
helping offset reserve build-up. 
Finally,  it  would  be  a  useful  exercise  for  the  Fund,  in  a  period  of  growing  vulnerability  to 
capital flow reversals, to identify those countries that do not have own, bilateral, regional, or 
multilateral  liquidity  arrangements  to  fall  back  on,  and  to  work  to  improve  their  access  to 
some safety net. The role of honest ex-ante marriage broker may be one that could prove to 
be immensely important when the interest rate environment changes. 
Conclusion 
The  current  non-system  in  international  monetary  policy  is,  in  my  view,  a  source  of 
substantial  risk,  both  to  sustainable  growth  as  well  as  to  the  financial  sector.  It  is  not  an 
                                                 
24   See Farhi, et al. (2011) for comprehensive proposals, as also Prasad (2014). 
25   So as to give a country time to adjust policies to qualify for higher limits, or to find alternative arrangements. 
26   See “The Fund’s Mandate – The Future Financing Role: Reform Proposals”, IMF June 29 2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  industrial  country  problem,  nor  an  emerging  market  problem,  it  is  a  problem  of  collective 
action. We are being pushed towards competitive monetary easing. 
If I use terminology reminiscent of the Depression era non-system, it is because I fear that in 
a  world  with  weak  aggregate  demand,  we  may  be  engaged  in  a  futile  competition  for  a 
greater  share  of  it.  In  the  process,  unlike  Depression-era  policies,  we  are  also  creating 
financial sector and cross-border risks that exhibit themselves when unconventional policies 
come  to  an  end.27  There  is  no  use  saying  that  everyone  should  have  anticipated  the 
consequences.  As  the  former  BIS  General  Manager  Andrew  Crockett  put  it,  “financial 
intermediaries  are  better  at  assessing  relative  risks  at  a  point  in  time,  than  projecting  the 
evolution of risk over the financial cycle.” 
A  first  step  to  prescribing  the  right  medicine  is  to  recognize  the  cause  of  the  sickness. 
Extreme  monetary  easing,  in  my  view,  is  more  cause  than  medicine.  The  sooner  we 
recognize that, the more sustainable world growth we will have. 
References 
Acharya, V, Marco Pagano and Paolo Volpin (2013), Seeking Alpha: Excess Risk Taking and 
Competition for Managerial Talent, NBER Working Paper 18891. 
Becker,  Bo  and  Victoria  Ivashina  (2012),  “Reaching  for  Yield  in  the  Bond  Market”,  NBER 
working paper 18909. 
Borio, Claudio (2014), “Monetary Policy and Financial Stability: What Role in Prevention and 
Recovery”, BIS Working Paper 440, January 2014. 
Borio,  Claudio  and  Piti  Disyatat  (2009),  “Unconventional  Monetary  Policies:  An  Appraisal”, 
BIS working paper 292. 
Bruno, Valentina and Hyun Song Shin (2014 a), “Capital flows and the risk-taking channel of 
monetary policy”, American University working paper. 
Bruno,  Valentina  and  Hyun  Song  Shin  (2014 b),  “Cross-Border  Banking  and  Global 
Liquidity”, American University working paper. 
Calvo, Guillermo, Leonardo Leiderman, and Carmen Reinhart (1996), “Inflows of Capital to 
Developing  Countries  in  the  1990s”,  Journal  of  Economic  Perspectives,  Vol  10,  no  2, 
pp 123–139. 
Caruana, 
http://www.kansascityfed.org/publications/research/escp/escp-2012.cfm. 
Chodorow-Reich,  Gabriel  (2014),  “Effects  of  Unconventional  Monetary  Policy  on  Financial 
Institutions”, Brookings Panel on Economic Activity Conference Draft. 
Coval, Josh and Tobias Moscowitz (1999), “Home Bias at Home: Local Equity Preference in 
Domestic Portfolios”, Journal of Finance, 54(6), pp. 2045–73. 
Diamond,  Douglas  and  Raghuram  Rajan  (2012),  “Illiquid  Banks,  Financial  Stability,  and 
Interest Rate Policy”,  Journal of Political Economy Volume: 120 Issue: 3 Pages: 552–591, 
JUN 2012. 
Dudley, William (2014), “U.S. Monetary Policy and Emerging Market Economies”, Remarks 
at the Roundtable Discussion in Honor of Terrence Checki: Three Decades of Crises: What 
Have We Learned?, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York City. 
Inter-connected  World”, 
“Policy  Making 
(2012), 
Jaime 
an 
in 
                                                 
27   For  an  interesting  episode,  see  the  farm  mortgage  crisis  in  the  United  States  documented  in  Rajan  and 
Ramcharan (2013). 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Eichengreen,  B.,  M.  El-Erian,  A.  Fraga,  T.  Ito,  J.  Pisani-Ferry,  E.  Prasad,  R.  Rajan, 
M. Ramos,  C.  Reinhart,  H.  Rey,  D.  Rodrik,  K.  Rogoff,  H.S.  Shin,  A.  Velasco,  B.  Weder  di 
Mauro and Y. Yu, “Rethinking Central Banking” (2011), Brookings Institution. 
Eichengreen, Barry and Poonam Gupta (2013), “Tapering Talk: The Impact of Expectations 
of  Reduced  Federal  Reserve  Security  Purchases  on  Emerging  Markets”,  Working  Paper, 
University of California, Berkeley. 
Farhi, E., Gourinchas, P.O., Rey, H. (2011), “Reforming the International Monetary System” 
http://www.helenerey.eu/RP.aspx?pid=Policy-Papers_en-GB&aid=72587282480_67186463733 
Farhi, Emmanuel and Jean Tirole (2012), “Collective Moral Hazard, Maturity Mismatch, and 
Systemic Bailouts.” American Economic Review 102: 60–93. 
Feroli,  Michael,  Anil  Kashyap,  Kermit  Schoenholz,  Hyun  Song  Shin  (2014),  “Market 
Tantrums and Monetary Policy”, Chicago Booth Working Paper 101. 
Ioannidou, V. and S. Ongena and J. Peydró (2009), “Monetary policy and subprime lending: 
a tall tale of low federal funds rates, hazardous loan and reduced loans spreads.” 
Jeanne,  Olivier  (2014),  “Macro-prudential  policies  in  a  global  perspective”,  NBER  Working 
paper 19967. 
Maddaloni, A. and J. Peydró (2010), “Bank risk taking, securitization, supervision, and low 
interest rates: evidence from lending standards.” Working Paper no. 1248, ECB Series. 
Mishra, Prachi, Kenji Moriyama, Papa N’Diaye and Lam Nguyen (2014), “The Impact of Fed 
Tapering Announcements on Emerging Markets”, IMF working paper. 
Obstfeld,  Maurice  (2012),  “Does  the  Current  Account  Still  Matter”,  Richard  T.  Ely  Lecture, 
American Economic Association Annual Meetings, Chicago IL. 
Ostry,  Jonathan  and  Atish  Ghosh  (2013),  “Obstacles  to  International  Policy  Coordination, 
and How to Overcome them”, IMF Staff Discussion Note SDN/13/11X. 
Mitchell Petersen and Raghuram Rajan (2002), “Does Distance Still Matter? The Revolution 
in Small Business Lending”, Journal of Finance, 57(6), pp. 2533–2570. 
Prasad,  Eswar  (2014),  The  Dollar  Trap:  How  the  U.S.  Dollar  Tightened  Its  Grip  on  Global 
Finance, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ. 
Rajan,  Raghuram  and  Rodney  Ramcharan  (2013),  “The  Anatomy  of  a  Credit  Crisis:  The 
Boom  and  Bust  in  Farm  Land  Prices  in  the  United  States  in  the  1920s”,  working  paper, 
University of Chicago. 
Rodrik,  Dani  (2008),  “Undervaluation  is  good  for  growth,  but  why?”,  Brookings  Papers  on 
Economic Activity, Fall 2008. 
Rose,  A.  (2007),  A  Stable  International  Monetary  System  Emerges:  Inflation  Targeting  is 
Bretton Woods, Reversed. Journal of International Money and Finance, 26, 663–681. 
Schularick, Moritz  and Alan  M.  Taylor  (2012),  “Credit  Booms  Gone  Bust:  Monetary  Policy: 
Leverage  Cycles,  and  Financial  Crises,  1870–2008.”  American  Economic  Review  102, 
1029–61. 
Stein, Jeremy (2012), Monetary Policy as Financial-Stability Regulation. Quarterly Journal of 
Economics 127, no. 1: 57–95. 
Stein,  Jeremy  (2013),  “Overheating  in  Credit  Markets:  Origins,  Measurement,  and  Policy 
Responses”,  speech  at  the  “Restoring  Household  Financial  Stability  after  the  Great 
Recession: Why Household Balance Sheets Matter” research symposium sponsored by the 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri, February 7, 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
  Stein, Jeremy (2014), “Incorporating Financial Stability Considerations into a Monetary Policy 
Framework”, speech at the International Research Forum on Monetary Policy, Washington, 
D.C. , March 21, 2014. 
Taylor, John (2013), “International Monetary Policy Coordination: Past, Present, and Future”, 
BIS Working Papers No 437. 
 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
