  Sabine Lautenschläger: Low inflation as a challenge for monetary policy 
and financial stability? 
Speech  by  Ms  Sabine  Lautenschläger,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European 
Central Bank, at the Parliamentary Evening, Hamburg, 7 July 2014. 
 Summary 
Although  low  interest  rates  might  have  side  effects  with  respect  to  financial  stability,  they 
were  necessary  for  the  ECB  to  fulfil  its  mandate  of  ensuring  price  stability,  said  Sabine 
Lautenschläger, member of the ECB’s Executive Board, in a speech at an event organised 
by the Deutsche Bundesbank in Hamburg. “The risks of the rate of inflation being too low 
over a long period are not to be underestimated,” she explained. The experience of Japan 
had  proven  that  an  unanchoring  of  inflation  expectations  could  start  a  downward  spiral  – 
consumers and investors could change their behaviour and defer spending. 
The ECB’s Governing Council had therefore cut the main refinancing rate and had decided 
on  a  package  of  instruments  to  encourage  banks  to  lend  more  to  corporations  and 
households.  Excessively  low  inflation  rates  made  it  harder  for  stressed  countries  to  adjust 
their  economies  and  regain  competitiveness.  “We  [could]  soon  find  ourselves  in  a  vicious 
circle  in  the  euro  area”,  Lautenschläger  warned.  It  would  take  some  time  before  the 
measures adopted took effect, especially the instruments designed to increase liquidity, she 
explained. “I would expect that to happen next year, rather than this year.” 
Should  inflation  rates  not  increase  gradually  as  expected,  the  Governing  Council  was 
unanimous  in  its  readiness  to  decide  on  further  unconventional  measures  to  effectively 
counter  the  risks  related  to  an  excessively  long  period  of  low  interest  rates,  said  Ms 
Lautenschläger.  A  broadly  ranging  programme  of  securities  purchases  was  basically  an 
instrument that a central bank could use, Lautenschläger claimed. But the requirement to be 
met for such a use had to be very high, because of the significant potential side effects, she 
said.  What  was  also  being  discussed  was  a  revitalisation  of  the  market  for  asset-backed 
securities  (ABSs),  which  Lautenschläger  regarded  as  a  worthwhile  goal  to  the  extent  that 
transparent  and  simple  securitisations  were  involved.  For  such  ABSs,  a  purchase 
programme would be possible, but the ECB should only take on liquidity risk and no credit 
risk.  Taking  on  credit  risk,  for  example  to  encourage  lending  to  small  and  medium-sized 
companies,  was 
the  governments  of  Member  States,  said 
Lautenschläger. 
An  easing  of  monetary  policy  has  side  effects  on  asset  prices,  said  Lautenschläger.  That 
could  reduce  risk  aversion  and  increase  the  threat  of  asset  price  bubbles.  In  addition, 
indebtedness  could  increase  further  and  the  flexibility  of  monetary  policy  action  could  be 
undermined.  Those  were  risks  that  should  not  be  addressed  by  monetary  policy  to  the 
detriment  the  central  bank’s  price  stability  mandate.  On  the  other  hand,  this  did  not  mean 
that there could not be any response. Instruments of macro-prudential supervision should be 
used,  said  Lautenschläger.  For  example,  higher  capital  requirements  could  slow  down 
lending in the event of excesses on regional real estate markets. 
responsibility  of 
the 
 President, 
Senator Tschentscher, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The  European  debt  crisis  mercilessly  uncovered  the  imbalances  in  the  euro  area  that  had 
long been hidden. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  It has generated huge economic costs. 
It has presented major challenges, especially for those of us responsible for monetary policy, 
not least because we do not act in a vacuum where politics are irrelevant. Sound national 
budgets and competitive economies are basic requirements for effective monetary policy. 
But it also set in motion urgently needed adjustment processes in many countries, as well as 
deep-reaching  institutional  reforms,  all  of  which  may  make  for  healthier  and  more  robust 
economic and monetary union if they are followed through to their conclusion consistently. 
However,  patience,  stamina  and  reliability  will  be  required  to  get  there.  The  euro  area 
economy  is  recovering  from  the  deep  recession,  but  only  extremely  slowly.  Growth  is 
currently  only  moderate  and  unemployment  remains  at  record  levels.  Lending  is  also  still 
extremely subdued in large parts of the euro area. 
All  this  means  that  wages  and  prices  are  rising  only  marginally  and  will  do  so  only  very 
moderately in the euro area in the coming years, too. According to Eurostat’s estimate, the 
rate of inflation in June was just 0.5%. And, although the projections show a slow rise in the 
rate of inflation to 1.5% in the fourth quarter of 2016, this would still fall short of the target. 
At  its  meeting  in  June  the  ECB  Governing  Council  was  united  in  its  reaction  to  the  risks 
associated with such a subdued price outlook and approved a package of measures. This 
package was necessary to fulfil our primary mandate of maintaining price stability, even if it 
could have unwanted side effects – but more on that later. 
(What is our monetary policy geared towards?) 
With respect to assessing the June measures and their risks, I would like to start by briefly 
explaining when I believe monetary policy action is called for. 
The mandate, which is clearly formulated in the Treaty on the Functioning of the European 
Union, forms the basis of any monetary policy action. It states: “The primary objective of the 
European System of Central Banks is to maintain price stability”. 
The  ECB  Governing  Council  has  given  the  objective  of  “price  stability”  a  more  specific, 
quantitative definition. You all know it: it is the famous 2% benchmark or, more precisely, our 
target of keeping the increase in prices for the euro area at below, but close to, 2%. Many 
expectations are associated with this target, which are often very different, depending on the 
traditions and experiences of inflation that prevail in the respective country: some expect the 
2% target to be adhered to in every country; some become restless and see an immediate 
obligation to act if inflation exceeds or falls short of the target for one or two months. Others 
in  turn  only  see  there  being  a  risk  if  inflation  rises  above  the  2%  benchmark;  the  risks  of 
inflation being low for too long are then considered minor. And there are lots of economists 
who  see  inflation  being  higher  than  2%  as  the  solution  to  the  crisis  and  the  difficult 
adjustment processes faced by national economies. 
Of course, it is not about price increases in individual countries: we make monetary policy for 
the euro area as a whole. And the focus is not on the prices of individual goods or services, 
but the stability of price levels in general. That is simple. 
However, it is more important that price stability should be ensured in the medium term. It is 
therefore not about achieving an inflation rate of below, but close to, 2% every month. This 
cannot  actually  be  done  through  monetary  policy  in  an  open  market  economy  with  free 
competition.  So  a  central  bank  should  not  expose  itself  every  month  to  pressure  to  take 
action, but orient itself towards the projected rate of inflation over a two to three-year horizon 
and of course inflation expectations. At the same time, however, price stability should not be 
postponed ad infinitum. 
And  we  should  certainly  address  upward  and  downward  deviations  in  the  rate  of  inflation 
from the desired target. After all, the risks of the rate of inflation being too low over a long 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  period are not to be underestimated. For me, keeping the downward gap to the benchmark 
within limits is therefore part of the price stability mandate in order to firmly anchor inflation 
expectations and reduce the risks of deflation. 
Despite  this  more  quantitative  definition  of  price  stability,  monetary  policy  is  not  a 
mechanistic process. The decisions as to what monetary policy measure to take and whether 
it is the right one depend on the causes of the very weak price developments. For example, 
is sluggish lending weakening demand? Do the weak price developments reflect necessary 
adjustment processes in the crisis countries? Or are fluctuating oil and food prices driving the 
sharp fall in the rate of inflation? 
Oil  and  particularly  food  prices  more  recently  have  indeed  played  a  key  role  in  inflation 
developments in recent months. And the increases in prices of services are also tending to 
decline, all in all, even if it is likely that this can mainly be attributed to developments in the 
crisis countries. 
Such  price  changes  are  normally  only  reflected  in  the  inflation  rate  temporarily.  Monetary 
policy therefore does not normally react to temporary oil or food price developments. The fact 
that our mandate is geared towards the medium term allows us to look beyond such short-
term developments. 
So why did we deem it necessary to act? In the current situation, keeping a steady hand on 
the tiller would have endangered our mandate of maintaining price stability. 
After all, the interplay between falling oil prices, an appreciating currency and a very faltering 
recovery in demand in many parts of the euro area masks the risk of a phase of very low 
inflation  lasting  too  long.  This  can  lead  to  market  participants  adjusting  their  inflation 
expectations. They would then no longer be geared to our target of below, but close to, 2%, 
but perhaps to the prospect of very low rates of inflation. The example of Japan shows that 
such  a  decoupling  can  directly  endanger  price  stability.  Falling  inflation  expectations  may 
become firmly established in lower wage settlements, triggering a spiral of falling prices and 
expectations that would be difficult to escape. The risk is then that prices fall so sharply that, 
for example, consumers postpone their purchasing decisions because they expect prices to 
fall even further, and companies put off investment. This does not just harbour considerable 
risks for price stability in the euro area; deflation also increases real debt, thereby impeding 
debt reduction, including the reduction of private debt. 
Now many critics of the low interest rate policy point out that low prices are the consequence 
of the necessary adjustment processes in the crisis countries. And these critics rightly argue 
that,  in  a  similar  way  to  short-term  fluctuations  in  oil  and  food  prices,  such  adjustment 
processes  within  the  euro  area  seldom  require  a  monetary  policy  reaction.  They  are  not 
normally  reflected  in  the  average  rate  of  inflation  for  the  euro  area  in  the  medium  term. 
Rather, the issue here is relative price changes. 
Germany, too, went through this kind of reform process a number of years ago. As a result, 
wage and prices in Germany were below the euro area average for a long time. Back then, 
however, Germany was already able to improve its competitiveness thanks to low inflation, 
while rates of inflation in many other Member States were higher than that specified in our 
definition  of  price  stability.  Overall,  though,  inflation  in  the  euro  area  was  close  to  our 
benchmark. 
However, the situation today is different. Even in Germany, inflation is and remains very low 
– it stood at 0.6% in May and 1% in June. Prices and wages in the crisis countries therefore 
need to fall even more sharply in order to make up competitive disadvantages. This in turn 
makes economic recovery in these countries more difficult and may therefore exert further 
downward  pressure  on prices.  Then  we  soon  find  ourselves  in  a  vicious  circle  in the  euro 
area. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  Overview of the measures adopted in June: design and necessity 
It was these risks – in particular, the danger of a decoupling of inflation expectations – that 
made the ECB’s Governing Council take responsive action in June. 
In essence, the decisions of June comprise three elements: 
 
 
 
further interest rate cuts combined with the reaffirmation of our forward guidance; 
measures to improve the monetary policy transmission mechanism; and 
the  announcement  that  work  to  prepare  further  possible  measures  in  case  they 
become necessary is under way. 
The reason why we reduced the official interest rates to historical lows is that the outlook for 
inflation had declined yet again. According to the latest estimates of Eurosystem economists, 
the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) for the euro area will rise by only 0.7% 
this year. Their projections for next year put the rate of inflation at 1.1%, while the rate of 
inflation  in  2016  is  expected  to  be  1.4%.  The  projections  are  cautious  even  for  Germany, 
where economic activity was brisk in the first half of the year and where the labour market is 
continuing  to  develop  along  favourable  lines.  Consumer  prices  will  probably  rise  by  only 
1.1% this year, and by 1.5% next year. This compares with an average increase of 1.8% in 
prices in Germany over the past ten years 
A further easing of our monetary policy was thus appropriate in view of a long-lasting phase 
of extremely low inflation. What is important in this respect is that the reduction of the main 
refinancing  rate  is  factored  fully  into  rates  on  the  money  markets,  in  order  to  enable  the 
monetary  policy  easing  to  full  effect  despite  already  very  low  interest  rates.  The  negative 
interest  rate  we  have  put  in  place  for  banks’  deposits  thus  ensures  that  the  interest  rate 
corridor, i.e. the spread between the interest rates on deposits, main refinancing operations 
and  marginal  refinancing  operations,  is  wide  enough  to  continue  to  provide  incentives  for 
banks  to  trade  actively  on  the  interbank  market.  In  addition,  we  have  stopped  the  weekly 
withdrawal of the liquidity that injected into the markets by way of bond purchases under the 
Securities  Markets  Programme  (SMP).  The  higher  excess  liquidity  thus  created  gives  the 
process  additional  impetus.  And  together  with  the  negative  interest  rate  on  deposits,  the 
package of measures adopted creates incentives for banks to no longer park their excess 
liquidity  at  the  ECB,  but  rather  to  extend  credit  or  to  seek  other  productive  investment 
opportunities. 
The  further  reduction  of  our  key  interest  rates  in  June  was  combined  with  measures  to 
ensure  that  the  monetary  easing  actually  reaches  those  who  need  it  most,  namely 
enterprises still suffering from credit terms and conditions that, despite the accommodative 
monetary policy, remain clearly more restrictive than those for enterprises with comparable 
risk profiles in other euro area countries. 
The  additional  measures  are  thus  aimed  at  revitalising  sluggish  lending  in  the  euro  area 
through  targeted  injections  of  liquidity.  For  some  time  now,  we  have  been  observing  with 
concern that the gap between actual lending levels and the lending levels that model-based 
estimates  see  as  appropriate  in  the  current  phase  of  the  business  cycle  is  continuing  to 
widen in many euro area countries. 
What exactly does that mean? After a recession, it is normal for lending to only pick up in a 
later  stage  of  the  recovery.  Enterprises,  for  instance,  often  first  use  internally  generated 
funds to finance capital expenditure or investment and only take recourse to loans or other 
external funds after a while. In many countries, the reduction of debt levels in the wake of the 
severe  distortions  on  the  financial  and  housing  markets  is  moreover  curbing  demand  for 
credit still further. 
Lending  is  nonetheless  stalling  even  more  sharply  than  in  earlier  business  cycles.  Credit 
growth in the euro area has, for instance, been on the decline since the second half of 2012. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Even though more recent surveys undertaken by the Eurosystem on bank lending show that 
credit  conditions  in  the  crisis  countries  have  largely  stabilised  in  the  first  half  of  this  year, 
around  60%  of  the  banks  report  that  the  current  terms  and  conditions  for  loans  are  more 
restrictive than those prevailing, on average, over the period since 2003. And if businesses 
or consumers know that they have to pay more for a loan than their credit standing would 
justify, they will not even ask for credit. 
That is exactly where the second part of our package of measures kicks in. 
The two targeted longer-term refinancing operations we have announced for September and 
December this year will allow banks to borrow, for a period of up to four years, funds in an 
amount of initially 7% of their euro area non-financial private sector loans outstanding at the 
end of April. The focus of our endeavours in this respect is clearly on loans to businesses. 
That is why residential loans to households have been excluded. Between March 2015 and 
June  2016,  all  Eurosystem  counterparties  will  be  able  to  borrow  additional  funds.  That 
additional  liquidity  will,  however,  be  closely  linked  to  the  respective  bank’s  net  lending  in 
order to ensure that the money actually goes where it is needed. 
But  many  of  you  may  be  asking  yourselves  whether,  given  that  many  banks  are  already 
repaying the funds raised through the previous three-year longer-term refinancing operations 
early, there is really any further need for long-term liquidity. 
We are indeed noting that the terms and conditions under which banks can raise funds on 
the money and credit markets have eased considerably (by around 100 basis points) since 
July 2012, and that this has slowly reduced their dependence on central bank liquidity. The 
TARGET  balances  relating  to  payment  transactions  between  central  banks  have  fallen  by 
some €540 billion, i.e. have been almost halved. These are favourable signs. 
Although  financing  conditions  for  banks  in  the  crisis countries  have  improved  dramatically, 
interest rates on loans to small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) in these countries are 
nonetheless still significantly higher than those in Germany or other core countries. The high 
lending rates in the crisis countries are, of course, due to the higher credit risk there, as can 
also be seen from the high risk of default and the proportion of non-performing loans in these 
countries.  Some  25%  of  all  loans  extended  to  SMEs  in  the  crisis  countries  are  currently 
deemed  to  be  non-performing.  And,  as  a  banking  supervisor,  I  am  happy  that  banks  are 
pricing-in  the  risks  inherent  to  lending.  It  would  be  of  only  short-term  benefit  to  the  real 
economies  of  Member  States  if  banks  were  to  extend  credit  without  any  close  and  critical 
look  at  the  associated  risk  of  default.  Enterprises,  in  particular  small  and  medium-sized 
businesses,  require  a  banking  industry  that  is  robust  and  does  not  immediately  reduce  its 
services whenever there is an even minor downturn in growth. In order to ensure that banks 
remain fit and able to provide financing also over the medium to long term, the risk for each 
individual bank needs to be in proportion to the return. Why do I nonetheless regard targeted 
injections  of  liquidity,  i.e.  targeted  longer-term  refinancing  operations  (TLTROs),  as 
appropriate? Aside from differences in credit risk, we are observing that the improvements in 
financing terms and conditions are not being passed on to businesses and consumers, and 
that  this  is  happening  even  though  assistance  programmes  have  already  seen  the 
implementation  of  far-reaching  measures  to  adjust  the  balance  sheets  of,  for  example, 
Spanish banks. 
The low fixed interest rate on, and the extended maturity of, the new targeted injections of 
liquidity  offer  banks  a  different  set  of  incentives.  We  are  ensuring  planning  certainty  with 
regard  to  the  cost  of  refinancing  corporate  loans  and  providing  major  help  with  respect  to 
maturity transformation between longer-term lending and often short-term refinancing. This 
could  make  one  or  another  loan  for  corporate  customers  economically  viable  without  our 
having  to  assume  any  credit  risks.  Allow  me  to  recall  here  that  the  interest  rates  on  our 
earlier  three-year  longer-term  refinancing  operations  were  variable.  For  banks,  the  greater 
uncertainty about the interest rate went hand in hand with greater uncertainty with respect to 
their own refinancing terms and conditions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  The new longer-term refinancing operations have a different focus and will come to bear in 
an  environment  that  has  changed.  Potential  side  effects  will  thus  have  a  lesser  impact 
because  yield  spreads  have  narrowed  considerably,  the  economic  outlook  has  brightened 
and  –  although  there  are,  of  course,  residual  uncertainties  –  the  banks  have  significantly 
improved their capital positions. All these factors should help make banks show less restraint 
in their lending. 
And in order to be able to fully benefit from the two refinancing operations of September and 
December – i.e. for them to make use of the funds raised over the full four years – the banks 
will need to expand their lending over and beyond our benchmark over the next two years. 
Otherwise, they will be required to repay the borrowed funds in September 2016. 
Our monetary policy measures thereby encourage banks to again increase their lending. But 
the  banks  must  also  be  sound  enough  to  enable  them  to  carry  out  their  core  business  of 
supplying the real economy with credit for productive investment. 
That, too, is a reason why I attach such great importance to the comprehensive assessment 
exercise,  the  check-up  on  the  health  of  banks  in  the  euro  area.  Only  banks  that  have 
properly written-off their losses and that are endowed with adequate capital will be able to 
extend  credit  at  reasonable  terms  and  conditions.  In  anticipation  of  the  comprehensive 
assessment, many banks have undertaken additional value adjustments, have sold assets 
and have stocked up their capital over the past 12 months – in short, they have cleaned up 
their  balance  sheets.  That  has  eliminated  yet  another  obstacle  to  an  adequate  supply  of 
credit next year. 
(The benefits and risks of further monetary policy action) 
Let me return to our monetary policy. Yes, we have adopted a comprehensive package of 
measures.  Immediately  after  the  announcement  of  these  measures  at  the  ECB’s  press 
conference, we were nonetheless confronted with the question: is that really all? When and 
on what basis will we consider the adoption of further measures? 
Patience is a virtue – that is all I can say on this. It will take a while for all our measures to 
take effect. Some responses will become visible sooner. In this respect, the re-affirmation of 
our forward guidance, the prolongation of the full allotment of our standard liquidity-providing 
operations  up  to  the  end  of  2016,  was  of  particular  importance.  This  form  of  forward 
guidance underlines the likelihood, as expressed by the Governing Council, that key interest 
rates in the euro area will, given the same circumstances, remain at the same level for some 
time to come. 
Other  measure  such  as  the  targeted  LTROs  will  take  longer  to  have  an  impact  –  in  this 
respect, I would expect that to happen next year, rather than this year. 
Should  a  gradual  improvement  of  the  inflation  outlook  not  materialise,  despite  the 
comprehensive  decisions  taken  in  June  and  contrary  to  our  expectations,  the  Governing 
Council was unanimous in voicing its intent to also use unconventional measures within the 
scope of its mandate to effectively counter the risks of too long a period of low inflation. 
Does 
the  whole  arsenal  of 
countermeasures if, for example, new economic or geopolitical circumstances cause the rate 
of  inflation  not  to  converge  on  the  desired  benchmark  more  rapidly,  as  is  expected  at  the 
moment?  I  don’t  think  so,  even  though  quite  a  number  of  market  participants  are  already 
hoping for a broadly ranging bond purchase programme. Such a programme is, of course, 
one instrument in the set that is, in principle, at the disposal of a central bank. However, the 
preconditions  for  the  use  of  such  a  form  of  monetary  policy  intervention  need  to  be 
particularly stringent, given that the side effects are singularly pronounced. Too low yields on 
government  and  corporate  bonds  could  create  the  wrong  incentives  and  thus  pose  a 
significant risk. The underlying monetary policy reasoning behind its use must therefore be 
beyond  question,  especially  in  a  monetary  union  comprising  18,  and  soon  19,  sovereign 
the  Governing  Council  will  run  out 
that  mean 
that 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  countries. Such an instrument could only be considered in a true emergency, for example in 
the  case  of  imminent  deflation.  Such  risks,  however,  are  currently  neither  discernible  nor 
expected. 
What is also being discussed is the revitalisation of the market for securitised loans. That is 
certainly  a  worthy  goal,  given  that  asset-backed  securities  (ABSs)  have  been  exceedingly 
demonised since the outbreak of the financial crisis. They certainly played a role in causing 
the crisis, but it must be borne in mind that not every case of securitisation is the same. What 
I am thinking of in this respect are not re-securitisation positions and synthetic securitisation 
transactions, but rather of very simply and clearly constructed products that are far less risky. 
The  rate  of  default  for  European  securitisations  that  are  underpinned  by  SME  loans,  for 
instance, stands at around 0.1%. Since the onset of the crisis, the average default rate for 
Europe  as  a  whole  has  been  between  0.6%  and  1.5%.  Cause  for  concern  are  rather  the 
default rates in the United States, which stood at between 9.3% and 18.4% over the same 
period. 
Against  this  background,  the  Governing  Council  has  decided,  in  cooperation  with  other 
relevant  institutions,  to  gradually  revitalise  the  market  for  ABSs,  in  particular  that  for 
securities backed by loans to SMEs. For me, that means looking once more at the capital 
requirements for ABS transactions. And in that respect, I am not thinking of endowing this 
field  of  business  with  any  unjustified  privileges.  I  am  and  remain  firmly  convinced  that,  in 
order  to  create  a  system  of  proper  incentives  for  banks’  internal  business  and  risk 
assessment strategies, the capital requirements imposed on banks must be aligned strictly to 
the risk entailed in the business operations involved. As the cost of capital for ABS-related 
risks has been raised simplistically without much differentiation in Basel since 2010, it is now 
time for another look at this field of business. 
But  what  can  the  ECB  still  do  for  the  revitalisation  of  the  ABS  market?  We  have  already 
relaxed  the  requirements  for  ABSs  that  are  eligible  for  use  as  collateral  in  our  refinancing 
operations. We have lowered the minimum standard of creditworthiness for certain types of 
ABS,  added  further  classes  of  ABS  to  our  range  of  eligible  collateral  and  reduced  the 
valuation haircuts for ABSs. 
The market for ABSs could also be revitalised if the ECB were to directly purchase securities 
that are backed by corporate loans. I have an open mind regarding the assumption of the 
liquidity risk involved in such a measure. Depending on how these operations are designed, 
however, the ECB could take on not only the liquidity risk inherent to such paper, but also the 
credit risk. In this regard, I have my doubts. If there is public interest in market intervention, 
for  example  in  order  to  specifically  encourage  lending  to  small  and  medium-sized 
enterprises,  the  national  governments  of  Member  States  should  not  be  left  out  of  the 
equation or, expressed more precisely, they should not be relieved of their responsibility. For 
instance, government guarantee programmes implemented via state development banks for 
the more risky ABS tranches could be a decisive contribution to success. 
Micro- and macro-prudential instruments to preserve financial stability 
I have now referred often enough to the benefits, but also the medium and long-term risks, of 
conventional and unconventional measures. Prolonged phases of low interest rate policies 
and  a  generous  supply  of  liquidity  to  banks  simply  do  have  a  material  influence  on  asset 
prices and the supply of credit to an economy. They may therefore also endanger financial 
stability, in particular if: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
they lead to declining risk aversion and the formation of financial market bubbles; 
the tendency to over-indebtedness increases; 
structural problems and productivity losses are not sufficiently tackled; 
the scope for monetary policy action is restricted. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
  The more the key interest rates are lowered and the longer the low interest rate phase lasts, 
the bigger the risk that one of these undesired side effects materialises. 
How  should  we  respond  to  such  developments?  Should  monetary  policymakers  make 
compromises on their objective of price stability? I don’t think so. And not only because I feel 
committed  to  our  Treaty  basis.  A  basis  that  we  are  not  authorised  to  change.  Even  if,  in 
choosing  its  instruments,  the  ECB’s  Governing  Council  cannot  ignore  the  side  effects  but 
must precisely analyse  the costs and benefits, the monetary policy objective of preserving 
price stability is always at the forefront; it is always the primary aim. 
But that does not mean that we should simply accept these undesired side effects. 
Effective  macro-prudential  oversight,  committed  to  preserving  financial  sector  stability,  is  a 
central  building  block 
for  a  stable  monetary  and  economic  union.  Europe  has 
comprehensively  responded  to  this  lesson  from  the  financial  crisis  and  has  created  the 
appropriate legal and institutional preconditions, which must now be made a reality by all EU 
Member States. As our experience shows, it is not enough to gear regulation and supervision 
exclusively to the stability of individual financial institutions. It is rather the close interaction 
between  macro-prudential  oversight  and  micro-prudential  supervision  that  is  one  of  the 
essential prerequisites for consistent crisis prevention. 
At European and national level, there are various institutions that can counter some, though 
not all, of the risks of asset bubbles. 
One such institution in Germany is the Financial Stability Commission, which is tasked with 
identifying and evaluating risks and recommending mitigating measures. Recommendations 
may be addressed primarily to banking supervisors, which have in recent years acquired a 
broad toolbox of instruments through the various legislative initiatives. For example, banking 
supervisors  can  now  respond  to  a  regional  property  bubble  by  subjecting  banks  to  higher 
capital requirements in order to make credit more expensive. Thus the ECB, too, through the 
establishment of the Single Supervisory Mechanism, has macro-prudential powers. While the 
national authorities remain entitled to use macro-prudential instruments at the national level, 
they must notify the ECB of their measures in advance. The ECB has the option of tightening 
national measures. In a sense, this is a protection against a failure to act at national level and 
hence improves the outlook for a more stable financial system in the euro area. 
Nonetheless,  in  particular  with  regard  to  macro-prudential  supervision,  there  is  still  some 
conceptual work to be done. Work on a well-equipped toolbox of instruments, for example; 
instruments that might not only address banks, but also other financial market participants. 
Conclusion 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  following  this  digression,  let  me  be  clear  on  one  thing:  preserving 
financial  stability  is  truly  a  Herculean  task.  Our  aim  must  be  to  make  the  whole  financial 
system stronger and more resilient. So it’s a logical step for us to target all the measures at 
our disposal towards realising this objective. 
But the ECB’s primary objective is still to maintain price stability in the medium term. Stable 
prices  are  the  basis  for  sustainable  growth  and  a  stable  banking  sector.  Our  most  recent 
monetary policy decisions do justice to this mandate. 
As  an  independent  central  bank,  we  are  committed  to  explaining  our  actions  to 
democratically elected representatives. But I personally find it particularly important to enter 
directly into dialogue with you. I am therefore delighted to engage in a discussion with you 
now. Many thanks to the Bundesbank for giving us the opportunity to do so today. 
 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
