 Jens Weidmann: Dinner speech 
 Dinner  speech  by  Dr  Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the 
20th Dubrovnik Economic Conference, Dubrovnik, 12 June 2014. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Governor Vujčić, dear Boris 
It is a great pleasure to be in this wonderful and picturesque Mediterranean town. So thank 
you very much for the kind invitation to give a speech at this conference dinner. 
You  will  not  need  reminding  that  today  marks  the  beginning  of  the  World  Cup  football 
tournament in Brazil. Kick-off of the opening match between Brazil and Croatia is in less than 
two hours’ time. With this in mind, I will try to be brief. 
Over  the  next  month,  football  will  be  at  the  centre  of  attention  all  over  the  world.  National 
football  teams  are  promoting  their  own  national  identity.  According  to  a  German  sports 
economist, there is a high correlation between a national football team’s performance and a 
country’s reputation. The teams are contributing significantly to the “branding of nations”. 
For now, at least, nobody would even dream of fielding a European Union team, even if it 
were considered to be unbeatable. I am quite sure that people continue to feel as nationals 
rather than as Europeans – at least where football is concerned. 
Rivalry in football, however, does not imply that there is no European team spirit. Nor does it 
suggest  that  the  European  project  is  not  one  of  the  greatest  ideas  in  post-war  times.  The 
European idea is still an appealing one. And despite all prophecies of doom concerning the 
crisis in the euro area, European integration remains attractive. 
This has been demonstrated, not least, by the accession of Croatia to the European Union 
as  of  1  July  2013.  By  becoming  a  member  of  the  EU,  Croatia  has  also  expressed  its 
willingness  to  join  the  European  Monetary  Union  one  day,  when  the  convergence  criteria 
have been fulfilled. And the intention of Lithuania to introduce the common currency as of 
2015 shows that joining the euro area is still considered attractive. 
For the time being, the crisis in the euro area has slipped from the focus of public awareness. 
Nevertheless,  it  is  too  early  to  claim  victory  over  the  crisis  in  the  euro  area.  Even  though 
financial markets might suggest otherwise, the crisis is far from over. 
In particular, the sovereign bond yield spreads of the euro-area countries most affected have 
decreased  significantly  over  the  past  two  years.  The  fall  in  long-term  interest  rates  has 
reduced those countries’ borrowing costs considerably. 
Markets  are  rewarding  adjustment  progress  in  the  stressed  countries.  It  is  clear  to  me, 
however,  that  the  decline  in  sovereign  bond  yield  spreads  has  also  been  supported  by 
central banks’ actions. The ECB’s announcement of conditional but unlimited purchases of 
sovereign bonds has – unsurprisingly – calmed investors’ fear of losing money. 
You may know that I was not in favour of this measure. While sovereign bond purchases are 
a widely used monetary policy tool, they are not without risks. They bring monetary policy 
very close to monetary financing of governments, which could undermine the central bank’s 
ability to maintain its mandate of price stability. 
Monetary policy may face the danger of being dragged and driven by fiscal policy, and find it 
very difficult to free itself. The more so as governments become increasingly accustomed to 
bond  purchases  that keep  the  interest  rates  low.  In  this  sense,  sovereign  bond  purchases 
may act like a sweet poison for the governments. The rude awakening may come when the 
purchases are reduced or stopped altogether. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  One  particular  problem  with  sovereign  bond  purchases  in  a  monetary  union  is  that  they 
redistribute risks among the taxpayers of different countries. Any such decisions, however, 
should be taken by democratically elected governments and parliaments. 
The  rallying  markets  are  also  being  sustained  by  exceptionally  easy  monetary  policy 
conditions the world over. Nevertheless, there is a risk that market valuations may be running 
ahead of the adjustment processes. 
The current long-term yields on some European government bonds already appear to have 
factored  in  the  required  adjustment  to  a  large  extent.  This,  however,  creates  a  setback 
potential. It is therefore all the more important that policymakers ensure that the necessary 
economic progress is actually achieved. Their determination to implement reforms is pivotal. 
In any case, low interest rates do run the risk of creating incentives to postpone necessary 
reforms. Thus, the current environment necessitates an even stronger political will. 
There  is  no  question  of  there  being  a  quick  fix  to  eliminate  the  causes  of  the  crisis. 
Considering that the risk potential built up over many years, it is obvious that it will also take 
time to reduce it. 
How to make EMU more resilient 
2. 
The question is: How do we best go about making EMU more resilient? 
As a starting point for the analysis of the crisis, it is helpful to recall the institutional set-up of 
the European Monetary Union. 
When  EMU  was  established,  monetary  policy  was  centralised  while  fiscal  and  economic 
policies remained in national hands. This set-up created vulnerabilities. 
It gave rise to a deficit bias, allowing the costs of fiscal imprudence to be partially shifted to 
other  countries.  If  the  fiscal  situation  in  one  country  is  unsustainable,  this  implies 
repercussions for the monetary union as a whole. 
Moreover,  abandoning  the  national  currency  in  favour  of  a  single  currency  has  two  major 
implications. First, member states cannot regain lost price competitiveness by depreciating 
their  currency  against  their  trading  partners’  currencies  and  internal  devaluation  as  a 
substitute is much more painful. 
And  second,  each  member  state  issues  debt  in  a  currency  not  of  its  own  making.  Fiscal 
discipline is therefore of the essence and even more important than in a country that has its 
own national currency. This applies to an even greater extent, as there are no explicit fiscal 
transfers among governments. 
However,  although  fiscal  transfers  were  deliberately  ruled  out,  the  central  banks’  balance 
sheets can serve as a conduit for shifting risks among national taxpayers. This undermines 
both the countries’ individual fiscal responsibility and the central banks’ independence. 
The founding fathers of the euro clearly foresaw the risk of unsustainable public finances for 
a stability-oriented monetary policy. Therefore, precautions in terms of fiscal rules were put 
into place to safeguard sound public finances. They took the form of the no bail-out clause, 
the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  and  the  prohibition  of  monetary  financing  of  government 
deficits for the reasons I have just mentioned. As it turned out, however, these precautions 
were not sufficient to prevent the crisis. 
The introduction of the euro and the associated disappearance of exchange rate risks led to 
strong capital flows to countries which previously had high interest rates. Unfortunately, the 
capital  inflows  were  not  always  put  to  productive  use;  banks  and  capital  markets  failed  in 
many cases to allocate the money efficiently. 
Instead  of  financing  productive  investment,  they  shifted  money  into  booming  real  estate 
sectors, for example. And the governments of some member states missed the opportunity 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  of lower interest rates to consolidate public finances. Instead they enjoyed a more relaxed 
budget restriction. 
Capital inflows also enabled higher wages while, at the same time, productivity growth was 
weak.  This  resulted  in  rising  unit  labour  costs  and  so  undermined  price  competitiveness. 
Economies  became  less  competitive  on  export  markets,  leading  to  large  and  persistent 
current account deficits. 
They suffered from a sudden halt in external funding during the financial crisis when lenders 
reined in their risk appetite and fled from risky investments to safe havens. Current account 
deficits as well as budget deficits became hard to finance – so hard that private funds had to 
be substituted by public funds. 
Fiscal  stabilisation  measures  by  the  euro  area  countries,  the  EU  and  the  IMF  as  well  as 
central  bank  operations  by  the  Eurosystem  helped  the  stressed  countries  to  bridge  the 
finance gap and to prevent the financial system of the euro area from collapsing. However, 
while this bridge saved the economies from an immediate and tough adjustment process, it 
did not remedy the underlying problems of the crisis. 
In order to foster the groundwork of EMU, three challenges have to be met. 
The macroeconomic adjustment process has to be continued. This adjustment process has 
to  be  accomplished  primarily  in  the  deficit  countries,  but  the  other  countries  –  including 
Germany – face challenges, too. 
Regarding  the  adjustment  of  the  euro-area  periphery  countries,  remarkable  progress  has 
been  made  so  far.  Current  account  deficits  and  public  deficits  have  been  reduced 
significantly and structural reforms on labour and product markets have been implemented. 
Nevertheless, the necessary adjustment has not been completed yet. 
In footballing terms, I would say “the half-time whistle has been blown” but there is no time 
for a break. And let’s not forget that the second half is usually more exhausting than the first, 
and we may even have to go into extra time. 
Actually, there are signs of growing reform fatigue and rising reluctance to implement further 
austerity measures. However, it is crucial to stay on the ball. 
In this respect I also wish to look at the large euro-area economies which have significantly 
lost competitiveness. Both France and Italy need to implement structural reforms to make up 
for  these  losses  and  thereby  act  as  a  role  model  for  the  crisis  countries  as  well  as  for  all 
other EU countries. 
The second requirement for a stable monetary union is a more resilient financial system. 
Owing to regulatory weaknesses, the financial system acted as an amplifier of the crisis. It 
has become apparent that the financial system is the Achilles’ heel of European monetary 
union. Without a sound banking system there will be no stable monetary union. 
The  establishment  of  a  banking  union  including  a  single  supervisory  and  a  resolution 
mechanism provides the opportunity to make the financial system more resilient and to boost 
investors’ confidence. 
At the current juncture, the ECB together with the national supervisors is comprehensively 
assessing the balance sheets of the banks which are candidates for direct ECB supervision. I 
agree with Jaime Caruana, the General Manager of the BIS, who recently said, “The asset 
quality review is a great opportunity to spur the necessary balance sheet adjustment. This 
chance must not be missed.” 
The  banking  union  closes  a  vulnerable  gap  faced  by  EMU  in  helping  to  strengthen  the 
financial system. However, the banking union is not sufficient to strengthen the institutional 
architecture of EMU. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  Rather, we need a fundamental reform of the EMU framework. And this is the third challenge 
that has to be met to make EMU more resilient. Let me elaborate on this point. 
The implementation of the Maastricht framework was not able to save the euro area from the 
crisis. One of the underlying reasons for this insufficiency is that the rules were too strongly 
focused on fiscal policies, while their implementation was too weak. 
It  should  be  kept  in  mind  that  Germany  and  France  were  the  driving  forces  behind  the 
Stability and Growth Pact reform about a decade ago which turned the Pact into a toothless 
tiger. With hindsight, they scored an own goal with their efforts. 
Another  flaw  in  the  framework  was  the  restricted  credibility  of  the  no  bail-out  rule.  If  the 
markets had believed in the rule, we would not have experienced such a strong convergence 
of sovereign bond yields as we saw prior to the crisis. 
When the EMU framework was established in the early 1990s, the risk of contagion among 
euro-area  member  states  was  clearly  underestimated.  Financial  markets  were  significantly 
less developed at that time. The credit default swaps market, for example, did not even exist 
back then. That may help to explain why fiscal firewalls were not deemed necessary when 
the EMU framework was established. 
While  the  rescue  measures  that  were  established  later,  such  as  the  EFSF  and  the  ESM, 
managed  to  contain  the  fallout  somewhat,  they  weakened  the  principle  of  individual 
responsibility. Fiscal decision making has essentially remained national, while liabilities have 
been  partially  mutualised.  In  other  words,  the  balance  between  liability  and  control  has 
become  lopsided.  This  balance,  however,  is  fundamental  to  the  stability  of  the  monetary 
union. 
But how do we restore that fundamental balance, and put monetary union on a more solid 
footing? 
In  principle,  there  are  two  options.  The  first  way  is  to  create  a  genuine  fiscal  union;  the 
second way would be to confirm the Maastricht framework, which essentially means making 
the principle of individual responsibility work better. 
The first option, a genuine fiscal union, would require the member states to surrender their 
fiscal  sovereignty  in  favour  of  the  European  level.  In  such  a  setting,  the  mutualisation  of 
future liabilities would be consistent. 
Such  a  giant  step  towards  a  fiscal  union  would  require  considerable  changes  to  the 
European treaties and the national constitutions as well. To be honest, however, I do not see 
the willingness of national governments to let Brussels have a say in fiscal matters, and the 
results of the recent elections for the European Parliament suggest that the electorates do 
not support such a shift either. Against this backdrop, this avenue seems blocked, at least for 
the foreseeable future. 
This leaves us with the second option: making the principle of individual responsibility work 
better. In order to do so, the Stability and Growth Pact was tightened and enhanced by an 
early  warning  system  for  macroeconomic  imbalances.  A  fiscal  compact  was  introduced 
according to which member states committed to incorporate balanced budget rules into their 
national legislation. 
Regarding the effectiveness of those changes, I would refer to the English proverb “the proof 
of the pudding is in the eating”. In other words, it is not clear yet whether the new rules do 
really bite. 
It  will  be  crucial  that  the  European  Commission  applies  the  stiffer  rules  strictly  and 
consistently. Unfortunately, fiscal policy rules have become highly complex and, in turn, the 
scope  for  interpretation  has  grown.  The  assessment  procedure  gives  the  Commission 
greater and more discretionary leeway. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  However, if France for example were allowed, for the third time, to postpone the correction of 
its  excessive  deficit,  this  would  severely  undermine  the  credibility  of  the  new  Stability  and 
Growth Pact. If I may use another football metaphor, the Commission should stick to its role 
as referee and not try to move the goalposts mid-game. 
To  make  EMU  more  resilient,  a  confirmation  of  the  Maastricht  framework  goes  beyond 
tightening  fiscal  rules.  Making  the  principle  of  individual  responsibility  workable  means 
making  governments,  banks  and  investors  feel  the  consequences  of  their  own  actions. 
Hence, a credible no bail-out rule is needed. 
A  credible  no  bail-out  rule,  however,  would  ultimately  require  that  an  orderly  insolvency 
regime  for  governments  exists.  As  long  as  a  sovereign  default  is  impossible  owing  to  the 
implied risk for the stability of the financial system, investors in sovereign bonds can expect 
to be bailed out. 
In order to make such a state insolvency bearable, we need a robust financial system with 
sufficient loss absorption capacity and one which is not too closely tied to the government. 
The so-called sovereign-bank nexus is a huge obstacle to permanently overcoming the crisis 
in the euro area. During the crisis, many banks, notably in the euro-area periphery, raised 
their  exposure  to  domestic  government  bonds;  in  doing  so  they  tied  their  fate  even  more 
closely to that of their national government. 
This  development  was  assisted  by  the  preferential  regulatory  treatment  of  government 
bonds. It includes the zero risk-weighting of government bonds issued in local currency and 
the lack of exposure limits. 
In order to strengthen the banking union and the monetary union, I believe we need to end 
this  preferential  treatment  of  sovereign  debt  over  a  reasonable  period  of  time.  Sovereign 
bonds should be adequately risk-weighted, and exposure to individual sovereign debt should 
be limited, as is already the case for private debt. 
Conclusion 
3. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
The French writer François Fénelon said, “The more you say, the less people remember.” 
Moreover, I promised to be brief. So let me conclude. 
According  to  econometric  studies  on  the  history  of  World  Cup  football  tournaments,  the 
advantage the home team has is statistically significant – no surprises there. Looking ahead 
to tonight’s match, this is bad news for the Croatian team, since it is playing against the host 
country of the World Cup. 
It is further shown that a positive relationship exists between a country’s population and its 
performance in World Cup tournaments. So these statistics are against Croatia, too. What’s 
more, Brazil leads the World Cup  all-time table, while Croatia is ranked 27th. Brazil is the 
favourite to win the competition. 
On  the  other  hand,  football  is  incalculable.  You  never  know  how  a  match  is  going  to  end. 
That’s what makes it so appealing. There are plenty of surprises in the history of World Cup 
football tournaments. I remember, for example, when Germany was beaten 3–0 by Croatia in 
the quarter final of the 1998 World Cup in France. So there are reasons to be optimistic. 
Pope  John  Paul  II  said,  “Amongst  all  unimportant  subjects,  football  is  by  far  the  most 
important.”  But  even  if  football  is  basically  unimportant,  as  John  Paul  II  claimed,  it  is 
nevertheless enjoyable for the players and it entertains the spectators greatly. 
In contrast to that, the resolution of the crisis in the euro area offers an enjoyment factor of 
close to zero and its entertainment value is also limited. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  If European policymakers succeed in overcoming the crisis and making EMU more resilient, 
it  would  certainly  not  trigger  the  same  euphoric  celebrations  as  a  World  Cup  victory. 
Nevertheless,  it  would  be  hailed  as  an  important  achievement,  not  only  from  a  central 
banker’s perspective, and it would be for the benefit of all. 
In particular, it would finally allow central banks to shed their role as decision makers of last 
resort and, thus, to return to their normal business. Moreover, it would help to preserve the 
independence of central banks, which is a key precondition to maintaining price stability in 
the long run. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
