  Yves Mersch: Finance in an environment of downsizing banks 
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  Yves  Mersch,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European 
Central  Bank,  at  the  Shanghai  Forum  2014  “Asia  Transforms:  Identifying  New  Dynamics”, 
Shanghai, 24 May 2014. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Thank you very much for inviting me to speak today. 
Europe and Asia have an increasingly symbiotic relationship. In 2013 total EU trade with Asia 
reached €1.25 trillion, almost double the value recorded a decade ago and representing over 
one-third  of  total  EU  trade.  At  the  same  time,  the  EU  accounted  for  almost  30%  of  Asian 
trade last year, far ahead of any other trading partner, including the United States. The EU is 
also a major investor in Asia, and vice versa. Around 20% of EU outward investment goes to 
Asia, while 20% of inward investment originates in the region. 
In other words, the economic situation in Europe today has important consequences for the 
growth trajectory of Asia – and this is a relationship that will likely only increase in strength in 
the future. I would therefore like to use my remarks to discuss developments in Europe as 
part of the growth equation for Asia. Asian policy-makers know best the domestic challenges 
that face them and the types of solutions that are needed. 
The European situation is no doubt a complex  one, but if there is a common factor in the 
crisis and its persistence, it is the difficulties of the euro area banking sector. The sector is in 
a phase of downsizing and structural change that will inevitably affect financial intermediation 
going forward. To think about how this will impact European and global growth, I think it is 
useful to recall an ancient Chinese fable. 
The fable is about a boy who lived near China’s northern borders, and whose horse one day 
wandered off into the territory of the northern tribes. Everyone commiserated with him for his 
misfortune. But not his father, a well-practiced Taoist. “Perhaps this will soon turn out to be a 
blessing,” he said. 
Then, a few months later, his horse returned, accompanied by a fine horse from the north. 
Everyone  congratulated  him  for  his  luck,  but  his  father  was  more  sanguine.  He  remarked, 
“Perhaps this will soon turn out to be a curse”. The boy quickly became fond of riding the fine 
new  horse,  then  one  day  out  riding,  he  broke  his  leg  in  a  nasty  fall.  Everyone  again 
commiserated with him. But once more his father disagreed. “Perhaps this will soon turn out 
to be a blessing,” he said. 
Soon after, the northern tribes invaded the border regions. All able-bodied young men took 
up arms to fight the invaders, and nine out of ten died. Due to his broken leg, however, the 
boy did not join in the fighting. He and his father therefore survived. 
This  fable,  known  as  “blessing  or  curse”,  is  essentially  about  how  the  true  significance  of 
developments is often not immediately apparent – and how the wise observer therefore pays 
due  attention  to  unintended  consequences,  both  positive  and  negative.  In  my  view  this 
describes rather well the situation in the euro area financial sector today. 
The euro area banking sector has suffered a substantial shock that has triggered widespread 
deleveraging, and on the face of it this is a negative development: it harms economic growth 
and  constrains  access  to  finance.  Yet,  it  is  also  clear  that  before  the  crisis  the  European 
banking system had become unhealthily large. It was too leveraged, too big relative to the 
size of national economies, and perhaps too dominant relative to capital markets. Thus, the 
effect of a downsizing banking sector might in fact be a blessing in disguise – that is, a shift 
towards safer banks and a more balanced financing mix. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Yet, we have to be careful that this too does not turn out to create problems. For example, 
the  transition  to  a  new  financing  mix  may  favour  some  jurisdictions  over  others,  thus 
reinforcing imbalances. A shift from bank to non-bank financing may create new sources of 
systemic risk in less transparent sectors. In other words, the challenge for policy-makers in 
Europe today is to capitalise on the potential positives from the situation that has befallen us, 
while making sure that we do not simply end up creating new problems for the future. 
Let me begin my discussion on how to achieve that by looking at the current trend towards 
bank downsizing in the euro area. 
The trend towards downsizing banks 
Financing of the real economy in the euro area has historically taken place through banks. 
The  euro  area  therefore  requires  and  has  a  large  banking  sector.  The  aggregate  balance 
sheet of euro area banks is around 270% of GDP, whereas in the US, where capital markets 
are deeper, it is only around 70% of GDP. 
The euro area banking sector, however, expanded rapidly in the years before the crisis from 
already high levels. From the start of the expansion in 2005 to its peak in 2012, banks assets 
increased  by  more  than  60  percentage  points  of  GDP.  This  was  associated  with  the 
development  of  unsustainable  bank  business  models.  Banks  relied  too  much  on  debt  to 
finance their lending, and that debt depended too much on wholesale market funding and too 
little on deposits. 
The crisis has brought those business models to an end and triggered a process of structural 
change  in  the  banking  sector.  European  banks  have  entered  a  period  of  secular 
deleveraging  and  restructuring.  Bank  balance  sheets  declined  by  around  20  percentage 
points of GDP in 2013 alone. Loan-to-deposit ratios fell from 142% in the first quarter of 2008 
to 117% at the end of last year, and I expect these ratios to continue to fall. Credit growth 
has consequently been very weak. 
This  trend  towards  a  downsizing  of  the  banking  sector  has  both  positive  and  negative 
aspects. 
The negative aspects are mainly cyclical and relate to the current situation. A deleveraging 
banking sector implies lower credit supply, which is problematic for a recovering euro area 
economy. While the early stages of recoveries do not depend on credit as firms tend to draw 
down internal funds, when credit demand picks up it needs to be matched by credit supply 
for  a  sustainable  recovery  to  take  hold.  The  typical  lag  between  credit  growth  and  the 
economic cycle is around 3 to 4 quarters. 
The recovery in the euro area began not yet a year ago, and we are seeing tentative signs 
from survey data that credit demand in the euro area is starting to pick up. The latest euro 
area Bank Lending Survey (April 2014) shows that net loan demand has turned positive for 
all loan categories. So, we need to make sure that the banking sector is strong enough to 
meet that demand. A car can run on low fuel for a while, but at some point it needs to fill up 
otherwise  the  engine  will  stall.  At  this  stage  of  the  recovery  it  is  clear:  There  needs  to  be 
sufficient fuel to rev up the engine. 
This  is  one  reason  why  the  ECB  has  been  putting  so  much  emphasis  on  its  on-going 
comprehensive assessment of bank balance sheets in the euro area. Our aim is to ensure 
that banks are sufficiently capitalised to once more start originating loans and taking risk. So 
far, the mere “shadow” of the exercise has had a catalytic effect on banks’ asset valuations, 
provisioning and capital raising. 
That is not to say that we expect a surge in aggregate credit growth as the exercise reaches 
its completion with the publication of the results later this year. Rather, our expectation is that 
new  finance  should  be  available  for  firms  that  need  it.  In  Spain,  for  example,  the  banking 
sector restructuring programme since 2012 has not yet led to an increase in overall credit. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  But loans of less than €1 million to non-financial corporations – which are associated mainly 
with small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) – have shown a notable recovery in recent 
months. 
The positive aspects of a downsized banking sector are mainly structural. 
Some research suggests there is a threshold beyond which the positive effect of finance on 
growth diminishes.1 For example, information rents in the financial sector might be generated 
by  complex  financial  products  or  opaque  banking  organizations,  allowing  –  at  least 
temporarily  –  for  higher salaries  and  bonuses  to  be  paid.  This  attracts  talented  individuals 
away from productive sectors. 
Alternatively, too-large banks may start expanding into less productive types of lending. If a 
housing  bubble  is  fuelled  by  aggressive  lending,  it  is  often  the  residential  construction 
industry  that  initially  benefits.  But  the  construction  sector  is  typically  characterised  by  low 
productivity growth compared to manufacturing. Indeed, the proportion of housing loans as a 
percentage of total loans in the euro area increased from around 50% in 1990 to more than 
70%  today,  which  is  a  type  of  lending  that  tends  to  be  associated  with  lower  growth.2 
Structurally, a smaller banking sector could – at least in theory – help to avoid those negative 
effects on growth and insulate the euro area from some of these risks. 
Still,  a  smaller  or  downsized  banking  sector  is  no  guarantee  for  lower  overall  risk.  The 
business models, risk attitudes and profitability of the banks need to be taken into account as 
well. Likewise does geographical expansion into foreign markets when it is not accompanied 
by local knowledge. 
Another  aspect  is  that  a  downsized  banking  sector  provides  impetus  for  capital  market 
development in Europe – after all, if savings are not being intermediated through banks, they 
must  be  being  intermediated  through  capital  markets.  I  see  this  as  central  to  a  more 
balanced and contested financing mix in the euro area. 
Contrary to the trend in most advanced economies, the relative importance of bank versus 
non-bank financing in the euro area has actually increased in the last two decades – from 
already  high  levels  –  and  this  may  have  given  banks  excessive  market  power.  Recent 
research looking at the pre-crisis period suggests that where banks face limited competition 
in their domestic markets, and firms are more dependent on them, financing constraints for 
SMEs have been higher.3] 
Matching credit supply and demand 
We  are  already  seeing  signs  in  the  euro  area  that  a  rebalancing  towards  capital  market 
financing is taking place: as bank credit to corporates has fallen, it has been approximately 
matched  by  issuance  of  corporate  bonds.  It  would  nonetheless  be  naïve  to  expect  this 
transition towards a new financing mix to occur seamlessly. While on aggregate, euro area 
credit supply might be sufficient to meet credit demand, I see two factors that might lead to 
an imperfect match between supply and demand for certain firms. They are the location of 
those firms and their size. 
                                                
1   See  for  example  Arcand,  Jean-Louis,  Enrico  Berkes,  and  Ugo  Panizza  (2012).  “Too  much  finance?” 
IMF Working  Paper  No.  12/161,  or  Manganelli,  Simone,  and  Alex  Popov  (2013).  “Financial  dependence, 
global growth opportunities, and growth revisited.” Economics Letters, 120(1), 123–125. 
2   OECD  (2014).  “The  role  of  the  financial  sector  for  economic  growth  in  OECD  and  G20  countries,”  internal 
paper prepared for the Economic Policy Committee. 
3   Ryan, R., O’Toole, C. and McCann, F. (2014), “Does bank market power affect SME financing constraints”, 
Journal of Banking and Finance, January. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Location 
In  terms  of  location,  the  cost  of  and  access  to  finance  in  the  euro  area  remains  strongly 
based on national conditions. For example, the average cost of borrowing for non-financial 
firms in Portugal is more than 5% per year, whereas the equivalent for French firms is around 
2% per year. 
One would imagine in this situation that a Portuguese firm would seek out a French bank, but 
the euro area banking market does not facilitate such arbitrage. Direct cross-border loans to 
firms  account  for  just  7.5%  of  total  loans  to  firms.  And  local  affiliates  of  foreign  banks 
represent  on  average  only  around  20%  of  national  markets,  and  much  less  in  larger 
countries. Thus, firms depend heavily on the health of their domestic banks. 
Moreover,  while  corporate  bond  issuance  has  partially  substituted  for  bank  lending,  it  is 
strongly concentrated in non-distressed countries where there has been no decrease in the 
net flow of bank loans. The net issuance of debt securities, quoted shares and bank loans in 
non-distressed  countries  was  plus  €66  billion  in  2013,  whereas  it  was  minus  €93  billion  in 
distressed countries. 
Of course, in principle firms from distressed countries can issue securities in non-distressed 
countries. In practice, however, it is legally complicated due to issues of different governing 
law, especially when securities are traded along a chain of financial intermediaries. 
This  analysis  points  to  two  missing  pieces  in  the  euro  area  financial  market:  lack  of  retail 
banking integration and lack of capital market integration. 
The low level of retail banking integration reflects several factors, but diverging approaches 
to supervision and resolution are certainly among them. For one, the persistence of national 
borders  in  a  European  financial  market  has  in  the  past  created  compliance  costs  and 
reduced the synergies of banking integration. A European Commission survey in 2005 found 
that opaque supervisory approval procedures were a major deterrent to cross-border banking 
M&As.4 
Moreover,  national  considerations  may  have  reinforced  the  fragmentation  of  retail  markets 
during  the  crisis.  For  example,  some  commentators  have  argued  that  supervisors  erected 
de facto  “internal  capital  controls”5  within  the  euro  area,  which  restricted  the  flow  of  funds 
between banks and within cross-border banks. 
A similar pattern can be observed in how national authorities in the euro area have dealt with 
failing  banks.  In  general,  non-viable  banks  were  merged  with  other  national  banks,  rather 
than  being  wound  down  or  broken  up  and  sold  off.  Thus,  what  could  have  been  an 
opportunity to increase foreign competition in domestic markets, and indeed to work through 
the crisis more quickly, in some cases ended up increasing national concentration. To give a 
comparison  with  the  US,  the  FDIC  has  resolved  around  500  banks  since  2008,  mainly  by 
selling  parts  of  banks  to  other  banks,  whereas  the  equivalent  figure  for  the  euro  area  is 
around 50.6 
All this suggests that the move towards a genuine Banking Union in the euro area could help 
create the conditions for deeper retail banking integration. A Single Supervisory Mechanism 
(SSM)  should  lead  to  harmonisation  of  rules  and  standards,  and  also  remove  distortions 
created by national borders. And a Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM) should ensure that 
                                                
4   See ECB Report on Financial Integration in Europe, March 2007. 
5   An example of this view is Véron, N. (2013), “Banking nationalism and the European crisis”, October. 
6   Sapir, A. and Wolff, G. (2013), “The neglected side of Banking Union”, note presented at the informal ECOFIN 
14 September 2013, Vilnius. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  banks  are  resolved  from  a  European  perspective  and  according  to  least-cost  principles, 
which should in principle open the door for cross-border resolution strategies. 
In  this  way,  even  though  the  banking  sector  on  aggregate  is  downsizing,  credit  allocation 
across the euro area may become more efficient. Banking Union is key part in ensuring that 
location becomes a diminishing factor in access to bank finance. 
While Europe is and will remain a bank-based economy, adding the second missing piece of 
the  euro  area  financial  market  –  deeper  capital  market  integration  –  is  key  to  ensure  that 
firms in all jurisdictions can use capital markets as a “spare tyre” when banks are not lending 
– and not only those in larger countries with more developed bond markets. Within a single 
currency area, there is no reason in principle why firms should not be able to tap a European 
pool of savings. What prevents this in practice, however, is regulatory heterogeneity across 
the euro area. 
Europe has made some good progress in tackling this issue in recent years, in particular in 
harmonising  the  rules  needed  for  the  transparency  and  integrity  of  securities  markets. 
Nonetheless, obstacles remain. 
One is legal uncertainty for cross-border holding and issuance of debt and equity securities – 
for example, different national definitions of securities ownership.7 Another is differences in 
national  insolvency  laws,  which  make  it  difficult for  investors to  properly  evaluate  the risks 
they assume when investing in securities in other jurisdictions. Still another is the transaction 
costs that investors face when engaging in cross-border securities trading due to divergent 
corporate governance and tax regimes.8 
In other words, building a truly integrated capital market in Europe requires further efforts and 
new legislation extending far beyond Banking Union. It is essential that the progress we have 
made on the banking side does not cause us to lose reform momentum here. And this is not 
a case of politics directing markets; it is about policy creating the pre-conditions for markets 
function properly. 
Firm size 
The effects of location on access to finance are exacerbated by firm size. While firms are in 
general  more  credit-constrained  in  some  jurisdictions  than  others,  this  phenomenon  is 
particularly  apparent for  SMEs.  For  example,  the  percentage  of financially  constrained  but 
viable  SMEs  –  defined  to  be  those  with  positive  turnover  in  the  last  six  months  seeking a 
bank loan – varies from a minimum of 1% in Germany and Austria to a quarter of the total 
population in Spain and even a third in Portugal. 
There are two reasons for this. 
First, bank lending to SMEs is concentrated in a handful of large banks as only they have the 
capacity  to  diversify  idiosyncratic  risks  by  lending  to  a  broad  enough  range  of  firms.  The 
three  biggest  originators  in  each  euro  area  country  represent  on  average  80%  of  the 
outstanding  amount  of  the  SME  loans.  This  makes  SMEs  particularly  vulnerable  to  any 
shocks to the banking sector and reduces their ability to switch between banks. 
                                                
7   At present, the legal position that an account holder “owns” as soon as securities are booked to his account 
differs across euro area countries: in some jurisdictions the holder enjoys full and unshared property rights, 
whereas  in  others  the  holder  receives  a  position  that  is  in  comparison  “inferior”,  i.e.  a  shared  or  indirect 
property interest or a mere claim against the account provider. 
8   For more details see Special Feature C, “Initiatives to promote capital market integration in European bond 
and equity markets”, in ECB report on Financial Integration in Europe, April 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Second, as smaller firms tend to be less transparent than larger firms, it is more costly for 
investors to obtain adequate information. This makes it harder for SMEs to substitute capital 
market finance for bank finance if the latter dries up. 
This is far from a trivial issue. The ability of SMEs to consistently access finance has vital 
macroeconomic importance for Europe. Between 2002 and 2010, 85% of total employment 
growth  in  the  EU  was  attributable  to  SMEs,  and  SMEs  have  a  much  higher  employment 
growth rate (1% annually) than large enterprises (0.5% a year). And within the SME class, 
most  employment  growth  takes  place  within  young  firms9,  for  whom  external  financing  is 
particularly important as they cannot draw much on internal funds. Recent research from the 
US  has  shown  that  these  firms  also  tend  to  be  more  sensitive  to  changes  in  investment 
opportunities.10 
So what is the solution here? There are many schemes underway in Europe to address this 
problem that I will not try and cover today. But one unifying theme that I see as critical is to 
better match the needs of SMEs with the funds of non-bank investors, thus providing more 
diversification for SMEs. 
One way in which non-banks provide this diversification is in terms of counter-cyclical access 
to credit. When banks contract credit, less risk-averse investors such as private debt funds or 
peer-to-peer lenders can fill the gap and thus help smooth the credit cycle. 
Another  way  is  in  terms  of  maturities.  While  regulatory  changes  have  made  commercial 
banks less willing to make long-term loans, some large institutional investors – for example 
pension  funds  and  insurance  companies  –  need  assets  with  maturities  and  returns  that 
match  their  liability  profiles.  SME  lending  can  provide  this,  especially  while  long-term  safe 
assets exhibit low rates of return. 
The size of this “shadow banking” system – which in my view is a misleading term11 – has 
increased considerably in the euro area since the crisis, rising by almost 20% since 2008. It 
has  also  taken  on  a  greater  role  in  financing  the  real  economy.  At  end-2013,  outstanding 
amounts of loans from euro area non-bank financial intermediaries to euro area non-financial 
firms amounted to €1.2 trillion. But the key challenge from a policy perspective is to ensure 
that these funds make their way to the most credit-starved SMEs. 
Here I see two initiatives as particularly important. 
The first is to increase their capacity to lend directly to SMEs via loans or bond purchases. 
Here improving the information available for non-bank investors is key. A possible solution, 
proposed in the recent report of a high level expert group12 on finance for growth in Europe, 
is  for  European  institutions  to  work  with  the  private  sector  to  establish  a  consolidated 
database on SME credit risk performance. Actions are also possible at the level of Member 
States. In Italy, for example, “mini bonds” for SMEs are guaranteed by the Italian state up to 
70% of principal, and the results are promising so far. 
The second initiative is to increase the capacity for non-bank investors to lend indirectly to 
SMEs via securitisation. This requires a concerted effort to revive the flagging market for high 
                                                
9   De  Kok,  J.  et  al  (2011),  “Do  SMEs  create  more  and  better  jobs”,  EIM  Business  &  Policy  Research  report, 
November 2011. 
10   Adelino, M., Song, M. and Robinson, D. (2014), “Firm age, investment opportunities and job creation”, NBER 
Working Paper 19845, January. 
11   The Financial Stability Board defines shadow banking as “credit intermediation involving entities and activities 
outside the regular banking system”, a definition which ranges from more transparent and regulated entities 
such as institutional investors and money market funds to highly complex and unregulated entities such as 
structured investment vehicles and special purpose entity conduits. 
12   “Finance for Growth”, Report of the High Level Expert Group on SME and Infrastructure Financing, December 
2013. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  quality securitisation in Europe, which the ECB and the Bank of England have been jointly 
pushing.13  Securitisation  has  the  double  benefit  that  it  not  only  encourages  existing 
originators to extend more SME loans, but to the extent that it partially removes credit risk 
from bank balance sheets, it may also help smaller, less diversified originators to enter the 
SME loan market. In this way, it could also mean that SME lending is less dependent on a 
few large banks in each country. 
It is worth reflecting, however, on what the new normal should be once the credit cycle picks 
up. On the one hand, there clearly benefits to having a more balanced financing mix. It is 
useful  not  only  to  provide  a  cyclical  cushion  in  bad  times,  but  also  to  increase  market 
contestability and reduce over-banking in normal times. On the other hand, if what we are 
seeing is the beginning of a structural shift from bank to non-bank financial intermediation, 
we have to keep a close eye on the potential risks that might be building up. Indeed, there 
may  be  little  long-term  value  in  shifting  risk  from  a  highly  regulated  sector  to  a  lightly 
regulated one, particularly if more and more lending is taken up entities that fall outside the 
regulatory reach. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
My message today is simple: the euro area financial system has been hit by a major shock, 
which  few  of  us  foresaw,  but  through  good  policy  choices  it  is  possible  to  steer  this 
development 
towards  a  positive  outcome,  while  avoiding  unintended  negative 
consequences. And looking at the developments across the euro area today, in my view the 
right choices are being made. 
Banks are already strengthening their capital as a result of the comprehensive assessment. 
The European supervisor will be fully operational in November this year. From next year we 
will start building up a single fund for European bank resolution. And initiatives are underway 
to strengthen access to finance for SMEs, especially through securitisation. 
For Asia, there is every reason to be confident that the euro area is addressing the structural 
problems  in  its  financial  system,  which  should  in  turn  support  more  sustainable  growth  in 
Europe  and  for  the  world  economy.  We  still  have  a  long  way  to  go,  to  be  sure,  but  I  am 
confident that Europe has now moved from being a risk to the global economy to a partner in 
global growth. 
Thank you for your attention. 
                                                
13   Bank  of  England  and  European  Central  Bank,  “The  impaired  EU  securitisation  market:  causes,  roadblocks 
and  how  to  deal  with  them”,  joint  paper,  April  2014.  See  also  the communication  from  the  Commission  on 
Long Term Financing of the European Economy, COM(2014) 168 final, March 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
