Deepak Mohanty: Why is recent food inflation in India so persistent? 
Speech  by  Mr  Deepak  Mohanty,  Executive  Director  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
Annual Lalit Doshi Memorial Lecture, Xavier’s Chapter, delivered at the St. Xavier’s College, 
Mumbai, 13 January 2014. 
 The assistance provided by Abhiman Das and Joice John in preparation of this lecture is acknowledged. 
It  is  an  honour  for  me  to  deliver  this  year’s  Annual  Lalit  Doshi  Memorial  Lecture.  I  thank 
Principal  Dr.  Fr.  Frazer  Mascarenhas,  Dr.  Aditi  Sawant  and  Ms.  Nikita  Kohli  for  this 
opportunity.  The  St.  Xavier’s  College  has  the  distinction  of  producing  many  leaders  and 
intellectuals, and Lalit Doshi was a giant among them. He was an accomplished economic 
administrator  and  thinker.  He  made  immense  policy  contributions  to  aid  the  industrial 
progress in our country, and in particular Maharashtra. 
As students of economics I do not have to tell you that the central objective of a central bank 
is  price  stability.  Central  banks  strive  to  achieve  a  low  and  stable  inflation  rate  in  order  to 
sustain  a  high  level  of  growth  and  maximise  social  welfare.  In  the  last  decade  we 
experienced a period of high growth and low inflation until the global financial crisis in 2008. 
The crisis adversely impacted the Indian economy given our increasing integration with the 
global economy. The Government and the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) took several policy 
measures to minimise the spillover of global crisis on our economy. In the process growth 
bounced  back  but  inflation  also  increased.  More  recently  while  growth  has  moderated, 
inflation still remains above our comfort levels. In the post-global crisis period since 2008–09 
inflation has emerged as a major public policy concern. A disturbing feature of the current 
episode of inflation is that it has been accompanied by high food inflation, which hurts most 
the poor and the low-income strata of our society. 
Against this background, I propose to take this opportunity to talk to you about food inflation. 
I will trace food inflation over the years, analyse the determinants of food inflation both from 
the supply and demand sides, reflect on the role of monetary policy and conclude with some 
thoughts on the way forward to address food inflation. 
Over  the  years  we  have  seen  that  the  share  of  agriculture  and  allied  sector,  generally 
representing the food producing sector, in our gross domestic product (GDP) has come down 
significantly: from around 25 per cent in the mid-1990s to around 14 per cent now. However, 
food currently accounts for over one-third of our wholesale price index (WPI) and over one-
half of our consumer price index (CPI). Since the food economy is essentially dependent on 
domestic production, fluctuation in agricultural production has a direct bearing on output and 
inflation.  It  is  important,  however,  to  note  that  the  adverse  impact  of  a  fall  in  agricultural 
output is significantly less on GDP than on inflation because of still a very high weightage of 
food in our price indices. 
As you know, weather plays an important part in agricultural production. We have seen this 
over the years that the volume and spatial distribution of monsoon rains have a significant 
impact  on  agricultural  production  and  hence  food  inflation  (Chart  1).  But  can  deficient 
monsoon satisfactorily explain the recent trend in food inflation? Let me turn to this issue in a 
little more detail. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
 
If  we  look  closely  at  food  price  index  for  a  longer  period,  we  could  notice  two  structural 
breaks,  one  at  the  beginning  of  financial  year  2000–01  and  the  other  in  the  middle  of  
2007–08 (Chart 2)1. 
 
  
It is interesting to see that average food inflation declined to 3.8 percent per annum during 
the  8-year  period  2000–08  from  7.1  percent  per  annum  in  the  second  half  of  the  1990s 
despite  higher  GDP  growth  of  7.2  per  cent  per  annum  as  against  6.7  per  cent  in  the 
                                                  
1   Estimated  trend  based  on  Bai-Peron  methodology  covering  monthly  WPI  data  for  the  period  1994:  April  to 
2013:November. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
preceding  period.  The  period  2000–08  experienced  two  years  of  deficient  monsoon  in  
2002–03 and 2004–05, in spite of that food inflation remained contained suggesting in a way 
that the impact of monsoon on food inflation has waned. In the subsequent 5-year period, 
2008–09 to 2013–14 so far, not only that the average food inflation rose sharply to 10.3 per 
cent  per  annum,  it  has  remained  persistent.  Arguably  the  trigger  for  high  food  inflation 
emanated from the drought of 2009–10. But good rains in the following years have failed to 
douse  food  inflation.  There  are  several  other  explanations  such  as  that  global  food  prices 
also rose and our exchange rate depreciated which exacerbated domestic food inflation. But 
subsequent moderation in global food prices has not dampened our food inflation. Of course 
food inflation has come off its peak, but its persistence around double digit level suggests 
that that there must be some thing more fundamental at play. Let us look at food inflation 
data at a more disaggregated level. 
In the more recent period, the components of food inflation seem to have changed. Although 
cereal inflation has risen, it is mostly protein items as well as fruits and vegetables that have 
driven the overall food inflation at the wholesale level (Chart 3). 
 
 
At the retail level food inflation has been even higher. Though food inflations at the wholesale 
and consumer levels tend to move together, consumer food inflation rises faster during an 
uptrend, accentuating the divergence between WPI and CPI (Chart 4). The recent changes 
in the drivers of food inflation could partly explain the divergence: the retail margins tend to 
be higher in the case of perishables such as fruits and vegetables. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  
The  household  consumption  expenditure  surveys  made  available  by  the  National  Sample 
Survey Office (NSSO) show that the composition of food expenditure has changed in more 
recent years. As income levels rise, it is natural to expect that the share of income spent on 
food  falls.  Even  within  this  reduced  share,  there  has  been  a  significant  increase  in  real 
expenditure on protein and vegetables in rural and urban areas across income deciles. Data 
for the years 1993–2012 suggest that it is only in the second half of the 2000s that annual 
average  real  expenditure  turned  mildly  positive.  But,  thereafter,  during  2010–12,  the  real 
average  per  capita  expenditure  has  remained  significantly  positive.  Moreover,  there  is 
greater allocation of expenditure away from cereals towards other forms of food items such 
as protein and vegetables (Table). Hence, demand seems to be one of the factors driving the 
prices of protein and vegetables. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 Another factor is the cost of cultivation. The prices of various inputs have gone up. The cost 
of  fuel  and  fertilisers  has  gone  up  because  of  high  international  oil  prices  combined  with 
exchange  rate  depreciation.  The  dominant  part  of  the  cost  of  cultivation  is  labour.  This  is 
particularly  so  in  our  set  up  with  the  preponderance  of  small  holdings,  which  are  less 
amenable to mechanisation. Agricultural wages have shown a sustained increase since the 
mid-2000s.  Even  after  accounting  for  inflation,  real  wage  increase  has  been  significantly 
positive. Non-agricultural wages too have shown similar increases in rural areas. 
There  are  several  explanations  why  rural  wages  have  increased.  One  explanation  is  that 
socially  inclusive  public  policy  such  as  Mahatma  Gandhi  National  Rural  Employment 
Guarantee  Act  (MGNREGA)  has  set  a  floor  to  rural  wages  and  increased  the  bargaining 
power of the work force. It is not to argue that rural wage increase is not desirable as real 
wages remained stagnant for quite some time. Admittedly, when GDP was rising faster, real 
wage  increase  could  be  somewhat  benign,  but  real  wage  increase  continued  to  remain 
significant even as GDP growth decelerated. Thus the wage catch up period seems to have 
overshot economic growth cycle (Chart 5). 
 
 
As  students  of  economics  you  know  very  well  that  the  increase  in  wages  if  not 
commensurate with productivity gains could be inflationary. Our food economy experienced a 
cost  shock,  which  was  reinforced  by  sustained  wage  increases  buttressing  demand.  As 
supply did not increase commensurately, prices rose at a more than desirable level. While 
stylised  facts  may  point  towards  the  above  conjecture,  as  economists  you  could  test  this 
formally in different ways. I attempted a simple structural vector auto regression (SVAR) of 
three  variables  of  food  price,  material  input  price  and  rural  wages  with  rainfall  as  an 
exogenous control variable.2 The results show that material input cost has a sharp positive 
                                                  
2   Estimated with monthly data from 1994: April to 2013: November; material cost includes prices of electricity, 
fertiliser & pesticide, and diesel. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
impact  on  food  inflation.  Similarly  wages  have  a  significant  positive  impact.  However,  the 
impact of wages is gradual, but more persistent than material cost. Now let me turn to the 
role of monetary policy. 
How  should  monetary  policy  respond  to  food  inflation?  From  textbooks  we  learn  that 
monetary policy should look through supply shocks such as a food price increase. But from 
experience we know that if the supply shock is persistent and becomes structural it will be a 
mistake for policy not to respond to it. For example, many central banks accommodated the 
oil  price  shock  of  the  1970s  judging  it  to  be  a  temporary  supply  shock.  This  was  a  major 
factor in subsequent worldwide inflation. The actual policy decision, however, may not be as 
simple and straightforward as that. 
Another layer of complexity is added to this process by the state of inflation expectations in 
the economy. If inflation expectations are low and well anchored, the inflationary impact of a 
supply shock may turn out to be transitory; this is because wages normally do not react to 
such inflation. However, if inflation expectations are high and not so well anchored even a 
temporary  supply  shock  could  have  an  adverse  impact  on  expectations  and  hence  the 
medium-term inflation outcome. 
We  have  seen  it  recently.  As  the  global  economy  recovered  from  recession  in  2009, 
commodity  prices,  particularly  food  and  oil  prices  rebounded  raising  headline  inflation  in 
many countries. However, headline inflation soon moderated in many advanced economies, 
as inflation expectations remained well anchored, besides significant negative output gap. Of 
course it is difficult to measure and interpret inflation expectations in a developing country 
like ours. However, the RBI’s quarterly household inflation expectations surveys conducted in 
select urban centres suggest that inflation expectations in India have remained elevated in 
double digits for quite some time now.3 The broad consensus in policy analysis is that while 
one could look through the first round direct impact of supply shock induced inflation, policy 
should  respond  to  the  second  round  effects  so  that  the  inflation  process  does  not  get 
generalised.  “…the  direct  role  of  monetary  policy  in  combating  food  price  pressures  is 
limited, but in the face of sustained high food inflation, monetary action may still be warranted 
to anchor inflation expectations.”4  
To sum up, the nature and composition of food inflation has changed in the recent years. As 
per capita income has increased the demand for food has shifted towards protein, fruits and 
vegetables. As supply response has not been adequate, there have been price pressures. In 
addition,  the  agricultural  sector  experienced  cost-push  both  in  terms  of  increasing  price  of 
material inputs and labour. 
Let me conclude with some thoughts on the way forward so that the food economy does not 
pose a major constraint on the path of non-inflationary growth that could be sustained over 
the medium- to long-term. 
First, there is substantial wastage of agricultural produce, particularly perishables like fruits 
and  vegetables  which  needs  to  be  minimised  by  improving  the  supply  chain  logistics  by 
setting up cold chains and processing facility at producing clusters. 
Second,  there  is  a  need  to  further  liberalise  agricultural  trade  by  modifying  agricultural 
produce  marketing  committee  (APMC)  Acts  by  state  governments  and  even  exempting 
perishables like fruits and vegetables from the provisions of APMC to give wider access to 
both producers and traders for better price discovery. 
                                                 
3   Please see http://www.rbi.org.in/scripts/PublicationsView.aspx?id=15423 for the latest results of the Inflation 
Expectation Survey of Households. 
4   Subbarao, D., (2011), “The Challenges of Food Inflation”, Presidential Address at the Annual Conference of 
the Indian Society of Agricultural Marketing at Hyderabad, November 22. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Third,  over  the  medium  term  supply  can  be  improved  in  a  non-inflationary  manner  by 
augmenting  productivity.  One  important  way  of  productivity  expansion  is  through  greater 
mechanisation. However, dominance of small size of land holdings puts a constraint on the 
choice  of  technology.  Hence  contract  farming  and  leasing of  farmland  while  protecting  the 
ownership  rights  of  small  landholders  should  be  facilitated  to  enhance  production  and 
productivity. 
Fourth, from the demand side dispensation of social welfare benefits through cash transfer 
would  help  not  only  in  rationalising  demand  for  food  products  but  also  in  containing  the 
distortionary  effect  on  the  labour  market  resulting  in  a  more  economic  use  of  the  labour 
supply. 
Finally, while the major policy actions to augment food supply may not be in the domain of 
monetary policy, it may have to perform a careful balancing act so that a sharp action does 
not choke off supply response and a weak response hardens inflationary expectations. 
Thank you once again for your kind attention and for inviting me to deliver this prestigious 
lecture which has been a privilege. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
