  Jens Weidmann: Monetary union as a stability union 
Speech  by  Dr  Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the  Duitsland 
Instituut, Amsterdam, 7 April 2014. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Dear Professor Nijhuis, 
dear Dr Plecher-Hochstrasser, 
dear Dr Ullersma, 
dear Klaas, 
ladies and gentlemen, 
I thank you for the invitation and for the opportunity to speak here today. 
The Duitsland Instituut’s mission is to increase knowledge of Germany and disseminate this 
knowledge to a wide audience in the Netherlands. I am glad to join in this effort today, though 
I  will  confine  myself  to  the  Bundesbank’s  take  on  matters  of  the  Economic  and  Monetary 
Union.  Adding  more  issues  to  that  would  probably  constitute  an  overburdening  of  the 
monetary policymaker you see before you. And overburdening monetary policy is of course 
anathema to the Bundesbank. 
To me, it seems particularly befitting to talk about the challenges of the intricate construction 
that is our monetary union here in Amsterdam. 
As you know better than I do, up until the 12th century, the area of what is today known as 
the Province of Holland was basically considered uninhabitable. The area consisted mostly 
of swampland and morass, and was traversed by many rivers. It took the erection of a dam 
to  protect  a  small  patch  of  land  from  the  Amstel  River  and  the  tireless  effort  of  pushing 
countless wooden piles up to 18 meters deep into the ground to lay a foundation that proved 
solid enough. Solid enough to pave some roads and to build the first houses of what would 
later become the city of Amsterdam. Nobody would claim now that it was not worth the effort. 
Amsterdam is both unique and beautiful. 
And this is where the European monetary union comes in. There are surely more obvious 
places to build a currency union than in Europe. Without a doubt the euro area lacks some of 
the characteristics of an optimal currency area. Labour mobility, for instance, is much lower 
than in the US; plus the business cycles are not synchronised, nor is there any central fiscal 
stabiliser. At the end of the day, the decision to create the European monetary union was a 
political one, not an economic one. 
But I am positive that if we learn from the sovereign debt crisis and do not falter in our efforts 
to push enough piles into the right parts of that tricky ground, the European monetary union 
can be preserved as a place of stability that is worth living in. In the first 15 years since the 
euro was launched, people have enjoyed a stable currency. The average euro-area inflation 
rate was 2.0%, which is very close to the ECB Governing Council’s definition of price stability 
(“below, but close to, 2%”). 
In the next 30 minutes, I will present my views on which additional piles are required and how 
they will need to be arranged in order to preserve the European monetary union as a stability 
union. In doing so, I will first look into what still needs to be done at the country level. From 
there, I will go on to address the weaknesses in EMU’s institutional foundation. 
But before talking about what needs to be done, let us take a step back and consider what 
went wrong in the first place. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The origins of the crisis 
2. 
For  many  euro-area  member  states,  the  introduction  of  the  euro  ushered  in  a  new  era  of 
abundant  capital,  due  to  the  elimination  of  exchange  rate  risks.  And  standard  economic 
reasoning  suggests  that  capital  should  flow  from  capital-rich  to  capital-poor  economies, 
where returns should be higher. 
However,  the  favourable  financing  conditions  in  the  euro-area  countries  with  previously 
higher  interest  rates  mainly  stimulated  their  domestic  consumption,  thereby  raising  prices 
and wages in the non-tradable sector. To put it in a nutshell: inflowing capital was not always 
put to productive use. 
Overinvestment  in  real  estate  as  well  as  public  and  private  consumption  failed  to  raise 
productivity in some member countries. Unit labour costs soared, competitiveness declined. 
And  the  rigidity  of  labour  and  product  markets  meant  that  this  process  gained  even  more 
momentum. 
When  the  financial  crisis  broke  out  in  2007,  the  vulnerabilities  became  apparent:  investor 
sentiment  began  to  shift,  and  interest  rates  for  the  countries  in  question  started  to  rise 
sharply, triggering a crisis that is still far from being fully resolved. 
How could it go so wrong? Here is where the euro area’s unique institutional set-up comes 
in. 
The euro area teams up one common monetary policy with 18 national fiscal and economic 
policies.  This  approach reflects  a  currency  area  composed  of  sovereign  member  states. It 
grants  member  states  enough  room  for  manoeuvre  to  preserve  their  diversity,  that  is,  to 
establish their own business models or to tailor institutions and policies to their own national 
preferences. Such preferences can differ, for example, with respect to income redistribution 
or the role of the state in the economy. At the same time, it leaves the consequences of such 
decisions  with  the  respective  member  state  and  consistently  rules  out  the  option  of 
mutualising public debt with other euro-area states. 
But this set-up also creates vulnerabilities. 
First,  such  a  combination  gives  rise  to  a  deficit  bias,  as  it  allows  the  costs  of  fiscal 
imprudence  to  be  shifted  partially  on  to  others.  An  unsustainable  fiscal  situation  in  one 
country has repercussions for monetary union as a whole. 
And  second,  each  member  state  issues  debt  in  a  currency  it  cannot  create.  Thus,  a  high 
level  of  fiscal  discipline  is  needed  to  ensure  that  solvency  concerns  do  not  spiral  out  of 
control. This notwithstanding, the central banks’ balance sheets can serve as a conduit for 
shifting  risks  among  national  taxpayers,  even  if  there  are  no  explicit  fiscal  transfers  and 
irrespective of the approval of national legislatures – thus undermining countries’ individual 
national  responsibility  and  hence  the  very  foundations  upon  which  responsible  decision-
making is built. 
However, if central bank independence is used for purposes other than price stability, it is 
only a question of time until central bank independence is challenged. 
The founding fathers of the euro clearly foresaw the risk of unsustainable public finances for 
a  stability-oriented  monetary  policy.  Therefore,  precautions  were  put  in  place  to  safeguard 
sound  public  finances.  They  took  the  form  of  a  prohibition  of  monetary  financing  of 
government deficits, the no bail out clause and the Stability and Growth Pact. 
Barry Eichengreen and Charles Wyplosz wrote in an article in 1998: “The most compelling 
rationale  for  the  Stability  Pact  rests  on  the  need  to  buttress  the  no-bailout  rule  of  the 
Maastricht  Treaty”.  And  having  a  good  sense  of  what  might  happen,  the  two  economists 
continued: “That need will be most pressing where debt problems place banking systems at 
risk and where bond market contagion is pervasive.” 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  At  the  time,  it  was  assumed  that  by  constraining  governments’  ability  to  fiscally  stimulate 
demand – and by shifting monetary policy to the European level – governments would have 
no choice but to implement structural reforms, improve their supply side, and strengthen their 
potential for sustainable growth. 
It  was  also  thought  that  the  financial  markets  would  enforce  fiscal  discipline.  As  we  know 
now,  things  did  not  exactly  work  out  as  expected.  So,  in  a  sense,  the  piles  on  which 
monetary  union  was  built  turned  out  to  be  unsound.  The  fiscal  rules  were  breached 
numerous times, not least by Germany and France. 
In addition, investors made hardly any distinction between the bonds of individual member 
states.  From  1999  to  2007  the  average  difference  between  EMU  government  bonds, 
excluding  Germany,  and  German  government  bonds,  for  instance,  was  a  mere  14  basis 
points. Just for comparison: at the end of March that spread stood at 123 basis points. 
I leave it to you to decide whether this was because investors were neglecting the growing 
differences in economic fundamentals or because they never really believed that the no bail 
out  clause  would  hold  when  the  going  got  tough.  In  any  case,  the  strong  convergence  in 
financing  conditions  set  the  wrong  incentives:  governments’  purses  were  loosened,  not 
tightened, structural reforms were postponed, not pushed. 
By the same token, banks and capital markets in many cases failed to allocate the inflowing 
capital  efficiently.  Instead  of  financing  productive  investment  they  shifted  money  into 
ballooning  real  estate  sectors.  As  a  result,  banking  systems  in  some  euro-area  countries 
were subsequently hit hard by a severe crisis. 
In sum, this is what, to me, largely explains the unsustainable developments in the run-up to 
the crisis. Hence, work is needed on three levels. 
First  of  all,  the  countries  have  to  correct the  macroeconomic  imbalances  and  to  boost  the 
potential  for  sustainable  growth  by  regaining  competitiveness,  by  consolidating  public 
finances, and by catching up on long-delayed structural reforms. 
Second,  we  need  to  address  the  weaknesses  in  the  monetary  union’s  institutional 
architecture. 
And third, we need a more resilient financial system. Owing to regulatory weaknesses, the 
financial system acted as an amplifying transmitter of the crisis. 
Due to time constraints, I would like to focus primarily on the first two issues. Let’s have a 
look at the state of play in the member states. 
Reforms at the national level 
3. 
In many countries, structural reforms to remove rigidities in product and labour markets are 
now  underway.  A  number  of  labour  market  reforms  have  been  introduced  to  foster 
employment  and  reduce  adjustment  costs  during  economic  downswings.  In  addition,  the 
retirement age has been raised as well. Product market rigidities that weaken competition, 
produce regulatory red tape, and inhibit growth, are also being addressed. 
And according to the World Bank’s Doing Business Report, progress has been made in this 
regard as well: Portugal, Italy, and Spain have climbed up the ranking ladder by 17, 13, and 
10  positions  respectively  over  the  last  four  years.  Greece  moved  up  by  37  positions.  Unit 
labour costs and current accounts of deficit countries have improved – not only because of 
shrinking imports, but also because of expanding exports. 
Factors of production are being reallocated to sectors with a strong focus on exports. The 
construction  sector  in  Ireland  accounted  for  over  half  of  the  decrease  in  aggregate 
employment; in Spain, Italy and Portugal, it accounted for around two-fifths. In industry, by 
contrast, either far fewer jobs have been cut or – as in Ireland – new jobs have recently been 
created. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Real  value  added,  in  particular,  far  exceeded  its  pre-crisis  level  in  the  export-intensive 
information and communications sector in Spain and Ireland as early as in 2012. In Ireland, 
other business-related services also showed substantial growth. Compared to its pre-crisis 
level,  real  value  added  in  trade  and  tourism  increased  in  Portugal  and  remained  virtually 
unchanged in Spain. 
Progress  has  been  uneven,  though,  and  further  reforms  are  needed  to  facilitate  this  shift 
from the non-tradable to the tradable sector and, therefore, to strengthen sustainable growth. 
Overcoming the crisis is still an uphill struggle; if you don’t go forwards, you go backwards. 
With  regard  to  reforms,  governments  therefore  have  to  keep  the  pedal  to  the  metal.  In 
footballing terms, I would say “the half-time whistle has blown”. However, there is no time for 
a break. 
Without doubt, adjustment has to happen primarily in the deficit countries, but countries with 
a current account surplus, such as the Netherlands and Germany, face challenges as well. 
While  the  Netherlands  is  still  dealing  with  the  aftermath  of  a  housing  bust,  demographic 
trends require Germany to raise its potential for sustainable growth. 
Germany’s  overall  investment  ratio  was  16.7%  in  2013,  compared  with  22.3%  in  the  year 
2000. This low level of investment is attributable to numerous factors, many of them cyclical 
in  nature.  However,  improving  the  conditions  for  investment  in  energy,  transport  and 
communications networks – like fast and efficient implementation procedures – would raise 
Germany’s  long-term  growth  potential,  as  would  further  investment  in  research  and 
education. 
In  order  to  counter  the  demographic  challenges,  Germany  should  improve  pre-school 
education  and  support  educationally  disadvantaged  young  people  in  order  to  foster  their 
employability. 
Furthermore, we should reduce, rather than create, incentives for early retirement, and we 
need a systematic approach to attract skilled labour from abroad, whose expertise is needed. 
And  I  am  not  talking  about  all  the  world-class  footballers  from  the  Netherlands  and  many 
other countries who play in Germany’s Bundesliga. 
When  looking  at  sectoral  developments  in  Germany,  one  fact  is  striking.  For  the  last 
20 years,  productivity  growth 
in 
manufacturing.  In  fact,  while  productivity  in  manufacturing  has  grown  by  more  than  30%, 
productivity growth in services has barely budged. Why is that? 
The data point to a higher degree of competition in the manufacturing sector: Mark-ups, an 
indicator of the pricing power of firms, have gone down following the launch of the common 
market. By contrast, mark-ups on services have stayed high in Germany, higher even than in 
many  other  European  countries.  Opening  up  closed  professions,  cutting  red  tape  and 
improving access to financing for nascent digital firms would serve to improve the functioning 
of the services sector. 
But  while  there  is  room  for  improvement  in  Germany  especially  when  it  comes  to  the 
efficiency of its services sector, the fact is that European mark-ups are elevated in general, 
compared to the US, for example. It is therefore high time to fully harness the forces of the 
market for Europe, by making the most of its main catalyst for competition and growth, the 
European single market. 
In his report to the European Commission, former Commissioner Mario Monti estimated the 
potential growth effects of creating a digital single market, which is largely services-based, to 
be about 4%, on a par with the gains made since 1993. 
Further  benefits  would  ensue  from  a  reduction  in  the  vast  number  of  exemptions  in  the 
Services Directive. Reforms that strengthen competition in the services sector therefore hold 
the promise of delivering stronger and more balanced growth. More balanced growth is likely 
to translate into a moderation of the current account as well. 
lagged  markedly  behind  growth 
in  services  has 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  This would come without weakening the competitiveness of Germany’s export sector. This 
would be the case, however, if Germany would accept the economic advice to excessively 
boost  its  wages  to  stimulate  domestic  demand.  This  would  harm  employment  in  Germany 
and, as a consequence, the economic situation in the entire euro area. 
So, while considerable progress has been made at the national level, in the deficit countries 
in particular, much remains to be done. And reforms at the national level could be reinforced 
by European efforts to strengthen competition, especially in the services sector. 
Strengthening EMU’s institutional architecture 
4. 
However,  when  it  comes  to  taking  action  at  the  European  level,  other  challenges  for 
monetary union are probably even more crucial. The safeguards originally put in place for the 
stability  for  the  monetary  union,  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  and  the  no  bail-out  clause, 
failed to prevent the crisis. 
It also turned out that other macroeconomic imbalances likewise pose a threat to the stability 
of the euro area: a steady loss of competitiveness, persistent current account deficits, or high 
levels of private debt. 
Ultimately,  the  risk  of  contagion  between  countries  was  also  underestimated  when  the 
monetary union was established. 
In response to the crisis, rescue mechanisms such as the EFSF and ESM were put in place, 
and  they  did  manage  to  contain  the  fallout  somewhat.  But  at  the  same  time,  the  rescue 
mechanisms have weakened the principle of individual responsibility, as fiscal responsibility 
has essentially remained national, while liabilities have been partially mutualised. 
In other words: the balance between liability and control has become lopsided. Yet I believe 
that this balance is fundamental to the stability of Europe’s monetary union. To put it rather 
bluntly: you would certainly not want to share your bank account with your neighbour if you 
were unable to control his or her spending. 
But  how  do  we  restore  that  balance,  and  put  monetary  union  on  a  more  solid  footing?  In 
principle, there are two ways: first, by creating a genuine fiscal union, or second, by making 
the principle of individual responsibility work. 
The first option, a genuine fiscal union, would require the member states to relinquish their 
fiscal sovereignty and cede it to the European level. In such a setting, the mutualisation of 
future liabilities would be consistent. 
This step would require a change of the European treaties as well as a change of national 
constitutions. But judging by the reluctance of governments and electorates to let Brussels 
have a say in fiscal matters, this avenue seems blocked, at least for the foreseeable future. 
This leaves us with the second option, making the principle of individual responsibility work 
better. In order to do so, the Stability and Growth Pact was stiffened and the fiscal compact 
was introduced. 
These are steps in the right direction. But the mere existence of these rules will not suffice. 
As Erasmus of Rotterdam once said: “A nail is driven out by another nail. Habit is overcome 
by habit.” 
Strict  and  consistent  application  of  the  stiffened  rules  is  therefore  important.  Here,  the 
Commission  has  a  special  responsibility.  In  this  context  I  am  worried  that  the  fiscal  policy 
rules have become ever more complex and, in turn, so has monitoring compliance with them. 
It has now become almost impossible for experts, let alone the general public, to determine 
whether or not countries are complying with these budget rules. 
This naturally reduces the binding force of the rules. The binding force of the rules can also 
be  diminished  if  there  is  the  impression  that  they  are  not  being  strictly  interpreted  by  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Commission.  And  the  assessment  procedure  gives  the  Commission  greater  and  more 
discretionary leeway. Metaphorically speaking, we need to make sure that the Commission 
does not go beyond its role as a referee and move the goalposts mid-game. 
Based  on  past  experiences  it  is  clear  to  me  that  stiffening the  rules  alone  won’t  suffice  to 
enforce  the  principle  of  individual  responsibility.  At  its  core,  this  principle  requires  that 
sovereigns, banks, and investors bear the consequences of their decisions. 
This implies that it is primarily up to the respective government and its citizens to come up 
with the revenue required for repaying public debt. This holds, in particular, since high levels 
of public debt often go hand in hand with substantial private assets. But it also implies that 
the risk of non-repayment ultimately lies with the investors, since they are the ones who reap 
the return when things go well. And if the fiscal limit has been reached for real, public debt 
needs to be restructured without posing a systemic threat to financial stability. 
The  introduction  of  collective  action  clauses  into  sovereign  bonds  was  a  first  step  in  that 
direction. But more steps are needed. 
The  Bundesbank  has  put  forward  a  proposal  for  sovereign  bonds  to  include  an  automatic 
maturity  extension  of  three  years  in  case  a  sovereign  accesses  the  European  rescue 
mechanisms.  This  automatic  maturity  extension  would  allow  the  sovereign  in  question  to 
tackle its fiscal challenges while preventing investors from bolting. Liability and control would 
be  brought  better  into  balance.  The  amount  of official  financial  support would  be  reduced, 
and time is bought to figure out if the problem is one of temporary illiquidity or insolvency. 
But ultimately, all these questions boil down to the quip of American economist Allan Meltzer: 
“Capitalism  without  failure  is  like  religion  without  sin.  It  doesn’t  work.”  For  the  above 
proposals to work, we need to make sure that the insolvency of both banks and sovereigns is 
possible without bringing down the financial system as a whole. 
At  the  moment,  the  insolvency  of  a  sovereign  or  of  a  systemically  important  bank  is 
perceived as an unpredictable risk. What do we have to do to make that risk manageable? 
At the core of the problem lies what is now known as the sovereign-bank nexus. In the crisis, 
this  sovereign-bank  nexus  developed  into  a  vicious  circle:  Tottering  banks  and  teetering 
sovereigns lean towards each other for support, but are in fact pushing each other over. 
If a large bank or one which is strongly interconnected with other banks runs into difficulties, 
this can pose a threat to the stability of the entire financial system. The state then often has 
no other option but to step in if it wants to prevent a meltdown of the real economy. But this 
rescue  can  be  a  huge  burden  on  government  finances.  This  is  what  happened  in  Ireland 
where  the  need  to  prop  up  the financial  system  pushed  the  public  debt  ratio  up  by  nearly 
30 percentage points. 
Conversely,  weak  government  positions  can  destabilise  banks  –  directly  through  their 
exposure to sovereign bonds, and indirectly through worsening macroeconomic conditions. 
This was the case in Greece. 
How can we break this “doom loop”? The strengthened Basel III capital rules are a first step 
in  that  direction,  as  they  increase  capital  buffers  and  therefore  the  capacity  of  banks  to 
absorb losses. 
The banking union, with its Single Supervisory Mechanism, is another such step. Strict and 
stringent supervision ensures that tough rules are applied equally to all. 
In  retrospect,  heeding  Wim  Duisenberg’s  advice  when  he  argued  in  favour  of  a  European 
banking  supervision  in  the  late  1980s  would  have  paid  us  all  a  handsome  dividend.  The 
establishment  of  the  SSM  25  years  later  is  testament  to  his  prescience.  The  SSM  is 
important for severing the link between banks and sovereigns. But to make sure that banks 
cannot pass on the consequences of their actions to the public, more is needed.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  As a natural complement to the SSM, an effective restructuring and resolution mechanism 
has to establish a bail-in regime that clearly assigns how losses are distributed, making sure 
that shareholders and creditors are first in line. In this regard, the agreement on the Directive 
establishing  a  framework  for  the  recovery  and  resolution  of  failing  banks  (BRRD)  and  the 
agreement on the Single Resolution Mechanism three weeks ago constitute progress. 
But it would be better still if the bail-in regime were to take effect at the time the SRM starts – 
not one year later as is currently envisaged. 
The  sovereign-bank  nexus,  however,  works  both  ways.  We  also  have  to  make  sure  that 
worsening public finances do not infect the financial system. The banking union still has a 
sovereign  virus,  as  Daniel  Gros  from  the  Centre  for  European  Policy  Studies  put  it.  To 
strengthen the banking union’s immune system, we need to end the preferential treatment 
afforded to sovereign debt. At present, sovereign bonds are treated by European regulators 
as being risk-free – an assumption that stands in contradiction both to the no bail out clause 
and to recent history. 
We  should  therefore  put  this  regulatory  fiction  to  rest.  Hence,  sovereign  bonds  should  be 
adequately risk-weighted, and exposure to individual sovereign debt should be capped, as is 
already  the  case  for  private  debt.  An  adequate  risk-weighting  of  sovereign  bonds  would 
make  banks  more  resilient  if  the  fiscal  position  of  the  respective  sovereign  were  to 
deteriorate. And it would bring spreads more into line with the underlying risk, thus sending a 
disciplining signal to the sovereign. 
But sovereign bonds pose a threat to financial stability not only because of preferential risk-
weighting. The most important rule in risk management is diversification. 
Yet when it comes to sovereign bonds, banks all too often seem to neglect this principle. In 
many  cases,  European  banks  hold  bonds  from  one  sovereign  only  –  their  home  country. 
During the crisis, many banks, particularly weak ones, used the low refinancing costs to buy 
even  more  sovereign  debt;  they  made  a  sort  of  “carry  trade”.  However,  a  high  level  of 
undiversified  sovereign  exposure  is  what  makes  sovereign  default  a  potentially  systemic 
event. 
Hence,  the  large  exposure  regime  which  caps  investments  in  a  single  debtor  has  to  be 
applied correspondingly to sovereigns as well. This might trigger substantial repercussions, 
but  these  would  be  manageable  if  they  were  phased  in  over  a  transitional  period  –  which 
would undoubtedly need to be granted. 
The role of monetary policy 
5. 
Consistently  applying  the  stiffened  rules  and  ending  the  preferential  treatment  afforded  to 
sovereign debt will be instrumental in strengthening the stability of our monetary union. So 
will the banking union. 
Currently,  much  of  the support  provided  to  the whole  structure  hinges on  one  pillar  alone: 
monetary policy. But this will work only for so long; monetary policy has already done a lot to 
absorb the economic consequences of the crisis, but it cannot solve the crisis. To say it once 
again in Wim Duisenberg’s words: “Don’t ask for monetary policy to perform tricks it cannot 
deliver.” 
Therefore, the best contribution the Eurosystem can make to a lasting resolution of the crisis 
is to fulfil its mandate: that of maintaining price stability. 
To  avoid  potential  conflicts  of  interest  between  the  ECB’s  mandate  to  safeguard  price 
stability and its role in banking supervision, changes to the European Treaty will be needed 
in the medium term in order to strictly segregate these two functions. 
Klaas  Knot  said  recently  in  an  interview  with  the  German  daily  “Handelsblatt”  that  it  was 
sensible  to  make  use  of  the  ECB’s  credibility  to  establish  the  SSM,  but  that  it  should  be 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  considered  to  eventually  outsource  the  SSM  from  the  ECB  and  to  establish  a  separate 
institution. And I can only agree with his view. 
Conclusion 
6. 
Ladies and gentlemen, let me conclude. 
The  crisis  has  laid  bare  shortcomings  at  the  national  level  as  well  as  weaknesses  in  the 
monetary  union’s  institutional  architecture.  Repairs  at  the  national  level  have  seen 
considerable progress, though there is still a long way to go. 
Like in a marathon, the second half of the course always feels tougher than the first – and 
one  major  challenge  is  to  not  give  in  to  the  growing  reform  fatigue.  But  at  this  point,  the 
weaknesses in EMU’s architecture probably pose a more fundamental challenge. 
The  balance  between  liability  and  control  has  got  out  of  kilter.  We  need  to  regain  that 
balance if we are to put EMU on a more solid footing. 
Since a genuine fiscal union is not on the cards – and to me it does not seem to be for the 
foreseeable  future  –  we  need  to  make  the  principle  of  individual  responsibility  work. 
Therefore, we need to break the sovereign-bank nexus in both directions. The banking union 
is an important first step. 
But we also need to put an end to the preferential treatment afforded to sovereign debt in 
order to immunise the financial system against sovereign default. 
To  me,  these  are  the  piles  we  still  need  to  push  into  the  ground  to  provide  for  a  lasting 
foundation of our monetary union. 
I now look forward to Governor Knot’s take on EMU’s most pressing challenges. Klaas, the 
floor is yours! 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
