  Choongsoo Kim: Strengthening central bank cooperation 
Closing  dinner  speech  by  Dr  Choongsoo  Kim,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Korea,  at  the  BIS 
bimonthly meetings, Sydney, 24 February 2014. 
 Thank you, Christian, for a very kind introduction. I still vividly remember your office the first 
time we met in Paris. I appreciated very much that you met me despite your busy schedule. I 
also envied you, as  we  Koreans must take a more than 10 hour-flight to see and visit the 
Chateau,  but  you  French  Central  Bank  people  enjoy  your  lives  working  at  the  gorgeous 
Chateau. 
Governor Glenn Stevens of the Reserve Bank of Australia, ladies and gentlemen joining us 
here today... 
It is a great honor and pleasure for me to stand before you all, in Sydney, one of the most 
beautiful and great port cities in the world. 
First of all, I wish to express my sincere appreciation to Governor Stevens, for hosting this 
event with the warmest hospitality. My thanks also go to General Manager Caruana, who has 
given Bank of Korea staff many opportunities to gain valuable experience working with the 
BIS. 
Looking back, I find that my four years of service as Governor have been influenced the most 
by  activities  of  the  BIS.  This  has  been  very  instrumental  to  me  in  learning  what  central 
banking is all about. I am sure that my life as Governor would have been much less fruitful 
and rewarding had there been no BIS. And taking this opportunity, I would like to talk about 
three things in this regard today. 
First, let me begin by telling you why I have loved coming to Basel. The reason why I have 
especially enjoyed the BIS meetings is that this is a peer group meeting, in which Governors 
can network with each other through intimate and frank discussions. 
I have gathered much information necessary to my work as a central bank governor through 
attending these meetings over the past four years. This has been an indescribably valuable 
experience to me, someone not originally from the central bank community. 
The BIS is acknowledged as a world-class institution and knowledge base, which leads the 
way in dealing with the main issues of the global economy. 
I have learned a great deal not only from participating in the BIS-led discussions, but also 
from reading the excellent background notes prepared by the Secretariat. And these are the 
two things that I will miss most in the future. 
One notable trend seen in the recent recovery from the global crisis is that central banks are 
now  becoming  knowledge  institutions  even  more  academic  than  academia  itself.  And  the 
true knowledge institution is the BIS, where the governors of central banks gather to share 
ideas and strengthen their cooperation in this regard. 
In  addition,  as  a  courageous  trailblazer,  the  BIS  has  I  think  very  excellently  fulfilled  its 
mission of providing clear ideas on ways of meeting the expectations for the increased role of 
central banks, and of plugging any gaps between their current roles and social accountability.  
Secondly,  I  would  like  to  express  my  hope  to  see  a  strengthened  role  for  the  BIS  going 
forward, in bringing a global equilibrium to the world economy by filling the gap due to our 
lack of a global jurisdiction. 
In going through the global financial crisis recently, we have realized that all economies are 
highly  interconnected,  and  that  advanced  and  emerging  market  economies  are  no  longer 
separate  but  now  in  the  same  boat.  As  General  Manager  Caruana  mentioned  during  one 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  speech  last  year,  cooperation  among  central  banks  is  now  a  necessity,  given  the  trend  of 
market fragmentation and re-nationalization since the global financial crisis together with the 
increases in globalization and interconnectedness. 
Based  upon  this  mindset  we  have  all  gained  new  ideas  during  our  discussions  at  the  BIS 
Governors  meetings,  and,  while  seeking  a  new  basis  for  monetary  policy,  come  to  realize 
that we can find mutually beneficial solutions for both advanced countries and EMEs. 
International cooperation in the “Basel  way”, and informal exchanges of policy experience, 
have  become  critical  factors  for  multilateral  surveillance.  And  as  the  BIS  has  played  an 
instrumental  role  in  opening  up  new  policy  areas for  central  banks  in  this  process,  central 
banks have become capable of responding well to their new challenges and opportunities. 
Although the  Bank  of  Korea  is  not  a  regulator or  supervisor  of financial  markets,  we  have 
learned many lessons from the discussions at the BIS Governors meetings, of the responses 
taken by the BIS to the global financial crisis. 
I  also  believe  the  meetings  to  have  been  very  meaningful  in  that  these  experiences 
contributed to the inclusion of financial stability among the mandates of the Bank of Korea, 
under the Bank of Korea Act revision that took place during my term. 
Thirdly,  like  most  of  you  I  have  spent  the  majority  of  my  time  during  the  past  four  years 
seeking  ways  to  overcome  the  global  financial  crisis  and  to  establish  a  new  system  of 
financial  regulation  to  prevent  future  crises.  And  so  let  me  tell  you  now  of  one  personal 
episode related to economic crisis management. 
When I taught graduate school economics at one private university in Korea in 1998, right 
after  the  Asian financial  crisis, I  set  up  a  course  there  on  “Economic  Crisis  Management”, 
which  was  to  my  knowledge  the  first  and  only  course  of  its  kind  in  Korea,  thinking  that 
economic crisis management would become a buzzword in the global market in the future. I 
taught this graduate-level course for five years, with my students including mid-level career 
government  officials  from  many  developing  economies.  The  course  turned  out  to  be  very 
popular, and I was asked by many universities around the world to send them the syllabus. 
In a similar vein, in carrying out my duties as Governor I have felt great academic curiosity 
about the character of the recent global financial crisis. And my conclusion has been that the 
recent  crisis  has  been  a  composite  one,  in  that  it  has  involved  all  facets  of  past  crises, 
including excessive financial liberalization policies such as financial engineering for example 
of  derivatives,  contagion  to  neighboring  economies,  large  amounts  of  public  debt,  rigid 
exchange rate regimes, the generation of innocent bystander victims, and inefficient financial 
surveillance and regulation. 
One  notable  difference  this  time,  however,  which  has  distinguished  the  recent  crisis  from 
past  ones,  is  that  our  central  banks  have  taken  bold  monetary  and  financial  regulatory 
measures  in  response,  through  which  collapse  of  the  global  financial  system  has  been 
prevented. 
Yes, this time has indeed been different in that way. And we are all very well aware that the 
BIS has been of great help in this process. 
I am relieved that the global financial crisis has now cooled down somewhat, at this time of 
my departure from my post as a governor. However, considering the saying that “It’s not over 
until it’s over”, one of my favorite Yogi Berra quotes, I hope that the global economy does not 
let its guard down until the crisis has been completely overcome. In particular, fundamental 
solutions such as the establishment of a global jurisdiction are still necessary. 
And as there are multiple disequilibria at present, I expect the BIS to play a certain role in 
solving this problem as well. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Meanwhile,  I  believe  strongly  that  all  of  our  central  banks  will  respond  adequately  to  the 
many difficulties we face, while broadening our mutual understandings of each other through 
the BIS meetings. 
Before concluding my speech, I would like to leave the following message to you all, hoping 
that you will find it food for further thought. I think that we live in an economy in which prices 
including  foreign  exchange  rates  overshoot,  markets  then  overreact,  and  policymakers 
subsequently tend to over-respond. The consequence is high market volatility. At the same 
time, as the costs of type I errors, such as a missed call of a crisis, are so devastating, a new 
tendency prevails of making too many type II errors, for example by sending false signals of 
crisis. 
And  while  the  social  costs  of  such  a  type  II  error  may  be  latent  or  unmeasurable  at  the 
moment, taken all together the repetition of such errors will have non-negligible social costs, 
which will have subsequent negative impacts on the growth potential of the economy. I do 
hope you will come up with optimal solutions to this and to the other problems I have noted. 
During a crisis period we tend to become over-cautious. And so I would like to remind you of 
what  Winston  Churchill  said  in  this  regard:  “A  pessimist  sees  the  difficulty  in  every 
opportunity,  and  an  optimist  sees  the  opportunity  in  every  difficulty.”  I  hope  to  see  more 
central bankers adopting this latter, optimist’s view in the coming years. 
To bring my speech to an end, I would like to once again express my deep gratitude to my 
fellow  governors  for  their  cooperation,  and  to  the  BIS  staff  for  their  arrangement  of  this 
wonderful meeting. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
