  Denton Rarawa: Financial inclusion in the Solomon Islands – key areas 
and current status 
Keynote address by  Mr  Denton Rarawa, Governor of Central Bank of Solomon Islands, at 
the opening of the Solomon Islands Financial Inclusion Expo, Honiara, 20–21 June 2014. 
 Your Excellency, Deputy Australian High Commissioner, Dr Dave Peebles, 
Chief Executive Officers & Representatives of Commercial Banks, National Provident Fund, 
Permanent Secretaries of Government Ministries 
Representatives of State Owned Enterprises 
Representative of Non-Government Organizations 
PFIP representatives 
Members of the National Financial Inclusion Taskforce 
Our major sponsors of the Event 
Media representatives 
Women’s groups, Young people, and Students 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Introductory remarks 
Good morning and a warm welcome to you all. 
It is a great pleasure for me to welcome you all to the opening of the first Financial Inclusion 
Expo,  with the theme, “Know  Your  Money, Save and Grow”, organised under the National 
Financial  Inclusion  Taskforce  (NFIT).  This  is  an  important  event  in  our  journey  towards 
achieving greater financial inclusion in Solomon Islands. 
The hosting of a financial inclusion exposition is an idea that NFIT has contemplated staging 
since its formation in 2011. So I am very happy indeed that we can finally witness its opening 
this morning. I believe, this event will greatly benefit both the consumers and the providers of 
financial services as we interact in this “out of office” environment in the next two days. 
NFIT and financial inclusion 
The NFIT, is a national committee set up in 2011, and comprises of stakeholders from the 
public, private, donor agencies, financial institutions and NGOs, with the goal of extending 
financial  services  to  our  people  especially  those  in  rural  areas.  Our  target  is  to  enable  an 
additional  70,000  (of  which  30,000  must  be  women)  Solomon  Islanders  have  access  to 
financial services by 2015. I am pleased to report that our target has been achieved, some 
21  months  ahead  of  our  target  date.  Since  the  start  of  2011  to  May  2014,  more  than 
98,000 new accounts have been opened with the commercial banks. While we can celebrate 
this  achievement,  and  I  think  we  should,  our  journey  has  just  begun.  There  are  still 
outstanding areas and issues that need to be addressed. 
Much has been said about financial inclusion and so I feel I need to explain what it means. 
Maybe it will help us understand and appreciate its relevance to our country. 
The  concept  of  financial  inclusion  continues  to  assume  increasing  prominence  and 
importance across the globe and in the Pacific region. This is because of the promise it holds 
to addressing poverty, income inequality, under development and the welfare of our under-
served rural populations. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  So what is financial inclusion? Although, financial inclusion promoters have their respective 
definitions; for us in Solomon Islands, we decided not to define it but to describe what we are 
trying to address. When we talk about financial inclusion we refer to four (4) key areas: 
1. 
Accessing financial Services: Access is about bringing financial services closer to 
the people, especially to our rural people. It also means addressing the barriers that 
prevent people from accessing financial services in our country. 
Usage of Financial Services: Concerns about the actual usage/regularity of usage 
of  the financial  services  by  customers. Whether  or  not  available  financial  services 
are used by the people. If not, what is the issue? 
Quality of Financial Services: This focusses on whether the financial services and 
products are affordable and appropriate for our customers. 
Impact  of  Financial  Services:  How  financial  services  can  improve  the  lives  and 
well-being of our people. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
These  four  broad  areas  are  core  agendas  of  our  financial  inclusion  efforts  in  Solomon 
Islands. But our ultimate goal is to see the impact that financial services has on the lives of 
people,  and  to  see  how  an  individual  can  improve  himself/herself  from  where  he  is,  to  a 
better financial position and outcome. 
Current status of financial inclusion in Solomon Islands 
Financial  Inclusion  is  a  national  agenda,  and  Solomon  Islands  has  taken  a  collaborative 
approach, by involving private and public sector stakeholders. 
What  is  the  current  status  of  financial  inclusion  in  Solomon  Islands  and  how  are  we 
progressing?  According  to  a  national  survey  on  “financial  competency”  carried  out  in 
2012/2013,  it  has  revealed  that  low  income  households  in  the  country  exhibit  low  or  low-
moderate levels of financial capabilities. It further highlighted that lack of access to financial 
services contributed to the low competency levels. 
Today, we are here as partners and champions to continue our efforts in progressing greater 
financial inclusion. During these two days, you will have the privilege to find out and better 
understand the different products and services currently available or will be available in the 
near future. It is a good example of public-private sector and civil society partnership towards 
our common goals. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen, this  Financial  Inclusion  Expo  is  a  rare  opportunity  and  a  first  of  its 
kind in the country. The theme for this year’s expo is, “Know your money, Save and Grow”. 
This theme was chosen because it is simple and better translates core messages of financial 
literacy,  savings  and  using  these  competencies  to  bring  about  growth  and  change  to  both 
personal and national livelihood. 
I hope you will take advantage of this great opportunity to get as much information on the 
services  and  products  displayed  and  presented  by  our  partners.  There  are  also  lots  of 
giveaways and also great fun. I kindly urge you to make the most of these two days and take 
home something new in terms of your understanding of financial services and products in our 
country. Please visit all the stalls where our stakeholders and champions are eagerly waiting 
to serve you. But most importantly just have fun and enjoy the day! 
Last but not least, I wish to thank on behalf of the organizing team, our platinum sponsor-
PFIP,  our  gold  sponsors-ANZ,  BSP,  CBSI,  OUR  TELEKOM,  Westpac  for  their  generous 
support, and to our Bronze sponsors –SPBD and SOLPOST, to our other supporting groups, 
our  participating  schools, 
the  Deputy  Australian  High 
Commissioner  and  the  Australian  Government,  the  RSIPF,  Solomon  Islands  Government 
and to the rest of stakeholders who have contributed to this program. 
to  our  guest  of  honour-HE 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Finally,  I  would  like  to  thank  the  Arts  Gallery  Group  through  the  Ministry  of  Culture  and 
Tourism  for  availing  this  venue  and  its  facilities  to  stage  our  exposition  and  to  launch  this 
program this morning and its use for today and tomorrow. 
Thank you. God bless you and may God Solomon Islands. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
