  Ashraf Mahmood Wathra: The importance of financial inclusion in 
Pakistan 
Speech by Mr Ashraf Mahmood Wathra, as Acting Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan, 
at the Bank Alfalah Mobile Commerce Conference 2014, Karachi, 13 March 2014. 
 Assalam-o-Aalaikum and Good Morning 
It  is  my  great  pleasure  to  join  you  at  the  international  Conference  &  Exhibition  on  Mobile 
Commerce in Pakistan, and share with you some of my thoughts on this important subject. I 
must  congratulate  the  organizers  and  sponsors  for  their  efforts  in  bringing  together  the 
stakeholders of mobile banking eco-system at one platform. 
Being  a  regulator  of  banking  sector,  SBP  believes  that financial  exclusion  is  hindering  our 
fellow  citizens  in  availing  economic  and  business  opportunities.  Today,  there  are  an 
estimated  2.5  billion  adult  people  worldwide  who  do  not  have  access  to  formal  financial 
services. According to World Bank’s Global Findex Survey, almost 80 percent of those living 
within incomes of less than $2 per day are financially excluded. 
Pakistan is a country of over 180 million people living in geographically diverse areas. Our 
branch  network  of  almost  12,700  is  insufficient to  serve  the  millions  of  unbanked masses. 
Banks  operating  in  Pakistan  are  hosting  only  35  million  customer  accounts  including 
3.5 million accounts opened by branchless banking providers. Despite phenomenal spread of 
banking business in Pakistan, we have a long way to go to achieve digital financial inclusion 
in the country. 
Given the complexities and challenges of limited financial access in the country, State Bank 
of  Pakistan  has  adopted  a  multi-pronged  and  long-term  strategy  to  address  financial 
exclusion 
through  structured  policy  &  regulatory  actions,  and  market-development 
interventions.  Our  program  initiatives  have  been  catalysing  the  market  developments  and 
fostering  market  ecosystem  to  especially  promote  innovative  ways  of  doing  banking 
business. 
As we all know that people around the world increasingly use technology and communication 
networks  to  live,  work,  socialize  and  remain  informed  and  entertained  through  the  use  of 
online services via personal devices like PCs, smartphones and computer tablets. Therefore 
online and other-off-branch modes of doing banking transactions have reduced the hassle of 
visiting a conventional bank branch to a considerable extent. 
Ladies & Gentlemen, Pakistan is amongst the pioneers of mobile/branchless banking in the 
developing world. Our branchless banking framework and models have achieved worldwide 
recognition and remarkable success in a short span of four and a half years. This could not 
have been possible without an effective and enabling regulatory regime, dynamic, innovative 
and always eager banking and telecom industry in the country. I would like to share some 
numbers that show the level of take-up of branchless banking services in the country. For 
example: 
• 
Currently,  eight  branchless  banking  deployments  are  live  in  the  market  and  four 
more are yet to go live this year. 
Up  to  December  2013,  providers’  combined  network  has  reached  to  almost 
125,000 agents spread across all over Pakistan. 
Total number of branchless banking transactions has shown continuous growth in 
each  successive  quarter.  54  million  transactions  worth  Rs.  234  billion  were 
performed during the quarter ended December 2013. 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   Currently  3.5 million  customers  hold  branchless banking  accounts (also known  as 
m-wallets)  to  avail  host  of  services  including  fund  transfer,  utility  bill  payment, 
domestic remittance, mobile top ups, loan repayment, and saving account features. 
Branchless  banking  has  played  a  pivotal  role  in  providing  efficient  Financially 
Inclusive Government to Person (G2P) payments to welfare beneficiaries of Benazir 
Income Support Program (BISP), Watan Card and Bayt-ul-mall. 
 Ladies & Gentlemen, while we have achieved initial success through accumulating a critical 
mass of transactions and customers’ acquisition in branchless banking, we are by no means 
complacent. We  are  focusing  our  energies  to  identify  gaps  and  bring  solutions  to  address 
those gaps. SBP is strengthening its regulatory oversight through measures such as regular 
diagnostic and inspections, compliance forum, and agent monitoring System. 
SBP  has  also  formed  the  National  Branchless  Banking  Consultative  Group  which  draws 
representation from branchless banking industry players including banks, mobile operators, 
and  technology  service  providers.  This  group  is  actively  working  on  different  protocols 
including agent code of conduct, agent sharing models, interoperability schemes, consumer 
protection framework etc. 
Ladies & Gentlemen, it is a matter of great comfort and satisfaction for banking and telecom 
companies  that  their  respective  regulators  i.e.  SBP  and  PTA  share  the  vision  and  are 
working in close collaboration to provide an enabling regulatory environment for development 
of mobile / branchless banking services. Keeping in view the importance of interoperability 
for  promotion  of  branchless  /  mobile  banking,  SBP  and  PTA  are  working  closely  in 
developing  a  regulatory  framework  for  Third  Party  Service  Provider  (TPSP).  Eventually, 
mobile  financial  services  would  become  interoperable  once  TPSP  regulatory  framework  is 
issued. 
Going  forward,  much  is  still  needed  to  be  done.  SBP  is  keen  to  work  with  different 
stakeholders  of  mobile/branchless  banking  industry  eco-system  to  provide  an  enabling 
environment for the creation of mobile/branchless banking ecosystem in the country. 
I trust that the today’s deliberations will take stock of the opportunities and challenges offered 
Branchless Banking and its related products. I also hope that the forum would come up with 
recommendations on how to harness potential of branchless banking for financial inclusion in 
Pakistan. 
Thank you! 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
