  Haruhiko Kuroda: Japan’s economy and monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Haruhiko Kuroda, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting with business 
leaders, Osaka, 16 September 2014. 
Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
 Introduction 
It is my great pleasure to have the opportunity today to exchange views with a distinguished 
gathering of business leaders in Osaka. I would like to take this opportunity to express my 
sincerest gratitude for your cooperation with the Bank of Japan’s branches in Osaka, Kobe, 
and Kyoto. 
In April last year, the Bank introduced quantitative and qualitative monetary easing (QQE) to 
achieve the price stability target of 2 percent at the earliest possible time, with a time horizon 
of about two years. When I spoke to you last November, I said that under QQE there was a 
positive  turnaround  in  areas  such  as  economic  activity,  financial  markets,  and  people’s 
sentiment  and  expectations.  Since  then,  QQE  has  continued  to  steadily  exert  its  intended 
effects. The year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI, excluding fresh 
food) was minus 0.4 percent in April last year when QQE was introduced, but it has improved 
since then, recently registering 1.3 percent excluding the direct effects of the consumption 
tax  hike.  Japan’s  economy  has  thus  been  on  a  path  suggesting  that  the  2  percent  price 
stability target will be achieved as expected, although we are only halfway there. 
Today,  before  exchanging  views  with  you,  I  would  like  to  explain  the  Bank’s  view  on  the 
current  situation  of  and  outlook  for  economic  activity  and  prices  as  well  as  the  Bank’s 
monetary policy management. 
I.  
Economic activity in Japan and abroad 
Current situation of and outlook for Japan’s economy 
Let me start by discussing the current situation of and outlook for Japan’s economic activity. 
Japan’s  economy  has  continued  to  recover moderately  as  a trend,  although  a  decline  has 
been observed in demand following the front-loaded increase prior to the consumption tax 
hike. The GDP statistics (second preliminary estimates) released last week showed that real 
GDP  in  the  April-June  quarter  of  2014  fell  substantially  at  a  rate  of  7.1  percent  on  an 
annualized  quarter-on-quarter  basis  (Chart  1).  However,  this  decline  followed  the  front-
loading of demand in the January-March quarter, in which real GDP had grown significantly 
at  a  rate  of  6.0  percent.  To  exclude  such  fluctuations,  when  we  compare  real  GDP  in  the 
January-June period this year with that in the July-December period last year, the annualized 
growth rate was 1.0 percent. Therefore, on average, Japan’s economy has continued to grow 
at  a  pace  above  its  potential.  More  specifically,  the  employment  and  income  situation  has 
continued  to  improve  steadily,  and  household  sentiment  has  been  improving,  although  the 
decline following the front-loaded increase prior to the consumption tax hike is still observed, 
and exports as  well as industrial production have shown some weakness. Moreover, firms 
have  maintained  a  proactive  stance  on  investment  due  mainly  to  their  favorable  business 
performance.  In  this  way,  a  virtuous  cycle  from  income  to  spending  has  been  operating 
steadily  in  both  the  household  and  corporate sectors. With this  mechanism  intact,  Japan’s 
economy is expected to continue its moderate recovery trend, and the effects of the decline 
in  demand  following  the  front-loaded  increase  are  expected  to  wane  gradually.  Next  I  will 
discuss the household and corporate sectors, respectively. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  the  employment  and 
income  situation  continuing  to 
Household sector: resilient private consumption 
In  the  household  sector,  private  consumption  has  remained  resilient  as  a  trend  with  the 
employment and income situation improving steadily. With regard to durable goods such as 
automobiles and household electrical appliances, the recovery from the decline has dragged 
on  reflecting  the  large  degree  of  front-loading  of  purchases.  On  the  other  hand,  sales  at 
department stores and supermarkets have followed a recovery trend on average. Moreover, 
consumption of services has been resilient, as seen for example in food service and outlays 
for  travel,  where  the  effects  of  the  consumption  tax  hike  have  been  limited.  Although 
developments in consumption after the consumption tax hike vary by item and bad weather 
may  have  adversely  affected  developments  in  some  regions,  the  effects  of  the  decline  in 
demand following the tax hike have gradually begun to wane on the whole. Looking ahead, 
with 
improve  steadily,  private 
consumption is expected to remain resilient. 
With regard to the household sector, it is claimed that wage increases have failed to keep 
pace  with  inflation  and  real  wages  have  declined,  putting  downward  pressure  on  private 
consumption. On this point, it is important to distinguish between an increase in the inflation 
rate resulting from the consumption tax hike and trend inflation. With the year-on-year rate of 
increase  in  the  CPI  since  April  this  year  having  been  pushed  up  temporarily  due  to  the 
consumption  tax  hike,  the  year-on-year rate  of increase  in  nominal  wages  has  been  lower 
than that in the CPI. However, the consumption tax hike was scheduled in advance, and it is 
not  an  additional  factor  putting  downward  pressure  on  economic  activity  and  prices.  Even 
since before the tax hike in April this year, the Bank’s outlook for economic activity and prices 
has factored in the two rounds of consumption tax hikes. While the hikes will adversely affect 
real  income,  such  effects  on  households’  spending  behavior  might  be  mitigated  to  some 
extent as confidence is enhanced in the sustainability in the government’s fiscal conditions 
and the social security system. 
Looking at the recent income situation of households, employee income has been increasing 
about  2  percent  year  on  year,  exceeding  the  inflation  rate,  which  is  hovering  at  around 
1¼ percent  excluding  the  direct  effects  of the  consumption tax  hike (Chart  2).  Specifically, 
the year-on-year rate of change in scheduled cash earnings turned positive reflecting a rise 
in  base  pay  by  many  firms  –  the  first  increase  in  many  years.  In  addition,  special  cash 
earnings have clearly risen due mainly to an increase in summer bonuses. Furthermore, the 
number  of  employees  has  been  growing.  Looking  ahead,  with  the  economy  recovering 
moderately,  the  employment  situation  is  expected  to  maintain  its  improving  trend,  exerting 
further  upward  pressure  on  wages,  and  therefore  employee  income  is  likely  to  continue 
increasing  moderately.  Underpinned  by  this  improvement  in  the  employment  and  income 
situation, private consumption is expected to remain resilient, and the effects of the decline in 
demand following the front-loaded increase are expected to wane further. 
Corporate sector: moderate increase in business fixed investment 
Turning to  the  corporate  sector,  industrial  production  has  recently  shown  some  weakness, 
particularly  in  durable  goods,  such  as  automobiles,  and  construction  goods,  both  of  which 
have  been  significantly  affected  by  the  decline  following  the  front-loading  of  purchases. 
Exports  have  been  lacking  momentum  due  mainly  to  a  delay  in  the  recovery  of  overseas 
economies, as I will explain later in more detail. Even in this situation, corporate profits and 
business sentiment have been favorable, and firms have maintained their proactive stance 
on business fixed investment. In fact, the corporate profits of listed companies for the April-
June  quarter  appear  to  have  surpassed  projections.  Surveys  point  to  favorable  business 
sentiment,  and  firms  are  planning  to  increase  their  business  fixed  investment  –  mainly 
investment in Japan – from the previous year. 
While it is claimed that growth in business fixed investment can no longer be expected due to 
Japanese firms’ accelerated relocation of production overseas, I hold the view that we are 
now in an environment supporting an increase in such investment (Chart 3). The reasons are 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  as  follows.  First,  as  a  result  of  restrained  investment  for  some  years,  capital  stock  has 
become  outdated  and  this  has  hampered  smooth  production  in  some  cases,  prompting 
increasing  demand  for  renewal  investment.  Second,  wages  have  risen  due  to  the  labor 
shortage while interest rates for borrowing to finance business fixed investment have been at 
low levels. Therefore, it might have become more advantageous for some firms to invest in 
labor-saving machinery and equipment than to hire new employees. Third, nearly two years 
have  passed  since  the  correction  of  the  excessive  yen  appreciation,  and  it  appears  that 
Japanese  firms  have  started  again  to  invest  in  improving  the  domestic  bases  of  their 
businesses, particularly for research and development. 
Against this backdrop, as corporate profits are expected to continue improving on the whole, 
the virtuous cycle from income to spending is likely to operate steadily, and business fixed 
investment is expected to continue its moderate increasing trend. 
Exports and overseas economies 
As  I  just  mentioned,  domestic  demand  is  expected  to  remain  firm.  On  the  other  hand, 
external demand has continued to lack momentum (Chart 4). This is due not only to cyclical 
factors including sluggishness in global economies such as emerging economies, but also to 
structural  factors  such  as  the  accelerated  relocation  of  production  overseas  by  Japanese 
manufacturing firms. Nevertheless, as the cyclical factors are expected to become favorable 
–  particularly  with  the  accelerating  growth  of  overseas  economies  (mainly  advanced 
economies)  –  exports  are  expected  to  head  for  a  moderate  increase,  especially  those  of 
high-value-added products. In fact, there are signs of a pick-up in exports, with an uptrend in 
external demand for machinery orders – a leading indicator of exports of capital goods and 
parts  –  and  an  improving  trend  in  the  forecast  diffusion  index  of  overseas  supply  and 
demand  conditions for  products  as  shown  in  the  Tankan  (Short-Term  Economic  Survey  of 
Enterprises in Japan). 
Of course, such an outlook for exports is based on the assumption that overseas economies 
will continue to recover. While there are concerns including geopolitical risks in some parts of 
the world, the global economy is likely to continue recovering, led by advanced economies, 
since economic recovery in the United States has become increasingly evident. In the World 
Economic  Outlook  Update  published  in  July  by  the  International  Monetary  Fund,  annual 
global economic growth – which slowed to 3.2 percent in 2013 – is projected to accelerate 
gradually  to  3.4  percent  in  2014  and  4.0  percent  in  2015  (Chart  5).  Looking  at  individual 
countries  or  regions,  in  the  U.S.  economy,  firmness  in  the  household  sector  has  been 
spreading  to  the  corporate  sector  and  a  pick-up  in  business  fixed  investment  recently 
became evident. These developments are likely to lead to an increase in demand for some 
capital goods and parts – in  which Japan enjoys a competitive advantage – and therefore 
deserve  attention  when  we  consider  the  outlook  for  Japan’s  exports.  In  the  euro  area 
economy, a disinflationary trend – as seen in the decline in the year-on-year growth rate in 
consumer  prices  to  0.3  percent  –  is  a  matter  of  concern.  However,  international  markets’ 
views  on  the  European  debt  problem  remain  stable  and  the  European  Central  Bank 
implemented a series of additional monetary easing measures in June and September. This 
background supports the view that the euro area economy will basically continue to recover, 
albeit moderately. In China, the economy is expected to maintain stable growth at around the 
current  pace,  since  the  government  plans  to  give  due  attention  to  the  economic  recovery, 
such as by providing economic stimulus measures both on the monetary and fiscal fronts, 
although  an  adjustment  in  the  real  estate  market  has  persisted.  While  other  emerging 
economies and commodity-exporting countries have continued to lack growth momentum as 
a  whole,  positive  effects  of  the  recovery  in  advanced  economies  are  expected  to  spread 
gradually. In the meantime, some geopolitical risks, including those in Ukraine and Iraq, still 
warrant attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Therefore,  the  Bank’s  baseline  scenario  is  that  overseas  economies  –  mainly  advanced 
economies – are likely to continue to recover, and Japan’s exports are expected to head for 
a moderate increase. 
Price developments in Japan 
II.  
Let me turn now to price developments in Japan. 
As I mentioned at the outset, the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (excluding fresh 
food)  –  which  was  minus  0.4  percent  in  April  last  year  when  QQE  was  introduced  – 
subsequently turned positive and increased further to around 1¼ percent recently (Chart 6). 
These  developments  reflect  an  improvement  in  the  output  gap  and  a  rise  in  inflation 
expectations.  The  output  gap  has  been  improving  at  around  0  percent  –  the  long-term 
average – with Japan’s economy continuing to grow at a pace above its potential as a trend, 
although the effects of the front-loaded increase and subsequent decline in demand prior to 
and after the consumption tax hike have been observed. Inflation expectations appear to be 
rising on the whole, albeit with monthly fluctuations. With the year-on-year rate of increase in 
the CPI (excluding fresh food) continuing to exceed 1 percent, a shift is observed in firms’ 
price-setting strategy, from a low-price strategy to one of raising sales prices while increasing 
value-added. As for wage setting, as seen in annual wage negotiations this spring, the rise in 
inflation is increasingly being taken into account in wage negotiations between management 
and labor. 
This  improvement  in  the  output  gap  and  the  rise  in  inflation  expectations  are  expected  to 
continue. Therefore, the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI, which is likely to be around 
1¼  percent  for  some  time,  is  expected  to  subsequently  follow  an  uptrend  again  from  the 
second half of this fiscal year and reach about 2 percent – the price stability target – around 
the middle of the current projection period from fiscal 2014 through 2016. 
III.  
Monetary policy management toward achieving the price stability target of 
2 percent 
Finally, let me discuss the Bank’s monetary policy management. 
The Bank has been pursuing QQE, aiming to achieve a state in which the 2 percent inflation 
rate is maintained in a stable manner. In this state, the inflation rate will be around 2 percent 
when the economy is at a normal level. That is, firms will be able to base decisions on an 
assumption  of  about  2  percent  inflation  when  they  consider  how  to  set  prices  and  when 
management and labor negotiate wages. If such an economy is achieved, economic entities 
will act based on an expectation that inflation will return to about 2 percent sooner or later – 
even if the economy faces temporary downward pressure on prices and wages due to, for 
example, a downturn in economic activity. Therefore, the risk of falling into deflation, where 
prices and wages continue to decline, will be lowered. 
As  I  mentioned,  Japan’s  economy  has  been  on  a  path  suggesting  that  the  price  stability 
target of 2 percent will be achieved as expected. We are only halfway there, however, and 
the Bank will continue with QQE, aiming to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent, as 
long as it is necessary for maintaining that target in a stable manner. If the outlook changes 
due  to  the  manifestation  of  risk  factors  and  it  is  judged  necessary  for  achieving  the  price 
stability target, the Bank will make adjustments without hesitation. I would like to conclude 
my speech today by assuring you that, through the Bank’s monetary policy management, the 
prolonged deflation will be overcome and an economy based on a moderate inflation rate of 
2 percent will be achieved. 
Thank you. 
 
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    5 
     6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    7 
