  Karnit Flug: Money and technology – means of payment in Israel 
Main points of a speech by Dr Karnit Flug, Governor of the Bank of Israel, at the Money and 
Technology  Conference  (taking  place  as  part  of  Israel’s  National  Science  Day),  Tel-Aviv 
University, Tel-Aviv, 26 March 2014. 
 In  this  conference,  which  deals  with  innovation  and  technology,  I  will  not  speak  about 
monetary policy, fiscal policy or about the macro situation, nor will shall I speak about any 
challenges  to  the  macro  economic  policy,  but  rather  about  part  of  the  economy  which  is 
rarely  discussed  –  its  “plumbing”.  We  always  take  it  for  granted,  and  only  speak  about  it 
when something goes wrong – when it either leaks or is clogged. 
This piping, which we call “payment and settlement systems”, comprises a number of levels, 
which  include  the  payment  systems,  the  means  of  payment  –  which  the  public  uses  on  a 
daily  basis  –  and  the  communications  infrastructure  between  the  system’s  various 
components.  When  making  a  payment  in  one  way  or  another,  we  all  assume  that  the 
infrastructure (or piping) ensures that transactions are performed efficiently and swiftly. The 
payment and settlement system is a key element of the financial infrastructure, making sure 
that each and every payment or credit we make or receive arrives at its destination quickly, 
efficiently and securely. The Bank of Israel, through its Accounting, Payment and Settlement 
Systems Department, serves as its oversight entity and is responsible for its regulation, for 
operating some parts of it (Zahav [the Real Time Gross Settlement system] and Paper-based 
(checks) Clearing House), as well as for its security and efficiency. I will focus today on those 
parts  of  the  system,  their  development  in  the  last  few  years,  as  well  as  on  expected 
developments. 
The means of payment include both traditional ones – paper based – such as cash, checks 
and vouchers, and the more advanced – electronic – ones, which include electronic debits 
and credits, payment cards, web-based payments and mobile payments. 
Each group has its advantages and disadvantages: paper-based means are characterized by 
ease of use, by availability to all parts of the population, by their immediacy and the finality of 
a  transaction,  as  well  as  by  being  anonymous.  Under  certain  conditions,  anonymity  may 
become a disadvantage, if used to commit offenses (such as money laundering, tax evasion, 
etc.)  Other  disadvantages  of  paper-based  payments  include  the  fact  that  transactions  go 
undocumented,  and  that  they  are  exposed  to  the  risk  of  loss,  theft  and forgery.  Electronic 
payment means are characterized by ease of use and availability to those who have access 
to them; they are efficient, quick and documented, thus contributing to a decrease in illegal 
activity.  They  are  also  relatively  safe  from  loss  or  theft,  and  bridge  physical  distance. 
However, their dependency on technology exposes them to both technological and security 
failures – issues whose risk mitigation requires significant investments. 
In the past few years, the Bank of Israel has pushed a number of reforms and a number of 
systems  have  been  built,  which  have  improved  the  infrastructure  for  the  use  of  advanced 
means of payment: 
• 
Development of an RTGS, an immediate and final settlement system, which allows 
for real time transfers and payments 
Including the shekel in CLS Bank for settlement purposes, thus turning the shekel 
into a convertible currency which is traded freely worldwide 
The enactment of the Payment Systems Law, 5768-2008, whose aim is to ensure 
the efficiency of Israel’s payment systems and minimize the risks embedded in them 
Changes  and  improvements  were  implemented  in  the  existing  payment 
systems – checks, MASAV (ACH) and the security exchange’s clearing houses. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The Committee for the Reduction of Paper-based Payments (the Locker Committee), which 
is working to reduce the use of cash and special check endorsements, will further push the 
development and expansion of the use of advanced means of payments. 
In the past decade, the use of advanced payment means has increased, both in terms of the 
percentage  of  transactions,  and  even  more  so  –  in  terms  of  transaction  amounts.  In  this 
context, in 2013, 56 percent of the transactions, in NIS terms, were made through the Zahav 
system (albeit a minor percentage of the number of transactions), with each money transfers 
greater than NIS 1 million being required to be made through the system. 
Technological advancement and innovation have not bypassed the payment means field, or 
even  traditional  means  of  payment:  The  new  banknote  series  –  the  first  denomination  of 
which, NIS 50, is expected to enter the market by the end of the year – includes innovative 
security  means,  such  as  marks  which  become  visible  under  ultraviolet  light  and  micro 
lettering. Thus, for example, the leaf illustration on the bill includes tiny lettering – featuring 
Tchernichovsky’s poem “Oh, My Land, My Homeland” in full – which can only be discerned 
using a magnifying glass. 
As time goes by, as technology advances, electronic means of payment become more and 
more  sophisticated:  from  manually  swiped  credit  cards  through  magnetized  cards,  web-
based payments, mobile payments, proximity cards, and electronic wallets, which include a 
variety of payment means and smart cards. Smart cards will enable customers to carry out 
any type of transaction currently conducted using debit cards – immediate debits, deferred 
debits,  credit  transactions  and  cash  withdrawals,  and  provide  them  with  new  advantages. 
The use of such cards, which is expected to begin in Israel in the next few years, will require 
entering a code into a terminal located at the business, thus reducing the use of stolen or 
loss cards. 
Israeli  innovation  and  creativity  have  not  bypassed  the  field  of  payment  means,  which  is 
evident from the large number of mobile payment and mobile wallet applications – some of 
which are becoming more popular both in Israel and abroad. Some of the electronic payment 
means  yet  to  be  widely  used  in  Israel  are  already  being  developed  or  used  in  various 
countries,  such  as  smart  cards,  proximity  cards,  payments  using  biometric  identification, 
electronic wallets and digital checks. 
We are at the height of a technological revolution in means of payment, which is expected to 
make them more user friendly, more convenient, more widely available and safer to use. It is, 
of  course,  highly  significant  that  this  process  be  appropriately  regulated,  ensuring  that  its 
advantages are fully realized and possible risks are minimized. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
