  Narayana Kocherlakota: Opening remarks 
Speech  by  Mr  Narayana  Kocherlakota,  President  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
Minneapolis, at Carroll College, Helena, Montana, 4 September 2014. 
 Thanks for the introduction, Tom. It’s a pleasure to be back in Helena – the site of the only branch office of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. 
I’ll kick things off with some basics about the Federal Reserve System and some thoughts 
about Fed history. But the plan is for us to spend the bulk of our evening on your questions. 
One  key  point  before  I  proceed:  The  views  I  express  today  are  my  own  and  are  not 
necessarily those of others in the Federal Reserve System, including my colleagues on the 
FOMC. 
In  terms  of basics  about  the  Fed:  I  like  to  tell people  that the  Fed  is a  uniquely American 
institution. What do I mean by that? Well, relative to its counterparts around the world, the 
U.S. central bank is highly decentralized. The Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis is one of 
12  regional  Reserve  Banks  that,  along  with  the  Board  of  Governors  in  Washington,  D.C., 
make  up  the  Federal  Reserve  System.  Our  bank  represents  the  ninth  of  the  12  Federal 
Reserve  districts  and  includes  Montana,  the  Dakotas,  Minnesota,  northwestern  Wisconsin 
and the Upper Peninsula of Michigan. 
Eight  times  per  year,  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  –  the  FOMC  –  meets  to  set 
monetary policy over the next six to seven weeks. All 12 presidents of the various regional 
Federal Reserve banks – including me – and the governors of the Federal Reserve Board 
contribute  to  these  deliberations.  However,  the  Committee  itself  consists  only  of  the 
governors, the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and a rotating group of 
four other presidents. I’m one of those four presidents this year. In this way, the structure of 
the FOMC mirrors the federalist structure of our government, because representatives from 
different  regions  of  the  country  –  the  various  presidents  –  have  input  into  FOMC 
deliberations. 
This  basic  federalist  structure  has  a  long  history.  In  fact,  this  year  is  the  centennial  of  the 
opening  of  the  12  Reserve  Banks  and  the  start  of  the  work  undertaken  by  the  Federal 
Reserve System. It’s been a fascinating hundred years, with many twists and turns along the 
way. I’m sure that many of you have questions about that journey. The answers to all of your 
questions  –  and  probably  more  –  are  on  a  website  that  the  Fed  has  created  at 
federalreservehistory.org. I encourage you to visit this site to learn more about the people, 
places and events that have shaped Federal Reserve history. I’d especially encourage you to 
look  up  Norman  Holter.  Mr.  Holter  was  one  of  the  original  directors  of  the  Minneapolis 
Reserve  Bank,  and  he  played  the  key  role  in  a  branch  office  being  established  here  in 
Helena in 1921. 
I’ve always enjoyed reading and studying history. And I strongly believe that history can help 
inform  policymakers’  decisions  in  the  current  day.  But,  at  the  same  time,  I  do  think  that 
policymakers need to be careful in how they use history. The monetary history of the 1970s 
is a great example of this need for care. I’m sure that some of you in this room remember 
that  inflation  –  the  rate  of  growth  of  prices  –  rose  to  disturbingly  high  levels  in  the  1970s. 
Faced with this challenge, President Ford launched a national campaign to “Whip Inflation 
Now” – WIN for short. The famous Broadway composer Meredith Willson wrote a song for 
the  WIN  campaign  in  which  he  summarized  the  economic  situation  in  these  catchy  lyrics: 
“Who needs inflation? Not this nation! Who’s going to pass it by? You are and so am I!” 
Mr. Willson’s pithy characterization was spot on in 1974. But 40 years later, I would suggest 
that it’s exactly backward. Right now, this nation needs more inflation. The Federal Reserve 
aims  to  keep  the  personal  consumption  expenditure  (PCE)  inflation  rate  at  2  percent.  But 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  since the start of the recession almost seven years ago, the PCE inflation rate has averaged 
1.5 percent. Over the past year, it has averaged 1.6 percent. And I expect it to remain below 
2 percent until 2018. 
The  persistently  below-target  inflation  rate  is  a  signal  that  the  U.S.  economy  is  not  taking 
advantage  of  all  of  its  available  resources.  If  demand  were  sufficiently  high  to  generate 
2 percent, then demand would be sufficiently high to allow the economy to make use of the 
underutilized resources. And the most important of those resources is the American people. 
There  are  many  people  in  this  country  who  want  to  work  more  hours,  and  our  society  is 
deprived of their production. 
So, it’s fun and educational to read about the 1970s on the Fed history gateway. I encourage 
you to do so. But it’s critical for monetary policymakers like myself to realize that the times, 
and challenges, that we face are different from the ones that Mr. Willson wrote about back in 
1974. 
Thanks again for coming tonight. And now let’s turn to your questions.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
