  Thomas C Baxter, Jr: Reflections on the new compliance landscape 
Remarks by Mr Thomas C Baxter, Jr, Executive Vice President and General Counsel of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, at “The New Compliance Landscape: Increasing Roles 
– Increasing Risks” Conference, New York City, 23 July 2014. 
 The views expressed are the views of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York, or any component of the Federal Reserve System. 
Let me begin by thanking the Risk Management Association, PWC, Debevoise & Plimpton, 
and my friend Paul Lee for inviting me to participate in this conference. Of course, I need to 
give what sometimes sounds like a Miranda warning – my remarks are personal, and do not 
represent an official position of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, or any part of the 
Federal Reserve System. There is nothing I will say that can be used against them. 
I am going to address three specific compliance problems: economic sanctions, tax evasion, 
and foreign corrupt practices. I will use these three compliance problems to illustrate a larger 
point  about  organizational  culture.  If  organizational  values  do  not  support  the  rules  that 
organizations  use  to  guide  the  behavior  of  employees,  and  worse,  if  organizational  values 
actually  conflict  with  those  rules,  the  organization  is  headed  for  troubled  territory.  In  my 
remaining time, I will elaborate on this fundamental point. 
Let me start with economic sanctions. We have the recent case against BNPP for its conduct 
in evading U.S. sanctions related to Iran, Sudan and Cuba. The case is noteworthy because 
the disposition involved  pleas to Federal and state criminal violations, and a record fine of 
nearly  $9  billion.  The  BNPP  case  is  not  the  only  case  against  a  financial  institution  for 
economic sanctions violations. There have been a series of others. Every one of this series 
of cases concerns a foreign bank. Observers ask, “why are all of these economic sanctions 
cases against foreign banks?” 
Before  offering  my  answer,  let  me  start  with  some  “not’s”.  In  my  view,  it  is  not  that  U.S. 
financial institutions are so much more compliant than foreign institutions. I will avoid an ugly 
name-and-shame ritual, where I would identify the U.S. financial institutions that violated U.S. 
law. It is not that U.S. prosecutors are xenophobic individuals who are bound and determined 
to  target  only  foreign  institutions.  I  know  from  personal  knowledge  that  prosecutors  have 
followed the evidence and it has led them to the doors of foreign banks only. 
What  explains 
institutions,  unlike 
their  American 
counterparts,  did  not  see  the  values  that  motivate  and  support  U.S.  economic  sanctions 
rules. At most U.S. financial institutions, and I may be myopic in seeing too much nobility in 
them,  there  is  a  widely  accepted  understanding  that  our  U.S.  sanctions  are  tailored  to 
accomplish  a  laudable  public  purpose.  The  Sudanese  sanctions  are  designed  to  coerce  a 
regime to cease certain horrific practices, like genocide. The Iranian sanctions are designed 
to stifle the Iranian regime’s nuclear ambitions. The Cuban sanctions are intended to hinder 
the  advancement  of  communism  in  the  Americas  and  to  change  an  oppressive  regime 
through  a  trade  embargo.  For  U.S.  financial  institutions,  which  operate  on  the  basis  of  a 
public  charter  issued  in  the  United  States,  the  public  purposes  supporting  economic 
sanctions  and  the  detailed  sanctions  regulations  are  in  harmony.  With  respect  to  rule 
compliance, the staff will follow those rules not simply because they are required to but also 
because they want to. 
While I am not here to speak for foreign institutions that have committed sanctions evasion, 
including BNPP, my sense from the evidence is that these institutions looked at economic 
sanctions very differently. They looked at economic sanctions as technical “American” rules 
that were not seen as consistent with the organization’s and the home country’s larger value 
system. In  Europe,  they found  no  similar  sanctions,  and  there  it  was  perfectly  legal  at  the 
this  phenomenon?  Some 
foreign 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  time  to  do  business  with  these  sanctioned  jurisdictions.  Some  European  bankers  almost 
naturally adopted the view that there was no value system underlying the technical American 
legal  rule.  The  foreign  institutions  saw  the  situation  as  providing  financial  services  to  just 
another country; not to a country committing genocide; not to a country building a nuclear 
weapon; and not to a country fostering a dehumanizing ideology. 
This  failure  to  correlate  the  rule  with  the  value  is  the  root  of  real  mischief.  It  erodes  what 
some  commentators  call  the  “culture  of  compliance”,  and  it  tends  to  foster  an  employee 
population  that  will  be  inclined  to  look  for  loopholes,  to  place  toes  on  the  edge  of  the 
permissible,  or  even  to  turn  a  blind  eye  to  a  black  letter  compliance  rule.  And,  the 
organization’s compliance staff will also suffer from a stifled motivation and the absence of 
any  meaningful  authority  –  it  relegates  that  staff  to  a  bunch  of  box  checkers,  rather  than 
people working toward a safer and better world. Is it a surprise then that foreign institutions 
have problems with sanctions compliance and U.S. institutions do not? I do not excuse this in 
any way, but I do understand it. 
Let us now turn to tax evasion. On May 19, Credit Suisse pled guilty to conspiring to help 
certain  Americans  evade  their  tax  obligations  to  the  Federal  government.  Credit  Suisse 
agreed to pay a fine of $1.8 billion. Like the criminal disposition concerning BNPP, this was 
headline  news.  Credit  Suisse  had  well  developed  compliance  rules  addressing  what 
relationship managers could and could not do when travelling into, and through, the United 
States.  But  those  compliance  rules,  while  cogent,  were  largely  ignored  by  certain  Credit 
Suisse  personnel.  Why  is  that?  Here,  again,  I  believe  that  the  answer  lies  in  the 
organizational value system. 
Credit Suisse was not alone in aiding customers to evade taxes. UBS had similar problems 
although  it  escaped  without  a  plea  to  a  Federal  felony.  Would  it  come  as  a  surprise  to 
anyone  in  this  room  that  some  of  the  Swiss  cantonal  banks  may  also  have  “issues”  with 
respect to U.S. tax compliance? Switzerland, the home country to the two big Swiss banks 
and  the  jurisdiction  that  charters  them,  does  not  have  a  law  that  criminalizes  tax  evasion, 
meaning the willful failure to report income and to pay the tax due on that income. This may 
be one of the reasons why Switzerland has earned a reputation as a tax haven, although that 
reputation  may  be  changing  as  Switzerland  faces  external  pressure  from  the  international 
community. 
So, is it surprising that personnel from Switzerland, working for an organization that for many 
years had a business strategy of taking funds from high net worth customers without many 
questions about taxation at the source, did not turn square corners when visiting New York? 
Does  it  shock  you  that  they  would  meet  with  U.S.  customers  and  discuss  their  accounts, 
even though that was prohibited by the rules imposed by compliance? Once again, when the 
rules are in conflict with an organizational  value system, watch out! People  will find a way 
around them, either by closing their eyes or by whispering in the darkness. 
Finally,  let  me  turn  to  foreign  corrupt  practices.  I  have  selected  this  topic  because  official 
corruption  is  a  problem that some  U.S. financial  institutions  have found challenging  during 
the last year. And, in my view, there are certain features of U.S. law that might give rise to 
conflict between organizational values and FCPA compliance. 
The Foreign Corrupt Practices Act was enacted in 1977, and it represents a Congressional 
response  to  revelations  of  widespread  bribery  of  foreign  officials  by  U.S.  companies.  One 
purpose of this legislation is stopping official corruption. Then, and continuing to the present 
time, the United States led the world in enacting laws designed to stop official corruption, and 
perhaps more importantly, in enforcing these laws. Let me say that, as an American lawyer 
who spends significant time outside the United States, this is a part of our legal infrastructure 
that I take pride in. 
With  all  of  that  said,  there  is  one  part  of  the  FCPA  that  makes  me  uncomfortable.  The 
FCPA’s bribery prohibition, and the compliance officers in the audience will know this well, 
contains a narrow exception for “facilitating or expediting payments” made in furtherance of 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  routine governmental action. Some of the cynical among you might know this provision as 
permitting  so-called  “grease”  payments  for  non-discretionary  acts,  like  processing  visas  or 
providing phone service. But, let us face it, this statutory exception permits a certain limited 
form  of  governmental  corruption.  While  I  understand  that  the  exception  is  grounded  in  a 
practical  reality,  I  feel  that  zero  tolerance  for  official  corruption  would  have  been  a  better 
choice. To any public servant with an extended hand, I would say in a loud and clear voice, 
“pull  it  back  and  do  your  job.”  And,  let  me  note  the  OECD  Working  Group  on  Bribery 
recommends  that  all  countries  encourage  companies  to  prohibit  or  discourage  facilitating 
payments. 
The real mischief is what this exception might do to an organizational value system. When an 
organizational  policy  allows  some  types  of  official  corruption  (and  we  have  come  up  with 
candy  coated  names  for  this,  like  facilitation  or  expediting  payments),  this  diminishes  the 
efficacy of compliance rules that are directed toward stopping official corruption. Again, the 
best compliance cultures are formed when the rules and the organizational value system are 
in  perfect  harmony.  So,  for  U.S.  chartered  institutions,  perhaps  this  is  a  place  where  your 
organizational  value  system  should  go  beyond  black-letter  U.S.  law.  If  you  tolerate  a  little 
corruption, watch out! 
So,  I  have  used  three  compliance  topics  –  economic  sanctions,  tax  evasion,  and  foreign 
corrupt  practices  –  to  make  the  case  for  harmonizing  organizational  value  systems  and 
compliance  rules.  At  an  absolute  minimum,  do whatever  is  practicable  to  assure  that  your 
value systems and compliance rules do not conflict or send irreconcilable messages. In the 
“New Compliance Landscape”, a failure to do this is a recipe for disaster. 
I also would like to make a concluding remark. I do not subscribe to the view that compliance 
officers or legal counsel should take on the mantle of the missionary. I am of the “old school” 
–  the  duties  of  the  management  and  the  board  are  owed  to  the  company  and  to  the 
shareholders. I do believe that the best among chief legal officers will see the job as more 
than just dispensing legal advice, and, as being the “guardian of the corporation’s integrity”.1 
But being the guardian of the corporation’s integrity cannot mean that integrity is defined by 
the chief legal officer’s personal value system and not the organization’s value system. We 
are not priests or rabbis. 
In a world where the consequence of rule breaking can lead to fines in the multiple of billions 
of  dollars,  lawyers  and  compliance  officers  can  accurately  claim  that,  in  guarding  the 
corporation’s  integrity,  they  are  enhancing  shareholder  value.  When  the  BNPP  case  was 
announced, FBI Director James Comey said: “Until shareholders demand from their boards 
that those boards choose leaders who understand what it means to create a healthy culture 
of compliance, the money will keep walking out the door . . . .”2 
My remarks today have focused on the organizational value system as distinct from its rule 
set. Organizations should adopt and nurture organizational value systems because they are 
healthy  for  the  company  and  its  shareholders.  The  personnel  in  the  organization  will  feel 
better  about  the  work that  they  do,  and  they  will  do  better  work  and  more  of  it.  It  is  good 
business to refuse to finance a jurisdiction that is sponsoring genocide. It is good business to 
say “no” to the customer who  wants help in evading taxes. And it is good business not to 
corrupt government officials. 
Companies  with  a  reputation  for  a  sound  culture  of  compliance  tend  to  do  well  at 
harmonizing their organizational value system and their compliance rules. If you look at those 
companies, you see success. Thanks for listening. 
                                                
1   E.  Norman  Veasey  and  Christine  DiGuglielmo,  Indispensable  Counsel:  The  Chief  Legal  Officer  in  the  New 
Reality (Oxford Univ. Press 2012). 
2   http://www.politico.com/story/2014/06/bnp-paribas-to-plead-guilty-sudan-sanctions-108438.html.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
