  Koji Ishida: Economic activity and prices in Japan and monetary policy 
Summary of a speech by Mr Koji Ishida, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at 
a  meeting  with  business  leaders,  in  Yamaguchi  Prefecture  (held  in  Shimonoseki),  29  July 
2014. 
I. 
Developments in economic activity and prices 
 Overseas economies 
A. 
I would like to start my remarks with a look at developments in economic activity and prices. 
The  Bank  of  Japan’s  current  assessment  is  that  overseas  economies  –  mainly  advanced 
economies – have been recovering, albeit with a lackluster performance still seen in part. The 
average of real GDP growth rates of major countries and regions weighted by value of exports 
from  Japan  decelerated  substantially  to  a  range  of  1.0–2.0  percent  in  the  January–March 
quarter of 2014, although it had continued to register growth of above 4.0 percent until the 
latter half of 2013. 
The  growth  rate  of  the  U.S.  economy  for  the  April–June  quarter  of  2014  is  scheduled  for 
release  tomorrow  evening  –  on  July  30  –  and  rates  for  other  economies  will  be  released 
subsequently.  Overseas  economic  growth  seems  to  be  accelerating  moderately  on  the 
whole. This is because many economic indicators since April, particularly those of the United 
States and other advanced economies, have improved, and such positive effects appear to 
be spreading to some of the emerging economies through export channels. I will now look at 
individual countries and regions. 
The U.S. economy registered negative growth in the January–March quarter of 2014 for the 
first  time  in  three  years,  due  partly  to  the  unusually  severe  winter  weather.  Since  then, 
however,  a  rebound  in  a  number  of  economic  indicators  has  been  observed,  such  as  a 
steady improvement in the employment situation. As for the outlook, the economy is likely to 
gradually  accelerate  its  pace  of  recovery,  led  mainly  by  private  demand,  albeit  with 
uncertainties such as the size of slack that remains in the labor market. 
The  euro  area  economy  is  recovering  moderately,  registering  positive  growth  for  four 
consecutive  quarters.  Financial  markets  have  been  stable  as  turmoil  arising  from  the 
European debt problem has subsided, and private consumption and firms’ production activity 
have  been  recovering  moderately.  For  the  time  being,  I  will  pay  attention  to  the  effects  of 
further  monetary  easing  by  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  in  June,  including  the 
introduction  of  a  negative  interest  rate.  The  situation  in  Ukraine  and  Russia  also  warrants 
attention. 
The  Chinese  economy  has  continued  to  see  stable  growth,  as  shown  by  the  fact  that  the 
year-on-year growth rate for the April–June quarter, which was released in July, registered 
7.5 percent. The economy has faced downward pressure, such as a slowdown  in the real 
estate  market,  as  authorities  have  been  progressing  with  structural  reforms.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  slowdown  in  growth  momentum  observed  since  the  beginning  of  the  year  has 
come to a halt due partly to the economic stimulus measures that the authorities have been 
implementing since the spring. As for the outlook, the Chinese economy is likely to continue 
to see stable growth, albeit at a slightly slower pace. 
Emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies  –  mainly  the  ASEAN  economies  that  are 
Japan’s major export destinations – have continued to lack growth momentum. However, the 
positive  effects  of  recovery  in  advanced  economies  have  spread  to  some  emerging 
economies. Moreover, as the financial markets have been calm on the whole, a pick-up in 
domestic  demand  has  been  observed  in  some  Asian  countries.  If  such  developments 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  continue,  emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies  should  gradually  show  an 
improving trend, although a high degree of uncertainty remains. 
In the World Economic Outlook released by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) in July, 
the  growth  rate  of  the  overall  global  economy  for  2014  was  revised  slightly  downward  – 
affected by the deceleration in the January–March quarter – but the projection of the growth 
rate  accelerating  toward  2015  remained  unchanged.  The  Bank  likewise  expects  that  the 
global  economy  will  moderately  increase  its  growth  rate.  This  is  mainly  because,  as  the 
Chinese  economy  is  continuing  to  see  stable  growth  –  albeit  at  a  slightly  slower  pace  – 
positive effects of the firm recovery in advanced economies will gradually spread to emerging 
economies. 
Japan’s economic activity and prices 
Current situation 
Economic activity 
B. 
1. 
a. 
Now I will discuss Japan’s economic activity and prices. 
The  Bank’s  current  assessment  is  that  Japan’s  economy  has  continued  to  recover 
moderately as a trend, although the subsequent decline in demand following the front-loaded 
increase prior to the consumption tax hike has been observed. Looking at developments in 
private consumption since April 2014, despite the decline I just mentioned, many firms have 
indicated that the degree of the decline has been broadly in line with expectations. In terms 
of sentiment, the consumer confidence index, which had been relatively weak for some time, 
has improved for two consecutive months. Yet a wide range of indicators should continue to 
be  monitored  closely,  as  the  adjustments  in  some  aspects  of  housing  starts  and  of 
automobile sales may be somewhat prolonged, and a decline in real wages could gradually 
affect consumption as a whole. 
As for business fixed investment, some indicators of machinery investment showed a decline 
following the substantial increase in the January–March quarter of 2014, but business fixed 
investment  plans  are  strong  in  the  June  Tankan  (Short-Term  Economic  Survey  of 
Enterprises  in  Japan)  –  released  at  the  beginning  of  July  –  suggesting  that  firms  are 
maintaining a positive attitude. Business fixed investment is therefore likely to continue on a 
moderate increasing trend. 
Exports  have  been  leveling  off  more  or  less,  with  a  continued  lack  of  momentum.  This  is 
largely  attributed  to  the  negative  growth  rate  of  the  U.S.  economy  in  the  January–March 
quarter  and  the  sluggishness  in  emerging  economies  –  including  ASEAN  economies  with 
strong ties to Japan’s economy. However, it is likely that structural factors have also been at 
work, such as the shift of Japanese firms’ production sites to overseas accompanying their 
increased local procurement. 
The  GDP  growth  rate  for  the  April–June  quarter,  which  is  scheduled  to  be  released  in 
August, is likely to register a considerable negative figure due to the effects of the decline in 
demand  following  the  front-loaded  increase  prior  to  the  tax  hike.  However,  the  Bank 
considers  that  a  virtuous  cycle  of  the  economy  has  been  operating  firmly,  together  with  a 
clear improvement in the employment and income situation, and therefore Japan’s economy 
has continued to recover moderately as a trend. 
b. 
With regard to prices, the year-on-year rate of increase in the consumer price index (CPI) for 
all items less fresh food, or the so-called core CPI, was 1.3 percent for June, excluding the 
direct effects of the consumption tax hike. The rate of increase has recently been hovering at 
around 1¼ percent, with the waning of upward pressure from energy-related prices generally 
offsetting the effects of price rises in other items. 
Prices 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Points that require attention 
Outlook for economic activity and prices 
2. 
In terms of the outlook for Japan’s economy, exports are expected to increase moderately 
while domestic demand is likely to maintain firmness. In this situation, a virtuous cycle among 
production,  income,  and  spending  is  likely  to  be  maintained.  Therefore,  the  economy  is 
expected to continue its moderate recovery trend, and the effects of the subsequent decline 
in demand following the front-loaded increase prior to the consumption tax hike are expected 
to  wane  gradually.  The  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the  CPI  is  likely  to  be  around 
1¼ percent for some time, and follow a rising trend again from the second half of fiscal 2014. 
The Bank compiles and releases the Policy Board members’ forecasts for economic activity 
and prices on a quarterly basis. Looking at the medians of the members’ forecasts released 
in July, the real GDP growth rate is projected to be 1.0 percent for fiscal 2014, 1.5 percent for 
fiscal  2015,  and  1.3  percent  for  fiscal  2016.  Japan’s  economy  is  expected  to  continue 
growing at a pace above its potential rate, which is assumed to be around 0.5 percent. The 
year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the  CPI  (all  items  less  fresh  food),  excluding  the  direct 
effects of the consumption tax hike, is projected to be 1.3 percent for fiscal 2014, 1.9 percent 
for  fiscal  2015,  and  2.1  percent  for  fiscal  2016.  The  Bank  judges  that  it  is  likely  to  reach 
around  2  percent  –  the  price  stability  target  –  around  the  middle  of  the  projection  period, 
which runs through fiscal 2016. 
3. 
In  terms  of  Japan’s  economic  activity  and  prices  for  the  time  being  and  near  future,  I  am 
paying close attention to the following points. 
The first is developments in private consumption. For the time being, close watch should be 
kept on whether private consumption, which has been driving Japan’s recovery so far, will 
overcome the effects of the decline in demand following the front-loaded increase prior to the 
consumption tax hike and return to a recovery path as expected from the July–September 
quarter of 2014. 
Let us look at movements in the CPI (all items less imputed rent)1 – a price index that reflects 
actual household consumption expenditures and is used to deflate such figures as wages. 
The year-on-year rate of increase for June 2014 was 4.4 percent, more than 1 percentage 
point above the core index, which is behind the recent substantial decline in real wages. As 
for recent developments, the rate of increase – after reaching 1.9 percent in November 2013 
–  remained  around  2  percent  through  June  2014,  excluding  the  direct  effects  of  the 
consumption tax hike. 
For  private  consumption  to  remain  resilient  in  such  circumstances,  it  is  vital  to  have  an 
increase  in  expectations  for  future  income  growth.  Factors  such  as  increases  in  summer 
bonuses  are  expected  to  support  private  consumption  for  now,  but  in  the  future 
developments in labor supply and demand conditions are likely to become the key. 
Turning to labor supply and demand-related indicators, the unemployment rate has declined 
to around 3.5 percent, and the active job openings-to-applicants ratio continues to improve 
as  a  trend,  exceeding  1.00.  If  the  tightening  trend  continues  in  labor  supply  and  demand 
conditions, this could help underpin consumption because of growing confidence regarding 
job  security  and  expectations  for  wage  increases.  Moreover,  in  the  medium  to  long  term, 
firms’ efforts to boost productivity in response to labor shortages, such as investment aimed 
                                                
1 
Imputed rent is a concept for evaluating owner-occupied homes – which do not involve actual payments and 
receipts of rent – in terms of general market prices, on the assumption that such homes are rented and thus 
generating production and consumption of services similar to homes and rooms rented in the usual way. In 
international  comparisons,  this  concept  is  very  useful  in  compensating  for  the  difference  in  housing  costs 
derived from varying home ownership rates. However, such rent is not an actual expenditure from households’ 
perspective. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  at  labor  saving,  are  likely  to  lead  to  a  strengthening  of  Japan’s  growth  potential.  Wage 
increases accompanying growth in labor productivity are expected to occur in the future. 
Indicators  of  labor  supply  and  demand  conditions  are  effective  in  demonstrating  firms’ 
confidence  about  the  future,  and  for  this  reason  I  will  pay  careful  attention  to  monthly 
changes, including developments in job openings. 
The second point for attention is the price-setting behavior of firms. Movements to pass the 
past increase in costs onto prices have been spreading steadily, as shown by the fact that in 
the June 2014 Tankan the diffusion index (DI) improved for output prices (the proportion of 
firms responding that output prices “rise” minus the proportion of those responding that they 
“fall”). In particular, the DI for small nonmanufacturing firms moved into net “rise” territory for 
the first time since 1991. The DI for input prices also continued to be in net “rise” territory, 
suggesting  that  a  certain  degree  of  potential  pressure  to  raise  output  prices  remains. 
Whether  such  pressure  will  materialize  as  a  rise  in  sales  prices  depends  on  economic 
developments. Therefore,  I  will  pay  attention  to  whether  the  price-setting  behavior  of firms 
becomes even more active after overcoming the effects of the decline in demand following 
the front-loaded increase prior to the consumption tax hike. 
The  third  point  for  attention  is  developments  in  exports.  The  environment  surrounding 
exports  is  expected  to  gradually  improve,  as  the  global  economy  –  mainly  advanced 
economies – recovers. On the other hand, structural factors, such as the shift of Japanese 
firms’  production  sites  to  overseas,  are  likely  to  continue  exerting  downward  pressure  on 
exports. Moreover, there is uncertainty about the extent to which the past depreciation of the 
yen will boost export volume. In the medium to long term, it is hoped that Japanese firms will 
make  progress  in  developing  and  supplying  new  high-value-added  products,  which  in  turn 
will lead exports. For the time being, however, I am paying attention to whether exports will 
turn  to  a  moderate  increase  mainly  against  the  background  of  the  recovery  in  overseas 
economies. 
II. 
The bank’s monetary policy 
Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing (QQE) and its effects 
A. 
Thus far, I have outlined developments in economic activity and prices. In what follows, I will 
discuss the Bank’s monetary policy. 
With a view to achieving the 2 percent price stability target at the earliest possible time, the 
Bank  introduced  QQE  in  April  2013.  Since  then,  it  has  continued  large-scale  monetary 
easing, increasing the monetary base at an annual pace of about 60–70 trillion yen. To this 
end,  the  Bank  is  purchasing  Japanese  government  bonds  (JGBs)  so  that  their  amount 
outstanding  will  increase  at  an  annual  pace  of  about  50  trillion  yen.  It  is  also  purchasing 
exchange-traded  funds  (ETFs),  Japan  real  estate  investment  trusts  (J-REITs),  corporate 
bonds, and CP. As for its future monetary policy stance, the Bank will continue with QQE, 
aiming to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent, as long as it is necessary to maintain 
the target in a stable manner. It will examine both upside and downside risks to economic 
activity and prices, and make adjustments as appropriate. 
Almost a year and four months have passed since QQE was introduced. During this time, 
Japan’s  economy  has  recovered  moderately  as  a  virtuous  cycle  of  economic  activity  has 
operated steadily. Prices have followed a rising trend, mainly reflecting a rise in import prices 
and an improvement in the aggregate supply and demand balance, or the output gap. 
Moreover, sufficient monetary easing effects have spread to financial conditions and financial 
markets.  Financial  conditions  have  been  extremely  accommodative.  As  for  firms’  funding 
costs, the average contract interest rates on new loans and discounts have been at historic 
low  levels  and  the  issuance  spreads  for  CP  and  corporate  bonds  have  also  been  low. 
Funding  conditions  for  firms  are  extremely  favorable;  according  to  the  June  2014  Tankan, 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  which was released at the beginning of July, firms’ perception of financial institutions’ lending 
attitude and financial positions of firms improved, including those for small firms. 
Regarding financial markets, yields on 10-year JGBs have continued to be extremely low in 
the  range  of  0.5–0.6  percent.  Given  that  the  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the  CPI  is 
currently  around  1¼  percent,  long-term  real  interest  rates  are  presumed  to  be  in  negative 
territory.  The  U.S.  dollar/yen  rate  has  been  above  the  100  yen  level,  and  the  Nikkei 
225 Stock Average has recently been moving above the 15,000 yen level. 
Loan support program2 
B. 
In addition to implementing QQE, the Bank has been employing the Loan Support Program 
to promote financial institutions’ use of the large-scale monetary base – supplied by the Bank 
through its aggressive monetary easing – for their efforts to increase the amount of lending 
and strengthen the growth potential of Japan’s economy. 
Thus far, the Loan Support Program has supported financial institutions’ efforts to increase 
the total amount of their lending and has produced positive effects as a catalyst in regard to 
firms’  and  financial  institutions’  efforts  to  strengthen  the  foundations  for  Japan’s  economic 
growth. At the Monetary Policy Meeting held on February 17 and 18, 2014, the Bank decided 
to enhance the program, including by increasing the scale of the program and extending its 
application  period.  The  Bank  expects  that  the  enhancement  will  further  promote  financial 
institutions’ actions as well as stimulate firms’ and households’ demand for credit. 
The bank’s price stability target 
C. 
Under the monetary policy I have described, the Bank considers that Japan’s economy has 
been  following  the  path  toward  achieving  the  2  percent  price  stability  target.  Recently, 
questions have often been asked regarding the criteria and approaches for judging whether 
the price stability target is achieved and whether the target is maintained in a stable manner. 
I would like to take this opportunity to offer some thoughts on this matter. 
As  the  Bank  announced  when  it  introduced  the  price  stability  target  in  January  2013,  the 
target has been set in terms of the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI. With regard to the 
CPI,  the  CPI  for  all  items  is  naturally  of  prime  importance  as  a  price  index  that 
comprehensively  covers  goods  and  services  consumed  by  households  and  to  which  the 
general public is accustomed. On the other hand, looking at the CPI for all items alone could 
lead to a misjudgment of the underlying trend of inflation, because this CPI includes items 
that  temporarily  show  large  fluctuations,  such  as  fresh  food.  In  this  regard,  the  CPI  for  all 
items less fresh food, or the core CPI, is considered to be the most useful index to identify 
the trend of the CPI for all items. The Bank in fact uses the year-on-year rate of change in 
the core CPI when referring to the forecasts of prices presented in the Outlook for Economic 
Activity and Prices, in which it outlines its thinking on the future conduct of monetary policy. 
Other  indices  that  demonstrate  the  underlying  fluctuations  in  the  CPI  include  the  CPI  (all 
items less food and energy) and the CPI (10 percent trimmed mean).3 These indices aim at 
identifying  the  underlying  fluctuations  in  the  overall  CPI  by  excluding  certain  items.  At  the 
same time, however, they eliminate a certain proportion of items consumed by households, 
and  thus  differ  somewhat  from  price  indices  that  comprehensively  reflect  the  structure  of 
household  consumption.  For  example,  food  expenditures  in  Japan  account  for  a  larger 
proportion of household consumption expenditures than in other countries; the CPI (all items 
                                                
2  The  Loan  Support  Program  consists  of  two  measures:  the  fund-provisioning  measure  to  stimulate  bank 
lending and the fund-provisioning measure to support strengthening the foundations for economic growth. 
3  The  10  percent  trimmed  mean  is obtained  by  rearranging year-on-year  rates  of  individual  price changes  in 
ascending order, excluding items corresponding to both the upper and lower 10 percent tails of weights and 
then taking weighted averages of the remaining items.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  less  food  and  energy)  of  Japan  covers  68  percent  of  the  total  items,  which  is  nearly 
10 percentage points below the 77 percent coverage in the United States. 
In terms of the effects on economic activity, it is also necessary to monitor developments in 
the  CPI  (all  items  less  imputed  rent),  which  –  as  I  mentioned  earlier  –  reflects  household 
consumption expenditures and is used to deflate such figures as wages. 
As illustrated, each price index is not necessarily perfect for grasping the underlying trend of 
the  overall  CPI  or  the  effects  on  economic  activity.  I  think  you  would  agree  that  it  is  not 
appropriate  to  judge  whether  the  price  stability  target  is  achieved  solely  by  examining  the 
core CPI, for example. In my view, the achievement of the price stability target should always 
be judged comprehensively by examining the CPI for all items, the core CPI, and other price-
related indicators to identify changes in the underlying trend of the overall CPI. 
The  same  basically  holds  true  for  judging  whether  the  target  is  maintained  in  a  stable 
manner. There  are  no quantitative  criteria  or  specific  indicators to  assess  such  conditions. 
Whether the target is maintained in a stable manner should be judged comprehensively by 
closely monitoring developments in a wide range of price-related indicators and sufficiently 
examining  and  assessing  the  current  situation  and  the  outlook  for  economic  activity  and 
prices. 
Toward the sustainable growth of Japan’s economy 
III. 
Thus  far,  I  have  talked  about  the  Bank’s  monetary  policy.  Japan’s  economy  has  been 
following a path toward overcoming deflation. In this situation, a trend in which the output gap 
is  positive  (representing  excess  demand)  –  has  begun  to  take  root,  albeit  with  some 
fluctuations  due  to  the  consumption  tax  hike.  This  trend  is  seen  in  the  tightening  of  labor 
supply  and  demand  conditions.  Given  that  slack  in  the  economy  has  shrunk,  as  widely 
recognized, it has become increasingly necessary to strengthen supply capacity in order for 
Japan’s economy to raise its growth potential in the medium to long term. 
An  economy’s  growth  potential,  from  a  relatively  longer-term  perspective,  depends  on  the 
growth  in  capital  stock  and  labor  input,  as  well  as  improvements  in  productivity  through 
innovation and the like. This indicates that it is private economic entities that play the most 
important role in efforts to strengthen growth potential and pursue the growth strategy. At the 
same time, to strengthen growth potential, it is essential to build an environment that enables 
private economic entities to unleash their creativity and “animal spirits” by (1) increasing the 
labor participation of women and the elderly, (2) eliminating restrictions to market entry, and 
(3) carrying out regulatory and institutional reforms. In promoting such an environment from a 
macroeconomic perspective, the government plays a critical role. In June 2014, the Cabinet 
decided  the  new  Japan  Revitalization  Strategy  and  Basic  Policies,  which  aim  to  revitalize 
Japan’s  economy.  I  strongly  expect  that  efforts  based  on  these  measures  will  proceed 
steadily. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
