  Ravi Menon: The Institute of Banking and Finance at forty 
Welcome  remarks  by  Mr  Ravi  Menon,  Managing  Director  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of 
Singapore and Chairman of the Institute of Banking and Finance, at the Institute of Banking 
and Finance 40th Anniversary Dinner, Singapore, 10 June 2014. 
 Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Finance, Tharman Shanmugaratnam, 
Pioneers of IBF, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, 
On  behalf  of  the  Council  and  staff  of  IBF,  let  me  welcome  you  to  IBF’s  40th  anniversary 
dinner. 
IBF is where it is today because of what previous generations of Council members and staff, 
industry practitioners and training providers accomplished together. They are the Pioneers of 
IBF, whose contributions and achievements we are gathered here to celebrate. 
It is the inspiring vision and tireless efforts of these Pioneers to build competencies in finance 
that helped create the international financial centre that Singapore has become today. I am 
delighted that several of them are here with us this evening. 
IBF was set up in 1974 with the support of the Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS) and 
the  Association  of  Banks  in  Singapore  (ABS).  Those  were  early  days  in  Singapore’s 
development as a financial centre. The birth of IBF helped to fill a critical gap in the training 
of Singapore’s financial sector workforce. 
The subsequent growth of IBF has been a story of each generation building on the efforts of 
previous  generations  and  helping  to  strengthen  the  capabilities  of  Singapore’s  finance 
professionals. 
Let me begin by thanking the first group of IBF Pioneers: the past Chairmen of IBF. 
• 
Mr Michael Wong Pakshong, as IBF’s inaugural Chairman from 1975 to 1977, laid 
out  the  vision  for  IBF  –  to  develop  a  strong  suite  of  educational  programmes  to 
support the growth of Singapore’s banking industry. 
Mrs Elizabeth Sam, as IBF Chair from 1977 to 1981, introduced IBF’s first and most 
widely-recognised diploma programme – the Diploma in Banking and Finance. 
Mr Ng Kok Song, who served as IBF Chairman from 1981 to 1982, introduced a new 
foreign  exchange  training  programme  that  helped  alleviate  the  shortage  of  FX 
dealers  in  those  early  years  when  Singapore  was  establishing  itself  as  a  global 
treasury hub. 
Mr Koh Beng Seng, IBF’s longest serving Chairman – from 1982 to 1997 – oversaw 
the introduction of many new training programmes beyond banking to cater to the 
broader range of financial sector activities that took root during those years. 
Mr Tharman Shanmugaratnam, as IBF Chairman from 1997 to 2001, fundamentally 
repositioned  IBF,  from  being  a  direct  provider  of  training  to  becoming  a  national 
accreditation and standard-setting body for financial sector training. 
Mr Koh Yong Guan, who followed as IBF Chairman from 2001 to 2005, built on this 
strategic  repositioning  with  the  introduction  of  the  now-familiar  Financial  Industry 
Competency Standards or FICS. 
Mr Heng Swee Keat, IBF Chairman from 2005 to 2011, launched an impressive set 
of 53 standards under the FICS and secured a range of accredited training providers 
offering quality training and assessments benchmarked against the FICS. 
      BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The Pioneers of IBF comprise not only its past Chairmen but the many captains of industry 
who served on IBF Councils over the last 40 years. They provided practical industry insights 
which helped make IBF’s programmes relevant and meaningful. 
I would like to acknowledge in particular a few recent Council members who have shaped 
much of the work that culminated in this evening’s presentation. 
• 
Mrs Euleen Goh, as the first Chair of the FICS Steering Committee, marshalled an 
impressive  army  of  industry  contributors  to  put  together  our  first  set  of  FICS 
standards in 2005. 
Mr Wee Ee Cheong, current IBF Vice Chairman and Chairman of the FICS Steering 
Committee,  worked  hard  to  drive  the  adoption  of  FICS  and  led  the  review  of  the 
FICS which will be re-launched later this evening as the IBF Standards. 
 We also  salute this  evening the  hundreds  of  industry  practitioners  who  stepped forward  in 
ways big and small over the last 40 years to help raise standards and build competencies. 
• 
You have served on IBF workgroups, reviewing consultation papers on competency 
standards or industry examinations or frameworks for continuous development. 
You  have  volunteered  as  speakers,  trainers  and  mentors,  acting  as  industry 
ambassadors at IBF’s outreach programmes. 
 You gave your time freely and shared your ideas selflessly. Thank you. 
We are also indebted to our partners and trainers who have contributed on a pro-bono basis 
to IBF’s learning resources – working on impossible timelines to deliver high-quality training 
standards and study guide materials. 
There is a final group that I want to acknowledge, the unsung heroes of the IBF story – the 
past and present staff of IBF. 
• 
From  administering 
examinations; 
from reviewing  and  accrediting training  programmes to  certifying  individuals  under 
FICS; 
the  management  and  staff  of  IBF  have  been  unrelenting  in  their  commitment  to 
raising industry standards. 
the  CMFAS  examinations 
to  developing  new 
industry 
  As we look back at IBF’s 40 years, we can take pride in what it has achieved. 
• 
Some 200,000 participants have benefitted to-date from training courses offered or 
accredited by IBF. 
Close to 2,000 practitioners have been certified under the FICS Standards. 
• 
One of the reasons why IBF has done well is that it has renewed itself periodically, to stay 
relevant  and  effective  amidst  a  changing  environment  but  always  focused  on  its  core 
mandate of promoting competency in finance. 
Today, IBF embarks on the next phase of its journey to raise industry standards. Our new 
mission is to “empower practitioners with capabilities for a robust Asian financial industry”. To 
equip our finance professionals for the next phase in Singapore’s development as a financial 
centre, IBF will focus on two new dimensions. 
First,  we  will  put  together  programmes  which  will  not  only  develop  depth  in  core 
competencies but also breadth across related functional capabilities. A successful career in 
finance  today  requires  versatility  across  different  areas,  be  it  to  offer  comprehensive 
solutions to customers or manage risks holistically across multiple business lines. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Second, we will build expertise and capabilities to serve and operate not just in Singapore 
but in a pan-Asian financial market. With the surge of opportunities in Asia, those with the 
knowledge and skills to operate across regional markets will be in high demand. These are 
capabilities that we must consciously seek to build amongst our professionals. 
IBF does not operate in a vacuum but in the larger context of what it takes to develop and 
grow the financial sector – to create meaningful jobs for Singaporeans, support the needs of 
the economy, and serve the larger region. 
It is now my pleasure to welcome our Guest-of-Honour, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister 
for Finance, Tharman Shanmugaratnam, to talk to us about this larger context. It is especially 
appropriate that  DPM  Tharman  is  doing this  as  he  is  himself  an  IBF  Pioneer  who,  as  IBF 
Chairman some 14 years ago, transformed IBF to set competency standards for the industry. 
DPM Tharman, please. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
