Mario Draghi: Financial integration and banking union 
Speech by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at the conference for 
the  20th  anniversary  of  the  establishment  of  the  European  Monetary  Institute,  Brussels, 
12 February 2014. 
 Summary 
A  banking  union  will  contribute  to  more  sustainable  financial  integration  in  the  euro  area, 
says  ECB  President  Mario  Draghi.  Speaking  at  a  conference  celebrating  the  20th 
anniversary  of  the  European  Monetary  Institute  in  Brussels,  Draghi  explains  how  stronger 
supervision, cross-border banking integration and resolution frameworks can reduce the risk 
of financial fragmentation. It was that kind of fragmentation which contributed to the recent 
financial crisis. 
Draghi  explains  that  financial  integration  is  necessary for  an  effective  monetary  union.  But 
“the  euro  area  did  not  succeed  in  achieving  sustainable  financial  integration”,  the  ECB’s 
President says. “And we can see the importance of financial integration all the more in its 
absence.” 
According  to  Draghi,  financial  integration  before  the  crisis  was  incomplete.  While  the 
interbank  market  was  fully  integrated,  retail  banking  remained  fragmented.  That  led  to  a 
situation  where  banks  used  short-term  and  debt-based  funding  to  increase  lending  to 
favoured domestic sectors such as real estate. “As banks’ assets were not well allocated, nor 
well diversified geographically, they were more vulnerable to domestic shocks. And as their 
foreign  liabilities  were  mainly  interbank,  they  could  not  share  the  subsequent  losses  with 
other jurisdictions.” So when the crisis hit, the cost of repairing balance sheets fell largely on 
their domestic fiscal authorities. “The result was the infamous bank sovereign nexus”, Draghi 
says. 
A banking union will generate a higher quality of financial integration. The Single Supervisory 
Mechanism will enable supervisors to mitigate the possible destabilising effects of financial 
integration.  It  will  also  help  to  maximise  the  benefits  of  integration  by  creating  a  policy 
framework  more  conducive  to  cross-border  banking.  If  problems  still  occur,  the  planned 
European  resolution  framework  will  help  by  improving  private  risk-sharing  while  insulating 
sovereigns.  To  reach  that  aim,  Draghi  makes  a  case  to  improve  the  design  of  the  Single 
Resolution  Mechanism  and  the  Single  Resolution  Fund.  The  proposed  ten-year  period  to 
mutualise national compartments into a single fund “creates uncertainty”, the President says. 
“We would see merits in doubling the pace of mutualisation to have a genuine European fund 
within five years.” 
 Dear Members of the European Parliament, 
Dear Alexandre, 
Dear Jacques, 
Dear Luc, 
Dear Governors, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  is  a  pleasure  to  speak  today  at  this  conference  marking  the  20th  anniversary  of  the 
European Monetary Institute (EMI), and in particular to be part of this session that recognises 
and celebrates the contribution of Alexandre Lamfalussy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The discussion today has naturally focused on the EMI, the euro and monetary policy, but I 
would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  reflect  on  another  issue  which  is  vital  for  the  single 
currency,  and  to  which  Alexandre  has  made  an  immense  contribution  –  that  is,  financial 
integration. 
Financial integration and the single currency are in many ways two sides of the same coin. 
One fundamental reason for the single currency was to maximise the benefits of the single 
market  for  capital.  And,  conversely,  it  was  understood  when  the  euro  was  conceived  that 
integrated financial markets would be necessary for an effective single currency.1 
Alexandre’s  experience  in  academia,  the  private  sector  and  central  banking  put  him  in  a 
unique  position  to  contribute  to  this  process.  He  contributed  intellectually,  for  example 
through his leadership of the SUERF2 network set up to promote discussion of financial and 
monetary issues among academics, central bankers and market participants. He contributed 
practically, not least as chairman of Euro-MTS, the European electronic fixed income market, 
late in his career. And he made significant policy contributions, from overseeing the creation 
of  the  TARGET  payment  system  at  the  EMI  to  launching  what  became  known  as  the 
“Lamfalussy process” for supervisory and regulatory convergence in Europe. 
For this reason, the ECB recognised and honoured his role by establishing about ten years 
ago a “Lamfalussy Fellowship” programme. It sponsors five young economists each year to 
conduct  research  on  the  integration,  structure  and  performance  of  the  European  financial 
system. 
However,  we  know  –  and  to  our  cost  –  that  ultimately  the  euro  area  did  not  succeed  in 
achieving sustainable financial integration. While financial integration deepened significantly 
after  the  euro  was  introduced,  the  global  financial  crisis  caused  that  process  to  go  into 
reverse. And we can see the importance of financial integration for the single currency all the 
more in its absence. 
In  the  periphery,  financial  fragmentation  has  led  to  high  interest  rates  for  firms  and 
households,  and  disrupted  monetary  policy  transmission.  In  the  core,  it  has  led  to 
exceptionally 
for  savers  and  potentially  distorted  asset  prices. 
Consequently, the whole of the euro area would benefit from lasting financial reintegration – 
and indeed, addressing financial fragmentation has been one of the key tasks of euro area 
policy-makers, including the ECB, over the past years. 
What I would like to focus on today is one aspect of reversing fragmentation that is perhaps 
underplayed – that is, the importance of raising the quality of financial integration in the euro 
area. My view is that the incomplete financial integration we achieved before the crisis made 
it susceptible to fragmentation. But I am confident that with a banking union we can create 
the pre-conditions for more sustainable financial integration in the future. 
interest  rates 
low 
Financial integration before the crisis: what went wrong? 
Let me start by outlining how financial integration evolved before the crisis. 
It  was  always  understood  that  financial  integration  could  have  both  stabilising  and 
destabilising  effects.3  Some  of  the  main  stabilising  effects  were  expected  to  come  from 
increased  portfolio  diversification.  As  banks  and  other  investors  became  more  diversified 
across borders within the euro area, they could reduce their exposure to domestic shocks, 
                                                
1  Report on Economic and Monetary Union in the European Community (Delors Report), 1989. 
2   SUERF,  the  European  Money  and  Finance  Forum,  is  an  abbreviation  of  the  Association’s  original  name 
“Société Universitaire Européenne de Recherches Financières”. 
3   For  example,  Ferguson,  R.,  P.  Hartmann,  F.  Panetta  and  R.  Portes,  International  Financial  Stability,  Ninth 
Geneva Report on the World Economy, International Center for Monetary and Banking Studies, 2009. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
and this would be reflected in greater income and consumption risk-sharing.4 Indeed, global 
and  European  evidence  suggested  that  financial  openness  and  integration  had  reduced 
consumption growth volatility.5 
Another  benefit  of  financial  integration  was  thought  to  come  from  improved  allocative 
efficiency.  Research  suggested  that  large  cross-border  banks  in  Europe  could  improve 
overall  economic  performance,  by  making  sure  that  productive  capital  was  channelled 
towards the most efficient firms. This would in turn reduce the risk of crises stemming from 
mispriced investment risk.6 
Destabilising  effects  of  financial  integration,  on  the  other  hand,  were  expected  particularly 
through risk-taking and contagion. Asymmetric information problems associated with cross-
border  lending  could  lead  to  misaligned  incentives  and  increased  risk-taking.  Similarly, 
savings imbalances abroad could compress risk premia and lower financing costs, allowing 
an  increase  in  leverage  in  the  domestic  financial  sector.7  And  if  negative  shocks  were  to 
occur, contagion could quickly spread through the interbank market, and lending to the real 
sector across borders could be affected, too.8 
As financial integration deepened, it was anticipated that the stabilising effects would overall 
be  more  important  than  the  destabilising  ones  –  that  is,  the  welfare  benefits  of  better 
diversification  and  improved  allocative  efficiency  would  offset  the  welfare  costs  of 
occasionally  higher  risk-taking  and  contagion  effects.9  So  why  were  the  costs  of  the 
European crisis so high? 
There  are  many  reasons  for  this,  but  in  my  view  one  important  factor  was  the  incomplete 
nature  of  financial  integration  in  the  euro  area.  Price  convergence  in  many  asset  classes 
created  an  appearance  of  financial  integration,  but  it  was  in  fact  relatively  shallow,  in 
particular in the banking sector. According to the ECB’s financial integration indicators, while 
euro area interbank markets became almost completely integrated, retail banking integration 
remained largely fragmented.10 This mismatch had at least three consequences. 
The first was on the asset side of banks’ balance sheets. A main channel through which retail 
banking integration is expected to improve allocative efficiency is by increasing the distance 
between the main shareholders and management of a bank and the vested interests in the 
country  where  the  bank  operates,  i.e.  by  reducing  so-called  “related  lending”.  But  without 
meaningful foreign competition, these gains did not materialise in the euro area. In fact, the 
ability to borrow freely in interbank markets allowed local banks to increase lending towards 
favoured domestic sectors such as real estate. This is essentially what we saw in Spain and 
Ireland. In the process, financial integration concentrated rather than diversified risk.11 
                                                
4   Demyanyk, Y., C. Ostergaard, and Bent E. Sørensen, 2008. “Risk sharing and portfolio allocation in EMU”, 
Economic Papers 334, European Commission. 
5   Bekaert,  G.,  C.  Harvey,  and  C.  Lundblad,  2006.  “Growth  volatility  and  financial  liberalization.”  Journal  of 
International Money and Finance 25, 370–403. 
6   Giannetti,  M.,  and  S.  Ongena,  2009.  “Financial  Integration  and  Firm  Performance:  Evidence  from  Foreign 
Bank Entry in Emerging Markets.” Review of Finance 13, 181–223. 
7   Caballero,  R.,  and  A.  Krishnamurthy,  2009.  “Global  imbalances  and  financial  fragility.”  American  Economic 
Review 99, 584–588. 
8   Popov,  A.,  and  G.  Udell,  2012.  “Cross-border  banking,  credit  access,  and  the  financial  crisis.”  Journal  of 
International Economics 87, 147–161. 
9   Fecht,  F.,  Grüner,  H.,  and  P.  Hartmann,  2007.  “Welfare  effects  of  financial  integration.”  CEPR  Discussion 
Paper 6331. 
10   Financial Integration in Europe, European Central Bank, April 2008. 
11   Fecht, F., H. Gruener and P. Hartmann, 2012. “Financial integration, specialization and systemic risk”, Journal 
of International Economics, vol. 88. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
The  second  consequence  was  on  the  liability  side  of  banks’  balance  sheets.  As  banks’ 
funding  from  abroad  came  mainly  through  the  interbank  market,  the  composition  of  their 
foreign liabilities was short-term and debt-based. This meant that funding could quickly dry 
up at the first sign of distress.12 With a more integrated banking sector, however, this effect 
would have been less dramatic. As foreign banks would have equity stakes, they would have 
an incentive to maintain cross-border funding within the group. This is what happened, for 
example, in the Baltic countries where foreign ownership of the banking sector was high.13 
These two consequences combined to create a third effect. As banks’ assets were not well 
allocated, nor well diversified geographically, they were more vulnerable to domestic shocks. 
And  as  their  foreign  liabilities  were  mainly  interbank,  i.e.  not  equity-based  and  short-term, 
they could not share the subsequent losses with other jurisdictions. This meant that when the 
crisis  hit,  the  cost  of  repairing  their  balance  sheets  fell  largely  on  their  domestic  fiscal 
authorities. The result was the infamous bank-sovereign nexus that has perpetuated financial 
fragmentation in the euro area.14 
My  conclusion  from  this  experience  is  as  follows:  the  quality  and  comprehensiveness  of 
integration matters. There are costs which can arise from a type of financial integration that is 
short-term and reversible; or from having perfect integration in one market and fragmentation 
in  another.  A  key  question  for  the  euro  area  is  therefore:  how  can  we  generate  a  higher 
quality of financial integration for the future? 
Making financial integration sustainable: the role of a banking union 
The pre-crisis experience suggests three changes are needed. 
First,  stronger  ex  ante supervision  to  mitigate  the  possible  destabilising effects  of financial 
integration. Second, an improved policy framework to maximise the stability benefits, namely 
by  encouraging  deeper  cross-border  banking  integration.  Third,  better  ex  post  risk-sharing 
arrangements, such as resolution frameworks, so as to prevent shocks from spilling over to 
sovereigns. 
I  see  that  a  banking  union  –  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM)  and  the  new 
European resolution framework – can make a significant contribution to these objectives. Let 
me address each in turn. 
Strengthening supervision 
To begin with, the SSM will enable supervisors to better identify emerging risks and to act 
counter-cyclically. This is thanks to its independence, its incentives and its instruments. 
The  SSM  has  been  designed  with  the  necessary  independence  to  lean  against  localised 
booms, being not only legally independent, but also independent of any single government or 
national  financial  system.  And  that  independence  is  reflected  throughout  its  organisational 
structure, for example by having mixed-nationality joint supervisory teams to supervise each 
significant bank. 
By virtue of its accountability, the SSM also has incentives that are clearly aligned with its 
European financial stability objective – it has to answer for the failure of any bank in the SSM 
                                                
12   Schoenmaker,  D.,  and  W.  Wagner,  2011.  “The  impact  of  cross-border  banking  on  financial  stability”, 
Economic Papers 492, European Commission. 
Tinbergen Institute Discussion Paper TI 11–054/ DSF 18, Duisenberg School of Finance. 
13   Gros,  D.,  and  C.  Alcidi,  2013.  “Country adjustment  to  a  ‘sudden  stop’:  Does  the euro  make  a diﬀerence?”, 
14   Acharya, V., I. Drechsler and P. Schnabl, 2014. “A pyrrhic victory? Bank bailouts and sovereign credit risk”, 
forthcoming  Journal  of  Finance,  or  Nikolov,  K.,  and  A.  Popov,  2014.  ‘”The  sovereign-bank  nexus”,  ECB 
Research Bulletin, No 20, 2–4. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
area. Compared with national supervisors, this gives it all the more reason to take account of 
excessive risk-taking and the cross-border externalities associated with it, and therefore to 
be proactive if local financial developments pose increasing systemic risk. 
Finally,  the  SSM  has  not  only  micro-prudential  powers  but  also  new  macro-prudential 
instruments to counter financial imbalances. For all the instruments in the EU legislation, it 
may  apply  stricter  measures  than  national  authorities  if  it  observes  emerging  risks.  This 
further strengthens the capacity at the European level to prevent financial instability. 
Deepening integration 
The SSM can also help maximise the benefits of financial integration by providing a policy 
framework that is more conducive to cross-border banking integration. 
Before the crisis, supervisory coordination mainly took place through the Lamfalussy process 
and committees, which were a major step forward and the best that could be achieved at the 
time.  However,  they  were  unable  to  fully  iron  out  supervisory  differences  between  EU 
jurisdictions.15  This  presented  cross-border  banks  with  substantial  compliance  costs  and 
reduced the economic synergies of integration. 
For  example,  a  Commission  survey  in  2005  found  that  opaque  supervisory  approval 
procedures  were  a major  deterrent to cross-border  banking  M&As  in  Europe. The  need  to 
comply  with  different  sets  of  rules  and  interact  with  several  different  authorities  was  also 
reported to be a barrier to cross-border activity.16 
The lesson from this period was that, while financial integration is ultimately a market-driven 
process,  policy  plays  a  key  role  in  creating  the  conditions  for  it  to  progress.  To  quote  the 
Lamfalussy report, “the EU has no ‘divine right’ to the benefits of an integrated market – it 
has to build one”.17 This SSM should help us in this building process. 
A  single  supervisor  automatically  removes  some  of  the  dividing  lines  between  jurisdictions 
that  create  compliance  costs.  For  example,  there  will  no  longer  be  a  distinction  between 
home and host supervisors for cross-border banks. Instead, there will be a single supervisory 
model and eventually a single supervisory culture, rather than one per country. And cross-
border groups will be able to report at the consolidated level. 
Another benefit of the SSM – and perhaps a more important one – will be the lack of “hidden 
barriers” to cross-border activity linked to national preferences. With a European supervisor, 
borders  will  not  matter.  Issues  such  as  protecting  national  champions  or  supervisory  ring-
fencing of liquidity will not be relevant. This means that banks will be in a better position to 
achieve the economies of scale that were promised by the single financial market – and that 
they also need to be competitive at the global level. 
It  is  of  course  for  banks  to  decide  whether  such  integration  makes  business  sense.  And 
some  obstacles  to  cross-border  integration  that  lie  outside  the  remit  of  supervision  –  like 
company law and tax – still remain. However, the low profitability and excess capacity of the 
European  banking  sector  suggests  that  efficiency  gains  could  be  achieved,  and  without 
exacerbating the “too big to fail” problem. 
Improving risk-sharing 
Even with a higher quality of financial integration, we know that shocks may still occur that 
cannot  be  contained  within  the  private  sector.  The  US,  for  example,  has  a  well-integrated 
                                                
15   Review of the Lamfalussy Framework: Eurosystem Contribution, November 2007. 
16   Financial Integration in Europe, European Central Bank, March 2007. 
17   Final  Report  of  the  Committee  of  Wise  Men  on  the  Regulation  of  European  Securities  Markets,  February 
2001. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
financial  market,  and  the  Federal  Deposit  Insurance  Corporation  (FDIC)  still  plays  a 
prominent role in managing crises. Our challenge in the euro area is to ensure that, when 
banks  fail  and  the  public  sector  has  to  intervene,  it  does  not  result  in  a  recurrence  of  the 
bank-sovereign nexus. The new European resolution framework will be key to achieving this. 
This framework can help insulate sovereigns by improving private risk-sharing within the euro 
area.  First,  it  will  ensure  that the  costs  of  bank failure  are  borne first  and foremost  by  the 
private sector, with sovereigns providing funds only in exceptional circumstances. The key 
innovation  here  is  the  Bank  Recovery  and  Resolution  Directive,  which  provides  the  legal 
underpinning for the bail-in of shareholders and creditors and other resolution tools. 
Second, the new framework will allow resolution costs to be more evenly spread across the 
euro  area  banking  sector,  and  less  concentrated  in  the  affected  countries, thus  enhancing 
the  potential  for  cross-border  risk-sharing.  Specifically,  the  Single  Resolution  Mechanism 
(SRM) will introduce a single resolution fund that is funded by and available to all euro area 
banks. 
Will this help break the bank-sovereign nexus today? In my view, the impact will certainly be 
positive.  The  fact  that  the  costs  of  any  bank  rescue  will  fall  less  on  sovereigns  should  lift 
expectations  of  government  debt  sustainability,  thus  improving  asset  quality  for  banks 
exposed to their governments. And the fact that bail-ins will precede bail-outs means banks’ 
funding costs should be better decoupled from the fiscal condition of their sovereigns. 
That  said,  in  terms  of  breaking  this  nexus,  there  are  some  elements  in  the  Council 
agreement on the SRM that I believe could be improved. The main problem is uncertainty 
about  resolution  financing  arrangements.  This  is  important,  because  if  markets  cannot 
ascertain  ex  ante  how  resolution  will  be  financed,  and  in  what  quantities,  they  may  find 
themselves  having  to  price-in  a  residual  risk  of  national  government  involvement,  thus 
perpetuating the bank-sovereign nexus. 
One issue that creates uncertainty is the protracted time period – currently 10 years – over 
which national compartments are to be mutualised into a single resolution fund. As legacy 
risks will be addressed by the ECB’s comprehensive assessment, this seems an unduly long 
period.  We  would  see  merits  in  doubling  the  pace  of  mutualisation  to  have  a  genuine 
European fund  within five  years. To  be  clear,  this  would  not  imply  that  banks  have  to  pay 
higher fees. The fund would still only reach its target level after 10 years, yet it would be a 
truly single fund after five years. 
Another  issue  that  needs  clarifying  is  what  backstop  arrangements  will  be  in  place  in  this 
transition period, and also in the steady state. What makes resolution authorities credible is 
the knowledge that, when private sector solutions do not suffice, they can draw on temporary 
public bridge financing. This steadies expectations and supports financial stability. 
Indeed, the job of a resolution authority could become more complicated if there are doubts 
about the adequacy of its resources in times of systemic stress. Even in the US, where such 
a public backstop is in place, the FDIC felt that its job was complicated during the financial 
crisis by media scepticism about its finances. 
For this reason, we believe that a single resolution fund needs a solid public backstop – be it 
an  ability  to  temporarily  borrow  from  the  market  backed  by  guarantees  from  participating 
Member States, or access to a credit line, potentially from the European Stability Mechanism. 
This would not be a transfer system between taxpayers: as in the US, such borrowing would 
be  recovered  by  additional  levies  on  the  banking  sector  in  the  future.  Therefore,  the  only 
transfer would be an intertemporal one among banks. 
Conclusion 
To conclude, financial integration is essential for a well-functioning single currency, but it is 
not something we can take for granted. We have learned a painful lesson here. Incomplete 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
financial  integration  is  an  Achilles  heel:  it  creates  vulnerabilities  and  is  liable  to  fragment. 
With  the  banking  union,  I  am  confident  we  are  laying  the  foundations  for  more  complete 
financial integration in the future. 
There are two final points I would like to make. 
First, while I have spoken mainly about banking sector integration, a single financial market 
must  also  ultimately  extend  to  capital  market  integration  –  a  theme  that  was  close  to 
Alexandre’s heart. There are still several barriers to such integration, and these call for the 
attention  of  policy-makers.  One  example  is  barriers  to  high-quality  securitisation  of  bank 
loans,  whose  removal may  help  to  promote  lending to  households  and  SMEs,  and  reduce 
fragmentation.  In  the  spirit  of  Alexandre,  we  need  to  begin  addressing  these  issues  in  a 
pragmatic manner, while never losing sight of our goal. 
Second, we should not forget that fragmentation also comes from the demand side. If less 
competitive  countries  undertake  structural  reforms  that  promote  higher  economic  growth, 
their  economies  will  converge  towards  more  competitive  ones,  and  finance  will  tend  to 
follow.18  This  is  why,  in  addition  to  the  banking  union,  the  re-establishment  of  country 
competitiveness is essential to reintegrate financial markets. In other words, all participants 
have to help achieve and sustain financial integration. 
Thank you for your attention. 
                                                
18   ]Recall, for example, the early intellectual debate among economists about whether finance follows the real 
economy (e.g. Joan Robinson, 1952, The Generalization of the General Theory) or drives the real economy 
(e.g. Joseph Schumpeter, 1911, The Theory of Economic Development). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
