Patrick Honohan: Irish exceptionalism in the world economy 
Address by Mr Patrick Honohan, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, at the Royal Irish 
Academy, Dublin, 10 March 2014. 
 Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech or on the Bank Ireland’s website.  
For one hundred years after the Great Famine, the Irish economy was at the extreme end of 
the international spectrum in numerous demographic dimensions (population growth, family 
formation,  fertility).  For  the  past  fifty  years  it  has  been  characterised  by  an  increasingly 
exceptional degree of internationalisation – not only in trade, but also and especially in the 
ownership of industry. The past thirty years have seen extreme swings in net international 
indebtedness  and  extreme  sensitivity  of  net  migration  flows  to  employment  conditions  at 
home and abroad. 
The persistence of distinctive characteristics illustrates the fact, nowadays often neglected, 
that  national  policy  choices  do  have  lasting  effects  and  structural  features  of  the  national 
economy  are  not  all  necessarily  washed  away  by  forces  of  international  economic 
convergence.  The  swings  also  suggest  an  adaptability  of  the  Irish  economy  which  has 
enabled  the  nation,  through  decisive  policy  action,  to  recover  from  situations  of  extreme 
macroeconomic imbalance. 
National capacity to influence the type of economy we live in, and to recover from setbacks, 
means  that  there  is  scope  for  choice  and  innovation  across  a  range  of policy  dimensions. 
Research  based  on  global  experience  suggests  that  national  success  in  generating 
sustainably  high  average  living  standards  and  employment  levels  does  not  pre-suppose  a 
narrowly  defined  type  of  economic  society.  Albeit  satisfying  a  vital  shared  institutional 
underpinning,  successful  economies,  both  within  Europe  and  elsewhere,  have  displayed 
economic diversity in numerous dimensions, ranging from the type of financial system to the 
distribution of income and wealth across households. 
Thus,  although  experience  has  taught  us  the  importance  of  ensuring  that  the  economic 
incentives  built  into  our  economies  are  not  destructive,  and  that  fiscal  and  monetary 
discipline is crucial to long-term prosperity, there is still room for important policy choices. 
Of course countries differ because of their natural resources, or their geographical location. 
That is not what I have in mind; rather it is matters which are in principle subject to policy or 
collective  action.  I  hope  there  will  be  indulgence  for  my  succumbing  to  professional 
deformation  by  drawing  somewhat  disproportionately  on  finance  for  examples,  but  on  this 
occasion I will not focus on day-to-day financial policy issues. 
The false new normal 
There was a period some years ago, peaking around 1996–7, when it seemed that a new 
normative  standard  for  national  economic  policy  was  coming  into  fashion  worldwide. 
Economic  growth  was  strong  in  what  are  called  the  advanced  economies  and  in  the 
emerging markets, and stable conditions had prevailed for several years in the international 
financial markets, allowing the expectation that – in what was soon to be dubbed the “Great 
Moderation”  –  economic  conditions  in  most  countries  of  the  world  would  at  last  begin  to 
converge to a satisfactorily high level. 
In  Ireland,  the  Celtic  Tiger  period  was  well  under  way,  with  its  seemingly  miraculous 
performance  in  delivering  increasingly  high  employment,  increasing  living  standards  and  a 
balanced budget. 
And there is much to admire about economic performance in the mid-1990s. We should not 
forget,  just  because  of  what  happened  subsequently,  the  very  substantial  and  sustained 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
improvements  in  living  standards  in  those  years.  And  we  should  not  forget  that  those 
improvements  reflected  the  correction  of  previous  policy  errors  which  had  resulted  in  the 
disruptive high inflation, unemployment and economic stagnation of the 1970s and 1980s. 
By the mid-1990s, then, it was not unreasonable to ask whether there would soon be any 
point  in  studying  the  differences  between  economies.  In  our  continent,  with  apparent 
consensus  on  a  European  way  of  conducting  economic  policy  in  a  consistent  and  largely 
cooperative way, and in particular with the creation of the single currency, what future would 
there be for students of the Irish economy if the object of their analysis was blending into a 
broader European background as a merely regional economic entity? 
As  the  millennium  turned,  everywhere  deregulated  financial  firms  seemed  to  be  at  the 
forefront,  spearheading  this  era  of  prosperity  with  their  support  for  investment  backed  by 
increasingly sophisticated risk management systems. 
By  now  everyone  understands  that  the  exaggerated  and  over-reaching  reliance  on 
financialisation (see later) for generating prosperity was sowing the seeds of the global crisis. 
Indeed,  just  as  a  warm  winter  allows  insects  and  disease  to  survive  into  spring,  the 
prolonged period of stability itself had lulled many into a sense of false security, creating an 
environment that provided no warnings to those with growing risk appetite. In particular, the 
combination of stability and hubris lured Ireland into a disastrous extreme – exceeded only 
by Iceland – in this dimension. 
One casualty of the crash should be the idea of inevitable convergence of national economic 
models.  Some  of  the  countries  which  most  conformed  to  the  conventional  view  of  best-
practice, and which had been held out as exemplars, have stumbled more heavily. True, the 
weaknesses that have been exposed are now easy to interpret in terms of crude failures of 
private and national housekeeping. It is crucial not to lose sight of those fundamental rules: 
the need to retain sufficient internal and external balance in order to ensure budgetary and 
financial stability. But that is not my focus today. 
What I want to reflect upon instead is something that has also been in evidence during the 
boom  and  bust:  the  fact  that  national  economies  preserve  long-lasting  and  persistent 
differences, one from the other, which can together affect the economy’s ability to generate 
high levels of employment, productivity growth and resilience to shocks as well as affecting 
the distribution of income and wealth and the quality of life in other dimensions. Successful 
economies continue to differ in many ways and – I would argue – are likely to continue to do 
so. While departing from budgetary and financial discipline is never a successful strategy in 
anything  other  than  the  shortest  of  time  horizons,  the  idea  that  economic  structure 
differences must inevitably erode over time is unsupported by evidence. 
It is not hard to illustrate ways in which the Irish economy has differed – in some respects 
quite  sharply  and  measurably  –  from  otherwise  comparable  countries.  One  dimension  is 
demography, and that brings us back to the Great Famine. 
Faint echoes of pre-Famine in the recent bubble 
I hope it will not be considered invidious or distasteful to draw some parallels between the 
Famine  and  more  recent  events.  A  million  dead  and  a  million  emigrants  –  the  traditional 
aphorism,  now  regarded  by  scholars  as  conservative  (Ó  Gráda,  2012)  –  are  not  to  be 
compared  in  scale  or  nature  with  the  consequences  of  what  has  happened  in  the  recent 
crisis.  But  there  is  some  similarity  in  the  build-up  of  vulnerability  and  monoculture  through 
early marriage, subdivision of land-holdings and reliance on a single nutritious but vulnerable 
foodstuff that preceded the Great Famine and the property bubble banking monoculture of 
the recent bubble. 
True, even if there have been mistakes, it is surely the case that the Irish policy response 
has  been  less  ideologically  contaminated  than  that  of  the  1840s.  But,  as  with  many  other 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
episodes  of  economic  downturn,  international  policy  activism  was  stayed,  not  only  by  the 
constraints of infeasibility, but by censoriously excessive concerns about moral hazard. 
The boomerang effects of a failure to recognise exceptional needs at exceptional times, on 
the part of those who could help more, but who are infected by such ideology, is something 
that continues to require the active efforts of scholars on the global and European stage to 
find  the  convincing  arguments  and  evidence  of  the  collective  benefit  of  a  more  holistic 
approach  to  policy  action.  The  need  for  Ireland  to  engage  with  partners  in  modelling  the 
future  macroeconomic  policy  for  Europe  and  mapping  out  Ireland’s  position  within  that 
landscape is by now well understood. 
Demographic exceptionalism 
One legacy of the Famine was Ireland’s persistent exceptionalism in demographic statistics – 
a topic about which I inherited my father’s fascination. As late as the 1950s, Ireland really 
stood out for its weak demographic dynamism. 
Best-known  here  is  the  decline  in  the  population  of  Ireland  right  up  until  1961,  when  it 
reached a nadir at about half the pre-Famine level of well over a century before. This was 
quite exceptional (Figure 1). 
Reviewing a worrying demographic situation in the early 1950s, the Government-sponsored 
Commission on Emigration and Other Population Problems still found Ireland at the extreme 
end  of  the  spectrum  in  many  dimensions,  not  only  in  regard  to  emigration,  but  especially 
related to family formation and childbirth. Thus, although the crude birth rate was exactly at 
the  average  of  twenty  comparator  countries,  this  was  the  product  of  two  outlying  features 
with offsetting effects: an exceptionally high rate of fertility within marriage (fully 50 per cent 
above  the  average  elsewhere)  and  very  delayed  marriage (with  average  age  of  women  at 
marriage  almost  2  years  above  the  average  along  with  the  highest  proportion  of  women 
remaining  unmarried  throughout  their  life)  (Figure  2).1  These  distinctive  features  clearly 
pervasively influenced Irish family, politics and society generally, and not least its economic 
development. 
As far as I know, long-conventional interpretations attributing these remarkable demographic 
anomalies 
largely 
unchallenged. The Great Famine had drastically changed the perception of risk and perhaps 
the risk aversion of the survivors of the Famine who stayed in Ireland and caused them to 
delay family formation, in many cases indefinitely. 
Faced with such a persistent situation a modern-day development economist would look for 
alternative risk-pooling and risk-sharing mechanisms – such as crop insurance – as welfare-
improving initiatives that could offset the impact of increased perceptions of risk. The 19th 
Century Irish financial system offered none of these, of course. Indeed, Ireland is generally 
considered  to  have  been  backward  in  the  development  of  community-focused  financial 
intermediaries. For a variety of reasons that are still debated by scholars,2 the cooperative 
credit  movement  of  Raiffeisen  and  his  competitors  on  the  continent  did  not  at  first  take  a 
strong hold in Ireland despite Horace Plunkett’s effort to bring the credit dimension into the 
cooperative movement in the late 19th Century.3  
to  altered  risk  perceptions 
the  Great  Famine  remain 
following 
                                                
1  Until the 1980s, the fraction of births to unmarried mothers was very small, averaging about 3 per cent, before 
jumping ten-fold by end-Century. 
2  A debate triggered by Guinnane (1994). 
3  The credit unions of today trace their origin only to the 1950s. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Globalisation 
Gradually  in  the  1960s  and  1970s  Irish  demography  began  to  normalise.4  But  in  one 
demographic  dimension  Ireland  remains  extreme,  namely  in  the  extent  to  which  migration 
continues  to  respond  to  economic  incentives.  The  emigration  story  is  an  old  one,  but  in 
improving times, such as we saw in the two decades before 2007, net immigration surged, 
bringing the share of foreign nationals in the population up to record levels for Ireland, and to 
an  extent  which  is  at  the  high  end  of  the  European  scale.  The  openness  is  partly  a 
consequence of policy decisions. 
One remarkably persistent consequence of the Irish propensity for openness to migration is 
the way in which British unemployment rates still seem to exert a powerful influence on Irish 
rates.  I  first  wrote  about  this  thirty  years  ago,  drawing  on  data  between  1963  and  1983. 
Although the boom times made the idea seem obsolete, the past decade has shown that the 
relationship has not gone away. Much though I would like to give as much credit as possible 
to Irish policymakers for the way in which unemployment in Ireland has begun to turn down in 
the past couple of years, at a time of increases in the euro area, the chart shows that some 
of  this  must  be  attributed  to  the  parallel  improvements  in  the  UK  economy,  which  has 
managed in several respects, including unemployment, to survive the recession rather better 
than the euro area (cf. Lane 2012) (Figure 3). 
The connection with foreign labour markets, enabling migration to swing rapidly in response 
to  pressures  and  opportunities,  is  only  one  lasting  and  pervasive  aspect  of  Ireland’s  deep 
embeddedness in the global economy. 
The most conspicuous dimension here is the extent to which the business sector, especially 
the manufacturing and export services sector is dominated by foreign-owned firms. This story 
is  well-known  and  does  not  require  much  rehearsing  here.  It  is  manifested  in  various 
statistical  comparisons,  some  more  directly  and  obviously  connected  with  the  presence  of 
multi-national corporations (MNCs) than others. 
Ireland  shows  up  as  one  of  the  international  outliers  in  the  ratio  of  exports  to  GDP,  for 
example:  Ireland’s  ratio  here  of  well  over  100  per  cent  is  matched  or  exceeded  only  by 
Luxembourg and a handful of entrepôts such as Singapore. Another indicator – the ratio of 
GNP to GDP – awards Ireland bottom ranking among any sizeable country (Figure 4).5  
To be sure, it is easy to exaggerate the extent of MNC dominance, inasmuch as a sizeable 
fraction of the output and exports generated by that sector are not attributable to the inputs of 
domestic factors of production, but depend heavily on imported materials and services, and 
the value of foreign-produced patents. Nevertheless, less problematic indicators, such as the 
share of manufacturing employment accounted for by MNCs confirm the importance of the 
foreign-owned sector. 
While the importance of foreign-owned firms can be traced back to pre-independence times, 
the present patterns of foreign ownership dominance have emerged as a clear consequence 
of Government policy from the 1950s on to encourage inward foreign direct investment. The 
                                                
4  Age at marriage and at birth of child declined, fertility within marriage declined, though not to the low levels to 
which other European countries have reached. The Total Period Fertility Rate TPFR fell from over 4 in the 
mid-1960s to 1.85 by the mid-1990s, but (having slightly recovered since to just over 2) is still the highest in 
the EU (though – at not quite the replacement rate), though the children come later in life with the average age 
of mother at childbirth back up to 31.8 (well over a year older than the EU average). (Report on Vital Statistics 
2011). 
5  Just 58 countries have a GDP of above US$ 100 billion. Ireland has the lowest ratio of GNP to GDP of these 
countries.  The  handful  of  smaller  economies  with  lower  ratios:  Chad,  Congo  (Brazzaville),  Luxembourg, 
Puerto  Rico,  Solomon  Islands.  The  impact  of  MNCs  on  the  interpretability  of  Irish  macroeconomic  data  is 
extremely  complicated  and  contains  many  very  important  traps  for  policy  analysis.  For  example,  see 
FitzGerald (2013). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
efforts of the IDA and other agencies, combined of course with the tax structure, have played 
a  powerful  role.  The  model  has  been  a  significant  driver  of  Ireland’s  success  in  achieving 
high  average  living  standards,  even  if  critics  have  long-noted  the  potential  vulnerability 
associated with such heavy reliance on this segment of enterprise. 
One  hoped-for  element  of  the  policy  of  encouraging  foreign-owned  firms  is  the  inward 
transfer  of  technology  and  business  know-how  including  to  locally  controlled  firms.  As  the 
decades passed, this transfer does seem to have happened to an increasing extent. But the 
reliance on foreign-owned firms has lasted a long time. Irish-owned companies have grown 
and prospered over the past half-century, and the most pessimistic of prognostications have 
not materialised. Nevertheless, this systemic dependence on foreign capital and know-how 
has  skewed  Irish  development.  In  the  interests  of  robust  diversification,  most  Irish 
economists observers would hope for a greater convergence towards normality in this aspect 
of  Irish  economic  development,  with  a  stronger  emergence  of  innovative  Irish  companies 
alongside those steered from abroad. 
One  side-effect  of  the  heavy  reliance  on  multinational  corporations for driving  employment 
and productivity growth has resulted from the fact that these companies generally bring most 
of  their  financing  with  them,  thereby  reducing  the  pressure  on  the  local  financial 
intermediaries and markets to innovate in the direction of designing and appraising financing 
packages for modern industry. While this did not discourage Irish banks from expansion, it 
likely contributed to their slide into a monoculture of property lending. 
Debt 
That leads us to the third dimension of exceptionalism, namely indebtedness. Here Ireland’s 
history once again displays some dramatic and exceptional evolutions. Unlike demography, 
debt was not a particularly prominent part of Ireland’s economic history until the past forty 
years or so. 
Indeed, rather the opposite was the case: Irish banks typically shipped a large segment of 
the funds mobilised through deposits into the London money market, where they remained 
relatively safe but yielding little (Figure 5).6 
As far as government debt is concerned, it was not until the early 1970s that the conservative 
fiscal discipline maintained by all parties started to weaken. Even before the first oil crisis of 
1973, the Government had abandoned its self-imposed rule of borrowing only for investment 
purposes. The global crisis that followed hard upon the heels of this slippage was associated 
with imported inflation, counter-cyclical Government spending and eventually a loss of fiscal 
control.  By  1986  the  Government’s  debt  ratio  had  risen  to  an  alarming  level  (Figure  6), 
prompting some distinguished commentators to forecast and even recommend (at that time) 
some form of debt restructuring or default. But the corner had been turned. The correction in 
the fiscal accounts that took hold and accelerated in the 1990s saw Ireland’s public finances 
return to health extraordinarily quickly. Indeed, a recent IMF study identifies Ireland’s fiscal 
turnaround after 1986 as quite exceptional and not replicable by other countries.7 Especially 
                                                
6  This built on a familiar UK colonial pattern, whereby the issue of colonial banknotes was permitted, but only on 
condition of the issuing authority holding British Government securities as backing. Irish banks did the same, 
not just for their note issue (superseded by Irish government Currency Commission notes after 1927), but also 
for  a  large  part  of  their  deposits.  The  deposits  in  turn  were  fuelled  by  high  wartime  prices  for  agricultural 
exports. Note that definitional changes mean that the time series in Figure 5 has significant discontinuities, 
notably at 1966, 1982 and 1996. 
7  This  is  how  the  IMF  staff  put  it:  “Among  the  recent  episodes  of  substantial  debt  reduction,  Ireland  (1986) 
stands out. Starting from a relatively low level of GDP per capita, however, this remarkable decline was driven 
mainly  by  the  very  high  growth  rate  resulting  from  the  process  of  catching  up  with  the  other  European 
economies.  Ireland  experienced  a  structural  transformation  in  the  late  1980s  from  an  agriculture-based 
economy, which had already occurred earlier in many other advanced economies (see Honohan and Walsh, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
noteworthy is the fact that this reduction in the debt ratio occurred without a surge of high 
inflation; rapid inflation and depreciation was part and parcel of the often-chaotic reductions 
in the real value of local-currency denominated debt issued by other over-indebted countries 
in the past. 
The Irish banking sector was a sizeable financier, but ultimately not the main financier, of the 
Government’s debt explosion in the late 1970s and early 1980s. The banks did draw down 
their net foreign assets and built up a limited net foreign liability position, but beyond a certain 
point it was for the Government to finance itself from abroad (cf. Barry et al., 2011). When 
the  Government  got  its  borrowing  under  control,  its  debt  ratio  began,  as  mentioned,  to 
decline sharply. Without the Government as a source of lucrative lending opportunities, the 
banks began to look elsewhere for business opportunities. 
For almost a decade up to 2007, even though public spending expanded sharply, Ireland’s 
public debt ratio continued to decline even from the low levels which it had reached by the 
end of the millennium. This was because tax revenue from the property boom was so high. 
But if public debt was under control, private debt was not. Returning to Figure 5 shows the 
rapid expansion in net foreign debt of the Irish banks. Recalling what I have said about the 
banks’ earlier behaviour, the speed and scale of this accumulation was altogether new. The 
Irish  banks  were  moving  into  unfamiliar  deep  waters,  where  they  would  soon  get  into 
difficulties and drown. 
Growth in the new millennium relied increasingly heavily on bank-financed property-related 
revenues to support – directly or indirectly – employment, profits, dividends, wage and salary 
income levels, and tax revenue. The rapid reversal in the trend of public debt after 2007 has 
been quite explosive. It reflects both the injection by the Government of funds into the failed 
private  banking  system,  as  well  as  the  emergence  of  a  huge  deficit  on  the  rest  of  the 
Government’s accounts, shorn as they now are of the boom-time tax revenues.8 Once again, 
it seems that the Irish economy has shown a propensity for rapid changes of fortune. It is not 
to understate the severity of the debt challenge, public and private, currently facing the Irish 
economy to recognise this propensity, and to believe that it reflects in part a flexibility which 
will clearly be a very helpful ingredient in the recovery.9 
Had  it  not  been  for  the  official  funding from  EU  and  IMF  sources,  the budgetary  cutbacks 
would have had to be much more severe, and economic wellbeing would have been much 
more badly affected. Indeed, the collapse in incomes and the rise in unemployment in the 
crisis largely predates the arrival of the Troika. Unemployment at the end of the programme 
was lower than at the beginning. But now the legacy of debt, public and private (only some of 
which  can  be  attributed  to  the  famous  bank  guarantee)  presents  major  challenges  for 
government and for over-indebted households, firms and their bankers. For the Government, 
there has been the challenge of dealing with indebtedness. 
Of course the early decision to socialise the risks of bank losses has turned out to be much 
more  of  an  unnecessarily  open-ended gamble than  it  can  have  seemed  at the time to the 
decision-makers, blindsided as they were to the lack of well-quantified underpinning of the 
advice they were being given. From that point on, as more and more information emerged 
                                                                                                                                                   
2002; and Perotti, 2012). We therefore have not included this episode in our case studies because it does not 
seem repeatable by countries currently dealing with high public debt.” (IMF World Economic Outlook, October 
2012) 
8  Of  the  increase  of  some  85  percentage  points  in  the  ratio  of  net  Government  debt  –  that  is  net  of  the 
Government financial assets – to GDP, about half is attributable to the bank recapitalisations; rather less of 
the increase in the gross debt ratio is attributable to this cause, because some of the recapitalisation was paid 
for by cashing-in existing financial assets.  
9  Full analysis of Ireland’s international debt position, public and private, raises complicated data issues. See 
Lane (2013). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
about the banks, and indeed as the extent to which tax revenues had become dependent on 
the now-vanished property boom, management of the rapidly accumulating official debt has 
become  a  central  priority.  It  has  included  efforts  to  improve  the terms  of  the  debt  (notably 
negotiating  with  European  partners  the  lengthy  debt  maturities  and  reduced  interest  rates 
eventually  secured  on  both  the  budgetary  and  bank-related  debt),  as  well  as  phasing  the 
adjustment in such a way as to protect firms and households from too sudden a contraction 
of  aggregate  demand  while  at  the  same  time  accomplishing  the  adjustment  sufficiently 
quickly to help speed the restoration of confidence by local and foreign investors. So far the 
judgment of the markets and of official lenders is positive. 
An exceptional bubble 
Coinciding  as  it  did  with  similar  developments  in  other  advanced  economies,  it  is  not 
straightforward to isolate what was truly exceptional about the Irish construction and property 
boom and bust. Certainly some elements were exceptional; others less so. 
In particular, should we interpret the way in which Ireland allowed a truly exceptional property 
bubble  to  emerge  in  such  an  uncontrolled manner  as  reflecting  some unique  and  inherent 
broad-based failures of the national psyche? After all, it is not only in Ireland, but in many 
countries  around the  world  also, that  bankers  and  regulators  are  –  or  should  be  –  acutely 
conscious of the mistakes – sometimes breathtaking – that they too made. Over-confidence 
in  the  risk  management  capacity  and  self-regulating  properties  of  modern  finance  were 
widespread. Hubris, and over-optimism, combined with greed, were by no means confined to 
the Irish economy. It was fatally easy in such an environment for Irish decision makers to buy 
in uncritically and unreflectively to naïve and to some extent ideological attitudes.10  
The  aggravating  Irish  ingredient  was  the  fact  that  it  had  just  experienced  the  employment 
miracle of the 1990s: against that background a continuation of double-digit growth rates did 
not feel as outrageously unsustainable as it should have. The earlier period – the true Celtic 
Tiger  period  –  represented  a  solid  and  exceptionally  fast  catch-up  to  attainable  living 
standards based on productivity and value for money (cf. Honohan and Walsh, 2002). But 
the catch-up was so fast as to encourage illusory expectations. The inflow of bank borrowing 
in the 2000s was turbocharged by the momentum of that period. It is the speed of Wile E. 
Coyote’s chase that brings him so far over the abyss before he realises his mistake. When 
the crash came, Ireland was further out than most of the others. 
Yes, those in charge should have been more aware of the risks than a cartoon character, but 
before claiming world exclusive rights to this type of error, let us not forget the foreign banks 
from Britain, Denmark and the Netherlands who, in their enthusiasm not to miss out on the 
money  to  be  made  from  the  Irish  boom,  lost  just  as  much  of  their  book  as  did  the  Irish 
controlled banks. 
This is not to question the value and importance of understanding in greater depth how these 
mistakes were made, thereby helping avoid such behavior in future. That promises to be a 
valuable function of the forthcoming Oireachtas hearings and inquiry. 
The wrenching adjustment that followed the abrupt end to the Irish property and construction 
bubble  (coinciding  as  it  did  with  a  sharp  global  recession)  has  presented  exceptional 
challenges for Irish economic actors, both in respect of short-term crisis management, and in 
setting course for the longer-term future. As far as the short-term is concerned, output and 
employment in Ireland fell exceptionally sharply during 2008–9 by amounts matched by few 
others (Figure 7). Since then, after three years of little change, a more positive tone emerged 
in  2013  with  employment  in  particular  recovering  almost  to  its  end-2009  level  –  while  still 
                                                
10  Of course policy should not have relied on “feel” cf. Lunn and Ruane (2013). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
over  11  per  cent  below  the  2007  pre-crisis  peak.  Despite  the  need  for  further  fiscal 
adjustment, all the signs are for a continued recovery, albeit slow. 
“Varieties of capitalism” 
Nor,  I  think,  is  Ireland  all  that  exceptional  in  the  spectrum  running  from  liberal  and 
coordinated market economies, seen as a key distinction in the current literature in Economic 
Sociology  and  Political  Economy  examining  what  are  termed  the  “varieties  of  capitalism”. 
Even  if  I  am  not  an  adept  of  this  method  of  comparatively  analysing  the  economies  of 
different  countries,  there  is  clearly  something  in  this  literature.  It  rightly  exposes  and 
emphasises that the characteristics of successful national economies can differ for extended 
periods: there is no ineluctable convergence to a single straitjacket determined by the logic of 
the market or of technology. 
In  recent  decades,  Ireland  has  oscillated  between  these  varieties,  having  exhibited  some 
features of each and at different times. 
One  dimension  discussed  in  the  literature  on  varieties  of  capitalism  is  the  growth  of 
“financialisation”  in  recent  decades.  Another  –  not  unrelated  –  is  the  degree  to  which  the 
varieties of capitalism may be correlated with levels and trend of inequality. Let me close by 
discussing these two dimensions. 
Financialisation and the future contribution of finance 
The term “financialisation” evokes the growth in size, revenue and influence of the financial 
sector  which  was  especially  striking  in  the  US,  UK  and  some  other  so-called  liberal 
economies, though noted also to a lesser extent across most of the world. 
Let’s  not  forget  the  extensive  body  of  empirical  literature  finding  that  financial  deepening 
(usually measured as a growth in the ratio of the assets of financial firms to the size of the 
economy)  is  clearly  causal  for  more  rapid  growth  in  developing  countries.  There  is  no 
evidence that financial deepening has systematically worsened inequality in those countries; 
if  anything  rather  the  opposite.  But  neither  proposition  seems  to  hold  for  advanced 
economies. Beyond a certain point, greater “financialisation” is not unproblematic. 
The  symptoms  of  “financialisation”  are  evident  in  Ireland  in  the  developments  of  the  early 
years of the new millennium (Cf. Ó Riain, 2012). The total size of the financial assets located 
in the “IFSC” firms and funds places Ireland on the edge of some international comparisons 
as having a very large financial sector relative the size of the economy, and even globally 
significant  in  absolute  terms  (cf.  Lane,  2013).  But  most  of  these  assets  are  at  most 
tangentially  linked  to  the  rest  of  the  economy.  Stripping  away  that  international  enclave 
business allows us to focus on what matters more. 
As we have seen, the domestic Irish banking system was traditionally rather passive as an 
investor,  stable,  but  contributing  comparatively  little  to  economic  growth.  From  the  early 
2000s, though, massive growth in its activities and apparent profitability told a new story. It 
would be hard to deny that this was “financialisation” even if, as I would argue, on a smaller 
scale than in the US.11,  12 Smaller because the exploitative predatory lending evidenced in 
                                                
11  It  is  notable  that  most  of  the  recorded  profits  of  the  banking  sector  were  reinvested  and  not  paid  out  in 
dividends:  more  so  indeed  in  Anglo  Irish  Bank  than  in  the  other  two  large  locally  controlled  banks.  Top 
bankers were indeed well paid, but their remuneration seems to have accounted for a smaller proportion of the 
bank’s revenue than the extraordinarily high figures for US investment banks. For instance the directors and 
top  management  (executive  committee  members)  of  Anglo  Irish  Bank  were  paid  the  sizeable  total  of 
€18 million  in  2007,  compared  with  €86  million  paid  in  equity  dividends,  but  also  to  be  compared  with  the 
before tax profit recorded as €1.2 billion. (Note, though that such remuneration figures do not include loans, 
for example). 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
that 
parts of the US sub-prime mortgage lending market spilled-over to Ireland to only a limited 
extent.  Nor  does  it  seem  that,  in  contrast  to  the  United  States  (Rajan,  2010),  provision  of 
easy mortgage credit was seen by the political establishment as an attractive way of meeting 
the living standard aspirations of lower income households. 
Yet  in  the  aggregate,  the  behaviour  of  the  banks  in  fuelling  the  property  bubble  with  their 
unrestrained  lending  both  to  developers  and  to  final  purchasers  was  hugely  damaging  to 
economic  wellbeing.  Their  shallow  credit  analysis  meant 
the  banks  greatly 
underestimated the risk of both forms of lending. Fixing the banks along those dimensions 
should be a relatively uncontroversial and mundane task. Probably it is much more important 
in  finance  that  fundamentals  of  soundness  are  restored  than  that  any  particular  flavour  of 
financial sector development is pursued in preference to others. 
But we should envisage far more than avoidance of failure from this sector in the future. 
Nobel laureate Robert Shiller, a perceptive critic of the US financial system and its excesses, 
is  nevertheless  an  advocate  of  greater  use  of  financial  engineering  in  improving  the 
performance of the economy, notably by devising and making available better instruments for 
risk-pooling  and  risk-sharing.  (Shillerian  finance  might  have  come  up  with  a  risk-sharing 
instrument sufficient to ease the anxieties that generated that post-Famine deferral of family 
formation.)  In  credit,  the  value  of  soft 
is  being 
re-appreciated,  leading  to  some  reappraisal  of  the  relationship  model  for  SME  lending. 
Community-based  lenders  can  be  key  actors  in  this  dimension.13  And  innovations  in  such 
areas  as  crowd-funding  could  also  come  to  complement  other  forms  of  non-bank  finance 
which are sure to grow in importance as banks repair their balance sheets and respond to 
regulatory  demands.  Not  every  financial  innovation  makes  sense;  finance  attracts  many 
crackpot schemes and is a happy hunting ground for populism. But it is clear that there are 
several  different  proven  models  of  organising  finance  that  are  equally  good  in  delivering 
growth outcomes,14 and which can have different impacts in other dimensions. 
local  knowledge 
information  and 
Income inequality 
Returning to the question of income inequality, I would argue that Ireland is not exceptional in 
this dimension either. As far as the income share of the top 1 per cent is concerned, the last 
quarter of the 20th Century saw Ireland’s figure growing midway between that of a group of 
“Anglo Saxon” countries and a group of “continental” countries (Alvaredo, Atkinson, Picketty 
and Saez, 2013). 
Indeed, in Ireland, despite the substantial loss of national income in the bust, policy has gone 
some  way  towards  limiting  the  rise  in  poverty  in  the  downturn  (Callan  et  al.,  2013).  This 
surely  reflects  a  broad  political  consensus  in  Ireland;  indeed  some  will  argue  that  more 
should have been done. Actually the data suggest that the later years of the boom did allow 
relative poverty to decline in Ireland, at a time when the opposite  was  happening in many 
countries  (Figure  8).  And  the  corresponding  data  for  2010  and  2011  suggest  that  any 
reversal in this improvement has been small and mainly concentrated among young adults 
(the  data  for  2012  are  not  yet  available).  A  similar  story  is  shown  by  the  Gini  coefficient, 
another indicator of inequality. Of course, holding inequality or relative poverty constant at a 
                                                                                                                                                   
12  In line with standard international practice, the recorded profits of the banks contributed to measured GDP, 
whereas their loan losses have been treated as a capital item, and have not been subtracted from the GDP of 
any year. 
13  This is why I regard strengthening of the credit union movement both financially and institutionally – a task 
which  has  been  conferred  on  the  Credit  Union  Restructuring  Board  (REBO)  as  worthy  of  the  substantial 
financial resources that have been earmarked for it. 
14  For instance the choice between relying mainly on stock markets or on universal banks for the financing of 
firms. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
time  of  falling  aggregate  income  still  means  a  loss  of  purchasing  power  for  those  at  the 
bottom  of  the  income  distribution  who  can  least  afford  it.  And  these  inequality  data  are 
probably not as reliable as some of the other more familiar macroeconomic data. But on this 
evidence  the  Irish  record  here  seems  better  than  in  some  of  the  adjusting  countries  in 
Europe. Here is an area where Ireland is not at an extreme: there is scope for policy to have 
a lasting impact. 
A long-argued issue in the economics of growth and development is whether greater equality 
of  income  is  causally  associated  with  more  or  less  development  –  this  is  a  topic  that  has 
been  receiving  a  welcome  degree  of  renewed  interest  internationally.  What  is  clear  is that 
countries at equally high levels of average living standards can exhibit very different internal 
income inequalities, reflecting different approaches to economic policy. “Growth is still good 
for the poor” is the self-explanatory title of a recent study by some of the leading experts in 
the  field  by  which  they  mean  that  there  is  no  systematic  tendency  for  growth  to  worsen 
income inequality: economic growth is accompanied by growing inequality in some countries, 
and  by  growing  equality  in  others.  Conversely,  recent  research  lends  some  support  to  the 
attractive  proposition  that  a  reduction  from  high  levels  of  inequality  can  help  drive  faster 
growth in average living standards (cf. Dollar et al., 2013; Ostry et al., 2014). 
Conclusion 
History shows us that, as a nation, Ireland does have a significant room for policy choices 
which  can  have  a  lasting  impact  on  the quality of  economic  development. While there  are 
important preconditions – common across countries and substantially defined in the acquis of 
the European Union – for successful national economic performance, economic policy is not 
simply  a  question  of  converging  to  a  single  normative  standard.  The  European  Union 
embraces  considerable  variety  of  style  within  the  acquis,  and  this  variety  enriches  and 
strengthens Europe. Such choices are political ones: we need to be aware that they exist. 
We  should  also  be  aware  of  the  speed  with  which  the  conditions  of  macroeconomic 
imbalance  can  change  quickly  in  Ireland,  not  least  because  of  its  exceptional  openness. 
Seemingly  intractable  imbalances  have  been  corrected  surprisingly  quickly;  balanced 
conditions have suddenly slipped out of control. The policy message here is one of optimism 
that at least some elements of current conditions can be made to swing around more quickly 
than is often supposed; and of vigilance that slippage does not occur again. 
 
 10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
  14 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
(1994). 
“A  Failed 
Institutional  Transplant:  Raiffeisen’s  Credit 
References 
Alvaredo, Facundo, Anthony B. Atkinson, Thomas Piketty, and Emmanuel Saez (2013). “The 
Top 1 Percent in International and Historical Perspective.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 
27(3): 3–20. 
Barry, Frank, John FitzGerald, Patrick Honohan and Iulia Siedschlag (2011). “The Globalized 
Irish Economy in Good Times and Bad.” IIIS DP 443. 
Callan, Tim, Claire Keane, Michael Savage, and John R. Walsh. (2013). “Distributional Impact 
of  Tax,  Welfare  and  Public  Service  Pay  Policies:  Budget  2014  and  Budgets  2009–2014.” 
ESRI Quarterly Economic Commentary, Winter. 
Dollar, David, Tatjana Kleineberg and Aart Kraay (2013). “Growth Still Is Good for the Poor.” 
The World Bank. Development Research Group Policy Research Working Paper 6568. 
FitzGerald, John (2013). “The Effect of Re-domiciled Plcs on Irish Output Measures and the 
Balance of Payments.” ESRI QEC Research Notes 2013/1/2 (Dublin: Economic and Social 
Research Institute). 
Guinnane,  Timothy. 
Cooperatives in Ireland 1894–1914.” Explorations in Economic History 31 38–61. 
Honohan,  Patrick  and  Brendan  M.Walsh  (2002).  “Catching-up  with  the  Leaders:  The  Irish 
Hare.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, No. 1, 2002, pp. 1–79. 
Ostry, Jonathan D., Andrew Berg, and Charalambos G. Tsangarides (2014). “Redistribution, 
Inequality, and Growth.” IMF Staff Discussion Note SDN/14/02. 
Lane,  Philip  D.  (2012).  “The  European  Sovereign  Debt  Crisis.”  Journal  of  Economic 
Perspectives 26(3), 49–68. 
Lane,  Philip  D.  (2013).  “The  Dynamics  of  Ireland’s  Net  External  Position.”  Journal  of  the 
Statistical and Social Inquiry Society of Ireland, forthcoming. 
Lunn, Pete and Frances Ruane, eds. (2013). Using Evidence to Inform Policy. (Dublin: Gill 
and Macmillan). 
Maddison, Angus (2003). The World Economy: Historical Statistics. (Paris: OECD) 
Ó  Gráda,  Cormac  (2012).  “Mortality  and  the  Great  Famine”,  in  John  Crowley,  William  J. 
Smyth & Mike Murphy, eds., Atlas of the Great Irish Famine (Cork University Press), 170–9. 
Ó Riain, Seán (2012). “The Crisis of Financialisation in Ireland.” The Economic and Social 
Review 43(4), 497–533 
Rajan, Raghu (2010). Fault Lines. (Princeton University Press). 
Shiller, Robert J. (1993). Macro Markets: Creating Institutions for Managing Society’s largest 
Economic Risks (Oxford University Press). 
Government  of  Ireland  (1955).  Commission  on  Emigration  and  Other  Population  Problem. 
(Dublin: Stationery Office).  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
