Grant Spencer: Coordination of monetary policy and macro-prudential 
policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Grant  Spencer,  Deputy  Governor  and  Head  of  Financial  Stability  of  the 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand,  at  the  Credit  Suisse  Asian  Investment  Conference,  Hong 
Kong, 27 March 2014. 
Accompanying tables and figures can be found at the end of the speech. 
 Introduction 
1. 
The Reserve Bank expects to tighten monetary policy substantially over the next two years in 
response  to  emerging  inflation  risks.  At  the  same  time,  speed  limits  on  high  loan-to-value 
ratio (LVR) lending have been in place since 1 October 2013, in order to reduce systemic risk 
associated with highly leveraged households and rising house prices. The natural question 
arises: how do LVR speed limits interact with monetary policy? And to  what extent should 
they be coordinated? These questions relate to the current business cycle but also raise a 
broader  question  –  what  are  the  general  principles  that  should  apply  in  managing  macro-
prudential policy and monetary policy going forward? 
These are important questions that do not have simple answers. They are being explored in 
the economic policy literature and the Reserve Bank is currently undertaking research to help 
clarify  the  issues  in  the  New  Zealand  context.  Today  I  would  like  to  discuss  the  Bank’s 
current  thinking  on  the  interaction  of  monetary  and  macro-prudential  policies,  and  point  to 
areas  for  further  analysis.  The  Bank  sees  it  as  important  to  communicate  its  thinking  on 
policy coordination, to maintain the transparency it has built up over many years on monetary 
policy. 
To summarise the Bank’s current position, we believe it is essential to retain clear primary 
objectives for both monetary and macro-prudential policy. These primary objectives are price 
stability and financial system stability respectively. However, there is an appropriate role for 
policy  coordination  in  certain  circumstances  and  with  certain  policy  tools.  The  key  in  this 
respect, is to ensure that the primary aims of the two policy arms are not undermined by too 
heavily diverting the attention of those policies to secondary objectives. 
Conceptually,  there  is  a  case  for  coordinating  the  use  of  monetary  policy  and  a  macro- 
prudential policy instrument provided they both affect outcomes relevant to the achievement 
of both policy objectives. In general this condition is likely to be met, but in widely  varying 
degrees. 
Most  of  the  time  monetary  policy  and  macro-prudential  policy  should  be  able  to  operate 
largely independently, or have complementary effects on each other that are relatively easy 
to manage (Table 1). Relative independence will be possible when one or both of the policies 
are in ‘neutral’, and therefore imparting little influence on the other’s objective. The greatest 
degree of complementarity will occur when the real and financial cycles are in sync – either 
rising  or  falling  together  as  depicted  in  the  SW  and  NE  corners  of  Table  1.  In  these 
situations, coordination should be relatively simple, requiring each policy setting to allow for 
the  complementary  effects  of  the  other.  Conversely,  the  two  policies  will  be  in  greatest 
potential conflict when the real and financial cycles are out of sync, as depicted in the NW 
and SE corners of the Table. These are the situations where coordination is difficult but also 
important.  This  is  where  the  primary  objectives  of  the  two  policies  need  to  be  carefully 
balanced. (Table 1) 
To  explore  the  policy  coordination  options  more  closely,  I  will  first  examine  what  macro-
prudential can do for price stability, and then turn the tables and ask what monetary policy 
can do for financial stability. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
What can macro-prudential policy do for price stability? 
2. 
The basic motivation for using a macro-prudential instrument to assist monetary policy is to 
help support the price stability objective of the central bank. The monetary authority will in 
most  cases  welcome  assistance  from  a  range  of  other  policies,  such  as  supportive  fiscal 
policy  or  structural  reforms  that  increase  competitive  pressures  and  enhance  productivity. 
Assistance will be particularly welcome from macro-prudential policy if it targets a ‘hot spot’ 
such as an overheated housing market. (Figure 1) 
Macro-prudential instruments can reduce systemic risk in two ways: 1) by dampening credit 
and  asset  price  cycles;  and  2)  by  increasing  the  resilience  of  balance  sheets  in  the 
downward  phase  of  the  cycle.  When  thinking  about  policy  coordination,  we  are  mainly 
interested in tools that work through the first channel, such as LVR restrictions. Our work to 
date  suggests  that  LVR  restrictions  have  material  impacts  on  the  supply  of  credit  (RBNZ 
(2013))  and  hence  on  the  inflation  objective.  Other  macro-prudential  tools,  such  as  the 
Counter  Cyclical  Capital  Buffer  (CCB),  operate  more  through  the  second  (resilience 
increasing) channel, and are less relevant for coordination with monetary policy1. 
Assistance from macro-prudential tools is likely to be most appropriate when monetary policy 
faces constraints and difficult trade-offs in dampening inflation pressures. For a small open 
economy like New Zealand, these constraints often emerge as a result of spill-over effects 
from  the  global  financial  markets  and,  in  particular,  exchange  rate  pressures.  A  good 
example  is  the  experience  with  monetary  policy  during  the  last  housing  boom from  2003–
2007. 
During that time, monetary policy lost a degree of traction as relatively high policy rates and 
market  returns  attracted  strong  capital  inflows,  resulting  in  a  high  exchange  rate  and 
downward  pressure  on  long-term  interest  rates.  Borrowers  responded  by  locking  in  longer 
term financing at relatively low rates, thereby reducing the impact of official cash rate (OCR) 
increases.  This  meant  that  larger  increases  in  the  OCR  were  required  to  control  inflation, 
putting additional upward pressure on the New Zealand dollar exchange rate. 
There  were  loud  calls  at  the  time  for  the  use  of  alternative  policy  instruments  to  assist 
monetary  policy.  Possible  candidates  included  macro-prudential  policy  and  tax  measures, 
such as a capital gains tax or a mortgage interest levy (Treasury and RBNZ (2006)). With 
hindsight, the use of another policy instrument would have been helpful during this period, to 
assist in slowing domestic demand and inflation pressure, with less of the work having to be 
done  by  the  OCR  and  the  exchange  rate.  LVR  restrictions  may  have  been  able  to  assist, 
given the rapid rates of credit and house price growth at the time which presented risks for 
financial stability as well as price stability. 
Macro-prudential tools may also have been a useful complement to monetary policy in the 
economic downturn from 2008. If banks had entered the recession with more stable sources 
of funding and larger capital buffers, then the tightening in credit conditions that ensued after 
the GFC may have been ameliorated, potentially reducing the need to ease monetary policy 
as significantly. In this way, the use of macro-prudential adjustments in downturn situations 
can lower the risk of running up against the zero lower bound on interest rates. 
But  there  can  also  be  significant  costs  if  macro-prudential  policy  instruments  are  used  too 
aggressively  in  support  of  monetary  policy.  All  macro-prudential  instruments  create 
incentives  for  financial  disintermediation–  credit  flows  that  avoid  the  regulation  by  moving 
outside  of  the  regulatory  perimeter.  Over-use  of  macro-prudential  tools  in  an  attempt  to 
                                                
1   These other macro-prudential tools work by forcing banks to temporarily increase capital or funding buffers 
during periods of rising asset prices and leverage. Because the cost of capital and/or core funding is likely to 
be compressed during such periods, any cycle-dampening effects from these instruments are likely to be more 
limited. However, these tools can have significant effects by improving the scope for banks to continue to lend 
in the downward phase of the cycle. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
manage  the  credit  cycle  would  likely  see  disintermediation  increase,  thus  reducing  the 
effectiveness  of  the  policy  tools.  Moreover,  by  pushing  financial  intermediation  towards 
secondary  ‘shadow  banking’  channels,  excessive  use  of  macro-prudential  policy  could 
weaken  financial  system  efficiency  and  ultimately  reduce  the  soundness  of  the  financial 
system. We have seen examples of such behaviour in New Zealand’s history and in many 
other countries. 
With  all  these  considerations  in  mind,  there  may  be  scope  for  macro-prudential  policy  to 
assist  monetary  policy,  to  a  limited  extent,  both  in  the  up  and  down  cycle,  provided  its 
primary objective of promoting financial stability is kept firmly in mind. 
What can monetary policy do for financial stability? 
3. 
We  regard  financial  stability  as  a  necessary  –  but  not  sufficient–  condition  for  macro-
economic  stability.  The  GFC-induced  recession  is  evidence  enough  of  the  potential  for 
financial  instability  to  generate  macroeconomic  instability.  Further,  monetary  policy  can 
influence asset price and credit cycles through its impact on bank lending rates. Thus, there 
is  a  potential  case  for  monetary  policy  to  assist  in  promoting  financial  stability  or,  at  a 
minimum, not to undermine it.2 (Figure 2) 
The emerging literature identifies a number of channels through which monetary policy can 
influence risk-taking behaviour and the build-up of systemic risk (Borio and Zhu (2010)). In 
particular, an extended period of low interest rates can contribute to financial stability risks by 
increasing risk-taking, leading to a ‘search for yield’ and compression of credit spreads. In a 
similar way, an extended period of low interest rates can also lead to an excessive easing of 
bank lending standards. 
Looking at the issue from another angle, a tightening of monetary policy to rein in inflation 
pressure has often brought an end to credit booms (Drehmann and Juselius (2012)). In other 
words, sharp movements in interest rates, as well as sustained low levels of interest rates, 
can lead to financial system stress. 
However,  a  key  lesson  from  the  literature  and  from  our  own  experience  is  that  the 
transmission of monetary policy to financial stability is far less clear than its transmission to 
inflation. In particular, the effect of monetary policy on financial stability will depend critically 
on the state of the financial sector at the time. For example, the impact of an OCR tightening 
cycle may be very different depending on the starting levels of household and corporate debt 
and debt servicing capacity. 
When  are  monetary  policy  adjustments  likely  to  be  helpful  from  a  financial  stability 
perspective? This is likely to be in situations where asset and credit markets are buoyant and 
prudential policies alone are insufficient to constrain a build-up of financial system stress. 
For example, by themselves, macro-prudential policies such as LVR restrictions may have 
limited  effects  on  asset  price  inflation  and  the  credit  cycle.  Macro-prudential  policies  must 
remain consistent with micro prudential principles and are therefore not generally scalable in 
the  way  that  interest  rates  are.  Further,  the  impact  of  macro-prudential  policies  can  be 
eroded  if  there  is  disintermediation  outside  the  regulatory  perimeter,  something  which 
becomes more likely if interest rates are set at stimulatory levels. Thus, in a situation where 
inflation is near the target, but asset markets are rising sharply, assistance from monetary 
policy can be an important means of meeting financial stability objectives. 
                                                
2   Many countries are currently actively considering how to manage the potential effects of an extended period of 
loose monetary policy on financial stability. For example, the Bank of England has recently included a financial 
stability knock-out in its forward guidance on monetary policy (Kohn (2013). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
As noted by Federal Reserve Governor, Jeremy Stein (2012), monetary policy“gets in all the 
cracks” of the financial system. It affects the cost of credit for all borrowers, including those 
that may be avoiding macro-prudential regulations as a result of disintermediation. 
Other policy initiatives that seek to alleviate supply-demand imbalances in asset markets can 
also  be  helpful.  In  the  case  of  housing  markets  for  example,  this  might  involve  regulatory 
reform around zoning and other planning restrictions, or changes in taxation that reduce the 
incentive for speculative investment. 
Should  monetary  policy  respond  to  a  request  from  the  prudential  authorities  for  tighter 
policy? The key test is whether this is consistent with the primary monetary policy objective 
of price stability. If monetary policy is diverted too far or too long from its primary objective of 
price stability there is a risk that the transparency and credibility of monetary policy will be 
damaged, thus reducing the long-run effectiveness of monetary policy in achieving its prime 
objective. This potential problem has been emphasised for example by Svensson (2011). 
Policymakers  and  academics  around  the  world  have  debated  the  appropriateness  of 
tightening  monetary  policy  on  financial  stability  grounds  during  credit  or  asset  booms. 
Broadly speaking, there are two opposing views in the ‘lean versus clean’ debate: 
• 
The “clean” view was dominant prior to the GFC. This view proposes that monetary 
policy should not respond to asset or credit booms, except to the extent that they 
influence  inflation  pressures.  It  assumes  that  monetary  policy  can  ‘clean  up’  the 
impact on the real economy if the financial cycle crashes, and that the tightening in 
monetary policy required to lean against a credit or asset price boom would create 
unacceptable costs for the wider economy. This view implicitly assumes that micro- 
and macro-prudential instruments can effectively limit the extent of financial system 
damage in the downturn. 
The ‘lean’ view has become more prominent since the GFC for two reasons. First, 
policy  makers  were  surprised  how  large  asset  bubbles  could  emerge  under 
conditions of sustained price stability, prudent fiscal policies, and small output gaps. 
Second,  the  output  and  employment  losses  and  other  social  and  economic  costs 
associated  with  the  aftermath  of  the  GFC  proved  to  be  much  greater  and  more 
deep-set than policy makers expected. The‘lean’ view proposes that monetary policy 
should  actively  lean  against  credit  booms  for  financial  stability  purposes.  It  is 
assumed that: (i) monetary policy that leans against credit booms is consistent with 
long-run price stability; and (ii) increased interest rates can be effective in limiting a 
credit boom with limited costs for the wider economy. This view implicitly assumes 
that there can be circumstances where prudential policies – both micro and macro – 
are insufficient to contain financial system risks on their own. (Table 2) 
 Research is continuing in this area. Although the ‘lean’ view has become more dominant, in 
particular reflecting research from the BIS (Borio and Lowe (2003)), there is no consensus 
that monetary policy should always respond to emerging financial stresses. Rather, there is 
an  emerging  consensus  that  financial  stability  is  a  valid  secondary  objective  and  that 
monetary  policy  may  respond  to  financial  stability  concerns  when  such  actions  are  also 
consistent with the primary price stability objective (Smets (2013)). 
The New Zealand framework: conditional policy coordination 
4. 
New  Zealand’s  policy  framework  might  be  described  as  one  of  conditional  policy 
coordination. That is to say, the two policies retain distinct primary objectives, but are free to 
lend  a  hand  to  the  other  policy  objective,  provided  their  primary  objectives  are  not 
compromised.  In  New  Zealand,  such  coordination  is  facilitated  by  decisions  on  macro-
prudential  and  monetary  policies  being  undertaken  by  the  Reserve  Bank’s  Governing 
Committee, but with clearly distinct mandates for the two policies. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand  has  long  had  a  mandate to  use  its (micro-)  prudential 
policies  to  promote  a  sound  and  efficient  financial  system. We  do  not  have  a  mandate  to 
protect  the  soundness  of  individual  institutions.  The  macro-prudential  policy  framework 
established in 2013 also focuses on promoting a sound and efficient financial system using a 
set  of  instruments  that  may  be  varied  through  the  financial  cycle.  A  Memorandum  of 
Understanding on macro-prudential policy was signed with the Minister of Finance in 2013 
that  sets  out  the  objectives,  instruments  and  responsibilities  for  macro-prudential  policy 
(Rogers (2013)). 
The new macro-prudential framework draws lessons from the monetary policy framework. It 
incorporates a commitment to achieving the objective that it is best suited to financial stability 
–  combined  with  decision-making  at  arm’s-length  from  political  pressures.  However,  a  key 
difference is that macro-prudential policy decisions involve a greater degree of consultation 
with government and the public. 
The  New  Zealand  policy  framework  recognises  the  interactions  between  monetary  and 
macro-prudential  policies  and  the  logic  of  conditional  policy  coordination.  In  pursuing  its 
primary objective of price stability, the Policy Targets Agreement (PTA) states that monetary 
policy  must  have  regard  to  financial  stability.  And  in  pursuing  its  primary  financial  stability 
objective, macro-prudential policy is required under the MoU to consider any implications for 
monetary policy. 
LVR speed limits and interactions with monetary policy 
5. 
New Zealand has experienced live issues at the interface of macro-prudential and monetary 
policies.  During  2003–2007,  New  Zealand  experienced  one  of  the  highest  house  price 
appreciations  among  the  OECD  economies.  A period  of  sustained  low  interest  rates  since 
2009,  combined  with  easing  lending  conditions  and  a  housing  supply  shortage  has 
contributed to a resurging housing market with house prices at end 2013 almost 15 percent 
above  the  2007  peak.  The  Bank  responded  with  the  introduction  of  an  LVR  ‘speed  limit’, 
commencing 1 October 2013 (RBNZ (2013)). 
The  purpose  of  this  LVR  restriction  is  to  reduce  the  build-up  of  financial  system  risk  by: 
1) dampening  the  rapid  growth  in  house  prices;  and  2)  strengthening  households’  and  the 
banks’ balance sheets. The policy does not ban high LVR lending, but allows banks to write 
no more than 10 percent of their mortgage commitments at LVRs over 80 percent, and has 
led to a significant reduction in high-LVR lending. (Figure 3) 
Initially, we estimated that the LVR restrictions would dampen annual growth in house prices 
by 1–4 percentage points; house sales by 3–8 percent, and credit growth by 1–3 percentage 
points over the first year that the policy was in place. The evidence to date suggests that the 
dampening effect of the LVR restrictions on house prices has been broadly in line with these 
expectations. House sales have fallen by 13 percent since September, and there are early 
signs that this is beginning to translate into weaker house prices and credit growth.3 (Table 3) 
While LVRs have a financial stability purpose, they have been an important consideration in 
our monetary policy assessment. The dampening effect of LVRs on house price inflation and 
credit  is  expected  to  reduce  wealth  and  credit  effects  on  consumption  that  might  have 
otherwise increased due to a rapid expansion in house prices. This, in turn, is estimated to 
have reduced CPI inflation pressures by an amount similar to a 25–50 basis point increase in 
the OCR. 
                                                
3   Reserve Bank simulations of the counter-factual – what would have happened to house price inflation in the 
absence of LVR speed limits – suggests house price inflation would have been about 2.5 percent higher than 
its current level. We are continuing to monitor the effects of LVR restrictions and will publish new estimates of 
their impact in the Reserve Bank’s May Financial Stability Report. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Earlier this month, in response to broadening inflation pressures, the Reserve Bank began 
an OCR tightening cycle after three years of no change in the policy rate. Given that the LVR 
restrictions  began  to  moderate  the  housing  cycle  from  October  2013,  the  monetary  policy 
tightening cycle might have needed to be more accentuated in their absence. While the main 
benefit of the LVRs has been to redress the impact of the easier lending conditions, they may 
also have helped to take some pressure off the New Zealand dollar exchange rate. 
What  if  the  policies  had  not  been  “conditionally  coordinated”? While  purely  hypothetical,  if 
these policy decisions were being made on a strictly independent basis, we may have seen 
macro-prudential  policy‘wait’  for  the  coming  monetary  policy  tightening  cycle  to  slow  the 
housing market. An absence of any macro-prudential measures may in turn have prompted 
the monetary policy tightening to have started somewhat earlier. 
To be clear, the monetary policy tightening cycle that is now underway is motivated by the 
need to ensure that CPI inflation remains in the vicinity of 2 percent over the medium term. 
The  boost  to  financial  system  resilience  provided  by  the  LVR  restrictions,  as  well  as  a 
decision  to  increase  risk  weights  for  high-LVR  housing  lending4,  has  meant  that  monetary 
policy has not needed to consider a tightening for financial stability purposes. However, while 
not motivated by the financial stability objective, the monetary policy tightening is expected to 
help in dampening further house price inflation. In this regard, as interest rates move back to 
more  normal  levels,  we  will  expect  to  have  greater  scope  to  ease  or  remove  the  LVR 
restrictions. 
The  Reserve  Bank  stated from  the  outset  that  the  LVR  restrictions  are not  intended  to  be 
permanent. They will be removed once housing market pressures have moderated and when 
we are confident there will not be a resurgence in house price inflation (Wheeler (2013)). But 
how should the exit be coordinated with the expected OCR tightening cycle? The factors to 
consider include: 
– 
The  degree  of  moderation  achieved  in  rates  of  house  price  inflation  and  credit 
expansion; 
Factors  that  might  affect  the  potential  for  a  resurgence  in  house  price  inflation 
following  the  removal  of  the  LVRs,  such  as  the  dampening  effect  of  increased 
housing  supply  and  mortgage  rates,  and  the  stimulatory  effect  of  higher  net 
immigration flows; 
Any distortions or inefficiencies that become apparent as a result of the policy. 
– 
A  decision  to  ease  or  remove  LVR  restrictions  will  ultimately  take  into  account  both  the 
financial stability and price stability implications of doing so. We will be alert to the risk that 
the removal of LVR restrictions could produce a resurgence in house price inflation, which 
would potentially undermine both financial and price stability. 
 Conclusion 
6. 
While  monetary  policy  and  macro-prudential  policy  need  to  retain  their  separate  primary 
objectives of price stability and financial stability, the significant spill-over effects between the 
two policies make a clear case for their co-ordination. However, such coordination must be 
conditional on each policy arm continuing to focus on its primary objective. Changing to joint 
objectives for both policies would: 1) complicate policy decisions; 2) undermine transparency; 
and  3)  potentially  be  damaging  to  the  credibility  of  monetary  policy  and  macro-  prudential 
policy. 
                                                
4  
Increased risk weights for high-LVR mortgages applied to the large Internal Ratings Based (IRB) banks from 
September 2013. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The  policy  framework  in  New  Zealand  is  consistent  with  this  conditional  coordination 
approach.  In  the  monetary  policy  targets  agreement  we  have  financial  stability  as  a 
secondary objective. This means that the monetary authorities need to think hard if an OCR 
decision might have adverse effects for financial stability. Similarly, in the macro-prudential 
MoU it is required that macro-prudential initiatives have regard to their potential impact on 
monetary policy. 
There  remain  many  aspects  of  policy  co-ordinations  where  we  need  to  deepen  our 
understanding. These include: 
• 
The  quantitative  effects  of  macro-prudential  policy  on  macro-economic  outcomes 
and their implications for monetary policy. 
The  scale  and  timing  of  spill-over  effects  between  the  OCR  and  our  four  macro-
prudential tools. 
How  best  to  coordinate  OCR  and  macro-prudential  policy  decisions  at  different 
points of the economic and financial cycles, particularly when the two cycles are out 
of sync and the policies are not complementary. 
  This is an active area of the academic literature and a priority area for our own research. I 
look  forward  to  the  insights  that  this  work  will  give  us  for  our  future  monetary  and  macro-
prudential policy decisions. 
References 
Beau, D, L Clerc and B Mojon (2012) “Macro-prudential policy and the conduct of monetary 
policy”, Banque De France Working Paper, 390. 
Borio,  C  and  P  Lowe  (2003),  “Borio,  C.  and  P.  Lowe  (2002),  “Asset  prices,  financial  and 
monetary stability: Exploring the nexus”, BIS Working Paper, 114. 
Borio, C and H Zhu (2008) “Capital regulation, risk-taking and monetary policy: A missing link 
in the transmission mechanism?” BIS Working Paper, 268. 
Drehmann,  M  and  Juselius  M  (2012),  “Do  debt  service  costs  affect  macro-economic  and 
financial stability?”, BIS Quarterly Review,September 2012. 
Kohn (2013), “The interactions of macro-prudential and monetary policies: a view from the 
Bank  of  England’s  Financial  Policy  Committee,Speech  given  to  the  Oxford  Institute  for 
Economic Policy, 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2013/speech692.pdf. 
Reserve Bank of New Zealand (2013), “Regulatory impact assessment: Restrictions on high-
LVR residential mortgage lending”, 
http://rbnz.govt.nz/financial_stability/macro-prudential_policy/5407434.pdf 
Rogers,  L  (2013), “A  new  approach  to  macro-prudential  policy  for  New  Zealand”,  Reserve 
Bank of New Zealand Bulletin, 76:3. 
Treasury  and  RBNZ  (2006),  “Supplementary  Stabilisation  Instruments:  Initial  report”, 
http://www.rbnz.govt.nz/monetary_policy/about_monetary_policy/2452274.pdf. 
Smets (2013), “Financial stability and monetary policy: How closely interlinked?”, Riksbank 
Quarterly Economic Review, 2013:3. 
Stein  (2012),  “Lean,  clean  and  in-between”,  Speech  presented  to  the  NBER  research 
conference: Lessons from the financial crisis for monetary policy, 
http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/stein20131018a.htm 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
Svensson, L (2011), “Monetary Policy after the Crisis”,Speech given at the Federal Reserve 
Bank of San Fransisco, http://larseosvensson.se/files/papers/LS111129e.pdf 
Wheeler  (2013),  “The  Introduction  of  Macro-prudential  Policy”,  Speech  delivered  to  Otago 
University, http://rbnz.govt.nz/research_and_publications/speeches/2013/5407267.html. 
 
 
 
Table 1. Possible scenarios for macro-prudential and monetary policies 
Source: Adapted from Beau et al (2012). 
Figure 1. Monetary and Macro-prudential policy interactions 
   8 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Figure 2. Monetary and Macro-prudential policy interactions 
  Table 2. Different views of the role of monetary policy in achieving financial stability 
 Source: Adapted from Smets (2013). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  9 
Figure 3. Share of high-LVR lending 
 Table  3  Housing  and  credit  developments  since  the  introduction  of  LVR  speed 
limits 
 
*  Due  to  the  slow-moving  nature  of  housing  credit,  this  figure  is  calculated  as  an 
annualised three-month percent change. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     10 
 