  Vítor Constâncio: “We are certainly not almighty”– interview with 
Börsen-Zeitung 
Interview by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, with Börsen-
Zeitung, conducted by Mr Mark Schrös, published on 11 September 2014. 
 The ECB’s Vice President talks about the power and the limits of the central bank, the risks 
of very low inflation and the strong criticism in Germany 
BZ: Mr Constâncio, many politicians and observers view the power and the instruments of 
the ECB in its fight against low inflation and a weak recovery as almost unlimited, but others 
say the ECB is already reaching its limits. Do you feel almighty or powerless? 
Constâncio: This is indeed a really interesting question. But I would say it is neither one nor 
the other: We are certainly not almighty, but we are also not powerless. What we do has an 
effect on the economy and so it is very important. 
But expectations or hopes that the ECB might change tack alone are overblown, yes? 
If one is talking about the perspectives of growth it is true that monetary policy cannot do it 
alone. It’s mostly up to governments, especially structural reforms. But if one is talking about 
inflation it is different: It is the responsibility of monetary policy to reach the inflation goal – 
that is the fundamental creed of monetary theory and of central banks. We cannot shift this 
responsibility to others, but if others can help, it is even better. 
ECB President Mario Draghi has said that it might be difficult to reach the target of below but 
close to 2% without some fiscal stimulus and structural reforms. But you would say that when 
the inflation goal is at risk, the ECB has to act, regardless of what others do? 
Right, this is how I see it with regards to inflation. However, Mr Draghi was also referring to 
growth in his speech, and as I just said, that is different. Naturally, at the moment it would 
help  enormously  if  politicians  would  also  deliver.  If  they  would  generate  more  growth  this 
would reduce the slack in the economy. This would help against the very dangerous situation 
of low inflation. 
But you have to be increasingly frustrated because the ECB always delivers but politicians 
do not, don’t you? 
Yes, absolutely. But it is important to acknowledge that the stressed countries have done a 
lot of structural reforms, and have started to grow again. 
But at the moment the problem children are France or Italy, they refuse to make reforms. 
Of course there are some countries in which structural reforms are urgently needed. If you 
look at OECD 2013 report about the responsiveness to their recommendations for structural 
reforms, the stressed countries are at the top and other euro area countries are below the 
euro average: France, the Netherlands, also Germany. 
Recently  there  has  been  a  lot  of  talking  about  a  “grand  bargain”,  meaning  a  kind  of  deal 
between fiscal, structural and monetary policy to overcome the crisis in the euro area. Draghi 
has said that there is no such bargain. But would you say this is something that is needed at 
the moment – like in Japan? 
I think we need the three pillars. But at the same time we are much more concerned about 
the independence of the central bank in Europe. So this kind of coordination would not be 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  appropriate. This is why we have decided what had to be decided on our part, and president 
Draghi has mentioned what the others should do. 
Only three months after a historical package the ECB has again loosened its monetary policy 
significantly.  Does  that  mean  that  there  is  an  increasing  worry  about  stagnation  or  even 
deflation? 
Two  things  happened  since  June:  On  the  one  hand,  the  decline  in  inflation  expectations 
across the whole spectrum. It would be extremely dangerous to let inflation expectations de-
anchor… 
… That means letting them fall significantly below the target of 2%... 
… Right. Not under any circumstances we should let that happen. If that happens it would be 
extremely difficult to regain control of inflation expectations. They are a main factor for future 
inflation.  On  the  other  hand,  the  final  results  for  the  second  quarter  have  been  very 
disappointing. This increases the slack in the economy with downward pressure on inflation. 
What  really  matters  are  medium-  to  longer-term  inflation  expectations.  Are  they  still 
“anchored”? 
They  are  starting  to  get  de-anchored  for  horizons  up  to  4  years.  These  figures  declined 
significantly  during  the  past  two  months.  Now  it  is  also  starting  to  attain  the  inflation 
expectations  in  five  years  for  the  following  five  years.  Furthermore,  the  influence  of  short-
term expectations on longer-term expectation is increasing. This is a bad signal and a big 
concern  for  us.  The  risk  that  the  longer-term  expectations  get  de-anchored  has  definitely 
increased enormously. 
And that also means the risk of deflation in the euro area has increased? 
I don’t see a risk of an actual deflation in the sense of a broad-based decline in prices. But 
the big problem at the moment is a prolonged period of low nominal growth, so low inflation 
and low growth. This creates debt sustainability problems – both for private households and 
governments.  Furthermore,  increasing  real  interest  rates  have  negative  effects  on  the 
economic recovery. 
But the new ECB projections for growth and inflation have been revised only marginally. Why 
did the Governing Council nevertheless decide to take quite far-reaching decisions? 
These  are  not  the  Governing  Council’s  projections  –this  is  very  important.  These  are  the 
ECB’s  staff  projections  and  in  that  sense  they  are  just  one  element  for  the  Governing 
Council’s  decision.  The  risks  to  the  downside  for  growth  and  inflation  were  seen  as  more 
important by the Governing Council. 
So it would be fair to say it was some kind of insurance policy against the downside risks? 
When we deal with risk management we always have to be as preemptive as possible. This 
is particularly the case if there is a risk to inflation expectations. We simply had to do more 
right now. 
With the recent decisions the Governing Council explicitly aims at a significant increase in 
the ECB’s balance sheet. This is a major shift in the ECB’s policy, bringing it even closer to 
other central banks. 
With the recent interest rate cut we are now at the zero lower bound. So if we believe that we 
need  an  even  more  expansionary  monetary  policy,  we  have  to  find  different  channels.  An 
increase  in  the  balance  sheet  is  one  option.  On  the  one  hand,  it  influences  the  inflation 
expectations for the future, and on the other hand, it triggers shifts in investors’ decisions. 
This will spill over to other asset markets and also have an impact on the exchange rate. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  According  to  many  observers  the  effects  could  be  even  bigger  if  the  ECB  would  give  a 
precise  figure  for  the  two  purchases  programs  of  Asset  Backed  Securities  (ABS)  and 
Covered Bonds. 
I  understand  the  argument.  But  from  our  perspective  it  is  difficult  and  it  would  not  be 
appropriate to commit to a certain number. We have decided not to do so. 
So  even  when  we  get  more  details  at  the  beginning  of  October  we  will  not  get  a  precise 
figure for the planned purchases? 
At the moment we are not intending to give a concrete number. 
But  Draghi  has  signaled  that  –  including  the  new  TLTROs  –  the  aim  is  to  increase  the 
balance  sheet  by  €750  billion  to  €1  trillion.  Many  observers  doubt  that  this  is  possible, 
especially within a short period of time. 
We are convinced that the three components will have a sizeable effect on our balance sheet 
–  with  the  consequences  I  have  described. We expect  the  most significant  effect to  come 
from the TLTROs. This is also why we again cut interest rates. There had been rumors that 
banks might not come to the first TLTROs because they were speculating that interest rates 
could be cut later. This is now off the table. 
Does that also mean the smaller the TLTROs uptake, the bigger the purchase programs will 
be? 
This is not necessarily the case. But again: We believe that this new facility is very attractive. 
So banks are well advised not to miss this opportunity. 
And  if  everything  else  fails  the  ECB  will  start  buying  government  bonds?  This  option  of  a 
broad based Quantitative Easing (QE) was already discussed in the Governing Council, but it 
did not happen already this time. Does that mean there is no “comfortable majority” for this 
step – like for the others which were announced last week? 
There was no proposal for doing QE at this meeting. QE was discussed, but it was not on the 
table for a decision. So I don’t think you could draw this conclusion. 
So QE, including the purchase of government bonds, would be the next logical step for the 
Governing Council? 
We are convinced that we are allowed to buy government bonds in the secondary market, if 
it is justified by monetary policy considerations. But we also know what it means and this is 
certainly something we would prefer not to be forced to do. We hope that the recent package 
will be enough. But in view of our responsibility and our mandate, buying government bonds 
certainly is something we cannot exclude. 
But this would lead to even more dissent within the Governing Council. Last week’s decision 
was not unanimous – although it is always stressed that the Governing Council is unanimous 
in its commitment to do what is necessary against the risks of low inflation. 
This phrase does not mean that in a particular moment everybody has to agree to a concrete 
package.  The  most  significant  thing  about  this  phrase  –  which  was  decided  upon 
unanimously – is that no unconventional instrument is a priori excluded. But calibration and 
timing can occasionally be a source of discussion. 
But with the most recent decision the consensus decision-making is ultimately history now? 
Since 2010, we have had some decisions which were not taken unanimously. In such difficult 
times,  there  are  different  views.  I  would  not  qualify  this  as  surprising  or  even  negative  as 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  such. In the future, we will also always try to reach consensus. But sometimes we have to 
take decisions. 
You  have  mentioned  the  impact  the  ECB’s  policy  has  on  the  euro.  Your  colleague  Ewald 
Nowotny made even more blunt comments by saying the aim was to weaken the currency. Is 
the ECB also in this respect becoming more like other central banks, which implicitly use the 
exchange rate as an instrument? Don’t you fear counter-measures by others? 
I have to contradict you: We have not taken a single decision which was aimed directly to the 
exchange rate. No one can say that. Our monetary policy is targeted to domestic objectives. 
We are justified to do so because of the difficult situation of low inflation we are in. Of course 
everybody  knows  that  unavoidably  there  are  consequences  for  the  exchange  rate.  The 
devaluation of the euro is a collateral consequence of our policy. But what really matters is 
the domestic objective. Not a goal for the exchange rate. We have not changed our policy in 
that respect. 
This reminds me of Japan. In 2013 Japanese leaders also said that the ultra-expansionary 
monetary policy was aimed at domestic targets and not to weaken the Yen. At that time also 
European policymakers and central bankers doubted and criticized that. 
If  you  read  the  IMF  or  the  G20  statements,  the  Japanese  policy  was  always  considered 
acceptable because it was directed towards understandable domestic targets. Now the same 
applies to the euro area, although in a different scale: We are not in deflation and we will not 
be in deflation. 
In Germany the ECB’s policy is heavily criticized. This will increase with the planned asset 
purchases. One concern is that the ECB takes risks on its own balance sheet which could at 
the  end  cause  some  problems  for  taxpayers  again.  Isn’t  it  a  big  risk  that  the  support  in 
Germany for the ECB could be get lost completely? 
This is of course a concern to us. We don’t live in an ivory tower. But we have a mandate 
and this mandate is for the 18 euro area countries as a whole. But I also think there are a lot 
of misunderstandings and unjustified fears in Germany. Just to give one example: When we 
started buying some government bonds for the first time in 2010, everybody was writing in 
Germany about the forthcoming hyperinflation. This did not happen and there is no reason to 
believe that it will happen now. And also in 2010 there had been fears about potential losses. 
If anything, the Eurosystem made a very significant profit with these acquisitions. 
But  the  feeling  is  that  the  ECB  is  more  and  more  deviating  from  the  stability-oriented 
monetary  policy  of  the  Bundesbank  in  its  former  days.  This  feeling  even  increases  if 
Bundesbank President Jens Weidmann is opposing ECB decisions. 
I find it difficult to say that the ECB is deviating from a stability-oriented policy when inflation 
rates are at 0.3%. You could say so if inflation was at 3% or 4%. Our primary mandate is 
price stability and we will not embark in policies that may create dangers to the upside in this 
regard. 
Another big fear is new bubbles in the financial system. 
Our mandate is price stability regarding products and services, not the level of asset prices. 
This is the mandate politicians have given to us in the Treaty. If we are talking about asset 
prices  we  need  macroprudential  instruments,  not  the  use  of  the  interest  rates.  Some 
instruments were given to the ECB in the SSM regulation – a limited set. I would like to have 
more instruments of that nature. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  For example? 
In the UK, the government recently gave to the Bank of England the instrument of loan-to-
value-  and  debt-to-income-ratios,  especially  to  prevent  bubbles  in  the  housing  and  real 
estate market. In the US, the Fed can declare non-banks systematically important and then 
have the supervision over them. These are some good ideas. 
In  the  euro  area  the  situation  of  the  banks  is  still  a  big  concern.  They  are  still  seen  as 
undercapitalized. What do you think, especially after the ECB’s Comprehensive Assessment 
comes close to its conclusion? 
First of all: Since last year banks have already frontloaded a lot of decisions in anticipation of 
the Comprehensive Assessment. They have raised new capital and increased provisions. All 
in all since June 2013 the 128 banks that will be under ECB supervision in the future have 
strengthened their balance sheets by €197 billion. This also means that the ECB’s check is 
already a big success. 
So the fears are unjustified? 
Such  concerns  were  in  general  based  on  the  assumption  that  some  assets  in  the  banks’ 
balance sheets were wrongly valued. This is exactly where the Asset Quality Review comes 
into play. We are confident that we can dispel such concerns once and for all. The behavior 
of  stock  prices  also  shows  that  investors  have  started  to  again  put  money  in  European 
banks. 
A  study  by  advisers  to  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB)  recently  called  the 
European banking system bloated and highly risky. Do you agree and is there a role to play 
for the ECB as the new supervisor? 
While not denying that some parts of Europe are “overbanked”, I would qualify this statement 
a little bit. The European banking sector looks much bigger than the US one compared to 
GDP,  but  in  the  US  most  mortgages  are  not  in  the  banks’  balance  sheets.  That  is  an 
important  difference.  The  shadow  banking  system  is  also  much  bigger  in  the  US.  The 
banking  union  will  provide  an  environment  in  which  we  will  see  a  concentration  in  the 
banking  system.  But  this  should  be  left  to  the  markets  and  not  be  achieved  directly  by 
policies.  I  also  believe  that  the  importance  of  capital  market  financing  will  become  more 
important also in Europe. Banks are going to see their role shrink. 
Let’s  get  back  to  monetary  policy.  There  is  an  intense  debate  about  a  “new  normal”,  for 
example in the sense that unconventional instruments are becoming normal and that interest 
rates are going to be lower than in the past. Do you also see such a “new normal”? 
I  think  there  is  a  “new  normal”.  The  first  element  is  the  introduction  of  macroprudential 
policies.  The  financial  crisis  has  shown  that  price  stability  does  not  automatically  lead  to 
financial stability and that financial crashes can be a risk to price stability. Therefore central 
banks need new instruments. It is dangerous and not very effective to try to prevent or prick 
bubbles via the interest rates. Another element is the necessity of unconventional measures. 
It is a fact that the environment is such that the neutral real interest rate… 
…that  means  the  interest  at  which  real  GDP  is  growing  at  its  trend  rate  and  inflation  is 
stable… 
… That this rate is negative at the moment and that it will be very low or even negative for 
quite a while. This rate has a lot to do with the potential growth rate of an economy and this 
potential  growth  rate  is  decreasing  in  many  countries  for  some  time  now,  because  of 
demographics  but  also  because  of  other  factors.  On  top  of  that,  the  planned  savings 
structurally  are  ahead  of  the  investment  opportunities.  This  is  why  I’m  convinced  that 
unconventional monetary policies will be normal for some time to come. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Does that also mean that you fear a “secular stagnation”, a long period without growth? 
I’m  not  sure  and  I  think  nobody  can  be  sure.  Certainly  there  is  a  trend  to  a  continuous 
decrease of real interest rates that has been visible in the advanced economies in the past 
decades. In this context, it is very important to increase potential growth. Therefore a lot of 
different policies are needed. We must hope that this period will not last too long and that we 
will be able to increase potential growth in our economies again. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
