  
 
Ignazio Visco: How to react to the fragmentation and the slowdown of the 
EU economy? 
Opening remarks by Mr Ignazio Visco, Governor of the Bank of Italy, at the Eurofi Financial 
Forum 2014, Milan, 11 September 2014. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, it is a pleasure to join Jacques de Larosière in welcoming you here in 
Milan. This event occurs at a crucial juncture for the European project and I hope it can be 
useful to shape our minds on what needs to be done. On my side, I will offer some thoughts 
on the current economic situation in the euro area and on the actions that are in my view 
most urgently needed. 
Economic situation in the euro area and the monetary policy response 
1.  
Let me start by briefly recalling the latest macroeconomic developments. 
In  the  euro  area  recent  data  indicates  that  growth  perspectives  remain  subdued  and 
economic  weakness  is  no  longer  confined  to  countries  under  stress.  Amid  ongoing 
geopolitical  tensions,  the  stimulus  provided  by  exports  may  be  losing  momentum,  while 
domestic  demand  continues  to  drag  because  of  the  contraction  in  gross  fixed  capital 
formation. 
Confidence  indicators  worsened  in  recent  months.  Among  firms,  the  deterioration  is 
particularly pronounced in the manufacturing sector, owing to the heightened uncertainty on 
world trade. Households’ confidence is affected by the persistently weak conditions in labour 
markets, with too high rates of unemployment in the euro area at large. The overall outlook is 
still consistent with a moderate growth of economic activity in the second half of the year, but 
downside  risks  have  clearly  increased.  Last  week,  the  ECB  revised  downwards  the 
projections of GDP growth for the next two years. 
Since Autumn 2013 inflation has been declining at a pace faster than expected, prompting 
continuous downward revisions of forecasts. In August the headline inflation rate was as low 
as 0.3 percent in the euro area and has turned negative in a number of countries. Declining 
inflation reflects not only the fall in energy prices, compounded by the past appreciation of 
the  euro,  but  also  the  persistent  weakness  of  the  economy.  Core  components  are  in  fact 
proving to be increasingly sensitive to the prolonged slackness in domestic demand. 
Medium-term inflation expectations have decreased markedly. At the end of August, based 
on inflation swaps, 1 and 2 year-ahead expected inflation rates were, respectively, at 0.8 and 
1.1 percent; only at horizons as far as 2022 does expected inflation appear to be consistent 
with  the  ECB  definition  of  price  stability.  With  declining,  even  negative,  inflation  rates  the 
consolidation  of  public  and  private  debt  is  more  difficult,  while  persisting  nominal  rigidities 
hamper the adjustment of relative prices. 
is  aggravated  by  persistent  divergences  among  countries. 
This  difficult  situation 
Fragmentation  of  financial  markets  along  national  lines  in  the  euro  area  has  progressively 
receded after the announcement of the OMT programme in the summer of 2012, but is still 
present.  Firms’  and  households’  borrowing  costs  in  stressed  countries are  still  higher than 
average, mainly reflecting the larger credit risk. For example, in July the cost of new bank 
loans  for  Italian  non-financial  corporations  remained  60  basis  points  higher  than  the  euro 
area average. 
The  response  of monetary  policy  has  been  wide-ranging.  Last  week  the  ECB’s  Governing 
Council decided to further cut policy rates to new unprecedented levels, basically reaching 
the  zero  lower  bound  for  the  Main  Refinancing  Operations;  it  also  launched  two  asset-
purchase  programs  (entailing  ABS  and  covered  bonds),  which  together  with  the  Targeted 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Longer-Term  Refinancing  Operations  decided  in  June  go  clearly  in  the  direction  of  fully 
restoring the monetary policy transmission mechanism and supporting the provision of credit 
to the broad economy. 
Macro-prudential policy can support the monetary policy task 
2. 
Averting the risk that a too-prolonged period of low inflation would eventually lead to a dis-
anchoring of medium-term inflation expectations is paramount. If needed, further monetary 
policy actions can be undertaken. 
Of course, we are well aware that, as the crisis has dramatically revealed, a prolonged period 
of low interest rates may fuel financial vulnerabilities and imbalances. In a monetary union 
with  diversified  financial  conditions,  tensions  may  emerge  in  some  countries  or  in  specific 
market segments or asset classes. 
However,  compared  to  the  past,  in  the  present  circumstances  monetary  policy  has  a 
powerful ally: macroprudential policy. In the European Union, with the new powers resulting 
from the entry into force of the CRDIV-CRR package, national authorities now have at their 
disposal an array of instruments to tackle localized emerging pressures. Indeed a number of 
countries  have  already  started  to  act,  in  particular  to  address  pressures  in  real  estate 
markets. 
The new framework ensures also a Europe-wide leg for macroprudential policy, with a view 
of  addressing  potential  negative  spillovers  of  country-specific  measures.  The  European 
Systemic Risk Board is tasked with monitoring and assessing systemic risks at EU level and 
represents the European forum where national authorities can discuss and coordinate their 
positions and policies. Moreover, the SSM Regulation has empowered the ECB with specific 
macroprudential tasks, such s the possibility to directly apply more stringent capital buffers to 
banks, as well as with a coordinating role within the euro area. 
Overall,  there  appear  to  be  no  constraints  for  monetary  policy  to  continue  providing  the 
required  stimulus  to  the  euro  area  economy.  At  the  same  time,  we  know  that  the  use  of 
macroprudential  tools  as  a  leaning-against-the-wind  response  to  the  accumulation  of 
financial  risks  depends  on  both  the  instruments  used  (e.g.,  countercyclical  capital  buffers, 
Loan-to-Value  or  Debt-to-Income  ratios)  and  the  targeted  sector/asset  class  (e.g.,  real 
estate, corporate bonds).At any rate, even more than to counter the building-up of financial 
imbalances in the face of shocks, macro-prudential measures should be effectively used to 
increase the resilience of the financial system. 
Financing investment and the recovery 
3. 
Following  deep  financial  crises,  economic  recovery  has  always  been  slow  to  materialize. 
However, the disappointing economic performance in the European Union goes well beyond 
previous experiences. At the heart of the problem is the weakness of aggregate demand, in 
particular investment. 
Since  the  beginning  of  the  global  crisis,  in  the  euro  area  public  and  above  all  private 
investments  have  collapsed,  by  20  percent  in  real  terms  over  2007–13,  more  than  in  the 
European  Union.  In  Italy  the  fall  was  even  larger,  by  more  than25and  30percent, 
respectively,  for  private  and  public  investment.  Reviving  investment  –  public  and  private, 
national and European – is critical in order to jumpstart recovery. 
Several factors held back investment; among them: 
– 
– 
– 
widespread uncertainty about prospective demand growth; 
deleveraging by over-indebted firms; 
difficult access to credit. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  importance, 
financing  conditions.  The 
investment  requires  supportive 
Today’s  overarching  goal  is  to  make  the  business  environment  more  conducive  to 
investment.  Besides  the  implementation  of  country-specific  structural  reforms,  which  is  of 
critical 
Italian 
Presidency has placed this theme at the top of its agenda. 
To foster investment and to improve access to credit, four priorities stand out: 
– 
– 
– 
– 
Let me briefly discuss each of them in turn. 
reducing the cost of capital; 
reviving securitization; 
developing capital market sources of finance; 
investing in infrastructure. 
Reducing the cost of capital 
The  latest  indicators  of  credit  supply  display  some  signals  of  improvement  in  lending 
conditions. The Eurosystem Bank lending survey shows that, in the second quarter of 2014, 
euro area banks, including Italian ones, reported a net easing of credit standards on loans to 
enterprises for the first time since the second quarter of 2007. Credit terms have been eased 
for households too, following a trend which started at the beginning of the year. 
While these signals are encouraging, there is still significant room for improvement as credit 
standards  remain  tight  compared  to  the  pre-crisis  years,  also  in  countries  that  did  not 
experience any credit boom before the financial crisis. 
As mentioned, monetary policy is doing its part to reduce the cost of capital and secure more 
uniform credit conditions across the monetary union. An important contribution to sustain and 
accelerate  the  flow  of  credit  to  the  economy  will  come  from  the  TLTROs,  as  they  contain 
specific built-in incentives for banks to on-lend to the private sector the funds obtained from 
the Eurosystem. Our own estimates for Italy show that if banks fully took up the additional 
funding and passed on the cost advantage to borrowers, the beneficial impact on GDP could 
reach 0.5 percent, a sizeable amount. 
The  completion  of  Banking  Union,  including  a  smooth  start  of  the  Single  Supervisory 
Mechanism  and  a  swift implementation  of the  Single  Resolution  Mechanism, together  with 
the continuation of an ordered process of balance sheet repair at European banks will help 
ensure  the  full  functioning  of  credit  markets.  Beyond  Banking  Union,  it  remains  critical  to 
address  country-specific  macroeconomic 
risks  and  vulnerabilities,  such  as  weak 
competitiveness  and  current  account  imbalances,  as  well  as  to  ensure  sustained  progress 
towards sound and sustainable public finances. 
Reviving securitization 
Reviving securitization has been long recognized as an essential complementary instrument 
and several initiatives have been debated (also in a joint paper by the ECB and the Bank of 
England) to revive this market. 
In particular, it is necessary that simple and transparent securitizations be defined, and then 
promoted, in a consistent way across the EU. Furthermore, a set of common rules applicable 
throughout  the financial  sector  should  aim  to  avoid  arbitrage  opportunities  across financial 
intermediaries  and  types  of  securities.  Finally,  more  information  on  the  characteristics  of 
securitization and the underlying loans should be made available to investors. 
In  order  to  achieve  these  objectives,  there  is  now  a  need  to  agree  on  an  EU-shared 
regulatory framework for high-quality securitization. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Developing capital market sources of finance 
From a medium-term perspective, it will be  important to develop capital  market sources of 
finance in order to progressively make euro area firms less reliant on bank credit. This would 
also  contribute  to  a  rebalancing  of  firms’  financial  structure  after  the  fast  increase  in  their 
leverage during most of the past decade in several euro countries. 
The Italian Presidency’s agenda emphasizes the development of capital market sources of 
finance and of non-bank financial intermediaries (venture capital funds, debt funds, European 
Long-Term Investment Funds – ELTIFs). In the face of the several valid proposals that have 
already been put forward, notably by the Commission, this agenda thus offers a good starting 
point  towards  selecting  a  well-defined  set  of  priorities  and  moving  to  the  implementation 
phase. 
A  first  important  lever  is  to  provide  non-financial  firms  with  incentives  for  more  equity 
financing,  which  allows  them  to  better  undertake  medium  and  long  term  investments, 
including those in research and development (best financed by risk capital), while decreasing 
their financial vulnerability. Taxation may play a key role in providing these incentives. For 
example, the use of an allowance for corporate equity (ACE), which allows corporations to 
deduct  a  notional  return  to  new  shareholders’  equity,  reduces  the  tax  advantage  of  debt 
funding  while  generally  implying,  due  to  its  incremental  nature,  only  a  limited  loss  in  tax 
revenues (an ACE was introduced in Italy in 2011 and reinforced in 2013 and 2014.) 
Increasing  non-bank  sources  of  finance  for  the  economy,  and  specifically  for  SMEs,  also 
requires the development of financial intermediaries such as equity and debt funds, closed-
end  funds  that  invest  in  loans,  bonds  and  shares  issued  by  unlisted  companies.  This 
semester could see the final approval of the Regulation on European Long-Term Investment 
Funds, a major step to stimulate their activity across Europe. 
Investing in infrastructures 
Along  with  country-specific  structural  reforms  on  the  supply  side,  broader  economic  policy 
action is required to accelerate the building-up of infrastructure, both tangible and intangible, 
indispensable to the success of a true Single Market. 
The financing of infrastructures and the proposal for an EU plan of public investment require 
a more efficient use of public resources along with greater involvement of private funds. To 
this  end,  euro  project  bonds,  public-private  partnerships,  infrastructural  funds  and  public 
guarantees could be the instruments to lever on private investments. 
Strengthening  the  role  of  European  Union’s  financing  institutions  (EIB, EIF)  and  improving 
the coordination among national investment banks should be essential parts of the process 
to  ensure  the  development  of  efficient  and  well-functioning  infrastructure  networks,  which 
represent the backbone of prospering economies. 
European integration as the ultimate way out of the crisis 
4.  
To conclude, let me reiterate that a substantial strengthening of the EU recovery, one that 
would  go  a  long  way  towards  the  definite  exit  from  the  crisis,  cannot  be  achieved  by  the 
isolated actions of individual economic policy authorities. In particular, monetary policy alone 
cannot  revive  growth  and  guarantee  financial  stability  in  the  euro  area  if  the  problems 
underlying the crisis are not resolved at both national and European levels. 
The  return  to  sustained  and  balanced  growth  requires  broader  economic  policy  action 
centered on investment – as I said, private and public, national and European – which is the 
linkage between today’s demand and tomorrow’s supply. The favorable financial conditions 
that both monetary policy and Banking Union are ushering in must not be missed. 
From  a  longer-term  perspective,  we  need  to  resume  the  process  of  European  integration, 
while recognizing that it is a long and arduous one, and far from being linear. The debate on 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  the euro area’s “fiscal capacity” needs to be restarted. Beyond the important achievement of 
the Banking Union, it is essential to continue resolutely along the path to a fuller Union. 
Let  me  conclude  by  emphasizing  once  again  that  the  benefits  of  strengthening  European 
integration  far  outweigh  the  alleged  advantages  of  weakening  it.  Choices  must  be  made 
responsibly. The risks of inertia far outweigh those of action. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
