  Mario Draghi: Keynote speech at the Euro Conference – Lithuania 
Keynote speech by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at the Euro 
Conference – Lithuania, Vilnius, 25 September 2014. 
 Summary 
The euro area benefits from Lithuania’s accession in at least two ways: first, Lithuania has 
shown  that  adjustment  is  not  only  necessary,  but  also  possible  –  even  without  currency 
devaluation;  second,  Lithuania’s  decision  to  join  the  euro  area  demonstrates  that  our 
common currency is attractive. 
Lithuania  itself  will  –  amongst  others  –  benefit  from  having  a  say  in  the  monetary  policy-
making of the world’s second largest economy. Initial scepticism among some Lithuanians 
regarding the introduction of the euro is already transforming into increasing support now that 
people  become  more  informed  about  their  new  currency  and  the  changeover  modalities. 
Joining  the  euro  area  does  not  only  follow  from  economic  considerations:  it  is  a  binding 
commitment to European values. 
*** 
Dear Prime Minister Butkevičius, 
Dear Vice President Katainen, 
Dear Finance Minister Šadžius, 
Dear Chairman Vasiliauskas, 
Excellencies, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
You might be aware of the timer above the door of Lietuvos bankas, Lithuania’s central bank, 
which is counting down to the euro changeover – less than 100 days [98 days] remain until 
Lithuania adopts the euro. Lietuvos bankas installed the countdown clock two months ago, 
when the Council of the European Union gave the green light for the adoption of the euro, 
but I am sure that many of us have been anticipating this day for much longer. And we have 
probably asked ourselves: what does Lithuania’s accession mean for the euro area and what 
does the euro changeover mean for Lithuania? In my remarks today I will elaborate on both 
of these aspects. 
How does the euro area benefit from Lithuania’s membership? 
With Lithuania introducing the euro, all three Baltic countries will soon be part of the currency 
union.  This is  a  great  asset  for  the  euro  area, not  least  because  it  demonstrates the  euro 
area’s attractiveness. 
Not  that  long  ago  the  Baltic  countries  were  in  the  midst  of  a  deep  recession.  In  2009 
Lithuania’s  GDP  declined  by  roughly  15%.  Today,  Lithuania  is  one  of  the  fastest  growing 
countries in Europe. Last year its GDP grew by 3.3%, whereas the euro area’s GDP shrank 
by 0.4%. Quite remarkably, Lithuania managed to reboot its economy without any external 
support. 
The Baltic countries have demonstrated that adjustment is possible – even without currency 
devaluation.  While  Lithuania’s  government  deficit  stood  at  9.4%  in  2009,  last  year  it  had 
fallen to 2.1% and is expected to decline further. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  Beyond  the  economic  aspects,  the  Baltic  success  story  also  shows  that  adjustment  is 
politically  feasible.  Despite  major  fiscal  consolidation,  there  was  hardly  any  public  protest 
against the government measures. 
So  how  was  this  possible?  In  my  view,  we  can  draw  an  important  lesson  from  the  Baltic 
experience:  governments  not  only  acted  boldly,  but  also  immediately.  They  used  the 
momentum  of  the  crisis  to  implement  the  necessary  consolidation  and  thus  managed  to 
convince the public of the need for these measures. 
Besides being politically astute, this swift and bold action was key in strengthening investors’ 
trust. It enabled the Baltic countries to recover quickly from recession. The Baltic case shows 
that – while consolidation might weigh temporarily on economic growth in the short term – it 
is the basis for sustainable growth in the longer run. 
Beyond showing commitment to making its own economy fit for the euro area, Lithuania has 
also  contributed  to  making  the  currency  union  as  a  whole  more  stable  –  even  before 
becoming part of it: the priorities set last year under its EU presidency included more steps 
towards banking union and a further deepening of Economic and Monetary Union. 
To  resume,  the  euro  area  benefits  from  Lithuania’s  accession  in  at  least  two  ways:  first, 
Lithuania has shown that adjustment is not only necessary, but also possible – even without 
currency  devaluation;  second,  Lithuania’s  decision  to join the  euro  area  demonstrates  that 
our common currency is attractive, despite difficulties in some euro area member countries. 
How will Lithuania benefit from becoming part of the euro area? 
But does the Lithuanian public agree that Lithuania will benefit from membership of the euro 
area? Or is the introduction of the euro just a project of the political elites? I am aware that 
some Lithuanians would rather stick with the litas. According to survey data, only half of the 
population favours the introduction of the euro. 
We certainly need to take such scepticism seriously. Europe cannot simply be a project that 
is imposed by the elites without the backing of the general public. 
Recent experience shows, however, that initial scepticism might well turn into support, once 
people  become  more  informed  about  their  new  currency  and  the  changeover  modalities. 
Prior to their respective accessions, it seemed that citizens in the other Baltic countries were 
not really in the mood for the euro either. However, information campaigns and the reality of 
the  new  currency  resulted  in  growing  support  –  a  trend  that  we  are  already  observing  in 
Lithuania. According to the latest survey data, support for the single currency increased by 
18 percentage points from late last year to mid-2014 in Lithuania. In Latvia, it even increased 
by 30 percentage points (to 68%) over the same period.1 And, even though public support for 
the  European  project  as  such  has  been  on  the  decline  across  Member  States  during  the 
crisis,  if  anything,  citizens  in  euro  area  countries  have  persistently  demonstrated  solid 
support for the common currency. 
In essence, those that are sceptical about the new currency have two concerns: first, they 
are worried that the changeover might lead to price increases; second, they are afraid that 
their country might lose part of its identity. 
Compared  with  other  EU  Member  States  that  are  not  yet  part  of  the  euro  area,  these 
concerns are especially high in Lithuania. Three-quarters of survey respondents in Lithuania 
believe  that  introducing  the  euro  will  lead  to  increased  prices.2  I  am  confident  we  can 
demonstrate  that  such  worries  are  unwarranted.  First,  the  ECB  will  be  the  competent 
                                                 
1   http://ec.europa.eu/public_opinion/archives/eb/eb81/eb81_en.htm. 
2   http://ec.europa.eu/public_opinion/flash/fl_400_en.pdf. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  monetary policy authority once Lithuania is part of the euro area. And I can assure you that 
we  take  our  price  stability  mandate  very  seriously  and  will  continue  to  do  so.  Second,  the 
Lithuanian  authorities  can  draw  on  the  experience  from  18  previous  euro  changeovers  in 
designing measures to prevent unjustified price increases. I trust they will make sure that the 
new banknotes and coins will have the same purchasing power as the litas. 
What about the other main concern, a loss of national identity? 
Designed by Antanas Žukauskas, the new coins resemble the litas coins, showing Vytis (“the 
Chaser”), which is an adaption of the country’s coat of arms. But Lithuania will not just bring 
a national symbol to the euro area. In joining the euro area, Lithuania will effectively re-gain 
part of the sovereignty it gave up earlier. 
Lithuania’s  Minister  for  Finance,  Rimantas  Šadžius,  allegedly  said,  “We  already  have  the 
euro, it just has a different name”. What he was referring to was the fact that the litas has 
been pegged to the euro since 2002. But even before then, Lithuania’s monetary policy was 
constrained  by  a  fixed  exchange  rate:  from  1994  to  2002  the  litas  was  pegged  to  the  US 
dollar. 
The Chairman of the Board of Lietuvos bankas, Vitas Vasiliauskas, has already participated 
twice as an observer in the monetary policy meetings of the ECB’s Governing Council. As of 
January next year, he will participate actively in the monetary policy-making of the world’s 
second  largest  economy.  This  shows  that,  in  an  era  in  which  nation  states  are  closely 
interlinked, sharing sovereignty means gaining sovereignty. If we explain this properly, I am 
sure  we  can  convince  those  worried  about  losing  part  of  their  national  identity  that,  rather 
than losing something, they will gain from closer integration. 
There are, of course, many more ways in which Lithuania can benefit from being part of the 
euro area. To name but one, international investors usually perceive the Baltic countries as 
belonging  to  the  same  economic  area.  With  Latvia  and  Estonia  already  using  the  euro, 
Lithuania  would  have  a  clear  competitive  disadvantage  when  it  comes  to  attracting 
investment  from  abroad  if  it  delayed  adopting  the  euro.  Furthermore,  belonging  to  the 
common  currency  area  may  provide  stability  for  the  country  in  the  current  geopolitical 
environment. I appreciate that the Lithuanian government approved a public information and 
communication strategy on the euro adoption. And I trust that it will do its best to implement 
this  strategy  such  that  “LAISVĖ,  VIENYBĖ,  GEROVĖ”  (freedom,  unity,  well-being)  will  not 
just be inscribed in the edge of the new two euro coins, but become reality. 
Conclusion 
The  way  in  which  Lithuania  has  striven  to  become  part  of  the  euro  area  shows  that  our 
common  currency  is  attractive  –  despite  the  difficulties  experienced  in  some  member 
countries. But joining the euro area does not only follow from economic considerations: it is a 
binding commitment to European values. I am happy to see that Lithuania is ready to make 
this commitment – welcome Lithuania! 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
