  Jwala Rambarran: Trinidad and Tobago’s economy against the 
background of global economic developments 
Feature  address  by  Mr  Jwala  Rambarran,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Trinidad  and 
Tobago, at the Second Monetary Policy Forum, Tobago, 27 May 2014. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Today  is  an  historic  day  for  the  Central  Bank  and  for  the  people  of  Tobago.  For  just  the 
second  time  in  its  50-year  history,  the  Bank  has  ventured  outside  of  its traditional  comfort 
zone in Port of Spain to deliver its monetary policy message. Events such as this Monetary 
Policy  Forum  give  the  Bank  a  platform  to  explain  the  thinking  behind  its  monetary  policy 
actions, interact with stakeholders and as far central banking regulations allow, account to 
the national community, who we are here to serve. 
I must, therefore, thank the Tobago House of Assembly and Chief Secretary Orville London 
for graciously agreeing to host this, our second Monetary Policy Forum. For us Tobago was 
an  almost  obvious  choice,  given  the  diversification  thrust  in  which  tourism  is  being  called 
upon to play an increasingly important role. In the IMF’s Article IV Consultation Report 2011, 
Tobago  is  considered  as  having  potential  for  substantial  growth  in  tourism,  owing  to  its 
conventional  beach  resort-type  properties  and  ecotourism.  We  are  aware  there  are 
challenges  surrounding  the  Tobago  Tourism  Development  Fund  for  stimulating  new 
investment  in  hotel  properties,  and  the  Central  Bank  is  working  with  the  banks  and  the 
Ministry of Finance to find a solution. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, I do not need to remind anyone in this audience that we are living in 
unusual times. I will start off this Monetary Policy Report, by placing Trinidad and Tobago’s 
economy in relation to the world economy and some of the major economic developments. 
Central banks and other policymakers around the world have been grappling for more than 
five  years  now  with  an  economic  crisis  that  is  constantly  mutating,  and  it’s  still  not  clear 
exactly how the crisis is going to evolve from here. 
Although global financial tensions have eased, we are heading into mid-2014, with a world 
economy that looks like it will be stuck in a subdued growth phase. 
Economic performance in the United States was weaker than expected in the first quarter of 
2014,  even  though  it  outpaced  that  of  Europe  and  Japan,  both  of  which  are  struggling  to 
cross a moderate 1 per cent annualised growth threshold. 
Economic  growth  is  also  slowing  in  the  larger  emerging  market  economies.  China,  the 
second largest economy, is slowing below the government’s growth target, and this is likely 
to lead to a drag on the global recovery, giving credence to the trending metaphor – when 
China sneezes the rest of the world catches a cold. Of course, that used to be said of the 
U.S. 
The  Russia-Ukraine  conflict,  which  started  early  this  year,  has  added  a  new  dimension  of 
uncertainty  to  global  economic  prospects,  although  to  date  contagion  effects  have  been 
limited to those countries with direct trade and financial links to the Eastern European region. 
For  Trinidad  and  Tobago,  this  is  a  double-edged  sword.  On  one  side  any  escalation  in 
tensions between Russia and Ukraine could result in an increase in higher crude oil prices. 
On the other side, wheat prices could increase, which will translate into higher food prices for 
Trinidad and Tobago. 
The changing monetary policy stance in major advanced economies remains a key focus of 
global financial markets. Of the major central banks, only the United States Federal Reserve, 
with  its  new  Chairman,  Janet  Yellen,  has  started  the  process  of  scaling  back  its 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  unconventional expansionary monetary policy that has been in place for the past five years. 
This  highly  anticipated  tapering  only  takes  into  account  U.S.  domestic  conditions.  In  other 
words,  emerging  market  economies,  including  Trinidad  and  Tobago,  are  left  to  fend  for 
themselves  and  navigate  the  spill-overs  and  policy  mistakes  that  could  arise  from  U.S. 
monetary tapering. 
One year ago, the Fed’s announcement that there would be an earlier-than-expected start to 
the  reduction  of  quantitative  easing  rattled  some  large  emerging  market  economies.  This 
resulted in capital outflows, depreciating currencies, and tumbled stock and bond markets. 
So, given the global prospects I want to talk to you about three things: 
• 
First, outline some key developments in Trinidad and Tobago’s economy over the 
past six months or so; 
Second, explain the monetary policy actions of the Central Bank in the context of 
evolving economic conditions; and 
Third, conclude with some thoughts on the short-term economic outlook for Trinidad 
and Tobago. 
  Recent economic developments 
Ladies and Gentlemen, I’ll begin with a brief overview of domestic economic conditions since 
the release of our last Monetary Policy Report in November 2013. Here the news continues 
to be encouraging; Trinidad and Tobago is in recovery mode. 
After a few years of sub-par performance, Trinidad and Tobago’s economy delivered faster-
than-expected growth of almost 2 percent in 2013. 
The on-going large-scale maintenance and safety upgrades at energy companies posed a 
considerable drag on recovery throughout 2013. This impact was concentrated in the third 
quarter, when the largest coordinated maintenance upgrades occurred. 
Activity  in  the  non-energy  sector,  though  slow  and  steady,  provided  critical  support  which 
kept the economy from veering off track. 
This performance continued into the first three months of 2014, although the rebound in the 
energy sector in the fourth quarter of 2013 did not fully carry over into early 2014. 
Two events temporarily affected energy production in the first two months of 2014 – BPTT 
took  down  its  Savonette  Platform  to  accommodate  drilling  at  another  well  and  Petrotrin 
undertook  planned  maintenance  at  its  Pointe-a-Pierre  oil  refinery.  However,  energy  output 
bounced back by March 2014. 
The non-energy sector maintained its growth momentum into 2014. Local sales of cement – 
a  key  indicator  of  construction  activity  –  showed  a  favorable  outturn.  The  increase  in 
construction  activity  reflected  several  on-going,  large  public  sector  projects,  including  the 
highway  to  Point  Fortin,  and,  perhaps  to  a  lesser  extent,  some  private  sector  projects 
breaking ground, such as... the “C3” movie and shopping complex in Corinth, South Trinidad. 
New  car  sales  are  still  hitting  double-digit  rates.  Also,  higher  crop  production  under  the 
Caroni Green Initiative is supporting growth in the agricultural sector. 
A key mandate of the Central Bank is price stability,  which roughly translates into keeping 
underlying  inflationary  pressures  well  contained.  Inflationary  pressures  have  remained 
subdued  so far  in  2014.  Headline  inflation  slowed  to just  under  3½  percent  by  April  2014. 
This ease in inflation was largely associated with a steady fall in food price inflation to single 
digit territory. 
Falling food prices reflected improved domestic agricultural output, better domestic weather 
conditions, and an easing of global food prices. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Meanwhile  core  inflation,  which  excludes  food  prices,  picked  up  slightly,  to  around 
2½ percent,  but  remained  stable  in  the  first  four  months  of  2014.  This  is  indicative  of 
improving economic activity. 
We are also starting to see a pick-up in business lending. After contracting for an entire year, 
business loans granted by the banking system rose by a little over 2 percent in February this 
year and further increased by almost 3½ percent in March. 
We have also seen relatively robust growth in consumer lending, especially for purchases of 
motor vehicles, home renovation and debt consolidation. 
Record  low  mortgage  rates  continue  to  spur  demand  for  real  estate  mortgage  financing. 
Although  such  loans  continue  to  record  double-digit  growth  to  March  2014,  and  there  has 
been an increase in property prices, there is no compelling evidence to suggest overheating 
in the residential property market. More importantly, commercial banks have maintained their 
prudent mortgage lending standards. 
Over the past few years, the Government’s budget has been the main stimulus supporting 
economic  recovery.  The  non-energy  budget  deficit  is  the  key  indicator  of  whether 
Government is engaged in fiscal stimulus activity. 
After  running  a  non-energy  fiscal  deficit  of  just  over  $19  billion  in  2012/2013,  the  central 
government  ran  a  non-energy  budget  deficit  of  $12  billion  in  the  first  six  months  of  fiscal 
2013/2014. At this pace the government is likely to meet its projected budgeted stimulus for 
the entire fiscal year. 
Foreign exchange 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  I  now  turn  to  a  matter  grabbing  headlines  and  generating  intense 
interest in the country over the past few months, and the reason I suspect most reporters are 
here this morning ….. to grill me about-foreign exchange. There have been many opinions 
circulating  on  this  topic  and  I  will  say  in  most  cases  these  opinions  are  uninformed.  The 
foreign  exchange  matter  came  to  a  head  last  week  when  this  sensitive  issue  entered  the 
political  domain  with  comments  made  by  those  who  displayed  little  knowledge  and 
understanding about the Central Bank’s role in the domestic foreign exchange market. 
So  please  allow  me  say  a  few  words  about  the  Central  Bank’s  actual  role  in  the  foreign 
exchange market. 
First, the Bank seeks to foster orderly conditions in the market, mainly by meeting the gap 
between the demand for, and the supply of, foreign exchange. This gap arises because the 
general public and the business community usually consume more foreign exchange than is 
generated  by  companies  in  the  energy  sector  which  are  our  main  suppliers  of  foreign 
exchange. Demand for foreign exchange is continuous throughout the year but the supplies 
come in at discrete intervals. 
This leads to periodic tightness in the domestic foreign exchange market which the Central 
Bank alleviates by selling foreign exchange from its stock of official reserves to the banks. 
Second, until April 2014, the Central Bank was using a twenty year-old system to sell and 
distribute foreign exchange to the banks. As an aside, I was part of the team at the Central 
Bank  that  instituted  this  distribution  system  following  liberalization  of  the  foreign  exchange 
market in April 1993. This system served the market well, particularly in the early years. Over 
the past 20-odd years, however, there was little, if any, modification this arrangement even 
though  the  economy  experienced  various  episodes  of  stabilization,  growth  its  third  energy 
boom,  stagnation,  and  now  recovery  that  fundamentally  altered  the  foreign  exchange 
demand/supply equation. 
Over  the  last  two  decades,  demand  for  foreign  exchange  not  only  expanded  but  its 
composition  changed  to  reflect  new  patterns  of  consumer  spending  (for  example,  use  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  credit  cards  for  making  online  payments)  and  new  forms  of  investment  (with  no  capital 
restrictions, citizens can move money freely to any part of the world). 
In  1993  the  demand  for  foreign  exchange  amounted  to  $US900  million  dollars.  Ten  years 
later this  demand  almost tripled  to  $US  2.6  billion  in  2003.  By  2013  demand  had  risen by 
more than 2 1/2 times to $US7.0 billion. 
At the same time, the supply of foreign exchange increased, but was outstripped by demand. 
In  1993  the  supply  of  foreign  exchange  amounted  to  $US856  million.  Ten  years  later  this 
would increase by almost 2 1/2 times to $US2 billion. In 2013, the supply of foreign exchange 
almost tripled to $US 5.8 billion. This prompted the Central Bank to intervene with increasing 
volumes of foreign exchange to quell excess demand pressures. In 1993 the Central Bank 
sold a mere $US33 million; this jumped to almost $US500 million by 2003 and in 2013 the 
Central Bank sold $US1.7 billion to the banking system. 
So  with  growing  tightness  in  the  domestic  foreign  exchange  market  since  the  start  of  the 
year,  the  Central  Bank  reviewed  its  twenty  year-old  arrangement  for  distributing  foreign 
exchange  to  the  financial  system.  Two  fundamental  changes  were  made,  effective  at  the 
start  of  April  2014.  First,  we  included  all  12  licensed  authorized  dealers  in  the  distribution 
system,  providing  everyone  with  greater  access  to  more  evenly  distributed  supply. 
Previously, only eight authorized dealers  were part of the arrangement. Second, we made 
more  use  of  the  auction  system  so  that  supply  of  foreign  exchange  could  go  to  where 
demand was greatest, based on price. 
After nearly two months of operating the new foreign exchange distribution system, we made 
further improvements to the system’s internal back-office operations, but we did not alter its 
fundamental parameters. This enhanced distribution system, coupled with more timely and 
sizable  interventions,  is  expected  to  meet  all  immediate  trade  related  demands:  from  the 
foreign-used  car  dealers  to  manufacturing  companies,  small  and  medium  businesses  and 
conglomerates.  For  the  first  five  months  of  2014,  we  sold  US$610  million  to  the  financial 
system, with the most recent being a sale of US$200 million. 
Let me make this clear: the new changes to the foreign exchange distribution system were 
not ineffective, but change is always difficult to accept. Foreign exchange management is a 
highly  sensitive  area  of  central  banking. We  are  not  at  liberty  to  divulge  the  details  of  our 
operations. However we have been regularly communicating as much as we are allowed to 
under the Central Bank Act on this matter. This central bank is not more secretive than any 
other. 
I  am  not  being  defensive,  but  irresponsible  statements  on  central  banking  matters  pose  a 
real  danger to  our  country.  I,  therefore,  want  to assure the  country  that there  is  no  risk of 
devaluation of our dollar. We have enough foreign exchange reserves to satisfy demand. 
As of mid-May 2014, the stock of foreign exchange reserves is almost US$ 10.5 billion, more 
than enough to cover over one year of imports. 
This is all I can and will say in this matter today. 
Central bank monetary policy actions 
Before I turn to the Central Bank’s monetary policy actions, I would like to reiterate the major 
changes made over the past year to the Bank’s monetary policy decision-making framework. 
These are as follows: 
• 
Inclusion  of  two  external  members  on  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  (MPC),  to 
ensure that the MPC benefits from specialized expertise and diverse viewpoints in 
its policymaking deliberations; 
Reducing  the  frequency  of  the  MPC  meeting  from  once  a  month  to  every  two 
months,  in  order  to  give  the  Committee  a  better  opportunity  to  fully  consider 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 4 
   financial  conditions, 
economic  and 
alternatives; and 
Communication of the Bank’s monetary policy decisions, including the setting of the 
repo  rate,  to  the  public  in  the  form  of  a  “Monetary  Policy  Announcement”  on  the 
Friday evening of the week in which the MPC meeting is held. 
issues  and  policy 
important 
including 
 Given the gradual pace of economic recovery and stability of core inflationary pressures, the 
Central  Bank  has  continued  to  maintain  an  accommodative  monetary  stance.  This  is 
reflected in the fact that the Bank has maintained its policy rate, the repo rate, at an historical 
low of 2.75 per cent since September 2012. 
Our  liquidity  management  capacity  was  improved  in  December  2013  when  Parliament 
approved increased borrowing limits on the issue of Treasury Securities for the purposes of 
open market operations. The limit under the Treasury Bills  Act was doubled to $30 billion, 
and  under  the  Treasury  Notes  Act  was  tripled  to  $15  billion.  We  now  have  an  additional 
$25 billion dollars in Treasury Securities that we can issue to absorb excess liquidity in the 
banking system. 
I  again  emphasize  that  these  Treasury  securities  are  purely  for  the  purposes  of  monetary 
policy, not fiscal policy. The proceeds of the securities are locked away in a blocked account 
at  the  Central  Bank  and  only  re-enter  the  financial  system  upon  maturity  of  the  existing 
securities. 
I must emphasise that these funds are not used to finance the Government’s budget or any 
Government programme. 
With elevated liquidity levels, the Central Bank increased its open market operations in April 
2014,  removing  roughly  $1.2  billion  from  the  banking  system.  However,  the  maturity  of  a 
$1 billion  Central  Government  bond  at  the  end  of  April  2014  pushed  liquidity  levels  even 
higher.  Subsequently,  in  the  first  three  weeks  of  May  2014,  excess  liquidity  climbed  to  an 
average of $8.3 billion, from an average of $6.3 billion in April. 
The Central Bank undertook other liquidity management measures over the past six months, 
including the rolling over of three commercial banks’ special deposits which matured during 
the period. The Bank also indirectly removed liquidity from the system through its sales of 
foreign  exchange. The Bank  will  intensify  its  open  market  operations  as  well  as  use  other 
liquidity absorption measures to rein in excess liquidity in coming months. 
Short-term prospects 
I would like to turn now to the outlook for the rest of 2014. 
While we expect a strengthening of the global economy over the next few years, it is fairly 
evident  that  uncertainty  continues  to  weigh  heavily  on  short-term  prospects.  Perhaps  the 
most immediate downside risk to emerging market economies, such as Trinidad and Tobago, 
relates  to  shifting  market  expectations  about  the  future  path  of  US  monetary  policy,  as  I 
mentioned earlier. 
Here  at  home,  the  first  Business  Confidence  Survey,  conducted  by  the  Central  Bank  and 
Arthur  Lok  Jack  Graduate  School  of  Business  found  the  local  business  community  is 
cautiously  optimistic  about  the  prospects  for  business  activity  and  the  economy  for  the 
remainder of 2014. 
Several factors support Central Bank’s 2014 outlook: 
• 
First, energy production returned to more normal levels in March 2014, providing a 
strong boost to the economic recovery now underway. Drilling in the shallow water 
blocks  has  commenced  and  some  new  development  wells  have  been  drilled. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
     Awards for on-shore bid rounds will lead to increased exploration activity  in these 
blocks in late 2014 or early 2015. 
Second, there has been an improvement in the pace of project execution at the level 
of the central Government. On-going large public sector projects include the Point 
Fortin  Highway,  the  Children’s  Hospital  and  the  National  Aquatic  Centre.  These, 
combined  with  other  projects  undertaken  by  the  private  sector,  are  expected  to 
further  boost  non-energy  activity.  Improving  energy  output  should  also  have  a 
positive impact on non-energy growth. 
Third, the Central Bank has begun to implement its resolution strategy for CLICO. 
This strategy always envisaged the sale of CLICO’s traditional book of business to a 
third  party  insurance  company.  As  we  undertake  this  sale  and  transfer  of  the 
portfolio, 
traditional 
policyholders  have  nothing  to  worry  about.  They  will  continue  to  be  serviced  by 
CLICO. The long-standing CLICO issue, when successfully concluded, should give 
a  further  boost  to  overall  confidence,  and  reinforce  the  positive  economic  growth 
trend. 
On this basis the Central Bank expects real GDP growth to strengthen to at least 
2.5 percent in 2014. 
requirements,  CLICO’s 
in  accordance  with 
legislative 
Over the past few years, record low domestic interest rates have contributed to consumers 
borrowing  more  to  finance  spending  on  high  priced  consumer  durables  such  as  motor 
vehicles. Domestic interest rates have also fallen below or are just above those in the United 
States, which means investors are more likely to be attracted to seeking higher investment 
returns in the United States leading to capital outflows. 
Looking  ahead,  the  strengthening  of  our  economic  recovery,  rising  consumption  and  the 
threat of higher international agricultural commodity prices, all suggest inflationary pressures 
could increase in the coming year. With a firmly established economic recovery, the Central 
Bank  will  start  giving  more  weight  in  its  monetary  policy  deliberations  to  managing  rising 
inflationary pressures. 
This  will  initially  start  with  a  gradual  withdrawal  of  our  accommodative  monetary  stance. 
Should the outlook for inflation, growth, or financial stability change, we will take appropriate 
monetary action. 
Conclusion 
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate that Trinidad and Tobago has shown tremendous resilience. 
Yet this is not the message that we continue to absorb as a nation. Instead, it usually tends 
to be one of negative sentiment. 
When I assumed office nearly 2 years ago, I faced the following economic conditions: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Today: 
• 
Sharp contraction in economic growth 
Soaring food prices – inflation at 25 percent 
Declining external reserve position 
Weak business confidence  
Economic recovery is established – the economy is expected to grow is by at least 
2.5 percent 
Food price inflation is down to within single digits – standing at 4.0 percent 
The difficulties in the foreign exchange market will dissipate in the coming weeks 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 6 
   Business  confidence  is  cautiously  optimistic  and  should  be  bolstered  by  a 
successful conclusion to the CLICO resolution, which is underway. 
 Therefore  it’s  not  all  doom  and  gloom.  At  the  same  time,  we  at  the  Central  Bank  are  not 
complacent. 
We  recognize  the  significant  threats  faced  by  emerging  markets  such  as  Trinidad  and 
Tobago’s in the still uncertain global economy. We see the obstacles that are on our road to 
recovery. 
The Central Bank continues to monitor the economic landscape and exercise our monetary 
options. As business leaders and stakeholders, we encourage you to take your place and be 
the positive change you want to see in Trinidad and in Tobago. I thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
