  Simon M Potter: Implementation of open market operations in a time of 
transition 
Remarks  by  Mr  Simon  M  Potter,  Executive  Vice  President  of  the  Markets  Group  of  the 
Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  before  the  Japan  Center  for  Economic  Research, 
Tokyo, 25 September 2014. 
 I would like to thank Deborah Leonard and Matthew Raskin for their excellent assistance in the preparation of 
these  remarks  and  colleagues  in  the  Federal  Reserve  System  for  numerous  insightful  comments  and 
suggestions. 
Thank you, Takeuchi-san. It is a pleasure to reconnect with you here in Tokyo and an honor 
to have the opportunity to speak before this distinguished audience. 
Central banks responded aggressively to the financial crisis that began in 2007 and the slow 
recovery that’s followed, and have taken unprecedented steps in providing monetary policy 
accommodation in pursuit of their macroeconomic policy objectives. In doing so, many have 
had to adapt in unconventional ways the frameworks and tools they use to implement their 
policy decisions. My remarks today will focus on the role played by the Open Market Trading 
Desk  (the  Desk)  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  in  the  implementation  of 
monetary policy in the U.S., and on the evolution of our operational tools in recent years. I 
will then discuss the implications of these changes for the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet 
and  for  the  eventual  “normalization”  of  monetary  policy  when  the  Federal  Open  Market 
Committee (FOMC) believes it is appropriate to remove the extraordinary levels of monetary 
policy accommodation that it has provided. Finally, I will discuss some of the considerations 
that  must  be  taken  into  account  in  normalizing  monetary  policy.  As  always,  these  are  my 
views  and  do  not  necessarily  reflect  those  of  the  New  York  Fed  or  the  Federal  Reserve 
System.  
The desk’s role in implementing monetary policy 
The  Federal  Reserve  (the  Fed)  has  a  somewhat  more  complex  organizational  and 
governance structure than most other central banks around the world, so before discussing 
recent developments in the implementation of monetary policy, I’d like to take a moment to 
describe roles and responsibilities within the Federal Reserve System and where the Desk 
fits in. 
The statutory basis for U.S. monetary policy is found in the Federal Reserve Act, which was 
enacted just over 100 years ago. Modern language around monetary policy objectives was 
added  in  1977,  when  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  and  the 
Federal  Open  Market  Committee  were  charged  by  Congress  with  maintaining  “long  run 
growth  of  the  monetary  and  credit  aggregates…so  as  to  promote  effectively  the  goals  of 
maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates.” The goals of 
maximum  employment  and  price  stability  have  come  to  be  known  as  the  Fed’s  “dual 
mandate.” 
Formulating policy in pursuit of that dual mandate is the province of two separate-but-related 
policymaking  entities  within  the  Federal  Reserve  System  (the  System)  –  the  Board  of 
Governors of the Federal Reserve System (the Board of Governors) and the FOMC (which I 
also refer to as “the Committee”) – each of which has responsibility for certain policy tools. 
The  FOMC  is  the  principal  body  for  monetary  policymaking  and  consists  of  the  seven 
members  of  the  Board  of  Governors  plus  the  presidents  of  the  twelve  Federal  Reserve 
Banks (only five of whom are voting members in any given year). The FOMC is responsible 
for the use of open market operations (OMOs), which are purchases and sales of securities 
in  the  open  market  for  the  System  Open  Market  Account  (SOMA),  the  Fed’s  securities 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  portfolio.  OMOs  are  traditionally  the  primary  tool  through  which  monetary  policy  is 
implemented. The Board of Governors is responsible for several complementary policy tools. 
These tools pertain largely to depository institutions (DIs or “banks”) and include the discount 
rate – that is, the rate at which banks borrow from the discount window, the Fed’s lending 
facility  administered  through  the  twelve  regional  Federal  Reserve  Banks  –  and  policies 
around reserves held by depository institutions at the Fed (including reserve requirements, 
and  more  recently,  the  payment  of  interest  on  reserve  balances  and  term  deposits).1 
However, it’s important to note that each of these tools is merely a means to an end, used to 
influence financial conditions in order to achieve the Federal Reserve’s dual mandate. 
Since  1936,  the  New  York  Fed  has  been  selected  each  year  by  the  FOMC  as  the  Bank 
within  the  System  responsible  for  the  execution  of  OMOs.  Within  the  New  York  Fed,  the 
Desk, under the guidance of a manager of the SOMA selected by the FOMC – currently me 
– is responsible for conducting open market operations under the authorization and direction 
of the FOMC.2 In practice, the FOMC’s operating objective for OMOs – for example, a target 
rate  for  overnight  interest  rates  or  a  specified  amount  of  assets  to  purchase  –  is 
communicated to the Desk through a policy “directive” that the Committee votes on at the 
conclusion  of  each  meeting.  This  directive  specifically  instructs  the  Desk  to  conduct 
transactions for the SOMA in furtherance of the desired operating objective. 
The Fed’s changed operating framework 
In  recent  years,  like  many  other  central  banks  around  the  world  in  the  face  of  the  Great 
Recession  and  the  prolonged  economic  recovery  that  has  followed,  the  Fed  adopted 
unconventional  measures  to  provide  monetary  policy  accommodation  in  pursuit  of  its 
macroeconomic  policy  objectives.  This  is  reflected  in  changes  in  the  Fed’s  operating 
framework and the FOMC’s operating objective for OMOs. 
For many decades prior to the crisis, the operating objective for OMOs was expressed as a 
target  for  the  federal  funds  rate  –  an  overnight,  unsecured  rate  in  the  market  for  reserve 
balances.  The  target  rate  was  achieved  through  permanent  and  temporary  OMOs  that 
sought to  adjust the  supply  of reserve  balances in  the  banking  system  to  a  level  that  was 
expected to equal the estimated level of demand for reserve balances at the FOMC’s target 
rate. The Desk’s permanent additions to the supply of reserve balances were designed to fall 
somewhat  short  of  the  total  demand,  creating  a  “structural  deficiency”  in  the  supply  of 
reserves. The Desk then conducted daily fine-tuning operations to temporarily add reserve 
balances  to  get  to  the  desired  level.  These  daily  operations  represented  a  marginal 
adjustment to the aggregate supply of reserves, largely in response to the exogenous impact 
of transitory changes in other Fed liabilities such as currency in circulation and the level of 
the U.S. Treasury’s account balance at the Fed. 
Minor variations in the total level of reserves supplied could move equilibrium market rates 
up or down as individual depository institutions with a deficiency of reserves had to find and 
trade  with  depository  institutions  with  a  surplus of  reserves. This  system functioned  with  a 
relatively low level of reserve balances.3 The Desk was able to reliably achieve the FOMC’s 
                                                
1  The  Board  of  Governors  is  also  responsible  for  the  supervision  and  regulation  of  banks  and  systemically 
important  financial  institutions,  payments  systems  and  infrastructure,  and  overall  oversight  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  System.  It  may  also  authorize  Federal  Reserve  Banks  to  extend  credit  to  other  entities  under 
emergency lending authority. 
2  The  FOMC’s  Authorization  for  Domestic  Open  Market  Operations  and  Authorization  for  Foreign  Currency 
Operations outline the activities that the selected Bank is eligible to undertake. The domestic policy directive 
and  foreign  currency  directive  specifically  instruct  the  Desk  to  execute  such  operations  in  furtherance  of  a 
particular operating objective defined by the FOMC. 
In the five years prior to the crisis, total reserve balances averaged $20 billion and excess reserves – balances 
in excess of those required to satisfy reserve balance requirements – averaged about $1.5 billion. 
3 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  policy directive under this implementation framework. The effective federal funds rate – the 
average  rate  prevailing  in  the  brokered  federal  funds  market  each  day  –  routinely  hit  the 
FOMC’s target rate, generating a high degree of confidence among market participants in the 
Desk’s ability to implement policy. 
This operating framework changed as the financial crisis deepened. By December 2008, the 
FOMC had lowered its target for the federal funds rate from a point target of 5¼ percent in 
mid-2007 to a target range of zero to ¼ percent. With the federal funds rate and other short-
term  interest  rates  effectively  at  the  zero  lower  bound, the  FOMC’s  operating  objective for 
OMOs  was  expanded  to  include  adjustments  in  the  size  and  composition  of  the  Federal 
Reserve’s securities portfolio. In particular, the FOMC initiated large-scale asset purchases 
(LSAPs)  of  agency  mortgage-backed  securities  (MBS),  agency  debt,  and  later  longer-term 
Treasury securities, in order to put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates, support 
mortgage  markets,  and  help  make  broader  financial  conditions  more  accommodative.  The 
expansion of the domestic securities portfolio that resulted from LSAPs vastly increased the 
supply of reserve balances in the system (Figure 1).4  
Importantly,  in  October  2008,  the  Fed  was  granted  authority  to  pay  interest  on  depository 
institutions’ reserve balances.5 In an environment of elevated reserve balances that resulted 
from  the  Fed’s  asset  purchases,  the  payment  of  interest  on  excess  reserves  (IOER)  – 
currently at a rate of ¼ percent – has kept the overnight federal funds rate within its target 
range (Figure 2).6 Although the FOMC continues to direct the Desk to undertake OMOs as 
necessary to maintain conditions in reserve markets consistent with federal funds trading in a 
range from zero to ¼ percent, the Desk has not needed to conduct OMOs to manage the 
supply of reserves since December 2008. 
Instead, OMOs have focused on directives to adjust the size and composition of the SOMA 
portfolio.  Since  late  2008,  the  FOMC  has  directed  the  Desk  to  carry  out  three  large-scale 
asset purchase programs and several other portfolio-oriented initiatives, such as the maturity 
extension program (MEP) and changes in reinvestment policies (Figure 3). Under the MEP, 
commonly referred to by market participants as “Operation Twist,” the FOMC lengthened the 
maturity  profile  of  the  SOMA’s  portfolio  of  Treasury  securities  by  offsetting  purchases  of 
longer-term  Treasury  securities  with  sales  of  equal  par  amounts  of  shorter-term  securities 
and redemptions of maturing ones.7 Additionally, since mid-2010, the FOMC has directed the 
Desk to reinvest or roll over payments of principal on the securities holdings in the SOMA, 
                                                
4  These asset purchases followed various programs the Fed initiated during the crisis to support the liquidity of 
financial institutions and foster improved conditions in financial markets. Credit extension through these crisis-
related  programs  was  temporary  in  nature,  so  the  impact  of  these  programs  on  reserve  balances  was 
unwound  as  the  loans  were  repaid.  In  contrast,  reserve  expansion  associated  with  LSAPs  has  a  more 
enduring  effect  as  long  as  the  assets  remain  in  the  SOMA  portfolio,  subject  to  offsetting  influences  on 
reserves from changes in other balance sheet items. 
5  The authority for the Federal Reserve to pay interest on reserve balances held by depository institutions was 
granted by Congress prior to the crisis, in the Financial Services Regulatory Relief Act of 2006, with a planned 
effective  date  of  October  2011.  However,  implementation  was  accelerated  as  part  of  the  response  to  the 
financial  crisis.  The  statute  authorizes  Federal  Reserve  Banks  to  pay  interest  on  balances  maintained  to 
satisfy reserve balance requirements (required reserves) and on excess balances (excess reserves). 
6  As  noted  earlier,  the  Board  of  Governors  is  responsible  for  setting  the  rate  of  interest  on  reserves.  Since 
December 16, 2008, the interest rates on required reserve balances and excess reserve balances have both 
been ¼ percent, but the rates need not be the same. Although the interest rate on reserves represents an 
overnight rate, it is calculated and paid out on a lagged basis according to two-week reserves management 
maintenance periods. The payment is based on daily account balances and a weighted average of applicable 
overnight rates over the maintenance period. More information can be found in Regulation D. 
7  The  MEP  provided  additional  monetary  policy  accommodation  by  increasing  the  duration  of  the  SOMA 
portfolio, but unlike LSAP programs, on net it had a neutral effect on the level of reserves. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  which maintains the size of the portfolio and adjusts the asset type and maturity composition 
of its holdings.8  
Large-scale asset purchases as a policy tool and their execution 
Of course, as this audience knows well, the Federal Reserve was not the first major central 
bank  to  use  alternative  tools  for  monetary  policy  implementation  at  the  zero  lower  bound. 
The  quantitative  easing  policy  (QEP)  that  the  Bank  of  Japan  (BoJ)  initiated  to  combat 
deflation in 2001, after operating for some time under a policy of zero interest rates, provided 
a  valuable  precedent  when  central  bankers  elsewhere  faced  similar  challenges  later  that 
decade. However, the balance sheet expansion under the BoJ’s original quantitative easing 
differed  significantly from  the  asset  purchase  programs  undertaken  by  advanced  economy 
central  banks  over  recent  years,  including  the  BoJ’s  current  quantitative  and  qualitative 
monetary  easing  (QQE).  The  earlier  QEP  was  a  liability-driven  program  in  which  the  BoJ 
changed its operating objective from an overnight interest rate to quantitative targets for the 
level of current account balances outstanding at the BoJ (the counterpart to reserve balances 
held by depository institutions at the Fed). To achieve its new target, the BoJ provided ample 
liquidity through a range of operations. Although the BoJ increased its outright purchases of 
long-term  government  bonds  as  part  of  this  initiative,  a  large  share  of  the  easing  was 
accomplished  through  temporary  open  market  operations  or  purchases  of  short-term 
securities. In contrast, the FOMC’s portfolio-oriented programs have been driven by a desire 
to expand and lengthen the maturity structure of the asset side of the Fed’s balance sheet in 
order to put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates. The accompanying growth of 
reserve  balances  has  been  a  byproduct  of  those  purchases,  not  a  specified  objective. 
Former Fed Chairman Bernanke referred to this approach as “credit easing,” in contrast to 
the BoJ’s “quantitative easing.”9  
The FOMC’s different objective for OMOs reflects the primary transmission channel through 
which  LSAPs  are  understood  to  affect  financial  and  economic  conditions.  Central  bank 
purchases of longer-term bonds reduce the stock of such securities held by private investors. 
Accordingly,  the  purchases  remove  duration  risk  –  and  in  the  case  of  agency  MBS, 
prepayment  risk  –  from  the  private  sector,  which  drives  term  and  other  risk  premiums  on 
those  assets  lower  than  they  would  otherwise  be.10  This  re-pricing  of  risk  ultimately  puts 
downward  pressure  on  long-term  interest  rates,  an  effect  that  spreads  to  other  assets  as 
some investors rebalance their portfolios. The term premium effect of the Fed’s purchases 
should continue to influence financial conditions as long as the assets remain in the SOMA 
portfolio, although the size of the effect will diminish over time as the risk associated with the 
portfolio diminishes. Some standard portfolio risk measures illustrate the degree to which the 
Federal  Reserve  has  absorbed  extra  duration  risk  onto  its  balance  sheet.  The  SOMA 
Treasury portfolio currently has an average duration of about 7.5 years, compared with a pre-
crisis level of about 2.6 years. Meanwhile, the duration risk of the entire domestic securities 
portfolio, including agency MBS and agency debt as well as Treasury securities, is equivalent 
to  about  $2.9  trillion  in  10-year  Treasury  securities  (Figure  4).  Purchases  likely  also  work 
                                                
8  From  mid-August  2010  through  September  2011,  principal  payments  from  holdings  of  agency  debt  and 
agency  MBS  were  reinvested  in  longer-term  Treasury  securities.  Since  October  2011,  they  have  been 
reinvested in agency MBS. 
9  Ben  S.  Bernanke,  “The  Crisis  and  the  Policy  Response,”  Stamp  Lecture,  London  School  of  Economics, 
London, England, January 13, 2009. 
10  A security’s duration captures the weighted average term to maturity of the security’s cash flows and provides 
a measure of the sensitivity of the security’s price to changes in interest rates. Duration (and therefore price 
risk)  is  generally  greater  for  longer-maturity  and  lower-coupon  securities.  Agency  MBS  prices  additionally 
carry prepayment risk, the risk associated with the uncertainty around the timing of principal cash flows owing 
to the fact that homeowners have the option to prepay their mortgages at any time. Because of this embedded 
option, agency MBS cash flows vary as interest rates change. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  through a signaling effect, to the extent that they are perceived as a credible signal of the 
central  bank’s  intentions  regarding  the  future  level  of  short-term  interest  rates.  And  in 
circumstances when market functioning is unusually strained, as was the case prior to the 
Fed’s first LSAP program, asset purchases may enhance liquidity through the central bank’s 
consistent and significant presence in the market. 
Over  the  past  six  years,  the  FOMC  has  been  flexible  in  using  these  tools,  adapting  as  it 
learned and as individual circumstances changed. In the first two LSAP programs and MEP, 
for example, the FOMC communicated an expected total size and completion date for each 
program. However, the third (and current) LSAP program has been outcome-based, with the 
FOMC announcing only a monthly pace and composition for its purchases and noting that 
purchases would continue until there is a substantial improvement in the outlook for the labor 
market in a context of price stability. Other central banks have also used conditional asset 
purchases  effectively.  Perhaps  the  best  example  is  the  Outright  Monetary  Transactions 
program announced by the European Central Bank (ECB) in September 2012. This program 
is credited with helping to stabilize euro-area fixed income markets by ruling out certain bad 
equilibria.  This  success  was  achieved  without  the  purchase  of  a  single  asset.  Another 
example of conditional asset purchases is the BoJ’s statement of a commitment to continue 
QEP until inflation registered stably at or above zero. 
if 
incoming 
information  broadly  supports 
Changes in the Fed’s balance sheet and implications for normalization 
So where are we now? The current purchase program appears to be nearing its completion. 
Last  week,  the  FOMC  directed  the  Desk  to  reduce  purchases  of  Treasury  securities  to 
$10 billion  per  month  and  purchases  of  agency  MBS  to  $5  billion  per  month  starting  in 
October. The Committee also indicated that it will end the current purchase program at its 
next  meeting 
its  expectation  of  ongoing 
improvement  in  labor  market  conditions  and  inflation  moving  back  toward  its  longer-run 
objective.  It  also  directed  the  Desk  to  maintain  its  agency  MBS  and  Treasury  security 
reinvestment policies – activities it separately announced it expects to continue after it begins 
to increase its target range for the federal funds rate. 
Should this course come to pass, the domestic securities portfolio will peak at a par value of 
about  $4.2  trillion  –  more  than  a  five-fold  increase  since  the  start  of  the  financial  crisis  in 
August  2007.  The  composition  of  the  portfolio  will  also  remain  more  complex.  Formerly 
composed  entirely  of  Treasury  securities,  the  domestic  portfolio  is  now  only  60  percent 
Treasury securities, with the remainder held in agency MBS (and a small amount of agency 
debt securities). As I noted earlier, the weighted average maturity of the Treasury portfolio 
has lengthened substantially, while the MEP essentially eliminated the portfolio’s holdings of 
any Treasury securities maturing prior to February 2016. Meanwhile, it’s hard to predict the 
exact  pace  at  which  the  SOMA  portfolio’s  agency  MBS  holdings  will  pay  down  over  time 
given the prepayment uncertainty associated with those securities. 
At last week’s meeting, the FOMC also reaffirmed its view that it likely will be appropriate to 
maintain  the  current  zero  to  ¼  percent  target  range  for  the  federal  funds  rate  for  a 
considerable  time  after  the  asset  purchase  program  ends,  especially  if  projected  inflation 
continues to run below the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run goal, and provided that longer-
term  inflation  expectations  remain  well  anchored.  Meanwhile,  as  a  matter  of  prudent 
planning,  the  Committee  has  been  deliberating  how  it  should  proceed  to  remove  policy 
accommodation (often called “normalization”), when it believes the appropriate time to do so 
comes.  Although  the  specific  timing  of  this  is  not  yet  known,  it’s  certain  that  the  level  of 
reserve balances in the banking system will be very high. Assuming no other liabilities are 
issued,  there  would  be  about  $2.9  trillion  in  reserves  –  mostly  in  excess  reserves  –  if  the 
Committee  ends  asset  purchases  next  month  and  continues  reinvestments.  In  itself,  an 
elevated level of reserve balances need not impede the FOMC’s ability to effectively raise 
the level of short-term interest rates because of the ability to pay interest on excess reserves. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Following last week’s FOMC meeting, the Committee released a revised set of normalization 
principles and plans (taking into account changes in the SOMA portfolio and enhancements 
in  available  tools  since  it  originally  issued  such  principles  in  June  2011)  that  it  intends  to 
implement when it becomes appropriate to begin normalizing the stance of monetary policy. 
Importantly, as the Chair noted during her post-meeting press conference, this statement is 
intended  to  provide  information  to  the  public  about  the  eventual  normalization  process;  it 
does not signal a change in the current or future stance of monetary policy. 
According to the principles, the Committee will adjust the level of monetary accommodation 
primarily by utilizing policy tools to influence the level of short-term interest rates – in the first 
instance, using tools with rates directly administered by the Fed. Tools that can immobilize or 
drain  large  levels  of  reserves  to  tighten  control  over  the  federal  funds  rate  also  remain 
available.  However,  the  principles  do  not  envision  that  active  adjustments  to  the  SOMA 
portfolio will play a featured role. 
Specifically, the FOMC indicated that the federal funds rate will continue to play a central role 
in the Fed’s operating framework and communications during normalization, and that it will 
raise  the  target  range  for  the  federal  funds  rate  when  economic  conditions  warrant  a  less 
accommodative monetary policy stance. Adjustments in the interest rate that the Fed pays to 
depository  institutions  on  excess  reserve  balances  –  that  is,  the  IOER  rate  –  will  be  the 
primary  tool  to  move  the  federal  funds  rate  into  the  target  range.  Raising  the  IOER  rate 
should  put  upward  pressure  on  a  range  of  market  interest  rates  and  influence  overall 
financial conditions in a way that fosters the Federal Reserve’s macroeconomic objectives. 
The  Committee  also  indicated  that  an  overnight  reverse  repurchase  agreement (ON  RRP) 
facility and other supplementary tools will be used, as needed, to help control the level of the 
federal funds rate. An ON RRP facility will supplement the primary role of IOER in controlling 
the  federal  funds  rate  by  providing  an  alternative  safe,  overnight  asset  for  money  market 
investors. I will describe the role of the ON RRP facility in more detail in a moment.11  
The  Committee  expects  to  gradually  return  the  balance  sheet  to  a  more  normal  size  and 
composition, primarily by ceasing to reinvest repayments of principal. A halt or reduction in 
reinvestments is expected to occur after the FOMC begins increasing the target range for the 
federal funds rate. The FOMC does not plan to use asset sales as part of the normalization 
process, but suggests that limited sales might be warranted in the longer run to reduce or 
eliminate residual agency MBS holdings. 
The Federal Reserve will continue to test some of these tools to gather additional information 
about  their  efficacy  and  to  enhance  their  operational  readiness  prior  to  liftoff.  For the  past 
year,  the  Desk  has  been  conducting  an  exercise  of  ON  RRP  operations.  Conducting  ON 
RRPs  for  same-day  settlement  with  a  broad  range  of  counterparties  –  including  primary 
dealers, money funds, government-sponsored enterprises, and banks – allows the Federal 
Reserve to provide a safe, liquid investment to a wider range of money market participants 
than those able to earn IOER, and thus expands the universe of counterparties that should 
generally be unwilling to lend at rates below those available through the Federal Reserve. 
The increased competition that the availability of this instrument provides should help to firm 
the  floor  on  the  level  of  short-term  interest  rates  –  that  is,  the  rate  beneath  which  market 
participants should theoretically be unwilling to lend funds. Indeed, ON RRP exercise results 
over the first year suggest that the operations have been successful working with IOER in 
establishing a floor on the level of key money market rates (Figure 5). 
                                                
11  A reverse repurchase agreement (reverse repo, or RRP) is a type of temporary OMO in which the Desk sells a 
security from the SOMA portfolio to an eligible counterparty with an agreement to repurchase that security at a 
specified price at a specific time in the future. It is economically equivalent to a collateralized investment with 
the  Fed  in  which  the  difference  between  the  sale  price  and  the  repurchase  price,  adjusted  for  the  time 
between transaction legs, implies a rate of interest paid by the Fed on the cash invested by the counterparty. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  All of the Desk’s eligible counterparty types participate in the ON RRPs, with money funds 
accounting for the largest share of take-up (Figure 6). Take-up at the operations generally 
increases  when  the  spread  between  market  rates  and  the  ON  RRP  offered  rate  narrows. 
Take-up also rises substantially around quarter- and year-end financial reporting dates, when 
some  money  market  participants’  access  to  other  overnight  secured  investments  is  more 
limited. The increase in take-up on these dates is especially large for prime money market 
funds  (Figure  7).  In  addition  to  patterns  of  usage  of  the  ON  RRPs  themselves,  we  also 
analyze  trading  patterns  and  interest  rate  dynamics  in  secured  and  unsecured  funding 
markets. In doing so, we use a wide range of data, including transactions data for unsecured 
funding markets obtained through a new Federal Reserve collection effort (FR 2420). 
While ON RRPs are a powerful tool for policy implementation, FOMC and market participants 
have  noted  the  potential  for  very  large  regular  usage  to  alter  patterns  of  financial 
intermediation  or,  in  a  fixed-rate  structure  with  no  take-up  limits,  to  exacerbate  liquidity 
pressures during times of stress. To further examine how ON RRPs might best be structured 
to  supplement  IOER  in  the  control  of  the  federal  funds  rate  while  limiting  the  potential  for 
unintended  effects  in  financial  markets,  the  FOMC  has  directed  the  Desk  to  test  several 
changes  to  the  design  of  its  ON  RRP  operations.  As  of  Monday,  the  per-counterparty 
maximum  bid  limit  was  raised  from  $10  billion  to  $30  billion,  and  an  overall  size  limit  of 
$300 billion  was  imposed  for  each  operation.  If  the  total  amount  of  bids  received  in  an 
operation is less than or equal to the $300 billion size limit, awards will be made at a fixed 
offering rate. However, if the total amount of bids received exceeds the overall operation size 
limit,  the  $300  billion  in  ON  RRPs  will  be  allocated  through  a  single-price  auction  using 
interest rates that counterparties now include with their bids. Awards are made at a “stopout 
rate”  –  the  rate  at  which  the  overall  size  limit  is  achieved  –  with  all  bids  below  this  rate 
awarded  in  full  and  all  bids  at  this  rate  awarded  on  a  pro  rata  basis.  The  stopout  rate  is 
determined  by  evaluating  all  bids  in  ascending  order  by  submitted  rate  up  to  the  point  at 
which the total quantity of offers equals the overall size limit.12 The Federal Reserve will be 
closely  analyzing  the  results  of  the  ON  RRP  exercise  conducted  under  these  new  testing 
parameters  in  order  to  further  its  understanding  of  how  an  ON  RRP  facility  might  best  be 
structured during the initial stages of the normalization process. 
In addition, the Federal Reserve Board has been testing a facility through which it offers term 
deposits  to  credentialed  depository  institutions.  Term  Deposit  Facility  (TDF)  transactions 
could be used to temporarily reduce the quantity of reserve balances. An eight-week series 
of tests this summer explored how demand for term deposits responds to variations in the 
maximum award limits and rates. Higher offered rates attracted greater use, both in terms of 
the number of participants and the total dollar volume demanded. Demand for the TDF may 
have been tempered somewhat by the instruments’ lack of an early-withdrawal feature, and 
thus the inability to consider them as high-quality liquid assets for regulatory purposes. The 
next  round  of  TDF  testing,  which  will  commence  in  October,  will  incorporate  an  early 
withdrawal feature, as well as gradually increase the maximum award amount and rate. 
the  FOMC’s  eventual  approach 
A broader perspective on normalization 
I’ve  discussed  how 
to  removing  monetary  policy 
accommodation  reflects  developments  in  the  Federal  Reserve’s  balance  sheet  since  the 
onset  of  the  financial  crisis.  As  noted  earlier,  the  relatively  long  maturity  structure  of  the 
SOMA  portfolio  means  that  the  level  of  reserve  balances  in  the  U.S.  banking  system  will 
decline only slowly through passive means, absent any asset sales. Other central banks that 
have  undertaken  unconventional  measures  also  face  (or  will  eventually  face)  similar 
challenges when they deem it appropriate to begin their own policy normalizations. 
                                                
12  For more details about ON RRP operations, please see FAQs on the New York Fed’s website. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  The  Bank  of  England  (BoE)  and  the  Bank  of  Japan  are  two  relevant  examples  that  come 
immediately to mind. The BoE’s Asset Purchase Facility, through which its Monetary Policy 
Committee  (MPC)  purchased  £375  billion  of  longer-term  assets  between  2009  and  2012, 
was quite comparable in purpose and design to the Fed’s LSAP programs. Moreover, since 
March  2013,  the  BoE  has  reinvested  the  cash  flows  associated  with  maturing  gilts  in  the 
facility  in  order  to  maintain  the  stock  of  securities  at  a  steady  level.  In  its  February  2014 
Inflation Report, the MPC provided guidance on its expected normalization framework, laying 
out an approach in which its Bank Rate – the deposit rate for central bank reserves in the 
U.K.  –  is  the  active  marginal  instrument  for  monetary  policy  while  portfolio-related  tools, 
including  reinvestments  and  asset  sales,  receive  less  emphasis.  Specifically,  the  MPC 
suggested that it intends to maintain its stock of purchased assets, including reinvesting the 
cash  flows  associated  with  maturing  securities,  at  least  until  it  raises  its  target  short-term 
interest rate from its current level. Meanwhile, the BoJ is still purchasing assets under QQE, 
which  it  launched  in  April  2013.  With  a  goal  of  increasing  its  Japanese  government  bond 
(JGB)  holdings  by  ¥50  trillion  per  year,  it  has  not  yet  initiated  a  discussion  of  eventual 
normalization. When that time comes, however, the BoJ will be holding a large portfolio of 
longer-term JGBs. The BoJ’s balance sheet will therefore look markedly different than it did 
when the QEP ended in 2006, at which time the BoJ just allowed short-term funds-supplying 
operations  to  roll  off.  The  portfolio  size  and  composition  to  which  each  central  bank 
eventually normalizes will, of course, depend on what it eventually determines is appropriate 
to  support  implementation  of  monetary  policy  in  the  longer  run.  Indeed,  the  FOMC  has 
indicated that in the longer run, it will hold no more securities than necessary to implement 
monetary policy efficiently and effectively, and that it will hold primarily Treasury securities. 
The ECB has also used unconventional measures to provide accommodation, but unlike the 
Federal Reserve, BoJ, and BoE, this has primarily been through liquidity provided directly to 
the  banking  system  via  longer-term  refinancing  operations,  rather  than  through  asset 
purchases. This liquidity was provided at fixed terms of up to three years, thus allowing the 
size  of  the  ECB’s  balance  sheet  to  normalize  automatically  as  refinancing  agreements 
mature. By contrast, the ECB’s upcoming purchases of asset-backed securities and covered 
bonds will present it with longer-term portfolio considerations. 
Finally, I should note that central banks – like other financial market participants – need to 
remain  aware  of  changes  in  the  financial  market  landscapes  in  which  they  operate.  They 
may  need  to  adapt their  operations  accordingly  as  they  move  away  from  asset  purchases 
and  back  to  money  market  instruments  to  implement  monetary  policy.  For  example,  in 
addition to reflecting developments in its balance sheet since the financial crisis, the FOMC’s 
approach  to  normalizing  policy  also  reflects  changes  in  U.S.  money  market  dynamics  that 
have  been  influenced  by  various  factors.  These  factors  include  the  extraordinary  level  of 
liquidity that’s been provided, access to IOER that is limited to depository institutions, and a 
number  of  international  and  domestic  regulatory  reforms.  International  regulatory  reforms 
include the liquidity coverage ratio, leverage ratio, and net stable funding ratio. In the U.S., 
changes  in  deposit  insurance  premium  calculations, rules governing money  market  mutual 
funds, and the potential for a capital surcharge based in part on short-term wholesale funding 
may also affect certain market participants. Many of the changes in regulation – along with 
changes in market structure, technology, and other factors – may affect market participants’ 
activity and relationships in money markets. On net, their balance sheet costs may be higher, 
which  may  prompt  money  market  participants  to  require  higher  returns  to  engage  in 
competition  to  arbitrage  wedges  in  money  market  rates  and  to  alter  their  participation  in 
central bank operations and facilities. This outcome may affect the transmission of monetary 
policy or require central banks to adapt their operations to accommodate these realities. 
Conclusion 
In conclusion, I’d like to note that the framework for implementing monetary policy and the 
landscape in which we operate have seen important changes in the years since the crisis, 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  and they continue to evolve. The Desk plays an important role in this process, carrying out 
open market operations at the direction of the FOMC, in pursuit of the operating objectives 
the  FOMC  deems  appropriate  to  achieve  its  dual  mandate  of  maximum  employment  and 
price stability. The operating tools that the Federal Reserve has developed will allow us to 
tighten monetary policy when the FOMC determines it is appropriate to do so, but I have no 
doubt  that  we  will  continue  to  learn  more  about  how  these  tools  interact  as  we  normalize 
policy and make adjustments over time, just as we have done in the past. We will also learn 
from  and  share  our  experiences  with  other  central  banks  that  are  undergoing  similar 
transitions. 
Thank you. 
 
 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
   10 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
      BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
   12 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
