  Peter Praet: Monetary policy and balance sheet adjustment 
Speech by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at 
the ECB Forum on Central Banking, Sintra, Portugal, 27 May 2014. 
 I  would  like  to  thank  Jan  Felix  Hammermann  and  Arthur  Saint-Guilhem  for  their  significant  contribution  in  the 
preparation of this speech. 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
It is a great pleasure to be here on the second day of the ECB forum on Central Banking. 
I am pleased to welcome on this panel three outstanding central bankers who have shaped 
our thinking on monetary policy. 
We  have  tasked  our  panellists  with  reflecting  on  monetary  policy  and  balance  sheet 
adjustment. I very much look forward to hearing their views on this important and complex 
topic. 
But before giving them the floor let me share with you a few thoughts on how the process of 
balance sheet correction that is taking place in the euro area could influence the shaping of 
monetary policy in the current conditions. 
Balance sheet recessions 
One important question raised by the crisis and its aftermath is the following: are “balance 
sheet” recessions different from “normal” recessions and do they call for a different monetary 
policy  treatment?  Put  differently:  the  crisis  has  left  a  legacy  of  cross-sectoral  financial 
exposures that, by and large, need to be run down in the aggregate. Probably, there exists a 
new financial texture (in terms of cross-sectoral borrowing and lending) that would make the 
economy more resilient and less conducive to financial shocks. The question is: should that 
new financial structure become a conditioning variable for monetary policy – possibly, on a 
par  with  other  and  more  traditional  target  variables,  such  as  inflation  and  macroeconomic 
stability that one sees in standard central bank reaction functions? And should the planned 
time to approach that goal determine the horizon for monetary policy? 
To  preview  my  conclusions:  I  have  a  lot  of  sympathy  for  the  view  that  balance  sheet 
recessions are indeed different and may require re-thinking the role of financial imbalances in 
monetary policy design, starting in the run-up phase. In fact, “rethinking” is not the right word 
in respect of the ECB. Let me quote from a speech that Otmar delivered almost 12 years ago 
in Jackson Hole: “…monetary aggregates and credit developments in situations of financial 
instability  can  signal  to  what  extent  consumption,  investment,  labour  and  price  setting 
decisions  are  being  affected  by  conditions  of  financial  disorder,  excessive  euphoria  or 
disillusion.” He went on to draw some strategic conclusions, saying that: “…we were given 
two  eyes:  one  to  watch  money  and  credit  aggregates  and  one  to  watch  everything  else. 
Ultimately,  these  two  policy  perspectives  are  to  be  combined  in  a  single  strategy  which 
subsumes them both in a unified – albeit complex – and robust framework for action.” This 
was  alien  language  in  the  homeland  of  the  “Jackson  Hole  consensus”,  which  did  not 
envisage a role for monetary analysis or financial disorder in monetary policy-making at all. It 
has become common parlance since, even there. 
At  the  same time,  I  have  questions  –  many  questions  –  on  how  best  to  integrate  balance 
sheet considerations into policy-making in a way that does not undermine the best legacy of 
the pre-crisis era: our price stability mandate. 
Let me elaborate. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Balance sheet restructuring 
Previous crises have shown that prompt and decisive balance sheet repair after a period of 
excessive  credit  growth  is  the  best  way  to  restore  sustainable  growth.1  Post-recession 
growth may not even be significantly weaker than normal if the overleveraged financial sector 
aggressively cuts back excess credit in the recovery phase.2 
Like  balance  sheet  imbalances,  structural  impediments  to  growth  and  to  an  efficient 
allocation  of  resources  are  generally  very  relevant  for  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  and 
need  to  be  tackled  decisively.  Trying  to  stimulate  growth  through  standard  aggregate 
demand  policies  may  be 
ineffective  and,  under  certain  circumstances,  even 
counterproductive  in  balance  sheet  recessions, when  structural  breaks on  potential  growth 
predominate.3 
It is for this reason that the changes to euro area and EU governance introduced in response 
to the crisis are so important and need to be implemented with determination. The reforms 
undertaken  in  many  stressed  countries,  especially  those  benefiting  from  official  external 
assistance, should eventually lay the foundations for a robust recovery. 
Most  importantly,  the  steps  being  taken  to  create  a  banking  union  should  help  to  address 
existing  balance  sheet  problems.  The  initial  focus  is  on  banks’  balance  sheets.  The 
comprehensive  assessment  of  their  balance  sheets  currently  being  done  by  the  ECB  is  a 
critical  element.  Thousands  of  supervisors  are  carefully  scrutinising  the  books  of  the  euro 
area’s largest banks. 
At the end of this process, the assets in banks’ books should accurately reflect the economic 
realities. That means that the value of loans to over-indebted firms and households will be 
adjusted  to  reflect  the  actual  debt  servicing  capacity  of  these  debtors.  Incentives  for 
evergreening and the associated misallocation of capital will be reduced.4 
At  the  same  time,  banks  will  be  required  to  take  corrective  action  regarding  their  own 
capitalisation levels, if needed. The increased transparency of banks’ books brought about 
by  the  comprehensive  assessment  should  make  it  easier  to  raise  additional  share  capital. 
This  will  reduce  the  need  to  resort  to  further  shedding  of  assets  with  all  its  negative 
macroeconomic consequences. 
All this will create the necessary preconditions for an eventual more robust and sustainable 
recovery in the euro area. 
Implications for monetary policy 
Leaving aside the ECB’s newly acquired role as supervisor and its traditional contribution to 
institutional reforms in Europe, what are the implications of a balance sheet recession for the 
monetary  function  narrowly  defined?  Should  the  policy  rule  that  traditionally  assigns  the 
control of inflation and minimisation of excess macroeconomic volatility to central banks be 
enriched with further elements which become binding at times of financial adjustment? 
                                                
1   For example, the Nordic banking crisis of the 1990s provides a case study of how decisive and well-targeted 
crisis management can mitigate and shorten the damaging effects of deleveraging stress. For an overview of 
the Swedish case, see Ingves and Lind (1996). 
2   See Takáts and Upper (2013). While in general credit-less recoveries – in which banks delever aggressively – 
are  indeed  significantly  slower  than  recoveries  with  credit  growth,  the  authors  find  that,  during  credit-less 
recoveries  following  financial  crises  that  were  preceded  by  credit  booms,  lower  bank  lending  to  the  private 
sector does not necessarily slow down economic growth. They find that after such financial crises economic 
growth and bank credit growth are not correlated in the first two years of recovery. 
3   See Bech, Gambacorta and Kharroubi (2012). 
4   See Caballero, Hoshi and Kashyap (2008). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  This, in my view, is the main area of reflections where a vision for the role of monetary policy 
in a changing financial landscape should take shape. In fact, how a central bank deals with 
structural  balance  sheet  imbalances  is  not  a  problem  confined  to  the  management  of 
recessions. It is a key element of a strategy for handling the business cycle in its entirety. So, 
it lies at the very heart of monetary policy. But it is an exceptionally difficult problem to solve. 
It is fraught with a cluster of ancillary questions. Let me list some of these. 
As I said, I tend to believe that the objective of repairing prior misallocations of credit and 
capital across sectors should be incorporated in one way or another as a “high priority” in the 
policy process. 
But  we  immediately  run  up  against  three  issues  here.  The  first  issue  concerns  the 
governance  of  instrument  setting  for  the  central  bank.  Let  us  take  a  very  simplified 
representation  of  monetary  policy-making:  a  Taylor  rule.  How  would  this  “high  priority”  be 
included  in  this  Taylor-inspired  interest-rate-setting  process?  Would  it  be  an  additional 
objective to be traded off, on a par with inflation and demand conditions, i.e. an additional 
reaction variable weighted by its own coefficient? Or should it be expressed as a constraint, 
a knock-out clause, which could become binding only occasionally? And, in the latter case, 
who should decide when this rebalancing or inversion of policy priorities – from time to time 
overriding the Taylor prescriptions – should be pursued? 
The second issue is one of policy legitimacy. It may be easy to say: the business sector as a 
whole  is  over-indebted  and  we  (central  banks)  need  to  promote  a  correction,  first  and 
foremost  avoiding  monetary  policies  that  can  induce  moral  hazard,  and  thus  only  obstruct 
and delay the adjustment that is anyhow inevitable. But it is more difficult to say “within the 
business  sector,  this  industry  deserves  less  credit  relative  to  that  industry”  without  quickly 
entering the terrain of allocative policies, which should be alien to our mandate. And I fear 
rebalancing policies will inevitably have allocative implications.5 
Finally,  the  third  issue  is  the  one  that  bothers  me  most.  Let  us  take  it  for  granted  that 
monetary  policy  should  –  at  least  occasionally  –  deviate  from  its  stylised  Taylor 
representation  and  look  at  and  act  upon  financial  imbalances.  Let’s  imagine  a  post-crisis 
situation, where various sectors are over-indebted. Let’s also assume that a central bank has 
a clear view about the size of “excess indebtedness” and its concentration across sectors. 
Third assumption: the central bank is assigned a price stability mandate, which it needs to 
deliver “over the medium term”. 
Probably,  in  this  situation,  the  time  horizon  for  normalising  inflation  will  be  the  relevant 
parameter that this central bank will have to select to chart its way out of a deep crisis in a 
manner  that  encourages  –  or  at  least  does  not  discourage  –  structural  rebalancing  in  the 
financial sector. Probably, the central bank will have to be able to choose a longer journey 
back  to  its  target:  it  will  have  to  accept  more  disinflation  –  and  for  longer  –  during  the 
transition than it would tolerate in different balance sheet conditions. 
But at this point I start wondering: allowing a central bank a lot of discretion in the choice of 
the horizon for monetary policy is sometimes almost the same as giving it discretion in its 
choice  of  the  monetary  policy  objective.  And  some  memories  come  back  to  mind.  In  the 
1970s monetary policy-makers were busy convincing their legislatures that rampant inflation 
was  a  temporary  phenomenon.  Once  the  various  structural  forces  at  play  –  high  pay 
demanded by unions, high oil prices charged by Middle Eastern countries, high food prices 
induced by drought – had faded, they claimed, inflation would return to more tolerable levels. 
Of  course  those  “temporary  factors”  never  reversed  and  inflation  persisted  for  a  decade. 
Inflation expectations had been fatally affected by a combination of high inflation and policy 
                                                
5   On the redistributive properties of monetary policy during the crisis, see Goodfriend (2011). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  forbearance, and it took central bank resolve – and a painful global contraction – to break 
away from that equilibrium. 
I tell myself: we could imagine situations in  which the same narrative – invoking structural 
forces  to  justify  a  monetary  policy  stance  that  tolerates  a  sustained  deviation  from  the 
objective for too long – leads to a symmetric, durable scenario of uncomfortably low inflation, 
which eventually feeds itself. 
I  do  not  have  definite  answers  to  all  these  questions.  History  is  still  being  written  as  we 
speak. But let me share a few thoughts on these issues. 
What is the role of monetary policy in this process? Maintaining a very accommodative policy 
stance for too long certainly carries severe risks. Incentives for a timely balance sheet repair 
may be undermined and new imbalances may ultimately emerge. 
Still, central banks will have to remain true to their mandates of ensuring price stability. This 
mandate should be interpreted as a symmetric mandate. Too low inflation, or even deflation, 
for a prolonged period of time cannot be seen as consistent with price stability. 
The ECB’s policy framework 
There are clear limits to the leeway that we – central banks – can afford within our mandates. 
Our medium-term price stability objective  implies that we cannot stretch our policy horizon 
forever – even if the economy is undergoing a lengthy deleveraging process. Monetary policy 
needs  to  act  forcefully  if  and  when  the  adjustment  process  threatens  the  fulfilment  of  our 
mandate. 
We  should  preserve  the  virtues  of  constrained  discretion:6  a  delicate  and  fragile  blend  of 
opposing attributes of monetary policy-making, which central banks acquired in the form of 
mandates in the 1990s, and which has served us well since then on our long journey back 
from the inflation years. Let’s not forget that – since the early 1990s when the industrial world 
eradicated  inflation  –  the  emphasis  in  the  “constrained  discretion”  oxymoron  has  always 
been on constrained. 
In  the  early  1990s  rules  won  a  long  battle  over  discretion.  And  rules  meant  a  numerical 
definition  of  the  inflation  objective  and  a  flexible  but  certain  horizon  for  accomplishing  the 
objective. 
Pushing  on  a  string  when  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy  stimulus  is  impeded  by  the 
countervailing forces of deleveraging can be counterproductive. At the same time, accepting 
low  or  even  negative  inflation  rates  in  such  a  situation  may  render  the  balance  sheet 
adjustment more painful and drawn-out. 
And it may destabilise inflation expectations. A protracted period of too low inflation, which is 
typical  for  episodes  of  balance  sheet  repair,  might  lead  to  a  de-anchoring  of  inflation 
expectations, magnifying the risks of a self-fulfilling decline in the general level of prices.7 
Most of the building blocks monetary policy has put in place in its fruitful interactions between 
academic theory and central bank practice remain valid. Let me highlight three key elements: 
First,  central  bank  independence;  second,  a  clear  price  stability  objective  supported  by  a 
quantitative  definition  of  price  stability.  We  chose  2  percent  as  the  upper  limit  of  our 
numerical  definition  of  price  stability  because  above  that  level  inflation  starts  becoming  a 
conditioning factor in economic choices. It introduces distortions. And there is no reason for 
                                                
6   The term was first used in connection with monetary policy by Bernanke and Mishkin (1997). For an account 
of the historical debates on rules vs. discretion in monetary policy, see Bernanke (2003). 
7   See Fisher (1933). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  the pace at which the nominal scale of a fiat money system drifts over time to be a distorting 
factor of real economic decisions. 
Should this upper limit be made bigger in steady state because that higher level would insure 
against major macroeconomic crises? I don’t think so. Maintaining a high tax almost all the 
time just for the pleasure of cutting it in a rare occurrence (and even if that rare event is going 
to  bring  sufficiently  severe  consequences)  does  not  seem  to  pass  the  test  of  optimal 
intertemporal allocation of policy action. The costs of high inflation are high. But the benefits 
of having high inflation as a hedge against a crisis are small after all, as central banks have 
learned to do crisis control with unconventional instruments. And these instruments work at 
any steady state inflation rate. 
The third key element is a transparent monetary policy strategy that will ensure central bank 
accountability and help to anchor inflation expectations at the central bank’s objective. 
Recent years have shown that such a framework – again bearing the imprint of constrained 
discretion with a clear emphasis on “constrained” – can notably reduce the risks of deflation 
– even in the face of the so-called zero lower bound. Long-term inflation expectations in the 
euro area remained firmly anchored even at the height of the global financial crisis and in the 
midst of the euro area’s sovereign debt crisis. This was a remarkable achievement. 
True, the crisis brought back pale memories – confined to books on the Keynes/von Hayek 
dispute in the 1930s – of what it means for a central bank to be handling an economy which 
is highly unbalanced. 
Central banks should draw on this experience. In an upturn, they should not actively promote 
financial  short-sightedness  by  ignoring  the  threat  of  credit  and  financial  exuberance.  In  a 
downturn, or during a painful recovery, they – again – should avoid short-sighted policies that 
promise to alleviate the side effects of the adjustment but in fact make that adjustment never-
ending. 
At the same time, we should never forget that price stability needs a quantitative expression 
–  put  simply,  a  number  that  people  can  internalise  firmly  in  their  decisions  –  as  well  as  a 
recognisable horizon. 
Thank you. 
References 
Bech, Morten L., Leonardo Gambacorta and Enisse Kharroubi (2012), Monetary policy in a 
downturn: Are financial crises special?, BIS Working Papers No 388, Bank for International 
Settlements. 
Bernanke, Ben (2003), Constrained discretion and monetary policy, Federal Reserve Board, 
speech before the Money Marketeers of New York University, February, 2003. 
Bernanke,  Ben  and  Frederic  Mishkin  (1997),  Inflation  Targeting:  A  New  Framework  for 
Monetary Policy?, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 11 (Spring), pp. 97–116. 
Caballero,  Ricardo  J.,  Takeo  Hoshi  and  Anil  K.  Kashyap  (2008),  Zombie  lending  and 
depressed restructuring in Japan, American Economic Review, 98(5), pp. 1943–1977. 
Eggertsson, Gauti B. and Paul Krugman (2012), Debt, Deleveraging, and the Liquidity Trap: 
A Fisher-Minsky-Koo Approach, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(3), pp. 1469–1513. 
Fisher,  Irving  (1933),  The  Debt-Deﬂation  Theory  of  Great  Depressions,  Econometrica,  1, 
pp. 337–357. 
Goodfriend, Marvin (2011), Central banking in the credit turmoil: An assessment of Federal 
Reserve practice, Journal of Monetary Economics, 58(1), pp. 1–12. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Ingves,  Stefan  and  Göran  Lind  (1996),  The  management  of  the  bank  crisis  in  retrospect, 
Swedish Riksbank Quarterly Review No 1, pp. 5–18. 
Takáts,  Elöd  and  Christian  Upper  (2013),  Credit  and  growth  after  financial  crises,  BIS 
working papers No 416, Bank for International Settlements. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
