  Sabine Lautenschläger: Interview in Frankfurter Allgemeine 
Sonntagszeitung – “Savers are not being dispossessed” 
Interview with Ms Sabine Lautenschläger, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central Bank, in Frankfurter Allgemeine Sonntagszeitung, conducted by Mr Rainer Hank and 
Ms Lisa Nienhaus and published on 6 July 2014. 
 Ms Lautenschläger, what are you doing with your money in these times in which savings are 
constantly shrinking owing to measly interest rates?  
I, of course, am also sensitive to the fact that interest rates are low. Like many Germans, I 
have  a  savings  account  where  the  return  is  currently  not  particularly  generous.  I  can  fully 
understand that it hurts. 
Why then did you and the Governing Council recently cut the key interest rate yet again? It 
now stands at a derisory 0.15%. 
The low interest rates are justified because growth in Europe is weak and the inflation rate is 
going to remain well below the target rate of just under 2% for several years. However, very 
low interest rates should last only for as long as absolutely necessary, since, like medicines, 
they are not without side effects. 
Savers are feeling dispossessed. 
It is a bit over the top to speak of dispossession. With our expansive monetary policy, with 
the low interest rate, we are pursuing our mandate to ensure price stability. Price stability is a 
precondition for a healthy economy. 
That means you are conducting policy in favour of entrepreneurs, but against savers? 
No, the Governing Council conducts monetary policy for the whole of the euro area, because 
price  stability  is  of  benefit  to  everyone.  In  general,  savers  are  also  workers  or  employers; 
they are not only savers. Therefore, the low interest rates will benefit them in other areas. 
They ensure that prices remain stable and that is the precondition for growth and therefore, 
ultimately, job security. 
Why would falling prices be bad for jobs? 
Buyers and investors begin putting off spending in anticipation of falling prices. With lower 
demand, production falls and the demand for labour declines. That therefore slows down the 
economy and can lead to a self-reinforcing downward spiral. 
But we’re not seeing that in Germany at all. People are consuming, employment is high and 
companies are doing well. 
And we  want it to stay that way. But even in this country inflation has fallen noticeably. In 
addition,  we  are  observing  a  slowing  down  of  investment  under  the  influence  of  expected 
long-term  growth  prospects.  The  negative  consequences  of  this  often  appear  only  after  a 
delay, particularly since Germany is not an island. 
The Bank for International Settlements (BIS), effectively the central banks’ central bank, is 
already  warning  that  the  ECB’s  measures  are  having  little  direct  effect,  but  are  instead 
having dangerous side effects, namely bubbles. 
Are you sure that that is not a rather provocative and one-sided summary? 
Not at all! 
Our  monetary  policy  is  working.  During  the  crisis,  it  stabilised  the  euro  area  as  a  whole, 
prevented a much stronger slump in the economy, and improved financing conditions, and 
that  is  having  an  impact  on  the  real  economy.  Indeed,  we  are  currently  seeing  moderate 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  economic growth in the euro area. That is not yet enough for us to breathe a sigh of relief. 
But an expansive monetary policy can also encourage speculation. Therefore, I will be the 
first to demand higher interest rates and a tightening of liquidity – as soon as that is justified. 
And what about the high property prices in Germany? Is there a bubble? 
The Deutsche Bundesbank, among others, is keeping a close eye on that and is also seeing 
warning signs, but is not speaking of a bubble. We are not seeing a strong rise in housing 
purchases financed by loans. A bubble is always accompanied by price increases and strong 
credit growth. 
Before  you  came  to  the  ECB,  you  were  at  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank.  The  presidents  of 
these two banks have very different opinions. Which of the two is closer to the truth, Jens 
Weidmann or Mario Draghi? 
I  think  that  the  differences  of  opinion  between  Mr  Draghi  and  Mr  Weidmann  are  often 
exaggerated by the media. When making decisions I prefer to follow my own principles and 
assessments. 
Nonetheless,  the  two  gentlemen  fought  a  duel  that  even  went  as  far  as  Germany’s 
Constitutional  Court.  It  concerned  whether  the  ECB  should  buy  bonds  from  crisis-hit 
countries. 
The Deutsche Bundesbank and the ECB gave evidence in court as expert witnesses. The 
action was initiated by others. Moreover, there are many different opinions in the Governing 
Council, not only those of Mr Draghi and Mr Weidmann. 
Let’s talk about your view: what is your position on government bond purchases? 
If you mean the OMT programme … 
… under which the ECB would buy the government bonds of countries covered by the euro 
rescue package … 
…  and  that  comply  with  the  requirements  of  a  stabilisation  programme.  I  am  somewhat 
critical of that. 
What does that mean? 
The  ECB’s  crisis  measures  have  provided  governments  with,  among  other  things,  time  to 
respond  to  the  crisis  with  better  policies.  The  OMT  programme  reduces  the  pressure 
emanating from the markets and I fear that creates the wrong incentives. There must not be 
a lull in the drive for reform and budget consolidation must not be put on the back burner. 
Which means that, even as a Member of the Executive Board of the ECB, you continue to 
side with the Bundesbank and its President, Jens Weidmann? 
I  stand  for  Europe.  And  that’s  why  the  spirit  of  the  treaties  is  what  guides  me.  And  I  can 
understand the reasoning behind a number of Mr Weidmann’s assessments. 
If,  at  some  point,  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  were  to  take  a  vote  on  whether  to 
activate the OMT programme, would you vote against it? 
I  doubt  if  there  are  any  circumstances  that  would  justify  it.  But  I  don’t  know  in  what 
circumstances such a question would come up. 
What  about  government  bond  purchases  in  general?  Aside  from  the  controversial 
programme for crisis countries? 
The ECB is not forbidden from purchasing government bonds per se. A large-scale purchase 
of  securities  –  whether  issued  by  the  government  or  the  private  sector  –  would  only  be 
considered in the event of exceptional risk. And this is really not something that I can see at 
the moment. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The  ECB  has  done  much  to  buy  time  for  the  governments  of  highly  indebted  euro  area 
countries with favourable interest rates, so that they can introduce reforms. By way of thanks, 
these countries now want to do away with the Maastricht Treaty and get further into debt? 
For a permanent exit from the crisis, which is also a crisis of confidence, governments must 
consolidate their budgets and implement the necessary structural reforms. Only then will the 
euro area countries increase the competitiveness of their national economies and create a 
basis for long-lasting prosperity for their people. It would be a huge error to stop this process 
now, when so much has already been achieved. 
Until recently, the Governing Council of the ECB was a male preserve. Now, with you and 
the Governor of the Central Bank of Cyprus, there are two women. What has changed? 
Nothing. Expertise has nothing to do with gender. 
So the effort to get more women in management positions does not achieve anything? 
That’s not the point. We are talking about the Governing Council of the ECB, which concerns 
itself with economic issues. Here, individual opinions have little to do with whether you are a 
man or a woman. Not everything should be made into a gender issue. 
But the atmosphere is surely a bit more cheerful. It’s easy to have a laugh with you. 
Do you mean to say that men don’t laugh? 
Germans are worried because soon the Bundesbank will not be able to vote in the Governing 
Council every time, on account of the rotation of voting rights. Is that a bad thing? 
Too much is being made of this topic. Anyone without voting rights at a given time can still 
clearly express his or her opinion in the Governing Council – and can convince the others. 
Will the others not take us to the cleaners when Mr Weidmann is not voting? 
Nobody  will  be  taken  to  the  cleaners.  Moreover,  there  is  no  place  for  resentment.  In  the 
Governing Council of the ECB, people exchange their views and now and again are even 
convinced  to  change  their  minds.  Since  the  Governing  Council  has  decided  to  start 
publishing its minutes in the near future, you will soon be able to see this for yourself. 
And if Jens Weidmann cannot vote, you can still represent the German position. 
I  can  always  vote,  but  I  take  a  rather  conservative  approach.  However,  above  all,  I  am 
independent and committed to the ECB’s mandate of maintaining price stability.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
