  Christian Noyer: Does Europe face the prospect of a lost decade? 
Speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France and Chairman of the Board 
of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, at the International Economic Forum of 
the Americas, Conference of Montreal, Montreal, 9 June 2014. 
 It is always a privilege to speak alongside Larry. But it is also a challenge. I will make the 
most of it by referring often to salient remarks made by Larry in recent months. I will address 
three questions: is the euro crisis over? Does Europe face the prospect of a lost decade? 
What short-term policy challenges are we facing today? 
I/ – Is the euro crisis over? 
Less than two years ago, the euro area was fighting for its existence. Euro pessimists were 
questioning its ability to survive. Not anymore. Analysts may be questioning Europe’s ability 
to grow. But the challenges that we are facing are different. They are macroeconomic, not 
existential or systemic. 
Thanks, mainly, to the Eurosystem’s actions, financial conditions are normalising. Spreads in 
peripheral  countries  have  been  dramatically  reduced.  Soon,  budgets  will  be  reasonably 
balanced and there will be no more fiscal drag on the economy. Households and corporates 
have strong balance sheets. Recent forecasts put German growth at more than 2%, Italy in 
positive  territory,  and  the  outlook  for  France  has  improved  markedly.  Growth  of  business 
activity in the euro area in April was the highest in the past three years. 
But the crisis has left an important legacy: 
• 
Money  and  financial  markets  remain  excessively  segmented.  The  monetary 
transmission  mechanism  is  severely  impaired  and  credit  conditions  are  still  very 
different across countries and sectors. 
Deleveraging  in  the  banking  sector  still  acts  as  an  impediment  to  recovery  and 
growth. Bank credit remains flat in the euro area as a whole, and SMEs’ financing is 
a  major  concern,  especially  in  stressed  countries,  where  the  percentage  of 
financially  constrained  but  viable  borrowers  is  estimated  at  25%  vs  1%  in  “core” 
countries. 
 We are very aware that balance sheet repair is a prerequisite for credit to resume and for 
monetary policy to be efficient. So, we are addressing the problem as a priority. 
1. 
We are building a safer and more robust system of financial intermediation. A major 
step has been the creation of a banking union that, as you all know, will delink bank 
and sovereign risks and ensure a harmonised and tough financial supervision. It is 
easy to underestimate this achievement. The idea was adopted less than two years 
ago.  The  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  is  now  up  and  running.  There  is  no 
example in contemporary European history when so much has been achieved in so 
little time. 
We have launched a tough and comprehensive AQR and subsequent stress tests 
that should be completed by the end of this year. For the first time, these exercises 
will be conducted in a fully integrated way – under the aegis of the SSM – with full 
accountability of the results. Completion should mark a turning point where there will 
be no more doubts about the sustainability of our banks and credit should resume at 
a normal pace. 
In the longer run, a major policy challenge for the euro area is to “reinvent” a new 
and robust financial integration model. We need sound cross-border capital flows, 
2. 
3. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  because  we  do  not  want  the  Eurosystem  to  intermediate  permanently  between 
borrowers  and  lenders  from  different  countries.  Developing  a  safe  securitisation 
process should be a priority, despite the major technical difficulties. 
II/ – Is Europe facing the prospect of a lost decade? 
Questions  about  long-term  growth  are  not  limited  to  Europe.  What  we  hear  about  our 
continent reflects a more general concern: the possibility of “secular stagnation” in advanced 
economies.  Larry  has  launched  this  crucial  debate.  I  don’t  know  whether  he  was  thinking 
specifically about Europe, but, of course, this question is very relevant for us. 
Secular  stagnation  rests  on  the  assumption  that  the  natural  interest  rate  is  negative.  This 
may happen for two reasons: 
• 
In the short run, we may have a downward shock on demand and an increase in 
savings resulting from the deleveraging process. I have just explained how we are 
currently addressing this issue. 
In the longer run, ageing and slower innovation may push up saving rates and bring 
down the return on capital. Therefore, the ultimate response to the risk of secular 
stagnation is to improve the return on investment, thus pushing the natural interest 
rate back into positive territory. Again, this is not only a European problem. But we 
do have difficulties in this regard. Structural reforms are not easy.  
 Many, however, are currently being implemented. Italy is abolishing its provinces, generating 
savings that will allow for a reduction in taxes and liberalising its labour market. France is on 
the same track and has reduced taxes on its labour costs as well as improving labour market 
flexibility. 
III/- short-term policy challenges and responses 
The main challenge, of course, is low and declining inflation, with inflation expectations in the 
euro area drifting downward at short to medium-term horizons. This prevents adjustments in 
relative  prices,  –  an  important  mechanism  to  eliminate  gaps  in  competitiveness  –  and 
increases the risk of outright deflation, should a negative shock occur in the future. 
Strangely, in the euro area, growth and inflation are moving in opposite directions. As growth 
accelerates,  inflation  keeps  going  down.  This  “disconnect”  in  the  Philips  curve  is  puzzling. 
We  must  look,  then,  at  the  broader  picture.  Euro  area  economies  have  attracted  strong 
capital inflows over the recent months, with two opposite effects on financial conditions: first, 
easing  through  lower  long-term  interest  rates.  And,  second,  an  appreciation  of  the  euro 
exchange rate. 
It’s  not  clear  whether  the  overall  effect  is  positive.  While  nominal  conditions  are  more 
accommodating in euro area than in the US, real indicators point to a more restrictive stance. 
We  may  see  a  perverse  feedback  loop  develop,  with  low  inflation,  increasing  real  rates, 
capital  inflows  and  exchange  rate  appreciation  mutually  fuelling  each  other.  The  financial 
economy may be heading towards a bad equilibrium that would threaten the real economic 
recovery. 
The  situation  called  for  an  appropriate  policy  response  and,  as  you  know,  the  Governing 
Council has agreed last Thursday on a strong package of four significant measures:  
First the refinancing and deposit rates have both been reduced – bringing the deposit rate 
into  negative  territory  for  the  first  time.  This  should  encourage  financial  intermediaries  to 
actively put their cash balances at work both on credit and asset markets.  
Those cash balances themselves will be significantly boosted as: 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Second, the ordinary regime of unlimited liquidity provision has been extended to the end of 
2016.  
Third, the Eurosystem will conduct a new set of targeted longer-term refinancing operations. 
This exceptional liquidity will be provided at long maturity (up to four years) and a guaranteed 
fixed rate, a clear sign that monetary accommodation should persist for a very long time. 
Finally,  the  Eurosystem  is  actively  preparing  to  buy  asset  based  securities  that  will  help 
channel  monetary  accommodation  and  ease  financial  conditions  to  private  non-financial 
borrowers, especially SMEs. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
