  Christian Noyer: The outlook for the economies of the euro area and 
France 
Speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France and Chairman of the Board 
of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  the  Paris  Europlace  International 
Financial Forum, New York, 14 April 2014. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
I am very pleased to be here with you today for this Paris Europlace International Financial 
Forum. I would like to extend my sincere thanks to the whole Paris Europlace team for their 
great  work  on  this  specific  event  and,  more  generally,  for  their  commitment  to  the  French 
financial sector. 
I would like to provide you with a quick overview of the outlook for the economies of the euro 
area and for France. 
The economic and financial situation in the euro area 
1. 
I shall start by updating you on the current situation in the euro area. 
As you know, the second quarter of 2013 marked a turning point in that it put an end to six 
consecutive  quarters  of recession. The  euro  area  economy finally  saw  a  return  to  positive 
growth, with a 0.3% expansion, and this was confirmed in the third quarter with 0.1% growth, 
and again in the fourth quarter with 0.3% growth. 
The recovery in 2013 was modest and unequal across countries. However, it still reflects a 
sharp improvement in the overall trend, which is continuing and gradually getting stronger.  
The ECB staff macroeconomic projections foresee annual real GDP increasing by 1.2% in 
2014 and 1.5% in 2015. 
In addition, the majority of soft indicators are improving, and have been above their long-term 
average for a number of months now, confirming a rebound in economic activity. 
Although the strength of the rebound varies across countries, it is important to highlight the 
return to positive growth in those countries most affected by the crisis and which are of major 
importance to the euro area: I’m thinking above all of Spain and Italy, where exports have 
rebounded sharply and are currently driving economic activity. 
On a financial level, we are also seeing a significant return to normal in the euro area: 
• 
bond  markets  in  periphery  countries  are  continuing  to  stabilise  and  interest  rates 
have  come  back  down  to  sustainable  levels,  with  several  periphery  countries  or 
programme  countries  recently  managing  to  obtain  market  financing  at  perfectly 
satisfactory rates; 
fragmentation within the euro area is decreasing – as shown for example by the fall 
in liquidity surpluses or Target2 balances; 
credit dynamics are still subdued on the whole, due to continuing weak demand and 
ongoing bank deleveraging. But we are confident that the asset quality review which 
we are undertaking and the upcoming stress tests will revive confidence and thus 
boost credit. Besides, we are working on revitalising market-based financing in the 
euro  area,  notably  through  the  revival  of  a  transparent,  robust  and  efficient 
securitization market; this has the potential to provide a useful complement to credit, 
the  ultimate  objective  being,  of  course,  the  healthy  financing  of  the  euro  area 
recovery. 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  In this context, of course, the key question at the heart of current debates is: how can we 
amplify this recovery? 
I believe that, fundamentally, what Europe needs in order to strengthen its pace of growth is 
to  improve  its  competitiveness  in  today’s  globalised  world.  Obviously,  the  euro  area  is  not 
without  its  strengths,  and  the  region  is  well-equipped  to  face  the  challenges  of  the 
21st century. With 370 million consumers and a high level of purchasing power, it is still the 
largest market in the world. It is also the world’s most economically integrated zone, with a 
highly qualified labour force and extremely good infrastructure.  
Besides, we have achieved considerable improvements in our economic governance and are 
continuing  to  make  progress  in  this  area  with  the  implementation  this  year  of  the  single 
supervisory  mechanism,  which  will  be  followed  by  a  single  resolution  mechanism,  as 
announced by the European Council of Ministers in March. This banking union is absolutely 
key to the strengthening of the euro area. It will make the transmission of the single monetary 
policy more efficient, it will break the vicious circle between banks and sovereign risk, and it 
will bring more confidence, more stability and, ultimately, more growth. 
However, the problem we face today is that many countries in the euro area are too often 
unable to take full advantage of these benefits, due to rigidities that have built up gradually 
during periods of easy growth. The only solution is to carry out structural reforms. 
In  this  field  as  well,  the  euro  area  has  made  considerable  progress  these  last  few  years, 
especially in those countries with the biggest competitive lag relative to the rest of the region, 
and  which  had  thus  been  plunged  deeper  into  crisis  than  their  neighbours.  Cost 
competitiveness  has  improved  substantially.  There  has  also  been  a  strong  correction  in 
current account balances, with several countries managing to turn significant trade deficits 
into surpluses. 
This  progress  can  be  attributed  to  major  reforms  in  some  of  the  most  decisive  areas  for 
competitiveness,  that  is  goods  and  labour  markets,  social  security  systems  and  pension 
schemes. Of course, the effects of these changes will mainly be felt over the medium to long-
term. 
We  still  have  a  lot  of  work  to  do,  however,  particularly  in  liberalising  goods  and  services 
markets,  making  labour  markets  more  flexible,  and  increasing  profit  margins  to  enable 
companies to start investing in innovative technology again. This is without doubt the most 
important lever for guaranteeing a strong and sustainable recovery in the euro area, and one 
that will create jobs. 
The outlook for inflation in the Euro area 
2. 
Of course, no summary of the euro area situation would be complete without talking about 
the current low level of inflation, which poses a major challenge for the Eurosystem, and for 
the euro area economy as a whole. 
The  sources  of  and  reasons  for  such  a  low  level  of  inflation  are  complex  and  multiple. 
Temporary  and global factors  may  be  at  play  in  the euro  area,  with  import prices falling.  I 
also think there are more permanent and deeper forces pushing inflation down both at the 
euro area and global level. 
Let me make a few points regarding this challenge to European monetary policy today. 
First,  and  you  all  know  this  perfectly  well,  low  inflation  is  not  deflation.  Deflation  is  a 
permanent and cumulative process of decline in the overall price index, fuelled by negative 
expectations. Having this in mind, there is no deflation today in the euro area. Prices are still 
increasing and, most importantly, so are nominal wages. And, something even more crucial: 
inflation expectations remain firmly anchored in positive territory, even in the short run. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Second, low inflation provides economic stimulus by boosting real income. In most parts of 
the  euro  area,  nominal  wages  are  downward  rigid.  Every  time  inflation  “surprises”  on  the 
downside, it creates an unexpected increase in real wages and purchasing power. I believe 
this  mechanism  is  playing  some  role  by  improving  economic  sentiment  and  supporting 
consumption as we have seen in the euro area over the past months. 
That said, when inflation is too low, it carries very significant dangers and risks: 
• 
• 
First, it makes real adjustment more complicated. 
Second, low inflation makes it difficult to attain low, or negative, real interest rates, 
which are necessary in all advanced economies at the current juncture. 
Finally,  low  inflation  increases  the  risk  that  the  economy  could  fall  into  outright 
deflation if and when it is hit by a negative shock. The 2% target is meant to act as a 
cushion against that risk. 
 To sum up, the situation today calls for a very careful assessment of the balance of risks. 
Precisely because deflation is hard to reverse, even small probabilities cannot be neglected 
and must be fully factored into policy-making. I think the ECB Governing Council has made 
this  point  very  clear  over  its  last  meetings. We currently  anticipate  a  progressive  return of 
inflation  to  our  objective  of  below  but  close  to  2%.  Our  monetary  policy  remains  very 
accommodative and we continue to expect the key ECB interest rates to remain at present or 
lower levels for an extended period of time. Should we note a deviation from this path, we will 
use  every  instrument  within  our  mandate,  including  unconventional  ones,  in  order  to  cope 
effectively with risks of a too prolonged period of low inflation. 
for  competing 
Outlook for the French economy 
3. 
I would like to end my speech by taking a closer look at the situation in France. 
Our growth is expected to be close to the euro area average in 2014, at around 1%. 
France  has  some  major  strengths 
in  a  global  economy:  dynamic 
demographics, a well-trained labour force, expertise in strategic or high-tech sectors such as 
mathematics,  aeronautics  and  nuclear  engineering,  and  excellent  infrastructure.  We  also 
have the advantage of an efficient financial system which has always  managed to play  its 
role in financing the economy. French banks have made the necessary efforts to meet the 
Basel  3  solvency  requirements,  and  are  also  improving  their  liquidity  levels  in  a  highly 
favourable monetary policy environment. 
But our economy has two main handicaps: first, taxes and social security contributions are 
too much of a burden, particularly for companies, because of our excessively high level of 
public  spending;  and  second,  our  labour  market  and  goods  and  services  markets  are 
overregulated and excessively rigid. 
As far as I can see, France’s main priority today is to ensure that it can take full advantage of 
its  strengths  by  implementing  structural  reforms  that  reduce  the  burden  of  taxation  and 
simplify administrative formalities. The government has made it clear that it shares this view 
of the causes behind our current problems and of the solutions that we need to implement as 
soon as possible. 
It  has  indeed  begun  implementing  major  structural  reforms,  and  is  committed  to  going 
further,  notably  on  firms’  cost  competitiveness  and  on  the  reduction  of  the  public  deficit 
through greater cost efficiency in public administration. 
Thank you for your attention and I am looking forward to your questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
