  Yves Mersch: Next steps for European securitisation markets 
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the Information Management Network (IMN) Global ABS Conference, Barcelona, 11 June 
2014. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure to be here with you at the 2014 Global ABS Conference. 
Over  the  last  year  ABS  have  become  a  major  focus  of  discussion  within  European 
policymaking circles. There is a growing consensus that an instrument once seen as part of 
the  problem  could  in  fact  be  part  of  the  solution.  I  am  therefore  happy  to  see  that  the 
conference  agenda  contains  many  sessions  touching  on  the  key  issues  we  are  thinking 
about,  such  as  regulation  and  economic  growth.  I  am  sure  there  will  be  several  useful 
insights we can draw on. 
In my remarks today I would like to provide you with the ECB’s perspective on securitisation 
markets and how they fit within our overarching objectives. I also want to offer some further 
proposals  and  thoughts  on  how  to  stimulate  European  ABS  markets,  which  I  hope  will 
provide some food for thought over the remainder of the conference. 
The Eurosystem’s interest in securitisation markets 
Let me start with the ECB’s perspective. As you may know, in recent months the ECB has 
put  a  great  deal  of  public  focus  on  reviving  the  European  ABS  market.  Why  are  we  so 
interested in this particular market segment? 
There are three parts to the answer: price stability, financial stability, and the stability of our 
balance sheet. 
First, and most importantly, we see ABS as a means to an end, and that end is achieving our 
primary objective of price stability. ABS provide a channel for the funds of liquidity-rich bank 
or non-bank investors to reach the real economy, in particular its more opaque segments. By 
stimulating further credit creation, which in turn feeds into consumer prices, this supports the 
transmission of monetary policy and the fulfilment of our mandate. This mechanism is useful 
at  any  stage  of  the  cycle,  but  especially  in  an  environment  of  low  interest  rates  and  low 
inflation as we see today. 
It is in this context that the Governing Council decided last week to intensify preparatory work 
related to outright purchases in the ABS market. Under this initiative, the Eurosystem might 
consider purchasing simple and transparent ABS with underlying assets consisting of claims 
against the euro area non-financial private sector. Moreover, we see longer-term monetary 
policy benefits to a stronger ABS market: firms that are less reliant on bank finance in future 
downturns, and banks that are less constrained in their lending decisions by their capacity to 
hold credit risk. 
The second reason for our interest in ABS is their potential financial stability role. Of course, 
we  know  that  overly-complex  and  opaque  ABS,  particularly  in  the  US,  contributed  to  the 
financial instability witnessed in 2007 and 2008. But as I have long argued, alongside other 
policymakers,  simple  and  transparent  instruments  can  spread  well-understood  risk  across 
different financial actors and hence play a stabilising role. As ABS can be customised, for 
example in terms of asset exposure, geography, and maturity, they can satisfy the needs of 
most  non-bank  investors,  whether  a  pension  fund,  an  insurer,  or  an  asset  manager.  And 
sharing  credit  risk  among  the  non-bank  sector  is  important  because,  in  a  severe  market 
disruption, the correlation between banks and non-banks’ financial health is likely to be lower 
than the within-banking industry correlation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  Finally, the ECB takes a close interest in ABS because they are an important component of 
the Eurosystem’s own balance sheet. As of the end of March this year, 307 billion of ABS 
collateral  was  pledged,  amounting  to  15%  of  the  total  pledged  collateral  for  Eurosystem 
operations. If a counterparty were to default on its obligations, the Eurosystem would gain 
ownership  of  this  ABS  collateral  and  would  then  seek  to  liquidate  it  in  secondary  ABS 
markets without incurring a loss. Thus, we have a strong interest in ensuring that ABS is a 
safe and transparent asset class traded in well-functioning, liquid markets. 
So  these  are  the  reasons  why  the  ECB  sees  ABS  as  deserving  specific  attention.  Let  me 
add,  however,  that  the  ECB  does  not  believe  that  ABS  should  warrant  special  treatment 
where  it  is not  justified  from  a  theoretical,  empirical  and practical  perspective.  The  ECB  is 
interested  in  ABS  insofar  as  they  can  help  us  achieve  our  policy  objectives  in  compliance 
with  our  legal  obligations,  while  ensuring  risk  equivalence  in  our  collateral  framework.  In 
other words, supporting the ABS market is not an end itself. If the ABS market benefits along 
the way to securing our objectives, so much the better, but we do not a priori favour any one 
type of financial instrument over another. 
Still, it is no secret that, broadly speaking, European securitisation markets are not doing too 
well. Market-placed issuance is low, trading is thin in some segments, the size of the investor 
base  has  not  recovered  and  various  conservative  regulations  are  under  discussion.  What 
can be done to revitalise securitisation markets in this context? 
Proposals to unblock European ABS markets 
Much has already been written on this topic and I will not attempt to repeat all the arguments 
in the limited time we have today. I would like instead to offer three proposals that I see as 
important  to  keep  moving  the  debate  forward.  These  relate  to  the  regulatory  treatment  of 
ABS,  transparency  and  standardisation  requirements  and  the  treatment  of  ABS  by  credit 
rating agencies. The proposals should be seen as complementary to the suggestions made 
elsewhere,  including  the  recent  joint  discussion  paper  from  the  ECB  and  the  Bank  of 
England. 
Regulatory treatment 
My  first  proposal  to  revive  EU  ABS  markets  is  to  find  a  more  holistic  approach  to  their 
regulatory  treatment.  There  has  been  a  lot  of  discussion  about  various  individual  issues 
related to ABS: for example, excessive securitisation capital charges, transparency and risk 
retention  improvements,  higher  credit  enhancement  requirements,  as  well  as  the  current 
liquidity rule proposals, which I see as overly constraining. And regulators have responded 
by making efforts to overhaul the securitisation capital framework, categorise ABS in liquidity 
categories, finalise securitisation capital requirements for insurers, and reform transparency 
and disclosure requirements for these instruments. 
In  my  view,  however,  this  focus  on  discrete  issues  is  causing  us  to  miss  their  continuous 
dimension.  There  is  still  a  sense  that  the  regulatory  agenda  is  proceeding  in  an 
uncoordinated manner. 
One  example  concerns  “high  quality”  treatment  across  regulations.  The  BCBS’  efforts  to 
finalise the securitisation capital framework before end-2014 will not consider “high quality” 
preferential  treatment.  In  a  few  weeks,  however,  the  European  Commission  must  identify 
which ABS are “high quality and liquid” in the Liquidity Coverage Ratio. 
Another  example  concerns  transparency  requirements  across  asset  classes.  Substantial 
efforts are underway to further improve the transparency and disclosure requirements of ABS 
in a pan-EU manner, building on the improvements to ABS transparency brought in by the 
ECB’s  ABS  loan-level  data  templates.  Yet,  while  so  much  effort  is  being  devoted  to 
improving  transparency  over  an  asset  class  where  substantial  progress  has  already  been 
made, covered bonds continue to have no common transparency framework and indeed no 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  common supervisory framework. Nonetheless, they benefit from preferential risk weights in 
the  Capital  Requirements  Regulation  –  which,  by  the  way,  deviate  from  the  Basel  capital 
framework. 
Still another example concerns capital requirements across different investors. The proposed 
insurer  securitisation  capital  requirements  have  been  set  using  a  spread  risk  approach 
calibrated to 99.5% Value at Risk. By contrast, the bank frameworks are based on a credit 
risk approach calibrated to 99.9% Value at Risk. Finally, closer to home, the ECB, Bank of 
England, and ESMA are all involved in loan-level data reporting requirements for ABS, where 
there appears to be significant but not perfect overlap. 
One  might  reasonably  respond  that  coordinating  such  an  approach  would  be  challenging, 
that deadlines are fixed by legislation, and that it is difficult to coordinate simultaneously at 
the global, EU, and national levels – especially given the different mandates and scope of the 
various  parties  involved  in  regulation.  However,  I  believe  all  of  the  actors  are  present  and 
pieces in place to go down this route. 
Indeed,  the  European  Commission,  the  ECB,  the  Bank  of  England,  the  three  European 
Supervisory Agencies, and the European Systemic Risk Board, cover the near totality of EU 
ABS considerations under discussion at the moment. They also possess many legal powers 
to reframe the regulatory debate in a more holistic and sequentially-sensible manner. Would 
it  be  too  challenging  to  regularly  align  views  at  least  at  the  EU  level,  and  to  speak  with  a 
common voice in global fora? This is already beginning, but much more could be done in my 
view. 
Transparency and standardisation requirements 
My  second  proposal  concerns  transparency  and  standardisation  requirements  for  ABS 
products. I wholeheartedly support disclosure for ABS. This is because ABS will always have 
the  potential  to  be  highly  complex,  which  implies  much  more  room  for  opacity  than  other 
standard financial products. 
As  I  mentioned,  much  has  already  been  achieved  or  envisaged  in  the  area  of  ABS 
transparency:  the  loan-level  data  requirements,  the  proposals  by  ESMA  to  have  minimum 
common  information  for  ABS  in  a  single  portal,  and  reforms  mandated  in  the  Prospectus 
Directive. Yet we could still streamline the reporting requirements: for example, ABS investor 
reports could be standardised to allow a consistent set of information to be provided across 
transactions and across time. These same investor reports could also be aligned, in terms of 
data cut-off dates, with loan-level data submissions. This would provide greater means for 
market  participants  to  verify  the  accuracy  of  data  provided  by  issuers  and  exert  market 
discipline. 
Another  interesting  area  for  exploration  is  the  provision  of  standardised  ABS  prospectus 
templates, including common diagrams, which would allow non-specialised investors greater 
ability to make comparisons across products. ABS are of course highly diverse instruments 
and so I would not propose to shoe-horn all types into a single form. Rather, the idea is to 
provide  a  common  starting  template  for  describing  ABS  transactions  that  could  then  be 
departed from as needed. 
My concern here is that prospectuses and broader transaction documentation must inform 
both legal and financial specialists. Some creative thinking on how to present the information 
in  an  accessible  manner  may  help  preserve  legal  precision  while  avoiding  information 
overload.  This  would  build  on  what  I  believe  are  the  very  helpful  ESMA  proposals  for  a 
transaction summary. 
Looking  forward,  I  believe  that  greater  standardisation  of  ABS  products  is  a  key  goal  to 
stimulate  greater  market  activity.  SME  ABS,  for  instance,  are  widely  acknowledged  to  be 
extremely  heterogeneous  across  EU  countries,  in  part  reflecting  both  the  type  of  business 
and banking relationships that prevail in each jurisdiction. Any efforts that could be made to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  enhance  the  transparency  and  consistency  of  ABS  structures  could,  I  believe,  provide 
greater comfort to investors reluctant to take the plunge into these instruments. 
Treatment of ABS by credit rating agencies 
My  third  proposal  relates  to  the  treatment  of  European  ABS  by  credit  ratings  agencies. 
Currently  many  ABS  in  stressed  economies  are  constrained  by  the  rating  of  the 
corresponding  sovereign.  The  rationale  put  forward  by  rating  agencies  is  that  there  are 
immitigable  risks  that  affect  all  issuers  and  assets  in  a  particular  country,  above  all  the 
sovereign. As regards calibration, some quantitative and many qualitative factors are taken 
into account by the agencies when setting this ceiling. Yet, I question whether this ceiling is 
appropriate. 
For example, I am not aware of any defaults on Greek RMBS or ABS transactions, despite 
the partial sovereign debt exchange in 2012. Or, in Italy, the vast majority of RMBSs appear 
to  be  constrained  by  the  sovereign  ceiling  despite  an  average  of  25%  current  credit 
enhancement. And, from my latest check, the ECB’s Composite Index of Systemic Stress for 
the  euro  area  is  around  the  5th  percentile  of  the  distribution  since  January  1999  and  six 
times lower than the median from  2010 to 2012. This suggests that many of the systemic 
risks used to justify the country ceiling approach seem far off. 
From all these examples, and others, I find it hard to believe that the redenomination risk that 
is driving so many sovereign ceilings still justifies such stringent caps. Moreover,  I am not 
fully reassured that there is no double counting taking place in these calculations: in other 
words, that country credit risk is not already being captured in the credit risk assessment of 
the pool and third parties to an ABS transaction. 
Be that as it may, I recognise that it is the rating agencies’ prerogative to decide on the best 
methodologies to assess risks and that these methodologies will not change overnight. I do 
believe  nonetheless  that  providing  more  transparency  on  how  ratings  are  derived  and,  in 
particular, disclosing ratings absent the sovereign ceiling to investors could certainly help, as 
suggested in our recent paper with the Bank of England. 
This proposal is underpinned by my conviction that it is investors who should decide whether 
to apply the sovereign cap or not when assessing a transaction. In fact, I would argue that 
rating agencies should publish the ratings absent any cap – whether for a sovereign, swap 
counterparty, account provider, or other entity – and then add on the caps in a building block 
approach,  all  for  the  sake  of  clarity.  And,  in  my  view,  it  behoves  the  rating  agencies  to 
provide  more  transparency  on  the  precise  methodologies  for  determining  and  applying 
sovereign ceilings, given the impact of these measures on the structured finance market. 
This points to the important role that market participants themselves have to play in reviving 
European  ABS.  It  is  one  thing  for  regulators  to  improve  transparency  or  credit  ratings 
agencies to provide more granular information; it is another for market participants to analyse 
it and trade on it. 
For  example,  I  recommend  that  market  participants  look  closely  at  what  the  ECB  is  doing 
with our loan-level data initiative. We are providing much higher quality information on which 
they can make informed credit risk assessments of ABS, either on the basis of the individual 
underlying  loans,  or  on  the  basis  of  the  summary  information  made  available  in  the 
respective data repositories. 
I realise that there is no free lunch, and that there are financial and resource implications to 
such detailed scrutiny. But I am convinced that the more market participants “get their hands’ 
dirty”,  the  more  the  ABS  market  as  a  whole  will  benefit.  This  is  because  more  informed 
market  participants  means  greater discipline  for  data  providers,  less  automatic  reliance  on 
others’  opinions,  and  greater  awareness  of  gaps  in  the  transparency  requirements  across 
financial products. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
The Eurosystem places great importance on the health of European ABS markets. ABS are 
an  important  means  to achieve  our  policy  objectives  in  a prudent  manner,  which  could  be 
achieved either by ensuring the applicable haircuts or by outright purchases in this market. 
Our decision to intensify the preparations could help to catalyse new securitisation activity. 
But for a virtuous circle to take hold, the regulatory and market barriers that are preventing 
the revitalisation of European ABS markets need to come down in tandem. 
Much work is already on-going to improve the environment for ABS issuance. What I have 
tried to outline today is several practical steps that can be taken to take this work forward. I 
believe that a holistic and coordinated approach among EU policy-makers, as well as greater 
standardisation  and  more  methodological  transparency  by  rating  agencies,  could  help 
encourage the revival of the ABS market that we all want to see. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
