John Murray: Stepping outside – analysing the Canadian economy from 
an international perspective 
Remarks  by  Mr  John  Murray,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  presented  to  the 
Victoria  chapters  of  the  Certified  Management  Accountants,  Certified General  Accountants 
and the Financial Management Institute, Victoria, British Columbia, 6 March 2014. 
Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
 Introduction 
Good morning. Thank you for the invitation to address your workshop. 
One of my responsibilities as a Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada is overseeing the 
Bank’s  analysis  of  international  economic  developments.  And  before  I  became  a  Deputy 
Governor, I was Chief of the Bank’s International Department. So over the years, I have had 
the opportunity to study other economies and the policies of other governments and central 
banks in some detail. 
Looking  at  Canadian  economic  issues  from  an  international  perspective  allows  us  to  ask: 
How are we the same? How are we different? There is often a benefit to looking outward, 
examining  developments  beyond  our  borders  as  an  aid  to  diagnosing  and  addressing 
suspected policy puzzles and problems at home. At the same time, we must be careful not to 
assume that what has happened elsewhere will necessarily happen here. 
Canada’s  superior  economic  performance  during  the  financial  crisis  and  through  the 
subsequent  recovery,  relative  to  that  of  most  other  advanced  economies,  was  due  in  no 
small part to the Bank of Canada’s success in controlling inflation and the credibility that it 
has  earned  since  1991,  when  we  adopted  our  inflation-targeting  monetary  policy  (Chart  1 
and Chart 2).1 Of course, other advantages, such as a resilient financial system and timely 
fiscal stimulus, also contributed importantly. 
However,  I  am  not  here  to  boast  about  our  past  successes.  My  purpose  today  is  more 
immediate, and comes in three parts. I will begin by describing the two major macroeconomic 
challenges to sustainable economic growth that we are presently facing in Canada. Next, I 
will outline three analytic puzzles underlying those challenges, which we need to understand 
in order to formulate an appropriate monetary policy response. Finally, I want to demonstrate 
how  information  gleaned  from  the  experiences  of  other  countries  can  help  answer  these 
puzzles and guide the conduct of policy here. 
Two major macroeconomic challenges 
Economic  activity  in  Canada  has  remained  significantly  below  its  potential  level  for  some 
time (Chart 3), and the weak rates of inflation that have recently been observed are largely a 
reflection of this (Chart 4). The Bank’s first challenge, therefore, is to return inflation to the 
2 per cent target jointly adopted by the Bank and the Government of Canada, and to return 
production  in  the  real  economy  to  its  capacity  level,  since  satisfying  these  two  conditions 
generally goes hand-in-hand. 
                                                 
1   Since 1995, the target has been to achieve an annual rate of total inflation of 2 per cent – the midpoint of a 
control range  of 1 to 3 per cent – as measured by the consumer price index (CPI). The target is reviewed 
jointly with the federal government approximately every five years, and was last renewed in 2011. See Bank of 
Canada, “Renewal of the Inflation-Control Target: Background Information – November 2011.” 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Eliminating excess supply in the economy and returning inflation to target are not enough, 
however.  The  second  challenge  is  unbalanced  economic  growth.  The  sources  of  growth 
must  be  well  balanced  for  growth  to  be  sustainable.  A  rapid  return  to  potential  is  neither 
sufficient nor desirable, if it is only temporary and purchased at the cost of future instability 
and lower growth. 
What do I mean by unbalanced economic growth, you might ask? Why isn’t all growth, by 
whatever means, good? In today’s economy, a lack of balance implies growth that has relied 
too heavily on increases in household spending – in particular, the purchase of houses, with 
a  resultant  rapid  increase  in  household  debt.  Future  growth,  if  it  is  to  last,  needs  to  draw 
more support from business fixed investment and exports. 
During  the  depths  of  the  last  recession,  demand  for  our  exports  collapsed,  and 
extraordinarily  accommodative  monetary  policy  was  needed  to  boost  domestic  demand  in 
order to support employment and income (Chart 5). The Bank’s timely and aggressive policy 
actions – combined with extraordinary fiscal stimulus – worked, with extra internal demand 
effectively substituting for weak external demand. However, there are limits to how far this 
can be taken. The household sector is now largely played out; pushing it much further could 
lead to trouble. So we are left with an economy that in many respects has done well, but one 
in which both output and inflation are roughly 1 per cent below where they should be, and 
where the sources of demand need to be rotated.2  
Macroeconomic puzzles 
The Bank’s base-case projection, as presented in our January Monetary Policy Report, has 
output returning to potential and inflation gradually returning to target in roughly two years. 
Setting the Bank’s overnight interest rate – the Bank’s primary monetary policy instrument – 
at  the  appropriate  level  over  this  period  to  achieve  our  objective  always  requires 
considerable judgement and must often balance more than one risk to the economy. Some 
of this uncertainty derives from not having a clear fix on where the economy is at present and 
what forces are acting on it. The output gap, for example, is not observable, and has to be 
estimated. 
But the challenge is more serious than simply not knowing exactly where the starting point is. 
Since  monetary  policy  operates  with  long  and  variable  lags,  policy  formulation  must  be 
forward-looking and anticipate the forces that might be acting on the economy one and two 
years out.3  
The  present  situation  is  further  complicated  by  three  macroeconomic  puzzles  –  the  recent 
behaviour of three key variables and their implications for future economic performance. 
First, inflation has been unusually weak given the estimated size of the output gap and other 
identifiable forces thought to be putting downward pressure on prices. 
Second, fixed investment has been unusually weak given healthy corporate balance sheets, 
historically  high  profits,  the  low  cost  of  capital  and  the  growing  momentum  of  the  global 
recovery. 
                                                 
2  
In its January policy statement, the Bank noted that “Inflation in Canada has moved further below the 2 per 
cent target, owing largely to significant excess supply in the economy and heightened competition in the retail 
sector. The path for inflation is now expected to be lower than previously anticipated for most of the projection 
period. The Bank expects inflation to return to the 2 per cent target in about two years, as the effects of retail 
competition dissipate and excess capacity is absorbed.” (Monetary Policy Report Summary, January 2014.) 
  And in its March 5 interest rate announcement, the Bank said that “with inflation expected to be well below 
target for some time, the downside risks to inflation remain important.” 
3   J. Murray, “Monetary Policy Decision Making at the Bank of Canada,” Bank of Canada Review (Autumn 2013): 
1–9. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Third, non-commodity exports have been unusually weak given strengthening global growth 
and somewhat improved competitive conditions. 
In other words, the macroeconomy has not been unfolding exactly as we had expected. 
The tendency in these situations is to view the puzzles as uniquely Canadian and to look for 
domestic  explanations.  Perhaps  inflation  is  surprisingly  weak  because  the  output  gap  in 
Canada has been mismeasured: there might be more excess supply in the economy than the 
Bank has estimated. Perhaps exports are weak because Canadian firms are less competitive 
than  originally  thought,  so  exports  are  not  rebounding  as  quickly  as  the  growth  in  U.S. 
demand would suggest. Perhaps investment is weak because Canadian firms are inherently 
cautious and too conservative or because exports have underperformed. 
Looking inward for answers might be too limiting, however, and cause us to ignore helpful 
information elsewhere. Economic developments in Canada are often  surprisingly similar to 
those  observed  in  other  countries.  This  is  not  simply  because  Canada  is  a  small,  open 
economy,  and  therefore  subject  to  significant  shocks  originating  in  the  global  economy, 
although this no doubt accounts for much of the synchronous movement here and abroad. 
The similarity is also driven in many cases by more general global forces that are affecting 
several  economies  simultaneously,  and  that  manifest  themselves  in  Canada  even  when 
there are no obvious direct trade or investment links to these other countries. Alternatively, 
the  similarity  could  be  to  events  in  another  country  that  happened  some  time  ago,  which 
nevertheless bear a striking resemblance to our own situation, and are therefore instructive. 
Whatever the nature or source of these common patterns, they are potentially useful as a 
counterpoint  to  our  own  experience,  an  important  and  valuable  lens  through  which  to 
examine the Canadian condition. 
What I propose to do now, is to take each of the puzzles described above and show how 
looking outward has improved our understanding of what is happening within. 
The three puzzles from an international perspective 
Weak inflation 
The  first  thing  to  note  about  inflation  is  that  it  is  weak  across  virtually  all  of  the  advanced 
economies. Canada is not alone. Indeed, inflation is well below the target levels in almost all 
advanced economies (Chart 6). It is not just the low level that is noteworthy, however. It is 
also the timing of the weakness. Most of the observed down-shift in inflation has occurred 
within the past two years. The significance of this will become apparent in a moment. 
In  Canada,  the  weakness  has  been  credited  largely  to  continuing  excess  supply  in  the 
economy, which is putting downward pressure on wages and prices, and to an increase in 
competitive pressures in the retail sector. But, according to our best estimates, these factors 
are unable to explain the entire shortfall. 
Looking at inflation in other countries, one might be tempted to argue that there are global 
forces at work, and that inflation in Canada is not determined exclusively by domestic forces. 
In fact, statistical evidence gathered from something known as principal component analysis, 
which captures a common factor from various data sets, suggests that for total inflation as 
measured by the consumer price index (CPI) this is, to a degree, true. 
The high correlation one observes among rates of total CPI inflation in all of these countries 
is driven to an important degree by common movements in food and energy prices, which 
are known to be highly volatile and largely determined in world markets. This finding is not a 
surprise, but more a confirmation of something that was already known. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
The surprise relates more to the movements in core inflation, which also exert an important 
influence  on  total  CPI  inflation.4  While  it  is  difficult  to  identify  a  common  component  using 
statistical techniques, they have moved in concert and have all shifted down quite recently. 
The existence of a sizable output gap in each of the countries could offer an explanation, but 
the timing is not right. These gaps have existed for several years, and, in some cases, have 
been narrowing (Chart 7). So why would inflation weaken now? 
It  is  possible  that  idiosyncratic  developments,  peculiar  to  each  country,  could  explain  the 
common pattern, but such an extreme coincidence seems unlikely. The more likely lesson 
that one might draw from this shared international experience is that the effect of output gaps 
on  inflation  is  subject  to  a  much  longer  lag  than  previously  thought  and  that,  to  have  an 
effect,  the  gaps  must  be  not  just  large,  but  persistent.  Indeed,  the  sensitivity  of  prices  to 
excess supply might increase through time. 
This is not to preclude the possibility of other forces at work in Canada, such as an output 
gap that might be underestimated, just that the alternative explanation – a delayed response 
–  must  be  given  serious  consideration.  Provided  this  relationship  holds,  inflation  can  be 
expected to return to target as output returns to potential. 
Weak investment 
The story for “missing investment” in Canada is much the same. One can easily identify a 
number of homegrown factors that might be inhibiting business investment here (Chart 8 and 
Chart 9). Are Canadians risk-averse by nature? Are Canadian businesses too comfortable 
with  what  has  worked  in  the  past,  and  reluctant  to  strike  out  in  new  directions?  Are  there 
institutional or financial impediments that we are not aware of? Could weak investment be 
the  result  of  the  poor  performance  of  our  non-commodity  exports  since  the  end  of  2011? 
Before answering yes to one or all of the above, it is important to note that businesses in 
other countries have also been accumulating cash balances and delaying fixed investments 
–  in  many  instances  reporting  rates  of  investment  that  are  much  lower  than  the  rates  of 
depreciation, pushing the capital stock ever lower. “Dead money,” as it has been called, is 
not a uniquely Canadian phenomenon. 
Researchers  in  the  United  States  have  advanced  an  explanation  based  on  their  statistical 
work  that  is  both  intuitive  and  convincing.5  They  have  shown  that  uncertainty  exerts  a 
significant  and  distinct  dampening  effect  on  investment  decisions,  separate  from  other 
factors that might be closely related to it. Their results have been replicated by researchers 
elsewhere, and one can see a tight correspondence, if not causal relationship, between their 
measures of uncertainty and fixed investment activity. It would not be surprising if businesses 
were a little gun-shy and reluctant to commit large sums of money following the traumatizing 
experience  of  the  crisis.  The  value  of  waiting  for  greater  clarity  is  simply  too  high. 
Fortunately,  the  uncertainty  appears  to  be  receding,  and  there  are  signs  that  investment 
activity will accelerate in the near future. 
Weak exports 
The  recent  disappointment  related  to  Canadian  exports  follows  much  the  same  pattern  as 
inflation and investment, but with one or two notable differences. There has been a seeming 
disconnect  between  foreign  demand  and  the  performance  of  Canadian  non-commodity 
exports over the past two years. The sectors of the U.S. economy that did especially badly in 
                                                 
4   The  Bank’s  main  measure  of  core  inflation  is  CPIX,  which  strips  out  from  total  inflation  eight  of  the  most 
volatile  components  of  the  consumer  price  index  as  well  as  the  impact  of  changes  in  indirect  tax  on  the 
remaining components. 
5   S. Baker, N. Bloom and S. J. Davis, “Uncertainty and the Economy,” Policy Review 175 (2012): 3–13. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the  recession  were  those  that  were  especially  important  to  Canadian  exporters.  As  these 
sectors recovered, our exports should have accelerated. But they didn’t. This disappointing 
performance is true even after one adjusts for the persistent strength of the Canadian dollar 
and the marked decline in our international competitiveness since the early 2000s. While it is 
possible  that  competitiveness  or  foreign  demand,  which  the  Bank  proxies  with  a  foreign 
activity measure (FAM), could have been mismeasured, sagging competitiveness seems to 
be a less obvious candidate.6 Neither the dollar, nor competitiveness defined more generally 
(i.e., in terms of productivity and wage gaps adjusted for the exchange rate), has shown any 
evident break in trend. Most of the export disappointment is specific to the past two years 
(Chart 10 and Chart 11). 
Interestingly,  the  growth  in  global  trade  collapsed  at  about  the  same  time  and  even  more 
dramatically  than  the  fall-off  in  Canadian  trade  (Chart  12).  Perhaps  the  weakness  in 
Canadian exports has a common cause and we should be thankful for what we have. 
In this case, however, any race to judgment based on coincident timing could be misleading. 
Most of the reasons put forward for the collapse in global trade, such as constraints on the 
availability of trade financing and exceptionally weak economic activity in Europe, have little 
direct relevance for Canada.7  
An alternative explanation has been put forward, however, that also has a foreign origin and 
holds a little more promise. It relates to the fiscal cliff in the United States and the significant 
budget consolidation that has been underway there in the past two years. 
Although one might assume that the demand for Canadian exports from U.S. governments 
(federal, state and local) would be minimal, preliminary evidence suggests that approximately 
12  per  cent  of  our  non-commodity  exports  over  the  1997  to  2012  period  went  to  the  U.S. 
government  sector.  Moreover,  a  modified  version  of  the  Bank’s  foreign  activity  measure, 
which gives greater recognition to U.S government purchases, seems to improve our ability 
to capture the weakness in exports over the last two years. However, its explanatory power 
over the previous three years is not nearly as good. Work is ongoing, therefore, with a view 
to  developing  alternative  measures  of  foreign  activity  which  might  perform  better  over  the 
entire period. 
This  provides  a  useful  example  of  how  the  international  perspective  has  the  potential  to 
mislead as well as inform. One possible connection proved to be a dead-end, while the other 
points to a possible answer. Correlation does not necessarily imply causation, but it helps us 
to flag events that might warrant further investigation. 
High household debt and housing sector activity 
Household debt and activity in the Canadian housing sector have also attracted considerable 
attention in the past few years. Unlike the three earlier examples – inflation, investment and 
exports  –  high  household  debt  and  housing  sector  activity  do  not  necessarily  represent  a 
puzzle.  However,  they  have  reached  historic  highs  and  have  been  stronger  and  more 
resilient  than  many  economists  had  expected.  Household  debt  and  housing  sector  activity 
are  not  only  exceedingly  elevated  relative  to  past  experience  in  Canada,  they  have  also 
approached levels where real estate busts were observed in other countries. 
Charts 13 and 14 provide some international comparisons for two series that have attracted 
particular  attention  from  international  organizations  (as  well  as  The  Economist  magazine). 
                                                 
6   The foreign activity measure is a trade-weighted index that aggregates the various sources of foreign demand, 
such  as  U.S.  housing  or  fixed  investment,  and  weights  them  according  to  their  importance  for  Canadian 
exports. 
7   Of course, this does not preclude the existence of an indirect linkage between Canadian and European trade 
that might explain the weakness. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
These are the ratio of household-debt-to-disposable income and the ratio of average housing 
prices to disposable income. Needless to say, they have not gone unnoticed by the Bank of 
Canada either. The Bank has identified household debt and stretched housing evaluations as 
the most important domestic risks to financial stability in the country. 
It is important to stress that the figures in these charts represent national averages and vary 
across  regions  and  types  of  accommodation.  In  some  areas,  they  are  much  lower  and  in 
others, such as Vancouver and Victoria, they are much higher. 
Although  countries  such  as  the  United  States  and  the  United  Kingdom  have  experienced 
sharp  and  painful  corrections  at  comparable  debt  and  price  levels,  leading  to  much  more 
serious economic and financial consequences, it would be a mistake to assume that a similar 
outcome is therefore inevitable in Canada. 
The  Bank’s  base-case  projection  sees  household  debt,  housing  prices  and  housing  starts 
levelling  off  and  then  gradually  declining  (in  real  terms,  in  the  case  of  housing  prices):  in 
other  words,  achieving  a  soft  landing.  Recent  data,  such  as  decelerating  monthly  price 
increases for existing homes, a declining number of housing starts and historically low rates 
of household credit growth, all support this view and indicate that the situation is stabilizing, 
although the risks remain elevated. 
International evidence also provides some support for this more benign scenario. Countries 
such  as  Australia  have  managed  a  soft  landing  and  the  preconditions  for  this,  one  could 
argue, are even more favourable in Canada. Higher mortgage underwriting standards, higher 
home  equity  margins,  historically  low  debt-servicing  costs,  a  more  resilient  banking  sector 
and a number of pre-emptive macro-prudential measures that have been undertaken, in the 
form of tighter mortgage insurance and mortgage-lending standards, all work in this direction. 
Indeed, credit quality in Canada has been increasing even as credit continues to expand. 
In  this  instance,  the  international  perspective  illuminates  the  downside  and  the  upside.  It 
highlights  the  risks  that  might  be  realized  if  the  situation  is  not  well  managed,  but  it  also 
provides evidence that a more positive outcome is possible – and indeed more likely. Close 
monitoring is nevertheless required to help ensure that this cautionary tale does not become 
a reality. 
Conclusion 
The  global  economy  and  the  experiences  of  other  countries  provide  a  sort  of  natural 
experiment through which we can better assess economic developments in Canada. In many 
cases, the economic cycles of other countries are either moving in step with ours or have 
preceded them. Often, this will be because events elsewhere are shaping events in Canada; 
at other times it may be mere happenstance or the result of some more general force hitting 
us and others in a synchronous manner. 
An international perspective can provide both understanding and policy insights. While it is 
important to interpret with caution what you see through the international lens, we have seen 
how  it  can  help  us  resolve  domestic  economic  puzzles  and  guide  policy.  With  regard  to 
inflation, fixed investment, exports and the household sector, it has also pointed the way to 
more  positive  outcomes  and  supported  the  base-case  projections  of  the  Bank.  The 
international perspective deepens our understanding of how the Canadian economy works 
and gives us greater confidence in how our policy actions influence the ultimate outcomes. 
Economic  developments  in  Canada  are  not  predetermined  by  events  outside  our  borders. 
Domestic factors are important and we are ultimately the masters of our own destiny. The 
international perspective simply allows us to conduct our affairs in a more informed way, and 
improves the odds of a favourable outcome. 
 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   7
    8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   9
    10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
    12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13
