  Thomas Jordan: Swiss National Bank’s assessment of the economic 
situation 
Introductory remarks by Mr Thomas Jordan, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss 
National Bank, at the media news conference of the Swiss National Bank, Berne, 19 June 
2014. 
 Ladies and gentlemen 
Welcome to the Swiss National Bank’s six-monthly news conference. As usual, I will begin by 
explaining  the  monetary  policy  decision  and  outlining  our  assessment  of  the  economic 
situation. Afterwards, Jean-Pierre Danthine will present our latest Financial Stability Report, 
before Fritz Zurbrügg comments on current developments in the financial markets. Following 
our introductory remarks, we will be pleased to answer any questions you might have. 
Monetary policy decision 
I will begin with the monetary policy decision. 
The SNB is maintaining its minimum exchange rate of CHF 1.20 per euro. The target range 
for the three-month Libor will remain unchanged at 0.0–0.25%. The Swiss franc is still high. 
We  will  therefore  continue  to  enforce  the  minimum  exchange  rate  with  the  utmost 
determination. If necessary, we are prepared to buy foreign currency in unlimited quantities 
for this purpose. With interest rates close to zero, the minimum exchange rate is the right tool 
to  avoid  an  undesirable  tightening  of  monetary  conditions.  This  applies  especially  if  the 
upward pressure on the Swiss franc were to intensify once again. And, if required, we are 
also willing to take further measures. 
Our  new  conditional  inflation  forecast  shows  that  inflationary  pressure  has  receded  once 
more in the medium term. The inflation forecast for the coming quarters is slightly higher than 
in  March.  This  is  because  the  departure  point  for  the  forecast  has  moved  upwards,  as 
inflation  was  somewhat  higher  in  May  than  expected.  However,  from  mid-2015  onwards, 
inflation  will  be  lower  than  forecast  in  the  previous  quarter.  The  reason  for  this  is  that  the 
global economic outlook has deteriorated slightly. Another factor is the unexpectedly  weak 
inflation in the euro area. At 0.1%, the inflation forecast for the current year is 0.1 percentage 
points higher than in March. For 2015 and 2016, the new forecast – of 0.3% for 2015 and 
0.9% for 2016 – is 0.1 percentage points lower, in each case, than at the previous monetary 
policy assessment. 
It is important to bear in mind that our forecast is conditional. It is based on the assumption 
that the three-month Libor remains at 0.0% over the next three years and the Swiss franc 
weakens over the forecast horizon. In our forecast, therefore, we assume that the SNB will 
pursue a very expansionary monetary policy. Even under such assumptions, there are still no 
signs of any inflation risks for Switzerland in the foreseeable future. 
Global economic outlook 
The SNB’s inflation forecast is embedded in a global economic scenario. I would therefore 
now like to give you our assessment of the global economy. 
The global recovery remains hesitant overall. Last quarter registered weaker growth than we 
had anticipated at our March monetary policy assessment. World trade also declined, after 
having exhibited strong growth in the last few months of 2013, which had raised hopes of a 
sustained economic recovery. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  In  the  US,  GDP  declined  in  the  first  quarter.  However,  we  consider  this  to  be  a  transitory 
phenomenon  which  can  be  largely  put  down  to  an  exceptional  cold  snap  experienced  this 
winter. Growth in the euro area was weak and varied greatly from one country to another. 
While economic activity continued to pick up in Germany, renewed stagnation in France and 
Italy gave rise to disappointment. 
We  continue  to  expect  the  global  economy  to  firm  in  the  coming  quarters.  However,  the 
global economic recovery will remain very subdued by historical standards. Compared to the 
last  monetary  policy  assessment,  we  now  anticipate  somewhat  slower  growth,  in  both 
advanced and emerging economies. 
It  is  entirely  possible,  however,  that  global  economic  growth  will  be  weaker  than  we  have 
assumed.  The  euro  area  continues  to  face  significant  challenges.  These  include  the 
consolidation of public sector finances as well as the implementation of institutional reforms 
and reforms to promote growth. In addition, various emerging economies are suffering from 
structural  problems.  Should  the  current  geopolitical  conflicts  worsen,  this  would  also  hold 
back  activity  in  the  international  economy.  Since  the  major  currency  areas  are  in  different 
phases of the monetary policy cycle, there is also a danger of greater volatility in the financial 
and foreign exchange markets. All this generates a high level of uncertainty with regard to 
future developments in the global economy. 
Swiss economic outlook 
I will now look at economic developments in Switzerland. 
As  expected,  growth  in  Switzerland  picked  up  somewhat  in  the  first  quarter,  after  having 
been  relatively  weak  in  the  previous  quarter.  The  rebound  was  mainly  attributable  to  the 
upturn  in  business  activity  in  manufacturing  and  the  banking  sector.  On  the  demand  side, 
exports of goods – which had still been declining in the previous quarter – and construction 
investment were the main growth drivers. 
Nevertheless, the capacity of the Swiss economy is still not fully utilised overall. Technical 
capacity  utilisation  in  manufacturing  remains  considerably  below  its  long-term  average. 
Although  employment  was  up  in  the  first  quarter,  the  unemployment  rate  remained 
unchanged. 
We  expect  the  moderate  recovery  to  continue  in  the  coming  quarters.  For  2014,  we 
anticipate  that  the growth  rate  will  remain  at  around  2.0%.  As  we  continue  to  see gradual 
improvement in the international environment, export demand is likely to rise. Over time, this 
should  encourage  corporate  investment  and  stimulate  demand  for  labour.  The  level  of 
residential  construction  orders  remains  high.  On  the  whole,  however,  we  expect  a 
considerable slowdown in the growth momentum of residential construction investment. 
In addition to global risks, the Swiss economy also faces uncertainty at home. In the past few 
weeks, the SNB’s delegates for regional economic relations asked companies to assess the 
impact of the popular initiative on curbing mass immigration on their business activity. The 
results suggest a tangible level of uncertainty about economic conditions. Most companies 
have not taken any specific measures, however. 
Monetary and financial conditions 
I will now turn to monetary and financial conditions. 
After about two years of negative inflation, consumer price inflation has been practically zero 
for  some  months  now.  This  very  restrained  development  is  also  reflected  in  inflation 
expectations. The majority of market participants expect inflation to remain unchanged in the 
short term. Over a longer horizon of more than two years, the relevant surveys show that the 
expected  rate  of  inflation  is  approximately  1.0%.  These  results  are  consistent  with  our 
assessment of the inflation outlook. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Geopolitical risks and mixed economic data in the major economies led to stronger demand 
for secure investments. This was reflected in falling yields on long-term government bonds. 
My colleague, Fritz Zurbrügg, will talk to you about developments in the financial markets in 
more  detail.  Mortgage  rates  also  declined  again,  thereby  further  bolstering  demand  for 
mortgage loans. 
However,  the  slowdown  of  momentum  in  mortgage  lending,  which  has  been  observed  for 
some  time  now,  continued.  This  is  a  step  in  the  right  direction.  Nevertheless,  imbalances 
remain. It is therefore still too early for an all-clear. 
Given the high level of liquidity, money market rates remained at a low level. Even prior to 
the introduction of negative interest rates by the European Central Bank (ECB), Swiss franc 
Libor futures slipped well into negative territory. We are closely monitoring the impact of the 
recent interest rate reductions in the euro area on Switzerland. Should there be a need for 
action, the SNB will take the necessary measures. 
The export-weighted real external value of the Swiss franc remains well above its long-term 
average. Since the introduction of the minimum exchange rate, it has changed only slightly. 
Thus,  the  Swiss  franc  is  still  high.  The  slight  inflation  differential  during  the  past  quarters 
meant  that  the  real  adjustment  of  the  Swiss  franc  against  the  euro  has  come  to  a  virtual 
standstill. 
for 
guaranteeing appropriate monetary conditions. 
the  minimum  exchange  rate  remains  essential 
this  environment, 
In 
SNB monetary policy 
To conclude, I would like to mention a number of challenges which the SNB will be facing in 
the near future. 
Overall, the environment remains extremely challenging for both the Swiss economy and our 
monetary  policy.  With  its  high  level  of  international  integration,  Switzerland  is  strongly 
affected  by  global  developments,  especially  those  in  neighbouring  countries.  The  ECB’s 
measures  to  support  economic  development  in  the  euro  area  are  also  likely  to  have  a 
favourable impact on the Swiss economy in the medium term. Nevertheless, given the low 
interest rates in Europe and the rest of the world as well as the strong Swiss franc, the SNB’s 
monetary policy environment will remain highly complex. We will continue to take all action 
necessary  to  fulfil  our  mandate  of  ensuring  price  stability,  while  taking  due  account  of 
economic developments. 
The financial crisis has shown that balanced economic developments require more than just 
price  stability;  financial  stability  is  also  of  key  importance.  The  SNB’s  annual  Financial 
Stability  Report  is  a  contribution  towards  this.  In  the  report,  we  draw  attention  to 
developments  which  might  present  a  risk  for  financial  stability.  In  this  respect,  we  are  still 
concerned about imbalances on the mortgage and real estate markets. The financial crisis 
showed  what  serious  effects  the  problems  in  the  financial  sector  can  have  on  the  overall 
economy.  It  is  precisely  in  the  current  environment  of  globally  low  interest  rates  that  the 
danger of imbalances on the financial markets is particularly high. With our report, we would 
like  to  urge  participants  in  these  markets  to  exercise  caution.  In  addition,  recent 
developments in the area of legal risks demonstrate once again the importance of strongly 
capitalised  Swiss  banks.  My  colleague,  Jean-Pierre  Danthine,  will  now  present  the  most 
important conclusions from our Financial Stability Report. 
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for your attention. It is now my pleasure to give the floor to 
Jean-Pierre Danthine. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
