  Marzunisham Omar: Risk and opportunity – managing risk for 
development 
Welcoming remarks by Mr  Marzunisham Omar, Assistant Governor of the Central Bank of 
Malaysia,  at  the  WB-BNM  Seminar  on  the  World  Development  Report  2014  “Risk  and 
Opportunity: Managing Risk for Development”, Kuala Lumpur, 29 April 2014. 
 It is my pleasure to welcome you to Sasana Kijang this morning to the seminar on the World 
Development  Report  2014,  with  the  theme  “Risk  and  Opportunity:  Managing  Risk  for 
Development”. 
Reading through the Report, I’m struck by two observations: 
• 
first,  in  the  past  50  years,  middle-income  countries  have  been  in  recession  14  to 
16 per cent of the time and low income countries, a staggering 27 per cent of the 
time. 
second, from 1970 to 2011, there were 147 banking crises in 116 countries. 
• 
So, while the world has, in the last 50 years, made significant progress in terms of economic 
development, poverty eradication and overall standard of living, the above observation begs 
the  question  of  whether  the  global  economy  is  also  more  prone  to  crises,  highlighting  the 
fragility of the economic system that is currently in place. This reinforces the need to have a 
proper framework to identify and manage risks, towards achieving a common shared goal of 
sustaining long-term development. 
Almost six years after the collapse of Lehman Brothers, the world economy is still coping with 
the  aftermath  of  the  Global  Financial  Crisis,  notably  the  worst  financial  crisis  in  the  last 
70 years. Of relevance is that excessive risk-taking behaviours featured prominently as a key 
factor contributing to the Crisis. In addition, what makes the Global Financial Crisis different 
is the extent of the economic and financial inter-linkages within and across borders, which 
explains  the  far-reaching  impact  of  the  crisis.  While  the  greater  interconnectedness  of 
economies  and  financial  systems  has  brought  about  opportunities,  it  has  also  resulted  in 
greater risks. 
The Global Financial Crisis has resulted in the re-assessment of how policymakers view the 
achievement  of  macroeconomic  and  financial  stability.  There  is  a  growing  recognition  that 
emerging risks to macroeconomic and financial stability have to be identified and managed in 
a  more  holistic  and  effective  manner.  As  the  economy  and  financial  system  grow  in 
complexity, policymakers have to strengthen the understanding of the macroeconomic and 
financial  inter-linkages  in  order  to  be  able  to  effectively  assess  the  implications  of  any 
potential risk on the economy. 
Before the Global Financial Crisis, the predominant view was that unfettered markets, self-
corrections and minimal interventions would deliver the best economic outcomes. However, 
recent  experiences  have  shown  that  policy  interventions  to  correct  market  misalignments 
after a crisis may prove too late as the aftermath could be extremely costly. This, therefore, 
call for policies to be pre-emptive rather than reactive. 
For policymakers, the aim is to preserve macroeconomic and financial stability, and build the 
country’s resilience to shocks. Macroeconomics stability is a very important prerequisite for 
businesses and individuals to undertake economic activities. In strengthening the resilience 
of  our  economy  and  promoting  the  sustainability  of  growth,  the  role  of  policymakers  go 
beyond managing short-term fluctuations in business and financial cycles. Equally important 
are structural reforms and institutional building that would increase the capacity and flexibility 
of the economy to absorb shocks and to improve the competitiveness and inclusiveness of 
the economy. The resilient and ability of an economy to face a crisis depends as much on 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  what has been done throughout the years to strengthen the economic fundamentals and the 
financial  system.  However, the  implementation  of  structural  reforms  is  not  without  risks.  In 
this regard, reforms that are undertaken in an environment of growth and stability would have 
a higher chance of success, as it would cushion the potential disruptions to economic activity 
and dislocations to vulnerable segments of society. 
The  formulation  of  appropriate  and  consistent  short-term  and  long-term  policies,  in  turn, 
requires  policymakers  to  have  a  holistic  understanding  of  the  domestic  economy  and 
financial system. From experience, a broad macro-level understanding of issues alone may 
not be sufficient, as issues at the sectoral level may be obscured at the aggregate level. This 
highlights  the  importance  of  having  a  firm  understanding  of  micro-level  behaviour  and 
reaction patterns of households and businesses, which would reinforce the design of macro-
based policy strategies. 
In  this  regard,  the World  Development  Report 2014  is  useful  in facilitating  policymakers  in 
making more informed policy decisions. The report provides a wide coverage of micro-level 
risk management practices by households, businesses and the wider community, and how 
they are linked to macro-level risk management policies by national and global institutions. 
Essentially, with a better understanding of micro-level risk management, the implementation 
of macro-based policies can be more effective, not only at the national level but also at the 
organisational and household levels. The Report further emphasis the need to manage risks 
in  a  pro-active,  systemic  and  integrated  way,  and  underscores  the  importance  of  forward 
looking planning and preparation. 
On  this  final  note,  I  would  like  to  extend  our  appreciation  to  the  World  Bank  for  the 
opportunity  for  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  to  co-host  this  event.  I  hope  you  will  find  the 
subsequent  discussion  on  the  World  Development  Report  2014  to  be  productive  and 
beneficial. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
