Glenn Stevens: Australia’s economy against the background of recent 
international developments 
Opening statement by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the 
House of Representatives Standing Committee on Economics, Sydney, 7 March 2014. 
 Madam Chair 
Members of the Committee 
Thank you for the opportunity to meet with you today. 
When  we  met  with  the  Committee  just  prior  to  Christmas,  I  suggested  that,  taking  an 
international view, 2013 could be described as a year that turned out not to be quite as good 
as hoped for, but not as bad as feared. Nothing that has occurred in the period since then 
would change that assessment. 
One  prominent  international  event  was  that,  within  hours  of  that  hearing,  the  US  Federal 
Reserve commenced the “tapering” of its monthly asset purchases. This was a possibility we 
talked about at the time and, although the timing of it wasn’t known, it was considered likely 
that it would begin before long. A further reduction in asset purchases was decided at the 
Fed’s January meeting. 
After  all  the  anticipation  of  this  change,  the  actual  announcement  of  the  Fed’s  decision 
caused little disruption in markets in December. During January there was more volatility in 
markets, and a few emerging economies came under pressure, with bond yields spiking and 
exchange rates declining. 
It is important to keep this in perspective. Periods surrounding changes of course by the Fed 
have often been times when market participants re-assess their positions and their appetite 
for risk, and this occasion has been no exception. It isn’t necessarily the Fed action per se 
that is most important, but rather what it conveys about the overall economic and financial 
environment.  At  such  times  investors  sometimes  start  to  focus  on  risks  to  which  they  had 
hitherto been attaching little significance. 
Investors have not, however, fled from risk indiscriminately on this occasion, at least to date. 
They  have  drawn  distinctions  between  alternative  classes  of  investment  and  different 
countries. Long-term sovereign yields of the core advanced countries have increased a little, 
but  they  remain  low.  With  compressed  risk  spreads,  this  means  that  borrowing  costs  for 
many  private-sector  borrowers  remain  very  low.  The  spreads  over  German  yields  for 
European  sovereigns  have  continued  to  fall.  This  suggests  that  actions  by  European 
policymakers  have  had  more  influence  on  European  markets  than  actions  by  the  US 
authorities. This is as one would expect, but it hasn’t always been the case in the past. 
Moreover,  not  all  emerging  markets  are  experiencing  the  same  pressure.  Some  that 
experienced  considerable  turbulence  in  the  middle  of  last  year,  when  tapering  was  first 
mooted, have seen less of that recently. This owes something at least to policy responses in 
those countries in the intervening period. Among those countries that have been under most 
pressure  of  late,  genuine  domestic  sources  of  risk  can  be  observed  in  most  instances.  In 
several  cases  the  market  pressure  has  resulted  in  policy  responses,  which  were  perhaps 
needed anyway. 
In general then, tapering is proceeding, so far, about as well as can be expected. 
In the meantime, forecasts for the global economy haven’t changed much in recent months. 
If  anything  they  have  inched  higher. They  suggest  that  2014 growth  will  be  higher  than  in 
2013,  and  at  about  average  pace.  More  of  the  growth  is  coming  from  the  advanced 
countries,  and  proportionately  not  quite  so  much  from  the  emerging  ones.  That,  too,  is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
probably  a  welcome  re-balancing  in  some  respects  after  the  weakness  of  the  advanced 
countries in recent years. Australia’s terms of trade have been little changed over the past 
year, though we still assume they will decline further in the future. 
Turning to the Australian economy, for some time our view has been that growth has been 
running  below  its  trend  pace.  The  national  accounts  released  a  couple  of  days  ago  don’t 
significantly  change  that  assessment.  For  the  year  to  the  December  quarter  of  2013,  real 
GDP rose by about 2¾ per cent. This is roughly in line with the forecasts we have had for a 
while. The drivers of growth are shifting. As we have been saying for some time now, and as 
confirmed in the recent survey of capital expenditure intentions by firms, the very high level 
of  investment  spending  by  mining  companies  has  turned  down,  and  the  decline  will 
accelerate over the coming year. Other areas of demand will provide at least some offset. 
Export  volumes  for  resources  are  growing  strongly,  as  the  capacity  that  has  been  put  in 
place by the high levels of investment comes on line. For example, iron ore shipments have 
risen by about 85 per cent from their levels of five years ago, to around 1.5 million tonnes per 
day. They will rise further over the coming year or two. 
It is clear that dwelling investment activity will rise strongly over the period ahead. Over the 
past three months, approvals to build private dwellings numbered almost 50,000. That is an 
increase  of  about  27  per  cent  from  the  figures  of  a  year  earlier,  and  is  the  highest  three-
month total in the 30-year history of this series. 
Consumer demand has had a firmer tone over the summer, after a fairly lengthy period of 
more subdued outcomes. This is evidence in the retail trade and national accounts data and 
is  confirmed  in  information from the  Bank’s  liaison.  Consumer sentiment  does  still  seem  a 
little skittish, though, and while we expect consumption spending to grow in line with income 
or perhaps a little faster, consumers are unlikely to be the drivers of growth that they were 
prior to the financial crisis. 
Business investment spending outside mining, which has been very low indeed, is bound to 
pick  up  at  some  stage.  The  signs  of  improved  conditions  and  confidence  that  we  have 
observed  in  some  sectors  will  help,  and  the  early  indications  of  an  improvement  in  capital 
spending  expectations  are  apparent.  Those  are,  however,  quite  tentative  at  this  point  and 
firms  are  looking  for  recent  signs  of  improved  conditions  to  persist  before  committing  to 
expanded  investment  spending.  Public  final  spending  is  scheduled,  according  to  the 
announced plans of federal and state governments, to be quite weak. 
The expected ongoing effects of very low interest rates and a somewhat lower exchange rate 
have resulted in a slight lift in forecast growth for the second half of this year and in 2015. 
This was reflected in our most recent published forecasts released last month. We haven’t 
made any further changes since then. 
With growth having been below trend, job vacancies declined, employment growth weakened 
and unemployment rose in 2013. Some forward indicators have stabilised and then improved 
a little of late, which is promising. But even with this, and with a slightly better growth outlook, 
the  labour  market  will  probably  remain  soft  for  a  while  yet,  given  that  it  lags  changes  in 
activity. This has seen the pace of growth of wages decline noticeably. 
Turning  to  consumer  price  inflation,  the  recent  data  show  inflation  in  underlying  terms  at 
about 2½ per cent over the course of 2013, and a pace higher than that in the second half of 
the year. This is a change from the middle of last year, when we  were receiving data that 
were lower than expected. 
Part of the increase in inflation is explained by the effect of the depreciation of the exchange 
rate, which has resulted in increases in prices of traded goods and services. But that does 
not  account  for  all  the  result  and  it  is,  at  least  on  the  surface,  something  of  a  puzzle  that 
underlying inflation moved up while growth in labour costs moved down. There may be a re-
building  of  margins  in  some  areas,  particularly  those  where  demand  conditions  have 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 improved a little from the very weak situation earlier. There may also be an element of noise 
in the quarterly data. 
The view we have taken, pending further evidence, is that there is probably both noise and 
signal  in  the  result.  Hence,  our  assessment  is  that  inflation  is  not  quite  as  low  as  it  might 
have looked six to twelve months ago, but nor is it accelerating to the extent a literal reading 
of the latest data might suggest. The general situation – 18 months of below-trend growth, a 
rise  in  unemployment,  a  marked  slowdown  in  wages  –  is  not  one that would  be  obviously 
associated  with  a  sustained  rise  in  price  pressures.  Our  view  remains  that  the  outlook  for 
inflation, while a little higher than before, is still consistent with the medium-term target. 
Monetary policy  is very accommodative. The cash rate has been unchanged since August 
last year. It and most borrowing rates are at multi-decade lows. The sorts of things that are 
normally expected to result from low interest rates are increasingly in evidence: 
• 
• 
• 
savers are looking for higher return assets as the yield on safe assets has fallen 
asset prices have risen 
credit growth has picked up somewhat for households, and particularly for investors 
in housing, where it is running at an annualised pace of close to 9 per cent 
construction of dwellings is set to rise, probably quite strongly 
liaison  suggests  that  lenders  are  becoming  more  accommodating  to  potential 
business borrowers and few complain about availability of credit 
the exchange rate has depreciated, though it is still high by historical standards. 
• 
On  the  whole,  then,  accommodative  monetary  policy  is  playing  its  part  in  supporting 
sustainable growth in demand, consistent with the inflation target. 
Of  course,  the  outlook  contains  many  uncertainties,  not  least  the  ‘hand  over’  from  mining 
investment spending to sources of demand outside mining. In some important respects, the 
basis for such a handover is coming into place, as I have just described. The question then 
is: will the additional demand likely to be generated outside mining as a result of these trends 
be just the right amount to offset the large decline in mining investment spending, so keeping 
the economy near full employment? 
No-one can answer that question with great confidence. Moreover, even if it were possible 
for forecasts to be much more accurate than experience could possibly lead us to hope, it 
could not be assumed that a shortfall in demand could necessarily be made good in short 
order  by  monetary  policy.  Monetary  policy  can  have  a  powerful  effect  on  the  general 
environment, but it cannot hope to fine-tune the quarterly or even annual path of aggregate 
demand. 
At  the  present  time  we  judge monetary  policy  to  be  doing  the  things  it  can  reasonably  be 
expected  to  do  in  the  circumstances  we  face.  We  have  signalled  the  likelihood,  if  the 
economy evolves more or less as expected, of a period of stability in the cash rate. As well 
as the low level of interest rates generally, a sense of stability should be of some help for 
businesses and households as they form their plans. 
My colleagues and I are here to respond to your questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
