  Eddie Yue: Structural reforms needed to improve Asia’s economies 
Statement by Mr Eddie Yue, Deputy Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, 
and Head of Delegation, Hong Kong, for the 47th Asian Development Bank Annual Meeting, 
Astana, Kazakhstan, 4–5 May 2014. 
 I would like to express my gratitude to the Government of Kazakhstan for hosting the 47th 
Annual  Meeting  of  the  Asian  Development  Bank  (ADB)  and  the  people  of  Kazakhstan  for 
their hospitality. I would also like to thank the Management and staff of ADB for the excellent 
organisation of the event. 
Since the last ADB Annual Meeting, we have seen a modest and uneven global recovery, 
with the advanced economies showing a pickup in economic activities while emerging market 
economies (EMEs) generally experiencing a moderation in growth. Financial markets have 
turned more volatile in response to the changing pattern of global growth and expectations of 
a turning point in US monetary policy, and a number of EMEs have seen a sharp reversal of 
capital flows. 
Regional economies have remained relatively resilient in the recent bouts of financial market 
volatility,  thanks  mainly  to  the  stronger  fundamentals  of  the  region  nowadays.  Since  the 
Asian financial crisis, many regional economies have implemented reforms to improve their 
macroeconomic management and fiscal positions, built up foreign reserves and strengthened 
their financial sectors. For some economies that were more affected by the recent financial 
market turmoil, they have also taken credible policies to address domestic imbalances and 
have been successful in restoring investors’ confidence so far. 
Nevertheless, we cannot afford to be complacent as what we had experienced in the past 
year  was  probably  a  prelude  to,  rather  than  the  end  of,  a  period  of  heightened  market 
volatility. The sentiment of global financial markets has turned more sanguine recently amid 
expectation  of  prolonged  low  interest  rates  in  the  US.  However,  the  pace  of  monetary 
normalisation in the US is very much uncertain and data dependent. With a large part of the 
cumulated  capital  inflows  to  Asia  since  2009  still  in  the  region,  it  is  possible  that  regional 
economies  with  domestic  vulnerabilities  built  up  during  the  period  of  ultra-loose  global 
monetary  conditions  could  experience  sharp  corrections  when  capital  flows  ultimately 
reverse. It  is therefore  imperative  that regional economies  should make  use  of the  current 
breathing  space  to  put  their  own  house  in  order,  take  credible  measures  to  reduce 
macroeconomic and financial imbalances, step up surveillance and ready contingency plans 
and  liquidity  backstops  such  as  the  use  of  foreign  reserves  and  bilateral/multilateral  swap 
lines to mitigate systemic risk in the financial systems when the need arises. 
A  sharp  reversal  of  capital  flows  could  deal  a  severe  blow  to  low-income  countries,  as 
reduced private capital, exports and remittance could have a disproportionally large impact 
on  their  less  diversified  economic  structure.  ADB  should  draw  on  the  experience  in  the 
aftermath of the global financial crisis and stand ready to provide timely and flexible crisis-
related assistance to its needy members. 
While macroeconomic policies and prudential measures could help smooth cyclical economic 
fluctuations, in the longer term, credible structural reforms are needed to sustain the growth 
of  the  region  and  preserve  investors’  confidence.  The  vulnerabilities  now  faced  by  some 
regional  economies  are  in  part  due  to  the  overheated  domestic  demand  in  the  past  years 
amid strong capital inflows. However, they also reflect, to a considerable extent, supply-side 
constraints on potential output and limited capacity of the region’s financial markets. While 
the situation differs across economies in the region, there are a number of structural reform 
needs that are common to the region and in which the ADB can play an active role. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  First,  the  supply-side  constraints  in  a  number  of  regional  economies  are  linked  to  weak 
investments, in particularly infrastructure investments. Many investors have cited that there is 
no  lack  of  funds  or  interest  in  investing  in  Asian  infrastructure  projects.  The  problem, 
however,  is  a  lack  of  a  pipeline  of  bankable  projects,  which  in  turn  is  due  to  fundamental 
issues  such  as  uncertainties  relating  to  the  government’s  commitment  in  supporting  a 
specific  sector;  lack  of  a  credible  PPP  framework;  political  force  majeure;  and  project 
governance. In this regard, the involvement of multilateral agencies such as ADB would be 
very useful in that not only will it foster investors’ confidence if the multilateral agencies put in 
their  own  financial  resources,  but  it  will  also  help  build  the  governments’  capacity  in 
structuring projects, strengthening the PPP framework and improving project governance to 
make their infrastructure projects commercially viable. 
Secondly, shortfall in educational inputs has been seen as one of the major constraints for 
some  developing  economies  to  enhance  productivity  and  move  up  the  value  chain.  It  has 
also  been  a  major  reason  for  the  remaining  pockets  of  poverty  in  the  region,  including  in 
countries where substantial economic progress has been made but a substantial proportion 
of the population is still living in poverty. We encourage ADB to further strengthen its support 
for the educational sector and developing human capital, which are essential to enhancing 
competitiveness, eliminating poverty and addressing the rising inequality in developing Asia. 
Thirdly, intra-regional trade has been an important source of growth after the global financial 
crisis as regional economies increased their domestic demand and reduced their reliance on 
exports to advanced economies. As the global economy continues to rebalance, the prospect 
of the region to sustain its growth would very much depend on its ability to hold up domestic 
demand through sustained productivity enhancement as mentioned above, and further trade 
integration  within  the  region.  While  intra-regional  trade  has  been  growing  fast,  a  further 
reduction  in  trade  barriers  should  help  promote  deeper  regional  trade  integration  and 
facilitate  more  efficient  resources  allocation.  A  wider  use  of  local  currencies  in  trade 
settlement  and  financing  would  also  help  diversify  sources  of  trade  financing  and  reduce 
currency risk and transaction costs. 
Lastly,  regional  economies  need  to  deepen  financial  market  reforms  and  promote  greater 
financial integration within the region to better channel Asia’s surplus savings to meet its own 
investment  needs;  to  support  growing  trade  integration;  and  to  enhance  the  absorptive 
capacity of our financial markets to capital flows. Further liberalisation of the financial sector 
and improving financial infrastructure such as establishing credit information sharing system 
and microfinance institutions should also help some regional economies to allocate credits 
more efficiently. Over the years, ADB has contributed to financial sector development in the 
region through its own programmes and through supporting regional initiatives such as the 
Asian  Bond  Markets  Initiative  under  ASEAN+3,  and  we  welcome  the  Bank’s  continued 
commitment in this regard going forward. 
It  is  noted  that  a  number  of  the  above  structural  reform  areas  have  been  identified  as 
strategic  priorities  in  the  Bank’s  midterm  review  of  Strategy  2020.  With  its  expertise,  we 
believe  ADB  has  an  important  role  to  play  in  helping  the  region  to  tackle  the  challenges 
arising  from  the  highly  uncertain  global  environment,  and  embark  on  structural  reforms  to 
raise its long-term growth potential. We look forward to ADB’s continued engagement with its 
members to provide support that will cater for their changing needs as the region continues 
to progress and transform. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
