  Narayana Kocherlakota: Reflections on diversity 
Speech  by  Mr  Narayana  Kocherlakota,  President  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
Minneapolis,  at  the  Council  on  Asian  Pacific  Minnesotans  2014  Asian  Heritage  Dinner, 
St. Paul, Minnesota, 9 May 2014. 
 Thanks to Dorothy Bridges, Duane Carter and David Fettig for their assistance with these remarks. 
I  would  like  to  thank  state  Senator  Alice  Johnson  and  Executive  Director  Sia  Her  for  the 
invitation  to  attend  the  2014  Asian  Heritage  Dinner.  I  am  honored  to  participate  in  this 
prestigious event. 
My  talk  tonight  will  consist  of  some  reflections  on  diversity.  I’ll  first  talk  about  the  regional 
diversity that lies at the heart of the Federal Reserve System. I’ll talk next about my journey 
to my current position and the role that international diversity played in that journey. Finally, 
I’ll close with some thoughts on the role of workplace diversity. 
My remarks represent my own views, which are not necessarily those of anyone else in the 
Federal Reserve System. 
The Federal Reserve System: a regionally diverse central bank 
I’ll begin by telling you a few things about my organization, the Federal Reserve System. I 
will  be  highlighting  the  role  of  regional  diversity  in  the  Federal  Reserve’s  formulation  of 
economic policy. 
Relative  to  other  central  banks  around  the  world,  the  Federal  Reserve  System  is  highly 
decentralized.  The  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Minneapolis  is  one  of  12  regional  Reserve 
Banks that,  along  with  the  Board  of  Governors  in Washington,  D.C., make  up  the  Federal 
Reserve  System.  Our  bank  represents  the  ninth  of  the  12  Federal  Reserve  districts  and 
includes  Montana,  the  Dakotas,  Minnesota,  northwestern  Wisconsin  and  the  Upper 
Peninsula of Michigan. 
This basic structure has a long history. In fact, this year is the centennial of the opening of 
the 12 Reserve Banks and the start of the work undertaken by the Federal Reserve System. 
It’s been a fascinating hundred years, with many twists and turns along the way. I’m sure that 
many of you have questions about that journey. The answers to all of your questions – and 
probably more – are on a new website that the Fed has created at federalreservehistory.org. 
I encourage you to visit this site to learn more about the people, places and events that have 
shaped Federal Reserve history. 
Over  the  course  of  its  long  history,  the  Federal  Reserve  System  has  performed  many 
economic functions. In my view, its regional diversity improves its effectiveness with respect 
to  virtually  all  of  those functions.  However,  tonight  I’ll  focus  on  one  of  the  most  important: 
monetary policy. Eight times per year, the Federal Open Market Committee – the FOMC – 
meets to set the path of interest rates over the next six to seven weeks. All 12 presidents of 
the  various  regional  Federal  Reserve  banks  –  including  me  –  and  the  governors  of  the 
Federal Reserve Board participate in these meetings. 
How  does  its  regional  structure  help  the  Federal  Reserve  System  make  better  monetary 
policy?  The  answer  lies  in  the  nature  of the regional  Bank  presidents’ contributions  during 
FOMC meetings. During the course of the meetings, the presidents typically comment on the 
behavior of their district economies – in my case, the economies of the six states that make 
up  the  Ninth  District.  This  region-specific  information  helps  to  provide  a  granular,  more 
forward-looking foundation for the making of national monetary policy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Where do the presidents get this region-specific information? There are many answers to this 
question.  But  we  are  especially  indebted  to  the  members  of  our  boards  of  directors  and 
advisory councils, who use their extensive contacts in the local community to provide us with 
valuable economic intelligence. The Reserve Banks know that our district economies are all 
complex systems, and so we need “intel” from a wide range of perspectives. Accordingly, the 
Reserve Banks work hard to ensure that the members of our boards and advisory councils 
come from many walks of life – farming, banking, Fortune 500 companies, nonprofits, labor 
unions and start-ups to name but a few – and many parts of our districts. 
So, the 12 presidents contribute to monetary policy deliberations by providing local economic 
intelligence  about  their  districts.  But  the  presidents  also  often  make  comments  about 
economic research being done within their Banks that helps shed light on national economic 
conditions.  Hence,  the  geographic  diversity  within  the  System  is  important  for  another 
reason: It generates valuable intellectual diversity across the System. For example, back in 
the  1970s,  the  Minneapolis  Fed  Research  department  played  a  key  role  in  fostering  the 
“rational  expectations  revolution”  that  has  helped  transform  the  making  of  monetary  policy 
around  the  world.  I’d  love  to  take  a  few  hours  to  explain  this  important  development  in 
policymaking  –  but  it’s  a  Friday  night.  The  relevant  point  is  this:  Would  these  economists 
have played this same role had they been working in Washington, or anywhere else in the 
System, for  that matter?  I  believe  that  the  answer  to  this  question  is  no.  The  ideas  in  the 
Research department were generated by synergistic interactions between Minneapolis Fed 
economists  and  University  of  Minnesota  economists  –  synergies  that  owed  a  lot  to  the 
geographical proximity between the two institutions. 
To  sum  up:  My  organization,  the  Federal  Reserve  System,  is grounded  in  a  decentralized 
regional structure. This decentralized regional structure ensures that national policymakers 
have access to information about local economies – information that is often more forward-
looking  than  lagged  aggregate  data.  But,  just  as  importantly,  the  regional  structure  also 
promotes intellectual diversity in the way policymakers think about the economy. 
My diverse beginnings 
I’ll now turn to a different set of reflections on diversity – reflections about my journey to my 
current position. 
I was born in Baltimore,  Maryland, but my parents moved me to Canada when I was less 
than a year old. I suspect that they did not consult extensively with me first! For most of my 
childhood, I grew up in Winnipeg, which is about 300 miles northwest of here as the crow 
flies, before returning to the United States to attend college. I’ve lived in my home country 
ever since. 
Both of my parents spent most of their professional careers as professors of statistics at the 
University  of  Manitoba.  Given  their  example,  it  is  probably  not  surprising  that  I  ended  up 
becoming  a  professor myself  –  albeit  in  economics,  rather than  statistics.  After getting  my 
doctorate, I worked in a number of economics departments around the country, including the 
University  of  Minnesota  for  most  of  the  2000s.  Along  the  way,  I  was  a  researcher  at  the 
Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Minneapolis  in  the  mid-1990s.  I  maintained  a  close  working 
relationship with the Research department following that stint. 
In early 2009, it was announced that Gary Stern, the long-time president of the Bank, would 
be retiring soon. Many of you will remember that, in early 2009, we were in the depths of the 
Great Recession. I was highly motivated to serve my country as best I could in this hour of 
need,  and  so  I  applied  for  the  job.  I  was  fortunate  enough  to  win  the  approval  of  the 
Minneapolis Fed’s board of directors and the Board of Governors in Washington, and so I 
became president in October 2009. The job has, to put it mildly, been a highly rewarding one. 
This description – with its emphasis on my training and experience – captures much of what 
matters about my journey to my current position. Nonetheless, I also feel that it glosses over 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  something important. That missing piece can be summed up in a question that I often get: 
Why do you have such an unusual name? 
The answer to this question is that my father was Asian Indian – and was, more specifically, 
from the state of Andhra Pradesh. (I add that specificity because it matters: My last name is 
very  much  identified  with  that  particular  state  –  a  state  that  has  roughly  one-fourth  the 
population of the United States.) My father immigrated to the United States in 1960 to attend 
graduate school in statistics, which is where he met my mother. My mother is of European 
descent. She grew up in a suburb of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, and her parents were both 
born in the United States. My parents got married when they were in grad school, and so I 
was able to attend my father’s Ph.D. graduation ceremony. I probably didn’t appreciate the 
event as much as I should have. In my defense, I was only nine months old. 
My parents’ household was – automatically – a diverse household. It was diverse in terms of 
food – something that mattered a lot to me as a child. It was diverse in terms of our family 
and friends. Perhaps most importantly, it was diverse in terms of ideas. As a child, I read the 
lives  and  words  of  American  heroes  like  Abraham  Lincoln.  But  I  also  read  the  lives  and 
words of Indian heroes like Mohandas Gandhi. In this way, I learned at a young age that two 
different cultures can give us at least two different ways to think about a problem. I learned 
too that both of those different ways can provide valuable insights, even if they seem to be in 
conflict. Perhaps as a consequence, I tend to follow many tracks – almost at once – in my 
thinking  about  problems.  I  have  found  this  multipronged  approach  to  problems  helpful  in 
many facets of my life. But it does have the potential to create communication challenges! 
I  can  sum  up  the  overall  impact  of  my  beginnings  in  this  way.  When  I  was  a  child,  and 
especially when I was a teen, my parents seemed, well, old-fashioned. I suspect that I was 
not the first nor the last child or teen to feel that way! But, looking back, I realize that, in many 
ways,  my  upbringing  in  the  1960s  and  1970s  was  surprisingly  well-designed  for  the 
21st century that was to come. In particular, our internationally diverse household was ideal 
preparation for our increasingly diverse country and interconnected world. 
Some final reflections on workplace diversity 
I’ve talked about two kinds of diversity. The first kind is the regional and economic diversity 
that  lies  at  the  heart  of the  Federal  Reserve  System. The  second  kind  is  the  international 
diversity that lay at the heart of my parents’ household. But you will observe that I implicitly 
argued  that  both  kinds  of  diversity  are  valuable  in  large  part  because  they  are  associated 
with a diversity of ideas. 
That brings me to some final thoughts about diversity and, more specifically, diversity in the 
workplace.  Many  organizations,  including  my  own,  emphasize  that  they  aim  to  attract  and 
retain  a  diverse  workforce.  Of  course,  as  we  just  discussed,  the  word  diversity  has  many 
meanings.  But  certainly,  when  we  talk  about  a  “diverse”  workforce,  we  typically  mean  to 
include gender and ethnic diversity. In the case of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, 
part of the mission of our Office of Minority and Women Inclusion is to promote exactly that 
kind of diversity within our workforce. 
The emphasis on this aim in public communications is mostly beneficial. But it can have an 
unfortunate  side  effect.  Some  observers  could  be  led  to  think  that  diversity  is  an  ultimate 
objective  of  the  organization,  and  so  there  is  an  implicit  trade-off  between  achieving  a 
diversity  objective  and  achieving  the  other  goals  of  the  organization.  I  don’t  see  any  such 
trade-off. Rather, I believe that an organization like the Minneapolis Fed will be less effective 
at achieving its core missions unless it is able to attract and retain a diverse workplace. I’ll 
put this as an economist: I do not see diversity as an objective unto itself. Rather, like the 
electricity that powers our building or the computers that fill our offices, diversity is simply a 
fundamental input to our being able to achieve our goals. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Why  won’t  we  be  effective  without  a  diverse  workplace?  There  are  many  answers  to  this 
question. But, again, I think one of the main answers is about ideas. Ultimately, a person’s 
ideas are a culmination of his or her journey through life. We will have access to more and 
better  ideas  if  our  employees  have  a  large  number  of  distinct  life  journeys.  And  we  need 
those  more  and  better  ideas  if  we  are  to  be  effective  in  solving  the  various  public  policy 
challenges that we confront. 
Thanks for listening.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
