  Stephen S Poloz: Summary of the latest Monetary Policy Report 
Opening statement (via video) by Mr Stephen S Poloz, Governor of the Bank of Canada, at 
the press conference following the release of the Monetary Policy Report, Toronto, Ontario, 
16 April 2014. 
 Good morning. Tiff and I are pleased to join you today by videoconference. 
As  you  know,  we  are  in  Toronto  to  attend  the  funeral  this  afternoon  of  Canada’s  former 
Finance Minister, Jim Flaherty. Before we discuss the Monetary Policy Report, I’d like to say 
a  few  words  about  him.  What  set  Jim  Flaherty  apart  was  that  while  he  was  a  formidable 
Finance Minister, he was first and foremost an ordinary man. You immediately connected to 
him  after  just  a  few  minutes,  and  it  was  immediately  clear  that  he  was  there  for  Canada, 
100 per cent. That’s what he did all day, every day. And to everything that he did, he brought 
a solid dose of common sense. People found that attractive and helpful, and his gut instincts 
were  usually  right.  A  lot  of  his  legacy  is  right there for  us. I’ll  miss  him tremendously,  and 
Canada is the poorer without him. 
Let me turn now to the MPR, which the Bank published this morning. Before we take your 
questions, allow me to note its highlights. 
• 
Inflation  in  Canada  remains  low.  Core  inflation  is  expected  to  stay  well  below  our 
2 per cent target this year and it will take close to two years for it to return to the 
target.  Total  CPI  inflation  is  expected  to  move  closer  to  the  target  in  the  coming 
quarters due to temporary factors. 
Let me take a moment to explain this inflation forecast. Core inflation is expected to 
remain  below  target  due  to  the  effects  of  economic  slack  and  heightened  retail 
competition. We expect these effects to persist until early 2016. 
However,  total  CPI  inflation  will  move  up  this  year,  before  core,  in  response  to 
higher consumer energy prices, as well as the lower Canadian dollar. 
We  expect  total  CPI  inflation  will  remain  fairly  close  to  target  throughout  the 
projection  period.  That’s  because  in  2015  and  into  early  2016,  as  the  upward 
pressure  from  energy  prices  dissipates,  the  downward  pressure  from  retail 
competition should gradually fade and excess capacity will be falling. This will cause 
core inflation to make its way gradually up to 2 per cent, catching up to total CPI 
inflation from below. 
The global economic expansion is expected to strengthen over the next three years 
as headwinds that have been restraining activity dissipate. 
The  economic  recovery  in  the  United  States  appears  to  be  on  track,  despite  soft 
readings  in  the  last  few  months  largely  due  to  unusual  weather.  Indeed,  private 
demand could turn out to be stronger than anticipated. 
Europe’s  economy  is  growing  modestly,  but  inflation  remains  too  low  and  the 
nascent recovery could be undermined by risks emanating from the Russia-Ukraine 
situation. 
In  China  and  other  emerging-market  economies  growth  is  expected  to  be  solid, 
although there are growing concerns about financial vulnerabilities. 
Overall, global growth is expected to pick up to 3.3 per cent in 2014 and increase 
further to 3.7 per cent in 2015 and 2016 – largely unchanged from January. 
        BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
            The Bank continues to expect Canada’s real GDP growth to average about 2 1/2 per 
cent  in  2014  and  2015 before  easing to  around  the  2  per  cent growth  rate  of the 
economy’s potential in 2016. 
Competitiveness  challenges  continue  to  weigh  on  Canadian  exporters’  ability  to 
benefit from stronger growth abroad. 
As an open economy, the performance of Canada’s export sector is critical. Given 
the growing wedge between Canada’s exports and foreign demand, the Bank has 
deepened  its  analysis  of  this  sector.  Our  research  has  broken  down  the  export 
sector  into  a  large  number  of  subsectors  and  we  are  discovering  that  there  is  a 
range of subsectors for which exports have been in line with the fundamentals – or 
better. 
This  suggests  that  as  the  U.S.  recovery  gathers  momentum  and  becomes  more 
broadly-based, many of our exports will benefit. The lower Canadian dollar should 
provide  additional  support  and  we  can  be  more  confident  about  our  recovery  in 
these subsectors. 
Other  subsectors  are  experiencing  greater  competitiveness  challenges  and,  for 
them,  the  wedge  remains.  The  recovery  for  these  groups  will  be  slower,  even  as 
they are helped by the lower exchange rate for the Canadian dollar. 
This analysis provides a more granular interpretation of the export picture. Overall, 
we expect a gradual convergence between the growth rate of Canada’s exports and 
that of the U.S. economy. But this implies some of the wedge between exports and 
foreign demand will be very persistent. 
Further, we continue to believe that rising global demand for Canadian goods and 
services, combined with the assumed high level of oil prices, will stimulate business 
investment in Canada and shift the economy to a more sustainable growth track. 
Recent developments are in line with the Bank’s expectation of a soft landing in the 
housing market and stabilizing debt-to-income ratios for households. Still, household 
imbalances  remain  elevated  and  would  pose  a  significant  risk  should  economic 
conditions deteriorate. 
In  sum,  the  Bank  continues  to  see  a  gradual  strengthening  in  the  fundamental 
drivers of growth and inflation in Canada. This view hinges critically on the projected 
upturn in exports and investment. With underlying inflation expected to remain below 
target for some time, the downside risks to inflation remain important. At the same 
time, the risks associated with household imbalances remain elevated. 
The Bank judges that the balance of these risks remains within the zone for which 
the  current stance of monetary  policy  is  appropriate  and  therefore  has decided  to 
maintain the target for the overnight rate at 1 per cent. The timing and direction of 
the next change to the policy rate will depend on how new information influences the 
balance of risks. 
With that, Tiff and I would be pleased to take your questions. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
