Daniel K Tarullo: Volcker Rule 
Testimony by Mr Daniel K Tarullo, Member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System,  before  the  Committee  on  Financial  Services,  U.S.  House  of  Representatives, 
Washington DC, 5 February 2014. 
 the  Federal  Deposit 
Insurance  Corporation, 
Chairman Hensarling, Ranking Member Waters, and other members of the committee, thank 
you for the opportunity to testify on the interagency final rule implementing the requirements of 
section 619 of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank 
Act),  commonly  known  as  the  Volcker  Rule.  Section  619  of  the  Dodd-Frank  Act  generally 
prohibits any banking entity from engaging in proprietary trading. It also generally prohibits a 
banking entity from investing in, or having certain relationships with, a hedge fund or private 
equity fund (a covered fund). My remarks today will focus on the recent actions taken by the 
Federal Reserve Board and other agencies responsible for issuing implementing rules under 
section  619.  As  I  have  previously  noted  in  congressional  testimony,  the  goal  of  the  Federal 
Reserve with respect to this and all other provisions of the Dodd-Frank Act is to implement the 
statute in a manner that is faithful to the language of the statute and that maximizes financial 
stability and other social benefits at the least cost to credit availability and economic growth.  
As you know, on December 10, 2013, the Federal Reserve, the Office of the Comptroller of the 
Currency, 
the  Securities  and  Exchange 
Commission,  and  the  Commodity  Futures  Trading  Commission  (collectively,  the  agencies) 
approved a common final rule that was developed jointly to implement section 619 of the Dodd-
Frank  Act.1  This  final  rule  applies  the  statutory  provisions  to  insured  depository  institutions; 
companies  that  control  an  insured  depository  institution;  and  foreign  banks  with  a  branch, 
agency, or subsidiary bank in the United States, as well as to affiliates of these entities, such 
as broker-dealers and commodity pool operators.  
The final rule is not a regulation that would have been written by any one agency, much less by 
any  one  principal  at  any  of  those  agencies.  But  I  think  the  text  is  an  improvement,  both 
normatively and technically, on the proposed rule issued in October 2011. The basic approach 
of the final rule is generally consistent with that adopted in the proposed rule, but the many 
comments we received from a variety of perspectives, including from members of Congress, 
helped us make useful changes and clarifications throughout the final rule. Also, of course, the 
“London Whale” episode allowed staff to test the procedural and substantive requirements of 
the  proposed  rule  against  a  real-world  example  of  what  should  not  happen  in  a  banking 
organization.  
The final rule has been modestly simplified from the 2011 proposal, but the agencies found that 
a good bit of the complexity in the proposal was hard to avoid in the final rule. Much of the 
remaining complexity lies in the part of the rule dealing with covered funds. The part of the rule 
dealing with proprietary trading has been streamlined somewhat, particularly by reducing the 
number of metrics that will be used in the reporting and analysis of trading data.  
Of course, as I have noted in previous testimony, a fundamental challenge of the Volcker Rule 
is  to  distinguish  between  proprietary  trading,  on  the  one  hand,  and  either  market-making  or 
hedging,  on  the  other  hand.  The  difficulty  in  making  this  distinction  inheres  in  the  statutory 
provision that makes trades either permissible or impermissible depending on the intent of the 
trader and the context and circumstances within which the trades are made. While the final rule 
issued by the agencies articulates standards for making those distinctions, those standards will 
be given meaning as they are applied by banking entities and supervisors in the field. Thus, 
implementation  will  be  particularly  important  in  continuing  to  shape  the  Volcker  Rule.  The 
                                                
1  See the agencies’ joint press release, www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/bcreg/20131210a.htm. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
is  engaged 
in  permitted  or  prohibited 
extended conformance period, during which relevant data will be collected from large banking 
organizations, will allow for the development of additional guidance. More generally, one would 
expect that a good many of the uncertainties will be reduced over time, as both banking entities 
and regulators gain experience with this new regulatory framework.  
The  final  rule  requires  banking  entities  with  significant  trading  operations  to  report  to  the 
appropriate regulatory agency a variety of metrics. These data will be an important tool to help 
firms  and  regulators  monitor  and  identify  prohibited  proprietary  trading  and  high-risk  trading 
strategies. In order to minimize burden and give full effect to the conformance period provisions 
of  section  619,  the  reporting  requirements  are  applied  in  a  graduated manner,  with  only  the 
firms with the largest trading books required to report metrics. These metrics will be used to 
trigger  further  scrutiny  by  banking  entities  and  examiners  in  their  evaluation  of  whether  a 
banking  entity 
trading  activities.  As  part  of 
implementation, we expect that a horizontal comparison of these metrics across firms and over 
appropriate time periods will help improve our understanding of the trading activities of banking 
entities. The agencies will continue to review and revise these metrics, as appropriate, as we 
learn what metrics are most useful.  
The  covered  funds  provisions  of  the  interagency  final  rule  are  mainly  driven  by  the  specific 
requirements  of  the  statute,  which  sets  limits  on  the  amount  of  investments  that  banking 
entities may make in covered funds as well as the types of relationships that banking entities 
may  have  with  covered  funds.  These  provisions  are  largely  designed  to  limit  exposures  by 
banking entities to covered funds, ensure that banking entities do not attempt to bail out other 
investors in covered funds, and prevent banking entities from using covered funds to evade the 
prohibition  on  proprietary  trading.  The  agencies  recently  addressed  an  issue  raised  by  the 
confluence of the covered fund restrictions of the Volcker Rule, accounting requirements, and 
the grandfathering provisions of section 171 of the Dodd-Frank Act (commonly known as the 
Collins Amendment) as they applied to investments in collateralized debt obligations backed by 
trust-preferred securities issued by community banking organizations. This is an early example 
of the constructive interagency cooperation that the agencies plan to bring to resolving issues 
raised by the regulations implementing the Volcker Rule.  
Both the proprietary trading and the covered fund restrictions and prohibitions of section 619 of 
the Dodd-Frank Act became effective on July 21, 2012. The statute provides banking entities a 
period  of  two  years  to  conform  their  activities  and  investments  to  the  requirements  of  the 
statute. Section 619 also permits the Board to extend this conformance period, one year at a 
time, for a total of no more than three additional years. Many commenters requested that, prior 
to or in connection with issuing a final rule, the Board extend the conformance period by an 
additional year. After consultation with the other four agencies and in connection with issuing 
the  final  rule  in  December,  the  Federal  Reserve  granted  a  one-year  extension  of  the 
conformance period until July 21, 2015. This extension provides banking entities with additional 
time to develop appropriate compliance programs as well as to identify and conform activities 
and investments to the requirements of the final rule. Providing banking entities with sufficient 
time for these actions is consistent with protecting the safety and soundness of banking entities 
because it allows for the termination of activities and the divestiture of prohibited investments in 
an orderly manner.  
Because  the  bulk  of  the  activities  encompassed  by  the  statute  takes  place  in  U.S.  broker-
dealers  and  national  banks,  entities  for  which  the  Federal  Reserve  is  not  the  primary 
supervisor, we will have a somewhat lesser role in the Volcker Rule implementation process. 
But  as  the  primary  supervisor  for  state  member  banks,  foreign  broker-dealer  subsidiaries  of 
U.S. bank holding companies, and state-chartered branches of foreign banking organizations, 
we will still have a role to play. Staff of the Federal Reserve will continue to engage with staff of 
the other agencies and work together, to the extent appropriate and practicable, to help ensure 
consistency  in  application  of  the  final  rule  to  banking  entities  within  their  respective 
jurisdictions. Indeed, shortly after adopting the Volcker Rule, the five agencies agreed to create 
an interagency working group in pursuit of this goal, and the group has already begun to meet.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
It  remains  to  be  seen  whether  other  jurisdictions  will  adopt  banking  reforms  similar  to  the 
Volcker  Rule.  While  reforms  dealing  with  the  trading  activities  of  banking  firms  have  been 
recommended by the Vickers Commission in the United Kingdom and by the Liikanen Group in 
the European Union, neither of these approaches expressly prohibits a consolidated banking 
firm from engaging in proprietary trading. Rather, these reforms bear closer resemblance to the 
traditional U.S. banking structure concept of ring-fencing depository institution subsidiaries of 
bank holding companies. Most notably, under both Vickers and Liikanen, banking firms would 
be  able  to  continue  to  engage  in  proprietary  trading,  but  would  simply  be  required  to  do  it 
outside of the retail deposit-taking unit of the organization. Some individual countries – France 
and  Germany,  for  example  –  have  developed  banking  structure  reforms  that  specifically 
address proprietary trading, but it appears that these proposals as well would require only a 
push-out of certain proprietary trading activities to non-bank affiliates. And just last week, the 
European  Commission  proposed  bank  structural  reform  that  would  prohibit  certain  large 
European  banking  firms  from  operating  standalone  proprietary  trading  desks,  though  this 
proposal appears to differ from the Volcker Rule in a number of significant respects.  
It is also important to keep in mind that the Volcker Rule has limitations, and it is critical that the 
Federal Reserve and other agencies take a comprehensive and appropriately tough approach 
to  monitoring  and  constraining  the  risks  in  all  the  trading  operations  of  our  largest  financial 
institutions. Capital regulation is at the core of that comprehensive approach. To that end, the 
Basel 2.5 and Basel 3 capital reforms that the federal banking agencies have developed and 
adopted in final form in the past several years are crucial. Bank liquidity regulations, such as 
the Basel 3 liquidity coverage ratio and net stable funding ratio, are also significant elements of 
the program. And at the Federal Reserve, this focus on monitoring and constraining the risks in 
the  trading  operations  of  our  largest  banking  firms  may  also  be  seen  in  our  supervisory 
assessment  process  –  through  the  trading  book  market  shock  conducted  as  part  of  the 
comprehensive capital analysis and review, or CCAR, and the stronger overall supervision of 
trading  operations  conducted  by  our  large  institution  supervision  coordinating  committee,  or 
LISCC.  These  approaches  to  strengthening  the  risk  management,  capital,  and  liquidity 
positions of our largest banking firms augment and enhance the steps taken under the Dodd-
Frank Act to strengthen the financial health and resiliency of our banking system.  
Thank you for your attention. I would be pleased to answer any questions you might have.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
