  Cecilia Skingsley: Household debt under the microscope 
Speech by Ms Cecilia Skingsley, Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at SABOs (the 
Swedish Association of Public Housing Companies) Finance Day, Stockholm, 8 May 2014. 
 I would like to thank Annika Svensson, Marianne Sterner, Jakob Winstrand and Dilan Ölcer for their help in writing 
this speech and for their views on earlier versions. 
The  issue  of  household  indebtedness  is  currently  under  discussion  in  many  different 
contexts. The Riksbank, for example, has expressed its concern about the development of 
household  debt  and  the  situation  on  the  mortgage  market  for  several  years  now.1  The 
discussions centre on to what extent the increase in household debt that we have seen for 
some time poses a risk to the real economy and to the stability of the financial system, and 
on the measures that may be needed to reduce these risks. 
However,  the  statistics  available  to  date  have  not  made  it  possible  to  conduct  all  the 
analyses that we would have liked to conduct to get a complete picture of the debt situation. 
With  the  support  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank  Act,  the  Riksbank  therefore  decided  in  the 
summer of 2013 to collect data on individuals’ debts from the eight largest banks in Sweden. 
This data provides important pieces of the puzzle regarding household debt. 
The analysis of the data shows, for example, that households in general are highly indebted 
in relation to their incomes – and this applies above all to low and middle-income earners. It 
also applies irrespective of where they live in Sweden and how old the borrowers are. The 
analysis also shows that almost four out of ten borrowers do not reduce their debts over time 
and that most of those who do reduce them very slowly. This indicates that the information 
on household debt that we previously had access to is more generally  applicable than  we 
thought. 
A  continued  increase  in  indebtedness  in  the  household  sector  may  have  serious 
consequences for the real economy and for financial stability. I therefore see clear risks with 
the Swedish households’ debt situation. 
Given  the  results  of  this  analysis,  and  given  that  there  are  vulnerabilities  in  the  Swedish 
financial  system  specifically  linked  to  the  banks’  mortgage  lending,  it  is  of  the  utmost 
importance to prioritise work on preventive measures. We need to reduce the risks relating to 
indebtedness and strengthen the resilience of the banks. I think that the Riksbank’s analysis 
can provide an important contribution to this work. 
Although  we  now  have  better  information  about  household  debt,  important  pieces  of  the 
puzzle are still missing. The Riksbank’s data collection was a first measure and there is no 
older, historical information on debts at the household level. And, as many others have said 
before me, we do not have any information on household wealth either. 
Today, I intend to speak above all about the new results from the analysis of the Riksbank’s 
data  on  the  debts  of  individual’s  and  households  and  explain  how  these  relate  to  other 
studies of household indebtedness. I also want to explain why the results should be viewed 
in the light of the vulnerabilities in the Swedish financial system. Let me begin, however, by 
saying a few words about why household debt is a cause of concern to the Riksbank at all. 
                                                
1 
International stakeholders, for example the IMF, the OECD and the EU, have also been concerned. The risks 
associated with high household indebtedness have also been discussed at other central banks. The Riksbank 
warned about these risks already prior to the financial crisis (see, for example the speech made by Stefan 
Ingves on 4 October 2013). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Household debt can threaten sustainable growth 
The Riksbank has long pointed out the risks associated with the development of household 
debt. When household debt is analysed, the debts are usually placed in relation to something 
else. As most households pay their borrowing costs using their current incomes rather than 
their assets, the debt ratio, that is debts in relation to disposable incomes, is often used as an 
illustrative measure of risk.2 
Since 1995, the aggregate household debt ratio, that is total household debt as a percentage 
of disposable income, has increased from 90 to 174 per cent, and it is expected to continue 
to  increase  in  the  years  immediately  ahead.  Although  the  aggregate  debt  ratio  has  grown 
somewhat more slowly  in recent years, it is still very high in an historical perspective (see 
Chart 1). 
Chart 1. Aggregate debt ratio 
Per cent 
190
170
150
130
110
90
70
50
70
79
88
97
06
15
 Sources: Statistics Sweden and the Riksbank 
This has led to the households becoming increasingly sensitive to shocks such as a loss of 
income,  falling  asset  prices  or  rising  interest  rates.  Our  primary  concern  is  not  that  the 
households will cause the banks any major loan losses. As we have pointed out for some 
time,  our  assessment  is  that  this  risk  is  limited.  However,  such  shocks  may  lead  the 
households to drastically reduce their consumption, especially in the case of households with 
large debts, and this may have an impact on the development of the macroeconomy.3 Falling 
consumption may in turn reduce the profitability of Swedish companies and ultimately lead to 
increased  loan  losses  from  the  banks’  lending  to  companies.  The  risk  of  such  a  scenario 
occurring in Sweden may also have increased in connection with the dramatic increase in the 
                                                
2   Data  from,  among  others,  the  European  Central  Bank,indicates  that  households  in  countries  that  were  hit 
relatively  hard  by  the  recent  financial  crisis  often  had  higher  debts,  fewer  liquid  assets  and  higher  interest 
expenditure in relation to incomes than countries that were hit less hard.  
3   One explanation of this is that a household’s propensity to consume is affected by how highly indebted the 
household is. Studies have found that a highly-indebted household reduces its consumption more in a crisis 
than  a  lowly-indebted  household.  See,  for  example,  Andersen,  A.L.,  Duus,  C.  and  Jensen,  T.L.  (2014), 
“Household  debt  and  consumption  during  the  financial  crisis:  Evidence  from  Danish  micro  data”,  Working 
Paper,  Danmarks  Nationalbank  and  Mian,  A.  Rao,  K.  and  Sufi,  A.  (2013),  “Household  Balance  Sheets, 
Consumption, and the Economic Slump”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 128(4), pp. 1687–1726. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
total level of indebtedness.4 I would also like to point out the difficulties that many individuals 
experience when bad times coincide with high private debts. 
An additional factor is that mortgage lending forms an important part of the Swedish banks’ 
assets, which means that the financial system is sensitive to risks linked with indebtedness. 
The  banks  fund  as  much  as  three-quarters  of  their  lending  for  housing  purposes  on  the 
market for covered bonds and access to funding on this market is based on Swedish and 
foreign  investors  being  highly  confident  in  the  safety  of  the  the  underlying  assets.  If 
confidence  wanes,  funding  costs  may  increase  and  access  to  funding  may  decline.  This 
would disrupt the functioning of the financial system and thus have a direct negative effect on 
financial stability. This means that the Swedish mortgage market is in fact not only a concern 
for us here in Sweden but also for many investors around the world. 
All in all, this means that shocks of various kinds can lead to the high level of indebtedness in 
the household sector causing problems for both the real economy and financial stability. This 
may  make  it  more  difficult for  the  Riksbank to perform  its tasks. There  are therefore good 
reasons for the Riksbank to care about household indebtedness. 
The analysis to date has been based on limited data 
The debate on whether the level of household indebtedness is sustainable or not has to date 
been based on partly inadequate data. In recent years, the analysis has largely been based 
on  aggregate  data  on  the  households’  assets  and  liabilities  from  Statistics  Sweden’s 
quarterly data.5 However, over the last four years it has also been possible to some extent to 
base the analysis on the annual mortgage survey conducted by Finansinspektionen, in which 
information  on  randomly-sampled  new  borrowers  and  some  aggregate  data  are  gathered 
from the banks. However, the random samples in the mortgage surveys only cover a limited 
period and only refer to new loans. The random samples thus only represent only 1.6 per 
cent  of  the  debts  of  the  household  sector.  Consequently,  they  do  not  provide  a 
comprehensive  view  of  the  situation  in  the  loan  stock,  that  is  for  existing  loans.  As  the 
information on the loan stock presented in the surveys is at the aggregate level, it is also not 
possible to analyse, for example, the distribution of debt ratios. 
In  November  2013,  the  findings  of  a  government  inquiry,  “Over-indebtedness  in  a  credit 
society”, were published. The data in the inquiry was partly based on new information from 
the Swedish Enforcement Authority and from UC, a credit information agency. However, the 
data  constituted  only  a  cross-section  of the  households’  debts  and thus  did  not  enable  an 
analysis of how debts had developed. 
All  in  all,  this  means  that  existing  sources  of  data  do  not  provide  a  complete  picture  of 
household debt, and that the discussion of the risks associated with household indebtedness 
has so far been based on limited material. 
The Riksbank’s credit data an important piece of the household-debt puzzle 
In  order  to  be  able  to  perform  better  analyses  of  household  debt  at  the  individual  and 
household  levels,  the  Riksbank  therefore  decided  in  the  summer  of  2013  to  gather  credit 
information on all of the borrowers of the eight largest banks.6 This information covers all the 
                                                
4  
International studies have shown that a substantial build-up of debt can increase the probability of financial 
crises  and  of  falls  in  housing  prices,  as  well  as  exacerbating  the  effects  if  a  crisis  does  occur.  See,  for 
example, Borio and Drehmann (2009), Schularich and Taylor (2012), and the IMF (2012). 
5   Since  2007,  when  wealth  tax  was  abolished,  no  authority  has  had  the  assignment  of  collecting  data  on 
individual’s debts and assets. 
6   The  eight  largest  banks  are  Danske  Bank,  Handelsbanken,  Länsförsäkringar  Bank,  Nordea,  SBAB  Bank, 
SEB, Skandiabanken and Swedbank.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  loans these borrowers have registered with UC, not just those granted by the eight largest 
banks.  The  amount  of  data  is  therefore  substantial  and  the  loan  volume  covers 
approximately 80 per cent of household loans from monetary financial institutions and 94 per 
cent  of  all  mortgages.7  This  should  be  compared  to  the  random  samples  in  the  mortgage 
surveys, which cover 1.6 percent of households loans from monetary financial institutions. 
The  data  includes  monthly  data  for  a  three-year  period8  on  various  types  of  credit,  taxed 
earned income after tax, number of co-borrowers, taxation values for detached houses, the 
parish  in  which  the  borrower  is  registered  and  other  information.  The  material  contains 
information  on  almost  four  million  indebted  adult  individuals,  which  corresponds  to  52  per 
cent  of  Sweden’s  total  adult  population.9 The  individuals  in  the  data  can be  linked  to  over 
1.8 million households. 
On the basis of this material we now have the possibility to conduct an in-depth study of total 
household  debt  and  not  only  of  new  loans  –  a  possibility  that  we  have  never  really  had 
before. Using this individual data, it is also possible to examine how debts are distributed, for 
example between different income and age groups and geographically. It also enables us to 
follow  how  debts  develop  over  time  and  thus  also  provides  some  information  on  the 
households’  amortisation  behaviour.  The  Riksbank’s  credit  data  is  therefore  an  important 
piece of the household-debt puzzle. 
The Riksbank’s credit data confirms our concern 
Let me now say something about what our data shows and also in some cases place the 
data in relation to other results that have been presented to us in various contexts. It is of 
course not my intention to give the impression that other results are incorrect in some way. It 
is  rather  the  case that  data  is  used  in  different  ways  depending  on  one’s  perspective  and 
focus, and this is reflected in the results. The Riksbank’s particular focus is on the risks that 
household indebtedness may pose to the real economy and financial stability. 
The aggregate debt ratio underestimates debts among borrowers 
As I mentioned earlier, the aggregate debt ratio is 174 per cent. However, as this figure is 
based on the entire Swedish household sector it also includes individuals who have no debts 
but have an income. Now that it is possible, it therefore seems more relevant to examine the 
debt ratio for those who actually have debts, that is almost four million Swedes over the age 
of  17.  If  the  debt  ratio  is  calculated  only  for  indebted  households,  the  figure  arrived  at  is 
263 per cent. If we look at those who have mortgages (which constitute approximately four-
fifths of indebted households) the debt ratio reaches 313 per cent (see Chart 2). 
This  comparison  clearly  shows  that  debt  ratios  vary  depending  on  which  households  we 
choose  to  look  at,  and  it  also  makes  clear  the  extent  to  which  the  aggregate  debt  ratio 
underestimates the actual burden of debt for indebted individuals. 
                                                
7   According to Statistics Sweden, loans from MFIs to households amounted to SEK 2,826 billion in July 2013, 
with 81 per cent of these being mortgages.  
8   From July 2010 to July 2013. 
9   According to Statistics Sweden, 7.7 million people aged over 17 were resident in Sweden in 2013. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Chart 2. Debt ratios for different groups 
Per cent 
 400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
All, including
non-indebted
Only
indebted
Only
mortgage
borrowers
New
mortgage
borrowers
 Note. The debt ratio for the group designated “All, including non-indebted” corresponds to the aggregate debt 
ratio shown in Chart 1. It is calculated as the household sector’s total debts in relation to the sector’s total 
disposable incomes. The debt ratios for the other three groups are calculated as averages of the individual 
households’ debt ratios. 
Sources: Statistics Sweden, the Riksbank and Finansinspektionen 
Not only new borrowers have high debt ratios 
Another  claim  is  that  high  debt  ratios  are  mostly  to  be  found  among  new  mortgage 
borrowers.  Considering  the  dramatic  price  increases  on  the  Swedish  housing  market  in 
recent  years,  this  is  a  completely  reasonable  claim.  The  higher  housing  prices  are,  the 
greater  the  loan  required  to  finance  the  purchase  of  a  house  or  flat.  Finansinspektionen’s 
mortgage  survey  shows  that the  debt ratio for  new  mortgage  borrowers  averages  370  per 
cent, which is a higher debt ratio than for existing mortgage holders. On the other hand, I do 
not think that the difference between new mortgage borrowers and those who have owned 
their homes for some time is as big as I had perhaps expected. This is because people who 
have owned their homes for a while have had the opportunity to reduce their debts. The fact 
that the difference is not bigger could indicate that the households reduce their debts at a 
relatively slow rate. Let me return to this a little later. 
The debt ratio is highest among low and middle-income earners 
One conclusion of the government’s inquiry “Over-indebtedness in a credit society” is that the 
highest debt ratios are to be found among those with the highest incomes. This is the picture 
you get if you look at the population as a whole, that is if you also include individuals who 
have  an  income  but  no  debts.  This  means  that  the  inquiry  really  shows  that  low-income 
earners do not take loans to the same extent as high-income earners. 
If we instead look at debts in relation to incomes only for those individuals who have debts 
we get a different picture. The average debt ratio is then higher than 200 per cent in all of the 
income groups, and in fact highest in the lower income groups (see Chart 3). 
If we look at households instead, which may be reasonable considering that many borrowers 
in fact live in a household with more than one income earner and thus share responsibility for 
servicing  the  loan,  the  picture  is  till  one  of  high  debts  in  relation  to  incomes  in  all  of  the 
income groups. And here too it is clear that the highest debt ratios are mainly to be found 
among low and middle-income earners. 
Our results thus contradict the picture that it is only those with high incomes that have the 
highest debt ratios, that is those who are traditionally regarded as having a higher level of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  eduction,  a  stronger  position  on  the  labour  market  and  wealth  that  they  can  draw  from  in 
difficult situations. 
Chart 3. Debt ratios in different income groups 
Per cent 
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Income deciles 
All households (SOU)
Indebted individuals
Indebted households
 Sources: SOU 2013:78 and the Riksbank 
High debt ratios are not only a metropolitan phenomenon 
It may also be of interest to look at the geographical distribution. It has often been claimed in 
the  debate  in  recent  years  that  debts  are  mostly  a  “Stockholm  problem”.  The  Riksbank’s 
credit  data  shows  that  the  debt  ratios  for  households  with  mortgages  in  the  three  major 
metropolitan municipalities are over 400 per cent (see Chart 4). This is a very high figure, 
which  to  a  certain  extent  confirms  the  picture  of  a  high  level  of  debt  in  the  metropolitan 
regions.  However,  something  that  surprised  me  is  that  the  debt  ratio  in  the  rest  of  the 
country,  that  is  outside  the  major  metropolitan  municipalities,  is  not  that  much  lower  but 
actually amounts to 300 per cent. 
As the rest of the country includes municipalities close to the major cities, however, it can be 
said that this figure exaggerates the debt ratio outside the metropolitan regions. If we instead 
look at the county level, the average debt ratios for households with mortgages were 430 per 
cent in the County of Stockholm, 324 per cent in the County of Västra Götaland, 352 per cent 
in the County of Skåne and 265 per cent in the rest of the country.10 
In my world, a debt ratio of 265 per cent is also a high figure. Moreover, more than half of 
Sweden’s  population  live  in  the  three  major  metropolitan  counties  where  the  debt  ratio  is 
even  higher.  I  therefore  object  to  the  picture  of  high  indebtedness  as  being  only  a 
metropolitan phenomenon. 
                                                
10   One quarter of the total debts are in the County of Stockholm, one sixth in the County of Västra Götaland, one 
seventh in the County of Skåne and one third in the rest of the country. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Chart 4. Debt ratios for households with mortgages in different municipalities 
Per cent 
500
450
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
Stockholm Gothenburg
Malmö
Others
 Source: The Riksbank 
Young people are most highly indebted, but older people also have high debt ratios 
I would also like to take this opportunity to say something about how the debts are distributed 
per  age  group.  It  is  sometimes  claimed  that  it  is  mostly  younger  people  that  are  highly 
indebted. This is also confirmed by the Riksbank’s credit data. However, we also note that 
indebtedness is actually rather high in the older age groups (see Chart 5). In other words it is 
not  only  “young  yuppies  in  central  Stockholm”  that  have  large  debts  but  also  their 
grandparents living in small towns and villages in other parts of the country. 
Chart 5. Debt ratios for indebted individuals in different age groups 
Per cent 
500
400
300
200
100
0
1 (27) 2 (33) 3 (38) 4 (42) 5 (47) 6 (51) 7 (56) 8 (61) 9 (66) 10 (76)
Age deciles (average age within decile) 
 Source: The Riksbank 
Many borrowers do not reduce their debts, and those that do reduce them slowly 
Let me now also shed some light on how debts change over time. Between 2012 and 2013, 
24  per  cent  of  the  individuals  with  mortgages  increased  their  debts  and  16  per  cent  had 
unchanged  debts.  Just  over  60  per  cent  reduced  their  debts  in  the  same  period  (see 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  Chart 6). For those that reduced their debts in this period, the reduction corresponds to an 
average remaining amortisation period of 99 years. 
In  other  words,  40  per  cent  of  the  individuals  that  have  mortgages  have  increasing  or 
unchanged debts, and those that reduce their debts do so very slowly. 
Over  the  three  years  for  which  we  have  data,  the  proportion  of  individuals  reducing  their 
debts has in fact increased and the proportion increasing their debts has decreased. On the 
other hand, the increase in the proportion of individuals reducing their debts has been very 
small. 
All  in  all,  the  analysis  of  the  Riksbank’s  credit  data  thus  shows  that  debt  ratios  are  fairly 
evenly-distributed across income groups. They are also spread throughout the country. The 
analysis also shows that debt ratios are high even for older borrowers. Consequently, I would 
like to point out that the problems associated with debt seem to be both more extensive and 
more comprehensive than we have previously realised. 
Chart 6. Change in debt among individuals with mortgages, July 2012–July 2013 
Percentages 
16% 
24% 
24% 
10% 
10% 
16% 
Source: The Riksbank 
Increased
0 to 10 years
10 to 30 years
30 to 50 years
>50 years
Unchanged
 The risks associated with household debt should be viewed in the light of 
vulnerabilities in the financial system 
The risks relating to the development of household debt should be viewed in the light of the 
vulnerabilities  that  exist  in  the  Swedish  financial  system  as  a  whole.  The  Riksbank  has 
pointed this out in its Financial Stability Reports. 
The Swedish financial system, of which the major Swedish banks form a substantial part, is 
large  in  relation  to  the  Swedish  economy.  For  example,  the  assets  of  the  Swedish  banks 
amount to 400 per cent of GDP. This is a high figure in an international perspective. Events 
that lead to problems in the banking sector will, not least because of the size of the sector, 
have serious consequences for both the financial system and the real economy. 
At the same time, all of the major banks have a large proportion of lending to the Swedish 
household sector and are also closely interlinked in that they have similar exposures. 
The major Swedish banks fund about half of their operations on the capital markets of which 
a substantial part is in foreign currency. In simple terms this means that more than one of 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  every two krona that are lent to Swedish households is ultimately governed by conditions that 
are set by anonymous capital managers in Sweden or elsewhere in the world. 
Moreover,  approximately  half  of  the  banks’  funding  consists  of  covered  bonds  which  are 
partly held by foreign investors and partly by the other major Swedish banks. 
All  in  all,  this  means  that  developments  on  the  mortgage  market  in  Sweden  are  not  only 
important to individual banks but also to the banking sector as a whole. If the providers of the 
banks’  market  funding  were  to  lose  confidence  in  the  banks,  or  in  the  situation  on  the 
mortgage market, the price of funding could increase and access to funding decrease. This 
would entail higher interest rates for households and perhaps also for companies, depending 
on  the  ability  of  the  banks  to  parry  such  a  situation.  It  is  therefore  vital  that  our  financial 
system is resilient and inspires confidence, and that the development of household debt is 
deemed to be sustainable in the long term. We are in a situation in which the development of 
debt in Sweden and the Swedish mortgage market are not only matters of importance to us 
here in Sweden but also to international investors. 
We need measures, and the possibility to follow them up, to ensure a system that is 
sustainable in the long term 
As  I  said  earlier,  the  new  data  means  that  we  have  taken  several  further  steps  towards 
seeing the risks associated with household debt. However, I would like it to make it clear that 
there is still a long way to go. We still do not have the entire picture. An important area where 
we need more data is the asset side, where we have information on the overall situation in 
the household sector but not broken down at the individual and household levels. In order to 
be  able  to  follow  developments  it  is  of  course  also  important  to  have  long,  continually 
updated time series. 
The analysis of the new data that we now have access to shows, all in all, that households in 
general are highly indebted in relation to their incomes, and this applies above all to low and 
middle-income earners. It also applies irrespective of where the borrowers live and how old 
they are. The analysis also shows that many borrowers do not reduce their debts over time 
and that those who do reduce them very slowly. 
I find this situation worrying. It is not mainly those with high incomes and those who can be 
assumed to have considerable wealth that have the largest debts in relation to their incomes. 
To  a  rather  large  extent  it  appears  to  be  those who  probably  have  less  financial  scope  to 
manage potential shocks. This poses risks to the development of the real economy, but also 
to the stability of the financial system, especially in the light of the vulnerabilities that we see 
in the Swedish financial system in general. 
I firmly believe that measures are needed in several areas to create long-term sustainability. 
This is a question of wide-ranging measures to increase resilience in the financial system, 
but also of targeted measures to reduce the risks relating to household debt. It is important 
that the discussion does not drag on – measures are needed now. I hope that the basis for 
analysis  that  the  Riksbank  is  now  presenting  will  help  those  concerned  to  make  good 
decisions on the required measures.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
