Andreas Dombret: Cutting the Gordian Knot or splitting hairs – the 
debate about breaking up the banks 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank,  at  the  ILF  (Institute  for  Law  and  Finance)  Conference  “Too  Big  to  Fail  III: 
Structural  Reform  Proposals  –  Should  We  Break  Up  the  Banks?”,  Frankfurt  am  Main, 
21 January 2014. 
 1.  
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Thank you for inviting me to speak at today’s conference. It is a pleasure and an honour to 
be here. 
The story goes that at some point in history the kingdom of Phrygia was without a king. The 
priests therefore  consulted  an  oracle  to  determine  who  should  fill  the  vacant  position. The 
oracle decreed that the next man to enter the city in an ox cart should become the new king. 
That man was Gordias, a peasant. 
Gordias became the king of Phrygia and, out of gratitude, his son dedicated the ox cart to the 
gods. The gods in turn tied the cart to a pole with a complicated knot – the famous Gordian 
Knot. This knot was so complex that for centuries no one was able to untie it. Hence, the cart 
was still tied to its pole when Alexander the Great entered the scene in 400 BC. 
Meanwhile, it had been prophesied that whoever untied the knot would become king of Asia. 
Alexander, full of ambition, took on the challenge. Unable to find the loose end of the knot, he 
drew his sword and sliced the knot in two, thereby undoing it. Since then, the Gordian Knot 
has become a symbol for solving seemingly insoluble problems by thinking outside the box 
and then taking bold action. 
The insoluble problem in our case is how to secure financial stability. And after six years of 
crisis, more and more people are, understandably, looking for a Gordian solution. To some, 
the solution would be to break up the banks – with one bold stroke of the sword, as it were. 
Broadly  speaking,  the  dividing  line  would  run  between  those  parts  of  a  bank  engaged  in 
commercial banking and those parts engaged in investment banking. 
In my speech today, I will address the question of whether this is a sensible approach. As I 
speak first at this conference, my objective is to give an overview of the issue, discuss the 
pros and cons of the proposal and try to draw a tentative conclusion. Let us begin by looking 
at the arguments put forward by the proponents of breaking up the banks. 
Breaking up the banks – the objectives 
2.  
The underlying notion is, of course, that there are two different worlds. There is the world of 
commercial banking, which is populated by conservative and “prudent” bankers who support 
the real economy and provide a haven for savings. And then there is the world of investment 
banking populated by the Gordon Gekkos of this world, who pose a constant risk to financial 
stability and to taxpayers’ money. 
The combination of these two worlds in a universal bank is seen as a source of systemic risk. 
It is therefore being proposed that they be separated: instead of universal banks there would 
just  be  pure  commercial  and  pure  investment  banks.  But  why  is  the  combination  of 
commercial  and  investment  banking  perceived  as  a  source  of  systemic  risk?  And  what 
specifically are the objectives of those who want to separate them? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The general objective when breaking up the banks is to shield those parts that are deemed 
vital  for  the  real  economy  from  those  parts  which  have  little  or  no  connection  to  the  real 
economy  –  to  shield  commercial  banking  from  investment  banking.  The  underlying 
assumption is that investment banking is risky and thus more prone to losses and failure. 
If  the  investment  banking  branch  of  a  universal  bank  were  to  fail,  it  would  drag  the 
commercial banking branch down with it. Both parts would go down together, disrupting the 
real economy. It is therefore argued that separating the two parts would block this channel of 
contagion, shield the real economy and protect savers and taxpayers alike. 
But there is more to the argument. Two aspects are usually emphasised. The first aspect is 
the existence of deposit insurance schemes. These schemes render deposits risk-free – at 
least up to a certain amount. Consequently, depositors demand lower risk premiums. This 
holds even if the bank in question is engaged in risky investment banking activities. Universal 
banks  can  therefore  draw  on  a  subsidised  source  of  funds  to  finance  their  investment 
banking  activities.  It  is  argued  that  separating  commercial  and  investment  banking  would 
abolish this subsidy, align incentives for investment banks and force them to reduce the size 
of their business. 
The second aspect is the existence of implicit government guarantees for certain banks. If a 
large and interconnected universal bank fails, the whole financial system might be disrupted, 
as might the real economy. The taxpayer might therefore be forced to step in and save the 
bank to prevent an even worse outcome. Banks that enjoy such a status are termed “too big 
to fail” or “too interconnected to fail”. Just like deposit insurance, such an implicit government 
guarantee subsidises investment banking activities. 
Proponents of breaking up the banks argue that pure investment banks with no connection to 
the  real  economy  would  be  treated  differently.  They  would  be  excluded  from  deposit 
insurance  schemes  and  also  from  implicit  government  guarantees.  Consequently,  if  things 
went wrong, they would not be rescued by the government at the taxpayers’ expense – moral 
hazard would be reduced. Moreover, banks would become less complex and thereby easier 
to resolve. 
These  are  –  in  a  nutshell  –  the  central  arguments  brought  forward  by  the  proponents  of 
breaking  up  the  banks.  They  claim  that  breaking  up  the  banks  would  block  channels  of 
contagion,  would  remove  subsidies  for  risky  investment  banking,  would  lower  the  risk  of 
systemic crises, would make banks easier to resolve and would eventually save taxpayers’ 
money. 
Breaking up the banks – would it work? 
3.  
Now, could one stroke of the sword really take us all the way to financial stability? To answer 
this question, we have to take a step back. To me, financial stability cannot be achieved as 
long as banks are too big, too interconnected or too complex to fail. Finding a solution to this 
problem would eliminate implicit government guarantees, would align incentives and would 
increase financial stability. 
What we need at a very basic conceptual level are two lines of defence. First, we have to 
make banks safer to reduce the likelihood of failure. Second, if a bank fails, it must be able to 
do so without disrupting the entire financial system. Erecting these two lines of defence is the 
basic  challenge  we  are  facing.  And  at  the  same  time,  it  should  be  the  benchmark  for 
evaluating the benefits of breaking up the banks. 
The first question is therefore: would breaking up the banks make them safer? It is true that 
commercial  banking  would  benefit  if  it  had  some  degree  of  insulation  from  the  perils  of 
investment banking. But is commercial banking in itself really safer than investment banking? 
Looking back, we have to admit that pure commercial banks were at the centre of the recent 
crisis: Washington Mutual, Countrywide, Hypo Real Estate and the Spanish savings banks, 
to name just a few. The question of stability ultimately depends on the sustainability of the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
business model. And a commercial bank that is highly leveraged and has an unsustainable 
business model can be as risky as any investment bank. In addition, breaking up the banks 
would  reduce  their  potential  to  diversify.  This,  in  turn,  could  increase  their  exposure  to 
individual shocks – they might even become less safe. 
The second question is: would breaking up the banks limit the size of investment banks by 
removing funding subsidies? Well, it certainly would remove at least those subsidies related 
to deposit insurance. But there are two things we should bear in mind. First, if deprived of 
deposits as a source of funding, an increasing number of pure investment banks would have 
to  revert  to  less  stable  sources  of  funding  –  they  would  become  less  safe.  Second,  what 
about  that  part  of  the  subsidy  that  is  due  to  implicit  government  guarantees?  This  point 
relates  to  our  second  line  of  defence  – to  the question  of  whether  a  bank  can fail  without 
disrupting the whole system. 
And  frankly,  I  am  not  fully  convinced  that  breaking  up  the  banks  would  block  the  relevant 
channels of contagion. True, it would block channels of contagion within banks. But wouldn’t 
they  just  be  replaced  by  channels  of  contagion  between  banks?  I  think  that  even  after 
breaking  up  the  banks,  the  financial  system  would  be  characterised  by  a  large  degree  of 
interconnectedness. And again, we could take a look into history. Lehman Brothers was a 
pure investment bank, yet when it failed in 2008 it brought the financial system to the brink of 
collapse – because it was so interconnected. 
Against this backdrop, the question is: what would happen if another pure investment bank 
were to fail? Would the government really just stand on the side-lines and watch the potential 
fallout? Or would it be compelled to step in, as it has done before, to save the failing bank – 
regardless of whether it is attached to a commercial bank or not? 
And  what  about  the  problem  of  shadow  banking?  I  see  the  danger  that  breaking  up  the 
banks might provide incentives to export more and more risky activities to the realm of non-
bank banking. However, the risks could easily be re-imported to the regular banking system. 
In  the  end,  we  would  have  gained  nothing.  This  is  why  our  efforts  to  control  the  shadow 
banking system have to continue. 
Regarding the  proposal  to  break  up  the  banks, a  lot  of questions  on the  effects  and  side-
effects remain unanswered. And this takes me directly to the last issue I wish to raise. We all 
know that the worst enemy of good ideas is the need to implement them. In the present case, 
this refers to the challenge of designing an actual system of separated banking functions. In 
the  theoretical  debate,  an  imaginary  line  is  drawn  between  investment  banking  and 
commercial banking. But where exactly would that line be drawn in reality? 
If  commercial  banking  is  supposed  to  support  the  real  economy,  it  should  comprise  more 
than just lending money. Take the example of Germany, which has a bank-based system of 
corporate  finance.  German  companies  procure  a  wide  range  of  services  from  their  banks. 
The  boundaries  between  customer  business,  hedging  transactions,  market  making  and 
traditional proprietary trading are consequently fluid. Finding the right dividing line in the grey 
area between those activities would be difficult and prone to lobbyism. 
The  fact  that  current  legislation  and  legislative  proposals  are  so  different  in  content  and 
scope  partly  reflects  these  problems.  In  the  US,  the  Volcker  Rule  seeks  to  prohibit 
proprietary trading by banks and places severe restrictions on certain forms of investment. In 
the UK, the Vickers proposal seeks to ring-fence deposit-taking and the provision of credit 
facilities in legal, organisational and operational terms. In Europe, the Liikanen Commission 
suggests  yet  another  model  which  would  maintain  the  universal  bank  within  a  holding 
structure but ring-fence deposit-taking units. 
Breaking up the banks – the alternatives 
4.  
Based  on  the  arguments  I  have  laid  out,  it  seems  unclear  to me  whether  breaking  up  the 
banks would take us all the way to financial stability. It could make banks somewhat easier to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
resolve – that much is clear. But there are three crucial points on which I have doubts and 
which should be discussed in more detail: 
• 
• 
I doubt that breaking up the banks would make them safe enough; 
I doubt that breaking up the banks would ensure that they can fail without disrupting 
the system; 
and I doubt that the proposal of breaking up the banks could be implemented in a 
suitable manner. 
 I  also  doubt  whether  it  is  the  responsibility  of  the  state to  determine  what  business  model 
works best. In my view, we do not need the same business model all over the world. A lot of 
countries, including Germany, fared very well with universal banks. Personally, I therefore do 
not  see  a  reason  to  abandon  the  concept  of  universal  banks.  And  as  a  matter  of  fact, 
legislative  proposals  such  as  the  Liikanen-proposal  also  do  not  seek  to  abolish  universal 
banks as a general concept. 
Why not let the market determine which business models work and which don’t? And please 
do not misunderstand me: the state certainly has to set boundaries to guide this selection 
process and to protect the financial system, the real economy, depositors and the taxpayer. 
In my view, other things are at least equally important if we want to secure financial stability. 
To make banks safer, we have to increase capital requirements. Banks need more capital 
and they need better capital. This is exactly what the new Basel rules prescribe. To enable 
banks to fail without disrupting the financial system, we need resolution mechanisms. At the 
international  level,  the  Financial  Stability  Board  has  published  relevant  principles.  At  the 
European level, a Single Resolution Mechanism is under construction. This mechanism will 
be a central pillar of the banking union and should be established as soon as possible. 
In my view, these measures are more important and bring us closer to financial stability than 
just breaking up the banks. And I would like to bring up a final point: we must be aware that 
we cannot solve all our problems through regulation. In addition to regulatory reform, there 
also has to be a change of culture within the world of banking. And here, investment banks 
might, on balance, have to change more than commercial banks. Just take the example of 
compensation schemes. Compensation schemes that reward excessive risk-taking need to 
be  replaced  with  more  sustainable  solutions.  Relevant  regulation  exists  but  to  be  really 
effective these rules must become part of the culture. 
Conclusion 
5.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  began  my  speech  with  an  account  of  how  Alexander  the  Great 
solved the seemingly insoluble problem of the Gordian Knot. Instead of attempting to untie it 
as everyone else had done, he just split the knot with his sword. 
This is certainly the most famous version of the story, but it is not the only one. There are 
alternative accounts of how Alexander untied the cart from its pole. According to Aristobulus, 
Alexander unfastened the cart by removing the pin which secured the yoke to the pole of the 
cart, then pulled out the yoke itself. 
This  exemplifies  that  there  is  never  only  one  solution  to  a  given  problem.  And  the  more 
complex a problem is, the less likely that it can be solved with a single stroke of the sword. 
To the contrary, it could make things even worse. Just recall the story of how Heracles cut off 
the head of the Hydra, just to have two grow back. 
To ensure financial stability, we have to apply a wide range of measures. We have to adjust 
capital requirements, we have to implement liquidity requirements, we have to make banks 
resolvable to name just a few. 
 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Breaking up the banks might shield commercial banking and thereby the real economy to a 
certain  degree.  But  it  cannot,  on  its  own,  ensure  financial  stability.  And  when  it  comes  to 
implementing  a system of  segregated  banking functions,  attempts to  cut  the  Gordian  Knot 
might mutate into a tedious exercise of splitting hairs. 
Thank you very much. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
