Njuguna Ndung’u: Enhancing the cross border payments system across 
the East African Community 
Remarks by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the official 
launch of the East African Payments System (EAPS), Nairobi, 16 May 2014. 
 Dr. Enos Bukuku, Deputy Secretary General, East African Community; 
Ms. Mwanamaka A. Mabruki, Principal Secretary, Ministry of the East African Affairs, 
Commerce and Tourism; 
Fellow Governors: 
Prof. Benno Ndulu, Governor, Bank of Tanzania; 
Hon. John Rwangombwa, Governor, National Bank of Rwanda; 
Mr. Jean Ciza, Governor, Bank of the Republic of Burundi; 
Dr. Louis Kasekende, Deputy Governor, Bank of Uganda; 
Distinguished Guests and Colleagues; 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
On  behalf  of  my fellow  Governors from  the  EAC  Central  Banks,  it  is my  great  pleasure  to 
welcome you all to the launch of the East African Payments System (EAPS). 
The  EAPS,  which  went  live  on  Monday  25th  November  2013,  is  a  cross  border  payment 
initiative  by  the  EAC  Central  Banks  and  the  EAC  Secretariat,  working  closely  with 
Commercial Banks in the region. It is part of the East Africa’s payments modernization efforts 
to enhance cross border payments system across the EAC Region. 
The  System  currently  integrates  with  the  respective  Real  Time  Gross  Settlement  (RTGS) 
Systems of Kenya, Uganda and Tanzania that utilize the internationally recognized SWIFT 
messaging network for safe and secure delivery of payment and settlement messages. 
It sends and receives cross border payments in the region’s currencies that is Kenya Shilling 
(Ksh), Tanzania Shillings (Tzs) and Uganda Shilling (Ugx) from any of the commercial banks 
in  the  three  East  African  Countries  on  a  Real  Time  basis  for  the  region’s  business 
community. 
EAPS will therefore enable the public to pay as well as receive payments on real time basis. 
As  such,  its  implementation  will  address  deficiencies  in  the  current  cross-border  payment 
methods, through enhanced efficiency and risk controls. 
All  the  commercial  banks  in  Kenya,  Tanzania  and  Uganda  are  participants  in  the  system. 
Commercial Banks in Rwanda and Burundi are expected to join later in the Year. 
With  respect  to  regional  trade,  the  System  is  expected  to  promote,  facilitate  and  support 
trade within the EAC Region. In this regard, EAPS has many benefits, they include: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Real time transfer of funds across the EAC borders; 
Transfer of large value payments in the region; 
Enhanced safety through use of the SWIFT infrastructure; 
Increased accessibility as it is available in all the commercial banks; 
Same day settlement; 
Increased reliability through integration with RTGS; and, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 Improved risk control mechanisms. 
Transactions are carried out in any of the EAC local currencies hence reducing (cost 
of transactions) and risk of the transactions. 
Since  go-live,  a  volume  of  1106  transactions  have  successfully  been  processed  through 
EAPS.  The  value  processed  in  the  three  EAC  currencies  is  Ksh.1.6B,  Ugx.9.9B  and 
Tzs.2.5B. On average 10 EAPS transactions are processed per day. 
All commercial banks open EAPS accounts with their respective central banks. The central 
banks also open accounts in each other’s central banks as they act as participants in their 
RTGS  systems  representing  the  individual  commercial  banks  in  their  countries.  Payments 
can  be  sent  in  EAC  currencies.  A  commercial  bank  ensures  that  all  its  accounts  in  these 
currencies have been pre-funded before sending payments. For example, a customer gives 
the commercial bank instructions, the message is sent to the central bank of the originating 
country. The message is then sent through SWIFT to the central bank of the country where 
the  payment  is  destined,  at  which  point  it  is  transformed  and  settled  in  the  respective 
commercial bank account through a cross border module. 
Finally,  let  me  take  this  opportunity  to  thank  the  Central  Bank  Governors,  the  EAC 
Secretariat and other colleagues in the Banks, Commercial Banks and Bankers Associations 
in  the  respective  Partner  States  for  working  tirelessly  in  the  last  few  years  to  make  the 
successful implementation of EAPS possible. 
It  is  my  hope  that  with  the  launch  of  EAPS,  there  will  be  an  uptake  in  its  usage  by 
Commercial Banks in executing their cross border payments. 
THANK YOU. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
