  Sabine Lautenschläger: Countdown to November – European 
supervision ready for lift-off 
Speech  by  Ms  Sabine  Lautenschläger,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European 
Central  Bank,  at  the  Handelsblatt  Konferenz  “Banken  im  Umbruch”,  Frankfurt  am  Main,  
3 September 2014. 
 Summary 
European banking supervision will draw on the long-standing experience of 18 – soon 19 – 
Member  States  and  incorporate  it  into  a  new  European  supervisory  culture,  said  Sabine 
Lautenschläger, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank (ECB) in a 
speech at the “Banken im Umbruch” conference in Frankfurt am Main. 
A significant advantage of the new Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) is the possibility to 
make  cross-country  comparisons.  “I  am  not  just  thinking  of  the  assessment  of  specific 
portfolios here, but also of the early identification of risks, which only become visible, or are 
at  least  easier  to  identify,  in  horizontal  analysis”,  she  said.  The  asset  quality  review  has 
already given us a deeper insight into the banks’ procedures, thereby making it possible for 
us to check “which differences between banks are justified and to ascertain where we need 
to probe critically”. 
Ms  Lautenschläger  stressed  that,  although  decision-making  in  the  new  European  banking 
supervision  will  be  organised  centrally,  the  SSM  can  build  on  regional  knowledge  and 
experience.  “As  national  supervisory  authorities  participate  in  the  supervisory  process,  the 
ECB  remains  close  to  regional  market  and  banking  structures”,  she  said.  Also  in  terms  of 
staffing, the SSM will bring together people from different supervisory cultures. The heads of 
Joint Supervisory Teams will come from a country other than that in which the institution it is 
supervising is established. “In concrete terms: the head supervisor for Deutsche Bank will be 
a French lady; BNP Paribas will be supervised by an Italian man.” 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
In  precisely  two  months’  time,  we  will  usher  in  a  new  era  in  the  euro  area.  With  the 
establishment  of  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM)  on  4  November  2014,  the 
European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  will  assume  key  competencies  in  the  field  of  banking 
supervision. However, unlike the introduction of the euro banknotes and coins in 2002, this 
step towards further integration will not entail a major symbolic change that is tangible for all 
citizens.  Nevertheless,  the  start  of  the  SSM  means  progress,  not  only  in  European 
integration, but also in day-to-day supervisory work. 
The ECB – one of the world’s largest supervisors 
The ECB will take on the direct supervision of around 120 credit institutions and more than 
80% of the aggregated balance sheet for the euro area banking sector. In absolute figures, 
this means a total of more than €21 trillion as per 30 June 2014. In addition, the ECB will be 
indirectly supervising the less significant institutions, of which there are just over 3,500. Here, 
we will shape supervision by setting binding supervisory standards. 
This will make the ECB one of the world’s largest supervisors. I anticipate that, over the next 
few years, the geographical area under our remit will expand and that the number of directly 
and indirectly supervised banks will continue to grow. On the one hand, further countries will 
join the euro area. On the other hand, the regime of “close cooperation” gives EU Member 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  States who do not yet have the euro as their currency a chance to participate in the banking 
union. When this option was introduced into the SSM Regulation, sceptics thought it unlikely 
that a Member State would exchange its exclusive supervisory competences for membership 
of  the  supervisory  mechanism.  Developments  over  the  last  few  months  have  shown, 
however,  that  the  ECB  has  significantly  more  to  offer  than  just  a  seat  on  the  Supervisory 
Board. The ECB enjoys trust and credibility – valuable assets for both monetary policy and 
banking supervision alike. 
Credibility, however, has to be earned anew each day. In this respect, the ECB’s monetary 
policy can already look back on a solid track record. In the area of banking supervision, we 
stand at the very beginning. But that does not mean that we will only start to find our way on 
4 November. For many months now, my colleagues and I have been working to determine, 
among  other  things,  the  focus  of  our  supervisory  approach,  both  conceptually  and 
thematically.  The  critical  issues  are:  how  can  the  ECB  reap  the  intrinsic  benefits  of 
supervising  19  national  banking  systems?  And  how  can  we  ensure  that  institution-specific 
insights of the national supervisors are best maintained and incorporated? Allow me to give 
you a few examples to explain the conclusions we have reached. I will focus on the specific 
features of the SSM. So do not be surprised if I do not mention things that are self-evident, 
such as a preventative, forward-looking and risk-oriented supervisory approach. 
18 perspectives – one best practice 
Let us start with 18 perspectives and what is deemed best practice. In developing the SSM’s 
supervisory culture, we are in a unique starting position. Following the financial market crisis, 
many  countries  adjusted  their  supervisory  structures.  The  reforms  generally  focused  on 
addressing country-specific experiences of the crisis and on international recommendations. 
We are in a similar situation in setting up the SSM – but with one major difference: we are 
not just looking at the experiences of one country; we are incorporating the perspectives of 
18  –  soon  19  –  Member  States  into  a  common  European  supervisory  culture.  For  me 
personally, this is one of the most exciting aspects of creating the supervisory mechanism. 
An example of this is the weekly meeting of SSM management. Every Friday, Danièle Nouy 
and I meet with the heads of the four SSM business areas. Around the table we therefore 
have  representatives  of  the  French,  German,  Finnish,  Spanish  and  even  US  supervisory 
traditions. Another colleague brings to the table many years of experience at a systemically 
relevant bank. That is of course just one example, among many, of how we are drawing on 
the various approaches to establish what is “best practice” as the basis for our supervisory 
activity. This process will not be completed by 4 November, but will rather be further refined 
over the coming years. 
Horizontal analyses and a level playing field 
Another  considerable  advantage  of  European  banking  supervision  will  be  the  possibility  to 
draw  comparisons  across  European  countries  and  to  establish  a  level  playing  field.  The 
banking  sectors  of  many  European  countries  are  dominated  by  a  few  large  banks.  The 
national  supervisory  bodies  were  therefore  faced  with  the  problem  of  having  to  assess 
circumstances on the basis of just one bank, or on that of a very small group of banks. I am 
not  just  thinking  of  the  assessment  of  specific  portfolios  here,  but  also  of  the  early 
identification  of  risks,  which  only  become  visible,  or  are  at  least  easier  to  identify,  in 
horizontal  analysis.  Although  international  working  groups  and  the  European  Banking 
Authority (EBA) have addressed this problem, it is only with the establishment of the SSM 
that a quantum leap forward can be made. The SSM is able to draw on detailed supervisory 
information from across the euro area and prepare comparative analyses. And I am using the 
present  tense  here  on  purpose.  With  the  ongoing  comprehensive  assessment,  we  are 
already  active  at  the  European  level.  With  great  efforts  on  the  part  of  the  authorities  and 
banks  involved,  we  have  submitted  the  assessment  of  the  bank  portfolios  to  a  unified 
assessment scheme. The asset quality review has given us a deeper insight into the banks’ 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  procedures, thereby making it possible for us to check which differences between banks are 
justified and to ascertain where we need to probe critically. We will use the knowledge that 
we  have  obtained  through  the  peer  group  review  for  other  supervisory  activities  as  of  4 
November. Thus far,  these  processes  have  been  carried  out  at the  national  level. We  are 
now going to harmonise them throughout the euro area, thereby making it easier to compare 
the respective risk situations of banks, thus enabling us to target our supervisory activities 
better. 
Federal structure – central decision-making 
Critical voices have warned us in the past about losing sight of the diversity of the European 
banking  sector  and  wanting  to  typify  a  “European”  bank.  I  admit  that,  in  the  process  of 
harmonising  and  centralising  decision-making  powers,  there  is  always  also  a  danger  of 
seeing  everything  at  par.  The  ECB  is,  however,  protected  from  such  developments  by 
institutional  barriers.  As  national  supervisory  authorities  participate  in  the  supervisory 
process,  the  ECB  remains  close  to regional  market  and  banking structures.  Moreover,  the 
ECB’s  staff  will  take  a  keen  look  at  the  business  models  and  risk  profiles  of  each  directly 
supervised bank. The kick-off meetings, which have been taking place since early summer 
between the current supervisors, the ECB and the banks, are simply a first step. 
In this connection, allow me to stress the inherent dangers in supervision not only of being 
too  far  removed,  but  also  of  being  too  close.  Other  viewpoints  and  new  supervisory 
approaches and methods may sharpen our perception and mitigate the danger of accepting 
a  bank’s  unjustified  customs  merely  because  they  have  long  been  familiar  to  us.  The 
comparisons and analyses I referred to earlier will also help to counter this danger. 
But that is not all. We will also address this issue in terms of our staffing policies. The head of 
a Joint Supervisory Team (JST) must come from a different country to the country in which 
the  institution  it  is  supervising  is  established.  In  concrete  terms:  the  head  supervisor  for 
Deutsche Bank will be a French lady; BNP Paribas will be supervised by an Italian man. In 
addition, there will a rotation of staff members among the JSTs. All in all, this will not only 
enable  us  to  reach  more  objective  judgements  about  a  bank,  but  will  also  foster  the 
development of a common supervisory culture. 
Banking supervision in a central bank 
Allow me to say a few words about banking supervision in a central bank. Housing the SSM 
within  the  ECB  will  enable  us  to  benefit  from  synergy  effects.  Exchanges  with  colleagues 
from market operations, payment systems and economic analysis will help the supervisors to 
develop a different viewpoint on current market developments, the importance of a specific 
institution for payments and the economic environment. One area in which cooperation will 
be  particularly  intensive  is  macro-prudential  supervision.  Our  aim  here  is  to  bring  together 
insights  from  both  the  macro-prudential  and  the  micro-prudential  areas,  and  to  address 
undesirable developments in a targeted way. 
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen, the European supervisory landscape is facing a major change. With 
the SSM, we have created a strong, new supervisor at the European level. The SSM will be 
able,  and  have  the  responsibility,  not  to  do  everything  differently,  but  to  do  some  things 
better.  With  the  conclusion  of  the  comprehensive  assessment,  and  the  publication  of  the 
results in the second half of October, and the start of our supervisory activity on 4 November, 
we have a few stressful months ahead of us. But we must also remember to occasionally 
pause for a moment and to reflect beyond the immediate tasks at hand. The SSM may have 
been created as a consequence of, and as a solution to, certain problems in Europe. But it is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  destined to be able to achieve much more and – at least that is my hope – to have an effect 
over and beyond Europe. 
Thank you for your attention. I am now at your disposal for questions. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
