  R Gandhi: Indian banking sector – role in triggering future growth 
Valedictory address by Mr R Gandhi, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
6th ICC Banking Summit, Kolkata, 14 June 2014. 
 Assistance  provided  by  Ms  Rekha  Misra,  Director,  Dr.  Saibal  Ghosh,  Assistant  Adviser  &  Shri  Radheshyam 
Verma, Research Officer is gratefully acknowledged. 
Good evening, Ladies and Gentlemen! 
2.  It  is  both  an  honour  and  a  privilege  to  attend  this  important  Conference  at  the  Indian 
Chamber  of  Commerce  (ICC)  in  Kolkata.  From humble  beginnings  in  the  early  1920s,  the 
ICC  has  come  a  long  way  and  has  presently  evolved  into  a  leading  national  chamber 
operating from Kolkata. With banks being the mainstay of the financial system, I am sure that 
the deliberations in the Conference would have provided important insights to all attendees 
on how the banks’ role is getting re-oriented in the new milieu. The Conference has a healthy 
mix  of  participants  spanning  not  only  representation  from  the  Government  and  eminent 
commercial  bankers,  but  also  people  from  auditing firms  and  general  audience.  I  am  sure 
that this diversified representation would have provided a varied perspective to each of the 
issues being debated and thrown up possible solutions. 
Financial sector and economic growth 
3. Banks’ primary purpose is to mobilize otherwise idle savings for the purpose of lending to 
productive investments. A lot of research work has been undertaken to study the relationship 
between the financial sector and real sector economic growth. The old model of economic 
growth as a function of land i.e. capital, labour, technology and entrepreneurship has been 
modified. The new paradigm of economic growth is that it is a function of savings rate, return 
on investment and cost of intermediation. We can easily see the role and importance of the 
financial sector with regard to all of these three factors. Thus while there is consensus about 
finance having significant impact on the quantity, quality ie productivity and the efficiency of 
capital, jury is still out in determining whether it is the banks or capital market which drives 
economic  growth.  Research  opinions  and  conclusions  are  equally  divided.  Very  often  the 
examples of the United States of America and the United Kingdom are quoted to prove that it 
is  the  capital  market  which  drives  growth.  To  counter  that,  the  examples  of  Germany  and 
Japan are quoted to establish that it is the banks which drive the growth. 
4.  Banks  constitute  the  backbone  of  a  nation’s  financial  system,  performing  manifold 
functions through liquidity, maturity and risk transformation. Indeed, it needs no gainsaying 
that  the  health  of  the  economy  is,  in  a  way,  the  mirror  reflection  of  the  banking  system, 
especially  in  bank-based  financial  systems  such  as  ours.  Of  course,  the  reverse  is  also 
equally true. I am reminded of a saying that a bank is like heart of the human body and the 
capital it provides is akin to the blood in it. So long as the blood circulates seamlessly, the 
organs remain sound and healthy. However, if for any reason, the blood were not supplied to 
any  organ,  then  that  part  would  be  rendered  useless.  Not  surprisingly  therefore,  there  is 
always  a  conscious  attempt  on  the  part  of the Reserve  Bank to  provide  adequate  liquidity 
and credit to all productive sectors of the economy. 
Indian experience 
5. India has the distinction of long history of both banks and capital market. Economic history 
of India narrates how both have been vibrant in many important cities, though Mumbai did 
dominate all others. However, slowly and steadily, especially in the last twenty five years or 
so  after  the  financial  sector  reforms,  the  banking  sector  has  emerged  as  THE  source  for 
investment funding. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   1172 billion and 
 2115 billion and 
 5114 billion by March 2001, 
 39420 billion by March 2011 and 
  5  billion  as  at  end  March  1951,  to 
6. What has been the actual contribution of banks for engineering investments in the Indian 
  13  billion  by 
economy?  Bank  credit  increased from 
 1164 billion by March 
March 1961,   47 billion by March 1971,   254 billion by March 1981, 
1991, 
 52604 billion by 
March  2013. What  has  been  the  contribution  of  capital  market  in  these  years?  During  the 
1970s, while capital market helped raising   10 billion worth of equity, bonds and debentures, 
 207 billion in that period. During the 1980s, the corresponding 
banks extended credit worth 
figures were   233 billion and 
 910 billion. In the 1990s, they were 
 3950 
 34206 billion respectively. In 
billion respectively and in 2000s they were 
the fiscal 2011 and 2012,   318 billion by the capital market and   13284 billion by banks. 
7.  Actually  banks  do  extend funds  by  way  of  investment  in the  bonds  and  debentures.  As 
these are heavily  in government bonds, rather than in those issued by  corporates and the 
split figures are not readily available, I have not included them here. 
8. While we can lament the lackluster performance of the capital market, a redeeming feature 
has been the growth of private placement market in the past twenty years. Though the issues 
thereat had been predominantly in the form of bonds and debentures, the growth in size has 
been very reassuring. It gained popularity from mid 1990s; from 1995–96 to 2000–01, this 
market raised 
 7614 billion and in fiscal 
2011–12 and 1012–13, this market raised   2009 billion. 
9. While we are happy that banks have been doing such a wonderful yeoman service for the 
growth  of the  economy,  will  we  be  happy  to  continue  to  depend  on  bank financing  as the 
predominant mode? Are we compelling the banks take too much risk, thereby endangering 
the depositors’ money? 
10. However, taking note of the predominant position of banks in the Indian financial system 
and taking a realistic view, can we expect the bank finance to comprehensively cater to all 
types  of  investment  needs?  Irrespective  of  whether  it  is  short,  medium  or  long  term,  or 
whether  it  is  loan,  debt  or  equity  financing,  or  it  is  with  low,  medium  or  higher  risk 
propositions?  Should  we  turn  our  banks  like  the  universal  banks  in  Germany,  catering  to 
every type of investment demand of the entire economy? 
11.  Or,  alternatively,  should  we  develop  capital  market  so  that  it  can  cater  the  increasing 
need for investment and also risky investments? Like those in the USA? 
12. These are sets of questions that we need to ponder over and take strategic decisions. 
 752 billion, in the next ten years, it helped raise 
Twelfth plan 
13.  12th  Five  Year  Plan  aims  to  usher  in faster,  more  inclusive  and  sustainable  economic 
growth. It notes that today, India can sustain a GDP growth of 8 percent a year. Increasing 
this to 9 or 10 percent will need more mobilization of investment resources; better allocation 
of these resources through more efficient capital markets; higher investment in infrastructure 
through both public and PPP routes; and more efficient use of public resources. 
14.  Twelfth  Plan  has  ambitious  target  for  investments  to  usher  in  high  growth  rate  of 
 5.4 trillion. The total public 
8 percent during 2012–17. It aims to mobilise resources worth 
sector investment in infrastructure envisaged in the Twelfth Plan is 
 16 trillion by the Centre 
  12.89  trillion  by  the  States.  Investment  by  the  private  sector,  which  includes  PPP 
and 
projects,  makes  up  the  balance  of 
  26.83  trillion,  which  is  48.14  percent  of  the  required 
investment during the Twelfth Plan, a much higher share than the anticipated 36.61 percent 
during the Eleventh Plan. Accordingly the Plan  aims for an eclectic mix of development of 
capital market, more specifically debt market, besides exhorting bank finance. 
15. Being from the Reserve Bank, let me ponder more over banks’ role in the coming years. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Banking sector reforms 
16. Leading economists most often cite the importance of sound financial sector reforms as 
being  central  to  a  healthy  banking  system  that  aids  economic  growth.  India  is  the  largest 
country  in  South  Asia  with  an  extensive  financial  system  characterized  by  varied  financial 
institutions, comprising of both banks and non-banks. Banks are the mainstay of the financial 
system with bank assets comprising, on average, around 70 percent of GDP during the post-
reform  period.  The  commercial  banking  segment  comprises  of  26  public  sector  banks  in 
which government has majority equity stake, 20 private sector, including 7 de novo (which 
became operational after initiation of economic reforms in 1991) private banks, although RBI 
has  recently  done  away  with  this  distinction  and  over  40  foreign  banks,  which  operate  as 
branches. 
17. Prior to the inception of financial sector reforms in 1991, the Indian financial system can 
best be characterized as highly regulated and financially repressed. The prevalence of high 
reserve  requirements,  interest  rate  controls  and  allocation  of  financial  resources  to  pre-
designated sectors adversely affected banks’ resource mobilization and allocation. 
18. The period 1992–97 laid the foundations for reforms in the banking system. The reforms 
comprised  of  five  major  planks:  cautious  and  proper  sequencing,  mutually  reinforcing 
measures, complementarities between banking reforms and other associated policies (e.g., 
monetary,  external,  etc.),  developing  financial  infrastructure  and  nurturing  and  developing 
financial markets. Some of the salient reforms undertaken in the financial system, included, 
among  others,  lowering  of  statutory  reserve  requirements;  liberalizing  the  interest  rate 
regime,  first  on  the  lending  side  and  later,  on  the  deposit  side;  infusing  competition  by 
allowing  more  liberal  entry  of  foreign  banks  and  permitting  the  establishment  of  de  novo 
private  banks;  institution  of  prudential  measures  (capital  adequacy  requirements,  income 
recognition,  asset  classification  and  provisioning  norms  for  loans,  exposure  norms, 
accounting  norms)  and  enhanced  disclosures  and  levels  of  transparency  in  their  annual 
audited statements to promote market discipline. 
19. Over the period of reforms beginning 1992 through 2013, real bank assets have grown at 
a compound annual rate of about 10%; the growth rate of deposits and credit both in real 
terms, during the same period has been roughly of the order of 10% and 12%, respectively. 
20. I am happy to note that the issues deliberated today are those that are likely to shape the 
future of the industry, going forward. I would like to take this opportunity to share with you my 
views  on  some  of  these  and  other  related  concerns,  which,  as  I  see  it,  will  shape  the 
contours of the industry in the years ahead. 
Financing of infrastructure 
21.  The  first  issue,  which  immediately  comes  to  my  mind,  is  the  issue  of  infrastructure 
financing. I am sure that this issue will also be uppermost in your minds as well. Inadequate 
infrastructure  exerts  a  cascading  impact  on  the  economy,  negatively  affecting  productivity, 
employment,  personal  income  and  international  competitiveness  and  costs.  The  12th  Five 
Year  Plan  as  mentioned  earlier  has  estimated  the  infrastructure  requirement  at  around 
INR 56 trillion, with a gradually increasing role for the private sector. Given the limited fiscal 
headroom and the long gestation lags involved in its fructification, there is a need to rope in 
long-term providers of funds. 
Can banks chip in? Yes and in fact has already done so. As the capital market’s significance 
has been waning, bank finance for infrastructure steadily grew. The outstanding bank credit 
to  the  infrastructure  sector,  which  stood  at 
  72  billion  in  1999–2000,  has  increased  to 
 7860 billion  in  2012–13,  registering  a  compounded  annual  growth  rate  (CAGR)  of  over 
40 per cent against an overall CAGR of bank finance to all industries at 20 percent during the 
same period. However, this kind of growth and the general economic downturn and policy 
conundrum have resulted in concentration risk for banks (Infra funding is as high as 15% in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  the banking books); banks are saddled with large scale stress assets in the infra segment. 
Further, there is the structural problem of using short term nature of the bank funds for very 
long term funding. Banks did evolve a midway  solution, of medium tenor funding for 12 to 
15 years. This, though solved the initial problems, is fundamentally a weak arrangement and 
the recent stress period has brought the cracks into open. Banks will have to appropriately 
structure  their  infrastructure  lending keeping  in  view  their  asset-liability  mix;  they  also  may 
have to raise long term resources. They should develop long-tenor fixed rate or floating rate 
products or develop appropriate hedging instruments to tackle counterparty and other risks. 
Takeout finance is another possible solution, as do Infrastructure Debt Funds (IDFs). These 
initiatives are presently at a nascent stage, but hold long-term promise. 
22. Over the longer-term, an efficient and vibrant corporate bond market is a sine qua non for 
ensuring viable financing of infrastructure. By facilitating long-term funding for the sector, it 
can provide much-needed debt capital that will be beneficial to both borrowers and investors 
alike. This will also ensure deep and broad financial markets, one of the key pillars of RBI’s 
financial sector policies. 
Financing of SMEs 
23. A second issue I would like to touch upon is the financing of micro, small and medium 
enterprises or MSMEs, as we call them. In 2011–12, the sector accounted for a significant 
proportion  of  manufactured  output  and  over  12  per  cent  of  our  GDP.  In  addition  to  their 
strong export orientation, they also have a strong employment potential, providing bread- and 
butter to nearly 100 million people, perhaps next only to the agricultural sector. With a big 
chunk  of  them  being  located  in  rural  areas,  it  also  offers  tremendous  potential  for  rural 
development.  Given  their  forward  and  backward  linkages  with  the  corporate  sector,  I  view 
them as “silent” engines of growth, especially in slow economic cycles. 
24.  Numerous  studies  have  documented  that,  given  the  lack  of  reputation  and  tangible 
collateral,  debt  financing,  mostly  from  informal  sources,  comprises  the  primary  source  of 
external  funds  for  these  entities.  Given  the  often  onerous  documentation  requirements  for 
banks,  these  entities  tend  to  get  a  raw  deal  when  it  comes  to  bank  finance.  The  Fourth 
Census  of  MSME  revealed  that  only  5.2  per  cent  of  the  units  (both  registered  and 
unregistered) had availed of finance through institutional sources; the majority of units – 93% 
of them in fact – had either no finance or depended on self-finance. A World Bank Enterprise 
Survey in 2011 also reinforces these conclusions. The moot point is that the credit flow to 
MSMEs  from  institutional  sources  is  not  commensurate  with  the  economic  activity 
undertaken by them. 
25.  A  RBI  Discussion  Paper  in  2013  had  propounded  an  innovative  combination  of  banks 
and  private  equity,  with  a  potential  role  of  state  in  providing  credit  enhancement 
mechanisms/ solutions as a way out of this credit constraint. It also put forth the proposal that 
small banks can provide a useful role by catering to the needs of this segment, for example, 
through relationship banking. 
26.  There  is  also  an  oft-heard  complaint  from  bankers  that  MSMEs  are  often  quite 
lackadaisical  when  it  comes  to  settling  their  dues.  It  needs  to  be  recognised  that  MSMEs 
often  act  as  ancillaries  to  large  industries,  and  their  cash  flows  are  lumpy.  The  business 
orientation  of  large  industries  often  affects  the  MSMEs  directly,  in  turn  hampering  the 
recycling of funds and business operation of MSME units. Banks need to take a proactive 
view,  carefully  analyzing  the  linkages  of  the  MSME  units,  when  sanctioning  funds.  The 
existing provisions of the Interest on Delayed Payment Act, 1998 for these entities have been 
suitably modified taking on board their unique characteristics. In addition, banks have been 
advised to sanction separate sub-limits within the overall limits sanctioned to the corporate 
borrowers for meeting payment obligations in respect of purchases from MSME sector. The 
Parliament  has  passed  the  Factoring  Regulation  Bill  that  is  expected  to  address  delays  in 
payment  and  liquidity  problems  of  micro  and  small  enterprises.  I  am  sure  that  these 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  measures will contribute in no small measure towards alleviating the extant constraints that 
plague this sector. 
Mobilising resources 
27. As we have seen, country needs enormous resources for its development. How do we 
raise them? Banking sector has a major role here, in mobilizing the savings of the people. As 
at end March 2014, the scheduled commercial banks had mobilized deposits to the tune of 
 76  trillion.  There  are  146  scheduled  commercial  banks  (including  the  Regional  Rural 
Banks) in the country, with more than 1.2 lakh branches undertaking this activity. However, 
to support economic growth, we need to reach out more and hence there is a need for more 
banks  to  be  functioning  in  India.  Not  just  more  banks,  perhaps  we  need  more  variety  of 
banks. I am not talking about public, private, foreign bank variety here. I am talking about the 
variety  of  functions  that  they  will  undertake,  the  niche  in  which  they  want  to  excel. 
Accordingly, the Reserve Bank has decided to license more banks. Two licenses we have 
given recently. We intend to offer this on tap basis. We are working on new set of guidelines 
for both full service commercial banks and differentially licensed banks. We hope that with 
more number of players, the banking sector will mobilize more resources for funding faster 
economic growth, will bring in financial inclusion and thereby support inclusive growth in a 
sustainable way. 
Conclusion 
28. I have touched upon several issues that are of contemporary relevance and are expected 
to remain important for quite some time in the near future. Conferences such as these offer a 
platform  for  interchange  of  views  in  a  structured  and  systemic  manner,  whilst  taking  into 
consideration the regional-specific concerns as well. I hope that the organizers will not stop 
at  this  one-off  Conference  and  instead,  will  arrange  follow-up  discussions  to  further  brain 
storm the issues and ensure that the discussions reach their logical conclusion. 
29. Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
