  Andreas Dombret: Financial market regulation – standing still means 
falling behind 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank,  at  the  2014  Alternative  Investor  Conference  of  the  Federal  Association  for 
Alternative  Investments  (Bundesverband  Alternative  Investments),  Frankfurt  am  Main, 
14 May 2014. 
 1 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Thank you very much for inviting me to speak at this year’s Alternative Investor Conference – 
I am delighted to be here today. 
My responsibilities at the Bundesbank have actually changed slightly since I accepted your 
invitation. As you may know, the Bundesbank appointed a new Deputy President, Professor 
Claudia Buch, yesterday, and the distribution of responsibilities within the Executive  Board 
has now changed. After being the board member in charge of financial stability for four years, 
I was assigned responsibility for banking and financial supervision yesterday. 
Ultimately, though, these two areas have the same overarching aim – they simply approach it 
from  different  angles.  Their  objective  is  to  maintain  a  stable  financial  system.  And  the 
business of achieving this aim has not got any easier over the past few years. 
Our world – and, not least, our economy – is becoming more and more interconnected. And 
a global economy can’t function without a global financial system. This makes the financial 
system more important, yet it is ultimately still a means to an end – it is a service provider for 
the real economy. 
In  this  role,  the  financial  system  –  or,  more  precisely,  its  stability  –  is  a  public  good.  As 
economists like to put it, there are external factors at play. If the financial system is thrown off 
balance,  this  also  has  a  negative  impact  on  those  outside  it  –  businesses  in  the  real 
economy or taxpayers, to name two examples. 
That is why it is necessary to regulate the financial system in order to safeguard its stability. 
The need for regulation is beyond dispute: the question is not whether, but how we should 
regulate.  Of  course,  there  are  a  number  of  different  ways  to  approach  the  issue,  but  one 
thing  is  clear:  regulation  isn’t  stationary.  The  financial  system  is  in  constant  flux,  and 
regulation has to keep pace with it. 
Regulatory reform is usually triggered by a crisis – and the recent crisis is no exception. It set 
in  motion  a  fundamental  review  and  reform  of  financial  market  regulation.  Work  on  this 
reform  began  at  a global  level  in  2008,  and  it  is  still  underway.  Many  important measures 
have been agreed, and some have already been implemented. Yet certain areas still need a 
lot  more  work.  I  would  like  to  discuss  two  of  these  issues  here  today:  the  “too  big  to  fail” 
problem and the shadow banking sector. 
Still “too big to fail”? 
2 
The “too big to fail” problem was a key factor in the recent crisis, and it still isn’t completely 
solved. But first let’s take a look at the essence of this problem. 
Participants in the financial system are highly interconnected. If a bank runs into trouble, this 
will also affect its counterparties. And if the bank in question is particularly large or has an 
especially high number of counterparties, its woes can destabilise the entire financial system. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  We  saw  how  devastating  this  scenario  can  be  in  2008,  when  Lehman  Brothers  became 
insolvent. 
In such cases, the state may have no option but to bail out the distressed bank in order to 
prevent an escalation of the crisis. Such bail-outs are, of course, extremely costly; in 2010, 
Ireland was obliged to spend more than 30% of its annual GDP on bail-outs for stricken Irish 
banks. And these costs are ultimately borne by none other than the taxpayer. 
But this policy not only comes at a cost to the taxpayer; at a deeper level, it also changes the 
structure  of  the  financial  system.  Large  and  interconnected  banks  enjoy  an  implicit  state 
guarantee. If they run into difficulties, they can always count on the state bailing them out – 
they are “too big”, “too interconnected” or simply “too important” to fail. 
This encourages large and interconnected banks to enter into high-risk transactions. If these 
transactions are successful, the bank will reap the benefits; if they make a loss, the taxpayer 
may  ultimately  have  to  foot  the  bill.  Large  and  interconnected  banks  therefore  intrinsically 
pose a risk to financial stability. At the same time, this is precisely why they engage in such 
risk-taking in the first place – which all makes for a dangerous feedback loop. 
So  how  can  regulation  help?  One  option  would  be  to  prevent  large  banks  from  becoming 
distressed in the first place. Notably, the new Basel III capital requirements are an important 
step in this process. But can they rule out bank failures altogether? And should we even try 
to do so? 
My answer to both of those questions is a resounding “no”. Of course we can’t rule out bank 
failures entirely, and nor should we try. The possibility of a market exit is fundamental to any 
market economy. Failed business models must make way for better ones, in the process that 
Schumpeter famously described as “creative destruction”. 
What  we  need  are  mechanisms  that  allow  even  big  banks  to  fail  without  destabilising  the 
entire financial system. Only then will banks face the real threat of a market exit; only then 
will we eliminate their implicit state guarantee; and only then will banks have an incentive to 
be risk-aware in their actions. 
Without these kinds of mechanisms, we cannot solve the “too big to fail” problem. And there 
is still a good deal left to be done, as the markets themselves acknowledge. Recent studies 
by the IMF and the OECD show that the markets still assume that, if push came to shove, 
the state would not let big banks go under. And it’s true that there are two problems relating 
to credible resolution mechanisms which have yet to be resolved. 
First, resolution mechanisms are inherently complex – especially those for big banks, which 
tend  to  operate  globally.  They  often  have  dozens  of  branches  spread  across  numerous 
countries. To be able to resolve a bank of this kind, we need international cooperation that is 
built on solid legal foundations. We have now taken some initial steps towards this goal – 
through the Financial Stability Board principles at an international level and the agreement to 
create a Single Resolution Mechanism at a European level. Even so, there is still a long road 
ahead of us. 
Second,  each  bank  resolution  throws  up  the  same  question:  who  should  bear  the  costs? 
When a bank is resolved, there have to be sufficient resources available to absorb losses. 
These resources – known as “gone concern loss absorbing capacity”, or “GLAC” – should be 
sufficient  to  allow  the  failed  bank  to  be  resolved.  In  other  words,  GLAC  should  help  to 
recapitalise viable components of the failed bank, or a bridge bank. The aim is to preserve 
the bank’s critical functions while avoiding a government bailout or turmoil on the financial 
markets. 
GLAC  should  become  to  the  “gone  concern”  scenario  what  the  Basel  III  regime  is  to  the 
“going concern” scenario. And for both we need internationally binding minimum standards 
which are mutually compatible. The Basel III capital standards have already been approved, 
whereas a minimum standard for GLAC is currently under development. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Parallel banking – there is no light without shadow 
3 
Ladies and gentlemen, we haven’t yet crossed the finishing line in our quest to solve the “too 
big to fail” problem. But that is not the only area which needs a lot more work. If we want to 
safeguard  financial  stability  in  future,  regulators  will  need  to  set  their  sights  beyond  the 
banking system – to the shadow banking system. 
But  I  have  my  reservations  about  the  term  “shadow  banking  system”.  The  word  “shadow” 
usually  conjures  up  images  of  unsavoury,  shady  activities.  And  that  is  in  no  way  a  fair 
description of the shadow banking system. 
Still, there’s no denying that we have too little data on the shadow banking system, which 
means that we don’t have quite as clear a picture of it as we do of other parts of the financial 
system. 
In addition, the shadow banking system is in constant flux: innovations shift its boundaries; 
activities and participants come and go. To regulate the shadow banking system, we need a 
definition that does justice to these changes. 
The Financial Stability Board has therefore opted to define the shadow banking system fairly 
broadly as “the system of credit intermediation that involves entities and activities outside the 
regular  banking  system”.  Put  simply,  this  definition  covers  bank-like  entities  and  bank-like 
activities which are not subject to banking regulation. 
Examples  of  shadow  banking  entities  include  money  market  funds,  hedge  funds,  asset 
management companies and financial vehicle corporations. Fittingly, their business is often 
described  as  “non-bank  banking”  or  “parallel  banking”.  Examples  of  shadow  banking 
activities include securitisations, securities lending and repos. 
Despite the blurred and constantly shifting boundaries, we can attempt to estimate the size of 
the shadow banking system. The Financial Stability Board, for instance, puts the figure for 
assets under management in the shadow banking system at US$71 trillion. That would make 
the shadow banking system about half as big as the regular banking system. However, this 
global  aggregate  does  not  capture  major  regional  differences.  For  example,  in  the  United 
States the shadow banking system is about 175% the size of the regular banking system, 
whilst the ratio in Germany is only around 25%. 
As  well  as  the  size  of  the  shadow  banking  system,  its rate  of growth  also  varies  between 
regions. In 2012, the system saw its sharpest expansion in emerging market economies, with 
China  recording  the  fastest  growth  worldwide.  By  contrast,  the  German  shadow  banking 
system  grew  comparatively  slowly.  Overall,  the  global  shadow  banking  system  has  grown 
rapidly in recent years: between 2002 and 2012, its assets under management expanded by 
US$45 trillion. 
This growth could continue into the future. For instance, more stringent regulation of banks 
may  cause  activities  to  migrate  to  an  increasing  extent  into  shadow  banking  –  what  is 
referred to as regulatory arbitrage. 
However,  it  would  be  wrong  to  attribute  the  growth  of  the  shadow  banking  system  to 
regulatory  arbitrage  alone.  Growth  is  also  being  driven  by  demand  for  the  specialised 
products and services offered by the system. Institutional investors in particular make use of 
shadow  banking  products  –  such  as  repo  trades  –  as  an  alternative  to  traditional  bank 
deposits. 
In consequence, the effects of shadow banking on financial stability are not entirely clear. On 
the one hand, the system undeniably fulfils an economic role: it offers alternative sources of 
funding  to  enterprises  in  the  real  economy  as  well  as  to  banks,  thereby  adding  to 
diversification  and  specialisation.  In  general,  that  enhances  both  the  efficiency  and  the 
resilience of the financial system. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  On the other hand, the shadow banking system also harbours risks. If activities are shifted 
into shadow banking as a result of regulatory arbitrage, then the concomitant risks are shifted 
too  –  and  thus  sometimes  moved  out  of  reach  of  the  regulatory  access  that  is  actually 
needed. 
However,  the  shadow  banking  system  may  be  a  source  of  risks  other  than  those  deriving 
from  regulatory  arbitrage.  Shadow  banking  participants  undertake  maturity  and  liquidity 
transformation, they engage in the transfer of credit risk, and they operate with leverage. This 
means  they  carry  out  a  range  of  bank-like  functions  which  are  associated  with  bank-like 
risks.  At  the  same  time,  however,  there  are  two  key  differences  compared  to  the  regular 
banking system. First, shadow banking participants and activities are not subject to banking 
regulation. Second, shadow banking participants have no access to central bank liquidity, nor 
do they benefit from public backstops such as deposit insurance schemes. 
The consequence of this structure is a latent risk of runs on shadow banking participants. A 
run may lead to liquidity bottlenecks which can only be cleared by rapid deleveraging. That in 
turn may contribute to a collapse in prices on the financial markets, and thus exacerbate the 
problems in procyclical fashion. At the same time, the structure of many of the transactions 
conducted  in  the  shadow  banking  system  means  that  the  participants  are  closely 
interconnected. Thus, contagion effects within the system are highly likely. 
These systemic risks within the shadow banking system may then spill over into the regular 
banking  system.  The  latter  is  linked  to  the  shadow  banking  system  through  a  number  of 
channels. Partly this is because banks are directly involved in shadow banking. At the same 
time, many banks are connected indirectly to the system through liquidity facilities, claims on 
shadow banking participants and common exposures in individual markets. 
Thus, the shadow banking system may well be a source of systemic risk. Accordingly, it is 
very  high  up  the  G20  reform  agenda.  In  November  2010,  the  G20  asked  the  Financial 
Stability  Board  and  other  international  standard setters to  develop  approaches  to  ensuring 
better supervision and regulation of the shadow banking system. 
In this connection, let me be absolutely clear: the purpose of regulation is not to proscribe 
shadow banking activities or to drive participants out of the market when such activities and 
participants  engender  no  systemic  risk.  The  sole  aim  of  regulation  is  to  put  a  brake  on 
systemic risk. 
There are essentially two approaches: a direct one and an indirect one. Indirect regulation is 
aimed  at the regular  banking  system  and tries  to  keep  a  check  on  its  links  to the  shadow 
banking  system.  Direct  regulation,  on  the  other  hand,  takes  direct  aim  at  shadow  banking 
participants and activities. 
In  terms  of  indirect regulation,  some  progress  has  been  made  in  the reforms  to the  Basel 
framework. For instance, capital requirements for various connections to the shadow banking 
system  were  increased  –  including  for  risks  arising  from  securitisation  and  from  liquidity 
facilities for securitisation vehicles. In addition, banking supervisory liquidity ratios may help 
to  stem  systemic  risk  –  where  macroprudential  considerations  are  factored  into  defining 
them. 
Money market funds constitute one example of direct regulation of participants. US money 
market funds in particular bear a strong resemblance to banks. For investors, there is very 
little difference between these funds and a bank account – including access to cash at ATMs. 
The  main  problem  comes  with  money  market  funds  which  operate  with  constant  share 
values, such that investor deposits have a constant value. With funds like this, losses are not 
distributed evenly across all investors. Instead, a “first come first served” rule applies. Those 
who withdraw their deposits first get back the full amount, while those who act too late have 
to  accept  corresponding  losses.  This  rule  makes  such  money  market  funds  susceptible  to 
runs. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Therefore,  a  shift  to  money  market  funds  which  operate  with  variable  share  values  is  an 
important step in making the sector more stable – in these funds, losses are shared evenly 
by shareholders. Regulatory proposals in this regard have now been published in both the 
United  States  and  Europe.  However,  these  are  focused  on  alternative  measures  such  as 
capital cushions, liquidity charges and delayed withdrawal for funds with a variable valuation. 
These initiatives are to be welcomed, but an obligatory shift to variable share valuation would 
be better. 
An  example  of  direct  regulation  of  activities  is  that  applying  to  securities  financing 
transactions.  In  these  transactions,  a  German  bank,  for  instance,  provides  a  UK-based 
hedge fund with short-term financing against collateral in the form of securities. In a liquid 
market, this type of transaction can contribute to a procyclical build-up of leverage. Since the 
securities  furnished  as  collateral  are  generally  used  several  times  over,  this  creates  long 
chains of transactions involving many different participants – participants in both the shadow 
banking  system  and 
the  degree  of 
interconnectedness within the financial system, increasing the risk of contagion effects. To 
counter this  risk, the  European  Commission  put  forward  a  proposal for a  regulation  at  the 
end of January. Under the proposed rules, securities would only be reusable if the provider of 
collateral agreed to it. These moves to put a brake on systemic risk in the securities financing 
markets are without doubt a step in the right direction. 
the  regular  banking  system.  This  adds 
to 
4 
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen 
The  financial  system  needs  appropriate  regulation  so  that  it  can  function  as  a  reliable 
provider  of  services  to  the  real  economy.  The  crisis  laid  bare  a  number  of  gaps  in  the 
regulatory framework applying to the financial system, gaps which we now need to close. 
We have already come a long way in this, but we have not yet reached the goal. We cannot 
allow  ourselves  to  come  to  a  standstill,  either  with  regard to  the  too-big-to-fail  problem,  or 
with respect to the shadow banking system and other issues still requiring more work. 
Standing still would  in fact mean falling behind, because the financial system is constantly 
changing. Thus, regulation is aiming at a target which is forever receding. And that is a good 
reason  to  make  progress  somewhat  more  swiftly  –  regardless  of  whether  we  are  talking 
about regulation from the point of view of banking supervision or in terms of financial stability. 
Thank you very much.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
