Peter Praet: Current issues and challenges for central bank 
communication 
Speech by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at 
the conference “The ECB and Its Watchers XV”, Frankfurt am Main, 12 March 2014. 
 Summary 
Communication is always key for effective monetary policy-making, and the benefits of good 
communication are greatly increased in difficult times, says ECB Board member Peter Praet. 
Speaking at a conference of ECB watchers at Frankfurt he emphasises that central banks 
have been communicating more intensely during the crisis and by steering expectation more 
firmly  their  communication  have  had  a  stabilising  effect.  “We  communicate  what  we  are 
trying  to  achieve,  and  how  we  go  about  achieving  it”,  Mr  Praet  says.  Notably,  forward 
guidance has emerged as a useful complement to existing tools, he adds. 
The introduction of Outright Monetary Transactions is according to Mr Praet an example of 
how communication added to the effectiveness of monetary policy tools. The ECB reaffirmed 
its commitment to the price stability mandate, as the pricing-in of unwarranted denomination 
scenarios could be a potential serious obstacle to fulfilling the mandate. He adds, “The OMT 
communication  –  unusual  as  it  was  in  substance,  for  the  ECB  and  probably  for  the  entire 
community of central banks – was in fact strictly coherent with our general communication 
approach. It was a well-articulated frame of reference for our actions.” 
Until  now  the  ECB  has  resisted  publishing  accounts  of  the  Governing  Council  meetings, 
Mr Praet states. One reason was according to him, that offering even more information on 
the ECB’s policy deliberations, in addition to what was already being provided, would come 
at the expense of clarity. On the other hand, publishing an account of the policy deliberations 
has now become “best practice” in the central banking community. Moreover, circumstances 
have  changed,  economic  uncertainty  has  increased  and  the  tools  used  now  include  non-
standard measures. He highlighted: “It is important for us to provide the public with a fuller 
picture of the internal debate: we need to explain ourselves better.” To avoid a “cacophony 
problem”, with many voices tending to obscure the message, Mr Praet says he would favour 
to  convey  the  content  of  the  debate  and  the  balance  of  views  of  Governing  Council 
members. 
Mr Praet concludes by explaining that the value of clarity in central bank communication is 
particularly evident in a financial crisis. He emphasises, “But communication – no matter how 
clear – only works if the communicator is credible. The ECB has a track record of following 
up words with deeds, and we intend to maintain it.” 
 
 Ladies and Gentlemen1, 
The  last  ‘’ECB  and  its Watchers’’  conference  took  place  in  June  2012.  On  that  occasion I 
talked about heterogeneity across euro area countries, which was indeed a burning issue at 
that time, when fractures were running along national borders within the euro area and the 
integrity of the euro area itself was threatened. Today, almost two years on, the situation has 
improved  distinctly.  Markets  are  slowly  but  consistently  re-integrating.  Production  and 
                                                
1 
I would like to thank Arthur Saint-Guilhem and Spyros Andreopoulos for their contribution in the preparation of 
this speech. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
incomes are growing again and growth is spreading visibly to the most stressed parts of our 
Union. And our Union has expanded in the meantime, a sign that the euro project remains an 
anchor for the future of many Europeans once on the outskirts of the Continent. 
But  the  necessary  institutional  transition  –  which  is  re-shaping  and  reinforcing  the 
architecture  of  monetary  union  –  is  still  proceeding.  The  central  bank  has  been 
accomplishing  its  objective  in  a  weak  institutional  environment,  which  did  not  facilitate  its 
task.  The  monetary  union  is  composed  of  18  independent  states,  with  important  internal 
imbalances  and  with  different  historical  backgrounds  which  shape  their  diverse  policy 
priorities. For some, a central bank managing the aftermath of the great contraction is doing 
too little. For other, we are too bold and experimental. Our policy aim is clearly price stability 
for the euro area as a whole. Several times over the past years we have been confronted 
with economic and financial developments that had the potential, if not addressed forcefully, 
to compromise price stability for the euro area as a whole. We had to act, to take decisions, 
and to communicate these decisions to the public in a clear and coherent manner. In doing 
so we were not alone, as several central banks have used communication more intensively 
as an instrument of crisis control. 
Monetary  policy  communication  is  never  easy:  one  has  to  find  the  right  vocabulary  to 
communicate to a wide audience notions and content that are not immediately intuitive but 
highly relevant for the lives of many people. Monetary policy communication to a community 
of peoples as diverse as the euro area’s is even more challenging. This will be the subject of 
my thoughts today. 
Put “central bank communication” into a search engine, you get millions of results; clearly, 
there  is  a  lot  of  communication  about  how  central  bankers  communicate  these  days.  For 
good reason. 
Communication  is  always  key  for  effective  monetary  policy-making.  This  is  true  in  normal 
times,  but the  benefits  of good  communication  are greatly  increased  in  difficult  times.  And 
yet, we should also be aware of the limits of communication. It is no substitute for action. In 
this, as in many other things, central banks are no different to anybody else: if warranted by 
the  circumstances,  they  need  to  follow  up  words  with  actions,  thereby  validating  earlier 
communication. Ultimately, this is the only way to maintain the credibility we need to achieve 
our price stability mandate. 
The role of central bank communication 
Let me start with the role of central bank communication in general. 
Successful monetary policy  is not only about controlling a very short-term interest rate but 
also – some would even say first and foremost – about affecting expectations of how those 
rates will evolve.2 Those expectations matter because they influence the maturity spectrum 
of  interest  rates  and,  through  that  channel,  the  investment  and  saving  decisions  which 
determine  economic  growth.  Therefore,  by  influencing  expectations  of  future  short-term 
interest  rates,  a  central  bank  can  ensure  that  its  monetary  policy  decisions  are  well 
transmitted along the yield curve and to the broader economy3. 
                                                
2  On  the  role  of  expectations  for  monetary  policy,  see  Woodford,  M.,  Interest  and  Prices:  Foundations  of  a 
Theory of Monetary Policy, Princeton University Press, 2003. For evidence on the role of the future path of 
policy,  see  Gürkaynak,  R.S.,  Sack,  B.  and  Swanson,  E.,  “Do  Actions  Speak  Louder  Than  Words?  The 
Response  of  Asset  Prices  to  Monetary  Policy  Actions  and  Statements”,  International  Journal  of  Central 
Banking, Vol. 1(1), May 2005, pp. 52–93. 
3  On the importance of communication for monetary policy, see Woodford, M., “Central Bank Communication 
and  Policy  Effectiveness”,  paper  presented  at  the  FRB  Kansas  City  Symposium  on  “The  Greenspan  Era: 
Lessons  for  the  Future”,  August  2005.  See  also  Issing,  O.,  “Communication,  Transparency,  Accountability: 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
feeds 
future  policy  rates, 
thereby  strengthening 
into  expectations  about 
How do central banks steer expectations in practice? Essentially with two key elements: one 
is clarity about their objective and the other is clarity about their monetary policy strategy to 
achieve that objective. These two elements help to create a certain degree of transparency 
about the central bank’s reaction function. This transparency can be further enhanced if the 
central bank lays out openly its assessment of the likely future evolution of the economy and 
the  risks  surrounding  it.  Based  on  these  ingredients  the  public  should  under  normal 
circumstances be able to develop over time a relatively good sense of how the central bank 
will react in a given circumstance. As a result, monetary policy becomes more predictable. 
This 
the 
effectiveness of monetary policy. Notice that the communication of a clear inflation objective 
–  defined  in  numerical  terms  –  is  a  critical  part  of  this  mutual  understanding  between  the 
central  bank  and  its  public,  because  it  provides  an  anchor  for  inflation  expectations.  The 
importance  of  a  credible  inflation  anchor  cannot  be  emphasised  enough:  it  contributes  to 
stabilising  inflation  dynamics  and  it  thereby  helps  the  central  bank  to  achieve  its  inflation 
objective. 
In  normal  times,  by  explaining  their  current  decisions,  central  banks  provide  sufficient 
information  for  the  public  to  anticipate  their  future  decisions,  taking  into  account  the 
economic outlook and its likely impact on the policy orientation. But in a financial crisis, this 
may  not  be  enough.  Especially  when  entering  uncharted  policy  territory  –  for  example, 
around the interest rate lower bound – it may be more difficult for the public to anticipate with 
any  precision  future  economic  conditions.  Also,  in  a  financial  crisis,  arbitrage  in  financial 
markets – a key mechanism that ensures a swift transmission of policy decisions throughout 
the inter-temporal chain of market prices – is impaired. Market participants need capital in 
order to be able to take positions that aid intertemporal transmission. But capital is scarce in 
times of financial stress. 
Dispersion of expectations concerning the state of the economy and the degraded efficiency 
of  the  financial  industry  make  the  formation  of  longer-term  interest  rates  an  uncertain  and 
noisy  process  in  crises. This  puts  a  premium  on  clear  communication  regarding  the  policy 
orientation.  And  in  fact,  during  the  crisis,  central  banks  have  been  communicating  more 
intensively and, in some cases, have expanded their communication toolkit. Notably, forward 
guidance has emerged as a useful complement to existing tools and several of the world’s 
major central banks have adopted it. This guidance consists of conditional communication on 
the  future  path  of  policy  instruments,  in  most  cases  policy  rates.  In  times  of  crisis,  such 
guidance can help to eliminate one potential factor contributing to the overall environment of 
heightened uncertainty. Moreover, it allows an alignment of the public’s policy expectations 
with the central bank’s policy intentions. 
Moving from  theory  to  practice:  Has  central  bank  communication  been  an  effective  tool  to 
strengthen  monetary  policy  during  the  crisis?  A  preliminary  assessment  suggests  that 
enhanced communication has generally served central banks well in dealing with exceptional 
developments, including policy rates approaching the lower bound4. By steering expectations 
more  firmly,  central  banks’  communication  initiatives  have  had  a  stabilising  effect,  thereby 
enhancing the effectiveness of monetary policy. But to be effective, communication has to be 
followed by actual decisions, if and when the circumstances require them. Actions consistent 
with  communication  are  only  possible  if  the  latter  is  in  turn  consistent  with  the  ultimate 
                                                                                                                                                   
Monetary Policy in the Twenty-First Century”, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, Vol. 87 (2, part 1), 
2005, pp. 65–83. 
4  See,  for  example,  Gilchrist  S.,  Lopez-Salido,  D.  and  Zakrajsek,  E.,  “Monetary  Policy  and  Real  Borrowing 
Costs at the Zero Lower Bound”, Finance and Economics Discussion Series, Vol. 3, Federal Reserve Board, 
2014. See also Femia, K., Friedman, S. and Sack, B., “The Effects of Policy Guidance on Perceptions of the 
Fed’s  Reaction  Function”,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  Staff  Report,  No.  652,  2013.  See  also 
Campbell, J.R., Evans, C.L., Fisher, J.D.M. and Justiniano, A., “Macroeconomic Effects of Federal Reserve 
Forward Guidance”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, spring 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
objective  and  strategy  of  the  central  bank.  Otherwise,  the  central  bank  either  risks  not 
following up on the communication or, if it does follow up, it runs the risk of not meeting its 
objective. In either case, hard-won credibility may be lost. This can be avoided by steering 
clear  of  making  unconditional  commitments  about  future  policy  action,  but  by  always 
emphasising the conditional nature of any guidance. These conditions should be derived in a 
consistent manner from the central bank’s mandate and strategy. 
The ECB’s approach to communication 
Let me now turn to the ECB’s approach to communication. 
Our approach starts from the premise that the central bank doesn’t have superior knowledge 
about  how  the  world  works.  Nor  are  we  likely  to  have  better  forecasting  abilities  than  the 
majority of observers. So what we can do is to provide an explicit, well-articulated frame of 
reference for our actions. This is provided by the Governing Council’s quantitative definition 
of price stability, together with our stability-oriented monetary policy strategy – in short: we 
communicate what we are trying to achieve, and how we go about achieving it. In practical 
terms,  this  means  that  communication  revolves  around  providing  a  narrative  about  the 
economy and the outlook for price stability relative to our objective. The ECB has established 
various channels through which this communication effectively reaches the whole of the euro 
area. These channels include the President’s press conferences, speeches by members of 
the  Governing  Council  and  the  different  official  publications,  which  are  translated  into  the 
official  languages  of  the  European  Union.  These  were  our  main  communication  channels 
before the crisis, and they continued to play an important role during the crisis. 
However,  like  other  central  banks,  we  have  seen  that  in  turbulent  times  it  was  useful  to 
strengthen our communication. In particular, clarity of communication has been essential. 
It’s  not  to  say  that  clarity  suddenly  became  a  new  principle  of  communication  during  the 
crisis. From the very beginning, we have insisted on improving the clarity – as opposed to the 
mere  quantity  –  of  our  communication.5  But  the  recent  experience  has  shown  that  what 
constitutes clarity under normal circumstances may not be enough in more uncertain times. 
Let me highlight three instances where we found it useful to go beyond the standard clarity of 
our communication in order to achieve our price stability objective. 
The first time, in the summer of 2012, we were faced with a severe tail risk that did not just 
pose downside risks to price stability, but actually threatened the very integrity of the euro 
area. Financial markets were rife with talk about the so-called “redenomination risk”. Spreads 
in  some  stressed  jurisdictions  increased  to  levels  that  were  difficult  to  justify  by  the 
underlying  fundamentals.  As  a  result,  there  were  clear  risks  to  the  singleness  of  the 
monetary  policy  of  the  ECB,  aggravating  an  already  impaired  transmission  mechanism.  In 
response, we used our communication to “draw a line in the sand”: we had to clarify that we 
would do “whatever it takes” to deliver on our price stability mandate. This was followed up 
with  further  decisions  and  communication  on  how  concretely,  in  our  view,  the  necessary 
“whatever” could materialise at that particular juncture: the Outright Monetary Transactions 
(OMT) programme. What did we do? Effectively, we reaffirmed our full commitment to our 
price stability mandate. In addition, we said that we considered the pricing-in of unwarranted 
denomination scenarios as a potential serious obstacle to fulfilling our mandate and that we 
would therefore take appropriate action. 
The OMT communication – unusual as it was in substance, for the ECB and probably for the 
entire  community  of  central  banks  –  was  in  fact  strictly  coherent  with  our  general 
                                                
5 
I am referring here to the Buiter-Issing debate. See Buiter, W. (1999), “Alice in Euroland”, CEPR Policy Paper 
No. 1; and Issing, O. (1999), “The Eurosystem: Transparent and Accountable or ‘Willem in Euroland’.” CEPR 
Policy Paper No. 2. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
communication approach. It was a well-articulated frame of reference for our actions. And it 
was conditional. Two elements stand out. First, the policy was specifically directed at pricing 
out  that  particular  financial  premium  which  was  compensating  for  risks  of  a  break-up  of 
monetary union. The “whatever it takes” had its limits in this specific objective of the policy 
initiative.  Second,  conditionality  was  intentionally  an  integral  part  of  the  design  of  the 
programme.  Any  intervention  by  central  banks  which  have  been  assigned  a  price  stability 
mandate has to take place in an environment where the solvency of counterparts is ensured. 
When we lend to banks, the supervisory solvency framework applies to our counterparties. 
With  OMTs,  this  solvency  framework  would  not  have  applied,  because  the  issuer  of  the 
securities  is  sovereign.  So,  making  OMT  interventions  conditional  on  a  supranational 
surveillance framework that can monitor and safeguard the solvency of sovereigns – if and 
when this cannot be taken for granted – was a precondition for our action. 
OMTs have been effective in restoring market functioning and confidence in the integrity of 
the euro area. In the period following the OMT announcement, tensions in sovereign bond 
markets subsided, supported also by policies at the national level. 
Before OMT there was a high dispersion in the response of lending rates to reduction in the 
MRO rate. In some cases lending rates actually increased following cuts in the MRO. After 
OMT,  the  pass  through  has  been  more  homogenous  across  countries  and  lending  rates 
actually  decreased.  The  response  to  the  November  cut  may  suggest  more  uniform  pass-
through.  Overall  there  is  evidence  that  OMT  has  favoured  a  reduction  in  financial 
fragmentation over time. 
A second instance that helps to illustrate the importance of enhanced communication was in 
the  context  of  our fixed  rate full  allotment  procedure.  In  May  2013  we  announced  that  we 
would extend the minimum horizon for this procedure until July 2014; in November 2013, this 
was  further  extended  for  as  long  as  necessary,  and  at  least  until  July  2015.  This  form  of 
forward reassurance provided banks with some certainty about their Eurosystem funding for 
as  long  as  necessary,  and  therefore  especially  in  conditions  of  renewed  turbulence.  This 
reassurance  has  also  helped  ease  concerns  about  the  expiration  of  the  two  three-year 
operations. 
A  third  occasion  when  communication  mattered  was  during  last  summer,  when  we  were 
facing  pronounced  volatility  in  the  money  market  forward  curve  which  threatened  to 
undermine  our  accommodative  monetary  policy  stance. We  succeeded  in  narrowing  down 
market expectations regarding the path of our instruments. In other words, we clarified our 
reaction function by including forward guidance in our communication. 
More precisely, on 4 July 2013 the Governing Council stated that it expected “the key ECB 
interest  rates  to  remain  at  present  or  lower  levels  for  an  extended  period  of  time”.  This 
qualitative statement about the likely evolution of policy interest rates was complemented by 
a narrative describing the macroeconomic conditions on which this guidance was based and 
which  would  effectively  determine  the  length  of  the  “extended  period”.  More  precisely,  the 
Governing Council explained that its expectation was based on “the overall subdued outlook 
for  inflation  extending  into  the  medium  term,  given  the  broad-based  weakness  of  the 
economy and subdued monetary dynamics”. This conditionality of the guidance ensures full 
consistency  with  the  ECB’s  strategy  and  mandate  and  thus  ultimately  guarantees  its 
credibility. 
Note a difference between our approach to verbal communication regarding the conditional 
path of our instrument and the approach taken by other central banks. Our main motivation 
was to regain control of the short-term segment of the money market in conditions in which 
that market  was  being  influenced  by  expectations  and  external  factors  that  we  considered 
misaligned  with  our  monetary  policy  inclinations.  In  other  words,  the  stance  of  policy  was 
considered appropriate, given the outlook for price stability prevailing at the time. But the way 
the stance was reflected in market prices had become subject to shocks that we wanted to 
minimise. Unlike other central banks, we had not reached the lower bound and the intention 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
was not to inject further doses of monetary stimulus. We wanted to prevent the stimulus that 
had been introduced from being removed by excess market price volatility. 
But that was not all: let me stress that we have followed up words with actions. In line with 
the Governing Council’s forward guidance, in particular its easing bias, we cut interest rates 
in  November  2013  when  risks  to  price  stability  materialised.  In  addition,  last  week  we 
confirmed and – at the same time – updated our formulation in view of the evolving outlook 
for  price  stability.  While  staff  forecasts  gave  us  indications  that  we  are  gradually  moving 
closer  to  2%  inflation  over  the  medium  term,  we  wanted  to  reassert  our  assessment  that 
upside pressures to inflation will continue to be dampened by a large amount of economic 
slack, and by a weakened capacity of banks to create liquidity and credit for the economy. 
Because  of  the  significant  amount  of  unutilised  capacity,  our  monetary  policy  stance  will 
remain as it is – with interest rates staying at the present or lower levels – even as we see 
improvements  in  the  economy.  Once  more,  forward  guidance  has  been  the  vehicle  for  a 
more precise articulation of the Governing Council’s thinking regarding the economy and the 
risks that surround our objective going forward. Once more, we followed up on the pledge we 
have consistently made in the past eight months since forward guidance was offered for the 
first time: we will keep updating our perception of the economic horizon, and will keep the 
public informed about our intentions, conditional on that outlook. 
Let me illustrate how the ECB’s forward guidance has helped us to regain tighter control over 
market conditions and align them better with our own assessment. 
First,  starting  from  the  low  level  reached  after  the  May  2013  rate  cut,  the  money  market 
curve shifted upward following the tapering discussions. After the announcement of forward 
guidance on 4 July 2013 the money market curve flattened and shifted down, with forward 
rates declining by around five basis points at maturities beyond six months. In the months 
thereafter,  the  curve  steepened  and  reached  a  new  high  in  September  2013,  before 
flattening  again,  in  particular  as  a  consequence  of  the  November  rate  cut,  which  has 
effectively strengthened our forward guidance by following up on our communication when it 
was  warranted  by  circumstances.  More  recently,  the  forward  curve  has  overall  remained 
close to the level reached after the May 2013 interest rate decision for maturities of up to two 
years. 
Second, there was a lasting decline in market uncertainty about the path of future short-term 
interest  rates.  Implied  densities  extracted  from  EURIBOR  options  and  used  to  gauge 
expectations of the forward OIS rate show that the dispersion of short-term rate expectations 
has declined from the elevated levels observed at the end of June 2013 to a level closer to 
that observed in early May 2013, after the interest rate cut. Third, since the announcement of 
forward  guidance  the  sensitivity  of  money  market  forward  rates  to  macroeconomic  data 
releases  has  declined  from  the  high  levels  reached  in  June  2013  and  become  more 
consistent with historical averages. 
Overall, this evidence suggests that forward guidance has helped to provide greater clarity 
and  transparency  on  the  monetary  policy  orientation,  conditional  on  the  outlook  for  price 
stability. 
Now,  you  may  ask,  what  do  OMTs,  forward  guidance  and  other  instruments  have  in 
common? One thing, essentially: they can only work if we are credible. 
And they have served us well – thanks to the clarity of our communication, but also to the 
credibility we have established over the years. In a way, our communication during the crisis 
can be seen as a promise to deliver on our mandate, no matter what. 
But  what  I  said  so  far  does  not  mean  our  communication  framework  is  perfect  –  there  is 
always  room  for  improvement.  So  looking  ahead,  we  should  ask  ourselves:  how  we  can 
improve our communication? 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Publication of policy deliberations 
As  you  know,  at  the  ECB  we  have  been  discussing  publishing  some  kind  of  record  or 
“accounts”  of  our  Governing  Council  meetings.  What,  and  how  much,  of  our  policy 
deliberations  should  we  publish?  These  questions  are  very  much  part  of  this  old  debate 
about our communication I mentioned before. So I think this is a good time to give you an 
update of our thinking on this issue. 
It is true that until now we have resisted publishing such accounts. One reason was that we 
felt that offering even more information on our policy deliberations, in addition to what was 
already being provided, for example, by the President’s press conferences, would come at 
the expense of clarity. In technical jargon, it would diminish, rather than increase, the “signal-
to-noise ratio”. A second reason was that we were a very young institution and still had to 
establish a track record of delivering on our mandate. So we were concerned that our policy 
debates could be misunderstood in ways that might damage our credibility. 
So  why  have  we  changed  our  mind?  It  is  true  that  other  central  banks’  experience  with 
publishing minutes has generally been positive. In fact, publishing an account of the policy 
deliberations has now become “best practice” in the central banking community. 
Moreover, circumstances have changed. Economic uncertainty has increased. So, too, has 
our toolbox, which now also includes various non-standard measures – which we are ready 
to use to achieve our price stability mandate. Non-standard measures are complex and so 
are the policy considerations that feed into the decisions on whether or not to adopt them. 
Therefore, providing more information on these considerations through published accounts 
adds complexity to the message. But this complexity is not “noise” but “signal”, as it reflects 
changed underlying realities. In a situation of fragmentation where non-standard measures 
play  an  important  role,  the  analysis  and  considerations  leading  to  policy  decisions  are  by 
necessity  much  more  complex  than  in  normal  times.  Furthermore,  by  their  very  nature, 
unconventional measures can be, I don’t hesitate to admit, controversial – both inside and 
outside our institution. So it is important for us to provide the public with a fuller picture of the 
internal debate: we need to explain ourselves better. 
Ultimately, we strive to be accountable because, in the words of Otmar Issing, this “reflects 
the conviction that in democratic society accountability is the “reverse side’” of central bank 
independence”.6  Having  established  our  credibility  over  the  years,  we  now  have  the  self-
confidence to make another step that will enhance our institution’s transparency even further. 
Having agreed that there is a case for the publication of accounts, we then need to ask: what 
should these accounts of our policy deliberations actually contain? What’s more, we need to 
strike a balance between the amount of information that we disclose, and the effectiveness of 
our message. How do we strike that balance? 
Again, we should be guided by our principle of clarity. We want to avoid creating what Alan 
Blinder  calls  a  “cacophony  problem”,  with  many  voices  tending  to  obscure  the  message, 
rather than elucidating it7. I would favour to convey the content of the debate and the balance 
of views of Governing Council members. 
Another important aspect to consider when framing our communication is the implications of 
the specific euro area context. It consists of different countries and nationalities, so it is not 
like  the  United  States,  the  United  Kingdom  or  Japan.  We  are  a  monetary  union  with 
18 countries. It is crucial that the governors continue to act in a personal capacity and remain 
independent in their decision-making. 
                                                
6  Op. cit., p. 7. 
7  Blinder, Alan S. (2004): “The Quiet Revolution: Central Banking Goes Modern.” Yale University Press. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
To  sum  up,  the  value  of  clarity  in  central  bank  communication  is  particularly  evident  in  a 
financial crisis. But communication – no matter how clear – only works if the communicator is 
credible.  The  ECB  has  a  track  record  of following  up  words  with  deeds,  and  we  intend  to 
maintain it. 
What will remain of the communication initiatives taken during the crisis? Will they be part of 
our  future  communication  toolkit?  Perhaps  forward  guidance  in  this  exact  form  will  not  be 
part of our toolkit as the type of communication we have adopted in normal times should be 
sufficiently  clear.  In  contrast,  any  steps  taken  regarding  the  publication  of  accounts  might 
well be viewed as being a permanent change to our communication framework. By providing 
additional  clarity  on  our  reaction 
this  publication  could  help  make  our 
communication  strategy  more  robust.  The  information  provided  will  be  adjusted  to  the 
information  needs  of  the  public  over  time,  as  the  nature  and  complexity  of  the  Governing 
Council  deliberations  reflect  changing  circumstances.  Thus,  with  published  accounts  there 
may be less need for forward guidance in the future. 
Thank you for your attention. 
function, 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
