  
 
Gill Marcus: A perspective on the global and domestic economic outlook 
and the challenges facing monetary policy in the current environment 
Address  by  Ms  Gill  Marcus,  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  at  the  South 
African Institute of Chartered Accountants (SAICA) Business Breakfast, Rosebank, 10 June 
2014. 
 Good morning and thank you for the opportunity to be with you today at this event organised 
by the South African Institute of Chartered Accountants. According to the World Economic 
Forum,  South  Africa  was  again  ranked  number  one  globally  in  strength  of  auditing  and 
accounting  standards.  This  ranking  is  a  tribute  to  SAICA  and  to  all  of  you  here  today. 
Unfortunately,  these  rankings  while  pleasing,  are  not  enough  and  there  is  no  room  for 
complacency. While the financial sector generally compares very favourably with the rest of 
the world, with deep and liquid markets and our banks ranked number three in the world for 
soundness, the broader economy performs less favourably on many of the other measures. 
While the accuracy of these measures can be debated, we only need to look at the recent 
growth rate of the economy, –0,6 per cent in the first quarter of this year and concerns for 
second quarter growth amid unresolved and intensifying labour disputes, to recognise that 
we have enormous challenges ahead of us. 
While  the  global  backdrop  remains  difficult  as  the  advanced  economies  emerge  from  the 
very deep financial crisis of the past seven years, it is no longer the main cause of South 
Africa’s  weak  domestic  economic  performance.  The  slowdown  we  have  experienced  is 
domestically  driven,  largely  self-inflicted  and  we  cannot  blame  external  factors  alone.  This 
does mean, however, that the solutions are in our own hands, and as a country instead of 
focusing on whether we are entering a recession or not, we should all be striving to restore 
the  economy  to  the  strong  growth  path  that  it  is  capable  of  achieving.  This  morning  I  will 
present  a  perspective  on  the  global  and  domestic  economic  outlook  and  the  challenges 
facing monetary policy in the current environment. 
The  recent  global  crisis  has  reminded  us  that  financial  crises  take  a  long  time  to  repair 
themselves.  Such  crises  are  characterised  by  high  levels  of  leverage  and  debt,  whether 
households,  firms  or  the  state,  and  the  loss  of  wealth  associated  with  the  start  of  a  crisis 
means that it takes a long time to repair these balance sheets. The process of deleveraging 
implies low levels of consumption and investment by households and firms, while banks will 
be reluctant to lend. There are now encouraging signs that some of the advanced economies 
have  been  through  this  process  are  on  a  path  of  sustained  recovery.  The  US  economic 
recovery appears to be taking hold, with a clearer path of fiscal consolidation and stronger 
bank  and  corporate  balance  sheets.  Households  deleveraging  has  also  occurred,  and  the 
housing  market  has  shown  signs  of  improvement.  However,  severe  weather  conditions 
earlier in the year resulted in a contraction in the first quarter, and it will be difficult for the 
economy  to  achieve  the  2,8  to  3,0  per  cent  growth  forecast  recently  by  the  US  Fed. 
Nevertheless, the underlying strength appears to be there, and the market consensus is for 
an annual growth rate of around 2,5 per cent. 
The UK economy also appears to have moved to a sustained recovery path, with growth of 
around  3  per  cent  expected  this  year.  Unfortunately,  the  outlook  for  the  Eurozone,  an 
important export market for South Africa, is much less favourable. Although the region has 
emerged from recession, growth is expected to be anaemic, with continuing concerns about 
deflation, particularly in some of the European periphery. Consequently, the ECB has taken 
significant  measures  in  an  endeavour  to  stimulate  growth  in  the  region.  The  German 
economy appears to be sound, but France has recently slowed down significantly. Although 
the Japanese economy recorded strong first quarter growth of 5,9 per cent in anticipation of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  the introduction of consumption taxes, this is not expected to be sustained, and the outlook 
remains uncertain with an annual growth rate expected to be around 1,5 per cent. 
The mixed signals emanating from the advanced economies have important implications for 
emerging markets, including South Africa. The abnormally low interest rate environment in 
the advanced economies, coupled with quantitative easing, led to an almost undiscriminating 
wall of money flowing into emerging markets. These flows suddenly reversed following the 
announcement  by  the  US  Fed  in  May  last  year  that  it  was  considering  tapering  its 
programme of quantitative easing. The initial impact on emerging market bond and foreign 
exchange  markets  was  severe,  particularly  those  markets  which  were  relatively  open  and 
liquid, including South Africa. The uncertainty surrounding the timing and speed of tapering 
resulted  in  a  highly  volatile  period  for  emerging  markets.  When  tapering  was  eventually 
confirmed  in  December  last  year,  attention  then  focused  on  the  timing  and  speed  of  US 
policy  normalisation,  which  is  the  increase  of  the  policy  rate  from  the  zero  bound  to  more 
“normal”  levels.  So  while  tapering  is  steadily  continuing,  and  is  expected  to  be  completed 
later this year, there is a great deal of uncertainty about the outlook for short term interest 
rates. Any changes in perception concerning the timing and intensity of the US interest rate 
cycle are likely to elicit reactions in global financial markets. Thus while the recovery in the 
US  is  good  news  for  emerging  markets  in  that  this  breaks  the  synchronised  downturn  in 
advanced economies and that a growing US economy is critical to global recovery, it does 
have implications for emerging market financial markets. 
We are therefore in for a bumpy ride, with the prospect of a series of “risk on” and “risk off” 
scenarios as global risk perceptions change in response to unfolding developments. We can 
expect financial markets, including the rand exchange rate, to remain volatile in response to 
these  changing  perceptions.  The  outlook  is  complicated  by  the  fact  that  a  synchronised 
normalisation  in  the  advanced  economies  is  not  expected.  The  Bank  of  England  is  most 
likely to move in line with the US, but the Eurozone and Japan are still in an easing cycle. 
Only last week, the ECB cut interest rates again, and announced a range of new measures 
to induce banks to increase lending, including measures to expand bank liquidity, and hinted 
at the possibility of some form of quantitative easing in the future. The ECB also indicated 
that  this  accommodative  stance  was  likely  to  remain  in  place  for  a  protracted  period.  The 
Bank of Japan is also likely to maintain its highly accommodative monetary and fiscal stance 
for some time. 
The bottom line is that normalisation will happen: it will not be a synchronised event, and the 
timing and speed of the cycle is uncertain and will be dependent on the pace of the recovery 
in  the  advanced  economies.  The  more  uneven  these  recoveries,  the  more  volatile  capital 
flows to emerging markets are likely to remain. But the era of abundant flows to emerging 
markets appears to be over: the volume of flows is likely to be lower and more discriminating 
than was the case in recent years. And of course this applies more strongly to countries such 
as South Africa, where sustainability of current account deficits are perceived to be an issue. 
These developments come at a time when emerging markets in general are slowing, and the 
previous optimism that emerging markets are the new epicentre of global growth may have 
been a bit misplaced. Despite this, emerging  markets remain an important driver of global 
growth,  but  the  outlook  is  fragile.  The  Chinese  economy  is  expecting  to  slow  to  levels  of 
between 7–7,5 per cent, growth rates that would be the envy of many countries. The slowing 
growth trajectory has already impacted adversely on South Africa through weaker commodity 
prices, and there are concerns the Chinese growth outlook could be undermined further by 
developments  in  the  shadow  banking  sector  and  the  housing  market.  South  Africa’s  other 
BRICS  partners,  particularly  Russia  and  Brazil,  are  also  facing  slowing  growth  scenarios. 
More positively, sub-Saharan Africa, where South Africa’s trade and investment links have 
expanded, is expected to remain one of the fastest growing regions in the world, although 
weaker commodity prices remain a risk to the outlook. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  While the global environment shows signs of improvement and there are real opportunities 
for South and sub-Saharan Africa, there are also new challenges. It is against this backdrop 
that the South African economy contracted by 0,6 per cent in the first quarter of 2014. This 
contraction arises largely from the negative growth of 24,7 per cent and 4,4 per cent in the 
mining and manufacturing sectors respectively in the first quarter. The rest of the economy, 
excluding mining and manufacturing, recorded growth of around two per cent, and while at 
least positive, is still inadequate. This follows a disappointing growth outcome of 1,9 per cent 
in 2013, following more optimistic expectations earlier on in the year. 
There  has  been  much  speculation  as  to  whether  the  country  is  headed  for  a  recession, 
defined as two consecutive quarters of negative growth. To give some perspective of how 
bad things will have to be in order to get to this point: if zero growth in each of the remaining 
three quarters of the year were to be recorded, the economy would still achieve a positive 
growth  rate  of  0,8  per  cent  for  the  year.  To  get  to  a  negative  growth  rate  in  the  second 
quarter, and assuming the rest of the economy continues to grow at rates of around 2 per 
cent, we would have to have significant further contractions off the already low bases in both 
the  mining  and  manufacturing  sectors,  and  such  contractions  would  have  to  be  of  similar 
orders of magnitude as in the first quarter. Given that the platinum strike covered more than 
two  months  of  the  first  quarter,  it  is  unlikely  that  a  further  contraction  of  that  order  of 
magnitude will occur in the second quarter. Therefore, we do not believe that a recession is 
the  most  likely  outcome.  Should  it  transpire,  it  would  be  a  very  grim  outcome  indeed.  But 
even  if  a  recession  is  avoided,  it  will  be  cold  comfort  if  the  growth  rate  is  a  weak positive 
number. Therefore it behoves all of us – government, business and labour – to rebuild the 
confidence and trust that is an imperative to change the negative trajectory that the economy 
is presently on. 
The Bank’s most recent growth forecast, as indicated in the May monetary policy statement 
of the MPC, is for growth for this year of 2,1 per cent, but with a downside risk. This follows a 
progressive downward revision of these forecasts since November last year when a growth 
rate of 3,0 per cent was still forecast. The main downside risks to the growth outlook were 
the continuing strike in the platinum sector and electricity supply constraints. The platinum 
mines affected by the strike account for about 40 per cent of platinum production in South 
Africa. The contraction in platinum output accounted for about 19 percentage points of the 
total mining sector contraction of around 25 per cent in the first quarter. In the meantime the 
strike is continuing, and even if a settlement were achieved today and workers returned to 
work soon thereafter, it would take weeks for normal operations to resume. It is also possible 
that a number of shafts will never re-open. 
In the meantime the costs to both workers and the mining companies continue to escalate. 
According to the Chamber of Mines, workers have lost R9,6 billion in wages foregone, while 
the  companies  have  lost  R21,5  billion  in  earnings.  The  knock-on  effects  of  the  loss  of 
earnings go well beyond the 70,000 workers and their dependents directly affected by the 
strike.  There  are  numerous  accounts  of  how  the  communities  and  businesses  in  the 
Rustenburg area and parts of the Eastern Cape are being impacted by the loss of earnings. 
It also impacts on the upstream and downstream industries that are connected to the sector. 
While the strike has already been felt in the economic growth outcome, it has not as yet been 
fully reflected in the export data. The mining companies had significant platinum inventories 
that  they  have  been  able  to  use  to  meet  their  contractual  commitments.  However,  these 
inventories are being depleted, and the longer the strike continues, the sooner the adverse 
effects on exports will be felt. The deficit on the current account of the balance of payments 
is often regarded as the Achilles heel of the South African economy, particularly in the light of 
a relatively slow export response to the rand depreciation. Some tentative positive signs in 
this respect was evident late last year with the deficit contracting from 6,4 per cent of GDP in 
the  third  quarter  of  2013  to  5,1  per  cent  in  the  final  quarter.  Import  compression  is 
constrained  by  the  fact  that  a  large  proportion  of  the  country’s  imports  are  capital  goods 
related to the infrastructural expenditure programme of government. We would not want to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  see  such  imports  declining  as  improved  infrastructure  increases  economic  efficiencies  by 
unblocking domestic bottlenecks in the economy, and allows for future exports. 
Therefore, a strong export performance is essential. It is difficult enough to achieve this in the 
context  of  weak  growth  in  the  Eurozone,  one  of  our  main  trading  partners.  But  to  have  a 
concurrent decline in platinum exports is an unnecessary self-inflicted wound at a time when 
the  mining  sector  should  be  responding  positively  to  the  rand  depreciation.  The  platinum 
group metals accounted for about 8 per cent of our total merchandise exports in 2012 and 
almost 9 per cent in 2013, so the impact of a total cessation of exports by the three affected 
companies is very clear. 
A  number  of  looming  strikes  in  other  sectors  also  threaten  the  growth  prospects  of  the 
economy. Nevertheless, unless these stoppages turn out to be far worse than anticipated, 
the Bank’s base case remains one of positive growth for this year, although it may be difficult 
to achieve a better outcome than last year. The growth forecast of 3,1 per cent for 2015 is 
predicated  on  a  more  stable  industrial  relations  environment  and  an  improvement  in  the 
electricity  supply  situation,  with  new  generating  capacity  coming  on  stream  early  in  2015. 
There  are,  however,  downside  risks  to  this  forecast.  On  the  positive  side,  government 
infrastructural  expenditure  is  set  to  continue,  and  this  should  underpin  current  and  future 
growth.  The  recent  growth  numbers  also  show  that  there  is  life  in  the  construction  sector, 
which grew by 4,9 per cent in the first quarter of 2014. In March, the real value of building 
plans passed increased by 13,6 per cent on the 3-month-to-3-month basis, and by 5,9 per 
cent  on  a  year-on-year  basis.  These  positive  developments  are  also  consistent  with  the 
improvement in the construction sector business confidence indices. However, the recovery 
needs to be more broad-based. In particular, the mining sector needs to get back to work, 
and the manufacturing sector needs to stay at work. This is also an imperative to ensure we 
retain the jobs we have, and do not have further job losses and increased unemployment. 
So what role can monetary policy play in this context? Unfortunately, monetary policy has a 
limited  role  in  kick-starting  the  economy,  particularly  given  the  causes  of  the  slowdown. 
Notwithstanding the interest rate increase in January, monetary policy is still accommodative 
and the repo rate low by historical standards, with the real repo rate being slightly negative. 
In effect, the 50 basis point increase simply offset the recent increase in actual and expected 
inflation. The problem of low growth and unemployment is therefore not high interest rates. 
The recent slowdown is clearly related to a fractious labour relations environment, while the 
unemployment rate is primarily structural in nature, and not something that monetary policy 
can solve. As we have stressed many times in the past, monetary policy can impact on the 
margin on cyclical growth and employment, but it cannot determine the potential real growth 
path  of  the  economy.  This  is  the  domain  of  other  policies  that  can  directly  influence  the 
structural constraints on the economy. 
The primary mandate of the Bank remains the achievement of price stability. Inflation moved 
outside the target band in April, in line with the Bank’s forecast, and we expect it to remain 
outside the target for the next four quarters. We also see an upside risk to this forecast, with 
the main risks coming from the exchange rate (for reasons elaborated on above) and food 
prices.  Other  potential  risks  come  from  wage  settlements  should  they  significantly  exceed 
productivity growth. 
In  response  to  these  inflation  pressures,  combined  with  the  prospect  of  normalisation  of 
monetary policy in the US, the MPC embarked on a tightening interest rate cycle in January, 
but stressed that the cycle would be moderate given the weak growth outlook. The MPC is 
sensitive  to  the  fact  that  it  risks  being  pro-cyclical,  and  it  could  undermine  growth  at  the 
margin. 
This is the dilemma that monetary policy faces – that of rising inflation and slowing growth. 
Monetary  policy  decision-making  in  a  flexible  inflation  targeting  framework  needs  to  be 
sensitive  to  the  general  state  of  the  economy.  So  any  given  inflation  forecast  may  elicit  a 
different  monetary  policy  response,  depending  on  the  economic  outlook.  For  example,  the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  current  inflation  forecast  may  have  produced  a  much  stronger  reaction  had  the  economy 
been performing much better than it currently is. In other words, in a simple Taylor rule world, 
the  smaller  the  negative  output  gap,  the  stronger  the  interest  rate  response  for  any  given 
deviation of inflation from the target. 
The  monetary  policy  dilemma  is  compounded  by  the  fact  that  the  economy  is  not 
experiencing  significant  demand  side  inflation.  Real  growth  in  consumption  expenditure  by 
households has been steadily declining, from 4,9 per cent in 2011 to 2,6 per cent in 2013. 
While a contraction in consumption expenditure is not expected, we believe that it will remain 
constrained by a variety of factors, including rising inflation, high household debt levels, and 
subdued levels of credit extension to households in particular. The slow growth environment 
means  that  employment  opportunities  are  limited,  and  job  security  is  reduced.  Since  the 
2009  recession,  employment  creation  in  the  formal  non-agricultural  sector  of  the  economy 
has been mainly by government. Private sector employment growth is likely to remain muted 
as long as investment confidence remains low, and government is constrained by the need 
to  maintain  its  fiscal  consolidation  path,  limiting  the  possibility  of  further  significant 
employment creation. 
The issue then is, how can monetary policy deal with inflation driven primarily by cost-push 
pressures, and under such conditions should we not simply ignore these inflation pressures? 
Inflation  expectations  are  central  to  price  formation,  and  expectations  of  future  monetary 
policy actions are an important element in this. If there is a view that the central bank is not 
concerned  about  inflation,  it  will  undermine  credibility  of  monetary  policy  and  impact 
adversely on inflation expectations. Inflation expectations, as measured in the quarterly BER 
survey, have been relatively well anchored for some time, although at the upper end of the 
target range. While we can take some comfort from the fact that they have not deteriorated, 
these  expectations  are  uncomfortably  high,  in  line  with  the  precarious  level  of  the  actual 
inflation rate. We would not want inflation or these expectations to become embedded at the 
upper end or worse, at a higher level. 
We know that monetary policy cannot prevent the impact effects of supply side shocks. For 
example,  if  international  oil  prices  increase,  domestic  petrol  prices  will  increase  in  the 
absence of an offsetting appreciation of the rand. But we do need to watch out for possible 
second round effects of these increases – that is, the extent to which increases are passed 
through to other prices, resulting in more generalised inflation. 
A  similar  example  would  be  the  impact  of  exchange  rate  changes.  We  have  noted  that 
despite the significant depreciation since 2011, pass-through to generalised inflation, while 
still positive, has been lower than during previous depreciation episodes. We ascribe this to 
the weak state of the economy, where retailers find it difficult to pass the full increases on to 
consumers for fear of losing market share. But there will always be a temptation on their part 
to  try  and  recoup  their  margins.  Under  such  circumstances,  if  there  is  a  perception  that 
monetary  policy  will  accommodate  these  inflationary  pressures  they  are  likely  to  increase 
their prices. However, if there is a tightening bias in monetary policy, firms are more likely to 
be constrained in their price setting. 
There is a view that is sometimes expressed that inflation may come down more quickly than 
we expect, or even if it does not, and if the Bank’s forecasts are correct, inflation will be back 
inside the target range next year. Under such circumstances, is there not a case for ending 
the tightening cycle, or even to consider a cut in interest rates? Although we have been more 
tolerant of inflation at the upper end of the target range, given the negative output gap, we do 
not  see  the  upper  end  of  the  target  range  as  being  the  inflation  target.  Currently  our 
forecasts,  and  most  other  forecasts,  are  for  inflation  to  remain  uncomfortably  close  to  the 
upper  end  of  the  target  range  in  the  next  two  year,  and  we  assess  the  risks  to be  on  the 
upside.  While  we  do  not  target  the  mid-point  of  the  band,  we  would  prefer  to  be  more 
comfortably and sustainably within the target, as this would provide more room for monetary 
policy to act as need be, and better anchor inflation expectations at a lower level. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  We also do not believe that the current level of real interest rates is sustainable. As I have 
mentioned  previously,  there  is  a  great  deal  of  uncertainty  surrounding  the  post-crisis  new 
normal level of interest rates, both domestic and global. But in the same way that it is clear 
that  the  current  abnormally  low  interest  rates  in  the  advanced  economies  cannot  be 
sustained indefinitely, the same applies to our interest rates. As we have stressed, the timing 
and  speed  of  adjustment  will  be  data  dependent,  in  part  influenced  by  monetary  policy 
developments  in  the  advanced  economies.  That  is  not  to  say  that  we  simply  follow  US 
monetary policy. A flexible exchange rate framework does give us a fair degree of monetary 
policy  independence,  but  it  is  not  absolute.  This  is  in  contrast  to  longer  term  bond  yields 
which are more highly correlated with those in the US, and over which the Bank has no direct 
control.  We  live  in  a  highly  integrated  financial  world  and  we  cannot  ignore  these 
developments. 
To reiterate the MPC position, the interest rate increase in January was not a one-off move. 
It is part of a necessary cycle to deal with the inflation risks and to normalise interest rates in 
the  economy.  However,  the  speed  and  extent  of  tightening  will  be  sensitive  to  domestic 
growth considerations, and to the pace of normalisation in the US which is likely to impact on 
the South African economy indirectly through the exchange rate. At this point in time, we are 
in what we assess to be a moderate extended cycle. That means the interest rates will not 
necessarily be adjusted at each meeting, or move by the same amount. 
In this context, we are often asked if a 25 basis point adjustment is a possibility. Yes, it is. 
When the repo rate was in double digits, a 25 basis point change would make little impact. 
But at current levels of the repo rate, it is an option. Can 25 basis points make an impact? 
Perhaps  not  on  its  own,  but  seen  in  the  context  of  a  longer  cycle,  it  could  be  part  of  a 
cumulative increase, particularly should the MPC wish to see a smoother and more gradual 
adjustment. The disadvantage of such a strategy, however, is that it could mean that we “fall 
behind  the  curve”,  which  may  require  even  stronger  moves  later  on.  A  more  moderate 
approach, on the other hand, could allow for easier adjustment to changing circumstances, 
and a less volatile interest rate environment in the short to medium term. 
In conclusion, the domestic economy is facing enormous headwinds, many of which are of 
our own making, and therefore within our capability to resolve. High on the list is the currently 
debilitating labour relations environment, and it is incumbent on all parties to resolve these 
issues. All parties need to recognise their own roles in bringing about this toxic environment, 
and consider the significant costs to the individual workers, the affected companies and the 
country of not resolving these disputes. 
Monetary  policy  cannot  resolve  these  issues,  nor  can  it  deal  with  structural  constraints  to 
longer  term  growth.  Rather,  the  role  of  monetary  policy  is  to  contribute  to  a  stable 
macroeconomic  environment  conducive 
inclusive  higher  growth.  The  National 
Development Plan is a broad blueprint for dealing with these structural issues and the focus 
should  remain  on  implementation  of  this  plan.  The  South  African  economy  has  enormous 
potential, but it also faces significant social demands in the context of high unemployment. 
Let  us  all  work  together  so  that  we  get  inclusive  growth  going  again and  realise  the  great 
potential we have as part of a growing region. 
Thank you. 
to 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
