  Narayana Kocherlakota: Discussion of Robert Hall’s paper 
Speech  by  Mr  Narayana  Kocherlakota,  President  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
Minneapolis,  at  the  National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research  Macroeconomics  Conference, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts, 12 April 2014. 
 I thank Richard Condor, Terry Fitzgerald, Fabrizio Perri, and Sam Schulhofer-Wohl for their comments. The views 
expressed in this discussion are my own, and are not necessarily those of others in the Federal Reserve System. 
Introduction 
Robert  Hall’s  paper  is  a  well-written  and  remarkably  wide-ranging  examination  of  the 
evolution of the U.S. economy over the past few years.1 I learned a tremendous amount from 
reading it – and I’m sure that I would learn even more upon rereading it. It should be read by 
anyone – policymaker or academic – who is interested in deepening and broadening his or 
her understanding of the current U.S. macroeconomic situation. 
I  found  the  paper’s  focus  on  the  behavior  of  the  capital  stock  and  total  factor  productivity 
(TFP)  to  be  especially  informative.  Hall  emphasizes  that  a  large  fraction  of  the  decline  in 
output (relative to trend) over the past seven years is attributable to slow growth in the capital 
stock and TFP. This point is valuable given how much the public policy conversation focuses 
on the behavior of aggregate employment. 
Hall’s  ultimate  goal  is  to  reach  conclusions  about  the  likely  future  course  of  the  U.S. 
macroeconomy  and  about  the  likely  impact  of  particular  kinds  of  policy  choices  on  that 
projected  evolution.  The  conclusions  are  well-summarized  in  Table  10  of  the  paper.  My 
discussion uses Table 10 as a jumping-off point and proceeds in two distinct directions. The 
first  direction  is  empirical.  I  discuss  the  behavior  of  U.S.  macroeconomic  data  in  the 
mid-20th century. My main theme is that, in these data, seemingly permanent changes in the 
macroeconomy  did  reverse  and  that  these  reversals  occurred  over  surprisingly  short  time 
periods. 
The  second  direction  is  theoretical.  I  argue  that  typical  modeling  of  aggregate  resource 
constraints  implies  that,  regardless  of  the  current  state,  it  is  possible  for  employment  and 
output  to  rise  remarkably  rapidly  over  short  time  frames.  This  perspective  implies  that  we 
should think about the future course of the American economy as being determined by the 
choices of private citizens and policymakers, and not as a matter of statistical inevitability. 
We can divide the relevant choice problem into two distinct questions about the future course 
of the economy. The first is a collective one for American society: Given the projected path 
for  macroeconomic  aggregates  like  consumption,  output,  and  employment,  are  there 
alternative (but resource-feasible) paths that would be preferred? The second is a technical 
one  for  economists:  Given  a  desired  path,  what  policy  choices  (specifically,  taxes  and 
subsidies) would give rise to that desired path? 
The  answer  to  this  second  technical  question  is  typically  model-dependent.  However,  I 
suggest that a long-favored prescription of public finance economists – to lower the tax rate 
on  physical  investment  –  would  give  rise  to  higher  output,  consumption,  capital,  and 
employment in a wide range of models. This potential approach seems especially relevant 
given Hall’s focus on the decline in capital over the past five or six years.1 
                                                
1   Just to be clear: I’m not suggesting that the declines in economic activity described by Hall are attributable to 
increased tax rates. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Mid-20th century evidence 
The first part of my discussion centers on the evolution of macroeconomic data during and 
after the Great Depression. The Great Depression started in the United States in 1929. By 
1933,  key  macroeconomic  aggregates  like  TFP,  real  output,  employment,  and  capital  had 
declined sharply relative to their historical trends. The unemployment rate had soared from 
under 5 percent to over 20 percent. I examine the recovery of each of these variables in turn. 
I’ll begin with total factor productivity. Cole and Ohanian (1999) document that, by 1933, TFP 
was about 15 percent below trend.2 It might well seem intuitive that such a profound decline 
would be challenging to reverse. But during the Depression, TFP grew so rapidly that it had 
recovered to its pre-Depression trend within three years after bottoming out in 1933.3 
There was also a dramatic turnaround in real output, employment, and unemployment, but 
this turnaround was much more delayed. Ten years after the start of the Great Depression, 
real output remained about 25 percent below trend, employment was about 18 percent below 
trend, and the unemployment rate remained above 15 percent. It would have been natural to 
conclude that such persistent changes would prove to be permanent. Of course, such was 
not the case. Real gross domestic product (GDP) almost doubled from 1939 to 1944.4 The 
unemployment rate fell by 13 percentage points in three years, falling from nearly 15 percent 
in 1940 to under 2 percent by 1943.5 Employment rose by 50 percent from 1939 to 1943.6 
Importantly, these reversals proved to be enduring: As of 1950, all three variables were close 
to what one might have expected as of 1929.7 
Finally, let me turn to the capital stock. Hall suggests that the decline in the size of the capital 
stock, relative to trend, over the past few years will be challenging to reverse. The mid-20th 
century data are consistent with this perspective. Even as late as 1950, fixed assets in the 
United States remained around 20 percent below trend.8 
To sum up, in the early years of the Great Depression, there were sharp declines relative to 
trend in several key aggregate variables. However, for most of these variables, the declines 
were  reversed  over  short  periods  of  time.  Strikingly,  for  real  GDP,  employment,  and 
unemployment,  these  reversals  occurred  after  they  had  persisted  for  over  a  decade. 
Consistent  with  Hall’s  emphasis,  though,  the  capital  stock  was  a  notable  exception  to  this 
pattern of recovery. It remained well below trend over 20 years after the Great Depression. 
A theoretical perspective 
It  is  typical  to  dismiss  the  mid-20th  century  recoveries  in  real  GDP,  employment,  and 
unemployment because of the obvious connection of those recoveries to World War II. But 
this dismissal seems overly glib to me for three reasons. First, in principle, the U.S. economy 
                                                
2   Ohanian  (2001)  argues  that  little  of  this  change  can  be  explained  by  reductions  in  factor  utilization  or  by 
compositional effects. 
3   See Cole and Ohanian (1999). See also Field (2011). 
4   See the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) National Economic Accounts. Data are from the “Current-dollar 
and ‘real’ GDP” spreadsheet. 
5   See Lebergott (1957). 
6   As measured by BEA full-time employment equivalents. See “Table 6.5A. Full-Time Equivalent Employees by 
Industry” in Section 6 of the National Income and Product Accounts. 
In terms of employment, this statement is based on 1948 data (the BEA’s series on full-time equivalents has a 
change in its estimation procedure starting in 1949). 
7  
8   BEA plus 3 percent trend line starting in 1929. See “Table 1.2. Chain-Type Quantity Indexes for Net Stock of 
Fixed Assets and Consumer Durable Goods” in Section 1 of the Fixed Assets Accounts Tables in the BEA 
National Data. Data are from line 2, “Fixed Assets.” 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  could have engaged in the same increased production, without the results of that increased 
production ever being used in the act of war. Second, the recoveries persisted well after the 
end  of  the  war  (and  indeed  proved  to  be  essentially  permanent).  The  final  reason  is 
theoretical:  The  usual  modeling  of  aggregate  resource  constraints  implies  that  rapid 
increases in aggregate inputs and outputs are in fact physically possible. I will spend the rest 
of my discussion on this last perspective and its implications. 
The  typical  macroeconomic  model  is  based  on  an  aggregate  production  function  that  is 
unbounded from above and increasing with respect to labor and capital. Hence, given this 
function,  it  is  possible  for  output  to  increase  rapidly  as  long  as  the  labor  input  increases 
sufficiently.  In  a  similar  vein,  aggregate  models  of  physical  capital  accumulation  typically 
assume  that  the  future  capital  stock  is  an  unbounded  and  increasing  function  of  physical 
investment. According to this formulation, it is possible for the capital stock to rise rapidly, as 
long as physical investment increases sufficiently. 
Thus,  the  typical  aggregate  models  imply  that  it  is  physically  possible  for  future  U.S. 
economic  activity  to  be  distinctly  higher  than  what  might  be  expected  to  unfold.  This 
implication  means  that  these  models  give  rise  to  the  following  key  policy  question:  Is  the 
United  States  willing  to  pay  the  costs  required  to  generate  that  materially  higher  path  for 
economic  activity?  It  is  important  to  be  clear  about  the  meaning  of  the  term  “costs.”  As  a 
society, we can only increase labor input by forgoing leisure and home production. And as a 
society,  we  can  only  increase  investment  by  increasing  labor  input  or  by  reducing 
consumption. Hence, I see the following as the key policy question: Is the United States, as a 
society, willing to forgo the leisure, home production, and/or near-term consumption required 
to generate materially higher future economic activity? 
I don’t see this question as one that I can answer using my tools as an economist. Rather, I 
see it as a social choice problem that can only be resolved through a collective decision by 
Americans.  But  let  me  stipulate,  for  the  purposes  of  this  discussion,  that  Americans  are 
collectively  willing  to  give  up  leisure  and  consumption  so  as  to  generate  a  higher  path for 
future  economic  activity. What  policy  choices  should  be  made  so  as  to ensure  that  higher 
path actually materializes? 
This  second,  technical, question  can  be  answered  –  at  least  in  the  abstract  – through the 
tools  of  public  finance.  Consider  some  feasible  allocation.  What  prevents  that  feasible 
allocation  from  emerging  as  an  equilibrium  outcome?  The  answer  is  that  the  marginal 
societal trade-offs implied by that desired allocation may not align with the marginal private 
incentives that arise in equilibrium.9 But this problem can be fixed by choosing a system of 
taxes  and  subsidies  that fills  in  the  gaps  between  marginal  societal  and private  trade-offs. 
Given that system, the desired allocation then emerges as an equilibrium outcome.10 
As I say, in the abstract, this is all well-understood in public finance. In macroeconomics, this 
basic approach has been used to great effect by a number of authors since the pioneering 
work of Lucas and Stokey (1983). 
Of course, the problem with this abstract approach is that it is hardly model-free. Different 
models  imply  different  marginal  private  incentives,  and  those  give  rise  in  turn  to  different 
                                                
9  
I’m abstracting from the kinds of informational restrictions on tax systems that are explored in some detail in 
Kocherlakota (2010). For plausible models of individual heterogeneity, these informational restrictions impose 
few limits on the set of aggregate outcomes that are achievable by a society. However, these informational 
restrictions do impose limits on social insurance and redistribution, and so may well affect societal preferences 
over aggregate outcomes. 
10   I’m  assuming  that  the  government  has  access  to  affine  taxes,  so  that  potential  budget  imbalances  can  be 
solved through an appropriate choice of an intercept for the tax system (as in Werning 2007). I’m also ignoring 
the potentially important issue of implementation (to guarantee that there is no other undesirable equilibrium 
allocation). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  implications  for  appropriate  taxes  and  subsidies.  Given  the  current  economic  situation,  I 
would  –  overly  crudely  –  divide  the  empirically  relevant  models  into  two  classes:  demand-
constrained  and  supply-constrained.  The  demand-constrained  models  imply  that  the  key 
private incentives have to do with the willingness of households and firms to spend given the 
current real interest rate. The supply-constrained models imply that the key private incentives 
have to do with the willingness of businesses to expand production given their assessments 
of  costs  (including  taxes  and  regulation). The two  kinds  of models  can have  very  different 
implications  for  appropriate  taxes  and  subsidies.  For  example,  the  supply-constrained 
models typically imply that employment will rise if there is a temporary cut in the payroll tax 
rate paid by employers. Eggertsson (2011) shows that this implication is, in fact, reversed in 
demand-constrained models. 
Fortunately,  there  is  (at  least)  one  kind  of  tax  reduction  that  will  work  to  stimulate  future 
economic  activity  in  both  demand-constrained  models  and  supply-constrained  models. 
Suppose  that  the  government  were  to  reduce  the  tax  rate  on  physical  investment. 
Eggertsson (2011) shows that, in a demand-constrained model, such a policy change would 
stimulate  investment  demand  and  so  generate  higher  economic  activity.  But  this  policy 
change is also effective in supply-constrained models. In those models, it leads to a higher 
rate of capital accumulation, which stimulates future economic activity by lowering the future 
costs of production.11 
I  should  be  precise  about  what  I  mean  by  the  phrase  “reducing  the  tax  rate  on  physical 
investment.” I don’t mean “reducing the tax rate on the income from financial wealth.” In a 
demand-constrained model, that would deter spending by households and firms and lead to 
worse  outcomes.  Nor  am  I  referring  to  reducing  the  tax  rate  on  dividend  income,  capital 
gains, or corporate profits. Such reductions may have effects other than reducing the tax rate 
on  physical  investment.  Rather,  I’m  referring  specifically  to  reducing  the  tax  rate  on  the 
process  of  transforming  current  goods  into  future  goods.  In  practice,  the  government  can 
accomplish  such  a  reduction  in  a  relatively  targeted  fashion  by  allowing  businesses  to 
completely expense any investments into equipment, structures, or R&D. 
Wrap-up 
Let me conclude. 
The  main  theme  of  my  discussion  is  that  the  future  course  of  the  U.S.  economy  is  not 
predetermined by the events of the past seven years. Both history and theory have the same 
lesson: It is possible to undo what might now appear to be permanent changes. The question 
is not whether such reversals are possible. The question is whether they are, in fact, socially 
desirable in light of the associated losses in terms of consumption and/or home production. 
In general, different models have different implications for what kinds of policies will stimulate 
current and future economic activity. However, reducing the tax rate on physical investment 
is an effective form of stimulus in a wide class of models. 
References 
Cole, Harold L., and Lee E. Ohanian. 1999. “Aggregate Returns to Scale: Why Measurement 
is Imprecise.” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review 23 (Summer): 19–28. 
Eggertsson, Gauti B. 2011. “What Fiscal Policy Is Effective at Zero Interest Rates?” In NBER 
Macroeconomics Annual 2010, eds. Daron Acemoglu and Michael Woodford. University of 
Chicago Press, Vol. 25, pp. 59–112. 
                                                
11   Also  see  Fernández-Villaverde,  Guerrón-Quintana,  and  Rubio-Ramírez  (2012)  for  a  discussion  of  future 
supply-side reforms that can serve as a current demand-side stimulus. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Fernández-Villaverde,  Jesús,  Pablo  A.  Guerrón-Quintana,  and  Juan  Rubio-Ramírez.  2012. 
“Supply-Side Policies and the Zero Lower Bound.” Working Paper. 
Field,  Alexander  J.  2011.  A  Great  Leap  Forward:  1930s  Depression  and  U.S.  Economic 
Growth. Yale University Press. 
Kocherlakota,  Narayana  R.  2010.  The  New  Dynamic  Public  Finance.  Princeton  University 
Press. 
Lebergott,  Stanley  (1957).  “Annual  Estimates  of  Unemployment  in  the  United  States, 
1900-1954.”  In  The  Measurement  and  Behavior  of  Unemployment.  National  Bureau  of 
Economic Research, pp. 211–42. 
Lucas, Robert E. Jr., and Nancy L. Stokey. 1983. “Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy in an 
Economy without Capital.” Journal of Monetary Economics 12 (1): 55–93. 
Ohanian, Lee E. 2001. “Why Did Productivity Fall So Much during the Great Depression?” 
American Economic Review 91 (2): 34–38. 
Werning,  Ivan.  2007.  “Optimal  Fiscal  Policy  with  Redistribution”  Quarterly  Journal  of 
Economics 122 (3): 925–67. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
