  Takehiro Sato: Recent economic and financial developments and 
monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Takehiro Sato, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting 
with business leaders, Oita, 5 June 2014. 
 Introduction 
I. 
Thank  you  for  giving  me  this  opportunity  to  exchange  views  with  people  representing  the 
political, economic, and financial arena of Oita Prefecture. I would like to take this opportunity 
to express my sincere gratitude for your cooperation with the activities of the Bank of Japan’s 
Oita Branch. 
In today’s speech, I will begin by focusing on economic and financial developments in Japan 
and  abroad,  as  well  as  the  Bank’s  recent  monetary  policy.  I  will  then  touch  briefly  on  the 
economy of Oita Prefecture. Following my speech, I would like to hear your views on actual 
conditions in the local economy and on the Bank’s conduct of monetary policy. 
II. 
A. 
Recent economic and financial developments in Japan and abroad 
Developments in Japan’s economic activity and prices following the 
consumption tax hike 
Regarding  recent  developments  in  Japan’s  economy,  although  statistics  relating  to 
production and sales for April 2014 indicate a reactionary decline in domestic private demand 
following  the  consumption  tax  hike,  the  economy  seems  to  remain  resilient  as  a  trend.  It 
should be noted that (1) some sentiment indicators are weak, although this was expected, 
and (2) a reactionary decline in demand following the front-loaded increase prior to the tax 
hike is somewhat hard to gauge due to supply-side constraints. Let me follow up on this latter 
point. In the automobile industry, for example, it is considered that a production decrease as 
a whole caused by the decline in demand will come to a halt in the July-September quarter of 
2014.  Nevertheless,  according  to  anecdotal  information,  there  are  some  concerns  about  a 
possible decline in that quarter and thereafter, because production for the April-June quarter 
is  not  expected  to  be  much  affected  by  the  decline  in  demand  following  the  front-loaded 
increase, as backlog orders from the January-March quarter had piled up due to supply-side 
constraints.  This  suggests  that  we  need  to  remain  cautious  about  this  decline  in  demand, 
although there are many views that recent developments have generally been as expected. 
From  a  somewhat  longer-term  perspective,  I  consider  the  critical  point  to  be  the  extent  to 
which positive effects on the employment and income situation – such as the recent rise in 
base pay – will be able to offset negative effects of the decline in real disposable income that 
is caused by the tax hike. 
In this regard, the recent employee income situation can be understood as follows. On the 
one hand, the rate of increase in nominal wages has remained weak at around 0 percent on a 
year-on-year basis, given that scheduled cash earnings are depressed – reflecting the recent 
rise in the number of non-regular employees whose working hours are relatively short – despite 
the increases in non-scheduled cash earnings and special cash earnings. On the other hand, 
the  total  number  of  employees  is  boosted  by  the  increase  in  non-regular  employees; 
consequently, nominal employee income – which is calculated by multiplying nominal wages 
by  the  number  of  employees  –  has  been  increasing  moderately  at  around  1  percent  on  a 
year-on-year  basis  (Chart  1).  Considering  that  the  recent  movements  toward  raising  base 
pay will likely increase scheduled cash earnings from this summer, and that a rise in base 
pay, should it be realized, will positively affect non-scheduled cash earnings and special cash 
earnings,  it  is  natural  to  think  that  nominal  employee  income  will  increase  at  a  somewhat 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  accelerated  pace.  In  my  view,  with  this  employment  and  income  situation  acting  as  a 
tailwind, Japan’s economy will remain resilient against the consumption tax hike. 
The consumer price index (CPI) figures since the consumption tax hike show that, excluding 
the effects of the tax hike, the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI for all items less fresh 
food, or the core CPI, was generally around the previous month’s level, and this is also a 
supporting factor for the assessment of the underlying trend that I just mentioned (Chart 2). 
Prior to the release of the CPI figures, there was a lot of conflicting anecdotal information – 
such as price hikes exceeding the rise in consumption tax and price cuts through discount 
sales.  It  turned  out,  however,  that  the  rise  in  consumption  tax  alone  has  basically  been 
passed on to consumers. From another perspective, consumer demand can be regarded as 
having been resilient enough to accept the passing on of the rise in tax. Japan’s economy is 
expected to return to a moderate recovery trend from the summer, as the subsequent decline 
in demand following the front-loaded increase wanes. 
B. 
Understanding of coexistence of the weaker-than-expected economic growth 
rate and higher-than-expected prices 
Japan’s economy has decelerated from a high annual growth rate of around 4 percent in the 
first  half  of  2013  to  around  1  percent  in  the  second  half  (Chart  3).  This  is  partly  due  to 
sluggish exports despite the yen’s depreciation, but a significant increase in imports should 
also  be  noted.  Imports  surged  due  to  firm  domestic  demand  as  well  as  the  front-loaded 
increase in demand prior to the consumption tax hike, thereby pushing down the headline 
GDP growth rate. However, focusing on domestic demand excluding net external demand, 
the economy did not see much of a slowdown given that this demand kept growing at around 
3 percent on an annual basis throughout the calendar year. As GDP growth for the second 
half of 2013 was weaker than expected, this will have a smaller carry-over effect  on GDP 
growth for fiscal 2014. Partly reflecting this technical factor, the median of the Policy Board 
members’ forecasts for 2014 presented in the April 2014 Outlook for Economic Activity and 
Prices  (hereafter  the  Outlook  Report)  was  revised  downward,  and  there  was  also  a 
downward  revision  to  forecasts  for  fiscal  2013.  However,  the  mechanism  of  economic 
recovery  will  be  maintained  in  a  situation  where  exports  recover  and  domestic  demand 
remains  resilient  as  a  trend  (Chart  4).  Regarding  the  April-June  quarter  of  2014,  the 
contribution of net external demand to GDP growth is expected to turn positive, reflecting a 
decline in imports, and this will in turn act as a buffer against a decline in domestic private 
demand.  As  I  will  describe  shortly,  recovery  of  overseas  economies  –  especially  the  U.S. 
economy, which is getting over the effects of the unusually severe winter weather and has 
started to return to a recovery trend – is expected to act as a tailwind for Japan’s economy. 
In the meantime, the core CPI for fiscal 2013, which was revised upward from the median of 
the Policy Board members’ forecasts in the January 2014 interim assessment of the Outlook 
Report, registered 0.8 percent on a year-on-year basis. The fundamental reason behind this 
upward  revision  to  prices  despite  the  downward  revision  to  the  GDP  growth  rate  will  be 
explained later. In what follows, I highlight the role of imports in this context. 
One factor contributing to the rise in the CPI is a rise in energy prices stemming from the 
yen’s depreciation. However, it is also the case that the year-on-year rate of increase in the 
CPI  for  all  items  less  food  and  energy,  or  the  core-core  CPI,  for  April  2014  excluding  the 
effects  of  the  consumption  tax  hike  registered  0.8  percent,  which  shows  that  prices  other 
than  those  of  energy  have  also  been  rising.  In  terms  of  price  hikes  for  items  other  than 
energy  and  related  goods,  I  am  focusing  on  the  price  changes  in  digital  appliances 
(Chart 5).1 
                                                 
1   Digital appliances refer to the following CPI items: TV sets, mobile audio players, electronic dictionaries, video 
recorders, personal computers (desktop type), personal computers (note type), PC printers, digital cameras, 
and video cameras. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  The CPI for digital appliances has risen by around 30 percentage points, from the range of 
minus 22–23 percent for February 2012 to the range of 6–7 percent for February 2014 on a 
year-on-year basis. This had an indispensable effect on the rise in the core-core CPI. As the 
background  to  this,  it  can  be  pointed  out  that prices  of  digital  appliances  had  fallen  to  the 
bottom and fierce price competition in the household electrical appliances industry came to 
an end. It should not be overlooked that the halt in the price decline of digital appliances is 
attributable  to  the  fact  that  prices  of  these  products  had  become  more  susceptible  to  the 
effects  of  the  yen’s  depreciation  with  the  increased  import  penetration  ratio.  A  decline  in 
competitiveness and pricing power in the industry in Japan can be pointed out as a reason 
behind such susceptibility. However, the CPI for digital appliances became more or less flat 
on  a  year-on-year  basis  in  the  March-April  period  of  2014  excluding  the  effects  of  the 
consumption tax hike as the yen’s depreciation paused, and the core-core CPI for the Ku-
area of Tokyo in May declined by 0.2 percentage point from the previous month on the same 
basis. The effects of the halt to the yen’s depreciation trend on future developments in prices 
should be monitored carefully. 
Overseas economic and financial developments 
C.  
As I just mentioned, Japan’s economy is expected to continue growing at a pace above its 
potential as a trend due to the ongoing firm domestic demand, while it will be affected by the 
front-loaded increase and subsequent decline in demand prior to and after the consumption 
tax  hike.  The  probability  of  this  scenario  will  be  enhanced  by  the  moderate  increase  in 
exports led by the recovery of overseas economies, particularly advanced economies. In this 
regard, recent developments in overseas economies will support Japan’s economy through 
exports;  for  example,  the  U.S.  economy  has  been  recovering  moderately,  led  by  private 
demand, with the recovery becoming more widespread, and the euro area economy is also 
recovering moderately (Chart 6). 
With regard to the U.S. economy, the pace of recovery will accelerate gradually, mainly in 
private  consumption,  as  the  improvement  in  households’  balance  sheets  makes  progress 
supported by the ongoing recovery trend of housing prices as a whole, and as the effects of 
fiscal  drag  fade.  These  positive  effects  will  likely  continue  spreading  to  firms’  production 
activity, and thus the recovery trend of business fixed investment is likely to become more 
evident  (Chart  7).  Of  course,  the  Federal  Reserve’s  (Fed’s)  policy  developments  and  their 
subsequent  effects  on  global  financial  markets  should  be  monitored  as  downside  risks.  In 
this regard, the end in autumn 2014 to the Fed’s asset purchase program has broadly been 
incorporated into the markets at this point. In addition, the statement by the Federal Open 
Market Committee (FOMC) has clarified the view that “it likely will be appropriate to maintain 
the  current  target  range  for  the  federal  funds  rate  for  a  considerable  time  after  the  asset 
purchase program ends.” My understanding is that the Fed will communicate carefully with 
market participants in order to avoid bringing instability to financial markets. 
Regarding the euro area economy, there are various adjustment pressures associated with 
the  excess  debt  problems  in  the  public  and  private  sectors.  However,  the  economy  is 
expected  to  continue  recovering  moderately  supported  by  ongoing  recovery  in  domestic 
demand, reflecting improvement in various economic entities’ sentiment (Chart 8). 
As  just  described,  advanced  economies  are  likely  to  recover  moderately,  led  by  the  U.S. 
economy. Meanwhile, emerging and commodity-exporting economies will likely continue to 
lack growth momentum for the time being, especially in those economies that are restraining 
aggregate demand, such as by raising interest rates. 
Looking  at  the  Chinese  economy,  domestic  demand  is  likely  to  continue  facing  downside 
pressure amid ongoing progress in structural reforms. However, since the authorities have 
formulated concrete policy measures to underpin economic activity and external demand is 
expected to continue picking up, the economy is likely to maintain stable growth in general at 
around the current pace. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  From a somewhat longer-term perspective, however, there are concerns about the Chinese 
economy due to factors such as demographic changes (Chart 9). Labor supply and demand 
conditions  seem  to  be  tight,  although  the  growth  rate  has  fallen  from  double  digits  to  the 
range  of  7–8  percent.  This  implies  the  possibility  that  China’s  potential  growth  rate  is 
declining  considerably.  While  the  authorities  have  set  the  growth  target  at  around 
7.5 percent,  some  of  them  have  said  that  some  downward  deviation  from  7.5  percent  is 
within  the  target  range.  It  is  better  to  take  a  conservative  view  that  China’s  growth  rate  is 
likely to be around 7.5 percent at its highest, despite the government’s measures to underpin 
economic activity. 
Risks to overseas economies 
D.  
The  outlook  for  overseas  economies  that  I  have  explained  is  subject  to  both  upside  and 
downside risks. Geopolitical risks such as the recent situation in Ukraine should be carefully 
monitored in the short run. In addition, I am personally concerned about the possibility of a 
disinflationary trend and decline in potential growth rates in Europe and the United States in 
the medium to long run (Chart 10). 
The euro area in particular should be carefully monitored as the disinflationary trend might be 
prolonged,  mainly  in  peripheral  countries.  Several  peripheral  countries  in  particular  are 
expected to continue facing downward pressure on wages in order to retain competitiveness 
under the appreciation of the euro, and the European Commission and the European Central 
Bank (ECB) have revised down their inflation forecasts for both this year and the next. 
Medium- to long-term inflation expectations both in Europe and the United States have been 
stable at around 2 percent, which is one of the reasons why the policy authorities in the euro 
area  have  taken  the  view  that  it  will  not  enter  stagnant  deflation  like  Japan  (Chart  11). 
However, Japan’s experience suggests the possibility that low inflation continuing for a long 
time  changed  people’s  inflation  expectations  in  a  backward-looking  manner,  and  thus 
medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  also  lowered  adaptively.  In  fact,  as  the 
disinflationary  trend  continues,  short-  and  medium-term  inflation  expectations  by  economic 
entities and the markets have already started to decline somewhat in the euro area as well. 
If  the  stability  in  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  is  undermined,  various  policy 
actions are expected to be taken. The ECB has already revealed its policy stance that it will 
not  hesitate  to  make  use  of  unconventional  measures  to  address  the  risk  of  prolonged 
disinflation,  and  I  therefore  am  keeping  a  watchful  eye  on  its  future  conduct  of  monetary 
policy. It should also continue to be noted that the financial system is still somewhat fragile in 
the euro area. 
In the United States, deflationary concerns have not been observed so far, and instead short-
term  inflation  expectations  in  the  private  sector  have  been  revised  upward.  However,  the 
inflation  rate  has  recently  been  lower  than  the  Fed’s  forecast,  partly  reflecting  the  stable 
energy prices brought about by the shale revolution. Therefore, I feel it necessary to take into 
account  the  risk  that  the  inflation  rate  will  remain  lower  than  the  optimal  level  from  a 
somewhat longer-term perspective. 
It also should be noted that an argument that raises concerns about secular stagnation of the 
global economy has attracted somewhat more attention. Lawrence Summers, for example, 
has argued that there is a possibility that the level of equilibrium real interest rate – or, the 
natural rate of interest – that is consistent with full employment has declined to the range of 
minus 2–3 percent in the United States since the late 2000s, as there has not been excess 
demand in the economy before and after the financial crisis, and because prices have been 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
stable, with the actual GDP rate continuing to be far below the potential one.2 The argument 
regarding secular stagnation after the crisis seems reasonable, considering the experience in 
Japan  –  namely,  that  it  continued  to  be  difficult  to  boost  demand,  in  part  reflecting  the 
financial crisis in the late 1990s and demographic changes since the 2000s. Paul Krugman 
previously  noted  that  Japan’s  equilibrium  real  interest  rate  had  temporarily  declined  to 
around  minus  4  percent.3  What  is  new  about  the  arguments  of  Summers  is  that  the 
equilibrium real interest rate has been declining for a long time, not temporarily, on a global 
scale,  against  the  background  of,  for  example,  excess  savings  in  countries  with  a  current 
account surplus and the decrease in the nominal investment amount arising from declining 
capital goods prices. 
Leaving  aside  the  question  of  whether  the  equilibrium  real  interest  rate  has  actually  been 
declining in negative territory for a long time, it seems plausible that growth momentum in the 
global economy has declined somewhat more than in a typical cyclical pattern, reflecting the 
prolonged  downturn  in  demand,  the  deceleration  in  labor  input,  and  the  slowdown  in 
technological innovation. As a background to this, for example, the forecast for global growth 
by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) has been consistently revised down, and growth 
rates in emerging economies are far lower than those before the Lehman shock. Assuming 
that the equilibrium real interest rate has declined due in part to the slowdown in the potential 
growth rate, and that weak growth in demand has started to become chronic in this situation, 
it becomes easier to understand the current disinflationary trend in advanced economies and 
the downward trend in inflation rates in emerging economies. 
However, we should avoid making a hasty conclusion. It is not easy to grasp the situation of 
the potential growth rate and the slack in the economy.4 There are various arguments over 
whether the decline in the inflation rate is solely attributable to a cyclical factor or is rooted in 
a structural one, as described earlier. It also is often difficult to distinguish a cyclical factor 
from  a  structural  one.  If  the  potential  inflation  rate  has  not  declined  much,  the  current 
disinflationary  trend  could  simply  reflect  the  slack  in  capital  stock  and  in  the  labor  market, 
and  it  is  possible  that  disinflationary  pressure  will  ease  as  the  slack  dissipates.  As  just 
described,  the  inflation  outlook  and  its  implication  for  macroeconomic  policy  could  change 
depending on how to understand the current potential growth rate. Thus, I will continue to 
carefully monitor this matter. 
III.  
The conduct of monetary policy for the immediate future 
Interim review on quantitative and qualitative monetary easing 
A.  
Fourteen  months  have  passed  since  the  Bank  introduced  quantitative  and  qualitative 
monetary easing (QQE) in April 2013. Looking at economic and price developments over this 
period, as mentioned earlier, economic growth has turned out to be somewhat lower than the 
Bank’s projection, due to developments in exports and imports, and prices have been higher 
than projected. Economic and price developments so far have been in line with the Bank’s 
                                                 
2   For  details,  please  view  Lawrence  Summers’ 
Polak 
(http://www.imf.org/external/np/res/seminars/2013/arc/index.htm). 
Conference 
Research 
Annual 
held 
by 
recorded 
remarks  at 
the 
IMF 
the  Fourteenth  Jacques  
in 
2013 
November 
3   See Paul Krugman, “It’s Baaack: Japan’s Slump and the Return of the Liquidity Trap,” Brookings Papers on 
Economic Activity 2, 1998, pp.137–205. 
4   There are many earlier studies on uncertainties regarding estimation of potential growth rates and slack in the 
economy.  See,  for  example,  Athanasios  Orphanides,  “Monetary  Policy  Rules  Based  on  Real-Time  Data,” 
American Economic Review, 91 (4), 2001, pp. 964–985. For examples of such estimation in Japan and the 
United  States,  see,  respectively,  Takuji  Fueki  et  al., “Measuring  Potential  Growth  in  Japan:  Some  Practical 
Caveats,” Bank of Japan Review Series, No. 2010-E-1, 2010, and Mitsuhiro Osada et al., “Beikoku no Roudou 
Shijyou no Surakku nitsuite (The Slack in U.S. Labor Markets),” Bank of Japan Review Series, No. 2014-J-2, 
2014 (available in Japanese). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  projection on the whole. Thus, the Bank summarized in the April 2014 Outlook Report that 
QQE  has  been  exerting  its  intended  effects.  The  Bank’s  Policy  Board  has  judged  it 
appropriate to steadily pursue QQE under its current guidelines. 
However, although prices are higher than projected, the transmission mechanism of QQE, 
such as progress in the so-called portfolio rebalancing and a rise in medium- to long-term 
inflation expectations, has not yet been observed to the extent the Bank initially intended. Of 
course, I have no intention of denying that the mechanism is working. In fact, some marginal 
changes have been observed; for example, financial institutions are gradually taking a more 
active risk-taking stance. However, the current price hike seems to be affected not only by 
the yen’s depreciation and the rise in energy prices but also by the fact that the economy 
–  mainly  on  the  employment  front  –  is  starting  to  reach  the  upper  limit  of  supply  capacity 
sooner  than  expected,  as  the  economic  recovery  is  led  mainly  by  nonmanufacturing,  for 
which  labor  productivity  is  lower  than  that  in  manufacturing.  In  what  follows,  I  explain  this 
matter. 
Mechanism of price hikes 
B.  
In the April 2014 Outlook Report, the mechanism of price hikes is explained as follows: the 
output gap, which shows the utilization of labor and capital, has been improving mainly on 
the labor front, reflecting firm domestic demand, which tends to have large stimulative effects 
on employment, and it appears to have reached around the past long-term average of about 
zero; in this situation, upward pressure on wages and prices due to the tightening of supply 
and demand conditions is likely to steadily increase. Actually, the bottleneck caused by the 
labor shortage can be observed widely, and its effects are reflected in the hourly pay of non-
regular  employees  such  as  part-time  workers.  The  effects  of  wage  hikes  easily  penetrate 
prices,  particularly  in  the  services  sector  –  which  is  relatively  labor  intensive  –  and  such 
effects  seem  to  have  already  appeared  in  services  prices,  such  as  for  meals  outside  the 
home (Chart 5). 
Let me note that there are various approaches to estimating the output gap, and estimates 
are subject to a margin of error. However, in light of the overall macroeconomic information – 
such  as  tightness  of  the  current  labor  conditions  and  the  reduction  in  excess  production 
capacity shown in the March 2014 Tankan (Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in 
Japan) – it could be considered that the output gap, regardless of whether it has or has not 
reached about zero, has already narrowed to a considerable degree. This narrowing seems 
to  be  affecting  prices  to  some  extent.  Nevertheless,  it  should  be  noted  that  this  situation 
seems  to  reflect  not  only  the  demand-side  pick-up  but  also  supply-side  constraints,  and 
therefore attention needs to be paid to the possibility that the mechanism of economic and 
price recovery could be different from what the Bank initially aimed for. 
In other words, it is possible that the potential growth rate of Japan’s economy has declined, 
especially after the Lehman shock. This is because manufacturers’ stagnant fixed investment 
in Japan led to a slowdown in accumulation of capital stock, which in turn decreased labor 
productivity.  Tight  labor  conditions,  due  to  the  recovery  led  mainly  by  nonmanufacturing, 
seem  to  be  affected  by  lower  labor  productivity  in  nonmanufacturing  compared  to 
manufacturing (Chart 12). 
It is true that wage increases induced by tight labor conditions are a profit-squeezing factor 
and thus not preferable for firms. If corporate profits are constrained by labor costs, business 
fixed investment will be restricted and stock prices will be affected, and consequently wage 
hikes will not be sustainable. It is desirable to see wage increases that are in line with growth 
in  labor  productivity.  In  this  regard,  in  achieving  sustainable  wage  increases,  it  is 
indispensable  to  have  a  boost  in  labor  productivity  in  nonmanufacturing,  such  as  through 
investment aimed at labor saving. If such efforts toward improvement in labor productivity in 
nonmanufacturing feed back into manufacturing and a virtuous cycle in the overall economy 
is  generated,  the  growth  potential  will  be  raised,  thereby  enhancing  the  probability  of 
achieving the price stability target of 2 percent in the medium to long term. Currently, in my 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  view, people’s perception of labor conditions is tighter than what is suggested by statistics, 
as labor shortages are being reported widely. It can be considered that Japan’s economy is 
at a critical point in terms of whether its growth will slow due to supply-side constraints or it 
steps up to a new stage of growth by leveraging such constraints as a driving force to further 
improve its labor productivity. 
Importance of flexibility in the conduct of monetary policy 
C. 
When the price stability target was introduced in January 2013, the Bank clearly stipulated 
that  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  has  to  be  flexible  by  examining  various  risk  factors, 
including  those  related  to  financial  imbalances,  in  addition  to  the  assessment  of  current 
developments and outlook for economic activity and prices, from the perspective of achieving 
sustainable growth with price stability. 
The  importance  of  flexibility  in  monetary  policy  is  what  I  have  been  focusing  on  to  date. 
Monetary  policy  requires  long  and  variable  time  lags  before  its  effects  permeate  the 
economy,  and  thereafter  prices.  Therefore,  to  achieve  a  sustainable  growth  path  in  the 
context  of  price  stability,  monetary  policy  needs  to  be  flexible,  taking  into  account  future 
prospects.  In  other  words,  the  Bank  examines  the  current  conditions  and  the  outlook  for 
economic  activity  and  prices,  and  also  analyzes  various  risk  factors  including  the 
accumulation of financial imbalances. 
In  addition,  the  Bank  clearly  commits  to  continuing  with  QQE,  aiming  to  achieve  the  price 
stability target of 2 percent, as long as it is necessary for maintaining that target in a stable 
manner. In my understanding, the timeframe for “maintaining that target in a stable manner” 
should be assessed on a forecast basis. 
In this regard, the price stability target is by no means a rigid and superficial framework that 
simply aims to raise the inflation rate to reach 2 percent temporarily. Rather, it is a flexible 
and practical framework that accommodates the needs arising from economic developments. 
As described in the minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting held on April 30, 2014, my own 
view  on  the  outlook  for  prices  is  somewhat  more  cautious  than  the  majority  view  of  the 
Bank’s Policy Board members. However, this does not mean that I am skeptical of QQE’s 
effects,  nor  does  it  mean  that  I  deny  the  effectiveness  of  the  QQE’s  transmission 
mechanism. My understanding is that the price stability target is not a framework that calls 
for the inflation rate to reach 2 percent with surgical precision, but rather that it represents a 
flexible  policy  framework  in  which  some  degree  of  latitude  –  both  upside  and  downside  – 
should be accommodated. Based on this understanding, I see some flexibility with regard to 
the achievement of the 2 percent price stability target. 
On this point, what the price stability target aims to achieve is not a situation in which only 
prices will rise. Rather, it aims to achieve an environment in which the improvement of the 
overall economy results in higher wages and then higher prices in a well-balanced manner. It 
is necessary to avoid any misunderstanding that the Bank has been solely pursuing a pick-
up in prices without due attention to the economy. 
Let me turn to price indicators that are referred to in assessing the achievement of the price 
stability target. It is sometimes misunderstood that the degree of such achievement is merely 
assessed by using the core CPI, given that forecasts of the Policy Board members are made 
in terms of the CPI on this basis. In fact, the price stability target is set based on the CPI for 
all items, not the core CPI. However, this does not mean that the degree of achievement of 
the target is assessed only by using the CPI for all items. 
To evaluate price developments, it is necessary to appropriately understand the underlying 
trend of price changes by excluding temporary destabilizing factors. In doing so, the indicator 
that  appropriately  assesses  price  developments  depends  on  each  country’s  economic 
structure.  The  Bank  puts  emphasis  on  the  core  CPI  that  excludes  fresh  food,  which 
fluctuates  largely  due  to  such  factors  as  the  weather.  This  CPI  is  used  for  Policy  Board 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
  members’  forecasts  in  the  Outlook  Report.  To  understand  the  underlying  trend  in  prices, 
however,  a  wide  range  of  indicators  should  be  monitored  carefully  while  fully  taking  into 
account  characteristics  of  each  indicator.  Such  indicators  include  not  only  the  CPI  for  all 
items,  the  core  CPI,  and  the  core-core  CPI,  but  also  the  CPI  for  all  items  less  imputed 
rents – which represents a concept similar to the cost of living – as well as those relating to 
wages. It is important to note that monetary policy is not tied to specific indicators (Chart 13). 
Developments in long-term interest rates 
D.  
Next, I would like to talk about developments in long-term interest rates. Market participants’ 
price outlook has been lower than the Bank’s baseline scenario to date, and as a matter of 
fact, long-term interest rates have been stable at low levels partly due to asset purchases by 
the  Bank.  Future  developments  in  long-term  interest  rates  depend  on  market  participants’ 
economic  and  price  outlook,  but  I  am  paying  close  attention  to  whether  the  price situation 
and nominal long-term interest rates will develop in a consistent manner in a situation where 
the rate of increase in the core CPI excluding the effects of the consumption tax hike has 
been around 1¼ percent on a year-on-year basis for six consecutive months. 
Here,  let  me  recap  how  QQE  will  work  on  nominal  long-term  interest  rates  through  its 
transmission mechanism. Nominal long-term interest rates combine two elements: one is the 
average  of  future  short-term  rates  and  the  other  is  premiums  (Chart  14).  Based  on  this 
understanding,  the  Bank  has  specified  its  forward  guidance  –  namely,  that  it  will  continue 
with  the  QQE,  aiming  to  achieve  the  price  stability  target,  as  long  as  it  is  necessary  for 
maintaining that target in a stable manner. This in effect will exert downward pressure on the 
average  of  expected  future  short-term  rates.  In  addition,  premiums  will  be  prevented  from 
widening  through  the  Bank’s  massive  purchases  of  JGBs  with  relatively  longer  maturities. 
However, under such unconventional policy, nominal interest rates are likely to face upward 
pressure  as  the  effects  of  the  policy  start  to  appear,  preceding  the  improvement  in  the 
economy and prices. Referring to the elements that I have just explained, expected future 
short-term rates are likely to rise if market participants judge that an exit from current easing 
policy is at hand. 
In the case of a rise in nominal long-term interest rates, even when a central bank increases 
its  purchases  of  government  bonds,  or  otherwise  is  put  under  pressure  to  increase  such 
purchases,  in  order  to  suppress  the  government’s  borrowing  costs,  the  premiums  might 
possibly  rise  if  it  is  judged  by  market  participants  that  the  central  bank’s  purchases  will 
weaken  fiscal  discipline.  This  is  because,  when  the  level  of  long-term  interest  rates  is 
formulated, it is the market’s judgment that matters rather than a central bank’s intention. 
These arguments are hypothetical and can be regarded as simply the result of brain storming 
at this point. However, as the economy heads toward overcoming deflation, the effects will 
start to spread to long-term interest rates. At that point, the Bank’s monetary policy, including 
the process through which it will eventually exit from the current easing policy, should not be 
decided by giving consideration to fiscal sustainability, but instead be decided solely from the 
standpoint  of  achieving  the  2  percent  price  stability  target.  In  that  sense,  I  would  like  to 
reemphasize that the government’s commitment to medium- to long-term fiscal consolidation 
plays an important role in ensuring the ultimate success of QQE. 
Concluding remarks: economic activity in Oita Prefecture 
IV.  
Economic  activity  in  Oita  Prefecture  is  somewhat  more  sluggish  than  that  in  Japan  as  a 
whole, which has been showing clear recovery. The share of manufacturing in this prefecture 
is larger than that in the country overall. Electronic parts and devices – which face a decline 
in orders due to increased competition with foreign manufacturers and to sluggish sales of 
final products – account for a large share of manufacturing in the prefecture. Accordingly, the 
industrial production index for this prefecture has been below that for the whole country as a 
trend, albeit with some fluctuations due to the front-loaded increase in demand prior to the 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  consumption  tax  hike  (Chart  15).  Considering  that  Japan’s  current  economic  recovery  is 
characterized as being led mainly by nonmanufacturing, the large share of manufacturing in 
the prefecture’s industrial structure might be the reason for the sluggish recovery compared 
with that of the country as a whole. 
It  also  should  be  noted  that  positive  developments  have  been  spreading.  Anecdotal 
information suggests that, although private consumption – mainly apparel, high-end goods, 
furniture, and household electrical appliances – has been affected by the reactionary decline 
in demand following the front-loaded increase prior to the consumption tax hike, the decline 
is  not  significant  despite  a  larger-than-expected  front-loaded  increase  in  demand.  Private 
consumption  is  therefore  likely  to  remain  resilient  in  a  situation  where  labor  supply  and 
demand  conditions  continue  to  improve.  Business  fixed  investment  will  likely  expand 
significantly in nonmanufacturing, due, for example, to new construction of large distribution 
sites  and  to  an  extensive  renovation  of  a  new  commercial  complex,  which  will  open  at 
Kyushu  Railway  Company’s  Oita  Station.  Such  investment  is  also  scheduled  to  start 
increasing  in  manufacturing  owing  to  positive  developments  such  as  the  establishment  of 
new  production  lines  for  some  new  products,  in  addition  to  a  rebound  from  the  decline 
observed in fiscal 2013. 
From  the  medium-  to  long-term  perspective,  it  is  encouraging  that  the  private  and  public 
sectors are making joint efforts that make the most of regional characteristics. I would like to 
give two examples. First, joint efforts have been made in the field of renewable energy. Oita 
Prefecture  is  a  frontrunner  in  Japan  in  this  field,  being  ranked  first  in  terms  of  the  self-
sufficiency rate of such energy and taking second place in terms of the supply amount. After 
the Great East Japan Earthquake, entry into the power generation business using renewable 
energy sources in the prefecture has become active, due in part to the introduction of the 
country’s  feed-in  tariff  scheme  for  renewable  energy.  In  particular,  geothermal  power 
generation business is very active in Oita Prefecture, which is rich in hot spring sources and 
daily inflow of water, both of which rank number one in Japan. Substantial support for this 
power  generation  business  is  available;  for  example,  the  prefectural  government  and  the 
private sector have jointly established a fund to encourage firms to start such business by 
utilizing  the  heat  of  hot  springs.  Second,  joint  efforts  have  also  been  made  in  the  field  of 
tourism. Oita Prefecture is rich in tourism resources, including some of the most popular hot 
spring sites in Japan, such as Beppu and Yufuin. With a view to taking advantage of such 
resources, the prefecture formulated the “Tourism Strategies” in 2012 and is actively doing 
promotion both in Japan and abroad under the slogan “‘OITA’ The Best Onsen (Hot Spring) 
Area in Japan.” In addition, there have been events such as the start of operation in October 
2013  of  the  super  luxury  sleeper  cruise  train  called  the  Seven  Stars  in  Kyushu,  or 
Nanatsuboshi,  and  the extension  of  the  Higashi-Kyushu  Expressway  in  fiscal  2014.  These 
will likely promote an increase in the number of visitors. I hope the economic activity in Oita 
Prefecture  will  become  more  active  through  these  various  joint  efforts  of  the  private  and 
public sectors. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
  10 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    11
    12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    13
    14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    15
 16 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  17
