Mario Draghi: Interview with Neue Zürcher Zeitung 
Interview with Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, and Neue Zürcher 
Zeitung, published on 23 January 2014. 
 Mr Draghi, the founder of the World Economic Forum, Klaus Schwab, said last week 
that this year’s Davos meeting should not only focus on the debt crisis. Is the crisis 
over, or are the political and economic decision-makers simply tired of the crisis?  
We see some encouraging signs but the recovery in the euro area is still weak and uneven. 
All in all, the risks are still on the downside. So I would be cautious about becoming overly 
optimistic.  
But the mood has brightened considerably. 
Yes, the economy in the monetary union is growing again, but the growth is not uniform and 
the  unemployment  rate,  at  over  12%,  is  still  very  high.  Another  positive  sign  is  that  this 
recovery,  which  was  originally  driven  by  exports,  is  now  gradually,  slowly,  spreading  to 
domestic  demand. We are  now  at  a  stage  like  that  of the  US  a  year  and  a  half  ago. The 
survey data are strong, but we don’t yet have a continuous stream of strong hard data. That’s 
a familiar pattern in economic recoveries after a deep crisis.  
What must happen so that euro area finds its way back to sustainable growth?  
Countries should not unravel their budget consolidation efforts, but the consolidation should 
become more growth-friendly than  what  we have seen so far. In other words: less current 
expenditure and lower taxes and more expenditure on infrastructure and on human capital. 
All this should be accompanied by the implementation of structural reforms. Only structural 
reforms will bring Europe back onto a sustainable growth path.  
And what contribution can the ECB make to more growth?  
The ECB contribution is to maintain price stability. Sustainable growth is possible only with 
stable prices. We have plenty of instruments to ensure price stability. Some of them we have 
already  used,  such  as  forward  guidance.  And  we  have  shown  that  we  can,  if  necessary, 
react quickly. Last November, for example, we did not wait. We saw that the inflation path 
was lower and we acted and, as a result of it, the credibility of our forward guidance became 
stronger. What we do not see, frankly, is deflation. Inflation expectations are firmly anchored 
in the medium term.  
Why are low prices a risk if inflation expectations are so well anchored? And why can 
the ECB live better with an inflation rate of just under 2% than with one of 0.5%?  
There are several reasons for this. First, we have learnt from Japan’s experience in 1990s 
that  it  is much more  difficult  to  operate  monetary  policy  when  inflation goes  close  to  zero. 
Moreover, due to measuring errors, during periods of very low  inflation you may think that 
inflation  is  still  in  positive  territory,  whereas  in  fact  it  might  be  below  zero.  Finally,  for 
countries  that  want  to  adjust  their  external  imbalances  it  is  much  more  difficult  to  become 
competitive again if you have very low inflation compared to near to 2% inflation. If there is 
no  inflation,  they  have  to  lower  the  levels  of  their  nominal  wages  and  prices.  That  is  why 
most central banks target inflation of just under 2%.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
But disinflation is unavoidable particularly for countries that want to become 
competitive again.  
Indeed. Disinflation currently has two causes. It is in part necessary because some countries 
need to regain their price competitiveness. Another aspect of disinflation, however, can be 
attributed to the very different and fragmented financing conditions in the euro area.  
Are you more concerned about deflation than inflation?  
Actually, I would say neither. The risks of deflation or inflation are limited at this point in time.  
But wouldn’t inflationary pressures rapidly increase in the case of a strong economic 
recovery?  
Not necessarily. In the US, for example, and certainly in the euro area the recovery after the 
crisis has not been accompanied by inflationary pressures; unemployment is too high for that 
and production capacities are underutilised.  
The financial markets have clearly calmed down since your famous speech in London 
in summer 2012, in which you promised to do whatever it takes to preserve the euro. 
Would you say that your words back then have prevented the euro area from breaking 
apart?  
The stress in the markets since then has indeed decreased dramatically. My words certainly 
had a calming effect. But the effect has lasted so long only because, shortly before that, the 
European  governments  had  agreed  on  banking  union.  The  trust  this  indicated  in  the 
monetary union has helped the effect last until today. 
But you received a lot of criticism shortly afterwards, particularly in Germany, when 
you announced the OMT programme, under which the ECB can theoretically purchase 
unlimited euro area government bonds under certain conditions. It was said that, in 
doing so, you would be carrying out monetary financing, which is prohibited.  
OMTs  were  not  designed  to  finance  government  budget  deficits,  but,  in  support  of  our 
mandate of maintaining price stability, to remove the risk of a break-up of the euro area. We 
took  a  lot  of  precautions  when  designing  OMT  that  demonstrate  that  the  programme  has 
nothing to  do  with  monetary financing.  For  example,  we  would  only  buy  on  the  secondary 
market;  only  buy  bonds  with  short  maturities  and  not  necessarily  keep  the  bonds  until 
maturity. But the most important thing is that OMTs are bound by strict conditionality. This 
conditionality  makes  sure  that  countries  put  their  own  houses  in  order  as  far  as  budget 
financing  is  concerned.  A  country  that  is  supported  by  OMT  would  have  to  have  a  reform 
programme, agreed by the Eurogroup. If a country no longer stuck to the requirements of the 
programme, OMT purchases would automatically be stopped.  
How come you were unable to convince the German public of this? Even Germany’s 
Federal Constitutional Court is dealing with OMTs. 
One of the fears in Germany was that this would in the end cause inflation. But this has not 
been the case up until now, and I get the impression that, as a result, we have been able to 
allay  the  concerns  of  German  people  somewhat  regarding  OMTs.  Indeed,  the  risks  for 
Germany have decreased since the announcement of the programme.  
 
 2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Yet people had the impression that, on many decisions taken by the ECB’s Governing 
Council during the crisis, a small number of northern European countries which are 
possibly more stability-oriented were outvoted by the rest. Do you not find it 
problematic if a minority are always outvoted?  
It  was  not  like  that  at  all.  The  three-year  financing  operations  for  banks,  LTROs,  were 
approved  by  the  overwhelming  majority  of  the  Governing  Council,  including  most  of  the 
members you are hinting at; OMTs were approved by all members of the Governing Council 
except  one;  the  various  interest  rate  cuts  during  the  crisis  were  mostly  unanimously 
supported, or with an overwhelming majority. For the last interest rate cut in November, the 
difference was not so much about whether to do it, but when. Up until now, there has not 
been  the  same minority  constantly  opposing  the  rest  of the  Governing Council  and,  in  my 
view, there will not be in the future.  
You stress again and again that the ECB has many other instruments at its disposal. 
But it has already done so much – what else could the ECB do as things stand? 
We  do  indeed  have  many  other  instruments  at  our  disposal.  But  it  would  be  confusing  to 
highlight individual instruments now because the use of a given instrument depends on the 
situation. For example, we would react with completely different means if the money markets 
were to stall than if there were a setback in the economic situation. 
But the ECB has already pumped so much cheap money into the system and it is still 
not getting through to the markets. 
Yes, it is. It is getting through to the markets very well. It is just that it is still the case that too 
little is getting through to the real economy.  
Could negative deposit rates be an instrument that would help here?  
I do not want to speculate about individual instruments. Any instrument may be used if the 
situation demands, including the one you mention. 
In several months’ time, the ECB will take over supervision of large euro area banks. 
Will we no longer see banking crises after that?  
Since the outbreak of the financial crisis, banking regulation has made huge progress all over 
the world. In Europe, approximately half a trillion euros of additional capital has flowed into 
the banking sector in the past three years alone, half of it from private sources. But I would 
never say that these improvements mean that there will be no more crises. Nobody knows 
where the next crisis will come from. It is therefore important to make the financial system as 
a whole even more resilient. 
But are there not simply too many banks in Europe?  
That is very hard to say. The ECB’s asset quality review of the banks that is currently being 
conducted  pursues  one  goal  in  particular:  we  want  to  shed  more  light  on  bank  balance 
sheets and therefore indirectly also on that issue. The markets and investors should know 
what  state  Europe’s  banks  are  really  in.  We  want  full  transparency.  Only  through 
transparency will investors be ready to provide additional capital for banks.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Yet this means that the ECB’s audit of the banks could itself become a systemic risk. If 
the ECB were to notice very large capital shortfalls or a large number of banks that are 
not capable of surviving, this would potentially trigger a new banking crisis. 
I  see  it  completely  differently.  If  there  are  problems  in  Europe’s  banking  sector,  they  are 
there, regardless of whether we uncover them or not. In the financial system in general, light 
is always better than darkness. Only by uncovering weaknesses in the banking sector can 
measures be taken to correct them, be it through recapitalisation, restructuring or winding up 
banks.  Without  transparency,  the  weaknesses  will  remain  and  put  a  strain  on  the  whole 
economy. After all, weak banks do not lend. We have learnt the lessons from Japan in the 
1990s that a weak banking sector inhibits growth for years. 
The consolidation of the banking sector in Europe since the crisis has made less 
progress than in the United States, so there should be much remaining to be revealed. 
If you look solely at the number of banks that have been wound up, that is certainly true. In 
the United States, more than ten times as many banks have been closed down as in Europe. 
However,  the  banking  structure  and  business  models  in  Europe  are  totally  different  from 
those in the United States. We will see what needs to be done in Europe – our assessment 
of banks will bring this to light. Precisely that is what the whole exercise is about: weak banks 
should  exit  from  the  market.  We  are  taking  this  very  seriously.  Should  there  be  any 
weakness, we will reveal them, and will take appropriate countermeasures. 
Are you happy with the resolution mechanism recently adopted by the governments? 
It is a first step. We are now getting a common mechanism, a resolution authority and also a 
joint  resolution  fund.  It  will  take  ten  years  for  that  fund  to  be  filled,  which  is  too  long,  of 
course. The proposal that has been put forward must be developed further in the next few 
weeks, but it is a good starting point.  
With regard to the forthcoming assessment of banks, do you believe that the 
governments will be prepared to take action if it becomes necessary to cover banks 
that have run into financial difficulties? 
Yes,  they  have  committed  themselves  to  do  so  both  at  the  level  of  heads  of  state  and 
government and at finance minister level. Moreover, there are clear bail-in provisions in place 
that  will  call  the  banks’  creditors  to  account.  We  did  not  have  such  rules  when  the  crisis 
erupted. In future,  it  will  no  longer  be  the  taxpayer  who  has  to  step  into  the  breach  in  the 
event of bank failures. 
Are you optimistic in this respect? Will the taxpayer really not be called upon to pay 
the bill in future? 
That is not a question of optimism. The new rules afford the taxpayer far better protection. I 
am confident that the bail-in rules will be complied with and that taxpayers’ money will only 
used as a last resort. 
Is the ECB really the institution that should deal with banking supervision? Aren’t you 
afraid of reputational risks? 
Not really. We will keep supervision strictly separate from monetary policy. The supervisors 
will  have  to  take  care  of  their  reputation  with  respect  to  banking  supervision,  while  the 
monetary  policy-makers  will  take  care  of  their  credibility  with  respect  to  price  stability.  I 
actually believe that our monetary policy will become more effective if supervision is carried 
out well, because healthy banks will ensure that our monetary policy is better transmitted to 
the real economy. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
And what do you expect of Davos? Praise, because you have rescued the euro area, 
or criticism because you are not doing enough? 
Both. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
