  Klaas Knot: The changing role of central banking 
Opening speech  by  Mr  Klaas  Knot,  President  of  the  Netherlands  Bank, at  the  Conference 
“De Nederlandsche Bank 200 years: central banking in the next two decades”, Amsterdam, 
24 April 2014. 
 Distinguished speakers, dear colleagues, friends, 
I am thrilled to welcome you to our conference. 
I’d like to extend a special welcome to the governors of our constituency countries. Over the 
past fifty years, your history has become increasingly interwoven with ours, and I’m therefore 
glad that you’re all here. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
You  accepted  our  invitation  to  celebrate  the  bicentennial  of  De  Nederlandsche  Bank.  And 
you all cleared your agendas to discuss the future of central banking. 
At this festive moment I will tell you more about the history of De Nederlandsche Bank. And 
against  that  background,  I’d  like  to  address  my  central  question:  has  the  recent  financial 
crisis stirred up the role of central banks, and if so, how? In other words: are we in the midst 
of a paradigm shift? I do so in light of the theme of this conference: where central banks will 
be heading over the next two decades. 
The  point  I  want  to  emphasise  here  today  is  that  our  understanding  of  the  role  of  central 
banks, has constantly changed over time. Let’s begin with the easy stuff: the origins of De 
Nederlandsche Bank; DNB. If you look at our history, you can see how DNB evolved over 
time. 
We  used  to  be  a  mainly  Amsterdam-oriented  credit  institution  that  performed  commercial 
activities. And now we’re a truly pan-European institution, with public duties and a centre of 
gravity in Frankfurt. 
How did this come about? Our history starts with King Willem the First’s decision to set up a 
central bank. Two hundred years ago. 
At the time, the Netherlands had just been liberated from the Napoleonic days. Our economy 
was in really bad shape. Not much was left of our Golden Age. 
The new King – also known as the King-Merchant – however, was determined [quote] “to lift 
up Commerce – the nerve of this State – , from the derelict condition to which past times and 
circumstances reduced her”. [unquote] 
He established De Nederlandsche Bank, to realise his plan for a national circulation bank. 
DNB had a difficult start in life. As a newcomer it was greeted with distrust. It took quite some 
time for DNB to evolve into the kind of national bank the King had in mind: a bank granting 
credit and distributing banknotes throughout the country. 
It wasn’t until the end of the 19th century that DNB turned from a principal lender to trade and 
industry into a real lender of last resort. By protecting the Netherlands from several financial 
crises,  DNB  gradually  became  –  in  the  words  of  my  then  predecessor  Vissering  –  “the 
absolute central institution, around which everything was concentrated”. 
In those unsettled times, DNB evolved from “a sleeping old lady” into a vibrant institution with 
a wide range of activities, and increasingly interwoven with society. 
We gained prominence as a national monetary institution. And the foundations where laid for 
the  modern,  post-war  Dutch  central  bank.  DNB  was  nationalised.  And  the  1948  Bank  Act 
made DNB responsible for preserving the value of the currency. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  From then onwards, DNB was known as the “Guardian of the guilder. We were responsible 
for circulating banknotes and for managing the payment system. And finally, DNB was given 
the task of supervising all financial institutions. 
Around  the  beginning  of  this  millennium,  financial  supervision  was  reorganized  along 
functional lines. 
I can be a lot briefer about DNB’s remaining history, given that many of you have shared our 
various milestones in recent years. 
By  this,  of  course,  I  mean  the  Treaty  of  Maastricht,  which  established  the  Economic  and 
Monetary Union, and the introduction of the single currency. These major events paved the 
way for DNB, and 17 other central banks, to become a truly pan-European institution within 
the European System of Central Banks. 
And  the  most  recent  milestone,  of  course,  is  the  European  Council’s  decision  in  2012  to 
create a European banking union; a project which is still under construction. 
In the first few decades after European co-operation got underway, we were able to reach 
some kind of consensus on the role of central banks. And their relationship with society. This 
general view was threefold: 
one: central banks served society best if they focused primarily on price stability. 
two: central banks played a relatively narrow role in financial stability. 
Yes, they should be ready to provide emergency liquidity, while promoting the stability of the 
payment system, but that is where it stopped. 
three:  central  banks  should  leave  micro-prudential  supervision  and  regulation  to  other, 
independent parties. 
That  generally  meant  outside  the  central  bank!  (although  there  were  some  exceptions, 
including DNB). 
These were the times that we now sort of nostalgically refer to as the Great Moderation. But 
then, however, came the Great Financial Crisis. And we moved from the Great Moderation to 
the Great Recession. And, here in Europe, to the EMU crisis. 
These events painfully reminded us that financial instability can indeed severely damage the 
broader economy. Has the recent crisis altered the general view we held for so long? 
This is a relevant question for us, central bankers, given two well-known pitfalls we have to 
avoid as monetary policy-makers. The first pitfall is reacting too late. 
During  the  interwar  years,  for  instance,  central  banks  in  the  major  economies  were 
“prisoners” of their own economic orthodoxies and so made mistake after mistake. 
My institution, too, was dogmatic in believing in the benefits of the gold standard, even in the 
face of the huge losses due to the devaluation of the British pound. 
The second pitfall is that we’re so afraid of reacting too late, that we respond too soon. How 
can we avoid both these traps? 
I believe there are two preconditions that we must meet. 
First, we should protect the independence of central banks in monetary policy matters, in all 
circumstances.  The  19th  century  economist  David  Ricardo  already  explained 
that 
governments would almost certainly abuse their power to issue paper money if, for instance, 
they were forced by war into creating money. He argued that central banks should instead be 
governed by individuals entirely independent of government. 
Central banks should – [quote] “ never, on any pretence, lend money to the Government, 
nor be in the slightest degree under its control or influence”. [unquote] 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  There are certainly many episodes in our history, when the central bank’s relationship with 
the State has come under pressure. For example, after Belgium – at that time known as the 
Southern  Netherlands  –became  independent  in  the  1830s,  the  Dutch  government’s  deficit 
soared to unprecedented levels. And when, at that time, DNB was unwilling to provide credit 
to the State in return for Treasury notes as security, the King sighed that he could expect 
little help from this institution. 
All I’m saying here is that preserving central bank independence is a delicate balancing act, 
but also one that’s vitally important to pursue. 
The second precondition to stay clear off the pitfalls of either reacting too late or too soon, is 
that  we  must  never  forget  that  central  banks  are  very  exceptional  institutions.  Because  of 
their ability to lend and so to create liquidity for banks. 
In  normal  times,  this  may  just  mean  day-to-day  management  of  liquidity  in  the  financial 
system. But in times of financial stress, as we’ve seen in recent years, it may mean having to 
act as lender of last resort. 
Being  the  “bank  of  banks”  means  central  banks  have  always  been  at  the  heart  of  the 
payment  and  settlement  process.  But  here,  too,  central  banks  will  continue  to  face  major 
challenges in keeping up with innovation and technological change. 
The difficulty here is that payments systems have characteristics of a public service, while 
most of them are actually operated by private agents. Given the overall economy’s reliance 
on  the  payment  system,  these  private  sector  activities  require  a  certain  degree  of  public 
policy guidance. 
And  they  also  require  an  increasing  amount  of  public  oversight  to  make  sure  they  take 
account of the needs and wants of the public at large. 
And  so,  as  well  as  preserving  their  independence,  central  banks  also  need  to  continue  to 
support  and  improve  the  safety,  the  reliability  and  the  efficiency  of  the  privately  operated 
payment and settlement systems. 
I’ve tried to shed some light on the history of DNB. And I’ve tried to point out the two pitfalls 
we have to avoid at present. Let me now address my central question, which touches upon 
our future: 
Has the recent financial crisis stirred up the role of central banks, and if so, how? In other 
words: has the financial crisis resulted in a paradigm shift for central banks? 
I would say it has. Let me explain that by looking with you at three major lessons that the 
crisis has taught us. Three lessons that have challenged the pre-crisis consensus on what 
central banking was about. 
The  first  lesson.  The  crisis  has  reminded  us  that  price  stability  alone  is  not  enough  to 
ensure macro-economic and financial stability. By now it’s therefore become widely accepted 
that the pre-crisis view of central banking, which was based on central banks focusing mainly 
on price stability, was too narrow. Or, to quote Willem Buiter, “the financial stability role of 
central banks has returned with a vengeance”. 
The second lesson. The crisis has shown us that central banks are on the front line when 
the  financial  system  comes  under  stress.  This  has  fed  arguments  in  favour  of  entrusting 
central banks with the prudential supervision of financial institutions. 
Since central banks are the only parties with enough information to decide whether lending 
on exceptional terms is reasonable. 
The  crisis  may,  therefore,  have  reversed  the  pre-crisis  tendency  to  separate  micro- 
prudential supervision and central bank regulation. A clear example of this, close to home, is 
of course the ECB’s preparations for taking on new banking supervision tasks as part of the 
Single Supervisory Mechanism. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
The third lesson. The crisis  has  also  taught  us  that  price  stability  alone  is  not  enough to 
ensure financial stability. And that adopting a micro-prudential perspective does not suffice 
either. We  know  that  the  key  factors  in  the  crisis  were  the  links  between  various  financial 
players, and the links between financial institutions and sovereigns. And so we are aware of 
the need to also have a macro-prudential perspective as well. 
This perspective places the financial system as a whole, including its pro-cyclicality, under 
constant scrutiny. Unfortunately, this scrutiny was clearly lacking in the pre-crisis framework. 
There is also some acceptance of a key role for central banks here, given that monetary and 
macro-prudential policies are very much interdependent. 
Here in the Netherlands, DNB has indeed been entrusted with this role. From 2014 onwards, 
enhancing financial stability is now also explicitly embedded in DNB’s mandate. We’re now 
on the verge of adopting a broader view of what constitutes central banking. The financial 
crisis has clearly brought the core functions of central banks closer: Monetary and liquidity 
policy,  micro-  and  macro-prudential  regulation  and  supervision,  stability  and  reliability  of 
payment and settlement systems…. They all complement each other! 
So we are gradually beginning to see this broader view taking shape. Yet there are still many 
operational questions we need to answer. 
For instance: What are the implications for monetary policy strategy of incorporating financial 
stability risks? 
How  should  we  deal  with  the  interactions  between  macro-prudential  policy  and  monetary 
policy and between monetary policy and supervision of banks? 
How  can  central  banks  contribute  to  cross-border  payment  cooperation  and  ensure  level 
playing fields without discouraging competition and without creating undue uncertainty about 
regulations? 
And  above  all,  and  this  is  very  important  in  my  view,  how  are  we  to  deal  with  the  major 
institutional challenges of bringing these core functions of central banks closer together and 
preserving the synergies between them? 
Luckily,  these  are  some  of  the  very  questions  that  you’re  here  to  discuss  today  and 
tomorrow. But these are also questions that are not easily answered. For there are several 
concerns that we need to take into account: 
– 
For  one,  giving  central  banks  a  larger  role  in  financial  stability  may  blur  the  lines 
between different policies. 
And the fact that financial stability involves so many different actors, makes things 
even more complicated. 
Also:  central  banks  may  end  up  becoming  more  political  than  they  were  in  the 
decades before the crisis. 
And  this,  of  course,  will  then  give  rise  to  a  legitimate  concern  about  a  possible 
democratic deficit. 
   The all-important question, therefore, is: How we can preserve our independence with regard 
to price stability, while at the same time broadening our responsibilities? 
In my view, it is therefore vital to foster a clear understanding of what central banks can and 
cannot do in each of their responsibilities and in each of their roles. Not until then can we 
avoid unreasonable expectations about what central banks can – and cannot – achieve. 
One way of improving the understanding of the role of central banks is to find new ways to 
increase  transparency  and  accountability.  After  all,  independence  on  the  one  hand,  and 
transparency and accountability on the other, are two sides of the same coin. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Let me end by returning to the start of our conference. I’m confident that this conference in 
celebration  of  our  bicentennial  is  going  to give  us  plenty  of  food for  thought,  and  will  also 
shed some light on the questions I just identified. 
The decades before the crisis were perhaps a period of relative calm. The aftermath of the 
crisis challenges us to look into the future, into the role of central banks over the next two 
decades. If only, because we need to bring our core functions more closely together, while 
preserving our independence where required. 
Given our long history as an institution at the heart of society and our continuing dedication, I 
believe we have proved to be of immense value as a contributor to sustainable prosperity. 
And I am confident that we will continue to be so. 
I thank you for your attention. And I wish you all a fantastic conference. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
