Yaseen  Anwar:  Brief  overview  of  Pakistan’s  banking  sector  and  innovative 
banking practices  
Speech  by  Mr  Yaseen  Anwar,  Governor  of  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan,  at  Bahria  University 
Convocation, Karachi, 22 December 2014. 
 Vice Chancellor, Bahria University, Prof….….. 
Distinguished  Faculty  members,  Dear  students,  Ladies  and  Gentleman,  I  would  like  to  thank 
Bahria University for inviting me to this Convocation. 
First of all, let me congratulate all position holders and students who have earned their distinctions 
and  university  degrees  through  sheer  willpower,  hard  work  and  dedication.  Your  education  has 
provided  you  with  the  resources  to  lead  and  change.  You  should  be  determined to  create  your 
own  individual  voice  upholding  the  values  of  creativity  championed  by  this  institution,  while 
acknowledging your link with the community. 
The  importance  of  education  cannot  be  overemphasized.  Education  is  fundamental  to  any 
society’s progress for it prepares generations to equip themselves with the knowledge and skills to 
meet the challenges of the ever changing world. When education blends with youthful energy, it 
organizes people economically, socially and politically, which helps the society to step-up on the 
ladder  of  civilization.  Education  is  the  catalyst  of  national  development;  it  is  what  distinguishes 
nations form one another. 
Pakistan has immense human potential. More than half of our population is below the age of 25; 
sadly  the  education  systems  aren’t  appropriately  managed  and  sufficient  enough  to  exploit  this 
potential. This is  where institutions  such  as Bahria University  and  the  rest  of  private  sector  can 
play  their  role  to  ameliorate  current  educational  level.  To  increase  the  pace  of  economic 
development,  our  policies  must  be  focused  towards  advancement  of  education.  For  a  stronger, 
respected  and  flourishing  Pakistan,  we  must  in  our  capacity  address  the  issues  related  to 
education. 
Taking benefit of this opportunity, I would like to share my thoughts on the state of banking sector 
and  the  need  for  adopting  innovative  banking  practices  from  around  the  world  to  deliver  better 
customer value and financial inclusion in Pakistan. 
In  recent  years,  growth  and  turnaround  in  Pakistan’s  banking  sector  has  been  remarkable  and 
unprecedented.  Classified  as  Pakistan’s  and  region’s  best  performing  sector,  the  banking 
industry’s assets have risen to over US $97 billion with profitability of Rs 187 billion (pre-tax) in 
FY12 which is exceptional and at an all-time high. Similarly, during FY 2012 deposits have grown 
at a fast clip of 17 percent which is the highest in the last five years. The Capital Adequacy Ratio 
(CAR) of the banking sector, which was already well above the regulatory requirements; increased 
further to 15.4 percent in FY12. The solvency of the banking sector has improved due to robust 
profitability,  fresh  equity  injections  and  decreasing  Risk  Weighted  Assets  (RWA)  owing  to  risk-
averse behavior. 
However,  the  important  question  that  we  all  must  ask  ourselves  is  that  has  the  banking  sector 
exhausted market opportunities and maximized return on equity? Here I would like to quote some 
statistics to flash the untapped opportunities for retail banking in Pakistan: 
• 
First, banks are yet to tap in the banking opportunities with the vast unbanked masses as 
the credit to private sector is only around 18 of the GDP which is too low. According to the 
Access to Finance Study (A2FS) only 12 percent of the population has access to formal 
financial services. Whereas of the remaining 88 percent, only 32 percent are informally 
served and 56 percent are completely excluded. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
    Second,  the  existing  branch  network  of  the  banking  system  is  insufficient  to  serve  the 
millions of unbanked masses. The total number of bank branches in Pakistan is very low 
at  around  10,600  which  place  Pakistan  among the  countries  with  the  highest  per  bank 
population of around 15,000 persons per branch. 
Third, private credit to GDP ratio is abysmally low at 18.4 percent compared with other 
countries at the same level of development. 
Fourth, the sectoral distribution of credit is highly skewed and very low compared to the 
needs of the producing sectors of our economy. 
Finally,  the banking  sector  has  nearly  neglected  the financing  needs  of the Mico Small 
and  Medium  Enterprises  (MSME)  as  80%  of  the  credit  is  availed  by  only  25,000 
borrowers. 
A  recent  World  Bank  study  confirms  a  positive  relationship  between  financial  inclusion,  faster 
economic growth and poverty alleviation. Given these challenges, SBP aims to address financial 
exclusion through variety of interventions, it aims to enhance delivery of financial services through 
technology based branchless banking, mobile wallets etc. Let me share my thoughts on financial 
inclusion, our efforts, and its current landscape. 
Financial  inclusion  is  core  component  of  financial  sector  development  strategy.  It  envisages 
transforming  the  financial  market  into  an  equitable  system  with  efficient  market  based  financial 
services to the otherwise excluded poor and marginalized population including women and young 
people. 
Pakistan  microfinance  regulation  had  been  ranked  number  1  in  the  world  by  the  economist 
intelligence unit of the economist magazine 2010 and 2011. 
Pakistan  has  become  one  of  the  fastest  growing  markets  for  branchless  banking  in  the World. 
These  developments  include  increased  competition,  technological  innovation,  new  business 
models,  transformation  in  customers’  needs  and  behaviors,  and  regulatory  proportionality. 
International development agencies and media have now been highlighting Pakistan for its market 
and  institutional  environment  for  branchless  banking.  Moreover,  according  to  a  recent  CGAP 
publication,  “Pakistan  serves  as  an  example  of  how  public  and  private  institutions  together  can 
move  a  country  towards  a  digital financially  inclusive  system.”  In fact  the  branchless  banking is 
going to dominate the retail banking landscape in the long-term. 
Branchless Banking has also proved to be an effective instrument in channelizing the Government 
to Persons (G2P) payments in trying times like serving Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs), flood 
affectees during the last two years, and beneficiaries of the Benazir Income Support Programme. 
In  the  coming  days,  this  channel  is  expected  to  continue  playing  an  important  role  towards  the 
promotion of financial inclusion and the management of Government to Person (G2P) Programs 
like Salaries  Disbursements, Pensions, BISP, Watan  Cards,  Pakistan Cards  and  tax  collections 
services,  etc.  The  existing  Branchless  Banking  deployments  can  cater  to  the  needs  of  over 
10 million potential beneficiaries of G2P payments in Pakistan. 
SBP has partnered with DFID to launch a financial inclusion program. A number of initiatives have 
been taken to promote access to finance in the MSMEs, agriculture and housing which creates 
enabling  environment  by  addressing  regulatory  barrier  market  failures  and  industry  bottlenecks 
and ensuring consumer protection. 
Lack of financial literacy is a major constraint in advancing financial inclusion SBP launched the 
first ever nationwide financial literacy program last year, the pilot phase of the program has been 
concluded  successfully  by  targeting  about  50000  beneficiaries  in  various  provinces  regions  and 
districts with emphasis on low income strata. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
SBP  has  deepened  global  partnership  with  World  Bank,  Asian  development  bank  and  other 
international  and  bilateral  development  agencies  to  make  financial  services  accessible  to  the 
unbanked population. 
We will see the impacts of these initiatives in near future, which should create more opportunities 
for the marginalized segment of the society, so they can play their part in the development of this 
country. 
At  this  point  in  time,  you’re  curious  minds  will  have  a  lot  of  questions,  some  of  them  will  be 
answered  by  your  mentors,  some  will  be  left  unanswered,  and  for  them  you  have  to  use  your 
imagination and knowledge. Some of you have already chosen a path for yourself and some of 
you are yet to decide, questions like what field will be more appealing. In which organization you 
will learn more? Should you apply in fast growing private sector or should you join public sector? 
Should you apply for a job or pursue higher studies? Whatever you do, do it with utmost dedication 
I am sure optimism, creative thinking and challenging conventional wisdom will help you achieve 
your goals and lead you towards a more prosperous future.  
Let me once again congratulate the graduates who have received their degrees today. I wish you 
well in your future pursuits. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
