Mugur Isărescu: Integrated supervision 
Opening speech by Mr Mugur Isărescu, Governor of the National Bank of Romania, at the 
Seminar “Integrated Supervision”, jointly organised by the Romanian Financial Supervisory 
Authority and the National Bank of Romania, Sinaia, 22 January 2014. 
 Distinguished guests,  
Ladies and gentlemen,  
It is a pleasure for me to warmly welcome you to this seminar on Integrated Supervision. The 
newly  established  Romanian  Financial  Supervisory  Authority  and  the  National  Bank  of 
Romania  decided  to  jointly  organize  the  conference  on  this  challenging  topic  that  has 
recently come into the spotlight.  
I particularly want to thank our guests from the national supervisory authorities of Austria, the 
Czech Republic, Germany, Poland, United Kingdom and Ireland. I also welcome the experts 
from the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund and the European Commission who 
will generously impart their knowledge to all of us.  
I  do  wish  all  of  you  a  pleasant  stay  here  in  Sinaia.  This  three  days  long  seminar  is  an 
excellent occasion to learn, to exchange views and to generate professional ties.  
Allow me to say a few words about where you are. This is a premise of the National Bank of 
Romania’s training center, situated in Cumpatu district, in this lovely resort, Sinaia.  
The name Sinaia is an eponym of Mount Sinai. By the end of the 17th century, a group of 
Wallachian  monks,  led  by  Mihail  Cantacuzino,  a  landlord  of  those  times,  went  on  a 
pilgrimage  to  Palestine  and  the  Sinai  Peninsula.  They  were  hosted  at  Saint  Catherine 
monastery.  Once  returned,  they  established  a  convent  quite  here,  in  the  heavily  forested 
area, at the bottom of the Carpathians. The new monastery was called Sinaia, in the memory 
of their journey to the Sinai Peninsula. A century later, the first King of Romania, Carol I fell in 
love  with  the  place  and  built  Peles  Castle,  his  summer  residence.  Following  the 
establishment of the Peles Castle a railroad connecting the capital to the king’s new summer 
residence was built. Little by little, Sinaia became popular among the members of the high 
society: they started building summer residences as well as hotels, villas. You can visit the 
Peles Castle and the Sinaia monastery on Friday.  
And now about this seminar.  
The  topic  of  this  seminar  is  integrated  supervision  to  ensure  financial  stability.  It  relies  on 
several  conceptual  layers.  First  of  all,  to  understand  that  the  frontiers  among  financial 
activities  have  been  blurred  by  financial  innovation  and  the  formation  of  conglomerates. 
Secondly, effective Regulation and Supervision involves a working together of regulators and 
supervisors, who oversee various financial markets. And thirdly, macro prudential concerns 
are increasingly on the radar screen of Regulation and Supervision. Above all one needs to 
understand the functioning of overall finance.  
The program of our seminar is quite rich. It covers an array of conceptual and operational 
issues  such  as:  the  need  for  integrated  financial  supervision;  risk-based  supervision; 
corporate governance for non-banking financial institutions; the risk management capacity of 
financial institutions; operational and systemic risks from an integrated perspective; macro-
prudential  and  micro-prudential  supervision  instruments;  central  bank  oversight  of financial 
markets  infrastructure;  supervision  of  conglomerates;  stress  testing  for  a  sound  financial 
system;  institutional  coordination  at  the  European  Union  level,  and,  not  least,  consumer 
protection.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Europe is not yet out of the woods when it comes to overcoming a very deep financial and 
economic crisis. There are some good signs, but there is still quite a long way to go  – as 
Mario Draghi recently reminded us in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs of 
the European Parliament on December last year.  
The  major  lessons  of  the  financial  crisis  are  incorporated  into  this  reform.  We  mostly 
recognize  now  that  price  stability  is  not  sufficient  for  ensuring  financial  stability  and  light 
touch regulation has failed. There is a derailment of finance, that needs to be corrected, and 
this  is  the  objective  of  reforms  under  way  in  Europe  and  the  United  States.  Inter-
connectedness has grown immensely in the latest couple of decades against the backdrop of 
technological change (new IT technologies) and financial deregulation.  
Consequently,  systemic  risks  have  grown  enormously,  banks  and  other  financial  entities 
have neglected them and regulation and supervision underestimated them.  
In  all  the  European  Union  countries,  Regulation  and  Supervision  is  undergoing  major 
changes, and integrated supervision is a hallmark of the new reform. At the European Union 
level,  reforms  have  led  to  the  setting  up  of  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  and  three 
European  Authorities  (European  Banking  Authority,  European  Securities  and  Markets 
Authorities, European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority). They work together 
in scrutinizing risks and formulating policies for dealing with systemic threats.  
The National Committee for Financial Stability has the task of overseeing the overall financial 
system. Therefore, the mission of adopting an integrated approach to examining risks is in its 
genes.  The  National  Bank  of  Romania  has  a  history  of  thinking  “globally”  about  the 
Romanian  financial  system,  which  is  of  enormous  help  for  the  National  Committee  for 
Financial  Stability.  The  Financial  Supervision  Authority  itself  has  to  develop  its  conceptual 
and operational arms in this regard.  
The  very  organizational  map  of  the  Financial  Supervision  Authority  shows  the  attention 
granted to integrated supervision. Thus, a directorate for financial integration is a novelty and 
has a prominent role to play. It is commendable that its staffing has tried to bring in highly 
experienced individuals. But, however experienced these people are, there is a lot they need 
to understand better in order to fulfil their mission. For the sake of fairness, it should be said, 
that integrated supervision is at the beginning in many European Union member states. And 
even where it has a longer history, its performance is not stellar.  
I do hope this seminar is going to offer you the opportunity for fruitful discussions and the 
experience and skills you gain from here will be beneficial to all of you. This is quite a special 
place  for  such  a  seminar  since,  for  eight  years  in  a  raw,  we  organised  along  with  the 
International Monetary Fund a regional conference on financial stability issues.  
Thank you and enjoy your dinner. 
 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
