  Ben Broadbent: Monetary policy, asset prices and distribution 
Speech by Mr Ben Broadbent, Deputy Governor for Monetary Policy of the Bank of England, 
at the Society of Business Economists Annual Conference, London, 23 October 2014. 
 I would like to thank Alina Barnett for research assistance and I am also grateful for helpful comments from other 
colleagues in particular from Richard Harrison, David Learmonth and Gareth Ramsay. The views expressed are 
my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Bank of England or other members of the Monetary Policy 
Committee.  
A few years ago, I used to take the overground train into work. The line was cluttered with 
stations – mine was barely 400 yards on from the previous stop. So you can understand why 
my fellow commuters were less than convinced one morning when, seeking to explain why 
our train was 20 minutes overdue, the driver said this was “because we left the last station 
late”. It raised a smile. But it wasn’t an explanation. 
I confess I have a similar reaction to accounts that seek to “explain” low interest rates, and 
the behaviour of asset prices more generally, solely by reference to what central banks have 
done. This is especially true when those accounts go on to attribute significant and lasting 
redistributive  effects  to  these  policies.  For  example,  and  at  least  when  they  happen  to  be 
going up, it’s quite common to hear that equity markets are benefiting from “easy money”. 
But  independent  changes  in  monetary  policy  will  ultimately  be  reflected  in  inflation  and, 
despite  a  decline  in  interest rates that’s  now  gone  on for  20  years,  inflation  has  remained 
pretty close to target, throughout the developed world (Chart 1). This suggests that, rather 
than  causing  the  decline  themselves,  central  banks  have  instead  been  accommodating  a 
deeper downward trend in the “natural” or “equilibrium” rate of interest. That is not a trivial 
matter: if they had failed to track this trend, policy would have been too tight and inflation and 
output too low. 
And  although  stocks  performed  well  through  the  early  part  of  that  decline,  for  much  of  it 
they’ve not done so. Chart 2 plots the yield – inversely related to the price – on indexed gilts 
and  UK  equities.  Through  the  1990s  these  two  markets  tended  to  move  together  and,  in 
price  terms,  generally  upwards.  Since  around  2001,  however,  their  yields  have  diverged. 
Equities have significantly underperformed bonds. This suggests that, over that past decade 
or so, the forces depressing the natural rate of interest have also been increasing the extra 
premium required of risky assets. What I want to do today is say something about the causes 
of these trends and (in only the broadest possible terms) their implications for the distribution 
of wealth and income. 
None of this will be particularly novel. Economists and central bankers were remarking on the 
low level of real interest rates as early as 2005.1 The MPC discussed the factors behind the 
more recent decline, since the financial crisis, in the February 2014 Inflation Report, in the 
context  of  its  forward  guidance.  My  colleague  David  Miles  went  through  some  of  these 
arguments  in  more  detail  in  a  speech  in  February  this  year.  The  debate  about  “secular 
stagnation” has also focussed a lot of attention on the issue. 
The only wrinkle here is to distinguish those factors that are good for risky assets from those 
that are bad – and, in doing so, to say something about distributional effects. I also want to 
caution against mistaking cause for effect and in particular, when it comes to asset prices, 
putting central banks at centre stage. Autonomous changes in monetary policy certainly can 
have an impact on asset prices. But that does not mean they’re the only thing that actually 
                                                
1  Bernanke (2005). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  does so. Over time, trends in real asset prices are determined by real (non-monetary) forces: 
we may occasionally be prominent actors but it’s someone else who’s written the script. 
Chart 1 
 Chart 2 
Inflation close to target despite protracted 
decline in short term interest rate 
Lower bond yields not always associated 
with higher equity prices 
Source: Bank of England and ONS 
 Note: * adjusted for changes in leverage2 
Source: Bank of England and Datastream 
 The decline in the natural rate of interest 
At  around  the  time  that  inflation  targeting  began,  the  economist  John  Taylor  proposed  a 
simple  representation  of  rate-setting  by  the  US  Fed  –  the  so-called  “Taylor  rule”.  This 
suggested that variations in real short rates were well explained, empirically, by movements 
in the “output gap” and inflation. Allowing for these real short rates looked relatively stable. 
The word “rule” wasn’t meant prescriptively. In this context it simply meant “reaction function” 
–  a  description  of the  way  US  policy  rates  had in  practice,  and  over  a particular  period of 
time, responded to the economy. But as the concept took hold, many began to interpret the 
relationship  not  just  as  a  description  of  what  central  banks  had  been  doing  but  as  an 
indicator  of  what  they  should  do.  In  particular,  the  Taylor  rule  cemented  a  view  that  only 
cyclical factors could justify deviating from a particular level of the policy rate. In the UK, for 
example, there was a commonly held view in the mid-1990s that, as long as the economy 
was operating at potential and inflation was on target, real interest rates would necessarily 
have to settle at a rate of 3% or so in real terms, roughly their average over the previous few 
years. This would imply a “neutral” nominal rate of close to 6%.  
“Neutral” doesn’t mean constant, however. It means the level of interest rates that, across 
the  world,  ensures  the  supply  and  demand  for  finance  –  desired  levels  of  saving  and 
investment – are brought into line3 (Chart 3). 
                                                
2  The blue line is actually E/V, where E is earnings and V the total value of the firm, net debt as well as equity. 
Unlike E/P, and at least if the Modigliani-Miller neutrality result applies, E/V is invariant to changes in leverage. 
For a given total value V, higher leverage raises earnings per share and the E/P ratio. 
I’ve been a bit imprecise with terminology here, using “natural”, “equilibrium” and “neutral” interchangeably. By 
the first two I mean the real short-term interest rate that would prevail if prices and wages were fully flexible 
3 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Chart 3 
Stylised supply and demand for finance 
  And in principle, any number of things – any number of real economic disturbances – can 
move that rate around. An autonomous rise in the supply of finance, for example, would tend 
to depress real interest rates and the expected returns on all assets, quite independently of 
monetary  policy.  More  optimism  about  the  future,  increasing  the  demand  for  investment 
funding,  would  push  up  real  interest  rates.  An  increase  in  the  perceived  degree  of  risk, 
increasing the wedge between the required return on risky assets and the risk-free rate, can 
push up the first but depress the second (using a simple model of asset prices I’ll present 
below some stylised simulations that make these points).  
So  the  notion  that  real  interest  rates  only  vary  because  the  output  gap  moves  around,  or 
because central banks are making mistakes, doesn’t square with theory. Nor does it make 
much sense empirically, particularly over the past twenty years: 
First, as I said in the introduction, inflation has been relatively stable. Anyone who believed in 
the  mid-1990s  that  the  neutral  policy  rate  was  fixed  at  6%  (in  nominal  terms)  would  have 
viewed  with  some  alarm  the  sharp  decline  since  then.  Bank  Rate  has  now  been  over  5% 
points below the estimates of the neutral rate that prevailed in the 1990s, for well over five 
years – a period far longer than the lags supposed to exist between policy changes and their 
effects. Taking into account any additional impact of quantitative easing (QE) the predicted 
result  would  presumably  have  been  a  cyclical  boom  in  output  and  ever-rising  inflation, 
throughout the developed world. That’s not what’s occurred. 
Second,  the  decline  in  short-term  real  interest  rates  has  been  accompanied  by  a  similarly 
steep  fall  in  longer-term  real  interest  rates.  The  yield  on  the  10–20  year  portion  of  the 
indexed gilt curve, for example, was 4% in the mid-1990s; by the end of that decade it had 
dropped to barely 2%; on the eve of the financial crisis, in mid-2007, it was less than 1%; 
today it is –0.3% (Chart 4). This is significant because, just as a matter of principle, it’s hard 
to see how pure monetary disturbances – including any independent decisions of monetary 
                                                                                                                                                   
(Woodford (2003)). Occasionally people distinguish the short and longer-term level of this rate (using “natural” 
and “equilibrium” respectively). Neutral is the term usually reserved for the rate that would keep the economy 
cyclically stable over the longer term – the intercept in the Taylor rule – though in many settings this is the 
same as the natural rate.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  policy makers – can have very enduring influences on real things, including real interest rates 
(that’s particularly true for monetary authorities in relatively small and open economies like 
the UK). So they’re unlikely to have had much bearing on real forward rates. 
Third,  even  if  you  doubt  these  basic  principles,  the  data  show  that,  where  we’re  able  to 
isolate autonomous (or at least unexpected4) shifts in official interest rates, they don’t seem 
to produce any reaction in longer-term real forward rates (Chart 5). 
 
Chart 4 
Chart 5 
Real interest rates have also declined at 
longer horizons 
Longer term yields insensitive to  
policy surprises 
Source: Bank of England 
Source: Bank of England and Bank calculations 
   
QE is a different matter. As has been well documented elsewhere, announcements of asset 
purchases did have statistically significant effects on longer-term interest rates. Work at the 
Bank suggests that the combined effects of the various stages of QE reduced 10-year gilt 
yields by as much as 100bp. But it’s not clear for how long that effect has persisted: there are 
reasons  to  believe  that  asset  purchases  have  a  greater  impact  when  markets  are  more 
illiquid, and have less capacity to absorb the flows. Most of the decline in longer-term real 
interest rates occurred before the crisis. And, in any event, the first point above still applies: 
judging by the subsequent behaviour of inflation, QE looks simply to have brought forward a 
decline in real interest rates that would have occurred anyway, only more painfully so. As the 
Bank of England explained in a Quarterly Bulletin article a couple of years ago, without QE 
we’d have experienced higher unemployment, lower wages and lower inflation. It’s hard to 
see bond yields rising in such an environment. 
In this respect it’s interesting to look at a passage from Keynes’s Treatise on Money, written 
in the teeth of the Great Depression in December 1930: 
We cannot hope for a complete or lasting recovery until there has been a very great fall in 
the long-term rate of interest throughout the world … Yet [that] is likely to be a long and a 
tedious process, unless it is accelerated by deliberate policy. Of specific remedies two [are] 
appropriate. The Bank of England and the Federal Reserve Board might reduce the rate of 
                                                
4  A policy surprise is defined here as the difference between the announced Bank rate and a proxy for market 
expectations embodied in meeting-to-meeting interest rate swaps on the day of the MPC decision.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  interest  to  a  very  low  figure,  say  ½  per  cent.  At  the  same  time  these  institutions  should 
pursue  open-market  operations  à  outrance.  That  is  to  say,  they  should  buy  long-dated 
securities either against an expansion of Central Bank money or against the sale of short-
dated securities until the short-term market is saturated. 
So QE certainly isn’t a novel idea (in fact the US Fed conducted large scale asset purchases 
in  1932,  something  that  Milton  Friedman5  later  suggested  was  critical  in  stabilising  the 
economy  later  that  year).  And,  as  Keynes  suggests,  the  purpose  was  to  “accelerate”  a 
decline in long-term interest rates that would otherwise have been a “tedious” process. 
Some stylised experiments affecting the natural interest rate 
So if it’s not monetary policy, what might have caused the long decline in the real risk-free 
rate  of  interest  in  the  past  twenty  years  or  so,  both  before  and  since  the  financial  crisis? 
Chart  3  provides  a  basic  visual  framework  for  thinking  about  these  things.  What  follows, 
based on a simple asset-pricing model, gives a slightly more quantitative flavour. 
Any  such  model  will  generally  allow  for  three  sorts  of  influences  on  asset  prices:  the 
underlying  discount  rate  (the  extent  to  which  people  care  less  about  the  future  than  the 
present), expected economic growth and the degree of uncertainty about that growth. The 
particular model I’m using here allows for two sorts of uncertainty – a generalised, two-sided 
risk and, on top of that, the possibility of a large downside hit to growth.6  
The first of these terms is connected with saving. All else equal, a lower discount rate means 
people want to save more – at the margin, they’re prepared to tolerate a lower rate of return 
on  any  asset. In terms of  Chart  3  you  can  think  of this  as  a rightwards  shift  in the  saving 
schedule.  In  the  simple  model,  the  effect  of  a  1%-point  drop  in  the  discount  rate  on  the 
risk-free interest rate and the value of equities is shown in Chart 6(a). Interest rates fall and, 
at  least  on  impact,  equity  prices  jump.  This  is  because  the  present  value  of  future  profits 
increases, not because the profits themselves do so. From that point on, expected returns on 
all assets would be lower. 
Higher saving was often touted as the possible reason for lower interest rates ahead of the 
crisis. At the time the argument was first made, during the early part of the last decade, the 
suggested “glut” in saving was often associated with the fast-growing East Asian countries. 
Some economists, notably Thomas Piketty, have suggested that, because the rich generally 
save  more,  widening  income  inequality  may  have  contributed  to  the  trend.  Others  have 
pointed out the importance of demographic factors. 
Whatever the underlying cause, the important point is that higher desired saving would tend 
to have a similar impact on the price of all long-dated assets, whatever their risk. That’s why 
it looks like a good candidate for the co-movement between equities and bonds evident in 
the early (pre-2001) part of Chart 2. 
The  other  determinants  of  asset  prices  –  the  level  of,  and  uncertainty  about,  future 
economic growth – tend to have differing effects on the two asset classes. Lower expected 
growth will reduce investment demand and, by shifting that schedule to the left (Chart 3), 
will tend to reduce the equilibrium risk-free interest rate. Future profits will be discounted 
more  generously,  as  before,  but  now  the  profits  themselves  will  be  lower.  So  despite  a 
lower interest rate, and a rise in bond prices, equity prices fall on impact (Chart 6(b), which 
                                                
5  Friedman and Schwartz (1963).  
6  The model, developed by the economist Robert Barro, and based on an earlier idea by Rietz, allows for the 
effects  of one-sided  tail  risk  –  the  potential  for macroeconomic  “disasters”  – as  well  as more conventional, 
two-sided  uncertainty  (Barro  (2009)).  The  downside  skew  to  growth  reduces  the  risk-free  interest  rate  and 
pushes  up  the  required  return  on  risky  assets.  I  used  this  model  to  speculate  about  the  causes  of  low 
investment in a speech a couple of years ago (Broadbent (2012)).  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  simulates  a  1%-point  decline  in  expected  future  growth).  They  also  return  less  from  that 
point on. 
Qualitatively, increases in uncertainty have similar effects – they reduce equilibrium interest 
rates and depress equity prices (Charts 6(c) and 6(d)). But their sizes  are rather different. 
Changes in two-sided uncertainty don’t do that much (6(c)); by contrast, small rises in the 
perceived  chance  of  very  bad  economic  events  can  have  powerful  effects  on  the  risk-free 
interest  rate.7  Intuitively,  this  makes  sense:  an  asset  whose  payouts  are  immune  to  such 
disasters are valuable. Even if that downside risk rises by only a little, people are prepared to 
pay quite a bit more for – and to tolerate lower returns on – the “safe haven” of government 
debt. And I think it’s plausible, at least, that an increasingly negative skew to global growth 
expectations might help to explain the divergence between equity and bond yields in Chart 2. 
 
Chart 6a 
Chart 6b 
Stylised effect of drop in discount rate 
Decline in expected growth 
 Chart 6c 
Chart 6d 
Rise in two sided uncertainty 
Rise in downside tail risk 
                                                    
7  This obviously depends on the sizes of the changes involved. Chart 6(c) simulates the effect of increasing the 
standard deviation  of  annual growth  from  2%  to 3%.  Given  that,  even  over  the  past  twenty  years,  the  true 
figure – for both world and UK growth – has been around 2%, that’s a fairly significant rise. Chart 6(d) shows 
what happens when you raise the perceived probability of an economic “disaster” by only 1% point (from 3% 
to 4%) and, although the simulated disaster is indeed very bad (a 20% drop in output) it’s not out of line with 
some of those that have occurred in the past (Barro 2009)).  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Now  these  are  extremely  stylised  simulations  and  one  should  obviously  take  them  with  a 
pinch  of  salt.  Even  within  this  basic  framework  there  are  plenty  of  other  things  that  might 
have  reduced  the  equilibrium  risk-free  interest  rate.  For  example  –  and  of  particular 
relevance since the crisis – saving might be forced higher by the need to deleverage, in both 
public  and  private  sectors.8  In  addition  to  elevated  risk  premia  between  equity  and  bond 
yields,  retail  lending  rates  may  be  affected  by  lower  liquidity  in  some  wholesale  financial 
markets.9 The debate about “secular stagnation” – the idea that the equilibrium real interest 
rate is sufficiently negative to be out of reach of monetary policy (given the zero lower bound) 
– has brought forth more potential factors still, including population aging, a shift toward less 
capital-intensive  production  and  institutional  changes  that  have  increased  the  demand  for 
safe assets.10  
But what all these possibilities have in common is that they’re real economic changes – they 
have consequences for, but do not originate in, monetary policy. Those consequences are 
significant. If monetary authorities fail to recognise a decline in the underlying, natural rate of 
interest, leaving the official interest rate unchanged amounts to a tightening in policy. That’s 
precisely the charge levelled by some economists at the US Fed in the 1930s. It’s also why it 
was  crucial,  for  the  sake  of  the  global  economy,  that  official  interest  rates  in  developed 
economies were cut as sharply, and as promptly, as they were in 2008 and 2009. But one 
should  see  those  cuts,  and  the  earlier  declines  that  preceded  them,  in  context:  they  took 
place against a backdrop of a falling natural, or equilibrium rate. 
Some remarks about distributional effects 
As long as assets are unevenly spread across the population, shifts in their prices will have 
redistributive effects. Let me now say something about what those might have been. I’ll make 
only a few, and very broad points. 
First, as regards the distribution of wealth, one of the main sources of unevenness is age. 
There is certainly considerable variation within age groups. In Chart 7, a snapshot taken from 
the ONS’s first Wealth and Asset Survey (2006), the vertical lines are interquartile ranges for 
each  10-year  age  bracket.  Among  households  headed  by  45–54  year  olds,  for  example, 
those  25%  from  the  top  had  over  £200,000  more  in  net  wealth  than  those  25%  from  the 
bottom of the distribution. 
But there is also significant variation across age groups. Even relatively wealthy 25-year-olds 
have  significantly  less  in  the  way  of  net  assets  than  the  average  50-year-old.  This  means 
that, during the first phase of the decline in real rates, when all asset prices were rising, it 
was  generally  older  people  who  benefited  the  most.  Anyone  who,  in  the  mid-1990s, 
happened already to own a house, or whose pension was already well funded, would have 
benefited  materially  from  these  trends.  Chart  8  plots  the  age  profile  of  net  wealth  in  1995 
versus that a decade later.11 It steepened considerably. 
                                                
8  Eggertson and Krugman (2012) develop a model where deleveraging pressure has very protracted effects on 
(ex ante) saving and on equilibrium real interest rates.  
9  David Miles (2014) points out the significant widening in the spread between interest rates on retail loans and 
Bank rate since the crisis. Part of this might reflect the more generalised widening in risk premia but it could 
also reflect factors specific to the banking system.  
10  Some  of  these  institutional  changes  –  requirements  for  banks  to  hold  great  quantities  of  liquid  assets,  for 
example  –  post-date  the  crisis;  others  (changes in  the  accounting  for  pension  fund liabilities)  have been  in 
place for longer. A good source for these and other arguments is an ebook on secular stagnation published 
earlier this year by VoxEU (2014).  
11  The  numbers  in  Chart  9,  which  was  published  in  a  recent  Quarterly  Bulletin  article  by  Phil  Bunn  and  May 
Rostom, are derived from the British Household Panel Survey. This is less detailed than the ONS’s Wealth 
and Asset Survey but it goes back further.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
 Chart 7 
Age an important determinant of  
net wealth 
Chart 8 
That much more important  
after mid-1990s 
    Source:  IFS  calculations  using  Wealth  and  Assets 
Survey 2006/08 
Source: British Household Panel Survey (BHPS) and 
Bank calculations 
 
Second, the implications of the trends in more recent years, during which bonds have done 
well  but  equities  relatively  poorly,  are  obviously  more  complicated.  It  depends  on  who, 
precisely,  owns  which  asset.  Because  the  majority  are  owned  by  institutions  –  banks, 
pension funds and insurance companies – it is hard to trace through the impact of any capital 
gain to its ultimate beneficiary. One thing worth saying is that, at least in terms of effective 
wealth,  the  gainers  clearly  include  those  entitled  to  future  payouts  from  defined-benefit 
pensions.  You  can’t  sell  such  an  entitlement.  But  it  does  offer  a guaranteed flow  of  future 
income, much like the coupons from an indexed gilt (that’s why DB pension funds are obliged 
to  discount  their  liabilities  using  gilt  yields  and  why,  in  response,  they  hold  significant 
quantities  of  government  debt).  The  present  value  of  this  income  has  therefore  risen  in 
similar  fashion.  To  the  extent  they  include  equities,  the  value  of  defined-contribution  (DC) 
pension funds will have performed less well. 
The third point is that none of this need have any bearing on the distribution of income, as 
opposed to that of wealth. This is an important distinction. To the extent that asset prices rise 
because  the  marginal  investor  is  becoming  more  patient,  lowering  the  discount  rate 
(Chart 6(a)), this reflects a change in the present value of a given stream of income, not in 
the stream itself.  
Things are a little more complicated if interest rates have fallen in response to slower growth 
(6(b)).  In  that  case,  anyone  who  has  locked  in  a  future  flow  of  income  (coupons  on 
government bonds, for example) will gain relative to others. But if we look at capital income 
in aggregate, there’s no evidence it’s risen at the expense of wages. Despite significant shifts 
in real interest rates and asset prices, and whatever their cause, the share of total income 
going  to  labour  (relative  to  profits)  has  remained  pretty  stable  in  the  UK  over  the  past 
30 years.12  On  the  face  of  it,  asset  price  movements  have  not  resulted  in  labour  taking  a 
lower share of the economic pie (Chart 9).  
                                                
12  In contrast to the UK the labour share in the US has declined in recent years (see also Elsby et al (2013)). But, 
over time, these movements have been uncorrelated with interest rates and most explanations, such as they 
are, involve more structural changes (see, for example, Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014)). 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Chart 9 
Labour share of income relatively stable in UK 
Source: ONS and FRED 
 Summary 
I  read  a  lot  of  economic  commentary  that  says  (i)  interest  rates  are  low  because  central 
banks  have  chosen  to  keep  policy  rates  low  and  (ii)  this  has  pushed  up  the  price  of risky 
assets, benefiting only those who happened already to own them. I’m not sure either of these 
is true. 
To be sure, autonomous changes in monetary policy can affect asset prices. If the central 
bank decided to lower interest rates arbitrarily, for no other reason than that it wanted to, real 
asset prices would rise. But it’s unlikely the effect would endure for a very long time: the only 
lasting  impact  would  be  on  inflation.  And,  in  the  real  world,  that’s  not  what’s  happened  – 
inflation  has  remained  broadly  close  to  target  even  as  real  interest  rates,  long  as  well  as 
short,  have  trended  downwards.  This  bears  out,  for  me,  that  the  real  task  for  policy  is  to 
understand – and then adapt to – economic forces affecting the natural, or equilibrium rate of 
interest.13 For a variety of reasons, and over a long period of time, this underlying rate has 
been  driven  remorselessly  downwards.  An  official  interest  rate  that  might  once  have  been 
considered  inflationary  is  now  contractionary;  failing  to  adapt  to  these  changes  sufficiently 
quickly  would have depressed output and pushed inflation below target. And sharp falls in 
the equilibrium interest rates – which have probably not yet fully unwound – can be thought 
of as a significant driver of the substantial cuts in interest rates undertaken by the MPC in 
2008 and 2009. 
As I say, those forces seem to have been at work for a long time, before as well as since the 
financial  crisis.  Over  that  time  they  have  had  differing  effects  on  the  performance  of  risky 
assets.  During the  1990s  all  asset  classes  did  well  –  bonds  and  equities  alike.  At  least  in 
terms of wealth, that will have benefited anyone who happened already to own long-dated 
assets,  mostly  older  people.  But  over  the  last  15  years,  equities  have  done  poorly.  Since 
1999 UK and US equities have delivered a real cumulative return of only 2% a year, only a 
touch higher than term bank deposits and a lot lower than the 4½% average return on long-
dated  gilts  (Chart  10).  The  implications  for  the  distribution  of  wealth  are  therefore  more 
                                                
13  The economist Michael Woodford describes optimal policy exactly in these terms – the task is to set the real 
short-term interest rate close to its natural, or equilibrium level (Woodford (2003)).  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  complicated.  Either  way,  it’s  not  clear  there  have  been  any  for  the  broad  distribution  of 
income, as between capital and labour (and as opposed to wealth). 
The low level of real interest rates has recently fuelled talk of a “secular stagnation”. Whether 
this situation persists – whether the stagnation in real interest rates really is “secular” – is, 
quite honestly, anyone’s guess. If forced to have a go myself, I’d say that neutral real rates 
are likely to stay low for some time yet – with the implication that any rises in official policy 
rates are likely to be “limited and gradual” – but that, eventually, as the headwinds previously 
highlighted by the MPC dissipate, they are likely to rise. My instinct is to set more store by 
the very long-term average for both productivity growth, and real interest rates, than the more 
recent trends. I am not so pessimistic as to imagine that the best one can do, over the next 
twenty years, is the negative real return offered by indexed gilts. 
But one can’t make these predictions with any  great confidence. And if that sounds rather 
non-committal, then it only underlines the point I’m trying to make. Whatever does cause a 
sustained rise in real interest rates – a lasting solution to the arrangements of the euro area, 
perhaps,  or  renewed  optimism  about  global  productivity  growth  –  it  is  unlikely  to  be  the 
arbitrary  whim  of  central  bankers. Those  betting  on  long-term movements  in  interest rates 
will have to work a little harder than just listening to people like me. And that sounds like a 
good place to end.  
Chart 10 
Despite low rates equities have performed 
poorly over the past 15 years 
Source: Bank of England 
 References 
Baldwin,  R.,  and  Teulings,  C.,  2014,  “Secular  Stagnation:  Facts,  Causes  and  Cures”, 
VoxEU, http://www.voxeu.org/content/secular-stagnation-facts-causes-and-cures 
Bank  of  England,  2014,  May  2014  Inflation  Report,  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/ 
publications/Documents/inflationreport/2014/ir14feb.pdf 
Banks J., R. Crawford and G. Tetlow, 2010, “What does the distribution of wealth tell us 
about future retirement resources?”, A report of research carried out by the Institute for Fiscal 
Studies on behalf of the Department for Work and Pensions. 
Barro  R.,  2009,  “Rare  disasters,  asset  prices,  and  welfare  costs”,  American  Economic 
Review 2009, 99:1, 243–264. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Bernanke B., 2005, “The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit”, Remarks 
at the Sandridge Lecture, Virginia Association of Economists. 
Broadbent  B.,  2012,  “Costly  capital  and  the  risk  of  rare  disasters”,  speech  given  At 
Bloomberg,  London,  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/ 
2012/speech581.pdf 
Bunn P. and M Rostom, 2014, “Household debt and spending”, Bank of England Quarterly 
Bulletin No. 304. 
Eggertson G. and P Krugman,  2012,  “Debt  deleveraging  and the  liquidity  trap:  a  Fisher-
Minsky-Koo  approach”,  The  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics 
(2012),  1469–1513. 
doi:10.1093/qje/qjs023. 
Elsby M, B Hobijn and A Sahin, 2013, “The decline of the US Labour Share”, Brookings 
Papers on Economic Activity, Fall 2013. 
Friedman M. and A. J. Schwartz, 1963, “A monetary history of the United States 1867–1960”, 
National Bureau of Economic Research 
Joyce M., N. McLaren and C. Young,  2012,  “Quantitative  easing  in  the  United  Kingdom: 
evidence  from  financial  markets  on  QE1  and  QE2”,  Oxford  Review  of  Economic  Policy, 
Volume 28, No. 4, pp. 671–701. 
Karabarbounis L and B Neiman, 2013, “The global decline of the labor share”, Quarterly 
Journal of Economics, 129(1), 61–103, February 2014. 
Keynes J. M., 1930, “A treatise on money”, New York, Harcourt, Brace and company. 
Miles,  D.,  2014,  “The  transition  to  new  normal  for  monetary  policy”,  Speech  given  at  Mile 
End 
available 
at 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2014/speech707.pdf 
Woodford M., 2003, “Interest and prices”, Princeton University Press. 
Queen  Mary 
College 
London 
Group, 
and 
in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
