  Ronald Waas: Coordinated handling of payment system and currency 
exchange crime 
Speech by Mr Ronald Waas, Deputy Governor of Bank Indonesia, at the Signing Ceremony 
for Cooperation between the Bank Indonesia Representative Office and Police Department in 
Riau Islands Province concerning “Coordinated Handling of Payment System and Currency 
Exchange Crime”, Batam, 22 October 2014. 
 Honourable, 
• 
• 
Deputy Governor of Riau Islands Province; Dr Soerya Respationo, SH, MH; 
Chief  of  the  Criminal  Investigation  Agency  of  the  Republic  of  Indonesia,  Suhardi 
Alius; 
Leaders of the National Police 
–  WaDir. TIPIDEKSUS, Kombes Rohmat Sunanto; 
– 
– 
– 
Leaders of Bank Indonesia Representative Offices and Departments 
– 
Kasubdit Upal, Kombes Agus Nugroho; 
Kabag Kerjasama antar Lembaga – Divkum Polri, Kombes Syahri Gunawan; 
Kapolda KepRi; Brigjen Polisi Drs. Arman Depari; 
Head  of  the  Bank  Indonesia  Representative  Office  in  Area  VIII,  Mahdi 
Mahmudy; 
Head  of  the  Bank  Indonesia  Representative  Office  in  Riau  Islands  Provice, 
Gusto Rizal Eka; 
Executive  Director  of 
Department; 
Executive Director of the Money Management Department; 
Executive Director of the Legal Affairs Department; 
Executive Director of the Communication Department; 
Expert Staff of the Board of Governors, Hari Utomo; 
– 
– 
– 
– 
Members of the Riau Islands Leaders’ Communication Forum; 
Mayor of Batam, H. Ahmad Dahlan, MH; 
As well as all those in attendance. 
the  Payment  System  Supervision  and  Policy 
  First,  let  us  praise  God  Almighty  for  blessing  us  here  in  attendance  at  such  a 
salubrious  setting  to  witness  the  signing  of  an  agreement  between  the  Bank 
Indonesia  Representative  Office  and  the  Police  Department  here  in  Riau  Islands 
concerning “Coordinated Handling of Payment System and Currency Exchange 
Crime”, also known as money changers. 
Such activity represents an integral part of institutional coordination between Bank 
Indonesia and the National Police, formalised in a Memorandum of Understanding 
(MoU)  concerning  “Cooperation  to  Support  Task  Implementation  and  Institutional 
Authority”  signed  by  the  Governor  of  Bank  Indonesia  and  the  Chief  of  Police  on 
1st September 2014. 
• 
• 
• 
Good morning to you all, 
1. 
  2. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 3. 
That Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) was followed by the signing of Working 
Guidelines  between  Bank  Indonesia  and  the  Criminal  Investigation  Agency 
regarding  the  “Handling  of  Alleged  Payment  System  and  Currency  Exchange 
Crime”. The working guidelines provide impetus for further similar cooperation at all 
Bank  Indonesia  Representative  Offices  and  Local  Police  Departments  throughout 
the Indonesian archipelago. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen; 
4. 
Information and/or data exchange; 
Security and escorts; 
Supervision; 
Enhanced human capital; and 
Socialisation.  
Coordinated  handling  of  alleged  payment  system  and  currency  exchange  crime 
represents  synergic  institutional  efforts  between  Bank  Indonesia  and  the  Police, 
particularly  in  the  area  of  law  enforcement.  In  broad  terms,  the  scope  of 
coordination entails the following: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
There  remains  substantial  cooperation  that  must  be  completed  and  refined  as  an 
inseparable  element  of  the  agreement  signed  here  today.  In  addition  to  the 
arrangement  concerning  law  enforcement  in  the  payment  system  and  currency 
exchange industry, Bank Indonesia and the Police will immediately initiate a number 
of other working guidelines as follows: 
•  Working guidelines concerning coordinated security (offices and personnel) as 
well as escorting valuable state-owned property; 
•  Working  guidelines  concerning  coordinated  development,  licensing  and 
supervision of security companies that secure the transportation of money and 
are responsible for rupiah management; and 
•  Working guidelines concerning coordinated prevention and handling of alleged 
rupiah currency crime. 
In  the  case  of  the  working  guidelines  concerning  coordinated  prevention  and 
handling of alleged rupiah currency crime, this represents a tangible follow-up to our 
previous  discussions  at  the  seminar  on  the  Mandatory  Use  of  the  Rupiah 
Domestically.  As  I  mentioned  at  that  seminar,  there  are  three  dimensions  to  the 
compulsory use of the rupiah. 
First is the Legal Dimension. A number of regulations, including the Currency Act 
and  the  Foreign  Exchange  Act  as  well  as  Bank  Indonesia  regulations  concerning 
rupiah  entering  and  leaving  Indonesia  and  Ministry  of Trade  regulations regarding 
labelling the prices of goods and services all serve to strengthen the legal basis for 
using rupiah in the archipelago. The variety of aforementioned regulations directly 
and  indirectly  reinforces  the  mandatory  use  of  the  rupiah  for  all  cash  and 
non-cash transactions settled in the territory of the Republic of Indonesia. 
Second is the National Dimension. The rupiah is a symbol of sovereignty of the 
Republic of Indonesia. Therefore, using the rupiah for all transactions settled in the 
territory of the Republic of Indonesia is the duty of all citizens. That is the only way 
the rupiah will become the “host” of its own nation. 
And  third  is  the  Economic/Business  Dimension.  Hitherto,  foreign  currency 
transactions in Indonesia have, amongst others, triggered greater domestic demand 
for  foreign  currencies.  The  large  foreign  currency  requirement  for  domestic 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
2 
   transactions  has  left  the  economy  vulnerable  to  economic  shocks.  Domestic  and 
international confidence in the rupiah will bolster economic resilience, providing the 
rupiah gravitas at home and abroad. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
15. 
16. 
17. 
Law  enforcement  in  the  area  of  currency  exchange  is  critical,  especially 
considering that the currency exchange business is vulnerable to abuse in the form 
of money laundering and terrorist funding, the narcotics trade as well as smuggling 
under the guise of currency exchange. 
The city of Batam is a hub of currency exchange activity, evidenced by the number 
of  licensed  non-bank  money  changers  in  the  city,  totalling  122,  which  is  the 
second largest in Indonesia along with Denpasar. In terms of transaction volume, 
up  to  September  of  this  year,  Batam  placed  fourth  after  Jakarta,  Denpasar  and 
Bandung, with a contribution equivalent to Rp683 billion (4.58%). 
Meanwhile, in terms of discovering counterfeit banknotes, based on records of Bank 
Indonesia  and  the  National  Police,  as  many  as  549  counterfeit  banknotes  were 
discovered on the Riau Islands up to September 2014, which is far lower than the 
amount  seized  last  year  totalling  1,666  banknotes.  Counterfeit  banknotes  in  Riau 
Islands Province accounted for 0.66% of the national total or around 10% of the total 
on  Sumatra,  placing  Riau  Islands  third  after  the  provinces  of  North  Sumatra  and 
Bandar Lampung. 
In  order  to  prevent  currency  exchange  crime,  Bank  Indonesia  promulgated  Bank 
Indonesia  Regulation  No.  16/15/PBI/2014,  dated  11th  September  2014, 
concerning Non-Bank Currency Exchange Activity. The regulation reinforces and 
refines  all  aspects  of  currency  exchange  activity  that  must  be  licensed  by  Bank 
Indonesia. Furthermore, the regulation is also expected to mitigate potential risk in 
the form of currency exchange crime. 
Pursuant to the Bank Indonesia Act, Bank Indonesia is the monetary and payment 
system  authority.  As  the  monetary  authority,  the  mission  of  Bank  Indonesia  is  to 
create  and  maintain  rupiah  stability.  Currency  exchange  activity,  as  a  supporting 
industry  of  the  financial  sector,  plays  a  strategic  role  in  terms  of  underpinning 
rupiah stability. 
Meanwhile, the mission of Bank Indonesia, as the payment system authority, is to 
create a secure, efficient and uninterrupted cash and non-cash payment system. In 
terms  of the  non-cash  payment  system,  Bank  Indonesia  tireless  strives  towards  a 
Less  Cash  Society  (LCS),  namely  encouraging  the  general  public towards  a 
proclivity  for  non-cash  payment  instruments.  To  that  end,  Bank  Indonesia 
recently  launched  a  National  Non-Cash  Movement  in  order  to  expedite  the 
proliferation of non-cash transactions. 
Payment  (retail)  transactions  in  Indonesia  are  currently  dominated  by  cash-based 
transactions.  Weak  public  understanding  concerning  the  existence  and  use  of 
non-cash payment methods, coupled with limited quality infrastructure, forces the 
public to favour cash-based transactions for their daily activity. 
A survey conducted by McKinsey & Company (2013) revealed that in comparison to 
its peer countries, the use of cash for retail transactions in Indonesia remains 
dominant at 99.4%. The dominant use of cash is a consequence of risk and rupiah 
management  costs.  Statistics  show  that  each  year  the  amount  of  currency  in 
circulation grows by around 15%, far exceeding population growth at around 2–3% 
and  GDP  growth  of  around  5–6%.  A  less  cash  society  is  expected  to  precipitate 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
14. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
 18. 
 more balanced growth with more widespread use of non-cash payment instruments 
amongst the public. 
The  National  Non-Cash  Movement  is  critical  to  hasten  the  realisation  of  a  more 
efficient  economy  as  well  as  better  governance 
financial 
management amongst the public, business players and government institutions. To 
ensure  a  more  effective  programme,  the  National  Non-Cash  Movement  is  run  in 
synergy with various ministerial and provincial government programmes through the 
application of e-Government and e-Payment. 
terms  of 
in 
Ladies and gentlemen; 
19. 
A  key  determinant  of  a  less  cash  society  is  a  sense  of  security  for  all 
stakeholders  when  conducting  non-cash  transactions,  in  particular  protection 
from  criminality  by  unauthorised  parties. This  was  confirmed  by  a  Bank  Indonesia 
survey,  which  found  that  security  when  conducting  non-cash  transactions  is  the 
main factor cited by the general public, followed by convenience and interoperability 
amongst financial service providers. 
In order to combat potential criminality, the intensive handling of suspected crimes is 
paramount.  Solid  coordination  and  consolidation  between  the  relevant 
authorities  and  law  enforcement  is  expected  to  prevent  and  minimise  various 
payment  system  and  currency  exchange  crimes.  Furthermore,  the  imposition  of 
stringent sanctions will act as a deterrent to potential criminals. 
Sound  coordination  and  cooperation  is  required  in  the  form  of  a  clear  and 
transparent mechanism pursuant to the respective task and authority of Bank 
Indonesia and the Police at the central and regional levels referring to prevailing 
laws  and  regulations  as  well  as  paying  due  regard  to  principles  of  justice,  mutual 
benefit and law. 
I  warmly  welcome  the  signing  of  this  agreement  on  handling  alleged  payment 
system and currency exchange crime as an integral part of our combined efforts to 
combat various crimes. 
Through the signing of this document, we are sure that the future handling of alleged 
payment  system  and  currency  exchange  crime  will  be  more  effective,  thereby 
bolstering efforts to protect the general public through the creation of a sound 
and secure payment system and currency exchange industry. 
The  working  guidelines  will  help  combine  effective  communication,  intensive 
coordination and synergic collaboration between Bank Indonesia, the Police and 
the  Government  and  the  central  and  local  levels,  whilst  ensuring  all  stakeholders 
maintain effective law enforcement in the payment system and currency exchange 
industry. 
In  closing,  with  the  confidence  that  God  is  always  by  our  side,  may  He  bless  our 
endeavours towards a brighter future. Thank you.  
Ladies and gentlemen; 
23. 
20. 
21. 
22. 
24. 
25. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
