  Andrew G Haldane: In giving, how much do we receive? The social value 
of volunteering 
Speech by  Mr Andrew G Haldane, Executive Director and Chief Economist of the Bank of 
England, at a Pro Bono Economics lecture to the Society of Business Economists, London, 
9 September 2014. 
 Accompanying figures can be found at the end of the speech. 
The views are not necessarily those of the Bank of England or the Monetary Policy Committee.  
I  would  like  to  thank  Lynne  Berry,  Martin  Brookes,  Karen  Hancock,  Sue  Holloway,  Jane  Walsh  (Pro  Bono 
Economics),  Stephen  Burgess,  Jeremy  Franklin,  Charlotte  Hogg,  Joanna  Konings,  Lee  Robinson  (Bank  of 
England),  Daniel  Fujiwara  (SImetrica  and  London  School  of  Economics),  Matt  Hill  (Institute  for  Volunteering 
Research) and Valerie Fender (ONS). 
I am delighted to be giving this joint Society of Business Economists (SBE) and Pro Bono 
Economics (PBE) lecture. The issue I want to discuss is volunteering and its contribution to 
the economy and wider society. This issue provides a natural link between the work of SBE 
with  its  interest  in  promoting  the  economy,  and  PBE  with  its  interest  in  promoting 
volunteering by economists. And, indeed, the work of both in improving societal welfare. 
Let me start with a word on PBE, for those unfamiliar with our work. PBE is a charity, which I 
co-founded around five years ago with Martin Brookes. Its aim, then and now, is to match 
economist volunteers into projects in the charitable sector, often to work on measuring the 
social impact of charities’ activities. In effect, PBE is a match-maker between economists and 
charities. 
Why might we match-make between the uplifting art of charities and the dismal science of 
economics?  Well,  our  hope  was  that  there  were  significant  gains  from  trade:  on  the 
charitable side, because of the rising pressures many charities have felt to demonstrate the 
impact of their interventions; and on the economist side, because of the usefulness of their 
applied skillset for tackling measurement issues of just this type.  
Five years on, the heartening news for both sides is that these theoretical gains from trade 
appear to have been realised in practice. PBE has worked with over 170 charities, spanning 
such  diverse  issues  as  homelessness,  eating  disorders,  child  exploitation  and  prison 
rehabilitation. And we have matched over 170 economist volunteers into around 85 projects, 
with a large lump of unused economist labour waiting in the wings. 
PBE’s experience illustrates nicely some of the broader points I wish to discuss about the 
value of volunteering – value not just to the recipient but also to the provider and to wider 
society.  In  other  words,  in  giving  our  time  through  volunteering,  we  –  individually  and 
societally – stand to receive.  
One of the aims of this lecture is to demonstrate that the societal gains from volunteering are 
potentially large – and also largely under-appreciated. Certainly, they are not well measured. 
At least in official GDP statistics, they are not captured at all. This failure to recognise fully 
the  value  it  creates  means  that  volunteering  suffers  from  a  market  failure  problem.  At  the 
end, I will suggest a few avenues for correcting that failure. 
The economics of well-being  
Volunteering, and the work of PBE, fits under the broader umbrella of the economics of well-
being. This has become a growth area of late. And, some might say, not before time. In his 
excellent recent report on  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  well-being,  former  Cabinet  Secretary  and  PBE  patron  Gus  O’Donnell  quotes  Robert 
F. Kennedy in 1968:1 
“[GDP]  measures  neither  our  wit  nor  our  courage,  neither  our  wisdom  nor  our 
learning,  neither  our  compassion  nor  our  devotion  to  our  country,  it  measures 
everything in short, except that which makes life worthwhile.” 
Economists,  from  Simon  Kuznets  in  the  1930s  onwards,  have  long  been  aware  that  GDP 
does  not  measure  social  welfare  (Coyle  (2014)).  But,  then  and  now,  it  remains  the  best 
available  proxy  of  the  volume  of  the  goods  and  services  an  economy  produces.2  For  this 
reason, it remains an essential ingredient when assessing and managing the economy – for 
example, when doing my day job of setting monetary policy.  
But  there  are  indisputably  a  much  broader  range  of  indicators  that  are  relevant  when 
assessing  the  welfare  of  society  more  generally.  For  that  reason,  in  their  report  for  the 
the  Measurement  of  Economic  Performance  and  Social  Progress 
Commission  on 
(CMEPSP),  Stiglitz,  Sen  and  Fitoussi  recommended  a  shift  away  from  measures  of 
economic production towards measures of economic well-being.3  
This is easier said than done technically. One approach is to take a set of metrics that are 
likely  to  shape  an  individual’s  well-being  and  combine  them  –  for  example,  income  and 
wealth,  health  and  education,  leisure  and  work  activities,  political  voice  and  governance, 
social connections and relationships, the environment and insecurity. 
Another is to ask people about the level of their well-being directly, so-called measures of 
Subjective Well-Being (SWB). Although that approach may sound simpler, it is not without 
measurement  problems.  Survey  responses  are  influenced  importantly  by  factors  such  as 
context and framing, which hinders comparability across time and countries. 
Despite being a fledgling science, several organisations and statistical agencies have started 
to construct indices of societal well-being. Here in the UK, the Office for National Statistics 
(ONS) now publishes measures of National Well-being in their annual “Life in the UK” report.  
According to the latest data, more than three-quarters of the UK population are satisfied with 
their  lot.  I  confess  to  being  a  touch  surprised  by  this  statistic.  It  is  certainly  considerably 
higher  than  my  own  informal  sample  of  rail  commuters’  faces  each  day  into  and  out  of 
London. 
Internationally,  the  UN  has  recently  published  its  second  World  Happiness  Report  (United 
Nations  (2014)).  The  UK  ranks  a  respectable  22nd  out  of  156  countries.  The  OECD 
publishes  a  range  of  well-being  indicators  as  part  of  its  Better  Life  Index.  An  un-weighted 
average of its indicators ranks the UK 12th out of the 36 countries (Figure 1). The UK does 
well  on  measures  of  income,  wealth,  security  and  environment,  less  well  on  work-life 
balance, education, skills, and housing (Figure 2). 
I  set  out  all  of  this  because  it  has  a  direct  read-across  to  measuring  the  societal  value  of 
volunteering, to which I now turn. 
The scale of volunteering 
You can only measure what you can first define. The International Labour Organisation (ILO) 
defines volunteering as: 
                                                
1   Deaton et al (2014). 
2   Coyle (2014). 
3   Fitoussi et al (2009). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  “Unpaid,  non-compulsory  work;  that  is,  time  individuals  give  without  pay  to 
activities performed either through an organisation or directly for others outside 
their own household”. 
Within  this,  there  is  formal  and  informal  volunteering.  The  former  is  done  through  groups, 
clubs  or  organisations  and  is  typically  easier  to  measure;  the  latter  can  be  through  any 
arrangement and so is often much harder to capture. 
Clearly,  volunteering  is  work.  It  also  involves  producing  goods  or  services  outside  of  your 
own household. So playing a musical instrument for your own pleasure does not count as 
volunteering, but playing in an old people’s home does. Driving your children to hospital is 
not volunteering, but driving your neighbours to hospital is. And so on. Figure 3 gives some 
more examples taken from the ILO manual.  
Given this definition, measuring volunteering activity is likely to be a tricky business. Would 
you  know  how  many  hours  you  had  spent  over  the  past  year  helping  your  neighbours? 
Those  London  commuters  might  know  –  a  roundish  number?  –  but  the  rest  of  the  UK 
population is unlikely to keep score. 
Household  surveys  can  help.  In  the  UK,  the  Community  Life  Survey  and  the  British 
Household  Panel  Survey  (BHPS)  ask  respondents  about  the  nature  and  scale  of  their 
volunteering activities. Although far from perfect, they enable us to build up a good overall 
picture of the volunteering sector. And what a picture they paint. 
First, the volunteer army in the UK is huge. Figure 4 illustrates the extent of participation in 
voluntary  activities  in  2012,  based  on  the  Community  Life  Survey.  Around  44%  of 
respondents had done some form of formal voluntary work over the previous 12 months and 
29% volunteer formally at least once a month. This means around 15 million people in the 
UK volunteer “frequently”.  
Looking  at  hours  worked,  this  equates  to  just  over  2  billion  hours  per  year  spent  formally 
volunteering.  To  give  you  some  context,  that  is  just  under  one  hour  per  week  for  every 
person over 16 in the UK. It is 5% of the total hours worked in the UK by paid employees. It 
is equivalent to 1.25 million full-time equivalents (FTEs), or double the number of paid FTEs 
in the voluntary sector. 4  
Put differently, there are around the same number of FTE volunteers in the UK as there are 
paid employees in the manufacturing, construction and real estate sectors combined. Indeed, 
the  only  industrial  sectors  with  a  larger  UK  workforce  are  wholesale  and  retail  services, 
education, health and social work. 
And  it  does  not  end  there.  It  is  estimated  that  another  170  million  hours  a  year  are 
volunteered by people less than once a month.5 And to this estimate of formal volunteering 
should  be  added  measures  of  informal  volunteering.  According  to  calculations  recently 
released  by  the  ONS,  informal  volunteers  provide  anywhere  between  1.7  and  2.1  billion 
hours of extra help each year.6  
So, all in, volunteering in the UK might amount to as much as 4.4 billion hours per year. That 
is 1.7 hours per week for every UK adult aged over 16. It is not far off 10% of the total hours 
worked by all UK paid employees. That is quite an army.  
                                                
4   Bank and Pro Bono Economics calculations using ONS Household Satellite Account hours.   
5   Bank and Pro Bono Economics calculations using ONS Household Satellite Account hours. 
6  See http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/about-ons/business-transparency/freedom-of-information/what-can-i-
request/published-ad-hoc-data/econ/august-2014/hhsa-consistent-estimates-of-the-value-of-informal-
voluntary-activity-in-2012-13.xls for further details. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Second, volunteering also appears to be big internationally. A group of academics at John 
Hopkins  University  have  been  pioneers  in  this  field  and  have  published  cross-country 
comparisons.7 They calculated that, in 2005, around 970m people in the world were engaged 
in voluntary activity. Given the growth in world population over the period since, the number 
of global volunteers may well now top the one billion mark. 
To  put  that  in  context,  imagine  if  these  volunteers  comprised  a  single  country  – 
“Volunteerland”. It would have the second largest working age population of any country in 
the world, behind only China (Figure 5). 
The  Charities  Aid  Foundation  calculates  a  World  Giving  Index  each  year  which  ranks  the 
generosity of people in different countries with their money and time. For volunteering, top of 
the league are the unlikely trio of Turkmenistan, Sri Lanka and the United States; bottom of 
the  pack  are  Yemen,  China  and  Greece. The UK  ranks  26th  out  of  131  countries. This  is 
respectable, if outside an automatic Champions League place (Figure 6).  
Of course, cross-country comparisons can be quite difficult. For example, the high rates of 
volunteering in ex-Soviet states, like Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan, are in part down to the 
authorities  having  national  days  of  volunteering  –  “subbotniks”.  As  these  are  more  or  less 
compulsory, they stretch to breaking point the definition of volunteering.8 
Third,  the  volunteer  army  is  a  diverse  one.  Volunteering  is  slightly  more  prevalent  among 
older people and slightly less prevalent among people of child-rearing age (Figure 7). But all 
age  groups  make  a  significant  contribution. Women  and  men  are  broadly  equally  likely  to 
volunteer.  And  there  do  not  appear  to  be  major  differences  in  volunteering  across  ethnic 
minority or socio-economic groups. 9  
Fourth,  numbers  of  volunteers  appear  to  be  stable  (Figure  8).  There  is  some  evidence  of 
cyclicality  in  volunteering,  with  it  falling  at  the  start  of  the  recession  and  rising  during  the 
recovery.  A  recent  report  suggested  that  volunteering  numbers  had  reached  a  ten-year 
high.10  It  is  possible  this  upward  trend  will  continue.  An  ageing  population  will  boost  older 
cohorts  where  volunteer  participation  rates  are  high.  And  among  younger  cohorts  there  is 
evidence of a behaviour shift, with participation rates having doubled in the past decade. 
Taken together, these patterns suggest that volunteering is tightly-woven into the UK’s social 
fabric – a fabric which is large, diverse, international and potentially growing. 
Measuring the value of volunteering  
So  far  we  have  established  that  labour  inputs  into  volunteering  are  considerable.  But  this 
does not tell us what value these volunteers create for the economy, much less for society. 
This is important when gauging the contribution volunteering makes to societal welfare. 
It is possible to build up an incremental, if somewhat piecemeal, picture of this contribution 
from  its  various  sources.  These  are  shown  schematically  in  Figure  9  as  layers  of  a 
“volunteering onion”. At the centre of the onion are the volunteer army, all 15 million of them. 
The outer three layers then measure respectively: 
• 
The economic value of goods and services created by volunteers – if you like, the 
GDP-equivalent value of volunteering services; 
                                                
7   Salamon et al (2011). 
8   See  for  example  http://enews.fergananews.com/news.php?id=2697,  describing  a  recent  subbotnik  in 
Uzbekistan in August 2013. 
9   Volunteering England (2009). 
10   Guild et al (2014).   
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   The  private  value  of  volunteering  activities,  in  particular  the  benefits  felt  by 
volunteers themselves; and 
The  social  value  of  volunteering  activities,  as  societal  gains  may  be  a  multiple  of 
economic and private benefits. 
 I  want  to  build  up  a  quantitative  picture  of  these  various  layers.  They  take  us  from  a 
conventional,  GDP-centric  measure  of  economic  value  through  to  a  more  fashionable, 
wellbeing-centric  measure  of  social  welfare.  In  other  words,  this  approach  combines 
elements of both the old and the new when determining the value of volunteering. 
Before diving into methodology, let me just highlight a few general caveats: 
• 
First,  these  value  layers  –  economic,  private  and  social  –  may  not  be  entirely 
distinct. For example, the private benefits from volunteering may be the very reason 
people volunteer in the first place and create economic value. So we should hesitate 
before  simply  adding  these  benefits  together.  I  will  try  to  resist  doing  so,  but  will 
probably fail. 
Second, value measurement becomes harder the further out you go from the centre 
of the onion. We can make reasonably informed guesses about the economic value 
of  volunteering,  by  adapting  national  income  accounting  techniques.  And  we  can 
construct some reasonable proxies for private benefits from various surveys. But we 
have only piecemeal evidence on measuring the social value of volunteering. This, 
in short, is a fledgling science. 
Third,  it  is  striking  that  virtually  none  of  these  onion  layers  is  captured  by  official 
statistical measures of activity, such as GDP. And, indeed, only some are captured 
by broader measures of subjective well-being. Measuring the value of volunteering 
typically relies on secondary, often non-official, statistical sources.  
  In  combination,  this  means  that  very  little  of  the  value  created  by  the  volunteer  sector  is 
easily  visible  to  statisticians,  to  policymakers,  to  politicians,  to  companies,  indeed  to  the 
volunteers themselves. This is a vast, but often invisible, army. So let me try to improve that 
visibility somewhat by piecing together some evidence. 
The economic value of volunteering 
Let’s  start  with  the  easiest  bit  –  the  economic value  of  volunteering.  In  other  words,  when 
volunteers give up their time to paint a building, take an elderly neighbour to hospital or feed 
the homeless, what is the value of the output they are producing?  
GDP  measures  the  monetary  value  of  goods  and  services  produced  in  an  economy. 
Because it is not normally associated with a monetary transaction, volunteering activity is not 
captured  by  existing  GDP  statistics.  This  point  is  well-recognised  by  statisticians,  which  is 
why the ONS publishes a series of  
Satellite Accounts to pick up important sources of activity which lie outside GDP. 
The Household Satellite Accounts are one example. They measure activities like childcare, 
adult care, meal production, laundry services and also the work of volunteers which do not 
involve  a  monetary  transaction.  In  aggregate,  these  activities  are  huge.  According  to  the 
Satellite Accounts, were they included they would increase GDP by around 80%. 
In an ideal world, we would observe the output of volunteers – the goods and services they 
produce – and work out what they could fetch in the market, just as with GDP. But there is no 
market for services in which no monetary transaction is involved. 
What the ILO recommends instead – and what the ONS does in practice – is to capture the 
value of the labour input used in producing these services, as a proxy for their market value. 
Specifically,  the  ONS  identifies  particular  voluntary  activities  from  household  surveys  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  then maps those to paid occupations. Taking the median hourly wage for those occupations, 
and  multiplying  by  the  number  of  hours  volunteers  provide,  gives  an  estimate  of  the 
volunteering sector’s output on a replacement cost basis. 
Using this method, the ONS calculates that frequent, formal volunteering produced just short 
of £24 billion of economic output in 2012. This would be equivalent to 1.5% of GDP. That is 
sizable. It would make volunteering one of the most important industrial sectors in the UK, 
producing twice as much value as the agriculture sector and about the same amount as the 
telecoms or the insurance and pension fund sectors. 
Of course, any estimate relies on certain assumptions. Let me highlight three important ones. 
First, these estimates consider only formal and frequent volunteering. Second, they assume 
that  the  productivity  and  the  quality  of  volunteer’s  work  is  the  same  as  comparable  paid 
workers. And third, they assume that wages are a reasonable guide to output.  
Taken together, these assumptions may if anything bias downwards estimates of the value of 
volunteering. So it is instructive to tweak them to gauge possible biases (Figure 10). 
• 
The  first  rows  in  the  table  show  what  might  happen  if  you  included  all  forms  of 
volunteering.  Infrequent  volunteering  does  not  add  that  much  –  the  Household 
Satellite  Account  suggests  around  a  further  £1.7bn  each  year.  But  informal 
volunteering is much more substantial. The ONS recently released an  estimate of 
informal volunteering in 2012 which puts the figure at almost £19 billion – not far off 
the  contribution  from  formal  volunteering.11  This  should  reasonably  be  added  to 
overall estimates of the economic value of volunteering. 
For most private sector firms actual output is a mark-up over labour costs, reflecting 
productivity  gains  and  returns  to  capital.  It  is  hard  to  know  for  sure  whether  the 
volunteering  sector  follows  the  same  pattern.  But  in  those  industries  involving 
“labour-intensive  services”,  like  volunteering,  the  labour  share  of  output  is  about 
80%.12  In  other  words,  the  economic  output  of  those  services  is  about  a  quarter 
more than the labour costs. As the third row in Figure 10 suggests, if volunteering 
activities are similar in nature, there is a case for scaling-up our estimates of output 
by a similar amount.  
The  final  issue,  outlined  on  the  fourth  row  of  Figure  10,  is  about  comparing 
volunteers with paid workers. In carrying out the same activity as a paid employee, 
volunteers may be more enthusiastic, but also less capable. I am more enthusiastic 
about painting a shed than my local decorator, but also less competent. So it is not 
altogether  clear  whether  the  wages  of  paid  workers  are  good  proxies  for 
volunteering value or not, with uncertainties on both sides. 
  The final row in Figure 10 offers estimates of the overall contribution of volunteering to the 
UK economy. It suggests this could exceed £50 billion per year, or around 3.5% of annual 
UK GDP. This would place the volunteering sector on a level pegging with the UK energy 
sector (both extraction and utilities). Very few sectors add more value. Clearly, the inner layer 
of the volunteering onion – economic value – is a very significant one. 
                                                
11   These  new  estimates can  be  found  at  http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/about-ons/business-transparency/freedom-
of-information/what-can-i-request/published-ad-hoc-data/econ/august-2014/hhsa-consistent-estimates-of-the-
value-of-informal-voluntary-activity-in-2012-13.xls. 
12   This calculation uses the following industries: professional and support services; distribution, transport, hotels 
and  restaurants;  government,  health  and  education;  and  other  services.  The  calculation  also  includes  an 
adjustment for “mixed income” – that is, the income of the self-employed that is classified separately in the 
national accounts but which arguably reflects a return to labour rather than capital. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Private value of volunteering 
The  second  layer  of  the  onion  is  the  private  benefit  from  volunteering.  This  might  sound 
fluffier  than  a  GDP-equivalent  measure.  Yet  even  the  hardest-nosed  economist  would 
recognise the existence of those private benefits. Why else would anyone volunteer in the 
first place! Volunteering is a prime example of revealed preference theory in practice. 
Surveys  of  individuals  overwhelmingly  support  this  conjecture.  The  2006/07  Helping  Out 
survey  of  volunteers  found  a  range  of  benefits  including  enjoyment,  satisfaction  and 
achievement,  meeting  people  and  making  friends,  broadening  life  experience,  boosting 
confidence, reducing stress, improving physical health and learning new skills (Figure 11). 
The  balance  of  benefits  differs  across  individuals.  For  example,  younger  people  are  most 
likely  to  highlight  the  importance  of  acquiring  new  skills  and  enhancing  employment 
prospects,  while  older  volunteers  see  the  benefits  from  increased  social  interaction  and 
improved health. But enjoyment and satisfaction rank high across all volunteer types. 
This  survey  evidence  is  consistent  with  PBE’s  experience.  Our  economist  volunteers  are 
often young. PBE offers the chance to apply existing skills to different sets of problem in very 
different  environments.  I  think  without  exception,  PBE  volunteers  have  found  projects 
enjoyable and satisfying – and, especially among government economists, liberating too. 
Digging  a  little  deeper,  these  self-reported  benefits  appear  to  fall  roughly  into  three 
categories: enhanced well-being, health benefits and increased skills and employability. It is 
worth considering the evidence on each in turn. 
(a) 
There  are  various  ways  of  assessing  the  impact  of  volunteering  on  individual  well-being. 
These  include  “stated  preference”  surveys,  where  people  are  asked  directly  about  how 
factors affect their well-being. But what people say and do are not always the same – and 
several studies have shown that this approach may lead to systematic upward biases.13  
Perhaps  the  most  authoritative  method  is  to  use  national  surveys  of  well-being  and  life 
satisfaction alongside data on the characteristics of the survey participants. This approach 
lies  behind  the  recent  report  by  Fujiwara  et  al  (2014).  This  report  estimates  the  impact  of 
various factors, including formal volunteering, on an individual’s life satisfaction.  
Their  results  provide  a  relatively  clear  ranking  of  what  factors  really  matter  for  well-being. 
Health  (physical  and  especially  mental)  comes  at  the  top  of  this  well-being  league  table, 
followed  by  employment  prospects.  On  the  next  rung  down,  however,  sits  volunteering.  In 
terms of personal well-being, this puts volunteering on a similar footing to playing sport.  
If you were wondering where watching TV would come in the well-being list I can tell you – 
close to the bottom. Indeed, watching TV is found to detract from well-being.14 This I think 
confirms what we all knew deep down: X-Factor is bad for you.  
It  is  possible  to translate  these  into monetary-equivalent  values  –  the  money  an  individual 
would need to be given to increase their well-being by the same amount. On this evidence, 
you  would  need  to  be  compensated  around  £2,400  on  average  per  person  per  year  for 
forgoing the opportunity to volunteer.15 That is a very significant sum for the average person, 
whose median annual salary was only £22,000 in 2013.16  
Enhanced well-being 
                                                
13   Campbell et al (2011). 
14   This was not estimated in Fujiwara et al (2014), but estimates of the impact of TV on well-being are available 
in Frey et al (2007). 
15   The exact figure is £2,357 from Fujiwara et al (2014). 
16   This is for all employee jobs from the ONS Annual Survey of Hours and Earnings. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  that 
Health benefits 
integration  and  engagement.18  Certainly, 
If you multiply that per-person benefit by the 15 million or so regular volunteers, you get a 
private  benefit  of  volunteering  close  to  £40  billion  per  year.17  If  you  added  in  non-regular 
volunteers, you would get a larger number still. In other words, adding together private and 
economic  benefits  roughly  doubles  estimates  of  the  value  of  volunteering,  to  something 
perhaps closer to £100 billion per year.  
(b) 
The Centre for Mental Health estimates that the economic and social costs of mental health 
problems  are  huge.  The  health  and  social  care  costs  alone  are  worth  over  £20bn,  the 
associated output losses £30bn and the human costs over £50bn. So anything that improves 
mental health, even in a small way, can make a big difference to social welfare.  
Volunteering is typically found to have a positive impact on mental health – for example, by 
enhancing  social 
is  what  volunteers 
themselves  say.  Remaining  active  and  socially  engaged  can  be  particularly  important  for 
older age groups, post-child raising and post-retirement. 
A  systematic  review  of  the  international  literature  by  Casiday  et  al  (2008)  assessed 
43 longitudinal,  cross-sectional  and  qualitative  studies  of  the  impact  of  volunteering  on 
mental  health.  It  found  that  volunteering  reduced  the  incidence  of  depression,  stress, 
hospitalization, pain and psychological distress. 
It is difficult to put precise numbers on those benefits. But Fujiwara et al (2014) find that, on 
average,  the  well-being  benefit  from  relief  from  depression  or  anxiety  is  worth  around 
£37,000 per year. And  
New Economy Manchester (2014) estimate that the average cost of treating those suffering 
from depression or anxiety is around £956 per year.19 Even a small effect from volunteering 
on mental health could deliver large benefits. 
(c)  
The evidence on the impact of volunteering on employability is more mixed. Ellis Paine et al 
(2013) find a significant, but weak, effect of volunteering on the probability of finding a job. 
Not all types of volunteering will lead necessarily to better employment outcomes. And it is 
important not to overlook the potential benefits from volunteering felt by employers, as well 
as their employees. 
A recent poll by YouGov found that nearly all managers believe that workplace skills can be 
gained  from  volunteering.20  And  recent  research  suggests  a  link  between  the  emotions 
induced  by  volunteering  (like  confidence  and  self-esteem)  and  factors  important  in  the 
workplace (like performance ratings and efficient problem solving).21  
Oswald  et  al  (2014)  provide  evidence  that  happiness  makes  people  more  productive.  If 
randomly selected individuals are made happier – for example, by having their TVs removed 
on  a  Saturday  evening  –  they  are  approximately  12%  more  productive.  Since  we  know 
volunteering has a significant impact on an individual’s well-being, it is a short step to think it 
is also productivity-enhancing.  
Increased skills and employability 
                                                
17   This  figure  is calculated as the  estimated impact  on  well-being from  volunteering  (£2,400)  x  the  number  of 
volunteers in the UK (15m) = £36bn. 
18   Casiday et al (2008). 
19   For further details see http://neweconomymanchester.com/stories/832-unit_cost_database 
20   For further details see Volunteering England: http://www.volunteering.org.uk/who-we-can-help/employers/the-
business-case-for-esv 
21   Estrada et al (1997), Wright and Staw (1999), Diener et al (2005). 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  That, too, is consistent with PBE’s experience. Employers of the economists used by PBE as 
volunteers have often given fed back that this has enhanced their motivation and skills. And it 
is worth just putting in context how big a potential benefit that could be. If the UK’s 15 million 
volunteers were each 5% more productive, that would deliver a boost to national income of 
£23 billion each year.22  
Once you tot up the private benefits of volunteering – well-being, health, skills – something 
quite striking becomes apparent. The benefits to volunteering might be as large, if not larger, 
for volunteers themselves as for recipients. In other words, in giving we really do receive – 
possibly as much as we give!  
That  hard-headed  economist  I  mentioned  earlier  would  at  this  stage  spring  to  their  feet. 
Brandishing revealed preference theory, they would say this is obvious – that it is these very 
benefits that explain why the volunteer army exists in the first place.  
And,  once  again,  they  would  largely  be  wrong.  For  research  has  shown  that  people  tend 
systematically  to  under-estimate  the  positive  effect  for  them  of  giving  to  others.  In  a  nice 
experiment, people were randomly assigned $20 to spend, either on themselves or others. 
Those  who  were  told  to  spend  it  on  others  subsequently  reported  significantly  higher 
subjective well-being ex-post, contrary to their expectations ex-ante.23 
This means that volunteer army would possibly be larger still if individuals had greater self-
awareness  of  the  private  benefits  of  volunteering.  When  it  comes  to  volunteering, 
preferences may be as much concealed as revealed.24  
Social value of volunteering 
Finally, let’s consider the social welfare benefits of volunteering. Why might these differ from 
the economic and private benefits? And by how much? 
Let’s take a simple example. Consider a volunteer who helps out a charity providing support 
services  for  the  homeless.  Is  the  value  of  this  activity  captured  by  the  hours  spent 
volunteering? By the amount it would have cost to hire that person to provide that help? By 
the amount that person themselves benefit from volunteering?  
Well,  all  of  the  above  are  important  and  large,  as  I  have  shown.  But  they  would  still 
potentially significantly under-estimate the value society should place on this activity. That is 
because homelessness comes with wider collateral costs, for the individual most obviously, 
but  also  for  society  generally:  the  reduction  in  employment  and  income  prospects;  the 
accompanying increased risk of criminal activity and addiction to drugs or alcohol; and the 
increased risk of physical and mental health problems.  
All of these take a very significant toll on the homeless individual. But they also tax the public 
purse,  through  increased  social  security,  criminal  justice  and  health  spending.  And  that  is 
before  you  even get to the  wider  social  costs  of, for  example,  criminality  and  addiction  on 
families and societies. These costs are a form of societal externality. 
The social value created by reduced homelessness is, then, a potential multiple of the cost of 
the  labour  input  to  volunteering.  But  how  large  a  multiple?  Well,  I  can  tell  you.  And  the 
reason I can tell you is that my thought experiment is not a hypothetical one. 
Last year, PBE brought together a team of volunteer economists from Oxera Consulting with 
a  charity  called  Centrepoint  which  does  wonderful  work  with  homeless  young  people  in 
                                                
22   This estimate assumes just under 60% of these volunteers are in employment, in line with the UK employment 
rate. 
23   Dunn et al (2014). 
24   Dunn et al (2014). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  
 
London.25 Centrepoint were keen to evaluate quantitatively the social benefits of their work. 
So the Oxera team sought to capture the benefits of reducing homelessness in getting young 
people into employment or training, preventing them from re-offending, treating their mental 
health issues and reducing their substance misuse. These are a subset, albeit an important 
subset, of the social costs of homelessness. 
The results of this study, which was published by PBE last year, are outlined in Figure 12. To 
cut a long story short, the study suggested that, for every £1 spent by Centrepoint, there was 
a societal benefit of at least £2.40. Or, put differently, Centrepoint delivered a social return on 
investment of 140% over a five year period. This was very much a lower bound estimate. 
Let me give you a second example of a PBE social impact study, this time on an even grittier 
issue – child sexual exploitation. In 2012, a PBE team from the Bank of England did a piece 
of work for Barnardo’s to judge the impact of their interventions to help exploited children.26 
They  looked  at  the  reduced  incidence  of  missing  person  calls  to  the  police,  the  reduced 
probability  of  becoming  classified  as  Not  in  Employment,  Education  or  Training  (NEET), 
reductions  in  substance  misuse  and  the  benefits  from  secure  accommodation.  These 
benefits are outlined in Figure 13. They suggest a higher social welfare multiplier, perhaps as 
large as six to twelve.  
This is not miles away from estimates from a recent City of London study. This found that, 
when a business invests £1 in employability-related employee volunteering, the social return 
is over £11 for society.27 
Of  course,  the  precise  social  multipliers  are  likely  to  vary,  charity  by  charity.  To  give  you 
some idea of scale, the lowest multiplier we have found from one of PBE’s studies to date is 
around  2.5,  while  the  highest  runs  into  double-figures.  And  while  the  number  of  studies 
conducted  by  PBE  is  too  small  to  constitute  a  representative  sample  –  there  are  around 
161,000 UK charities28 – these studies demonstrate clearly two things. 
First, that evaluating these social benefits is usually possible, if sometimes with difficultly and 
imperfectly. And second, at least in the cases we have considered so far, the social returns 
from the  voluntary  sector,  and  hence from  volunteering,  can  be  significant multiples  of  the 
labour input cost. Social multipliers are typically well in excess of one. 
Despite  this,  the  number  of  charities  who  have  actually  undertaken  social  cost-benefit 
analyses  is  depressingly  small.  Research  by  New  Philanthropy  Capital  in  2012  found  that 
25%  of  charities  surveyed,  and  nearly  half  of  those  with  income  below  £100,000,  do  not 
measure  their  impact  at  all.  Given  that  charities  with  income  below  £100,000  make  up 
roughly 80% of all general charities, this means there is a huge number whose activities are 
not evaluated.29 
This has all the classic symptoms of a market failure: social welfare externalities which are 
not being understood, much less tackled. The reason is not difficult to fathom. Social cost-
benefit analysis requires skills which charities themselves can rarely afford to hire. Or, put 
differently, as a charity why would you spend money on an analyst if it came at the expense 
of helping a homeless person or a sexually-exploited child? You wouldn’t – and, in the main, 
they don’t. 
                                                
25   PBE (2013). 
26   PBE (2011) 
27   See http://www.volunteering.org.uk/resources/esv-resource-hub/case-studies.  
28   UK Civil Society Almanac 2014, National Council for Voluntary Organisations (NCVO). 
29   Ní Ógáin et al (2012). 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  It  is  precisely  this  market  failure  that  PBE  was  created  to  help  correct.  Economists  have 
precisely  the  analytical  skills  that  charities  themselves  can  ill-afford.  If  these  skills  are 
volunteered,  then  they  can  be  matched  into  charities  to  help  plug  that  societal  externality. 
That is why studies evaluating the social benefits of charitable interventions have been a key 
element of PBE’s work since its inception.  
Volunteering and public policy 
So where does this leave us? Let me now do what I told you at the beginning I would try to 
resist, by adding-up the layers of the volunteering onion: 
• 
We have a volunteer army, the full-time equivalent of 1.25 million people, diverse in 
age, gender, background and ethnicity and potentially growing in number.  
They create each year economic value of at least £50 billion and potentially higher.  
They create private value for individual volunteers of maybe as much again.  
And  although  the  confidence  intervals  are  large,  it  would  not  be  unreasonable  to 
apply a social multiplier of upwards of two to these estimates. 
 imperfect,  suggests  some  significant  benefit  multipliers 
However you cut this onion, it is clear that the value it creates is eye-watering. And this is 
value, let’s remember, much of which is not captured or visible from official statistics. This is 
a largely invisible onion.   
Now, it is fair to say that I have not much discussed any costs of volunteering. Plainly, no 
activity  is  costless,  both  in  a  direct  and  opportunity  cost  sense.  But  the  evidence  here, 
however 
from  volunteering, 
economically, privately and socially.  
Given that, could this value be leveraged by changes, large or small, public or private? There 
are already a number of organisations who support volunteering. For example, Volunteering 
England is a UK-based independent charity providing a range of services to assist employers 
and potential volunteers take part in volunteering activities. 
The  National  Council  for  Voluntary  Organisations  (NCVO),  which  recently  merged  with 
Volunteering England, champions volunteering activity, from practical how-to guides to video 
training  courses  to  bespoke  advice.30  One  of  their  members,  the  Institute  for  Volunteering 
Research (IVR), provides a range of tools to help employers understand the costs associated 
with setting up volunteering schemes.  
Let  me  offer  just  a  few  reflections  of  my  own  on  other  possible  avenues.  The  fact  that  a 
sector  is  creating  societal  value  does  not,  by  itself,  imply  the  need  for  public  policy 
intervention.  Nonetheless,  there  may  be  policy  “nudges”  which  might  lower  frictions,  or 
sharpen incentives, in ways which could enhance the value already being created. 
Increasing visibility 
The  key  theme  of  this  lecture  is  that  the  value  created  by  volunteering  is  rarely  well-
measured or well-understood, especially when it comes to the wider social benefits. There is 
an information gap. This gap puts grit in all components of the volunteering machine, in ways 
which potentially inhibit its scale and effectiveness. 
Take  volunteers  themselves.  Individuals’  behavioural  biases  lead  them  systematically  to 
under-estimate the private benefits from philanthropy and volunteering. And state-of-the-art 
econometrics suggests these benefits may be substantial, the monetary equivalent of more 
than a month’s work for the average person.  
                                                
30   For further details see http://www.ncvo.org.uk/practical-support.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
  One  implication  is  that  volunteering  may  be  being  systemically  under-supplied  relative  to 
what  even  private  individuals  would  desire.  Or,  put  more  positively,  both  individuals  and 
society  stand  to  gain  from  a  better  appreciation  of  these  private  benefits.  This  could  be 
achieved  through  more  research.  But,  perhaps  more  importantly,  there  may  be  a  case  for 
considering  a  public  education  programme  which  helped  explain  and  popularise  these 
benefits more widely.  
What is true of private benefits is true, perhaps to even greater extent, of societal gains. A 
greater understanding of these stands to benefit funders of charities in deciding where best 
to allocate funds; charities themselves when deciding where best to allocate their energies; 
and  policymakers  to  the  extent  they  wish  to  encourage  the  creation  of  these  quasi-public 
goods.  
To give one example from the funding side, through joint research with Oxford Economics 
the  homelessness  charity  CRISIS  found  that  for  every  £1  invested  there  was  a  saving  to 
society of £4.37.31 On the back of this, CRISIS began offering “investment units” as a way of 
emphasizing the social return on a donation.  
A more formal way of linking funding to social returns is through Social Impact Bonds (SIBs). 
These allow socially-minded investors to fund the provision of a service delivered by a social 
enterprise or charity, with a return on their investment from government if the service delivers 
the  results  specified.  In  fact,  last  year’s  Rybczynski  prize,  awarded  by  SBE,  was  on  work 
looking at the use of payment by results in the criminal justice system. So far, 14 SIBs have 
been issued.  
But  social  impact  measurement  remains  the  exception,  not  the  rule.  And  SIBs  remain  a 
fledgling  asset  class.  Underlying  this  is  not  so  much  an  information  gap  as  a  chasm.  It  is 
puzzling that a sector whose core contribution is to societal well-being does not do a better 
job of measuring that contribution. Charities like PBE are seeking, on a small scale, to bridge 
that chasm through our measurement work. But we are under no illusion that, so far at least, 
we have only skimmed the surface.  
Skills and time matching 
There are several obvious frictions in the matching process between volunteers and socially-
worthwhile  activities,  which  potentially  reduce  the  effectiveness  of  volunteering  or  the 
likelihood of it happening in the first place. One is time. It is not surprising that time is the 
most cited barrier to volunteering (Figure 14).32 But technology, as in every other aspect of 
life, can improve the efficiency of matching in ways which can stretch time.   
We have recently seen the emergence of a number of charities with support what the NCVO 
have  called  “micro-volunteering”.  For  example,  “Help  from  Home”  is  an  initiative  to 
encourage micro-volunteering by allowing people to donate as little as 5 minutes to a worthy 
cause.  For  example,  you  can  spend  a  few  minutes  describing  photos  to  improve  a  blind 
person’s experience of a museum, play an online game in aid of scientific research, or write 
an email to a sick child. Tasks are given a “pyjama-rating” to drive home the message that it 
is easy to volunteer. 
A second friction is appropriately matching the skills of volunteers to those activities where 
they  would  be  best  put  to  use.  PhD  economists  are  no  less  capable  of  painting  sheds  or 
cleaning riverbeds than the next person. But this is unlikely in general to be the best use of 
their skills and time, nor the charities. This was one of the key motivations behind PBE – to 
harness the skills of economists in ways which most benefitted charities.  
                                                
31   For further details see: http://investors.crisis.org.uk/.  
32   Citizenship Survey 2010/11. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  And what is true of economists is no less true of other professions and occupations, whose 
skills  might  be  better  targeted  and  harnessed  than  at  present.  It  is  known  that  using  their 
skills is more likely to persuade someone to volunteer in the first place.33 One example of 
that would be the charity “Datakind”, which harnesses the skills of budding data scientists to 
help  solve  social  problems.  More  generally,  the  potential  to  improve  further  such  skill-
matching between volunteers and charitable activities is considerable. 
Employer incentives  
It is in employers’ power to make volunteering work in their firms – for example, by allowing 
flexible  working  hours  or  a  certain  amount  of  paid  volunteer  leave.  It  is  also,  as  I  have 
discussed, potentially in their own interest from a satisfaction and productivity perspective.  
A number of employers appeared to have heeded that message. For example, in 2011 the 
Civil Service began formally encouraging civil servants to spend one day a year volunteering 
– “to turn the civil service into a civic service”.34 My home institution, the Bank of England, 
adopts a similar approach. 
In  support  of  this,  volunteering  England  provide  online  guidance  to  help  employers  set  up 
Employer  Supported  Volunteering  (ESV)  schemes.  Their  website  lists  a  variety  of 
organisations that have well-established schemes ranging from the big supermarkets to local 
councils.35  Within  the  private  sector,  around  70%  of  FTSE  100  companies  already  have 
some  kind  of  employer-sponsored  volunteering  programme.36  Perhaps  unsurprisingly,  that 
percentage is much lower for small and medium-sized businesses. This is a decent starting 
point.   
Yet my suspicion is that many companies are still not close to recognising fully the benefits 
from volunteering. And let me illustrate that with one startling fact courtesy of Lynne Berry, a 
PBE trustee and expert on the sector. Among those FTSE 100 companies, how many Board 
members are drawn explicitly from the voluntary sector? Precisely one. That is not consistent 
with volunteering having entered the corporate bloodstream. Nor is the fact that 30% of the 
UK’s largest companies still do not have a volunteering programme.  
My  hunch  is  that,  over  time,  more  companies  will  need  to  recognise  the  benefits  of 
volunteering,  not  just  among  Board  members  but  among  employees.  Why?  The  two  Rs  – 
recruitment and retention. Generation Y, born from the 1980s onwards, place a much greater 
weight  on  a  diverse  career  experience,  with  a  strong  social  dimension,  than  their 
predecessors. And Generation Z, the Millennials, are unlikely to buck that trend. Where they 
lead, companies will surely need to follow. 
Shifting social norms  
Given  the  quasi-public  good  nature  of  volunteering,  it  is  possible  to  conceive  of  more 
ambitious proposals still through which the state could encourage volunteering.  
A few countries have sought to do so by mandating it. But this “subbotnik” approach risks 
turning a social opportunity into a statutory obligation.  
One  way  of  shaping  social  behaviour  is  to  catch  volunteers  when  they  are  young.  Once 
volunteering is a habit, it might last a lifetime.37 The US has experience of such programmes. 
                                                
33   Meier and Stuzer (2004). 
34   See https://www.gov.uk/government/news/next-steps-in-turning-the-civil-service-into-a-civic-service 
35   For further details see http://www.volunteering.org.uk/who-we-can-help/employers. 
36   CSV, “Employee Volunteering: Who is benefitting now?” (2013). See http://www.volunteering.org.uk/who-we-
can-help/volunteer-involving-organisations/employer-supported-volunteering/the-business-case-for-esv  
37   Halpern (2004), Putnam (2000) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
  Their Peace Corps have a larger, but less well-known, domestic counterpart – AmeriCorps. 
AmeriCorps  provides  members  with  full  or  part  time  positions  in  non-profit  community 
organisations and public agencies. Not only do volunteers learn valuable life skills, such as 
teamwork  and  leadership,  but  the  scheme  also  makes  contributions  to  the  costs  of  their 
education. Since its introduction in 1993, AmeriCorps has had 900,000 volunteers enter its 
programme, with over 75,000 participating in 2012 alone. 
Here  in  the  UK,  the  National  Citizen  Service  (NCS)  was  introduced  in  2011.  It  recently 
passed the milestone of 100,000 young people having taken part. This scheme runs outside 
term time for 15–17 year olds and combines opportunities to take part in adventure activities 
with  social  action  projects.  The  evidence  so  far  suggests  this  scheme,  as  well  as  being 
enjoyable, increases the chances of participants subsequently volunteering.38  
It is possible to imagine ways of building on that success. For example, the NCS programme 
only covers holiday periods and participants pay a small fee to participate. By contrast, the 
AmeriCorps programme lasts for up to a year and participants are offered financial support 
towards  educational  costs.  This  has  meant  AmeriCorps  has  not  only  encouraged 
volunteering;  it  has  also  provided  incentives  for  generations  of  Americans,  especially  from 
poorer  backgrounds,  to  stay  on  in  higher  education.  This  small  financial  nudge  has  thus 
potentially delivered lifelong returns. 
More generally, the UK already encourages giving money by allowing charities to reclaim tax 
on donations through “Gift Aid”. Is there a case for providing tax-based incentives for people 
who  instead  volunteer  time?  The  idea  is  not  without  precedent.  In  2008,  the  Canadian 
Parliament  debated  a  bill  that  proposed  taxpayers  who  volunteer  at  least  250  hours  be 
issued  a  tax  credit  up  to  $1,000.39  It  was  rejected.  But  since  2011,  Canadian  firefighters, 
most  of  whom  are  volunteers,  have  received  a  tax  credit  of  $3,000  if  they  complete  over 
200 hours of volunteering a year. 
Such a policy may sound ambitious, certainly administratively, as it would require auditable 
records  of  volunteer  hours  worked.  But  it  is  not  impossible  to  conceive  of  a  system  of 
Individual Volunteering Accounts (IVAs) for people engaged in formal volunteering. Relative 
to the value created, the administrative costs would probably be modest. 
Once in place, those IVAs could serve a number of useful purposes. As an additional way of 
sharpening incentives, individuals could be recognised or rewarded, locally or nationally, for 
passing  certain  volunteering  milestones  –  5,000  hours,  10,000  hours  etc.  If  we  wanted  a 
more systematic way of calibrating the UK honours system, what better metric than the credit 
balance in an individual’s IVA? 
Conclusion 
So let me briefly sum up. Whether seen from an economic or social perspective, volunteering 
is  big  business,  with  annual  turnover  well  into  three-figure  billions.  But  it  is  a  well-hidden 
jewel, whose social worth is rarely the subject of a public valuation. One of the purposes of 
this lecture was to provide such a valuation, however imperfect.  
If the value of volunteering remains largely out of sight, it is likely also to remain out of mind. 
The  potential  economic  and  societal  benefits  from  volunteering  then  risk  remaining  un-
tapped. Yet with a nudge, that volunteer army could swell further. Indeed, I hope some of you 
here tonight might swell the ranks by signing-up to PBE as a volunteer. 
My message to you is that, by doing so, we – individually and societally – stand to receive.  
                                                
38   Booth et al (2013). 
39   Around £550. 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  2013  Evaluation  Report”, 
Ipsos  Mori:  Social  Research 
References 
Booth, C, Cameron, D, Cumming, L, Gilby, N, Hale, C, Hoolahan (2014) “National Citizen 
Service 
Institute: 
http://www.ncsyes.co.uk/sites/all/themes/ncs/pdf/ncs_2013_evaluation_report_final.pdf 
Campbell,  R  and  Fujiwara,  D,  “Valuation  Techniques  for  Social  Cost-Benefit  Analysis”, 
Department for Work and Pensions and HM Treasury:  
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/209107/green
book_valuationtechniques.pdf 
Casiday,  R,  Kinsman,  E,  Fisher,  C,  and  Bambra,  C  (2008),  “Volunteering  and  Health: 
What  Impact  Does  It  Really  Have?”.  Report  commissioned  by  Volunteering  England  and 
carried out by the University of Wales Lampeter. 
http://www.ivr.org.uk/ivr-news/133-volunteering-health-what-impact-does-it-really-have 
Centre  for  Mental  Health,  (2010),  “The  economic  and  social  costs  of  mental  health 
problems in 2009/10”:  
http://www.centreformentalhealth.org.uk/pdfs/Economic_and_social_costs_2010.pdf 
Charities Aid Foundation, (2013), “World Giving Index 2013”:  
https://www.cafonline.org/PDF/WorldGivingIndex2013_1374AWEB.pdf 
Coyle,  D.,  (2014),  “Measuring  economic  progress”,  VoxEU:  http://www.voxeu.org/article/ 
measuring-economic-progress 
Deaton, A, Durand, M, Halpern, D, and Layard, L, O’Donnell, G (2014), “Wellbeing and 
Policy”, Report of the Commission on Wellbeing and Policy (commissioned by The Legatum 
Institute):  
http://li.com/docs/default-source/commission-on-wellbeing-and-policy/commission-on-
wellbeing-and-policy-report---march-2014-pdf-.pdf?sfvrsn=5 
Diener, E, Lyubomirsky, S, and King, L (2005), “The Benefits of Frequent Positive Affect: 
Does  Happiness  Lead 
to  Success?”,  Psychological  Bulletin,  Vol.  131  No.  6. 
http://sonjalyubomirsky.com/wp-content/themes/sonjalyubomirsky/papers/LKD2005.pdf 
Dunn,  E,  Aknin,  L,  and  Norton,  M,  (2014)  “Prosocial  Spending  and  Happiness:  Using 
Money to Benefit Others Pays Off”, Current Directions in Psychological Science 2014 
http://www.hbs.edu/faculty/Publication%20Files/Dunn%20Aknin%20%20Norton%20-
2014%20CD_bfccfc43-4139-476a-904b-ebcf855ab7c3.pdf 
Ellis Paine, A., McKay, S., and D. Moro, (2013), “Does volunteering improve employability? 
Evidence from the British Household Panel Survey”, Third Sector Research Centre Briefing 
Paper 100 and Working Paper 100.  
Estrada, C.A., Isen, A.M., and M.J. Young, (1997), “Positive Affect Facilitates Integration of 
Information  and  Decreases  Anchoring  in  Reasoning  among  Physicians”,  Organizational 
Behavior and Human Decision Processes Vol.72, No.1, October, pp.117–135. 
Frey, B, Benesch, C, and Stutzer, A, (2007) “Does watching TV make us happy?”, Journal 
of Economic Psychology, 28, pp.283–313. 
Fujiwara,  D,  Leach,  M,  Trotter,  L,  Vine,  J  (2014)  “Measuring  the  Social  Impact  of 
Community Investment: A Guide to using the Wellbeing Valuation Approach”, HACT: ideas 
and innovation in housing. 
Gaskin,  K,  (2011)  “VIVA  –  The  volunteer  investment  and  value  audit.  A  self-help  guide”, 
Institute for Volunteering Research:  
http://www.ivr.org.uk/component/ivr/viva--the-volunteer-investment-and-value-audit-a-self-
help-guide&qh=YToxOntpOjA7czo0OiJ2aXZhIjt9 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
 of 
and 
charitable 
volunteering 
giving”.  Cabinet  Office: 
(2013),  “How’s  Life?  2013:  Measuring  Well-being”,  OECD  Publishing. 
 
 
Guild,  M,  Harrison,  T,  Saxton,  J,  (2014)  “The  New  Alchemy:  How  volunteering  turns 
donations  of  time  and  talent  into  human  gold  time”,  nfpSynergy:  http://nfpsynergy.net/free-
report/new-alchemy-how-volunteering-turns-donations-time-and-talent-human-gold-part-1  
Helliwell, J.F., Layard, R., and J.D. Sachs (eds.), (2013), “World Happiness Report 2013”, 
UN Sustainable Development Solutions Network:  
http://unsdsn.org/resources/publications/world-happiness-report-2013/ 
International Labour Organisation, (2011), “Manual on the measurement of volunteer 
work”: http://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---dgreports/---
stat/documents/publication/wcms_162119.pdf 
Low,  N.,  Butt,  S.,  Ellis  Paine,  A.  and  J.  Davis  Smith,  (2007),  “Helping  Out:  A  national 
survey 
London. 
http://www.ivr.org.uk/component/ivr/helping-out-a-national-survey-of-volunteering-and-
charitable-giving 
MacKerrona, G, Muratoc,S (2013) “Happiness  is  greater  in  natural  environments”, Global 
Environmental Change Vol 23 Issue 5. 
Meier, S and Stuzer, A (2004) “Is volunteering rewarding in itself?” Forschungsinstitut zur 
Zukunft der Arbeit: http://ftp.iza.org/dp1045.pdf 
National Council for Voluntary Organisations (NCVO), (2014), “UK Civil Society Almanac 
2014”: http://data.ncvo.org.uk/category/almanac/ 
OECD, 
http://www.oecd.org/statistics/howslife.htm 
OECD Better Life Index: http://www.oecdbetterlifeindex.org/ 
ONS,  (2013),  “Household  Satellite  Accounts:  Valuing  Voluntary  Activity  in  the  UK”: 
http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/rel/wellbeing/household-satellite-accounts/valuing-voluntary-
activity-in-the-uk/art--valuing-voluntary-activity-in-the-uk.html  
ONS, (2014), “Measuring National Well-being: Life in the UK”:  
http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/rel/wellbeing/measuring-national-well-being/life-in-the-uk--
2014/art-mnwb--life-in-the-uk--2014.html#tab-Overview 
Oswald, A.J., Proto, E. and D. Sgroi, (2014), “Happiness and Productivity”, Working Paper: 
http://www2.warwick.ac.uk/fac/soc/economics/staff/eproto/workingpapers/happinessproductiv
ity.pdf 
PBE (2011) “An assessment of the potential savings from Barnardo’s interventions for young 
people who have been sexually exploited”, Pro Bono Economics:  
http://www.probonoeconomics.com/news/publications/pbe-report-assesses-effectiveness-
and-value-barnardo%E2%80%99s-services-sexually-exploited 
PBE  (2013)  “Impact  of  Centrepoint’s  intervention  for  homeless  young  people”,  Pro  Bono 
Economics: 
http://www.probonoeconomics.com/news/publications/understanding-value-
centrepoint%E2%80%99s-services  
Salamon L., Sokolowski S. and M. Haddock, (2011), “Measuring  the  economic  value  of 
volunteer work globally – concepts, estimates and a roadmap to the future”, Annals of Public 
and Cooperative Economics Vol. 82, No. 3. 
Stiglitz,  J.E.,  Sen,  A.,  and  J.P.  Fitoussi,  (2009),  “Report  by  the  Commission  on  the 
Measurement  of  Economic  Performance  and  Social  Progress”:  http://www.stiglitz-sen-
fitoussi.fr/documents/rapport_anglais.pdf 
 
 16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  (2009), 
England 
England, 
“Volunteering 
Volunteering 
http://www.volunteering.org.uk/images/stories/Volunteering-England/Documents/Free-
Information-Sheets/IS---National-Statistics--
(VE09).pdf?phpMyAdmin=ea19469af65d57852a6dcf96ae252f42&phpMyAdmin=af59e07939
33f8849c29e6a3a0aa550d&phpMyAdmin=aOV51K4pN6n2U-SVePLZzBRWAjd 
Wright, T.A., and B.M. Staw, (1999), “Affect and favorable work outcomes: two longitudinal 
tests of the happy-productive worker thesis”. Journal of Organizational Behavior 20, 1–23. 
 
Information 
Sheet”: 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 17 
 Appendix 
Figure 1:  
The OECD Better Life Index 
Source: http://www.oecdbetterlifeindex.org/ 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2:  
OECD Better Life Index – UK Summary 
Source: http://www.oecdbetterlifeindex.org/ 
 
 
    18 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Figure 3:  
Examples of activities which do and do not count as volunteering under the definition given 
by the International Labour Organisation 
Classed as “volunteering” 
Lies outside the boundary of 
“volunteering” 
Cooking meals for one’s own children 
Cleaning one’s own house or yard 
Working in a soup kitchen cooking meals for 
the homeless 
Serving on a neighbourhood clean-up 
committee 
Serving as an usher or otherwise working on 
behalf of a religious organisation 
Providing unpaid legal advice at a legal 
services agency 
Providing marginally paid foster-care 
services on a short-term basis 
Sewing a blanket for a sick neighbour 
Attending a religious service 
Receiving payment for legal advice or 
assistance 
Providing foster-care services on a long-term 
basis 
Sewing a blanket for a sick household 
member 
Source: ILO (2011), Manual on the measurement of volunteer work (adapted). 
 
 
 
Figure 4:  
Estimates of the extent of formal volunteering in the UK in 2012 
 Total (at least once per year)  Of which frequent (at least 
2.29 
Hours (billions per 
year) 
Proportion of the 
sample 
Source: ONS (2013), “Household Satellite Accounts: Valuing Voluntary Activity in the UK”. Underlying data from the Community 
Life Survey.  
 
44% 
29% 
 once per month) 
2.12 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 19 
  Figure 5:  
The global volunteer workforce relative to the adult population of the world’s largest countries 
Source: Salamon, Sokolowski and Haddock (2011). 
 
  20 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Figure 6:  
Proportion of people in a selection of countries who volunteer at least once per month 
Country 
Rank 
Turkmenistan 
Sri Lanka 
United States of 
America 
Myanmar 
Philippines 
Canada 
Tajikistan 
New Zealand 
Guatemala 
Uzbekistan 
Ireland 
Netherlands 
State of Libya 
Nigeria 
United 
Kingdom 
Germany 
France 
India 
Spain 
Sweden 
Iraq 
China 
Greece 
1 
2 
3 
4 
4 
6 
7 
8 
8 
10 
11= 
11= 
11= 
14 
26 
34 
41 
68 
75 
90 
102 
131= 
131= 
Proportion of respondents 
who volunteered in the month 
prior to interview 
57 
46 
45 
43 
43 
42 
41 
40 
40 
38 
37 
37 
37 
36 
29 
27 
25 
18 
17 
13 
11 
4 
4 
Source: Charities Aid Foundation World Giving Index (adapted), based on poll carried out by Gallup. The sample includes 
135 countries representing 94% of the world’s population.  
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 21 
 Age group 
Figure 7:  
Average number of hours volunteered by age group in 2011 
Average number of 
hours volunteered per 
year* 
87 
77 
109 
113 
97 
16 to 29 
30 to 49 
50 to 69 
Older than 70 
UK average 
Sources: ONS (2013), “Household satellite accounts: valuing voluntary activity in the UK”. Underlying data from the 
Understanding Society survey.  
*Conditional on volunteering. 
 
 
 
Figure 8:  
Change in volunteering activity over time in the UK 
  Source: Chart reproduced from ONS, “Household satellite accounts: valuing voluntary activity in the UK”. Original data come 
from Home Office, DCLG and Cabinet Office surveys. 
 
 
 
 22 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Figure 9:  
The “Volunteering Onion”, a summary of the estimated contribution from volunteering 
activities in the UK 
Social value 
Social impact multipliers of 2-10? 
 Private value 
Probably more than  
£40bn per year* 
 Economic value 
Around £50bn per year 
 Labour input 
15m volunteers 
1.25m FTE 
   Source: Bank and Pro Bono Economics calculations.  
Note: The estimate of private value shown is an estimate of the benefits to an individual’s well-being, not including health 
benefits or improvements to an individual’s skills or employability.  
 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 23 
  Figure 10:  
Illustrative calculation of the economic contribution to the UK economy beyond formal 
volunteering (£23.9bn in 2012).  
Infrequent volunteering (less than once per 
month) 
Informal volunteering (not through 
organisations) 
Official estimates only measure the value of 
labour inputs to volunteering, not the outputs. 
Hard to know whether volunteers perform in 
the same way as paid workers (whose 
wages are used as a proxy for volunteer 
output) 
Potential higher estimate (very uncertain) 
Source: Bank and Pro Bono Economics calculations. 
Data quality is less good than for frequent 
volunteering, but ONS estimate this could 
add a further £1.7bn 
The ONS have recently put out an estimate 
of the total value of informal volunteering in 
2012. It is nearly as significant as formal 
volunteering, and its contribution is 
estimated at £18.6bn (both frequent and 
infrequent). 
You need to make assumptions here about 
the role of capital, and the level of 
productivity in volunteer jobs. Based on 
rough calculations that treat volunteer jobs 
like labour-intensive service industries, the 
current method could be understating 
“output” by perhaps a quarter. But this is 
very uncertain. 
It could be that volunteers are less 
productive than experienced workers in 
some jobs. But they might be more 
enthusiastic. 
1.25*(18.6 + 1.7 + 23.9) -> gives you around 
£55bn as a possible alternative estimate. 
24 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Figure 11:  
Survey responses for volunteering regularly 
   Source: 2006/07 Helping Out survey. 
 
 
 
Figure 12:  
The average lifetime cost of risk factors associated with sexual exploitation 
 
 
Average cost per individual 
 
Going 
missing 
Substance 
abuse 
 Dis-
engagement 
from 
education 
£10,504 
£8,327 
£17,312 
Accommodation 
needs 
Total 
£11,338 
 
£9,223 
 
£16,904 
 
£45,784 
 
£28,148 
 
£63,508 
 
£19,664 
£7,551 
£24,235 
Pre-
intervention 
Post-
intervention 
Control 
group 
Source: PBE (2011).  
 
£4,278 
£3,047 
£5,057 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 25 
  Figure 13:  
Benefit of Centrepoint intervention to the public purse, average per Centrepoint client  
   
Central scenario  
(£, 2010/11 prices) 
6,989 
12,332 
2,639 
46 
188 
117 
–136 
22,174 
Avoided welfare benefits 
Tax raised 
Crime (avoided costs) 
Mental health issues (treatment costs avoided) 
Class A drugs (treatment costs avoided) 
Cannabis (treatment costs avoided) 
Alcohol (treatment costs avoided) 
Benefit of Centrepoint intervention to the public 
purse 
Source: PBE (2013).  
Note: row totals do not add to the total benefit due to rounding. 
 
 
 
Figure 14:  
Reasons for not participating in volunteering-related activities, 2010/2011  
(% of respondents) 
Work commitments 
Doing other things with spare time 
Looking after children/the home 
Studying commitments 
Not knowing any opportunities to help 
Not knowing of any groups needing help 
Looking after someone elderly or ill 
Feeling too old 
Feeling too young 
60% 
34% 
31% 
14% 
14% 
14% 
8% 
3% 
1% 
Source: UK Civil Society Almanac (2014), Citizenship Survey (2010/11). 
 
26 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
