  Andrew G Haldane: Central bank psychology 
Speech by  Mr Andrew G Haldane, Executive Director and Chief Economist of the Bank of 
England, at the “Leadership: stress and hubris conference”, hosted by the Royal Society of 
Medicine, London, 17 November 2014. 
 The views are not necessarily those of the Bank of England or the Monetary Policy Committee. I would like in 
particular to thank Rashmi Harimohan, Jeremy Franklin, Michael McMahon and Nick Mclaren for assistance in 
preparing the text. I would also like to thank John Barrdear, Rob Elder, Bob Gilhooly, Chris Hackworth, Jeremy 
Harrison and Gareth Ramsay for their comments and contributions. 
13 September 2007 will be seen as a red letter day in financial history. It was the date news 
broke of Northern Rock seeking emergency liquidity from the Bank of England, prompting the 
first run on a UK bank in over a century. It also fired the starting gun on what subsequently 
became known as “The Great Recession”. That very day, the Bank hosted a conference. In a 
painful irony, its theme was “The Great Moderation”. 
The  Great  Moderation  described  the  long-period  of  pre-crisis  macro-economic  calm,  with 
stable growth, stable inflation and stable banks.1 This view held that central banks, while not 
eliminating  boom  and  bust,  had  moderated  macro-economic  undulations.  It  also  held  that 
financial innovation, while not eliminating risk, had scattered it to the four winds. 
As Great Recession abruptly replaced Great Moderation, it was clear a grave analytical and 
policy error had been made. Economic and financial pride had come before a momentous 
fall.  Nemesis  had  duly  followed  hubris.2  It  was  the  coldest  of  comforts  that  this  cognitive 
lapse was shared by the whole economic and policy-making profession. 
Clinical  diagnoses  of  this  failure  will  continue  for  some  time.  Was  this  an  example  of  the 
intoxicating  effect  of  power,  the  anaesthetising effect  of  success,  or  the  humbling  effect of 
uncertainty?  I  do  not  know.  But  if  nothing  else,  this  episode  underlines  the  importance  of 
cognitive constraints on decision-making when assessing the robustness of policy. 
Over  recent  years,  there  has  been  a  huge  amount  of  research  on  how  human  decision-
making  is  affected  by  various  cognitive  biases.3  Behavioural  economics,  the  fusion  of 
psychology  and  economics,  has  come  of  age.  There  has  also  been  a  huge  amount  of 
research over many years on central bank decision-making.4 Yet the link between the two – 
the psychology of central banking – has to date been largely unexplored territory.5 
I  want  to  engage  in  a  little  amateur  psychology  by  beginning  to  explore  that  terrain. 
Psychology tells us that behavioural biases, because they are neurologically hard-wired, are 
often  difficult  to  detect:  they  are  unconscious  biases.  Simply  recognising  the  cognitive 
constraints on decision-making is thus a first step towards making policy robust to them. 
So too is institutional design. Indeed, I wish to argue that the evolution of central bank policy 
frameworks  over  recent  years  can  be  seen  as  an  attempt  to  make  them  robust  to 
                                                
1 
2 
It was a term first popularised by Ben Bernanke, then-Chairman of the US Federal Reserve Board (Bernanke 
(2004)). 
In  Greek  mythology,  Nemesis  was  the  spirit  of  divine  retribution  against  those  who  succumb  to  hubris 
(arrogance  before  the  Gods).  The  term  hubris  now  typically  refers  to  a  loss  of  contact  with  reality  and  an 
overestimation of one's own competence, accomplishments or capabilities. 
3  Loewenstein et al (2008), Kahneman (2011), Mischel (2014), Urminsky and Zauberman (2014). 
4  Blinder (2004), Reis (2013) and Friedman and Schwartz (1963). 
5  There are some obvious exceptions in research on monetary policy decision-making, discussed below. Sibert 
(2006) also discusses the topic of “Central bank psychology”.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  psychological  biases.  I  want  to  illustrate  that  by  reference  to  the  Bank  of  England’s  policy 
framework.  And,  based  on  that  analysis,  I  want  to  suggest  some  areas  where  a  further 
evolutionary “nudge” in those frameworks might be warranted.6 
Behavioural biases in practice 
The literature on behavioural economics has sky-rocketed over recent years.7 This identifies 
a long list of cognitive ticks that can affect human decision-making. All of these are likely to 
affect policy decision-making to some degree. But from that potentially very long list, let me 
highlight four biases which may pose a particular policy-making challenge. 
Preference biases 
Public policy involves making choices on society’s behalf. Society typically delegates these 
choices to an individual or set of individuals, often either politicians or bureaucrats. That act 
of delegated authority means that policy decisions usually involve both a principal (society) 
and  an  agent  (such  as  government).  The  nature  of  that  principal/agent  relationship  then 
becomes crucial for effective policy.8 
Yet history suggests that this relationship is not always entirely harmonious. One potential 
source of friction is that the agent may have preferences which are not perfectly aligned with 
society  at  large.  This  is  human  nature.  For  example,  it  might  arise  from  the  agent  putting 
personal objectives over societal ones, such as personal power or wealth.9 
These  problems  have  been  widely  studied  in  political  and  management  science.  In  their 
extreme form, this preference misalignment can manifest itself as autocracy (the pursuit of 
personal  power  at  society’s  expense)  or  corruption  (the  pursuit  of  personal  wealth  at 
society’s  expense).  Historically,  such  “extractive  regimes”  have  had  dire  consequences for 
societal welfare. Indeed, they may explain “Why Nations Fail”.10 
Historically at least, the antidote to these preference problems is typically found in institutions 
– property rights, the rule of law, democratic processes. Strong institutions have often laid 
the  foundation  on  which  nations  have  been  built.  Typically,  these  institutional  structures 
comprise  an  ex-ante  mandate  (agreed  by  society)  and  ex-post  accountability  mechanisms 
(assessed by society). Colloquially, these are often called checks and balances. 
For  example,  electoral  democracy  is  an  institutional  response  to  a  potential  preference 
misalignment between the electorate and the polity. Parties publish manifestos ex-ante to set 
their mandate. And, if successful, they are held accountable for that mandate by society ex-
post  through  elections.11  Democracy,  and  its  associated  institutions,  is  the  solution  to  an 
ageless principal/agent problem. 
What  is  true  at  the  level  of  the  nation  state  is  also  true  at  the  level  of  the  firm  and  the 
individual.  In  firms,  principal-agent  problems  can  arise  because  managers  put  their  own 
preferences  (for  mega-mergers,  mega-bonuses,  mega-jets)  ahead  of  shareholders.12  They 
                                                
6  A  term  first  popularised  in  the  Book  ‘Nudge:  Improving  Decisions  about  Health,  Wealth,  and  Happiness’ 
(Thaler and Sunstein (2008). 
7  As discussed in Diamond and Vartiainen (2007). 
8  Bergman and Lane (1990). 
9  Gailmard (2014). 
10  Acemoglu and Robinson (2012). 
11  Frerejohn (1986). 
12  Jensen and Meckling (1976). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
also arise from workers putting their own preferences (say, for an easy life) over managers.13 
Institutional structures – in this case, company and employment law – can help solve these 
problems. 
Among  individuals,  preference  biases  can  also  have  negative  societal  implications.  In  the 
medical  profession,  there  is  research  arguing  that  doctors  systematically  over-prescribe 
drugs and over-admit patients to hospital.14 Neither may be in the patients’, nor societies’, 
best interests. This is usually the result of doctors weighing their own preferences (the risk of 
reputational or financial loss) over the patient’s (the risk of health problems worsening). 
their 
in  everything 
Myopia biases 
Psychological  experiments  show  that  people  differ  materially  in  their  capacity  to  defer 
gratification. The classic example is the “Marshmallow test” devised by Walter Mischel in the 
1960s.15  Mischel  gave  children  at  Stanford  University’s  Bing  Nursery  School  the  choice 
between one marshmallow for immediate consumption or two if the child waited. 
Not  only  did  children  differ  significantly  in  their ability  to  defer gratification.  As  researchers 
followed the fortunes of these children as they grew older, a remarkable pattern emerged: 
children  which  had  exhibited  greater  patience  in  their  pre-school  marshmallow  test 
subsequently  outperformed 
impatient  counterparts 
from  school 
examinations, to salaries, to reported levels of life satisfaction. 
Subsequent sociological studies have established a longer list of ways in which impatient or 
myopic behaviour influences human decision-making. Myopic individuals are more likely to 
smoke, to suffer alcohol and drug addiction problems, to be obese and to have credit card 
debt problems.16 Myopia also differs significantly across countries.17 
To explain this, Richard Thaler developed a psychological model based on the “two selves”. 
In effect, each of us comprises a patient “planner” and an impatient “doer”.18 Neuro-scientific 
evidence has subsequently lent support to Thaler’s model, with different areas of the brain 
found to be responsible for patient and impatient behaviours.19 
In  practice,  myopic  behaviour  appears  often  to  hold  sway  in  everyday  decision-making. 
People  appear  consistently  to  discount  too  heavily  future  rewards,  a  property  called 
hyperbolic  discounting.20  This  can  explain  myopic  saving  behaviour  by  households  and 
companies, when tomorrow’s consumption is brought forward to today.21 And it can explain 
political business cycles, when tomorrow’s GDP is brought forward to today.22 
Myopic behaviour also appears rife in risk decisions. People appear to exhibit risk myopia, 
discounting  risk  events  more  heavily  the  longer  the  period  that  passes  without  that  risk 
materialising.23  This  is  the  behaviour  we  see  from  car  drivers  whose  speed  gradually 
                                                
13  Ross (1973). 
14  Orlowski and Wateska (1992). 
15  Mischel (2014). 
16  As discussed in Urminsky and Zauberman (2014). 
17  Wang et al (2011). 
18  Thaler and Shefrin (1981). 
19  McClure et al (2004), Figner et al (2010) and Lowenstein et al (2008) 
20  Ainslie (1975). 
21  Laibson (1997).  
22  Nordhaus (1975). 
23  Kahneman and Tversky (1979) and Thaler, Kahneman, Tversky and Schwartz (1997). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  increases after witnessing an accident. It was also the behaviour we saw during the Great 
Moderation when financial markets suffered progressively greater risk myopia (Chart 1). 
Hubris biases 
In  1965,  psychologist  Stuart  Oskamp  performed  a  multiple  choice  test  on  a  group  of 
psychology  students  based  on  a  case  study.  He  also  asked  them  to  assign  a  confidence 
rating to their answer.24 The students were then given more information on the case study 
and asked to answer further questions with a confidence rating. 
He  found  that  additional  information  did  nothing  to  improve  the  accuracy  of  the  students’ 
answers. It did, however, cause the confidence rating they attached to these answers to rise 
significantly.  The  addition  of  information  and  experience  led  students  to  become  over-
precise, to over-estimate their abilities, to over-state their performance. 
There is no shortage of casual evidence of such hubris or over-confidence biases. 90% of 
faculty  at  the  University  of  Nebraska  rate  themselves  as  above-average  teachers.25  Over 
90%  of  US  students  rate  themselves  as  above-average  drivers.26  And  over  80%  of 
Frenchmen rate themselves to be above-average lovers.27 
Over-confidence  biases  have  been  widely  studied  in  politics  and  management.  There  is  a 
degree  of  Darwinian  self-selection  at  work  here.  Over-confident  individuals  tend  to 
outperform in tournaments. 
This means they are more likely to occupy positions of influence in the first place, whether 
Prime Minister or CEO, though not Chief Economist.28 
But the same factor that pushes these individuals to the summit may also push them over the 
edge.  Over-confidence  increases  the  risk  of  over-reach  –  for  example,  pursuing  over-
ambitious  targets  or  undertaking  over-complex  company  takeovers,  generating  an  above-
average risk of systemic failure. That is why nemesis is often thought to follow hubris. 
What is true of those managing countries and companies appears to be no less true of those 
managing money. Investment managers have consistently been found to over-estimate their 
abilities  and  traders  consistently  to  over-trade  their  positions.  On  average,  there  is  little 
evidence of either consistently out-performing their peers.29 
Over-confidence  effects  tend  to  be  more  acute  among  individuals  than  groups,  as  groups 
dilute the influence of hubristic individuals, as well as promoting a greater understanding of 
others’  perspectives.  Consistent  with  that,  studies  of  decision-making  by  the  US  Supreme 
Court in the US have found benefits from expert, unelected committees.30 
Groupthink biases 
In 1951, Solomon Asch conducted a series of tests on a group of students. Each was asked 
in turn to state which of three lines on a card matched the length of the line on a separate 
                                                
24  Oskamp (1965). 
25  Cross (1997) 
26  Svenson (1981) 
27  Taleb (2007) 
28  Goel and Thakor (2008). 
29  Kahneman (2011). 
30  Iaryczower et al (2013). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
card.31 The twist came in the fact that all but one of the participants was an actor, primed to 
give the wrong answer. The real student, answering last, then responded. 
These Asch experiments found something remarkable. The unsuspecting student conformed 
to the group’s wrong answers between a third and a half of the time. Their decision-making 
suffered  a  systematic  conformity  bias.  Interestingly,  if  as  little  as  one  dissenting  view  was 
added, this conformity bias was reduced by up to 75%. 
In 1972, Irving Janis called this tendency for groups to act cohesively “groupthink”.32 Janis 
focused on a number of US political decisions to motivate this concept, the most celebrated 
of which was President Kennedy’s decision to invade the Bay of Pigs in 1961. More recently, 
groupthink was used to explain the Challenger space shuttle disaster.33 
Groupthink is the collective manifestation of confirmation bias – the tendency to search and 
synthesize information in ways which confirm prior beliefs. This, rather than alcohol, is why 
drunks search for lost keys under the lamppost.34 Confirmation bias is prevalent in uncertain 
environments, where popular narratives are used to filter uncertainties.35 
Psychologists  such  as  Janis  have  identified  a  number  of  ways  to  mitigate  groupthink  or 
confirmation  bias.  Actively  encouraging  dissent  in  groups  is  one.  Seeking  alternative 
perspectives  from  outside  experts  is  a  second.  And  having  the  group  chair  state  their 
preferences last is a third.36 
Evolution of Bank of England’s policy framework 
Let me now describe the evolution of the UK’s macro-economic policy framework over the 
past half-century or so. This is a journey whose starting point was a rules-based regime over 
which the Bank had little discretion and whose finishing line is a regime over which the Bank 
exercises significant discretion. 
For much of its 320-year history, the Bank of England’s role in UK economic policy was as 
operational agent. The role of policy principal was played by government.37 In the setting of 
monetary policy, the Bank’s role from the end of the second world war through to the 1990s 
was  as  implementer,  not  decision-maker.  The  Bank  had  little,  if  any,  independence  in  the 
setting of monetary targets or instruments. 
That  changed  progressively  in  the  1990s  and  decisively  after  1997.  Through  the  Bank  of 
England  Act  1998,  the  Bank  was  granted  operational  independence  for  the  setting  of 
monetary  policy  in  the  UK,  to  meet  an  inflation  target  set  by  government.  Specifically, 
monetary  policy  came  to  be  set  by  a  nine-person  Monetary  Policy  Committee  (MPC), 
meeting monthly and comprising five Bank “internals” and four “externals”.38 
In the light of the crisis, the UK’s policy framework has been further changed. The Financial 
Services  Act  2012  vested  the  Bank  with  further  responsibilities,  creating  a  new  10  person 
Financial Policy Committee (FPC), meeting quarterly to execute macro-prudential policy. The 
                                                
31  Asch (1951). 
32  Janis (1972, 1982). 
33  Hughes and White (2010). 
34  Kaplan (1964). 
35  Tuckett (2011). 
36  Janis (1982). 
37  Capie, Goodhart and Schnadt (1994). 
38  King (2010), Lambert (2005). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  FPC sets regulatory policy to ensure the stability of the financial system as a whole. Like the 
MPC, it comprises both internals and externals.39 
The Financial Services Act also gave the Bank responsibility for micro-prudential supervision 
–  ensuring  the  safety  and  soundness  of  individual  financial  firms.  This  responsibility  rests 
with the Prudential Regulation Authority (PRA) at the Bank, specifically its Board. The PRA 
Board also comprises both Bank insiders and outsiders.40 
So  in  a  nutshell,  for  the  first  300  years  of  its  history  the  Bank  of  England  operated  as  an 
agent of government. In the subsequent 20 years, its degree of policy discretion has been 
transformed.  It  now  comprises  monetary,  macro-prudential  and  micro-prudential  policy  –  a 
“3M”  regime.  The  Bank’s  span  of  responsibilities  may  well  be  unique,  at  least  among 
advanced economy central banks. 
Though  there  are  differences  in  detail,  there  are  also  striking  elements  of  institutional 
similarity  in  the  decision-making  architecture  for  monetary,  macro-prudential  and  micro-
prudential policy, as carried out by the MPC, FPC and PRA respectively. Let me mention four 
features in particular: 
(a) Goal dependence: The policy objectives of all three policy committees are set in statute 
by  Parliament,  reflecting  the  attitudes  of  the  electorate  at  large.  In  the  language  of 
economics,  the  3M  regime  thus  exhibits  “goal-dependence”.41  Though  different  in  detail, 
these  objectives  share  some  similarities.  For  example,  the  MPC  and  FPC  have  a  unique 
primary objective, augmented with a common secondary objective.42 
(b)  Instrument  independence:  The  policy  instruments  of  the  three  policy  committees  are 
delegated, through statute, to them. In other words, the settings of these instruments on a 
day-to-day  basis  are  for  the  Bank  of  England’s  policy  committees,  subject  to  meeting  the 
Parliamentary-set target. The 3M regime thus exhibits “instrument-independence”. 
(c) Committee-based decision-making: Decisions on monetary, macro-prudential and micro-
prudential  policy  rest  with  three  Committees,  rather  than  any  one  individual.43  The 
Committees themselves vary in size from 9 to 11 people. They comprise a mix of Bank of 
England  “internals”  and  “external”  experts.  Decisions  are  made  either  by  majority  voting 
(MPC), consensus (PRA) or by consensus with a provision for majority voting (FPC). 
(d) Transparency and accountability: The deliberations and decisions of each Committee are 
subject to public scrutiny. The minutes of MPC and FPC policy meetings are published. All 
three  Committees  produce  periodic  reports,  tabled  in  Parliament,  on  their  actions  and 
analysis.44  And  members  of  each  Committee  appear  regularly  before  Parliamentary 
Committees. There is individual accountability, as well as collective responsibility, for policy. 
These  institutional  features  are  no  historical  accident.  Each  serves  as  a  constraint  on  the 
policy discretion exercised either by the Bank as agent or by its principal Parliament. The 3M 
                                                
39  For more on the FPC, see Tucker, Hall and Pattani (2013) and Murphy and Senior (2013). 
40  Bailey, Breeden and Stevens (2012). 
41  Debelle and Fischer (1994). 
42  For  example,  for  the  MPC  the  remit  specifies  that  the  primary  objective  is  to  maintain  price  stability  and, 
subject  to  that,  the  secondary  objective  is  to  support  the  economic  policy  of  Her  Majesty’s  Government, 
including its objectives for growth and employment. 
43  Although a single individual – the Governor - chairs all three committees. 
44  For MPC, this is a quarterly Inflation Report; for FPC, a semi-annual Financial Stability Report; for the PRA, an 
Annual Report. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
policy regime is one of “constrained discretion”.45 Each of these constraints can, in turn, be 
seen as an institutional response to the behavioural biases discussed earlier. 
Behavioural biases in policy 
So let me now link these institutional features to each of the behavioural biases. And let me 
also try to provide some evidence on how successful these features have been in  leaning 
against these biases. With elements of this policy framework still fledgling, it is too early to 
reach definitive conclusions on some of its features. 
Preference biases 
The policy frameworks of the MPC, FPC and PRA Board share the feature that targets are 
set ex-ante in legislation by Parliament acting on behalf of society. The policy mandates of 
the MPC, FPC and PRA are those of the principal (society), not the agent (the Bank). The 
Bank is not setting its own exams. 
Nor, ex post, is the Bank marking its own exams. For example, if the MPC fails to meet its 
2% inflation target by one percentage point in either direction, it is required to write an open 
letter to the Chancellor, setting out why this happened and how the MPC intends to respond 
in returning inflation to target. And the Bank’s regular policy reports set out the MPC, FPC 
and PRA’s intended actions and are subject to Parliamentary scrutiny. 
These  design  features  –  ex-ante  mandates  and  ex-post  accountabilities  –  are  explicitly 
designed  to  ensure  the  actions  of  the  Bank’s  policy  committees  are  well-aligned  with 
society’s  wishes.  They  are  designed  to  reduce  the  risk  of  the  Bank  becoming  a  mono-
maniacal inflation-fighter or risk-slayer, with preferences out of kilter with society’s. 
To operate effectively, these institutional checks and balances need to be reasonably well-
specified – for example, the mandate needs to be clear and monitorable. On the monetary 
policy  side,  this  is  relatively  straightforward.  The  MPC’s  inflation  target  is  quantitative  and 
observable. It also appears to be pretty well-aligned with societal preferences. 
The Bank conducts regular surveys of public attitudes towards the inflation target. They paint 
a consistent picture. Around half of respondents think the 2% target for inflation is about right 
(Chart 2). The minority who disagree are roughly evenly-split between those thinking it is too 
low and too high. 
There  is  also  a  striking  correlation  between  public  attitudes  towards  the  Bank  and 
perceptions  of  inflation,  with  the  public  seemingly  strongly  averse  to  above-target  inflation 
rates (Chart 3). There is little sense that the Bank may be acting like an “inflation-nutter”. This 
pattern is replicated internationally where inflation targets are centred around 2% and survey 
evidence indicates a strong public aversion to inflation.46 
Even if public minds are made up on appropriate inflation targets, academics are not. Since 
the crisis, a number of countries have operated near the zero bound for interest rates. It has 
been argued that targeting a 2% inflation rate results in this zero bound constraint binding too 
frequently, inhibiting the effectiveness of monetary policy.47 A higher target would loosen that 
constraint. This academic debate may run for some time. 
On the financial stability side, the position is less straightforward. There is no single, easily 
observable or quantifiable target for systemic risk against which to hold the FPC and PRA to 
                                                
45  Bernanke and Mishkin (1997) first coined this term in the context of inflation–targeting. 
46  Shiller (1997). 
47  Ball (2014). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  account. And the public at large often do not have well-defined or strong attitudes towards 
financial stability – except, perhaps, when things go wrong. 
Since 2012, the Bank has been surveying the general public on how they believe the Bank 
has performed in protecting the financial system. Some reassurance can perhaps be taken 
from  the  fact  that  this  has  moved  from  a  net  dissatisfaction  score  of  13  in  2012  to  a  net 
satisfaction score of 40 today.48 Nonetheless, by itself this approach falls well short of having 
a clear objective against which the FPC and PRA can periodically be assessed. 
The FPC has begun publishing a set of financial stability indicators against which it assesses 
systemic risk and is held to account. And through the process of stress-testing the balance 
sheets of financial institutions, the FPC and PRA are now laying out transparently the risk 
standard they are requiring from firms and from the financial system as a whole and which is 
the subject of external scrutiny. 
But this has not fully allayed occasional criticisms of the Bank’s regulatory policy choices. At 
various times, the Bank has been warned against pursuing the stability of the graveyard or 
the  tendencies  of  the Taliban.  A  somewhat  better  defined financial  stability  anchor,  set  by 
Parliament and reflecting society’s desires, could over time damp these criticisms. 
In the 1950s and 1960s, central banks and academics strove to define an appropriate anchor 
for  monetary  policy.  That  brought  success,  with  inflation  targets  and  attitudes  now  well-
anchored. This gives grounds for optimism that financial stability can follow the same path 
though, as monetary policy found, the journey is likely to be long and arduous. 
Myopia biases 
The  Bank’s  monetary,  macro-prudential  and  micro-prudential  policy  regimes  all  exhibit 
instrument independence. Decisions are made by Committees of technocrats, operating at 
arms-length  from  the  political  process.  The  case  for  delegation  of  policy  responsibility  is 
founded on myopia biases within society at large or among its elected representatives. 
In  a  monetary  policy  context,  myopia  tends  to  manifest  itself  as  a  desire  to  bring  forward 
tomorrow’s income to today, typically by setting monetary policy too loose. As one former US 
president is rumoured to have put it, “I want tight money – and lots of it”. Myopia risks coming 
at the expense of higher inflation tomorrow. It imparts an inflation bias.49 
What is true of monetary policy is equally true of regulatory policy. A desire to bring forward 
income may result in regulatory policy also becoming too loose. As one former British Prime 
Minster  put  it,  pre-crisis  regulation  was  “hugely  inhibiting  of  efficient  business  by  perfectly 
reasonable companies”.50 Myopia then risks coming at the expense of a higher incidence of 
crises tomorrow. It imparts a crisis bias.51 
Luckily,  these  temporal  biases  also  have  a  potentially  straightforward  solution.  This  is  to 
delegate  decision-making  over  monetary  and  regulatory  policy  to  an  agency  less  prone  to 
myopia  bias  –  an  agent  whose  time  horizon  stretches  beyond  the  political  business  cycle. 
This is where central bank independence comes into the picture. 
The inflationary experience of the 1970s and early 1980s was taken by many as evidence of 
myopia-induced inflation biases. Politicians had flunked the marshmallow test. In response, 
                                                
48  The  Bank  of  England  GfK  /  NOP  FPC  Survey.  Further  details  available  at:  http://www.bankofengland. 
co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2013/fpcsurvey.xlsx. 
49  Barro and Gordon (1983). 
50   Blair (2005). 
51   Haldane (2013). 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  countries began granting central banks greater degrees of monetary policy independence, as 
an institutional response to a behavioural bias.52 
This  international  trend  was  followed  by  the  UK  in  1997,  when  the  Bank  of  England  was 
granted  operational  independence.  Has  this  curbed  the  inflation  bias?  Chart  4  plots  a 
measure of financial markets’ expectations of UK inflation since 1985. Also shown is the date 
of Bank of England independence and inflation targets since their inception in 1993. 
These measures of inflation expectations were consistently and materially above target in the 
period  prior  to  independence  –  the  myopia  or  inflation  bias  problem  looked  real.  But  from 
pretty much the point of announcement of independence, they began ratcheting down. Within 
12 months, they were aligned with the inflation target. They have stayed there in the period 
since. The Bank of England has thus far passed the marshmallow test. 
Another lens is provided by looking at the stability of inflation and output either side of central 
bank  independence  (Chart  5).  Since  independence,  UK  inflation  variability  has  fallen  by  a 
factor  of  five  and  output  stability  by  a  factor  of  almost  two.  As  this  period  saw  the  largest 
macro-economic collapse in memory, it loads the dice against independence. 
This evidence may seem to suggest that central banks have tamed the inflationary tiger. That 
metaphor is apt. Friedrich Hayek likened the process of controlling the economy as akin to 
taking a tiger by the tail.53 As far as inflation control is concerned, Hayek was right. As some 
countries are finding today, the tiger is capable of biting back. 
Chart 6 plots inflation expectations from financial markets in the UK, US, the euro-area and 
Japan  over  recent  years.  In  Japan,  inflation  expectations  have  been  anything  but  well-
anchored, varying significantly around a trend close to zero. Most recently, they have been 
falling once again. The same is true in the euro-area and, to lesser extent, in the US. 
So far, inflation expectations in the UK have held up and, on a central view, the Bank expects 
inflation to be on target at a 2–3 year horizon. But this tiger needs careful handling. Even in 
the  UK,  some  measures  of  household  inflation  expectations  have  fallen  slightly  over  the 
course of this year. The tiger has stirred. Wearing my MPC hat, and with UK inflation already 
below target, this is something I am watching like a dove. 
For financial stability, quashing myopia-induced crisis biases is at an earlier stage. The long 
history  of  past  financial  crises  attests  to  that.  Tellingly,  history  often  ascribes  political 
structures and incentives a key role in determining which countries are most susceptible to 
crisis.54 It tells us why financial regulation has repeatedly failed the marshmallow test. 
Nonetheless, there are institutional grounds for optimism. In the UK, the FPC and PRA have 
been created as independent regulatory policy  bodies housed under the Bank of England. 
They are a direct response to past crisis myopia. They mimic the changes made to monetary 
policy 16 years ago and, at root, were done for the same reasons. 
For the FPC and PRA, still in their infancy, it is far too early to tell whether they will be able to 
quell  future  crises  more  effectively  than  regimes  in  the  past.  Nonetheless,  there  are 
encouraging straws in the wind. Surveys of market participants’ expectations of systemic risk 
– the closest analogue to inflation expectations on the financial stability side – have subsided 
over recent years (Chart 7). How much of that is attributable to the new regulatory regime, 
rather than external factors, is at present unclear. 
Looking  internationally,  unlike  with  monetary  policy,  consensus  has  yet  to  be  reached  on 
whether regulatory policy should also be set independently from government. A recent IMF 
                                                
52  Hammond (2012). 
53  Hayek (1979). 
54  Calomiris (2014). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  study  found  only  half  of  macro-prudential  regimes  internationally  were  operated  by  central 
banks, though a number of others were in the hands of independent regulators.55 
Perhaps with the passage of time that will change, as with monetary policy independence. 
Psychology  suggests  it  should.  Because  the  risk  cycle  is  even  longer  than  the  business 
cycle, myopia biases are even more likely when tackling crises than inflation. The case for 
independence is at least as strong for regulatory policy as it is for monetary policy.56 
Hubris biases 
Under  the  UK’s  new  framework,  decisions  on  monetary,  macro-prudential  and  micro-
prudential policy are made by Committee, rather than by an individual. Committee members 
are  individually  accountable  and  drawn  from  inside  and  outside  the  Bank.  This  structure 
provides  some  safeguard  against  over-confidence  bias  –  for  example,  by  diluting  the 
influence of any one individual’s views on policy decision-making. 
There is evidence to support this in monetary policy decision-making. In the early days of the 
MPC,  the  Bank  used  experimental  evidence  to  assess  the  impact  of  committee  decision-
making. It found they made for better decision than individuals, by eliminating the bad play of 
individuals but also by promoting learning among Committee members.57 
Subsequent  evidence  from  real-world  MPC  decision-making  has  found  the  same.58  For 
effective  information  aggregation,  individual  MPC  members  need  to  bring  a  diversity  of 
views. While difficult to observe directly, voting patterns suggest a reasonable degree of such 
diversity. There has been at least one member dissent from an MPC decision at around half 
of all meetings (Chart 8). 
External MPC members have contributed importantly to this diversity. On average, they have 
been around twice as likely as internals to dissent from monetary policy decisions (Chart 9). 
And although less likely to be in a minority, the Governor of the day has been outvoted on 
nine occasions.59 
Voting  diversity  does  not  of  course  prevent  collective  over-optimism.  That  might  arise,  for 
example,  if  the  MPC  consistently  over-estimated  its  ability  to  forecast  the  economy.  Since 
1996, the Bank has published forecast paths for inflation and output growth, together with its 
assessment  of  the  uncertainty  around  these  estimates  –  so-called  “fan  charts”.60  Chart  10 
shows the fan chart for inflation from the Bank’s most recent Inflation Report. 
These fan charts allow us to conduct a real-world version of Oskamp’s experiment. Chart 11 
plots the standard deviation of the Bank’s fan charts for output and inflation over time. During 
the  Great  Moderation,  forecast  errors  shrunk.  The  MPC  narrowed  their  fan  charts  in 
response, becoming more precise in their estimates of future output and inflation. 
Post-crisis,  that  picture  has  changed  radically.  Forecast  errors  increased.  The  fan  charts 
were widened significantly, almost doubling for both future output growth and inflation. Like 
psychology students of the 1950s, there was a significant degree of pre-crisis over-precision 
by the MPC in their assessment of the economy. 
                                                
55  IMF (2013). 
56  Haldane (2013). 
57  Lombardelli et al (2005) for the UK and Blinder and Morgan (2007) for the US. 
58  Hansen, McMahon and Velasco Rivera (2014). 
59  It is too soon to assess the decision-making structures of the FPC and PRA, all of whose decisions so far 
have been consensual.  
60  For further discussion on decision making under uncertainty, see Aikman et al (2011). 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Despite the post-crisis widening of the fan charts, it remains unclear whether the now higher 
degree of uncertainty in the fan charts is correctly calibrated. Chart 12 looks at outcomes for 
output growth and inflation since the crisis, relative to the MPC’s probability distribution at the 
one year horizon, broken down into 20% buckets. 
If  the  fan  chart  distribution  had  been  roughly  right,  these  outcomes  would  be  equally 
distributed  across  the  buckets.  They  are  not.  In  practice,  output  and  inflation  have  fallen 
systemically into the tails of the distribution, with around 50% in the outer 20% buckets. 
Groupthink biases 
A  related,  but  distinct,  decision-making  defect  is  confirmation  bias  or  its  collective 
counterpart,  groupthink.  As  with  other  biases,  the  institutional  structures  of  the  MPC,  FPC 
and PRA contain a number of safeguards. Committee-based decision-making, with individual 
accountability and with the chair voting last, reduces the risk of a single collective narrative. 
The degree of dissent across the MPC is also a positive diagnostic. 
Nonetheless, Committee-based decision-making, especially by consensus, does not remove 
the  risk  of  conformity  risk.  Indeed,  it  could  even  propagate  groupthink  if  cross-pollination 
becomes rather too effective. As an illustration, Michael McMahon from Warwick University 
has undertaken a detailed text-based analysis of MPC minutes to assess the importance of 
certain “topics” in shaping the MPC’s deliberations. 
Chart 13 plots the incidence of discussion in the MPC minutes of topics around “banks”.61 
For the decade prior to 2007, banking issues did not get much of a look-in. They typically 
accounted  for  only  around  2%  of  MPC  discussion  time  during  the  Great  Moderation. With 
hindsight, given emerging pressures in the banking sector, this was a collective blind-spot. 
The Northern Rock crisis of 2007, and the failure of Lehman Brothers in 2008, made visible 
those  pressures.  In  response,  Committee-time  devoted  to  banking  issues  rose  to  a  peak 
almost ten times higher than the pre-crisis period. Today, discussion of banking issues has 
settled at levels below the crisis peaks, but above those in the pre-crisis period. 
The  proportion  of  MPC  discussion  around  banks  bears  a  striking  resemblance  to  market-
based  measures  of  banking  risk  (Chart  14).  Since  these  market-based  measures  were 
affected by risk illusion, it is reasonable to assume the MPC suffered that same illusion. Just 
like the students in the Asch experiments, MPC yielded to the wrong answers given by other 
financial actors. The MPC were looking for their keys under the wrong lamppost. 
It is too soon to tell whether any collective blind-spots remain. But compared with the pre-
crisis period, the Bank today has two extra pairs of policy eyes through the PRA and FPC. 
Joint  meetings  between  the  MPC,  FPC  and  the  PRA  Board  now  take  place.  These  help 
strengthen the committees’ peripheral vision and are a safeguard against groupthink. 
As  for  economic  forecasting,  this  is  the  most  inexact  of  sciences.  The  Bank  has  already 
undertaken  an  external  review  of  its  forecasting  procedures.62  And  it  also  has  taken  a 
sequence of measures to improve this process and the transparency around it.63 This has 
included publishing more information on forecast inputs and outputs. This is progress. 
My  own  view  is  that  improvements  to  the  Bank’s  forecasting  process  have  some 
considerable distance still to travel. Since the crisis, the Bank’s forecast errors for output and 
inflation,  like  those  of  external  forecasters,  have  tended  to  be  one-sided  and  serially 
                                                
61  This is part of a larger, on-going research project led by Stephen Hansen (UPF), Michael McMahon (Warwick) 
and Andrea Prat (Columbia University).  
62  Stockton (2012).  
63  See  the  Box  ‘Changes  to  Section  5  of  the  Inflation  Report’  on  page  49  of  the  May  2013  Bank  of  England 
Inflation Report. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
  
 
correlated (Chart 15).64 So too, often more dramatically, have been its forecast errors for real 
wages and productivity. To some degree this is understandable, as the MPC adapts to the 
unfolding landscape.65 But can we do much better? We must. 
This brings me to my final point. The Bank is about to embark on what will be, in the area of 
research, a cultural revolution. To caricature slightly, Bank research in the past was typically 
used to nourish and support the Bank’s policy thinking and framework. Relatively rarely was 
it used to challenge that prevailing policy orthodoxy, at least in public. 
That  is  about  to  change.  As  part  of  its  strategic  plan,  the  Bank  has  decided  to  cut  the 
umbilical cord. In future, it will carry out, and publish externally, research covering the whole 
waterfront  of  policy  issues  it  faces,  monetary,  financial  and  regulatory.  Through  new 
publications,  we  will  put  into  the  public  domain  research  and  analysis  which  as  often 
challenges as supports the prevailing policy orthodoxy on certain key issues. 
This research will hopefully act as spur and springboard for new policy thinking, and perhaps 
in time policy change, on key central bank issues of the day, whatever they may be. It will act 
as another bulwark against hubris, over-confidence and groupthink. 
Conclusion 
Behavioural  biases  afflict  us  all,  in  every  activity  from  setting  concrete  to  setting  interest 
rates,  from  stress-testing  steel  to  stress-testing  banks.  Central  banks  cannot  be  immune. 
Because central banks’ judgements affect society at large and in large ways, it is important 
there are institutional means of safeguarding against these biases. 
The Bank of England’s new policy framework is part of the response to that challenge. By 
design, it contains institutional safeguards against many of the biases most important for UK 
monetary  and  financial  stability.  But  it  is  early  days.  In  developing  this  framework  further, 
three principles will be important – recognition, research and revision. 
Because  behaviour  biases  are  often  unconscious,  recognising  them  is  crucial  for  building 
robustness. Put differently, denying their existence is proof of their importance! Research can 
help  in  identifying  and  understanding  these  biases  and  assessing  institutional  means  of 
leaning against them. The Bank hopes to make a real behavioural change of its own on the 
research front in the years ahead. 
Armed  with  that  research,  the  Bank  should  be  better-placed  to  make  revisions  to  policy. 
Historically, flexing policy frameworks has often been taken as a sign of regime failure. Quite 
the opposite ought to be the case. If the Bank’s policy machine is to be robust over time, it 
will need to evolve and  flex. If central bank regimes are encased in glass, they are apt to 
shatter when next hit by a falling Rock. 
 
                                                 
64  Stockton (2012) also reaches this conclusion. 
65  See Broadbent (2013), Hackworth et al (2013) and Elder et al (2005). 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 References 
 (2011), 
‘Uncertainty 
Acemoglu, D and Robinson, J (2012), ‘Why Nations Fail: The Origins of Power, Prosperity, 
and Poverty’, Crown Publishers. 
Aikman, D, Barrett, P, Kapadia, S, King, M, Proudman, J, Taylor, T, de Weymarn, I and 
Yates,  T 
in  macroeconomic  policy-making:  art  of  science?’, 
Philosophical Transactions vol. 369 no. 1956. 
Ainslie,  G  (1975),  ‘Specious  reward:  a  behavioral  theory  of  impulsiveness  and  impulse 
control’, Psychology Bulletin 82:463–96. 
Anand,  G,  and  Thakor,  A  (2008),  ‘Overconfidence,  CEO  selection,  and  corporate 
governance’, Journal of Finance, Journal of Finance 63, 2737–2784. 
Asch, S (1951), ‘Effects of group pressure upon the modification and distortion of judgment’, 
in H. Guetzkow (ed.) ‘Groups, leadership and men’, Pittsburgh, PA: Carnegie Press. 
Bailey, A, Breeden, S and Stevens, G (2012), ‘The Prudential Regulation Authority’, Bank 
of  England  Quarterly  Bulletin,  Vol.  52,  No.  4,  pages  354–62,  available  at: 
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/quarterlybulletin/qb120405.pdf. 
Ball,  L  (2014),  ‘The  Case  for  a  Long-Run  Inflation  Target  of  Four  Percent’,  IMF  Working 
Paper No. 14/92. 
Barro, R and Gordon, D (1983), ‘Rules, discretion and reputation in a model of monetary 
policy’, Journal of Monetary Economics Vol. 12, Issue 1, pages 101–121. 
Bergman, M and Lane, J (1990), ‘Public Policy in a Principal-Agent Framework’, Journal of 
Theoretical Politics, Vol. 2, No. 3, pp. 339–352. 
Bernanke,  B  and  Mishkin,  F  (1997),  ‘Infation  Targeting:  A  New  Framework  for  Monetary 
Policy?’ Journal of Economic Perspectives, 11(2), 97.116. 
Bernanke,  B.  (2004),  ‘Remarks  by  Governor  Ben  S.  Bernanke’,  Meetings  of  the  Eastern 
Economic Association, Washington, DC, 20 February. 
Blair, T (2005), ‘Common sense culture, not a compensation culture’, speech given at the 
the  Guardian.  Available  at: 
Institute 
http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2005/may/26/speeches.media. 
Blinder, A (2004), ‘The Quiet Revolution: Central Banking Goes Modern’, New Haven, CT: 
Yale University Press. 
Blinder,  A  and  Morgan,  J  (2007),  ‘Leadership  in  groups:  A  monetary  policy  experiment’, 
http://www.ijcb.org/ 
International 
Journal 
journal/ijcb08q4a4.pdf. 
Broadbent, B (2013), ‘Forecast errors’, Speech given at the Mile End Group of Queen Mary. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2013/ 
speech653.pdf. 
Calomiris, C (2014), ‘Fragile by Design: The Political Origins of Banking Crises and Scarce 
Credit’, Princeton University Press, ISBN 978–0691155241. 
Capie,  F,  Goodhart,  C  and  Schnadt,  N  (1994),  ‘The  development  of  central  banking’,  in 
Capie, F.; Fischer, S., Goodhart, C. and Schnadt, N. (eds), The future of central banking: the 
tercentenary  symposium  of  the  Bank  of  England.  Cambridge,  UK  :  Cambridge  University 
Press, pp. 1–261. 
Cross,  K  (1977),  ‘Not  can--but  will  college  teaching  be  improved?’,  New  Directions  for 
Higher Education, 17 (Spring): 1–15. 
of  Central  Banking.  Available 
for  Public  Policy 
thinktank, 
reported 
at: 
in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
  
 
Debelle,  G  and  Fischer,  S  (1994),  ‘How  Independent  Should  a  Central  Bank  Be?  in 
J.C. Fuhrer (ed.), Goals, Guidelines and Constraints Facing Monetary Policymakers. Federal 
Reserve Bank of Boston, 195–221. 
Diamond,  P  and  Vartiainen,  H  (2007),  ‘Behavioral  Economics  and  Its  Applications’, 
Princeton University Press. 
Elder,  R,  Kapetanios,  G,  Taylor,  T,  Yates,  T  (2005),  ‘Assessing  the  MPC’s  fan  charts’, 
Bank  of  England  Quarterly  Bulletin  2005  Q3.  Available  at:  http://www.bankofengland. 
co.uk/publications/Documents/quarterlybulletin/qb050301.pdf. 
Ferejohn, J. (1986), ‘Incumbent Performance and Electoral Control’, Public Choice, Vol. 50, 
pp. 5–25. 
Figner, B, Knoch, D, Johnson, E, Krosch, A, Lisanby, S, Fehr, E and Weber, E (2010), 
‘Lateral prefrontal cortex and self-control in intertemporal choice’, Nature Neuroscience 13, 
pp 538–539. 
Friedman,  M  and  Schwartz,  A  (1963),  ‘A  Monetary  History  of  the  United  States,  
1867–1960’, Princeton University Press, ISBN: 9780691003542. 
Gailmard, S (2014), ‘Accountability and Principal-Agent Models’, Oxford Handbook of Public 
Accountability, edited by Bovens, M., Goodin, R. E. and Schillemans, T., Oxford University 
Press. 
Goel, A and Thakor, A (2008), ‘Overconfidence, CEO selection and corporate governance’, 
Journal of Finance Vol. LXIII No. 6. 
Hackworth,  C,  Radia,  A,  Roberts,  N  (2013),  ‘Understanding  the  MPC’s  forecast 
performance  since  mid-2010’,  Bank  of  England  Quarterly  Bulletin  2013  Q4.  Available  at: 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/quarterlybulletin/2013/ 
qb130405.pdf. 
Haldane, A (2013), ‘Why institutions matter (more than ever)’, speech given at the Centre for 
Research  on  Socio-Cultural  Change  (CRESC).  Available  at:  http://www.bankofengland. 
co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2013/speech676.pdf. 
Hammond, G (2012), ‘State of the art inflation targeting – 2012’, Centre for Central Banking 
Studies  Handbook  –  No  29.  Available  at:  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/education/ 
Documents/ccbs/handbooks/pdf/ccbshb29.pdf. 
Hansen,  S,  McMahon,  S,  and  Prat,  A  (2014),  ‘Transparency  and  Deliberation  within  the 
FOMC: A computational linguistics approach’, Centre for Macroeconomics Discussion Paper 
11, available at: http://www.centreformacroeconomics.ac.uk/pdf/CFMDP2014–11-Paper.pdf. 
Hansen,  S,  McMahon,  M  and  Velasco  Rivera,  C  (2014),  ‘Preferences  or  Private 
Assessments  on  a  Monetary  Policy  Committee?’,  Journal  of  Monetary  Economics  Vol. 67, 
Pages 16–32. 
Hayek, F (1979), ‘A Tiger by the Tail: The Keynesian Legacy of Inflation’, Cato Inst, ISBN 
978–0932790064. 
Hughes, P and White, E (2010), ’The Space Shuttle Challenger disaster: A classic example 
of Groupthink’, Ethics & Critical Thinking Journal, Vol. 2010, Issue 3, pp. 63. 
Iaryczower, M, Lewis, G and Shum, M (2013) ‘To elect or to appoint? bias, information, and 
responsiveness of bureaucrats and politicians’. Journal of Public Economics 97, 230–244. 
IMF  (2013),  ‘Key  aspects  of  macroprudential  policy’,  available  at:  http://www.imf.org/ 
external/np/pp/eng/2013/061013b.pdf. 
Janis, I (1972), ‘Victims of groupthink: A psychological study of foreign policy decisions and 
fiascos’, Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company. 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 (2011), 
‘Thinking  Fast  and  Slow’,  Farrar,  Straus  &  Giroux,  
 
 
Janis, I (1982), ‘Groupthink: A psychological study of policy decisions and fiascos’, Boston: 
Houghton Mifflin Company. 
Jensen, M and Meckling, W (1976), ‘Theory of the firm: Managerial behavior, agency costs 
and ownership structure’, Journal of Financial Economics, Volume 3, Issue 4, pp. 305–360. 
Kahneman,  D 
ISBN 978–0374275631. 
Kahneman, D and Tversky, A (1979),  ‘Prospect Theory:  An  Analysis  of  Decisions  Under 
Risk’,  Econometrica  47,  Chart  10  shows  the  fan  chart  for  inflation  from  the  Bank’s  most 
recent inflation report, pp 313–327. 
Kaplan,  A  (1964),  ‘The  Conduct  of  Inquiry:  Methodology  for  Behavioral  Science’, 
Transaction Publishers. 
King,  M  (2010),  ‘The  MPC  ten  years  on’,  lecture  to  the  Society  of  Business  Economists. 
Available at: http://www.bis.org/review/r070507a.pdf. 
King, M (2013),  ‘Monetary  policy:  many  targets,  many  instruments. Where  do  we  stand?’, 
Speech  given  at  the  IMF  Conference  on  ‘Rethinking  Macro  Policy  II:  First  steps  and  early 
lessons’.  Available  at:  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/ 
2013/speech649.pdf. 
Laibson,  D  (1997),  “Golden  Eggs  and  Hyperbolic  Discounting.”  Quarterly  Journal  of 
Economics. 112:2, pp. 443–77. 
Lambert, R (2005), ‘Inside the MPC’, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, 2005 Q1. Available 
at: http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/quarterlybulletin/qb050105.pdf. 
Loewenstein,  G,  Rick,  S  and  Cohen,  J  (2008),  ‘Neuroeconomics’,  Annual  Review  of 
Psychology, Volume 59:647–72. 
Lombardelli,  C,  Proudman,  J,  Talbot,  J  (2005),  ‘Committees  versus  individuals:  An 
experimental  analysis  of  monetary  policy  decision  making’, International  Journal  of  Central 
Banking. Available at: http://www.ijcb.org/journal/ijcb05q2a5.htm. 
McClure, S , Laibson, D, Loewenstein, G and Cohen, J (2004), “Separate Neural Systems 
Value Immediate and Delayed Monetary Rewards, Science 306(5695), pp 503–507. 
Mischel, W (2014), “The Marshmallow Test: Mastering Self-Control”. 
Murphy,  E  and  Senior,  S  (2013),  ‘Changes  to  the  Bank  of  England’,  Bank  of  England 
Quarterly  Bulletin,  Vol.  53,  No.  1,  pages  20–28,  available  at:  www.bankofengland. 
co.uk/publications/Documents/quarterlybulletin/2013/qb130102.pdf. 
Nordhaus,  W  (1975),  ‘The  political  business  cycle.  Review  of  Economic  Studies’, 
Volume 42, pages 169–190. 
Orlowski,  J  and  Wateska,  L  (1992),  ‘The  effects  of  pharmaceutical  firm  enticements  on 
physician  prescribing  patterns.  There's  no  such  thing  as  a  free  lunch’,  CHEST,  Vol. 102, 
No. 1, pp. 270–273. 
Oskamp,  S  (1965),  ‘Overconfidence  in  case-study  judgments’.  The  Journal  of  Consulting 
Psychology, 29, 261–265. 
Reis, R (2013), ‘Central Bank Design’, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 27(4): 17–44. 
Ross, S (1973), ‘The Economic Theory of Agency: The Principal's Problem’, The American 
Economic Review, Vol. 63, No. 2, pp. 134–139. 
Shiller,  R  (1997),  ‘Why  Do  People  Dislike  Inflation?’,  in  Romer,  C.  D.  and  Romer,  D.  H. 
(eds),  ‘Reducing  Inflation:  Motivation  and  Strategy’,  Chicago:  University  of  Chicago  Press, 
pp. 13–65. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
  
 
Sibert, A. (2006), ‘Central Banking by Committee’, International Finance, Vol. 9, Issue 2, pp. 
145–168. 
Stockton,  D  (2012),  ‘Review  of  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee’s  forecasting  capability’, 
Bank  of  England,  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/news/2012/ 
cr3stockton.pdf. 
Svenson, O (1981),  “Are  we  all  less  risky  and  more  skilful  than  our fellow  drivers?”,  Acta 
Psychologica, Vol. 47, No. 2, p. 143–148. 
Taleb, N (2007), ‘The Black Swan – The Impact of the Highly Improbable’. New York, NY: 
Random House. 
Thaler,  R  and  Shefrin,  H  (1981),  ‘An  economic  theory  of  self-control’,  J.  Polit.  Econ.  
89:392–406. 
Thaler, R and Sunstein, C (2008), ‘Nudge: Improving decisions about health, wealth, and 
happiness’, Yale University Press. 
Thaler, Richard, Kahneman, D, Schwartz, A and Tversky, A (1997), ‘The Effect of Myopia 
and  Loss  Aversion  on  Risk  Taking:  An  Experimental  Test’,  The  Quarterly  Journal  of 
Economics, Volume 112, issue 2, 647–661. 
Tucker, P, Hall, S and Pattani, A (2013), ‘Macroprudential policy at the Bank of England’, 
Bank  of  England  Quarterly  Bulletin,  Vol.  53,  No.  3,  pages  192–200,  available  at 
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/quarterlybulletin/2013/qb130301.pdf. 
Tuckett, D (2011), ‘Minding the Markets: An Emotional Finance View of Financial Instability’, 
Palgrave Macmillan, ISBN 978-0230299856. 
Tuckett,  D,  Ormerod,  P,  Smith,  R,  and  Nyman,  R  (forthcoming),  ‘Bringing  Social-
Psychological  Variables  into  Economic  Modelling:  Uncertainty,  Animal  Spirits  and  the 
Recovery  from  the  Great  Recession’,  UCL  Centre  for  the  Study  of  Decision-Making 
Uncertainty. Available at: http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2408155. 
Urminsky,  Oleg  and  Zauberman,  Gal  (2014), 
intertemporal 
preferences’,  To  appear  in  the  ‘Wiley-Blackwell  Handbook  of  Judgment  and  Decision 
Making’. 
Wang, Mei, Marc Oliver Rieger and Thorsten Hens (2011), ‘How time preferences differ: 
Evidence from 45 countries’, NHH Discussion paper, FOR 18. 
 
‘The  psychology  of 
 16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Appendix 
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
 Chart 1: Equity market volatility and CDS premia  
for major UK banks 
Average 5yr CDS for UK banks (RHS)
VIX (LHS)
Basis points 
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
 0
2003
2005
2007
2009
2011
2013
Source: Bloomberg. Notes: Equity market volatility is shown using the US VIX index. 
Major  UK  banks  include:  Standard  Chartered,  Santander  UK,  RBS,  Barclays,  LBG, 
HBOS, and HSBC. 
Chart 2: Household views of the Bank of England’s 2%  
inflation target 
is too high
or too low
or about right
Percentages  of respondents 
1999
2001
2003
2005
2007
2009
2011
2013
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
 Source:  Quarterly  Bank  of  England  GfK/NOP  Inflation  Attitudes  survey.  Notes: 
Respondents  were  asked  the  following  question  “The  Government  has  set  an 
inflation target of 2%. Do you think this target is too high, too low or about right?”. 
Respondents who answered “no idea” are not shown on the chart. On average, 
around 14% of respondents answer in this way. Data are to 2014Q3. For further 
details on this survey, please see the 2014 Q2 Quarterly Bulletin Article, “Public 
to  Monetary  Policy”,  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/ 
Attitudes 
Documents/quarterlybulletin/2014/qb14q205.pdf. 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 17 
  Chart 3: Satisfaction with the Bank and inflation perceptions 
Net satisfaction with the Bank (a)
Median perceptions of current inflation - inverted (b)
 Differences from averages since 2000 (number of 
standard deviations) 
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
-0.5
-1.0
-1.5
-2.0
-2.5
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
Source:  Bank  of  England  GfK/NOP  survey.  Notes:  a)  The  percentage  of 
respondents who were fairly or very satisfied with the way in which the Bank of 
England is doing its job to set interest rates in order to control inflation, less the 
percentage who were fairly or very dissatisfied. b) Respondents were asked how 
they  thought  prices  had  changed  over  the  past  twelve  months.  Data  are  to 
2014Q3.  For 
the  2014  Q2  
Quarterly  Bulletin  Article, 
to  Monetary  Policy”, 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/quarterlybulletin/2014/q
b14q205.pdf. 
this  survey,  please  see 
further  details  on 
“Public  Attitudes 
Chart 4: UK financial market implied measures of inflation  
expectations and the inflation target 
5yr5yr inflation implied from index-linked gilts
Inflation targets
Per cent 
9
First inflation 
target and 
ERM exit 
Operational  
independence and 
creation of MPC 
Switch to 2% CPI inflation 
target 
1985
1989
1993
1997
2001
2005
2009
2013
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
 Source: Bloomberg and Bank calculations. Notes: Inflation targeting periods: 1–4% from 08 Oct 1992, 
2.5% from 14 Jun 1995, 2% CPI from 10 Dec 2003. The light blue line is adjusted down by 1pp to take 
account of the RPI-CPI wedge. 
18 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Chart 5: UK inflation and output gap variances 
  e
c
n
a
i
r
a
v
n
o
i
t
a
 l
f
n
I
4
3
2
1
0
Pre-independence 
1955-1997 
Great moderation 
1998-2007 
Post-independence 
1998-2014 
Great recession 
2008-2014 
0
1
2
3
Output gap variance 
4
 Source: Bank calculations. Notes: The methodology is based on King (2013). 
The inflation variance is calculated as the variance of quarterly inflation rates 
based  on  the  GDP  deflator.  The  output  gap  variance  is  calculated  as  the 
variance of deviations of real GDP from a simple HP filtered trend. 
Chart 6: Financial market implied measures of inflation expectations 
US (5yr5yr from swaps)
EA (5yr5yr from swaps)
UK (5yr5yr from swaps)
Japan (1yr forward rate to 2018 from index linked bonds)
Per cent 
4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.0
-1.0
-2.0
2008
2009
2010
2011
 
Source: Bloomberg and Bank calculations. Notes: The UK line is adjusted down by 1pp to take 
account of the RPI-CPI wedge. As there are very few index linked bonds for Japan, the 1 year 
forward inflation rate in 2018 is shown as a rough proxy. 
2012
2013
2014
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 19 
  20 
 Chart 7: Probability of a high-impact event in the  
UK financial system 
Net percentage balances 
   Short term 
                                        Medium term 
2
0
0
8
2
0
0
9
H
1
 2
0
0
9
H
2
 2
0
1
0
H
1
 2
0
1
0
H
2
 2
0
1
1
H
1
 2
0
1
1
H
2
 2
0
1
2
H
1
 2
0
1
2
H
2
 2
0
1
3
H
1
 2
0
1
3
H
2
 2
0
1
4
H
1
 2
0
1
4
H
2
 2
0
0
8
2
0
0
9
H
1
 2
0
0
9
H
2
 2
0
1
0
H
1
 2
0
1
0
H
2
 2
0
1
1
H
1
 2
0
1
1
H
2
 2
0
1
2
H
1
 2
0
1
2
H
2
 2
0
1
3
H
1
 2
0
1
3
H
2
 40
30
20
10
0
-10
-20
-30
High
Very high
Low
Very low
Net
Sources:  Bank  of  England  Systemic  Risk  Survey  and  Bank  calculations.  Notes: 
Respondents  were  asked  for  the  probability  of  a  high-impact  event  in  the  UK 
financial system in the short and medium term. From the 2009 H2 survey onwards, 
short term was defined as 0–12 months and medium term as 1–3 years. The net 
percentage balance is calculated by weighting responses as follows: very high (1), 
high (0.5), medium (0), low (–0.5) and very low (–1). Bars show the contribution of 
each component to the net percentage balance. 
Chart 8: The number of dissenting MPC members over time 
Bank Rate decisions
Asset Purchase decisions
No. of members 
5
4
3
2
1
0
Jun.97
Jun.00
Jun.03
Jun.06
Jun.09
Jun.12
  Source:  Bank 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/monetarypolicy/pages/decisions.aspx. 
calculations  based  on  published  data  available  at: 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Chart 9: Number of meetings where at least one MPC  
member has deviated from the majority 
Bank Rate decisions
Asset Purchase decisions
No. of meetings 
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
 Internal members
External members
Source:  Bank  calculations  based  on  published  data  available  at: 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/monetarypolicy/pages/decisions.aspx. 
Chart 10: CPI inflation projection from the  
November 2014 Inflation Report 
 Source: Bank of England November 2014 Inflation Report. Notes: It has 
been conditioned on  the  assumption  that  the stock  of  purchased  assets 
financed by the issuance of central bank reserves remains at £375 billion 
throughout  the  forecast  period.  If  economic  circumstances  identical  to 
today’s  were  to  prevail  on  100  occasions,  the  MPC’s  best  collective 
judgement  is  that  inflation  in  any  particular  quarter  would  lie  within  the 
darkest  central  band  on  only  30  of  those  occasions.  The  fan  chart  is 
constructed  so  that  outturns  of  inflation  are  also  expected  to  lie  within 
each  pair  of  the  lighter  red  areas  on  30  occasions.  In  any  particular 
quarter  of  the  forecast  period,  inflation  is  therefore  expected  to  lie 
somewhere  within  the  fan  on  90  out  of  100  occasions.  And  on  the 
remaining 10 out of 100 occasions inflation can fall anywhere outside the 
red area of the fan chart. Over the forecast period, this has been depicted 
by  the  light  grey  background.  See  the  box  on  pages  48–49  of  the  May 
2002  Inflation  Report for a  fuller  description  of the  fan  chart  and  what  it 
represents. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 21 
  22 
 Chart 11: The uncertainty parameter in the one year ahead  
inflation and GDP fan charts 
 Inflation
GDP
Standard 
deviation 
1998Q1
2001Q1
2004Q1
2007Q1
2010Q1
2013Q1
2.0
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
 
Source:  Bank  calculations.  Notes:  The  chart  shows  the  standard  deviation 
implicit  in  the  one  year  ahead  probability  distribution  published  in  the  MPC 
Inflation  Reports  since  1998.  See  the  box  on  pages  48–49  of  the  May  2002 
Inflation Report for a fuller description of the fan chart. 
Chart 12: Dispersion of inflation and GDP growth outturns  
since 2007Q3 across the quintiles of the one year ahead  
Inflation Report fan chart distributions 
Percentages of outturns 
GDP growth  
Inflation  
Lower 
Higher 
Lower 
Higher 
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
 
Source:  Bank  calculations.  Notes:  For  further  details  on  the  methodology 
please see Hackworth et al (2013). 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Chart 13: Estimate of the proportion of MPC minutes  
covering the topic of “banking” 
 Source: Bank calculations. Notes: This chart shows the estimated allocation of each month’s 
MPC  minutes  to  a  topic  which  we  label  “banking”.  The  words  used  most  frequently  in  the 
topic  are  bank(s)/banking/banker(s),  credit(s), 
financial/finance,  market(s),  asset(s), 
condition(s),  money  and  lend(s)/lending/lender.  The  estimation  of  the  topics,  and  the 
allocation of each set of minutes across all topics is completed using latent Dirichlet allocation 
as applied to FOMC transcripts in Hansen et al (2014). The lines correspond to: September 
2007  when  Northern  Rock  received  a  liquidity  support  facility  from  the  Bank  of  England; 
September 2008 when Lehman Brothers filed for bankruptcy; June 2011 when speculation 
and uncertainty about the euro area sovereign debt crisis started escalating; June 2011 when 
ECB President Mario Draghi delivered his “whatever it takes” speech. 
Chart 14: Estimate of the proportion of MPC minutes covering  
the topic of “banking” and major UK banks CDS premia 
Source: Bank calculations and Bloomberg. Notes: The blue and vertical lines are the 
same as Chart 13. Major UK banks include: Standard Chartered, Santander UK, RBS, 
Barclays, LBG, HBOS, and HSBC but does not include Northern Rock. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 23 
  Chart 15: One year ahead inflation and GDP forecast errors 
Source: Bank calculations. 
 24 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
