  Hiroshi Nakaso: Toward innovative payment and settlement systems 
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  Hiroshi  Nakaso,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the 
9th Asia Banking CEO Round Table, Tokyo, 25 November 2014. 
 Introduction 
Thank you for your kind introduction. Distinguished guests, friends, and colleagues. It is my 
great pleasure to speak at the 9th Asia Banking CEO Round Table. 
Today’s  theme  is  “Operating  in  a  New  World:  Digitisation  and  Disruptions  in  Banking.” 
Initially, I was somewhat puzzled by the word “disruptions,” but soon realized that disruption 
is  only  a  prerequisite  to  creation.  Banks  can  generate  new  value-added  by  discarding  old 
business models and embarking on innovative challenges. Now, the questions are: What is 
the role of central banks in accelerating such innovation? What can we central bankers do to 
help  banks  steer  through  new  challenges?  How  can  we  work  together  with  the  financial 
community  to  maximize  the  benefits  of  households  and  businesses?  These  are  all  very 
deeply  rooted  in  the  fundamental  purpose  of  central  banking;  that  is,  to  contribute  to  the 
sound development of the national economy. 
Today, I will explain our efforts toward creating innovative payment and settlement systems. 
In my view, the future payment and settlement infrastructure should offer an environment that 
facilitates the smooth delivery of the Japanese yen and Japanese government bonds (JGBs) 
anywhere and anytime. This is what I would call the ubiquity of the Japanese yen and JGBs. 
As a guardian of the national payment and settlement systems, the Bank of Japan (BOJ) will 
cooperate with bankers, market participants, and central bank colleagues overseas to make 
the unprecedented a reality with ideas that are innovative if sometimes disruptive, to borrow 
a word from today’s main theme of the round table. Please note that the views expressed 
today are mine, not necessarily those of the BOJ. 
The plan of my talk is summarized on slide 1. First, I will consider where we currently stand 
and what we can expect for the future. Next, I will elaborate on four major areas in which we 
are  exerting  efforts  toward  better  payment  and  settlement  systems.  After  that,  I  will  briefly 
touch on recent developments in Japan’s economy and the conduct of monetary policy under 
the quantitative and qualitative monetary easing. Lastly, I will make my concluding remarks. 
Where do we stand and what do we expect for the future? 
I.  
Following  the  Asian  currency  crisis  in  1997–98,  the  region  has  seen  remarkable 
performance.  Asian  economies  and  financial  markets  have  been  expanding  at  a  healthy 
pace.  As  you  can  see  on  slide  2,  according  to  the  IMF,  the  average  GDP  growth  rate  of 
Asian  emerging  economies  since  2000  marked  8.0  percent,  whereas  that  of  advanced 
economies  was  merely  1.8  percent.  Likewise,  on  slide  3,  when  we  compare  the  capital 
inflows into Asia and other leading economies, big gyrations in capital flow were observed 
before and after the Lehman crisis. The capital flows to the euro area and the United States 
changed their course from inflow to outflow. Despite this development, capital has flowed into 
Asia steadily. 
On the back of such performance, a number of initiatives have taken place in the region to 
build  a  safety  net,  thereby  raising  its  capacity  for  crisis  management.  These  initiatives  are 
namely (i) the Chiang Mai Initiative (CMI), (ii) the Asian Bond Fund (ABF), and (iii) the Asian 
Bond  Markets  Initiative  (ABMI).  We  all  know  that,  after  the  Lehman  crisis,  the  region  has 
remained resilient and the safety net has effectively prevented risk from permeating it. 
Let  me  briefly  elaborate  on  these  initiatives.  The  CMI  is  a  set  of  international  swap 
arrangements in the region, having started from a network of bilateral arrangements and now 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  developed  into  a  common  multilateral  arrangement.  The  Chiang  Mai  Initiative  Multi-
lateralization  (CMIM)  is  a  multi-lateral  currency  swap  contract  covering  all  ASEAN+3 
members.  The  objective  of  the  CMIM  is  twofold:  first,  to  address  balance  of  payment  and 
short-term liquidity difficulties in the region; second, to supplement the existing international 
financial arrangements. In July this year, the CMIM was amended by doubling its total size 
from 120 billion to 240 billion U.S. dollars, and by introducing a precautionary line in order to 
strengthen the regional safety net. As for the ABF, this concerns the enhancement of bond 
markets in Asia. The Asian Bond Fund 1, often referred to as ABF-1, invested in U.S. dollar-
denominated  bonds  issued  by  sovereign  and  quasi-sovereign  borrowers  in  some  EMEAP 
(Executives’  Meeting  of  East  Asia  and  Pacific  Central  Banks)  economies,  while  ABF-2, 
launched in December  2004, invested in domestic currency bonds rather than U.S. dollar-
denominated bonds. Lastly, the ABMI, started in 2003, aims to develop efficient and liquid 
bond markets in Asia, so that savings in the region can be better utilized for investments in 
the region. Under this initiative, the ASEAN+3 economies have set up a forum to explore the 
possible establishment of cross-border securities settlement infrastructure, which I will come 
back to later. 
What is the objective of these initiatives? The CMIM set up the safety net in the region, while 
the ABF put in place a keystone for the primary bond market and the ABMI has been aimed 
at fostering regional securities settlement infrastructure. As I said, Asia is a region that has 
registered the fastest growth in the world, and it continues to enjoy high growth potential. The 
role  of  banks  will  become  even  more  important  down  the  road,  as  they  contribute  to 
facilitating balanced growth in the region. There are two channels through which banks can 
contribute.  The  first  is  reinforcing  their  lending  activity  in  business  areas  with  growth 
potential. The second is enhancing payment services and reinforcing payment infrastructure. 
In the following, I will focus on the latter role expected of banks today. 
As a central bank, we need to work together with banks to ensure that they contribute to the 
balanced  growth  of  the  region.  I  find  it  particularly  important  that  central  banks  lay  the 
foundation  for  banks  so  that  they  can  exert  the  utmost  efforts  to  demonstrate  their 
intermediary function. I say this because we provide an infrastructure with finality for the yen and 
JGBs. As I summarized on slide 4, banks can complete payments and settlements by resorting 
to  the  central  bank’s  services.  “Central  bank  money,”  consisting  of  cash  and  central  bank 
deposits,  constitutes  the  most  intrinsic  foundation  and  underpinning  of  the  nation’s  financial 
system by providing a settlement chain in collaboration with “commercial bank money.” 
Let me paraphrase what I mean by this. A central bank issues money and delivers it to end 
users,  such  as  households  and  businesses,  through  the  network  of  banks’  branches  and 
ATMs.  Likewise,  non-cash  payments  are  provided  to  the  end  users  through  the  nation’s 
payment  and  settlement  systems  in  collaboration  with  banks.  It  is  evident  that  the  central 
bank’s money and its payment and settlement services furnish the national economy with the 
“ultimate finality” of payments and settlements. 
Raising the standard of our services will incentivize banks to improve their payment services to 
their customers, thereby creating an environment conducive to sustainable growth and a stable 
financial system. This leads me to say how important it is for central banks to be involved in the 
functioning of the payment and settlement system and to provide settlement finality. 
The  enhancement  of  payment  services  is  driven  by  the  need  to  make  the  best  use  of 
innovative information technology and related skills. I believe this is well captured in today’s 
main  topic  of  the  round  table.  Frankly  speaking,  however,  I  have  an  impression  that  non-
banking institutions have recently been playing an active role in providing innovative means 
of  payment.  On  slide  5,  the  amount  and  volume  of  settlements  through  non-banking 
institutions – which are exemplified by credit cards, electronic money, and debit cards – are 
compared with those through banking institutions, which are summarized under the headline 
of the Zengin System. The Zengin System is an online network that links banks nationwide 
and processes customers’ fund transfers in real time all over Japan. The evidence suggests 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  that payment instruments provided by non-banking institutions have far outpaced the Zengin 
System both in terms of amount and volume. 
As  another  example,  take  the  emergence  of  Bitcoin.  It  may  well  be  that  Bitcoin  excels  in 
facilitating access to the global markets and securing users’ anonymity, so that customers 
find it more convenient to use Bitcoin for payment rather than settling transactions through 
conventional means of payment in the banking system. We central bankers should consider 
carefully how we can ensure the proper functioning of the traditional transmission channel of 
monetary policy while Bitcoin and other virtual currencies continue to be used in the world. 
One possible solution that addresses the Bitcoin issue is enforcement action. New regulation 
may  curtail  its  further  usage.  Nevertheless,  payment  services  provided  by  banks  have  a 
comparative advantage over those provided by non-banking institutions, because a central 
bank can complement banks’ services by providing a payment instrument with finality. Such 
funding  is  not  readily  available  to  non-banking  institutions.  Owing  to  this,  improving  the 
convenience  of  banks’  payment  services  and  encouraging  better  access  to  those  services 
appear to be the most essential ways of responding to a number of challenges triggered by 
non-banking institutions’ innovative activities. 
The network of a central bank and banks constitutes the core of payment infrastructure, but 
from the central bank’s perspective, we need to make incessant efforts to ensure that those 
banks  have  a  firm  footing  with  regard  to  the  provision  of  payment  services,  and  that  they 
make efforts to ground their presence in the payment system. 
Major initiatives in Japan 
II.  
Next,  I  would  like  to  explain  major  initiatives  that  are  underway  in  Japan  in  the  context  of 
banking and non-banking activity. 
It is understandable that much attention is being paid to the conduct of monetary policy, but a 
central bank plays no less a crucial role in building the most important infrastructure for the 
economy. That is, to enhance the payment and settlement infrastructure. It is fair to say that 
the  central  bank’s  payment  services  provide  a  pivotal  underpinning  for  the  conduct  of 
monetary policy. Without the smooth settlement of funds among banks and other financial 
institutions, we cannot contribute to the stability of Japan’s financial system either. 
History  shows  that  central  banking  has  been  involved  in  the  functioning  of  payment  and 
settlement much longer than in the operation of monetary policy. The term “central banking” 
comes  from  the  fact  that  this  has  long  been  at  the  center  of  the  payment  and  settlement 
infrastructure. As the central bank of Japan, the BOJ also runs the payment and settlement 
systems in funds transfers and JGBs. Thus, it is our supreme responsibility to ensure that 
central  bank  money,  which  possesses  ultimate  finality,  as  I  mentioned,  is  used  in  places 
where it should be used. 
Based on such understanding, I would like to elaborate on four areas in which we have been 
making  extensive  efforts.  As  summarized  on  slide  6,  these  are  namely  (i)  cross-border 
collateral  arrangements  between  central  banks,  (ii)  the  T+1  project  for  JGB  settlement, 
(iii) possible cross-border expansion of the yen and JGBs, and (iv) the improvement in retail 
payment  services.  It  is  important  to  recognize  that  these  will  contribute  to  enhancing  the 
ubiquity of the Japanese yen and JGBs. 
The  first  area  aims  at  enhancing  the  convenience  of  banks  and  businesses  through  the 
central  banks’  cooperation.  All  the  rest  are  challenging  to  the  banking  industry,  but  the 
reward it eventually will get will be worthwhile. All areas would enable financial transactions 
that are not currently available. From the central banks’ perspective, the implication derived 
from those innovative measures is exciting. Minimizing the unsettled funds and facilitating the 
ubiquity of the yen and JGBs will open a new frontier in financial services. With that in mind, 
let me now explain the four major initiatives in turn. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  Cross-border collateral arrangements with central banks in Asia 
A.  
The  first  initiative  is  cross-border  collateral  arrangements  with  Asian  central  banks,  with 
which the BOJ has been collaborating. 
Specifically, with the Bank of Thailand, the BOJ established in 2011 a framework in which 
Thai Baht liquidity could be provided by the Bank of Thailand against JGBs and the yen as 
collateral. A similar arrangement was established with the Monetary Authority of Singapore in 
2014, and agreed upon in principle with Bank Indonesia in 2013. 
As shown on slide 7, under such arrangements, the central bank in a host country – in this 
case, the Bank of Thailand – provides liquidity in its own currency to banks against JGBs as 
collateral. The BOJ plays the role of a custodian to receive JGB collateral from those banks. 
All  these  arrangements  allow  eligible  banks  –  both  Japanese  banks  and  other  banks 
operating in respective countries – to obtain liquidity in local currencies from central banks to 
which JGBs are submitted as eligible collateral. Thus, those banks have additional sources 
of  local  currencies  from  local  central  banks  under  stressed  funding  conditions.  Such 
arrangements  are  beneficial  to  their  customers (e.g.,  firms),  which  will be  able  to maintain 
stable  borrowings  in  local  currencies  from  their  banks.  In  sum,  financial  cooperation  with 
central  banks  in  Asia  will  contribute  to  the  stability  of  financial  systems  as  well  as 
development of our economies. It also can be regarded as an important cornerstone for the 
BOJ to germinate its initiatives to ensure the ubiquity of JGBs. 
T+1 project for JGB settlement 
B.  
The  BOJ  also  has  been  working  with  market  participants  to  improve  the  safety  of  JGB 
settlement. For example, we implemented online processing of JGB settlement as early as 
1990.  We  also  embarked  on  various  initiatives  including  a  delivery-versus-payment  (DVP) 
mechanism in which a delivery of securities takes place if, and only if, payment occurs. Lastly, 
we have collaborated closely with market participants to introduce a central counterparty (CCP) 
for JGB transactions. As for the latter, the Japan Securities Clearing Corporation (JSCC), after a 
merger with the Japan Government Bond Clearing Corporation (JGBCC) in October 2013, has 
become a CCP for JGB cash transactions, in which it plays the role of a buyer to every seller as 
well  as  the  role  of  a  seller  to  every  buyer.  Thus,  the  JSCC  provides  guarantees  for  JGB 
settlements even in the case of a default by market participants. 
In  the  course  of  advancing  measures  to  improve  the  safety  and  efficiency  of  JGB 
settlements, the collaboration between the BOJ and market participants has been one of the 
most important elements. 
In this context, another initiative that the BOJ has been working on is to shorten the time lag 
between the execution of JGB trading and settlement. At present, the JGB settlement cycle 
is T+2 for both standard outright transactions and special collateral repo transactions, and 
T+1  for  general  collateral  repo  transactions.  As  you  can  see  on  slide  8,  we  have  been 
working with market participants to shorten such settlement cycles, from T+2 to T+1 for both 
standard outright transactions and special collateral repo transactions, and from T+1 to T+0 
for general collateral repo transactions to ensure improvement of the safety in JGB markets. 
In fact, the Working Group on Shortening of JGB Settlement Cycle, which was set up under 
the  auspices  of  the  Japan  Securities  Dealers  Association,  identified  three  overarching 
principles  for  shortening  the  JGB  settlement  cycle.  The  first  was  to  reduce  the  settlement 
risk. The longer the time lag between trading and settlement, the more unsettled positions 
accumulate;  hence,  the  settlement  risk  rises.  By  containing  such  a  build-up  of  unsettled 
positions, we can effectively mitigate the settlement risk. 
The second principle was to enhance the liquidity, safety, and efficiency of the JGB market. 
The  JGB  market  –  the  largest  financial  market  in  Japan  –  provides  a  benchmark  that 
facilitates  the  transactions  of  other  financial  assets  such  as  corporate  bonds  and  CP. 
Shortening the settlement cycles will make it smoother for banks to raise funds against JGB 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  collateral. In effect, this will in turn provide investors with a variety of short-term investment 
opportunities. 
The last principle for the shortening of JGB settlement cycles was to maintain and reinforce 
the international acceptance of JGBs. As for the outright transactions, T+1 has already been 
achieved in the United States and the United Kingdom. In Asia, Singapore has also moved to 
the T+1 platform. In these economies, shortening of the cycles has often been discussed in 
the context of maintaining a competitive edge against peers overseas. 
Based  on  these  principles,  market  participants  are  now  aiming  to  achieve  T+1  for  JGB 
transactions as early as 2017. This is also a part of efforts to achieve the ubiquity of JGBs. 
By the end of spring 2015, members of the working group will come up with a more concrete 
timetable to achieve T+1, and we are actively providing support on that front. On this point, I am 
particularly heartened by the fact that the shortening of settlement cycles is not simply motivated 
by  the  reduction  of  the  settlement  risk.  Market  participants  also  regard  this  as  a  means  to 
enhance investment opportunities through the internationalization of the yen and JGBs. 
As Japan is in the first set of time zones, it is beneficial to tackle a move toward a shorter 
settlement cycle. The shorter cycle is an integral part of the initiative to achieve advanced 
and  market-wide  development  of  straight-through  processing  (STP).  The  shorter  cycle  will 
also help galvanize Tokyo’s position as a global financial center as it becomes a frontrunner 
of financial networks. 
Extension of the operating hours of the BOJ-NET 
Possible cross-border expansion of the Yen and JGBs 
C.  
The  third  initiative  concerns  possible  cross-border  expansion  of  the  yen  and  JGBs.  Under 
this  initiative,  the  BOJ  will  provide  a  cross-border  payment  network  by  anchoring  payment 
and settlement systems. 
1.  
Specifically,  as  shown  on  slide  9,  the  BOJ  has  already  announced  that  it  will  extend  the 
operating  hours  of  the BOJ-NET  until  9  pm  JST  from  February  2016.  This  will  generate  a 
longer overlap of the operating hours not only between Japan and Asian countries but also 
between Japan and European countries. Consequently, new financial services will become 
available,  such  as  overseas  remittance  services  in  yen  by  customers,  same-day  foreign 
exchange transactions – or T+0 transactions – between banks, and the usage of JGBs as 
collateral to raise foreign currencies and post as eligible collateral to overseas CCPs to meet 
margin requirements. 
Beyond  extending  the  operating  hours  of  the  new  BOJ-NET,  additional  proposals  are 
currently  being  considered.  These  include  measures  such  as  global  access  and  a  cross-
border link in Asia to enhance the ubiquity of the yen and JGBs. 
2.  
Starting with global access, as shown on slide 10, this allows the BOJ-NET participants that 
physically have a presence in Japan and hold current accounts at the BOJ to set up their 
BOJ-NET  terminals  in  their  overseas  locations,  whereby  staff  members  can  operate  the 
terminals. For example, if a Japanese bank sets up its BOJ-NET terminal in its London base, 
it  can  post  JGBs  as  collateral  to  a  European  CCP  in  London.  Alternatively,  if  a  Japanese 
bank sets up its BOJ-NET terminal in its Bangkok base, it can carry out same-day remittance 
of  its  customers’  funds  from  Thailand  to  Japan.  Although  much  needs  to  be  examined 
beforehand,  the  requests  from  Japanese  and  foreign  banks  have  been  heard  and  global 
access could significantly improve the convenience of the yen and JGBs. 
3.  
The  second  measure  concerns  enabling  cross-border  linkage  between  the  BOJ-NET  and 
systems  overseas.  Allowing  the  BOJ-NET  to  be  connected  with  its  overseas  counterparts 
can introduce a DVP mechanism for JGB transactions, in which the delivery of JGBs can be 
Cross-border linkage 
Global access 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  infrastructure 
regional  settlement 
made simultaneously with funds transfers. For example, as shown on the left side of slide 11, 
the  DVP  mechanism  for  foreign  securities’  transactions  can  be  used.  A  Japanese  bank 
(Bank A) can make yen funding available to a foreign bank (Bank B) that provides foreign 
securities as collateral to the Japanese bank overseas. Alternatively, as shown on the right 
side of the slide, a Japanese bank (Bank A) can also provide JGBs as collateral to a foreign 
bank (Bank B), which can provide foreign currency funds to the Japanese bank overseas at 
the same time. By linking the BOJ-NET with those systems overseas, we can facilitate such 
DVP transactions, and this will again contribute to enhancing the efficiency and convenience 
of the yen and JGBs. In this regard, we are currently continuing discussions with Asian peers 
concerning 
that  promotes  cross-border  securities 
transactions in the region. 
4.  
The kind of cross-border linkage that I have illustrated will contribute to stable daily funding in 
foreign currencies on an ongoing basis. What kind of technological innovation can make this 
come true? A possible answer is currently being discussed in the ASEAN+3 countries. They 
created a forum in which the establishment of cross-border linkage in the region is currently 
being  explored.  More  concretely,  the  set-up  of  a  cross-border  link  between  the  securities 
settlement system in one country and the central bank’s real-time gross settlement (RTGS) 
system in another has been discussed, as shown on slide 11. Such cross-border linkage will 
enable  market  participants  to settle  foreign-currency  funding  transactions  against domestic 
assets  as  collateral  on  a  DVP  basis.  If  this  means  of  funding,  which  is  known  as  cross-
currency  repos,  becomes  available  on  an  ongoing  basis,  it  will  contribute  to  improving  the 
safety and efficiency of financial transactions in the entire region. 
ASEAN+3 initiatives 
24/7 services 
Improvement in retail payment services: 24/7 services and financial EDI 
D.  
The last initiative that I want to mention is the improvement of retail payment services. We 
are particularly interested in two issues. First, whether to realize real-time payments between 
end users on a 24/7 basis; second, to enhance linkage between remittance information with 
payment information to achieve financial Electronic Data Interchange (EDI). 
1.  
As for the 24/7 services in retail payments, let me step back and explain where we currently 
stand in Japan. As you can see on slide 12, the Zengin System, which is at the core of the 
Japanese payment system, has long been regarded worldwide as one of the most advanced 
systems in the field of retail payment. 
It  already  allows  for  near  real-time  payment  services  during  the  daylight  hours  of  working 
days.  More  recently,  however,  some  countries,  including  Singapore  in  our  region,  have 
developed 24/7 retail services. These offer near real-time payment services 24 hours a day, 
7 days a week; hence, they are known as 24/7 services. We also have seen similar services 
being offered in countries like the United Kingdom and Sweden. In light of such progress in 
overseas  economies,  it  has  become  a  must  in  Japan  to  elevate  bank  transfers  to  a 
comparable  level  of  convenience  and  efficiency  in  terms  of  service  availability.  This  would 
ensure  smooth  operation  of  retail  payment  services  to  underpin  business  and  household 
activities. 
2.  
Slide  13  presents  another  issue  that  we  are  interested  in:  realizing  financial  EDI.  As  you 
know,  businesses  have  started  to  electronically  exchange  remittance  information,  such  as 
purchases and sales orders, by taking advantage of internet technologies. An arrangement 
to link such remittance information with payment information – namely, information related to 
a  beneficiary’s  bank  account  and  the  payment  date  –  and  to  exchange  both  remittance 
information and payment information together is called financial EDI. 
Financial EDI 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  The question is: What is the benefit to businesses in adopting financial EDI? In the short run, 
they  incur  costs  associated  with  developing  IT  systems  that  accommodate  standardized 
formats to exchange data electronically. However, in the medium to long run, they can enjoy 
the  benefits  of  raising  the  efficiency  of  their  operation.  For  example,  firms  will  be  able  to 
automate the reconciliation of payment information with remittance information; thus, they no 
longer need to rely on manually processing accounts receivable. 
Looking  at  the  Japanese  situation,  the  Zengin  System  moved  its  platform  to  the 
6th generation in November 2011, and one of the new features at that time was to accept the 
ISO  20022  XML  format  as  an  option  for  transfer  messages.  Nevertheless,  because  the 
adoption of this format is not an obligation and it requires coordination among a wide range 
of stakeholders, neither banks nor customers have taken advantage of the new format. From 
the viewpoint of maintaining competitiveness against their peers overseas, Japanese firms 
would need to articulate the means through which to reduce costs by realizing financial EDI 
as well. 
To be fair, the Japanese Bankers Association has already started looking into the issues of 
whether  to  extend  the  operating  hours  of  the  Zengin  System  and  how  to  make  use  of 
financial EDI within the Japanese context. It is expected to release the results of its study by 
the  end  of  this  year.  These  initiatives  show  that  Japanese  banks  have  started  taking 
measures  to  build  infrastructure  surrounding  retail  payment  systems  as  a  foundation  to 
underpin their basic payment services. 
Japan’s economy and monetary policy 
III.  
Thus far, I have focused on the rather technical issues concerning payment and settlement 
systems. However, given the continued interest in our monetary policy, and particularly in the 
latest action we have taken, I want to spend a few minutes on monetary policy at this point. 
In  April  last  year,  the  BOJ  introduced  the  Quantitative  and  Qualitative  Monetary  Easing 
Policy,  dubbed  the  QQE,  to  achieve  the  price  stability  target  of  2  percent  at  the  earliest 
possible time, with a time horizon of about 2 years. The main objectives of the QQE have 
been to dispel a view that took root among people over a long period of deflation that prices 
would not rise – in other words, a deflationary mindset – and to create a situation in which 
households  and  firms  behave  on  the  assumption  that  prices  would  moderately  increase. 
Specifically,  in  terms  of  the  policy  transmission  mechanism,  we  intend  to  raise  inflation 
expectations through a strong and clear commitment to achieve the price stability target of 
2 percent, and at the same time to exert downward pressure across the entire yield curve 
through massive purchases of government bonds. As a result, real interest rates will decline, 
thereby stimulating such private demand components as business fixed investment, private 
consumption, and housing investment. The upward pressure on prices will grow stronger as 
demand increases and the output gap narrows accordingly. Rises in actual inflation rates will 
be translated into higher expected rates of inflation and thus lower real interest rates. This 
will reinforce the virtuous cycle as the economy is provided with additional stimulus. 
Since its inception, the QQE has been producing the intended effects, and Japan’s economy 
has steadily followed a path towards the achievement of the price stability target of 2 percent. 
In fact, the year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI) excluding fresh 
food,  which  stood  at  minus  0.5  percent  in  March  2013  immediately  before  introducing  the 
QQE, subsequently turned positive and moved up to reach above 1 percent by the end of 
last year. 
In recent months, however, a couple of developments on the price front have attracted our 
attention.  First,  the  decline  in  demand  following  the  consumption  tax  hike  has  been 
somewhat  protracted  in  durable  consumer  goods  including  automobiles,  as  well  as  in 
housing investment. Second, crude oil prices have declined substantially after the summer. 
These factors have contributed to slowing the CPI inflation rates, which had hovered in the 
range of 1.0–1.5 percent since the end of the last year, down to 1.0 percent in September. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
  Of the two factors, the temporary weakness in demand associated with the consumption tax 
hike has already started to wane. Meanwhile, the decline in crude oil prices will have positive 
effects on economic activity and push up prices over the longer-run. Nevertheless, given the 
fact that Japan’s economy is currently in a transition process of converting the deflationary 
mindset,  prolongation  of  the  current  downward  pressure  on  prices,  albeit  temporarily,  was 
judged to run the risk of delaying the process. To prevent such risk from materializing and to 
maintain the improving momentum of expectation formation, we decided to take preemptive 
actions to expand the QQE at the Monetary Policy Meeting held on October 31, as shown on 
slide 14. 
Specifically, we decided to accelerate the pace of buildup in the monetary base by about 
10–20 trillion yen to “an annual increase of about 80 trillion yen.” In order to carry this out, we 
will increase the amount outstanding of the holdings of JGBs by about 30 trillion yen to “an 
annual  increase  of  about  80  trillion  yen.”  At  the  same  time,  we  decided  to  extend  the 
average remaining maturity of the JGB purchases by about 3 years at maximum to “about 
7–10 years.” The purpose of the measures is to leave operational flexibility to buy JGBs from 
across  the maturity  zones  and  thus  effectively  compress  the  entire  yield  curve  in  line  with 
market  conditions,  whereas  the  downward  pressure  on  the  yield  curve  has  been  rather 
uneven  thus  far,  with  substantial  declines  in  rates  on  the  shorter  end  while  rates  on  the 
longer  end  remain  relatively  high.  In  addition,  as  for  exchange-traded  funds  (ETFs)  and 
Japan real estate investment trusts (J-REITs), the increases in the amounts outstanding of 
the BOJ’s holdings will be tripled in both cases. The latest decision to expand the QQE will 
further strengthen the policy transmission mechanism that I mentioned. The decision is also 
intended to demonstrate and confirm our strong and unequivocal commitment to achieve the 
price stability target. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. The BOJ endeavors to put an end, once and for all, to deflation and bring 
the economy back on track towards sustained growth. In the meantime, as I explained to you 
today,  upgrading  the  financial  and  payment  infrastructure  is  also  an  important  part  of  our 
mission.  We  have  been  taking  a  number  of  steps  to  bring  the  Japanese  payment  and 
settlement systems to the forefront. Specifically, the BOJ would encourage the enhancement 
of retail payment systems and examine the ways to realize payments and settlements using 
the new BOJ-NET for cross-border transactions in yen or JGBs. The initiatives are part of our 
priorities for fiscal 2014–18, which show our determination to progress toward the ubiquity of 
the yen and JGBs by incorporating the latest technologies. I believe the initiatives will also 
promote the internationalization of the yen, which has long been on the policy agenda but 
with limited results thus far. 
At the same time, I know that our efforts have to extend beyond national borders if we are to 
upgrade  the  financial  and  payment  infrastructure  in  the  entire  Asia  Pacific  region.  Hence, 
collaboration  with  market  participants  and  other  central  banks  in  the  region  is  essential. 
Given  the  globalized  and  integrated  nature  of  financial  markets  of  today,  only  through 
collective exercises can we jointly benefit from new ideas and innovation with respect to the 
financial  and  payment  infrastructure.  The  new  initiatives  would  pave  the  way  to  further 
innovation in the banking sector, enhance the safety and efficiency of financial markets, and 
underpin the real economy. It is encouraging in this regard to see that ambitious talks among 
the relevant authorities in Asia are already under way. We are committed to playing a key 
role because we know too well that without prosperity in the region, there will be no growth 
for Japan. Let me end my remarks by reiterating our commitment to contributing to the joint 
works with our colleagues in Asia to ensure that the region continues to foster prosperity long 
into the future. 
Thank you for your attention. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     9
     10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     11
     12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     13
 14 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     15
