  Cecilia Skingsley: Changing payments market 
Speech by  Ms Cecilia Skingsley, Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at the Royal 
Institute of Technology, Stockholm, 24 November 2014. 
 I would like to express my warm thanks to Björn Segendorff for his help with this speech. 
The market for payments is changing rapidly. Sweden is in the forefront with regard to the 
development and use of electronic payments. Cash has therefore met with tough competition 
from new, innovative methods of payment. This development is positive in many ways, but 
changes  also  entail  challenges.  The  Riksbank  is  taking  an  active  part  in  the  work  on 
managing these challenges to make things easier for economic agents. 
Why is it important that our payments function? 
We rarely think about it when we are paying for a product or service. Often we pay in the 
same way as we have always done and we assume that this will work. It is rather like walking 
or cycling – we can think about something else while we are doing it. 
Nevertheless, all of the day-to-day payments are very important to us – they give us access 
to  the  goods  and  services  we  need  in  our  daily  lives.  But  all  payments  mean  that  we  are 
using  highly-specialised  services.  Behind  every  non-cash  payment  we  make  there  are 
intermediaries  mediating  the  payment  from  payer  to  payee.  This  is  done  within  an 
infrastructure  of  various  technical  systems  that  are  necessary  to  make  the  payment.  The 
intermediaries  and  infrastructure  that  are  required  depend  on  which  means  of  payment  is 
chosen.  It  is  therefore  very  relevant  to  talk  about  payments  as  a  consumption  of  payment 
services.  An  efficiently-functioning  market  for  payment  services  assumes  that  payment 
services meet certain important requirements. 
Three important requirements of retail payment services 
Firstly, the payment service must be safe, but this is not enough. It must also be perceived 
as safe. Both the payer and the payee must feel secure, otherwise the payment service will 
not be used. If banknotes are easy to counterfeit, shops will not want to accept them. If cards 
can be easily hijacked, consumers will not want to pay with them.1 When we pay by other 
means  than  cash,  security  also  means  that  we  rely  on  the  mediator  of  payments  that  we 
have actually entrusted with our money. 
Secondly, the payment service must be useful. It must be simple and convenient. You may 
remember  when  a  card  payment  was  made  using  a  paper  slip,  with  carbon  in  between, 
where you filled in the amount and signed it and showed your ID. This was not as simple and 
easy as the chip and PIN code in today’s card terminals. 
Thirdly,  payment  services  must  be  accessible  to  households  and  accepted  by  companies 
and public authorities. Accessibility means it is easy to get hold of cash when you need it, 
that it is not too expensive or complicated to acquire a card or online banking services or that 
the mobile network has good cover if I want to use mobile payment or banking services. The 
same reasoning also applies, of course, to the recipient of a payment. Willingness to accept 
various types of payment may be undermined by factors such as technical problems, high 
costs and difficulty in depositing daily takings. Accessibility is also closely linked to uniform 
payments standards. The methods of payment should be predictable and this is the case if 
                                                
1  By hijacking a card, we mean skimming and similar activities where the card data is secretly scanned and then 
used for fraudulent purposes.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  we all agree on how payments will be made. The more of us that are in agreement the better, 
as we can then make use of the network effects and economies of scale that are inherent in 
the  mediation  of  payments.  For  instance,  this  type  of  unanimity  means  we  can  be  fairly 
certain that it is possible to pay by card or in cash at the nearest shop. 
The reason for a positive attitude towards innovation and development is that they enable us 
to have safe, efficient and accessible payment services. I believe we can all agree that it is 
easier to use banknotes and coins today than it was a couple of hundred years ago, and that 
it is easier, quicker and safer to use chips and PIN codes than paper slips for card payments. 
Cards are in turn preferable to cheques. What about the Swedish payments market? Does it 
give us payment services that are uniform, safe, efficient and accessible? 
the  market  changes  rapidly 
The transformation of the Swedish retail payments market 
As 
the 
establishment of new operators, it is important that the Riksbank follows and analyses the 
Swedish retail payments market. The results I am about to describe come from a telephone 
interview  survey  about  households’  payment  behaviour  that  the  Riksbank  regularly  carries 
out. 
technological  advances  and 
through 
through 
High accessibility and high level of confidence 
If we look at the most common payment services we use when we pay at points of sale, 96% 
of the respondents said that they had access to cash, and almost 99% said they had access 
to a bank or credit card. No respondent said that they had access to neither cash nor cards. 
Accessibility for cards and cash is thus very high and so is the general public’s confidence in 
them and this is reflected in the fact that both are used to a considerable extent. However, 
cards are being used increasingly often as a means of payment at the cost of cash. 
The  Riksbank  also  examines  access  to  the  payment  services  we  use  when  we  pay  at  a 
distance, for instance, our household bills.2 In Sweden we mainly use various credit transfer 
and direct debit products for paying bills. The survey showed that almost 90% had access to 
online banking services and 23% had access to credit transfer using paper forms. Only 3% 
said they did not have access to any of these services. If we add direct debit, only 1 per cent 
lacked access to a payment service for paying at a distance. These payment services were 
also used to a large degree. 
Broad access to innovative payment services 
Sweden is often said to be a technology-friendly country and this is reflected in the fact that 
so many have access to online banking. Now, online banking services have been available 
for  nearly  20  years,  while  mobile  payment  services  are  much  newer.  It  is  therefore 
remarkable that almost one quarter of the respondents said they had access to some form of 
mobile  payment  service.3  If  we  broaden  the  perspective  somewhat  and  include  non-
traditional  payment  services  such  as  payments  via  a  third-party  provider  and  virtual 
currencies such as Bitcoin, then 40% have access to one of these services.4 A good 23% of 
respondents  said  they  had  paid  with  one  of  these  alternative  methods  in  the  past  month. 
Another example is that some banks reported as early as last summer that they had more 
log-ins via mobile banking services than via traditional online banking services. This, as I see 
                                                
2  Cards can be used when paying at a distance, too, for instance for online purchases. However, the Riksbank 
has no confirmed statistics on these payments.  
3  Examples of mobile payment services include Swish, WyWallet and SEQR.  
4  Examples of payments via intermediary include PayPal, Klarna (payment by invoice) and direct payments that 
link you up directly with your online bank.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  it, broad acceptance of new technology solutions is a very interesting observation to which I 
will return shortly. 
The  fact  that  so  many  people  are  using  cards  and  other  electronic  payments  is  a  form  of 
proof that these services are widely available, not just for households but also for retailers 
and companies. There are more than 20 million cards in Sweden and just over two hundred 
thousand  card  terminals.  Recently  mobile  card  terminals  and  opportunities  to  accept  card 
payments by mobile phone have also arisen. This chart, which shows how often households 
say they have not been able to pay by card or cash, illustrates the high level of acceptance 
among payees. A large majority say that they are unable to pay by either card or cash less 
than once a month. 
Close to ATMs and good Internet connections 
Cash  should  not  only  be  possible  to  use  in  shops.  Households  also  need  to  be  able  to 
withdraw  cash  and the retailer  has to  be  able to  deposit  his  daily  takings. This makes  the 
physical distance to service points and ATMs important. The average distance for a shop-
owner to the nearest service point to deposit his daily takings is 6 km for Sweden as a whole 
and more than 10 km for Jämtland county, which has the longest distances. The distances 
for cash withdrawals are less; around 4 km for the country as a whole and around 7 km in 
Norrbotten county. 
For electronic payments, access to the Internet is the equivalent of geographical proximity. It 
is  also  becoming  increasingly  important for  both  households  and  companies  to  have  good 
Internet  connections  to  be  able  to  make  and  receive  payments.  In  Sweden  as  a  whole, 
around 500 households and companies are unable to have access to the Internet. Given that 
we  are  a  sparsely-populated,  but  geographically  large,  country,  this  is  nevertheless  an 
impressively small figure. 
Of course, what I have just said does not mean that individual shops and households may 
have  much  longer  distances, that  the fees  paid  by  a  shop-owner for  card  payments  or for 
handling daily takings can be perceived as high or that it is not a problem for those who are 
unable  to  have  access  to  the  Internet.  I  shall  shortly  return  to  the  challenges  we  have 
identified  on  the  market,  but  before  I  do  so  I  would  like  to  say  a  few  words  about  current 
trends and developments. 
Trends and changes 
Sweden is in the forefront 
I said earlier that Sweden is in the forefront with regard to using other payment services than 
cash, and this is illustrated in this chart, which summarises the situation in a few selected 
countries.5 The picture that appears is that use of cash is much lower in Sweden than in most 
other  countries  and  that  the  use  of  cards,  primarily  bank  cards,  is  higher.  The  situation  is 
roughly the same in our Nordic neighbour countries. 
I  mentioned  earlier  that  Sweden  is  a  technology-friendly  country.  We  have  an  extensive 
infrastructure for telecommunications and a high percentage of households have Internet in 
their  homes,  are  familiar  with  technology  and  have  smart  phones  and  tablets.  Moreover, 
there  is  a  high  degree  of  confidence  and  trust  between  households,  companies,  payment 
intermediaries and public authorities. This chart shows an aggregate of all of these factors. It 
is the World Economic Forum’s ranking of countries according to how well they are situated 
                                                
5 
If we look at cards and cash, it is unfortunately difficult to find good and comparable statistics. The information 
on other countries than Sweden is often a few years old, and the exact percentages should be taken with a 
pinch of salt.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  with regard to utilising possibilities offered by information and communication technology. We 
can see that Sweden is highly placed and has been for a long time. Of course, this creates 
the right conditions for the payments market to develop. 
Changes also create difficulties 
It  is  positive  that  the  market  for  payments  is  developing  and  can  meet  the  new  payment 
requirements that arise. Payments are increasingly based on technology and this trend will 
probably continue and expand. However, at the same time this development leads to new 
problems and tensions that need to be overcome. The problems we have identified include 
the following: 
Households  and  companies  need  even  better  access  to  different  payment  services.  The 
capacity  in  the  mobile  network  is  not  always  adequate  to  manage  temporary  peaks  and  it 
may then be difficult, for instance, to make a card payment for a hot dog and soft drink at a 
sports  event  attended  by  several  thousand  people.  Some  groups  in  society,  such  as  the 
visually impaired and very short people, can face problems as card terminals and ATMs are 
not always adapted to their specific needs. 
Other  problems  concern  to  a greater  extent the tensions  that  may  arise in  relation  to  new 
payment services. Households may also have access to the technology needed to use a new 
payment service, but nevertheless prefer to use the old technology. As the latter technology 
becomes less accessible, tension may arise when the individual feels that his or her needs 
are  not  met.  For  instance,  an  elderly  person  may  want  to  continue  depositing  and 
withdrawing cash over the counter in a bank or to pay payments there, but as fewer bank 
branches handle cash manually; this is becoming more difficult in practice. 
There is also a risk that the market will become fragmented and by this I mean that there 
may be a number of different payment solutions, but that none of them is generally accepted 
by  the  payment  recipients.  One  example  could  be  mobile  payments.  If  the  launch  of  new 
mobile  payment  services  continues,  perhaps  I  as  consumer  will  need  to  have  a  couple  of 
different payment applications in my mobile phone to be sure of being able to pay in different 
shops. Similarly, the retailer will then need to subscribe to several different payment services. 
Last year, an inquiry on the use of cash in Sweden was published, and earlier this autumn 
the commission of inquiry presented its report entitled Cash management in Sweden. This 
inquiry has resulted in a number of proposals and I will discuss two of them here. The first is 
that  it  is  proposed  that  the  Riksbank  has  overall  responsibility  for  cash  management  in 
Sweden.  The  second  is  that  the  counting  services  of  cash-in-transit  companies  should 
become subject to licence and come under financial supervision. It is recommended that the 
Riksbank become the supervisory authority for these operations. 
The  Riksbank  welcomes  the  work  of  the  inquiry  as  we  consider  it  important  that  cash 
management in Sweden functions smoothly. We have taken part in the work of the inquiry 
and will now analyse the proposals put forward and respond to the submission sent out for 
comments. 
Cash changeover positive but entails practical challenges 
It is not only the banks’ services that need to become more user-friendly, cost-effective and 
certain over time, our banknotes and coins also need to develop in the same way. When the 
new  banknotes  and  coins  are  introduced,  starting  next  year,  the  size  and  weight  of  the 
banknotes and some of the coins will decline and two new denominations will be introduced; 
the  2-krona  coin  and  the  200-krona  banknote.  The  banknotes  and  coins  will  thus  become 
much more user-friendly and will be cheaper to handle. Safety is also increased through the 
new  security  features.  I  believe  that  we  all  agree  these  improvements  are  positive  for  all 
parties  concerned.  However,  as  with  electronic  payments,  the  introduction  of  the  new 
banknotes  and  coins  will  give  rise  to  some  practical  problems  and  friction  during  a 
transitional period. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Firstly, there is a huge amount of banknotes that are to be replaced; 300 million banknotes 
are to be withdrawn and around as many are to be put into circulation. For coins the figure is 
500  million  to  be  distributed  in  both  directions.  Secondly,  Sweden  has  one  of  the  world’s 
most automated cash systems. This means that all appropriate equipment in Sweden must 
be adapted to be able to handle the new banknotes and coins. Thirdly, much of the practical 
changeover work will occur in the retail trade and shops, partly because this is where we use 
cash  and  partly  because  the  banks  have  cut  down  on  their  cash  handling.  However, 
conditions  vary  considerably  in  the  retail  trade  with  regard  to,  for  instance,  technical 
equipment and security. It is necessary to ensure the entire changeover functions in a way 
that is felt by the general public to be simple and secure. 
How should we deal with the challenges? 
To  summarise,  one  can  say  that  there  are  two  groups  of  challenges  on  the  Swedish 
payments  market.  One  concerns  the  slightly  longer-term  challenges  following  on  from 
developments on the payments market, and the other concerns more near-term challenges 
regarding  the  banknote  and  coin  changeover.  Let  me  begin  with  cash  and  the  near-term 
challenges. 
The cash changeover 2015–2017 
The Riksbank has over a long time, and since its planning began in 2008, had a dialogue 
with the various participants in the market regarding the banknote and coin changeover. This 
means that the banks, cash-in-transit companies and retail trade have been able to influence 
every  part  of  the  work,  especially  the  timetable.  This  has  been  very  important  to  the 
Riksbank, as we no longer play any role in the practical handling of cash. The timetable for 
the changeover has been divided into two stages and extends over a relatively long period, 
which means that all of those involved have had plenty of time to prepare. 
You saw from the slides I showed earlier that the general public on the whole has relatively 
good access to places where they can made cash withdrawals and the retail trade has good 
access to service points where they can leave their daily takings, but is it at the same time a 
well-known fact that several of the banks have cut back on their manual cash handling. The 
consequence is that a number of households, perhaps those in sparsely-populated areas in 
particular, have  had  a  long  way  to  travel  to  the  nearest  bank that  handles  cash. This  is  a 
problem that may increase with regard to the banknote and coin changeover. The Riksbank 
is therefore conducting a regular dialogue with the banks on how the changeover should be 
managed.  The  banks  have  said  that  they  will  help  their  customers  to  the  extent  that  they 
need  it  and  that  they  will  contribute  to  a  smooth  changeover.  We  are  assuming  that  the 
banks will take this responsibility, but we are at the same time monitoring developments, for 
instance, by making a survey of access to cash services in different parts of the country. The 
continued dialogue with the banks will show whether the Riksbank needs to take any further 
measures. 
Starting from 2015, we will carry out extensive information campaigns aimed at both market 
participants and the general public. 
include  shortfalls 
The effects of more electronic payments 
The challenges regarding electronic payments are essentially very different. The challenges I 
have  mentioned 
telecommunications  network, 
accessibility  and  user  problems for  some  vulnerable  groups  and  possible  fragmentation  of 
some segments of the market. But there are other challenges, too. Common to these is that 
the  Riksbank  does  not  have  any  formal  tools  to  manage  the  problems.  Often  the  primary 
responsibility for these areas lies with another authority and often there are many different 
parties  involved  who  need  to  cooperate  to  resolve  the  problems.  For  instance,  the  county 
administrative boards and the Swedish Post and Telecom Authority have the task of ensuring 
in  capacity  on 
the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  that  everyone  has  access  to  basic  payment  services.  Finansinspektionen  (the  Swedish 
financial  supervisory  authority)  has  responsibility  for  financial  supervision.  The  Swedish 
Competition  Authority  is  responsible  for  ensuring  there  is  suitable  competition  on  the 
payments market, and so on. The banks, other providers of payment services and the retail 
trade are on different sides of the market, but their participation is often a decisive factor for 
bringing about a change. 
The Riksbank is inviting to a new retail payments council 
I believe that the Riksbank is well-positioned to take part in managing the challenges arising 
from  a  changing  payments  market.  But  as  I  mentioned  earlier,  successful  management 
depends on the various market participants talking to one another and working together. At 
present, there is no suitable forum for these discussions. The Riksbank, which is a centrally-
located and independent participant, can contribute by creating a forum where stakeholders 
can discuss and try to resolve problems on the market. This is why the Riksbank sent out an 
invitation to take part in a new retail payments council last week. 
The idea is to bring together public authorities and market participants from both the supply 
and  demand  sides  of  the  market.  The  council  will  not  make  decisions,  but  will  act  as  a 
discussion forum that will identify and analyse problems and shortcomings on the market and 
propose possible ways of counteracting and resolving them. The council can thus become a 
joint resource for all of the parties involved. Examples of questions that may be discussed 
include  how  to  improve  the  situation  for  vulnerable  groups,  how  to  remove  obstacles  to 
competition  or  to  improve  statistics.  The  invitation  was  sent  to  central  participants  in  the 
market and to public authorities. Preferably, the council members should represent groups of 
participants rather than an individual participant, that is, the banks should be represented by 
the Swedish Bankers’ Association rather than by an individual bank. We are aware that at 
present this excludes smaller participants who are competing with the banks and introducing 
innovative products on the market. But our aim is to broaden participation by having greater 
participation in the working groups that may operate under the council. 
Nor should the Riksbank’s proposals be regarded as set in stone; it must be possible for the 
retail  payments  council  to  develop  to  remain  relevant  and  thus  working  methods  and 
participation  should  be  reviewed  on  a  regular  basis.  The  Riksbank  intends  to  have  a 
preliminary constituent meeting at the beginning of February. 
The way forward involves new and old technology 
To  summarise:  Sweden  is  in  the  forefront  with  regard  to  the  development  and  use  of 
cashless payment methods. This development is positive  in many  ways, but changes also 
entail  challenges.  The  Riksbank  is  taking  an  active  part  in  the  work  on  managing  these 
challenges to make things easier for the various participants in the economy. 
Given this, I am convinced that we have a good basis for resolving short-term and long-term 
problems  and  frictions.  The  way  forward  is  to  continue  refining  old  technology  in  new 
versions  and  also  to  create  entirely  new  solutions.  There  is  good  scope  to  ensure  our 
payment  services  will  be  even  safer,  more  efficient,  easily  accessible  and  cheaper  in  the 
future. 
Thank you!  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
