  Andreas Dombret: Shadow banking and the roots of international 
cooperation 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at a reception to bid farewell to Mr Winfried Liedtke, financial attaché, and to 
welcome his successor, Mr Thomas Notheis, Beijing, 29 October 2014. 
 Ladies and gentlemen 
Welcome  to  our  reception  here  in  Beijing.  I  am  happy  to  have  the  opportunity  to  officially 
thank  the  Bundesbank’s  departing  representative,  Winfried  Liedtke,  and  to  welcome  his 
successor, Thomas Notheis. 
Allow me to say a few words on the roots of international cooperation. Not too long ago the 
saying was that when the United States sneezes, the world catches a cold. This is certainly 
still true, and the turbulence following the Federal Reserve’s announcement of tapering was 
a case in point. 
However,  the  world  economy  of  today  is  no  longer  a  unipolar  system.  Take  China  as  an 
example. China is now the second largest economy in the world, and the IMF estimates that, 
measured  in  purchasing  power  parities,  China  might  have  overtaken  the  United  States  in 
2014 to become the world’s largest economy. 
Thus,  China  is  an  important  player  on  the  global  stage.  According  to  IMF  data,  China 
accounted for more than one third of global economic growth in 2014. At the same time, it 
promotes growth in other parts of the world through trade linkages or direct investment. Over 
the  past  six  years,  Chinese  imports grew  by  an  average  of  12%  per  annum  while  China’s 
foreign  direct  investment  reached  a  new  record  in  2013  with  a  total  of  more  than 
US$ 100 billion. 
However,  no  one  can  deny  that  a  global  player  can  also  be  a  global  risk:  when  China 
sneezes, the world might catch a cold, too. Consequently, the IMF has recently warned that 
a hard landing in China might pose a risk to the world economy. 
Nevertheless, globalisation has not just taken us from a world economy that was dominated 
by one country to a world economy that is dominated by two countries. The world in which 
we  live  has  become  very  small  over  the  past  decades.  And  in  a  small  world,  every 
policymaker  in  every  country  must  be  aware  that  his  or  her  decisions  can  influence  other 
countries as well. 
The  world  is  interconnected  by  a  close-knit  network  of  trade  relations  and  through  a 
globalised financial system. Financial markets in particular have become integrated to such a 
degree that a small distortion at one end of the world can quickly spread and affect the entire 
system. In 2008, the failure of a single investment bank in the United States sparked a global 
financial crisis and a worldwide recession. 
Having acknowledged that financial crises today are global in scope, the G20 embarked on 
an  ambitious  agenda  to  reform global financial  regulation.  And  they  have  made  significant 
progress. The new Basel III rules will ensure that banks hold more and better capital. At the 
same  time,  new  liquidity  standards  will  ensure  that  banks  have  sound  funding  structures. 
These and other measures will make the global banking system more stable. 
However,  there  is  always  the  other  side  of the coin:  tougher rules for  banks  might  lead to 
regulatory  arbitrage  where  risky  activities  are  shifted  toward  unregulated  areas  of  the 
financial  system.  One  current  example  is the growth  of  the  shadow  banking  sector,  where 
financial enterprises conduct business which creates bank-like risks but is either regulated 
insufficiently or not at all. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The Financial Stability Board estimates that the assets of non-bank financial intermediaries 
grew  by  US$  5  trillion  in  2012  and  now  stand  at  US$  71  trillion.  Non-bank  financial 
intermediaries represent about half of banking system assets and 117% of global GDP. And 
China is no exception here. According to the IMF, the size of the Chinese shadow banking 
sector has more than tripled since 2008 and reached 35% of GDP in March 2014. The IMF 
estimates that China has the fifth largest shadow banking sector in dollar terms among those 
jurisdictions which are members of the Financial Stability Board. 
A growing shadow banking sector is something regulators have to watch closely – not just in 
China  but  in  other  countries,  too.  Shadow  banking  participants  undertake  maturity  and 
liquidity  transformation,  they  engage  in  the  transfer  of  credit  risk,  and  they  operate  with 
leverage. This means they carry out a range of bank-like functions which are associated with 
bank-like risks. 
At the same time, however, there are two key differences compared to the regular banking 
system.  First,  shadow  banking  participants  and  activities  are  not  subject  to  banking 
regulation. Second, shadow banking participants generally have no access to central bank 
liquidity, nor do they benefit from public backstops such as deposit insurance schemes. 
The consequence of this structure is a latent risk of runs on shadow banking participants. A 
run may lead to liquidity bottlenecks which can only be cleared by rapid deleveraging. That in 
turn may contribute to a collapse in prices on the financial markets, and thus exacerbate the 
problems in a procyclical fashion. 
In  addition,  the  structure  of  many  of  the  transactions  conducted  in  the  shadow  banking 
system means that the participants are closely interconnected. Thus, contagion effects within 
the  system  are  highly  likely.  These  systemic  risks  within  the  shadow  banking  system  may 
then spill over into the regular banking system, which is often directly or indirectly linked to 
the shadow banking system. 
Thus, the shadow banking system may well be a source of systemic risk. Accordingly, it is 
very high up on the G20 reform agenda. In this context, let me make one thing absolutely 
clear:  the  purpose  of  regulation  is  not  to  proscribe  shadow  banking  activities  or  to  drive 
participants  out  of  the  market  when  such  activities  and  participants  engender  no  systemic 
risk. The sole aim of regulation is to put a brake on systemic risk. We have certainly made 
some progress on this issue but we still have further to go. 
Because the growth of the shadow banking sector is a global issue, further cooperation is 
needed  to  make  the  financial  system  a  safer  place.  And  international  cooperation  always 
starts  at  the  personal  level,  with  personal  relations  forming  the  root  of  successful 
cooperation. This is where our representatives here in Beijing come into play. Their task is to 
build networks, to share information and ideas, to explain the Bundesbank’s positions and to 
facilitate cooperation. 
For the past three years, Winfried Liedtke has served as the Bundesbank’s representative in 
Beijing.  And  judging  from  the  distinguished  crowd  gathered  here  today,  he  has  done  an 
excellent  job.  I  would  therefore  like  to  thank  him  personally  and  in  the  name  of  the 
Bundesbank for his service. 
I would also like to take the opportunity to welcome our new representative, Thomas Notheis. 
For the past four years, Thomas Notheis has served as the Bundesbank’s representative in 
Mumbai, meaning that he is not new to either the world of economic diplomacy or to Asia. 
Some of you have already met him, and I am certain that he will be a worthy successor to 
Winfried Liedtke. 
Having a representative here in Beijing shows that the Deutsche Bundesbank acknowledges 
the  global  importance  of  the  Chinese  economy  and  its  role  in  global  financial  markets.  I 
strongly believe that our presence here in Beijing will deepen friendship and cooperation, not 
only  between  Thomas Notheis  and  his  peers  but  also  between  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank 
and the Central Bank of China, and eventually between Germany and China. 
Thank you! 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
