  Mario Draghi: Stability and prosperity in Monetary Union 
Speech  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  University  of 
Helsinki, Helsinki, 27 November 2014. 
 Summary 
ECB  President  Mario  Draghi  outlined  the  minimum  requirements  needed  to  complete 
monetary union in a way that offers stability and prosperity for all its members in a speech to 
students of the University of Helsinki. 
Acknowledging  that,  “for  all  its  resilience,  our  union  is  still  incomplete”,  Mr  Draghi  argued 
that, ultimately, Member States “have to be better off inside than they would be outside.” 
“If  there  are  parts  of  the  euro  area  that  are  worse  off  inside  the  Union,  doubts  may  grow 
about whether they might ultimately have to leave”. 
“The  euro  is  –  and  has  to  be  –  irrevocable  in  all  its  member  states,  not  just  because  the 
Treaties say so, but because without this there cannot be a truly single money”, he said. 
In the absence of permanent fiscal transfers among Member States, there are two minimum 
requirements to achieve these objectives: the first is that all euro area countries need to be 
able to thrive independently, the second is that euro area countries need to invest more in 
other mechanisms to share the cost of shocks. 
In a monetary union, the economic performance of any single country cannot be seen as a 
purely  national  concern.  “There  is  a  strong  case  for  sovereignty  over  relevant  economic 
policies  to  be  exercised  jointly.  That  means  above  all  structural  reforms”,  the  President 
remarked. 
But even so, economic adjustments can have short term costs. 
To ensure that countries are better off being in the Union when a shock hits than they would 
be outside, “we need other ways to help spread those costs…there is a particular onus on 
private risk-sharing to play this role”. In this context Mr Draghi said barriers to capital markets 
integration needed to be addressed with urgency. 
Sovereign debt needs also to act as a safe haven in times of economic stress. It can do so 
first of all through a strong fiscal governance framework. Secondly, by having some form of 
backstop  for  sovereign  debt  in  place.  “Over  the  longer-term”,  the  President  concluded,  “it 
would  be  natural  to  reflect  further  on  whether  we  have  done  enough  in  the  euro  area  to 
preserve at all times the ability to use fiscal policy counter-cyclically. But it is also clear that… 
this could only take place in the context of a decisive step towards closer Fiscal Union”. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
A common misconception about the European Union – and the euro area – is that they are 
economic unions without an underlying political union. This reflects a deep misunderstanding 
of what economic union means: it is by nature political. 
The  Single  Market  is  itself  a  political  construct  that  could  not  operate  without  adequate 
political  structures.  A  strong  competition  authority  requires  an  executive  to  enforce 
competition  policy,  a  legislative  to  write  the  law  that  it  enforces,  and  a  judiciary  to  resolve 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  conflicts under the Law. The Commission, EU Council, European Parliament and European 
Court of Justice all play these roles.1 
Likewise, fiat money is a political construct, and monetary union could not operate without 
adequate  political  structures.  In  this  case,  an  independent  central  bank  has  to  ground  its 
legitimacy  in  a  precisely  defined  mandate  that  is  embedded  in  a  democratically  agreed 
constitutional framework – which the ECB finds in the EU Treaties.2 
If  our  union  has  proved  more  resilient  over  the  past  years  than  many  thought,  it  is  only 
because those who doubted it misjudged this political dimension. They underestimated the 
political  underpinnings  of  our  union,  the  ties  between  its  members,  and  the  amount  of 
political capital that has been invested in it. 
Yet it is clear that, for all its resilience, our union is still incomplete. This is the diagnosis that 
was  made  two  years  ago  by  the  Presidents  of  the  European  Council,  the  European 
Commission,  the  Eurogroup  and  myself,  in  the  so-called  “Four  Presidents  Report”.  And 
though progress has been achieved in some areas, it remains unfinished in others. 
So until we have completed EMU, which means achieving the minimum requirements in all 
areas  for  our  union  to  be  truly  sustainable,  doubts  about  its  future  will  never  entirely  fade 
away. And this is true no matter how much political commitment is voiced. 
What I would like to discuss today is what those minimum requirements are to complete our 
Union in a way that brings stability and prosperity for all its members. 
The minimum requirements for monetary union 
When  countries  join  a  monetary  union,  they  share  monetary  policy  and  no  longer  have 
individual exchange rates. This offers significant benefits, but it also creates costs. 
On the one hand, especially for smaller countries, sharing sovereignty over monetary policy 
is  a  way  to  regain  sovereignty.  Rather  than  having  their  monetary  policy  effectively 
determined by a larger neighbour, they can participate on equal terms in decision-making for 
the  entire  euro  area.  The  removal  of  exchange  rate  uncertainty  also  yields  immediate 
benefits in terms of reduced risk premia. 
On  the  other  hand,  sharing  monetary  policy  and  in  particular  an  exchange  rate  deprives 
national economies of some adjustment tools in the face of local shocks. 
This  means  that  such  shocks  have  to  be  preempted to  the  extent  possible  through  sound 
economic  policies.  It  also  means  that  when  shocks  do  occur  –  as  they  inevitably  will  – 
adjustment has to take place through other channels. And crucially, those channels have to 
be at least as effective as if countries were not part of monetary union. Members have to be 
better off inside than they would be outside. 
The reason for this is as follows: if there are parts of the euro area that are worse off inside 
the Union, doubts may grow about whether they might ultimately have to leave. And if one 
country can potentially leave the monetary union, then this creates a replicable precedent for 
all  countries.  This  in  turn  would  undermine  the  fungibility  of  money,  as  bank  deposits  and 
other financial contracts in any country would bear a redenomination risk. 
This is not theory: we all have seen first-hand, and at considerable costs in terms of welfare 
and  employment,  how  fears  about  euro  exit  and  redenomination  have  fragmented  our 
economies. 
                                                
1   See  lecture  by  Mario  Draghi  on  “Europe’s  pursuit  of  ‘a  more  perfect  Union’”  at  Harvard  Kennedy  School, 
Cambridge (USA), 9 October 2013. 
2   See  acceptance  speech  by  Willem  Duisenberg  on  receiving  the  International  Charlemagne  Prize,  Aachen, 
9 May 2002. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  So it should be clear that the success of monetary union anywhere depends on its success 
everywhere.  The  euro  is  –  and  has  to  be  –  irrevocable  in  all  its  member  states,  not  just 
because the Treaties say so, but because without this there cannot be a truly single money. 
What I am saying of the euro area could apply to most currency areas. But participation in 
our monetary union has different characteristics to participation in other political unions. This 
is particularly because we operate in an environment where there are no permanent fiscal 
transfers between countries.3 And this has important consequences. 
In all national economies, permanent transfers take place from richer to poorer regions; from 
more densely populated to more sparsely populated areas; and from those better endowed 
with natural resources to those less endowed. This is true in the United States, where those 
transfers  occur  through  the  federal  budget.  It  is  true  within  Germany,  within  Italy,  within 
Finland. Fiscal transfers, so long as they remain fair, often help cement social cohesion and 
protect against the temptation of secession. 
But as such transfers are not foreseen within the euro area, this model does not apply for us. 
We need a different approach to ensure that each country is permanently better off within the 
Union than outside – and it entails two minimum requirements. 
The first is that all euro area countries need to be able to thrive independently. This means 
that  every  economy  has  to  be  flexible  enough  to  find  and  exploit  their  comparative 
advantages,  so  as  to  benefit  from  the  Single  Market.  They  have  to  be  able  to  allocate 
resources  efficiently  and  create  a  dynamic  business  environment,  so  that  their  economies 
can attract capital and generate enough jobs. 
And they also have to be flexible enough to respond quickly to short-term shocks, including 
through adjustment of wages or reallocating resources across sectors. 
This is particularly important because, due to cultural barriers, labour mobility offers only a 
limited escape valve from high local unemployment in the euro area – at least compared with 
more  homogenous  unions  like  the  US.  Certainly,  greater  cross-country  mobility  would  be 
welcome, and we should encourage measures that facilitate it. But research suggests that it 
is unlikely that cross-country migration flows will ever become a key driver of labour market 
adjustment after large shocks.4 And no country will thrive anyway if its population deserts it. 
The  second  implication  that  follows  from  not  having  fiscal  transfers  is  that  EMU  countries 
need to invest more in other mechanisms to share the cost of shocks. 
Many  shocks  can  be  preempted  by  the  right  policies.  But  for  those  that  cannot,  internal 
adjustment  will  generally  be  slower  than  if  countries  were  able  to  adjust  relative  prices 
instantly  through  their  own  exchange  rate.  In  these  circumstances,  some  form  of  cross-
country  risk-sharing  is  essential  to  help  reduce  adjustment  costs  for  those  countries  and 
prevent recessions from leaving deep and permanent scars. 
In  our  case  this  means  deepening  financial  integration  in  ways  that  improve  private  risk-
sharing – that is, through having more diversified financial portfolios that can spread risk and 
reward  across  regions,  and  more  integrated  credit  markets  that  can  smooth  consumption 
patterns.  And  it  means  ensuring  that  the  conditions  are  in  place  so  that  all  countries  can 
retain full use of national fiscal policy as a counter-cyclical buffer. 
Let me explain these various points, and their implications, in some more detail. 
                                                
3   Cross-country transfers exist as part of the EU cohesion policy. These funds are however of a limited size and 
are primarily designed to support the “catching-up” process in lower income countries or regions. 
4   Beyer, R., and F. Smets (2013), “Has mobility decreased? Reassessing regional labour market adjustments in 
Europe and the US”, mimeo, European Central Bank. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Economies that can adjust quickly to shocks and grow 
Building economies that are resilient and flexible entails that wages and prices can adjust to 
economic conditions, and that resources can reallocate swiftly across firms and sectors. 
We  know  from  economic  theory  that  this  is  crucial  in  a  monetary  union  to  ensure  that 
adjustment  happens  through  prices,  not  quantities  –  that  is,  unemployment.  And  we  have 
also seen this play out in our direct experience: during the crisis countries with more flexible 
economies  have  on  the  whole  adjusted  faster  and  with  a  lower  employment  cost.  This  is 
evident, for example, if one compares the experience of Ireland and Latvia with that of Spain, 
Portugal and Greece.5 
We  know  as  well  that  economies  that  are  flexible  and  can  allocate  resources  efficiently 
benefit most from the Single Market by exploiting their comparative advantages. And where 
populations are ageing, they also have the best chance of raising potential growth. This is 
again  true  in  theory,  but  also  visible  in  practice.  To  give  just  one  example,  the  World 
Economic  Forum  ranks  Finland  fourth  in  the  world  in  terms  of  global  competitiveness, 
whereas Greece is ranked 81st.6 
Until now, such differences in the structures and institutions of our economies have largely 
been  seen  as  a  national  concern.  Countries  that  reformed  their  economies  and  improved 
their business environments were seen as the chief beneficiaries of their efforts. And if some 
countries did not reform, it was largely believed that they would be the only ones to suffer as 
a consequence. 
This understanding was reflected in the fact that, while monetary policy became European, 
important parts of economic policy remained at the national level – and with relatively loose 
common  governance.  This  seemed  natural  as  many  of  these  policies  –  such  as  labour 
market  institutions  or  social  protection  schemes  –  are  deeply  rooted  in  a  country’s  social 
model and national traditions. 
But with the benefit of experience, I am sceptical as to whether this view is still valid. That 
economies can adjust and grow is in fact very much a concern for others. 
If  some  countries  in  monetary  union  perpetually  adjust  more  slowly  than  others,  they  are 
likely  to  have  consistently  higher  unemployment.  And  if  they  also  have  lower  growth 
potential,  then  that  unemployment  is  more  likely  to  become  entrenched  and  structural.  In 
other words, lack of structural reforms raises the spectre of permanent economic divergence 
between  members.  And  insofar  as  this  threatens  the  essential  cohesion  of  the  Union,  this 
has potentially damaging consequences for all EMU members. 
Seen from this perspective, euro area countries cannot be agnostic about whether and how 
others  address  their  reform  challenges.  Their  own  prosperity  ultimately  depends  on  each 
country putting itself in a position to thrive within the Union. And for this reason, there is a 
strong  case  for  sovereignty  over  relevant  economic  policies  to  be  exercised  jointly.  That 
means above all structural reforms. 
This was the starting point for the reflection that began with the Four Presidents’ Report in 
2012 on building a genuine Economic Union for the euro area. And to my mind, deepening 
Economic Union would mean two things. 
First,  in  the  short-term,  using  more  effectively  the  rules  and  procedures  we  already  have, 
such  as  the  European  Semester.  This  means  making  all  parties  more  accountable  for 
                                                
5   See  speech  by  B.  Cœuré  on  “Structural  reforms: learning the  right  lessons  from  the  crisis”,  at  the  Bank  of 
Latvia Economic Conference 2014, Riga, 17 October 2014. 
6   World  Economic  Forum  (2014),  The  Global  Competitiveness  Report  2014–15,  Geneva,  World  Economic 
Forum. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  ensuring that recommendations are well-targeted, closely monitored and followed up. And it 
means actively using the corrective tools that are there to tackle large imbalances, such as 
the Excessive Imbalances Procedure. 
Second,  over  the  longer-term,  acknowledging  the  community  of  interest  and  the  reality  of 
spillovers in the form of a real sharing of sovereignty in the governance of structural reforms. 
That is, shifting from coordination to common decision-making, and from rules to institutions. 
Private risk-sharing through integrated financial markets 
As I said, however, economies will never be so flexible that adjustment happens as quickly 
as  if  they  had  their  own  exchange  rate.  There  will  always  be  short-term  costs.  And  so  to 
ensure that countries are better off being in the Union when a shock hits than they would be 
outside, we need other ways to help spread those costs. 
In a monetary union like ours, there is a particular onus on private risk-sharing to play this 
role. Indeed, the less public risk-sharing we want, the more private risk-sharing we need. 
Private  risk-sharing  chiefly  comes  through  a  well-integrated  financial  system.  Diversified 
portfolios make balance sheets more resilient to local shocks and allow the effects of those 
shocks  to  be  dispersed  across  countries.  And  integrated  credit  markets  allow  firms  and 
households  to  smooth  any  negative  effects  on  income  by  bringing  forward  future 
consumption – which in the euro area essentially means borrowing from countries that are 
less affected. In other words, financial union is an integral part of monetary union. 
The  US  provides  an  example  of  how  effective  private  risk-sharing  can  be  in  a  monetary 
union. A well-known study found that around two-thirds of economic shocks are absorbed via 
integrated  financial  markets  in  the  US.  By  contrast,  studies  on  the  euro  area  suggest  that 
credit and capital markets are much less effective in smoothing income.7 
The explanation for the limited degree of risk-sharing in the euro area can be found in the 
relatively shallow type of financial integration that evolved before the crisis. 
In  the  banking  sector,  integration  of  interbank  markets  proceeded  much  faster  than 
integration of retail markets. Thus, most banks’ assets remained concentrated in their local 
markets,  while  their  liabilities  were  mainly  comprised  of  short-term  debt.  This  meant  that 
when  a  large  local  shock  hit,  they  were  exposed  to  heavy  and  concentrated  losses.  And 
rather  than  sharing  those  losses,  their  creditors  were  able  to  “cut  and  run”.8  The  resulting 
financial fragmentation also meant that cross-border credit markets could not do their job. 
In this context, Banking Union represents a vital step forward in creating the conditions for a 
higher quality of financial integration. Single supervision and resolution should be catalytic in 
lowering  the  hurdles  to  cross-border  activity  and  encouraging  deeper  retail  banking 
integration. In the process, this will create more private risk-sharing within the sector.9 
Banking Union is now  well underway: the Single Supervisory  Mechanism (SSM) took over 
supervision  of  euro  area  banks  earlier  this  month.  Its  founding  act,  the  Comprehensive 
Assessment  of  banks’  balance  sheets,  was  successfully  completed  the  month  previously. 
And the Single Resolution Mechanism will begin on 1 January next year. 
                                                
7   See for example Van Beers, M.,  M. Bijlsma and G. Zwart (2014), “Cross-country insurance mechanisms in 
currency unions: an empirical assessment”, Bruegel Working Paper 2014/04, March; IMF (2013), “Towards a 
Fiscal Union for the euro area: technical background notes”, September 2013. 
8   For an explanation of how the form of cross-border banking integration can influence the stability of financial 
flows  see  Schoenmaker,  D.,  and  W.  Wagner  (2011),  “The  impact  of  cross-border  banking  on  financial 
stability”, Tinbergen Institute Discussion Paper TI 11–054/DSF 18, Duisenberg School of Finance. 
9   For more on this point see speech by Peter Praet on “Repairing the bank lending channel: the next steps”, at 
European Macro Conference, London, 17 November 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  But  limited  risk-sharing  within  the  euro  area  is  not  just  about  banks;  it  also  reflects  our 
relatively incomplete capital markets, and in particular equity markets. Those markets are the 
most effective for absorbing losses. Yet only 44% of equity issued in the euro area is held by 
other euro area residents.10 
So,  if  we  are  to  deepen  private  sector  risk-sharing  in  the  euro  area,  we  urgently  need  to 
address  the  barriers  to  capital  market  integration.  This  is  no  doubt  a  complex  issue  as  it 
extends into multiple aspects of national law.11 But if we do not want a transfer union, then 
we have to be consistent and establish an environment where other mechanisms can work. 
This means, first, advancing with the agenda of the new Commission President to establish a 
genuine  Capital  Markets  Union  in  Europe.  And  second,  establishing  a  genuine  Economic 
Union in parallel. If countries are to attract capital and benefit from financial risk-sharing, then 
it has to be attractive to invest there. And this can only be achieved if, over the medium-term, 
all countries have sufficient adjustment capacity and growth prospects. 
Yet even with full implementation of these Unions, we could still not call EMU complete. We 
also have to acknowledge the crucial role that accrues to fiscal policies in a monetary union. 
that  national 
fiscal  policies  can  perform 
National fiscal policies that can act counter-cyclically 
A  single  monetary  policy  focused  on  achieving  euro  area  price  stability  cannot  react  to 
shocks that affect only one country or one region. And we do not have a federal budget that 
can respond instead, as in the US for example. So, for as long as this situation persists, it is 
absolutely  essential 
their  macroeconomic 
stabilisation role alongside monetary policy, and react whenever a local shock occurs. 
Fiscal  policies  are  in  fact  particularly  relevant  for  us,  as  a  recent  study  demonstrates  that 
47%  of  an  unemployment  shock  is  absorbed  by  the  automatic  stabilisers  in  the  EU, 
compared with only 34% in the US.12 
For national fiscal stabilisers to be able to play out in full, sovereign debt has to act as a safe 
haven in times of economic stress. If it instead acts like private debt, and borrowing costs 
rise  under  stress,  governments’  market  access  becomes  constrained  at  precisely  the 
moment they most need it. Then, fiscal policy risks becoming pro-cyclical. 
There are in principle two ways to protect the safe haven status of sovereign debt: the first is 
a strong fiscal governance framework that is implemented in a credible manner. This means 
having sufficient buffers over the cycle to absorb exceptional shocks, and having public debt 
levels that are sufficiently low in good times that they can rise in bad times without disrupting 
market confidence. 
The second way is some form of backstop for sovereign debt. 
In the euro area, due to various aspects of our institutional framework, we have very much 
pursued  the  first  approach,  strong  fiscal  rules.  And  this  provides  an  essential  anchor  for 
confidence,  not  only  for  investors  but  also  among  firms  and  households,  and  crucially, 
between  countries.  The  importance  of  each  country  sticking  to  its  commitments  under  the 
Stability and Growth Pact should therefore be beyond debate. 
                                                
10   ECB (2014), Financial Integration in Europe, April 2014. 
11   For  details  see  Special  Feature  C  of  Financial  Integration  in  Europe  2014,  “Initiatives  to  promote  capital 
market integration in the European corporate bond and equity markets”. 
12   M. Dolls, C. Fuest and A. Peichl (2012), “Automatic stabilizers and economic crisis: US vs. Europe”, Journal of 
Public Economics, Elsevier, vol. 96(3). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Indeed, that a sound fiscal framework is necessary in a monetary union goes without saying. 
Whether it is sufficient to safeguard fiscal policy as a stabilisation tool, however, has been 
challenged by our experience during the crisis. 
The  EMU  framework  was  grounded  on  the  assumption  that  keeping  one’s  fiscal  house  in 
order  would  be  enough  to  ensure  market  access  and  ward  off contagion.  And  to  be  sure, 
countries  with  more  robust  fiscal  positions  have  on  the  whole  enjoyed  easier  financing 
conditions and have been more protected from spillovers. But we have also seen that this 
protection is not absolute. 
Ireland and Spain, for instance, had low public debts and deficits on entering the crisis yet 
suffered serious contagion from Greece. And during the phase of the crisis where contagion 
within  the  euro  area  was  at  its  worst,  almost  all  countries  saw  their  credit  default  swap 
spreads rise. 
In other words, as panics can happen in financial markets, even abiding fully with the fiscal 
rules cannot provide a cast-iron guarantee of affordable market access. 
So  what  can  governments  do  in  these  circumstances  to  safeguard  fiscal  policy  as  a 
stabilisation tool? 
First, this is precisely the kind of situation I mentioned earlier where we can and should aim 
to better preempt economic shocks. The SSM is particularly important in this context, as it 
should help prevent the kind of large financial imbalances we saw in countries like Ireland 
and Spain, which subsequently spilled over to the public sector. 
Second,  markets  are  less  likely  to  react  negatively  to  temporarily  higher  deficits  if 
government debt is clearly sustainable over the medium-term. This can in part be achieved 
through credible fiscal plans, which act on the numerator of the debt-to-GDP ratio. But it also 
has  to  involve  raising  potential  growth  through  structural  reforms,  which  act  on  the 
denominator. 
And  for  this  reason,  governments  in  fact  have  a  further  incentive  to  enter  into  closer 
Economic  Union.  Insofar  as  this  acts  as  a  commitment  device  that  reforms  will  indeed  by 
implemented, it will help to raise future government income and improve debt sustainability. 
And in doing so, it can even help create fiscal space today. 
Moreover, using EU funds more effectively to boost both current demand and future potential 
–  which  means  raising  investment  –  would  have  a  similar  effect  on  growth  and  debt 
sustainability. I therefore welcome the Commission’s new proposal to stimulate investment 
spending in Europe. What matters is that its size complements the fiscal stance of national 
governments, that it is deployed quickly so that it can support demand, and that it is targeted 
towards those sectors where its impact on potential growth will be largest. 
Still, a third conclusion seems unavoidable: that no form of stronger governance can entirely 
remove the risk of self-fulfilling liquidity crises. 
I do not think this is a controversial statement. It has already been acknowledged with the 
creation  of  the  European  Stability  Mechanism.  And  it  is  also  what  motivates  the  ongoing 
discussion on establishing a backstop for the Single Resolution Fund: the idea is to prevent 
sovereigns from losing market access based on self-fulfilling expectations of future bailouts.13 
So  over  the  longer-term,  it  would  be  natural  to  reflect  further  on  whether  we  have  done 
enough  in  the  euro  area  to  preserve  at  all  times  the  ability  to  use  fiscal  policy  counter-
cyclically.  But  it  is  also  clear  that  such  a  reflection  would  have  to  be  part  of  a  larger 
                                                
13   For a full explanation of this mechanism see Acharya, V., I. Drechsler, I. and P. Schnabl (2011), “A pyrrhic 
victory? Bank bailouts and sovereign credit risk”, NBER Working Paper No. 17136. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  discussion on how to reinforce common decision-making over fiscal policies and strengthen 
accountability arrangements. 
In  other  words, this  could  only  take  place  in  the  context  of  a  decisive  step  towards  closer 
Fiscal Union. And to make that step we would need to first see a process of convergence in 
economic and financial policies in the ways I have described. 
Conclusion 
This brings me to my conclusion. 
What I have argued today is that doubts over the viability of EMU will only be fully removed 
when we have completed it in all relevant areas. This means Banking and Capital Markets 
Union; it means Economic and Fiscal Union. In a monetary union no policy area can be seen 
in isolation. Each interacts with and affects the other. And as such, completing EMU  in all 
areas strengthens and underpins the others. 
Monetary  union  is  more  effective  in  securing  the  fundamental  interests  of  citizens  when 
common  interests  are  recognised  as  such;  and  when  the  responsibilities  that  come  with 
participating  in  a  community  are  assumed  in  full.  In  other  words,  its  ultimate  success 
depends  on  the  acknowledgment  that  sharing  a  single  currency  is  political  union,  and 
following  through  with  the  consequences.  And  that  requires  commensurate  accountability 
and transparency arrangements. 
All countries must benefit permanently from participation in monetary union. And this means 
that the requirements I have laid out cannot be met only at the time when a country joins the 
union, or for some of the time. They have to be met all the time. They have to be irrevocable 
features of participation in monetary union. 
And for that reason, the institutional arrangements that ensure those requirements are met 
must ultimately be binding in nature, and permanent in form. 
 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
