  Fernando Restoy: Forging a new financial system – reforms outstanding 
and ongoing 
Opening  address  by  Mr  Fernando  Restoy,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Spain,  at  a 
conference at Complutense University of Madrid, Madrid, 27 October 2014. 
 Let me first thank the organisers, in particular professor Carmen Alonso Ledesma, a fellow 
sufferer on the Banco de España Governing Council, for their kind invitation to participate in 
this conference. 
Looking at the programme, the topics to be discussed in the various papers and roundtables, 
and  the  expertise  of  the  speakers,  I  harbour  no  doubts  that  this  conference  will  prove 
enormously  useful  in  enriching  the  knowledge  of  all  those  present  about  the  reforms 
undertaken and the challenges still pending for the financial system. 
A  good  number  of  these  reforms  and  challenges  are  linked  to  the  flaws  identified  in  the 
functioning of the sector as a result of the international financial crisis that broke in 2007. In 
particular, the crisis has highlighted considerable structural shortcomings – which led to an 
incorrect  evaluation  and  management  of  key  risks  by  financial  institutions  –  and  major 
limitations to the prevailing crisis-prevention and management systems. 
In the euro area, as you know, the perverse link between the vulnerability of the credit sector 
and the weakness of public finances precipitated an institutional crisis which jeopardised the 
very continuity of the Monetary Union. 
The  consequences  of  the  financial  crisis  have  been  very  adverse.  It  plunged  many 
economies  into  recession,  considerably  weakened  public  finances  in  many  countries  and, 
generally,  entailed  considerable  losses  in  well-being.  Fortunately,  and  this  is  a  positive 
message worth emphasising, the authorities’ response was generally correct. In a relatively 
short time, sweeping regulatory changes – which you will be able to review in detail in this 
conference  –  were  ushered  in.  Moreover,  the  euro  area  has  managed,  at  unprecedented 
speed, to launch an institutional reform, namely the banking union, whose scope cannot be 
overstated and which entails the strengthening of the Monetary Union. 
In Spain, I believe the work done in reforming our financial system has had very satisfactory 
results.  International  agencies,  in  particular  the  IMF  and  the  European  Commission,  have 
repeatedly  testified  to  these  results.  So  too  have  the  markets,  where  there  have  been 
significant  increases  in  the  valuation  of  instruments  issued  by  Spanish  banks.  And,  most 
recently,  there  was  further  acknowledgement  in  the  comprehensive  assessment  of  the 
European banking sector by the ECB and the European Banking Authority. 
Given the importance of this exercise, as a prior step to the start-up of the Single Supervisory 
Mechanism  (SSM),  allow  me  to  refer  to the  results  disclosed  yesterday,  before  discussing 
the  most  significant  measures  taken  in  Spain  to  strengthen  the  financial  system  and 
highlighting some of the challenges to be faced in the near future. 
Results of the comprehensive asset-assessment exercise 
As  you  probably  all  know,  the  European  bank  assessment  exercise,  covering  130  banks, 
most of which will be directly overseen by the SSM, essentially comprised two components. 
First, an asset quality review (the AQR), which  basically involved an analysis of the rigour 
with which bank balance sheets reflect the value of different assets. The review evaluated, 
as  appropriate,  accounting  classifications,  collateral  values,  fair  value  calculation  methods 
and the recognition of borrowers’ impaired creditworthiness. Second, a stress test, evaluating 
how solvency would fare in two macroeconomic scenarios: a baseline scenario, considered 
likely, and another highly adverse scenario. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  In  addition  to  increasing  the  transparency  of  banks’  financial  position  and  to  providing 
information  to  help  ensure  the  effective  functioning  of  the  SSM  as  a  supervisory  authority 
from  the  outset,  the  analysis  aimed  to  detect  potential  capital  shortfalls  that  needed  to  be 
rapidly redressed. To do this, quantitative benchmarks were set for capital adequacy ratios – 
measured by the ratio of common equity tier 1 (CET1) capital to risk-weighted assets – for 
each part of the exercise (8% in the AQR and in the baseline scenario of the stress test, and 
5.5% for the adverse scenario). 
The exercise was designed to high standards. This was manifest in the breadth of the field 
work  done  for  the  review  of  bank  balance  sheets,  in  the  severity  of  the  adverse 
macroeconomic scenario envisaged and in the wide range of risk (credit, market, sovereign, 
etc.)  factors  considered.  Also,  several  thousand  experts,  including  auditors,  consultants, 
appraisers, etc., participated in the exercise and strict quality assurance was enforced both 
at the level of the national supervisory authorities and by the ECB. 
The results disclosed yesterday show that European banks have, in the main, a comfortable 
solvency cushion. 
A good number of them have been able in recent months to reinforce their solvency levels 
notably, meaning that the capital measures needed to comply with the requirements arising 
from  the  exercise  are  modest  in  scope.  However,  the  analysis  has  shown  that  some 
European banks are in a vulnerable solvency position, which they should redress as soon as 
possible. 
All  told,  as  important  as  the  solvency  assessment  the  exercise  provides  is  the  detailed 
information furnished on each bank. In particular, the asset quality review offers significant 
data on the potential shortcomings of the way in which the financial information disclosed by 
banks  reflects  the  risk  they  assume.  Here  it  can  be  seen,  once  again,  that  there  is  no 
widespread material understatement of risk, in the form of valuation failings or provisioning 
shortfalls.  But  there  are  European  banks  where  the  asset  review  has  evidenced 
shortcomings of some significance. 
In the case of Spanish banks, the analysis has offered fairly satisfactory results. In particular, 
the  asset  quality  review  situates  Spain  as  the  country  where  fewest  failings  have  been 
detected  in  proportion  to  the  sector’s  aggregate  assets.  In  other  words,  according  to  the 
exercise,  the  balance  sheets  published  by  Spanish  banks  reflect,  on  average,  the  risks 
arising from their investment with greater rigour than that seen in the other jurisdictions, with 
fewer valuation flaws or provisioning shortfalls being detected as a result. 
This is a particularly positive outcome as it arises from the application of a methodology – 
common to all the banks analysed – based on objective observations and which, unlike the 
stress  test,  does  not  depend  on  the  design  of  debatable  macroeconomic  scenarios  or 
working hypotheses. 
In  any  event,  the  stress  test  also  provides  positive  results  for  the  Spanish  banking  sector 
which, in virtually all cases, exceeds fairly comfortably the minimum capital thresholds set. 
Only one bank evidenced a very small capital shortfall as at 31 December 2013, and this has 
now been more than covered following the capital increase made by the bank in the first half 
of 2014, which gives it a solvency level in line with the sector average. 
Accordingly,  Spanish  banks  may  be  said  to  have  comfortably  passed  the  test,  evidencing 
both  high  quality  of  disclosed  financial  information  and  considerable  resilience  to  adverse 
macroeconomic developments. 
Naturally,  there  is  no  room  for  complacency,  and  the  results  should  not  be  taken  as 
conclusive proof of the unquestionable and generalised health of our banks. 
The challenges are manifold, and I shall refer to some of them later. However, it would seem 
fair to say that the exercise has validated the collective efforts made to overcome the huge 
impact  that  the  international  and  European  financial  crisis  and  the  harsh  macroeconomic 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  conditions – linked in part to the collapse of the real estate sector – has had on our banking 
system. 
What has changed, then, since 2012, when Spain signed up to the financial assistance 
programme? 
Naturally,  much  of  the  soundness  gained  by  our  financial  system  reflects  the  general 
improvement in economic conditions over the past two years, stemming from the stabilisation 
of international markets, the institutional changes and the monetary policy measures taken at 
the European level, along with the reforms to our economy’s productive sector. 
At the same time, however, I believe that the reforms in the financial sector have managed to 
significantly mitigate, if not eliminate, some of our banking system’s negative particularities, 
which made it especially  vulnerable to the macroeconomic and financial shocks witnessed 
since the start of the crisis. 
In my view there were four such vulnerabilities. 
1. 
Firstly,  the  lack  of  sufficient  capital  at  that  time  and,  generally,  of  loss-absorption 
capacity in a significant part of the banking sector. Correcting this shortcoming was, 
as you will recall, the main objective of the financial assistance programme. 
The  capital  shortfalls  identified  in  the  2012  stress  tests  were  corrected  by 
recapitalisation measures that combined capital increases at some banks, burden- 
sharing  mechanisms  and  the  contribution  of  public  funds  in  eight  banking  groups 
that were unable to cover their needs by their own means. 
More recently, an appreciable number of banks have taken advantage of improved 
market  conditions  to  issue  various  capital  instruments  (for  an  amount  of  over 
€3.7 billion since the start of the year). Moreover, banks have generally pursued a 
policy  of  containing  dividend  payouts  and  returns  on  deposits,  following  the 
recommendations made by the Banco de España. 
The  second  main flaw  in  our financial  system was  a  disproportionate exposure  to 
assets  with  highly  pro-cyclical  credit  quality  and,  in  particular,  to  the  real  estate 
sector.  This  vulnerability  was  corrected  through  two  main  channels:  by  increasing 
the  volume  of  development  risk  provisioning  required  in  2012  and,  of  course,  by 
establishing SAREB, the external asset management company to which all the real 
estate exposure of the most vulnerable institutions was transferred. 
More  recently,  the  level  of  coverage  of  credit  portfolio  risk  was  reinforced  by  the 
review,  by  the  Banco  de  España,  of  the  criteria  for  classifying  refinanced  and 
restructured loans by risk and, therefore, of the level of provisioning required. 
All these steps, on top of the traditionally conservative provisioning policies followed 
in Spain, reduced the latent risk on balance sheets and increased coverage, and are 
largely responsible for the Spanish banking sector’s generally satisfactory results in 
the asset quality review. 
The  third  flaw  in  our  financial  system  was  the  inappropriate  corporate  regime 
governing  the  savings  banks,  which  came  to  account  for  almost  half  the  Spanish 
banking sector. 
If  the  crisis  has  shown  us  anything  it  is  that,  despite  the  good  management 
performance  at  numerous  savings  banks,  the  former  ownership  regime  of  those 
institutions and, in some cases, their reliance on political power, created risks that 
hindered their proper management. The successive reform measures taken, and in 
particular the legislation on savings banks and bank foundations enacted last year, 
are a key qualitative change, requiring that former savings banks over a certain size 
be transformed into (ordinary or bank) foundations and that those which maintained 
  2. 
  3. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  4. 
    a significant shareholding in a bank have sufficient incentive to waive control of the 
bank  and  meet,  in  any  event,  certain  conditions  to  ensure  they  are  professionally 
and independently managed. 
I take this opportunity to confirm that in the next few days the Banco de España will 
be  issuing,  for  public  consultation,  a  draft  circular  which  implements  the  above-
mentioned legislation and sets out in detail some of the requirements that the bank 
foundations will have to satisfy. 
The  fourth  and  last  main  flaw  in  the  Spanish  banking  system  was  its  surplus 
capacity, as a result of the tremendous growth in loan demand during Spain’s long 
period of economic expansion. In the present setting of ongoing deleveraging of the 
non-financial  private  sector,  mounting  regulatory  pressure  and  narrow  interest 
margins, re-sizing of the industry was essential. 
Much of this re-sizing has come on the back of the intense process of rationalising 
the balance sheets of the banks that received public support, in accordance with the 
conditions laid down in the restructuring and resolution plans approved by the Banco 
de España and the European Commission. 
Moreover,  the  concentration  processes  involving  the  integration  of  some  of  these 
institutions into other bank groups (for example, Caja 3 in Ibercaja, Banco Gallego 
with  Banco  de  Sabadell,  Banco  de  Valencia  with  Caixabank,  CEISS  with  Unicaja 
and,  most  recently,  Catalunya  Banc  with  BBVA),  added  to  those  completed 
previously, have reduced the number of bank groups in Spain by more than 30 in 
recent years. 
Accordingly, the reform of the Spanish financial system may be said not only to have 
restored stability, but also to have placed the banking sector in general back onto a 
normal footing, through the recapitalisation and consolidation processes undertaken, 
the clean-up of balance sheets and the reform of the savings banks. 
Upcoming challenges 
Nevertheless, however positive this return to normal – which has now been evidenced by the 
tests  conducted  in  the  run-up  to  the  SSM  –  has  been,  especially  following  the  turmoil 
experienced, there is no respite, as there are major challenges ahead for Spain’s banks, as 
there are for the banks of our European partners. 
In  particular,  banks  will  have  to  learn  to  live  with  the  considerable  increase  in  regulatory 
demands. These will arise especially from the imminent entry into force of the liquidity and 
provisioning  requirements  included  in  the  Basel  III  Accord,  and  from  the  foreseeable 
introduction  of  additional  measures,  such  as  those  that  will  demand  separation  in  some 
cases  between  the  investment  banking  business  (proprietary  trading,  market-making,  etc.) 
and the traditional banking business, or that will require banks to have liabilities available that 
may be converted into equity in the event of resolution. At the same time, greater restrictions 
can  be  expected  on  the  admittance  of  internal  asset  risk  assessment  models  when  they 
represent savings in regulatory capital. 
In turn, within the framework of the SSM, work can be expected to begin to try to harmonise 
the  regulatory  differences  that  persist  (for  example,  in  the  calendars  for  application  of  the 
capital  deductions  established  in  Basel  III)  as  well  as  supervisory  practices  (for  example, 
relating to the approval of internal risk assessment models). Insofar as greater harmonisation 
can  be  expected  to  be  conducive  to  stricter  supervisory  practices,  in  each  area  the  new 
supervisory framework will generally tend to raise the bar for all European banks. 
Hence, in order to adapt to the new regulatory and supervisory environment, many banks will 
need  to  make  further  efforts  to  strengthen  their  own  funds.  Moreover,  this  will  have  to  be 
done against a complicated macroeconomic backdrop in Europe, where economic conditions 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  are  still  prone  to  vulnerability  and  interest  rates  remain  very  low,  acting  as  a  brake  on 
improvements  in  the  quality  of  loanable  assets,  growth  in  lending  and  recovery  in  interest 
margins. 
That  said,  at  the  Banco  de  España  we  are  convinced  that  Spain’s  banks  will  successfully 
adapt to all these challenges, adjusting where necessary their business strategies, improving 
where possible their efficiency levels and harnessing any opportunities the market may offer 
to continue to bolster their balance sheets in keeping with the new demands. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
