  Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Sukuk development and financial stability 
Speech  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia  (Bank  Negara 
Malaysia), at 10th World Islamic Economic Forum (WIEF) “Sukuk Development and Financial 
Stability”, Dubai, 28 October 2014. 
 It is my great pleasure to be here in Dubai at this World Islamic Economic Forum 2014 to 
speak  at  this  dialogue  session  on  the  potential  of  the  sukuk  market  and  its  role  in  the 
economic  development  process  and  in  contributing  towards  financial  stability.  This  recent 
decade has witnessed the accelerated development of the global sukuk market. The global 
sukuk market which has now reached USD$270 billion outstanding is evolving to become a 
distinct  platform  for  fostering  greater  international  economic  and  financial  linkages.  The 
success  of  the  sukuk  market  reflects  its  ability  to  meet  the  changing  and  differentiated 
demands  of  the  modern  economy,  to  develop  innovative  and  cutting  edge  structures  and 
products, and to achieve such issuances at competitive pricing. 
The  sukuk  market  has  drawn  increasing  interest  from  sovereigns,  multilateral  institutions, 
multinational  and  national  corporations  both  from  developed  and  emerging  economies  to 
finance investments in a  wide range of economic activities and development projects. The 
geographical  reach  of  the  sukuk  market  has  also  become  more  extensive,  with  the  global 
sukuk outstanding now being domiciled in more than 20 countries, while the investor base 
that spans from Asia, the Middle East and Europe. In addition to issuances in international 
reserve currencies that includes the US Dollar, the British Pound and Euro, more recently in 
Malaysia has been the issuance of sukuk in Renminbi. 
For the investors, the sukuk offers the diversification into multiple asset classes and different 
techniques used to structure medium to long term instruments. Given that the sukuk is based 
on underlying assets, it discourages over-exposure of the financing beyond the value of the 
underlying assets. Issuers are thus discouraged from leveraging in excess of the asset value. 
The  prospect  of  over-indebtedness  and  its  consequences  on  financial  stability  are  thus 
reduced.  There  is  also  potential  for  direct  participation  of  investors  in  the  project,  thereby 
granting investors beneficial ownership in the underlying assets, with the rights to receive a 
share  of  profits  or  rental  income  from  the  underlying  asset  of  the  sukuk  while  taking  the 
associated risk of such ownership. 
The sovereign sukuk is generally the first inroad into Shariah compliant funding in the capital 
market, enabling the creation of reference prices over time, to which private sector entities 
can benchmark their fund raising activities. Governments have for the most part, remained 
the most active issuers in the history of the global sukuk market with sovereign issuances 
accounting for more than 80 percent of the global sukuk issuances. This recent few years 
has  also  seen  a  number  of  jurisdictions  in  developed  economies  strengthening their  legal, 
regulatory and governance framework to facilitate such sukuk issuances. 
Going forward,  the financing  requirements for  economic  development  are  envisaged  to  be 
massive,  particularly  for  emerging  and  developing  economies  in  the  Asian  and  Middle 
Eastern regions that are seeking huge amounts of capital to fund new infrastructure and to 
support  economic  development.  Given  the  sheer  size  of  these  projects,  equity  and 
government budgets cannot be the only source of financing for this next phase of economic 
growth  and  industrialisation  in  our  regions.  The  sukuk  market  has  become  a  potentially 
important new source of funding for such long term projects. In the recent decade, a total of 
US$95 billion of infrastructure sukuk has been issued by more than 10 different countries. In 
Asia, it is estimated that a funding of US$8.3 trillion is required until 2020 for infrastructure 
projects, while the funding requirements in the Middle East are estimated to be US$2 trillion 
over the same period. Developing economies in Africa have also already begun its entry into 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  the  sukuk  market for  such  infrastructure financing  with  some  having  put  in  place  the  legal 
groundwork for such sukuk issuances. 
However,  low  sovereign  ratings  have  limited  the  ability  of  certain  high-growth  developing 
countries to source such funding, despite being rich in natural resources. Countries that are 
rich in natural resources may however, pledge these resources for such issuance. Funding 
may thus be secured arising from the securitisation of such assets. Given the recourse to the 
asset by investors, it provides the incentive for disciplined and appropriate governance of the 
management of the project. Additionally, multilateral development banks may also facilitate 
this process by providing credit guarantees to these countries to reduce the financing cost 
and improve the quality of the sukuk issuances. On this front, multilateral development banks 
such  as  The  Islamic  Development  Bank  (IDB)  Group  and  The  Asian  Development  Bank 
(ADB) commenced initiatives to support member countries to leverage on Islamic finance for 
sourcing  of  funds,  through  the  provision  of  advisory  services,  capacity  development  and 
technical assistance. 
Allow me to now share Malaysia’s experience in the development of the sukuk market in our 
Islamic finance marketplace. The Islamic capital market in Malaysia has been systematically 
developed to ensure accessibility whilst ensuring the protection of investors and efficiency in 
the intermediation process. The initiatives to develop the market are also strongly backed by 
the  legal  and  Shariah  framework  which  is  further  supported  by  a  robust  financial 
infrastructure, including the settlement and bond information system that enables Malaysia to 
provide a complete sukuk issuance and trading platform. 
Since the first sukuk issuance in 1990 by a multinational corporation in Malaysia, the sukuk 
outstanding  in  the  Malaysian  marketplace  is  now  US$158  billion.  In  2002,  the  Malaysian 
government  issued  its  inaugural  global  sovereign  sukuk,  raising  US$600  million,  which 
became  an  international  benchmark  for  the  issuance  of  global  sovereign  sukuk.  The 
marketplace  has  now  been  liberalised  to  allow  for  multilateral  financial  institutions, 
multinational and national corporations from other jurisdictions to issue both ringgit and non-
ringgit denominated sukuk in our sukuk market with increasing foreign investor participation 
in such issuances 
The  sukuk  market  in  Malaysia  has  seen  wide  ranging  innovative  structures  and  a  greater 
diversity in the type and maturity of the sukuk. A landmark issuance is the US$750 million 
exchangeable  sukuk  Musyarakah  in  2006  by  Khazanah,  the  government’s  investment 
corporation  for  the  purpose  of  selling  a  stake  in  Telekom  Malaysia.  It  marked  the  first 
issuance of its kind, incorporating full convertibility features common to conventional equity-
linked  transactions.  A  further  notable  issuance  was  the  pioneering  retail  exchange-traded 
sukuk to raise funds for a transportation project that allowed retail investors the opportunity to 
have direct access to the sukuk and thus a stake in a massive infrastructure development in 
the country, therefore broadening the range of low-risk investment products available to such 
investors. In terms of maturity, the ringgit sukuk market has seen issuances of maturities to 
30  years  which  were  well  received  by  the  financial  market.  Regular  sukuk  issuances  with 
different maturities by the Malaysian government has also created a benchmark yield curve 
for market reference, of which is complimented by the establishment of a number of indices 
for  non-ringgit  and  ringgit  denominated  sukuk  that  serve  as  benchmarks  to  track  the 
performance  of  sukuk.  These  initiatives  have  progressively  contributed  towards  creating  a 
vibrant secondary sukuk market in Malaysia, with increased depth and liquidity. 
In  complementing  the  sukuk  market  as  a  source  for  fund  raising,  also  being  explored  are 
other funding channels to assist small and medium enterprises, new growth industries and 
entrepreneurs  that  have  limited  access  to  the  sukuk  market.  A  multi-bank  investment 
platform is now being developed for the effective matching of funds from potential investors 
with targeted industries and ventures in the real sector. Foreign Islamic financial institutions 
and  investors  also  stand  to  benefit  from  this  platform,  with  the  offering  of  multi-currency 
financing  options  for  foreign  projects.  The  platform  facilitates  Islamic  banks  to  perform 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  investment intermediation functions. It enhances further the intermediation role of the Islamic 
banking institutions to also function as an investment intermediary. 
In  an  increasingly  internationalised  global  financial  marketplace  that  has  generated 
significant cross-border flows, one of the requirements as we advance forward is the need for 
more  tradeable  cross-border  Islamic  financial  instruments  that  can  cater  to  the  different 
profiling of investors’ risk appetites. The issuance of the short-term sukuk by the International 
Islamic  Liquidity  Management  Corporation  (IILM)  is  a  breakthrough  in  innovation  towards 
increasing  cross-border  liquidity  flows  that  could  potentially  enhance  financial  stability  and 
the efficient functioning of the Islamic financial markets. 
Let  me  conclude  my  remarks.  There  is  clear  indication  of  the  growing  relevance  and 
importance of the sukuk market, with the growing interest from both emerging and developed 
jurisdictions and the strategic approaches taken to diversify the funding sources through the 
sukuk market. The overall direction and potential of the global sukuk market are certainly well 
recognised,  particularly  in  its  role  in  contributing  towards  greater  economic  development. 
There is significant potential for the sukuk, in particular to fund infrastructure projects. This is 
particularly relevant for the GCC, African and Asian regions given the infrastructure needs 
going forward. This would contribute towards building deeper and more liquid, efficient and 
effective global sukuk market. The dynamism of the sukuk market also contributes towards 
strengthening financial stability and in facilitating the expansion of inter-regional investment 
flows. As we move towards increasing this internationalisation of Islamic finance, and thus 
towards greater global financial integration, it will contribute towards a global growth process 
and financial stability that will be mutually reinforcing. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
