  Glenn Stevens: Economic possibilities 
Address by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the Committee 
for  Economic  Development  of  Australia  (CEDA)  Annual  Dinner,  Melbourne,  18  November 
2014. 
 I thank Elliott James for assistance in preparing these remarks 
Thank you again for inviting me to address CEDA’s Annual Dinner. Tonight marks the fifth 
time I have done so, and it continues a long tradition. 
My  first  venture  to  your  gathering  in  2006  talked  about  the  role  of  finance  in  economic 
development. An important part of the story was that, through history, financial development 
and  innovation  went  hand  in  hand  with  the  extraordinary  growth  in  living  standards  that 
flowed  from  the  industrial  revolution.  Another  part  was  that  financial  development  did  not 
come without its risks, which on various occasions in history had materialised in damaging, 
or even devastating, fashion. In 2006 we were talking, among other things, about the rise in 
debt of Australian households and the various risks that might accompany that. We had had 
a  “stress  test”  focused  on  such  issues,  conducted  as  part  of  the  International  Monetary 
Fund’s Financial Sector Assessment Program. The results had been pretty good actually, but 
we were not sure how reassured we should be by them. And we talked about an increase in 
risk-taking  in  certain  parts  of  the  corporate  sector  that  was  occurring  at  the  time,  and 
wondered how that would all turn out. 
We didn’t have to wait long for answers to those questions. The next time I came to CEDA in 
2008  the  global  financial  crisis  had  erupted  and  the  global  economy  and  financial  system 
were  facing  their  darkest  moments  since  the  1930s.  The  G20  Leaders  had  just  met  in 
Washington and taken the first steps towards putting the global financial system back on a 
sound footing. 
By then economic growth in Australia had already begun to moderate, but we feared a much 
more significant slowing could be in prospect. Confidence was shaken and, understandably, 
households  and  businesses  became much more  cautious  about spending,  taking  on more 
debt, or investing in a new process or idea. The deteriorating global outlook also led to large 
declines in asset prices and the prices of commodities important for Australia. The feeling at 
the time was that the terms of trade, which had risen substantially as prices for minerals and 
energy had reached very high levels, had probably peaked. The falling terms of trade were 
expected to subtract noticeably from growth in national income over the subsequent period. 
It’s  a  matter  of  record  that,  due  to  a  combination  of  factors,  Australia’s  economy  and  its 
financial  system  came  through  that  real-life  “stress  test”  remarkably  well,  all  things 
considered. And, as it turned out, the boom in our terms of trade had further – a lot further – 
to run. 
By the time of the 2010 dinner, it was time to introduce this chart, which has been a feature 
of my presentations since then. The terms of trade had just broken through the peak of two 
years  earlier  and,  on  a  five-year  moving  average  basis,  were  at  their  highest  level  since 
Federation (Graph 1). Our assumption was that the terms of trade would probably peak that 
year, in 2010, before declining steadily over the next few years. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 Graph 1 
 Updating the chart two years later, that assumption was shown to be somewhat pessimistic. 
The  terms  of  trade  peaked  in  September  2011,  about  12  per  cent  higher  than  we  had 
previously forecast and 12 months later (Graph 2). The chart was by now sporting a decade-
long average, to emphasise not just the level of the terms of trade but the persistence of the 
episode – even though we were not assuming it was “permanent”. 
 Graph 2 
The  terms  of  trade  had,  however,  finally  started  to  decline.  It  has  been  a  standard 
assumption since then that they would fall further. 
And so they have. In the latest version of the chart, the terms of trade have fallen by about 
13 per cent since two years ago and by 22 per cent since their peak (Graph 3). As additional 
 2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  supply  of  commodities  comes  on  line  (including  particularly  from  Australia)  and  demand 
grows perhaps more slowly than it has until recently, our best guess is that the terms of trade 
will  fall  further  but  remain  at  a  level  well  above  the  standard  of  the  past  century.  But  of 
course, as this history amply demonstrates, such forecasts – all economic forecasts – have a 
wide range of uncertainty. This is something the Bank has emphasised more strongly over 
the past couple of years in our published material. 
Graph 3 
The increase in the terms of trade prompted a surge in investment to increase supply of the 
commodities  that  were  now  commanding  very  high  prices.  Two  years  ago  we  expected 
capital expenditure by resources firms to peak at about 8 per cent of GDP and then decline. 
This updated chart shows what an extraordinary period of investment this was (Graph 4). 
 Graph 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  The peak has been reached and mining investment has since declined to about 7 per cent of 
GDP. The detailed information we receive from liaison suggests that this decline has quite a 
long way to go yet, though there are still some large projects ongoing in the gas sector that 
will hold investment for a few years at what would once have been seen as very high levels. 
As the expansionary effect of very high levels of mining investment is unwound, even if only 
partly,  other  sources  of  demand  will  need  to  play  a  stronger  part  in  driving  growth  in  the 
economy. It’s very clear that growth in export volumes for resources is very strong. Indeed, 
the contribution of “net exports” to growth in real GDP has over the past year or two been the 
largest for more than a decade.  
Even so, we need stronger growth outside the resources sector. After several years of quite 
subdued growth, we estimate that non-mining activity has picked up some speed over the 
past year (Graph 5).1 But it would be good to see some further strength here, as the decline 
in mining investment activity continues. There are sufficient spare labour resources such that 
we could probably enjoy a couple of years of non-mining sector growth somewhat above its 
trend rate before we needed to worry too much about serious inflation pressure. The non-
resource traded sector could contribute to such growth. The decline in the exchange rate will 
be  of  some  help  here,  but  the  currency  remains  above  most  estimates  of  its  fundamental 
value, particularly given the further declines in key commodity prices in recent months. An 
exchange rate more in line with fundamentals would be a helpful contributor to a balanced 
growth outcome.  
Graph 5 
 As for domestic sources of demand, an obvious contributor is the set of forces at work in the 
housing sector. Investment in new and existing dwellings is rising. It ought to be possible, if 
we are being sensible both on the demand management side and the supply side, for this to 
go further yet and, more importantly, for the level of activity to stay high for longer than the 
average cyclical experience. A high level of construction, maintained for a longer period of 
time,  is  vastly  preferable  to  a  very  sharp  boom  and  bust  cycle.  That  alternative  outcome 
might give us a higher peak in the near term, but then a slump in the housing sector at a time 
when the fall in mining investment is still occurring. A sustained period of strong construction 
will be more helpful from the point of view of encouraging growth in non-mining activity – and 
                                                
1  Estimating  non-mining  activity  requires  an  estimate  of  imports  used  in  mining  activity.  This  is  a  rather 
imprecise exercise and so the estimates for non-mining activity should be considered as very approximate. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  also,  surely,  from  a  wider  perspective:  housing  our  growing  population  in  an  affordable 
manner. 
Considerations  such  as  these  are  among  the  reasons  we  ought  to  take  an  interest  in 
developments  in  dwelling  prices,  the  flow  of  credit  towards  housing  purchases,  and  the 
prudence  with  which  these  funds  are  advanced.2  It  is  perhaps  opportune  to  offer  a  few 
observations on this topic. 
Having fallen in late 2010 and 2011, dwelling prices have since risen, with the median price 
across the country up by around $100 000 – about 18 per cent – since the low point. Prices 
have risen in all capitals, with a fair degree of variation: the smallest increase has been in 
Canberra, at about 6 per cent, and the largest in Sydney, at 28 per cent. 
Credit outstanding to households in total is rising at about 6–7 per cent per year. I see no 
particular  concern  with  that.  When  we  turn  to  the  rate  of  growth  of  credit  to  investors  in 
particular,  we  see  that  it  has  picked  up  to  about  10  per  cent  per  annum  over  the  past six 
months, with investors accounting for almost half of the flow of new credit. 
It is not clear whether this acceleration will continue or abate. It is not clear whether price 
increases will continue or abate. Furthermore, it is not to be assumed that investor activity is 
problematic, per se. A proportion of the investor transactions are financing additions to the 
stock of dwellings, which is helpful. It can also be observed that a bit more of the “animal 
spirits”  evident  in  the  housing  market  would  be  welcome  in  some  other  sectors  of  the 
economy. 
Nor,  let  me  be  clear,  have  we  seen  these  dynamics,  thus  far,  as  an  immediate  threat  to 
financial stability. The Bank’s most recent Financial Stability Review made that clear. 
So we don’t just assume that all this is a terrible problem. By the same token, after all we 
have seen around the world over the past decade, it is surely imprudent not to question the 
comfortable assumption that it is all entirely benign. A situation where: 
• 
prices have already risen considerably in the two largest cities (where about a third 
of our population live) 
prices are rising, at present, faster than income by a noticeable margin, and 
an important area of credit growth has picked up to double-digit rates 
• 
• 
should  prompt  a  reasonable  observer  to  ask  the  question  whether  some  people  might  be 
starting to get just a little overexcited. Such an observer might want to satisfy themselves that 
lending standards are being maintained. And they might contemplate whether some suitably 
calibrated and focused action to help ensure sound standards, and that might lean into the 
price dynamic, may be appropriate. That is the background to the much publicised comment 
that the Bank was working with other agencies to see what more could be done on lending 
standards. 
Let’s be clear what this is not about. It is not an attempt to restrain construction activity. On 
the  contrary,  it  is  an  attempt  to  stretch  out  the  upswing.  Nor  is  it  a  return  to  widespread 
attempts  to  restrict  lending  via  direct  controls. That  era, that  some  of  us  remember  all  too 
well, was one in which the price of credit was simply too low and credit growth too high all 
round.  We  don’t  have  that  problem  at  present.  That  growth  of  credit  to  many  borrowers 
                                                
2  The  Reserve  Bank  does  not  take  a  doctrinaire  view  of  the  “correct”  level  of  house  prices.  The  endless 
discussion  about  whether  or  not  the  level  of  prices  constitutes,  at  any  one  time,  a  “bubble”  is  not  very 
productive. We can observe that, for more than a decade, the level of prices relative to disposable income has 
been noticeably higher than it used to be, and not just in Australia. If that is a bubble, it is a remarkably long-
lived and widespread one. But even if we lose no time arguing over that question, it is still the fact that prices 
go up AND down, and that these trends matter for the economy. If we are interested in strong and steady 
growth, we have an interest in dwelling prices and indeed all asset prices.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  remains moderate suggests that the overall price of credit is not too low. In fact the level of 
interest  rates,  although  very  low,  is  well  warranted  on  macroeconomic  grounds.  The 
economy has spare capacity. Inflation is well under control and is likely to remain so over the 
next couple of years. In such circumstances, monetary policy should be accommodative and, 
on  present  indications,  is  likely  to  be  that  way  for  some  time  yet.  But  for  accommodative 
monetary  policy  to  support  the  economy  most  effectively  overall,  it’s  helpful  if  pockets  of 
potential over-exuberance don’t get too carried away. 
Turning  from  housing  investment  to  investment  more  generally,  a  more  robust  picture  for 
capital spending outside mining would be part of a further strengthening of growth over time. 
Some of the key ingredients for this are in place. To date, there are some promising signs of 
stronger intentions, but not so much in the way of convincing evidence of actual commitment 
yet.  That’s  often  the  way  it  is  at  this  point  of  the  cycle.  Firms  wait  for  more  evidence  of 
stronger demand, but part of the stronger demand will come from them. 
With  respect  to  consumer  demand,  I  should  complete  the  picture  by  showing  an  updated 
version of the relevant chart from last time. In brief, not much has changed. The ratio of debt 
to income remains close to where it has been for some time (Graph 6). It’s rising a little at 
present  because  income  growth  is  a  bit  below  trend.  Household  consumption  growth  has 
picked up to a moderate pace and has actually run ahead of income over the past two years. 
Given that household wealth has risen strongly over that period, and interest rates are low, a 
modest  decline  in  the  saving  rate  is  perhaps  not  surprising  and  indeed  we  think  it  could 
decline a little further in the period ahead.3 As I’ve argued in the past, however, we shouldn’t 
expect consumption to grow consistently and significantly faster than incomes like it did in 
the 1990s and early 2000s, given that the debt load is already substantial. 
Graph 6 
                                                 
3  See  Kent,  C  (2014),  “The  Business  Cycle  in  Australia”,  Address  to  the  Australian  Business  Economists, 
Sydney, 13 November.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Productivity and competency 
When  last  I  was  here  there  were  early  signs  of  a  pick-up  in  productivity  growth,  after  a 
number of years of much slower growth. The most recent data, as measured, confirm that 
labour  productivity  has  now  grown  faster  over  the  past  three  years  than  it  did  on  average 
over  most  of  the  2000s  (Graph  7).  This  is  observable  across  a  wide  range  of  industries 
outside of the utilities and mining sectors, where some unusual forces have been at work. 
Graph 7 
 The  standard  caveats  apply,  of  course,  and  it  is  too  soon  to  draw  strong  conclusions. 
Nonetheless, the evidence is at least consistent with the hypothesis that productivity growth 
is on a better track than it was. 
Business models have been challenged by the substantial change occurring in the structure 
of  the  economy,  itself  a  response  to  changes  in  relative  prices,  in  technology,  the  high 
exchange rate and other forces. The good news is that businesses can respond to that, and 
they are doing so. 
This process will need to continue and, as you will recall, there is the “to do list” set out by 
the  Productivity  Commission.4  But  there  is  also,  I  think,  a  broader  set  of  questions 
increasingly  being  asked,  about  whether  our  overall  business  environment  is  conducive 
enough  to  risk-taking  and  innovation,  and  whether  we  are  doing  enough  to  develop  the 
relevant competencies. 
The questions  would  include  ones  like:  how  easy  is  it  to  start  a  business?  If  the  business 
fails,  as  many  small  ones  do,  is  it  easy  enough  to  try  again?  How  easy  is  it  to  hire 
employees? And to let them go if things don’t work out? The harder it is to do the latter, the 
more difficult it is to do the former. Are the rewards to a scientific/research career sufficient to 
attract  a  share  of  the  best  and  brightest?  What  is  the  role  of  private  sector  support  for 
research  and  development  –  as  distinct  from  our  rather  heavy  reliance  historically  on 
                                                
4  4.  See Banks G (2012), “Productivity Policies: The ‘To Do’ List”, Speech at the Economic and Social Outlook 
at 
Conference, 
http://www.pc.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0009/120312/productivity-policies.pdf.  
Melbourne, 
November. 
“Securing 
Available 
Future”, 
the 
1 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  government  support?  Is  business  itself  doing  enough?  Does  industry  want  to  get  more 
involved in research and developments? Does academia want to let it? Can private finance – 
be it banks, venture capital, “angel investors”, private equity and so on – get more involved in 
supporting  innovation?  Are  the  entrepreneurs  who  would  like  to  receive  such  support 
prepared to submit to the accompanying discipline? 
We  are  talking  about  a  much  broader  set  of  issues  than  just  “competitiveness”  as 
conventionally defined and discussed. We are really coming at the question of whether we 
have  the  competencies,  across  multiple  dimensions,  to  be  effective  in  the  modern  global 
economy. 
It  is  hard  to  evaluate  that.  These  questions  are  not  within  my  area  of  responsibility  or 
competence,  and  I  would  hesitate  to  attempt  a  definitive  answer.  I  note  that  others  more 
qualified than I am have expressed various views and CEDA itself has done some interesting 
work relevant to these matters.5  
But lest it all seem too hard, let me offer one perspective based on something that I have 
observed reasonably closely. Australia has just hosted the G20. Here was something global, 
complex  and  requiring  careful  leadership.  Since we  last  hosted this gathering  in  2006,  the 
scale and complexity have grown almost beyond recognition. These days the Leaders meet 
annually and there are a host of ministerial and other meetings at various levels – around 
60 formal meetings and related seminars in a year. There is the B20, C20, L20, Think 20, 
Youth  20  and  various  other  groups.  All  these  groups  need  to  be  accommodated  and 
engaged.  They  all  have  their  own  agenda,  but  somehow  we  have  to  make  them  come 
together  with  the  G20’s  main  agenda.  At  the  same  time,  the  main  G20  agenda  seriously 
needed  to  be  streamlined  and  focused.  The  G20  needed  to  show  that  it  could  effectively 
meet  the  challenges  of  securing  better  economic  performance  –  “strong,  sustainable  and 
balanced growth”. 
Australia is one of the smaller members of this group by GDP and certainly by population. 
We cannot match the scale of human resources available to larger countries in the various 
workstreams.  We  are  geographically  remote.  We  are  not  powerful  enough  simply  to 
command attention or demand others follow our lead. If we are to be effective, we have to try 
harder  than  the  average  country.  And  it  was  our  job  this  year  to  run  this  unwieldy  body 
effectively. 
The  feedback  I  have  received  from  my  counterparts  has  been  universally  and  strongly 
positive. They judge that the Australian presidency has, by the metrics that count, been very 
successful.  Prodigious  efforts  by  exceptionally  dedicated  people  in  the  public  and  private 
sectors  ensured  improvements to  the  agenda, process,  logistics  and  conduct  of  meetings. 
Substantive  things  have  been  achieved  by  way  of  pro-growth  commitments  that,  if  carried 
through  by  the  various  jurisdictions  over  time,  will  make  a  material  difference  to  wellbeing 
around the world. 
Achieving  all  this  was  costly  in  human  and  financial  resources.  It  required  coordination 
between multiple organisations. It was not on the scale of running the Olympic Games, but it 
was  nonetheless  a  big  deal  and  it  was  done  well.  It  wasn’t  achieved  by  any  effortless 
superiority; it owed to careful preparation, astute use of some of our natural advantages and 
continuous  effort  over  a  long  period.  But  that’s  where  success  always  comes  from,  really. 
The only question is: how badly do we want it? 
                                                
5  See  Chief  Scientist  for  Australia  (2014),  “Senate  Inquiry  Submission  –  Australia’s  Innovation  System”, 
Innovation  System,  23  July.  Available  at 
Submission 
http://www.chiefscientist.gov.au/wp-content/uploads/Chief-Scientist-submission-to-Senate-inquiry-into-
Australias-Innovation-System1.pdf;  and  CEDA  (2013),  “Australia  Adjusting:  Optimising  National  Prosperity”, 
November. Available at http://www.ceda.com.au/media/338287/cedaaustadjusting_web.pdf. 
the  Australian 
to  Senate 
Inquiry 
into 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Responsibility for the G20 now passes to Turkey. We can bask in the glow of success for a 
few weeks and then get on to other matters. The point simply is that this has gone well as a 
result of the determined efforts of a range of people who were clear about what they wanted 
to achieve and who mobilised the necessary resources and effort to get there. 
One other result of Australia’s leadership of the G20 is that the whole issue of infrastructure 
is well and truly on the table. No one doubts the need for infrastructure provision and it has 
clear  economic  attractions.  Spending  on  infrastructure  supports  aggregate  demand  during 
construction but, if done well, also augments the economy’s supply capacity for the long run. 
It is also clear from the various discussions over the past year that there is not a shortage of 
capital  in  global  markets  to  fund  infrastructure  projects.  The  issues  to  be  overcome  don’t 
include  finding  the  money.  They  concern  appropriate  project  selection  criteria,  long-term 
planning, governance, contract design, appropriate risk sharing between public and private 
sectors, pricing usage of the infrastructure and so on. 
There is an opportunity here, including for Australia, to do something of value over the years 
ahead. Of course, we will need to be serious and to put in the effort over an extended period 
– in all the above areas. If we don’t put in that effort, not much actual infrastructure will be 
delivered. But if we are serious, a lot could be achieved. I imagine that the Committee for the 
Economic Development of Australia would be keen to be involved. 
Conclusion 
I have reached the limits of our time this evening. Australia’s economy is continuing to grow, 
moderately.  It  has  been  responding  in  ways  you  would  expect  to  the  remarkable  set  of 
circumstances it has faced over the past decade. There is continuing adjustment ahead and 
doubtless no shortage of challenges. 
But  beyond  these  challenges  of  the  next  couple  of  years,  maximising  our  economic 
possibilities in the modern world requires sustained efforts at adaptation and innovation, at 
doing things better and, perhaps most of all, a willingness to take the occasional risk. I would 
be  confident  that  we  have,  or  can  develop,  the  relevant  capabilities.  The  only  question  is 
whether we are sufficiently determined to succeed in deploying them. 
Bibliography 
Gillitzer  C  and  J  Kearns  (2005),  “Long-term  Patterns  in  Australia’s  Terms  of  Trade”,  RBA 
Research Discussion Paper No 2005–01.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
