  Luis M Linde: Functions of the Bank of Spain in the new European 
context 
Speech  by  Mr  Luis  M  Linde,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Spain,  before  the  Parliamentary 
Committee on Economic Affairs and Competitiveness, Madrid, 25 November 2014. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Allow  me  first to  thank  the  Committee for  Economic  Affairs for  calling me  to report  on the 
organisation and functions of the Banco de España following the start-up on 4 November of 
the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM). 
The  launch  of  the  SSM  naturally  marks  a  deep-seated  change  in  banking  supervision 
procedures and in the distribution of the attendant responsibilities in the euro area countries. 
After  discussing  the  main  characteristics  of  the  SSM,  I  shall  turn  to  how  the  Banco  de 
España  is  affected  in  terms  of  its  competences,  workload,  relationship  to  the  European 
Central Bank, staffing needs and relations with other participating supervisory authorities. But 
first  I  should  like  to  summarise  some  key  figures  relating  to  Banco  de  España  staff  and 
operating expenses compared with other Eurosystem central banks that are participating in 
the new European supervisory arrangements. 
The Banco de España within the framework of the Eurosystem 
As at 1 January 2014, total Banco de España staff numbered 2,652, 4.3% down on 2008. 
84% of its employees work in Madrid, and 16% in the regional branches (of which there are 
15 at present). A significant portion of the staff work outside the Bank, on secondment or on 
special or obligatory leave (i.e. not voluntary leave). Overall, 193 employees are currently in 
this situation. 
Banco de España employees account for 5.6% of total Eurosystem staff. 
Having  regard  to  the  proportion  accounted  for  by  our  employees  in  total  Eurosystem  staff 
(5.6%) and our weight in the capital of the ECB (11.8%), the Banco de España ranks first 
among the euro area central banks, i.e. the ratio of one figure to the other is the lowest in the 
entire  Eurosystem;  and  the  same  applies  if  the  comparison  is  made  not  with  the  share  in 
ECB capital but with the size of the euro area central banks’ balance sheets. 
Moving  from  staff  to  personnel  costs,  the  latter  totalled  €218  million  in  2013,  representing 
0.06% of our total balance sheet, compared with 0.14% in the case of the European Central 
Bank,  which  is  the  same  percentage  as  that  for  the  entire  Eurosystem.  The  Banco  de 
España also ranks first for this ratio (i.e. the lowest proportion) among the euro area central 
banks. 
If we compare operating expenses, i.e. including personnel costs, administrative expenses, 
depreciation  of  tangible  fixed  assets  and  banknote  production,  in  relation  to  the  balance 
sheet total, the proportion for the Banco de España in 2013 was 0.12%, which is also the 
lowest among the group of the six national central banks with the biggest balance sheets in 
the Eurosystem. 
In  short,  on  the  basis  of  these  data  the  Banco  de  España  can  be  said  to  score  highly, 
comparatively speaking, from the standpoint of the efficient use of its resources. 
The  Directorate  General  for  Banking  Supervision  is  the  business  area  in  the  Bank  most 
affected in terms of functions and human resources owing to the start-up of the SSM, though 
it is not alone in this. It had a staff of 416 at the start of 2013, 16% of our total employees, 
373 of whom were managerial staff (222 were bank examiners) and 43 belonging to other 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  areas of professional specialisation. As I shall now explain, it is naturally this area that has 
been and should continue in the future to be the focus of the efforts to adapt to the SSM. 
The functioning of the SSM 
Let me very briefly describe the core characteristics of the SSM. 
The  new  banking  supervisory  authority  has  two  components:  the  European  Central  Bank, 
accommodating the new Supervisory Board, and the national supervisory authorities. 
It makes sense for the SSM to be called a “mechanism” because what is actually involved is 
an  institution  made  up  of  different  interconnecting  cogs  and  wheels.  The  Mechanism  is 
based  on  cooperation  arrangements  entailing  decision-making  by  the  Supervisory  Board 
and,  ultimately,  by  the  ECB  Governing  Council,  which  remains  the  maximum  decision-
making body, and by the national supervisory authorities, which continue to play an essential 
role, since they will provide most of the human and material resources for the Mechanism 
and combine the experience and knowledge of the different national banking systems. 
The  banks  of the  countries  participating  in  the  SSM  have  been  divided  into  two  groups  of 
significant  and  less  significant  institutions. The  ECB  will  exert  “direct  supervision”  over  the 
former;  as  regards  the  latter,  it  merely  assumes  “indirect  supervision”  functions,  as  the 
national authorities will in fact continue to be responsible for their effective supervision. 
A  list  of  120  significant  banking  groups  has  been  drawn  up,  accounting  for  approximately 
85% of euro area bank assets. 15 of these are Spanish groups, representing around 90% of 
the assets of our country’s deposit institutions. It should be borne in mind that when we talk 
about  120  groups,  we  are  referring  to  consolidated  groups;  that  is  to  say,  the  number  of 
individual  banks  is  far  higher.  In  total  there  are  1,244  individual  institutions,  which  is 
essentially explained by the importance of cooperative banks in certain euro area countries, 
in particular France, the Netherlands, Austria and Finland. 
To  directly  supervise  the  significant  banks,  the  ECB  has  created  two  directorate  generals, 
which shall perform the continuous monitoring of the 120 groups. DG I will supervise the 
30  biggest  banks  in  terms  of  balance  sheet  and  activities,  while  DG  II  will  cover  the 
remaining 90 significant banks. However, the supervision of specific aspects or matters, what 
is known as on-site inspection, will be carried out by different teams. The ECB has thus 
adopted  a  different  model  to  that  place  at  the  Banco  de  España  to  date:  functionally 
separating the continuous monitoring of banks and inspection visits. 
The centrepiece of the supervision of significant banks will be the Joint Supervisory Teams, 
responsible  for  the  day-to-day  oversight  of  these  banks.  These  teams  will  be  made  up  of 
specialists  from  the  ECB  and  from  the  national  authorities,  under  the  leadership  of  a 
coordinator  designated  by  the  ECB,  and  a  sub-coordinator  designated  by  the  national 
supervisor.  Approximately  75%  of  those  making  up  the  teams  will  be  drawn  from  and 
designated by the national supervisors; in the case of Spanish banks, it will of course be staff 
from the Banco de España. 
Inspection visits to significant banks, what is known as on-site inspection, will continue to be 
conducted by the national authorities, and their results will be passed onto the ECB for the 
adoption of the appropriate measures. 
With  regard  to  the  less  significant  banks,  national  authorities  will  continue  to  directly 
supervise them as they have to date. Over 3,600 banks across the euro area are involved 
here.  The  ECB  will  define  common  practices  and  criteria,  it  will  monitor  the  actions  and 
position of these banks and it will always be entitled, if it considers it necessary, to re-claim 
direct supervision over any of these banks. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
The competences and responsibilities of the Banco de España in the framework of the 
new Mechanism 
I would now like to address the competences and responsibilities of the Banco de España, 
as a national supervisor, under the new Mechanism. 
First, with regard to significant Spanish banks, the Banco de España, in addition to providing 
its experience and most of the staff of the joint supervisory teams, will shoulder the weight of 
on-site inspections, it will participate in the preparation of all the decisions to be adopted by 
the ECB Supervisory Board and it will be active in the exercise of its sanctioning powers. 
As regards the sanctioning regime, it should be stressed that the European Central Bank will 
be  responsible  for  imposing  sanctions,  provided  that  three  requirements  are  met:  that  the 
sanction is imposed on the credit institution, i.e. on the legal person; that it stems from non-
compliance with directly applicable European Union legal rules; and that the sanctions are of 
a  pecuniary  nature.  In  the  remaining  cases,  power  will  continue  to  be  exercised  by  the 
national supervisory authorities, without prejudice to the ECB being able to demand that the 
appropriate proceedings be initiated. 
Second,  as  stated,  the  Banco  de  España  will  continue  to  be  fully  responsible  for  the 
supervision of the 81 credit institutions deemed less significant. 
Third, the entry into force of the Mechanism will entail the need to conduct new activities and 
develop  new  functions:  the  monitoring  of  the  banking  systems  of  the  remaining  euro  area 
countries,  which  is  needed  to  underpin  the  Banco  de  España’s  place  on  the  Supervisory 
Board;  participation  in  the  definition  of  the  Mechanism’s  supervisory  policies  and  in  the 
administrative  procedures  in  relation  to  the  significant  banks;  and  also  collaboration  in  the 
performance  of  other  horizontal  and  specialised  supervisory  functions  developed  by  the 
SSM. 
Fourth, there are certain areas of banking activity whose supervision will not be assumed by 
the Mechanism, but will continue to be within the remit of the national authorities. The Banco 
de  España  will  thus  continue  to  exercise  supervisory  powers  in  the  areas  of  money 
laundering prevention, consumer protection and, partly, in the oversight of financial markets. 
It will also retain the supervision of banking foundations within its sphere of competence, that 
is to say having regard to regional governments. 
Fifth, the Banco de España, like the other national supervisory authorities participating in the 
SSM, fully retains its supervisory powers over non-bank financial institutions, other financial 
institutions and entities related to the financial sector such as payment institutions, electronic 
money  institutions,  credit  financial  intermediaries,  mutual  guarantee  companies,  currency-
exchange bureaux and appraisal companies. 
In  short,  with  the  launch  of  the  SSM,  the  main  centre  of  supervisory  decision-making  on 
significant Spanish banks has passed from the Banco de España to the ECB. But this does 
not mean that there are no important tasks for the Banco de España – or other participating 
countries’  national  supervisors  –  to  perform  in  the  SSM,  in  addition  to  the  functions  that 
remain  intact  as  they  are  not  assumed  –  or  are  assumed  only  partially  or  in  exceptional 
circumstances – by the SSM. 
In recent months there has been talk of the Banco de España becoming devoid of its powers. 
This reflects a lack of knowledge or misunderstanding of how the SSM is organised and how 
it will operate and is reminiscent, in a sense, of the talk afoot when Monetary Union came 
into being and the ECB assumed responsibility for the main monetary policy decisions. 
The  model  then  adopted  entailed  full  decentralisation  of  monetary  policy  implementation. 
This meant that it relied on the national central banks for its implementation (in fact, credit 
and  deposit  institutions  have  no  direct  operational  relationship  with  the  ECB)  and  that  in 
practice,  although  the  ECB  assumed  decision-making  powers,  there  was  no  decrease  in 
either the workload or the staffing needs of the national central banks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Albeit for different reasons, the start-up of the SSM is expected to have a similar impact on 
workload and staffing needs at the Banco de España and at the other national supervisory 
authorities. 
 In  any  event,  the  creation  of  the  SSM  poses  an  organisational  challenge  for  the  national 
authorities. Since 2013, and in addition, naturally, to our contribution to the preparatory work, 
we have been working hard at the Banco de España in two directions: 
a) 
b) 
first, to adapt our structure to the new needs; and 
second,  to  encourage  the  presence  of  experts  from  the  Banco  de  España  at  the 
ECB. 
A few  weeks  ago  a  reform  of  the  Directorate  General  Banking  Supervision  was  approved, 
designed to create a structure that mirrors that of the ECB, to facilitate interaction between 
the two authorities and achieve efficient management of resources. 
The new organisation replicates the arrangements envisaged by the ECB: two departments 
will be responsible for ongoing supervision of the significant banks, a third will be responsible 
for  the  less  significant  banks,  and  a  fourth  will  perform  the  so-called  “horizontal”  tasks,  in 
addition to on-site inspections of the significant banks. 
To underpin the position of the Banco de España’s representatives on the SSM’s governing 
bodies, a new SSM Coordination Service was created in February , which will be responsible 
for analysing and monitoring non-Spanish significant banks. 
Regarding the Spanish presence in the SSM, our experts have been very successful in the 
ECB  selection  processes,  both  at  senior  management  and  junior  analyst  levels,  which 
testifies to their excellent qualifications and vast experience. 
One of the SSM’s four directors general and two of its seven deputy directors general are 
from  the  Banco  de  España,  while  by  the  end  of  this  year  almost  100  Spanish  experts  will 
have joined the SSM as junior analysts or managers, almost all of them from the Banco de 
España.  Of  the  102  management  posts  corresponding  to  the  SSM’s  top  six  management 
levels (which include directors general, deputy directors general, directors, heads of division, 
deputy heads of division and head of section), 19 are from the Banco de España, making it 
the national supervisory authority that has supplied the most managers. 
Naturally, as a result, we have had to fill the gaps left by the staff who have moved to the 
ECB. 
On our estimates, the target staffing level in the Directorate General Banking Supervision in 
order to meet the needs of the new supervisory model is approximately 440, which is virtually 
the same as before the launch of the SSM. The Banco de España has already set in motion 
the selection and hiring processes to fill these vacancies. 
To conclude, I would like to sum up my address in three points. 
First,  the  creation  of  the  Banking  Union  is,  without  doubt,  the  most  ambitious  European 
project undertaken since the launch of Economic and Monetary Union. It is the first step in a 
new  phase  of  economic  integration,  establishing  a  more  robust  institutional  and  regulatory 
framework that will help restore confidence in banks, safeguard financial stability and lay the 
foundations for more stable economic growth. 
Second, the new model, which relies to a great extent on national supervisors, will not entail 
a decrease in the workload or, therefore, in the staffing needs of the participating countries’ 
authorities, or in the importance of their work. This will also be the case for the Banco de 
España. 
And  third,  the  Banco  de  España  has  already  made  the  necessary  changes  in  the 
organisation  of  the  Directorate  General  Banking  Supervision,  to  adapt  its  structure  to  the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  needs and arrangements that the SSM requires. Moreover, it has also begun to implement 
the changes needed in its working methods and systems in order to contribute, as effectively 
as possible, to the operation of the euro area’s new supervisory structure. But we are still at 
the early, founding stages of the SSM. And foreseeably for some time, even for some years, 
adjustments  and  changes  will  have  to  be  made  to  the  different  components  of  our 
supervisory  arrangements,  both  in  terms  of  organisation  and  of  working  procedures  and 
staffing levels. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
