  Patrick Honohan: Central banking boundaries 
Address by Mr Patrick Honohan, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, to the University 
College Dublin Economics Society, Dublin, 6 October 2014. 
 Introduction 
With a single currency, a single monetary policy and, now, a single system for supervising 
key banks, what role (it could be asked) is left for a national central bank operating within the 
Eurosystem? The answer is, actually, quite a lot. True, while the single currency, and now 
the single supervisory mechanism, also play a fundamental role in delivering on the mission 
slogan  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland  of  ‘safeguarding  stability,  protecting  consumers’  the 
Central Bank of Ireland retains many functions to itself that also play a significant part in this. 
The euro 
Getting the euro area inflation rate back up closer to 2 per cent, in line with the medium term 
target of the European Central Bank (ECB) is technically quite a tricky challenge. Given that 
interest  rates  are  already  as  low  as  they  can  go,  the  ECB  has,  like  the  Fed,  the  Bank  of 
England and the Bank of Japan, been navigating uncharted waters which, in the European 
context, are known to contain hidden shoals and quick sands. From Dublin, we try to bring a 
distinctive  flavour  to  this  difficult  policy  debate  and  contribute  to  influencing  the  design  of 
novel instruments and programmes. 
The SSM 
Ensuring that the Irish banks could stay open and provide the essential payments and short-
term credit functions while they undertook urgent running repairs has been a big task for us 
at  the  Central  Bank  over  the  past  number  of  years.  The  banks  needed  to  re-assess  their 
entire risk management functions and our role as prudential supervisor has been to assess 
and  challenge  their  effectiveness  in  doing  this.  In  addition  to  the  application  of  standard 
international  rules  and  practices,  we  have  felt  the  need  to  improvise  additional  intrusive 
engagement with the banks to try to accelerate and improve the speed with which they have 
been processing and dealing with the very large percentage of their loan portfolio which is 
still not fully performing even after six years of crisis and the forced sale to NAMA of some 
€70  billion  of  large  property  loans.  Now  that  job  of  supervising  the  main  banks  from  a 
prudential point of view passes to the new Frankfurt-based Single Supervisory Mechanism 
(SSM),  following  the  completion  later  this  month  of  the  “Comprehensive  Assessment”  of 
capital adequacy. 
The Comprehensive Assessment illustrates the future continuing role in prudential regulation 
of the Central Bank and the relationship with the SSM staff in Frankfurt. The design and rules 
of the Comprehensive Assessment have been decided centrally, but the bulk of the detailed 
work has been managed in the national capitals. 
This pattern of most of the prudential supervision work being done in Ireland, with most of the 
final decisions in Frankfurt, is how things will be for this aspect of our work. There will also be 
some  changes  in  the  way  we  approach  prudential  supervision  of  banks  in  practice,  as  we 
learn lessons from the past five years and also adapt to the supervisory manual adopted by 
the SSM and drawing on the best of practices from each of the existing supervisors around 
Europe. Irish contributions to the system as a whole will continue, as with our initial provision 
of the software PRISM which we developed in the Central Bank of Ireland and have been 
using to systematise our own supervision across the Irish financial sector for the past couple 
of years: we were very pleased when the ECB purchased PRISM from us to use as the initial 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  basis  for  controlling  the  SSM  supervisory  engagement  with  banks  across  the  euro  area 
banking system. 
And  of  course  smaller  banks  will  continue  to  be  supervised  wholly  from  Dublin  (within  the 
overall SSM approach), as will the 400 credit unions, some of which continue to need special 
attention as the sector strengthens and consolidates. 
Irish financial stability 
Despite  the  progressive  centralisation  of  important  parts  of  central  banking  in  Europe 
important tasks remain a national responsibility. Among these is an overall responsibility for 
the  preservation  of  national  financial  stability.  Bubbles  and  other  sources  of  financial 
instability can, as we well know, emerge in the national economy even if not present across 
the euro area as a whole. Interest rate policy is obviously not available as a tool to inhibit the 
growth of a country-specific asset price bubble, so what should be done? 
Actually, an emerging academic consensus among central bankers even outside the context 
of  the  monetary  union  is  that  asset  price  bubbles  and  surges  in  general  consumer  price 
inflation should be dealt with separately, using a wider range of policy tools. If the interest 
rate  is  being  used  to  control  inflation,  then  it  is  not  available  to  dampen  an  asset  price 
bubble:  instead  one  or  more  macro-prudential  tools  should  be  used.  These  can  include  a 
range of instruments outside the toolbox of the Central Bank, including tax policy, but they 
can also include such central banking and regulatory tools as capital adequacy surcharges, 
loan-to-value (LTV) and loan-to-income (LTI) caps for residential mortgages. 
The last two-mentioned instruments are not governed by EU law and are a matter for local 
discretion. Actually, in decades gone by, Irish lenders followed mechanical rules on LTV and 
LTI ratios which seemed to keep them out of trouble. Evidently they are both fairly crude: the 
borrower’s income can change, and an LTV ceiling is less constraining the higher the level of 
the property purchase price. But given how badly banks misjudged risk-management in the 
post-millennial boom in Ireland, it is hard to deny that having a rule constraining LTV and LTI 
could avoid the re-emergence of this kind of problem in the future. Even in the absence of a 
credit-driven  bubble,  there  is  much  to  be  said  for  bringing  back  some  rules  of  this  type, 
limiting the share of their mortgage lending that is at high LTV and LTI rates, now that the 
property  market  has  stopped  falling  and  has  indeed  turned  around  with  a  bit  of  a  bang  in 
Dublin. The use of macroprudential tools is a national responsibility and falls within the remit 
of  the  Central  Bank.  We  have  been  talking  about  this  publicly  for  a  while  and  have  been 
working on developing appropriate measures. We will be announcing tomorrow our intention 
to  introduce  some  measures  along  these  lines  and  further  detail  on  that  will  be  available 
then. 
Consumer protection and running the banks 
Another task which has not migrated to the SSM is consumer protection. We will continue to 
devote  resources  in  this  area  and,  indeed  to  the  extent  some  of  the  special  prudential 
supervisory measures that we introduced in relation to the processing of mortgage arrears 
also conveyed a consumer protection function, as recently confirmed, we will not be reducing 
our engagement with the banks on that front. 
Some  observers  find  it  tempting  to  imagine  the  Central  Bank  centrally  monitoring  and 
directing each distressed mortgage resolution on a case-by-case basis. That is not realistic 
or desirable (and was not even done in the centrally-planned economies of Eastern Europe 
and the Former Soviet Union). 
It’s not desirable for several related reasons. The main reason is the need to assign clear 
responsibilities  close  to  decisions.  Already,  even  though  our  regulations  and  codes  of 
conduct in general prescribe minimum quality standards for the way in which banks deal with 
their  retail  customers  and  do  not  compel  or  ban  specific  products,  we  often  find  bankers 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  their  customers’  circumstances,  and 
hiding behind a fictitious Central Bank rule said to be the reason for what should be, and is, a 
bank’s  own  responsibility.  With  their  sizable  staffs,  the  detailed  knowledge  they  have  –  or 
should  have  –  about 
their  direct  contractual 
involvement,  the  banks  are  the  entities  best-placed  to  design  solutions  for  their  distressed 
mortgage borrowers. 
Instead  the  Central  Bank  has  mandated  standards  that  must  be  satisfied  by  the  banks, 
without  constraining  innovation  regarding  the  design  of  restructuring  solutions.  Different 
banks have tried different mixes of solutions and each has learnt from the others in the slow 
process of correcting an extreme situation. (We have also had since 2006 – last revised in 
2012 – a mandatory Consumer Protection Code covering new lending). 
Some people think that the Central Bank should mandate specific debt relief or forgiveness 
for borrowers. In fact this is not within the Central Bank’s power, nor could it be. Intervention 
into  the  property  rights  of  creditors  is  a  matter  for  legislation  under  the  Constitution  (or 
Government fiscal action – the latter remaining highly unlikely given overall fiscal pressures). 
The  reformed  insolvency  legislation  is  an  example  of  such  intervention,  and  its  enactment 
has helped focus the minds of lenders on accelerating their realistic provision of sustainable 
restructurings or other arrangements for households with unaffordable debts. Where they do 
not or cannot do so, the matter goes to the courts, which tend to operate in a slow process 
with many lengthy adjournments (providing the banks with an additional entity to which they 
can attach blame). 
Perceptible  progress  in  dealing  with  arrears  is  now  undeniable.  But  it  is  still  too  slow 
(Figure 1).  The  persistence  of  chronic  arrears  cases  inhibits  the  ability  of  Government  to 
attract buyers for the banks that have been nationalised and results in higher imposed capital 
requirements than would otherwise be necessary. This problem has not gone away. 
Meanwhile  it  is  noteworthy  that  spreads  on  non-tracker  mortgage  interest  rates  have 
moved higher and higher, not responding positively to the lowering of the ECB policy rate 
from 1.5 per cent in mid-2011 to 0.05 per cent today (Figure 2). (This is not quite visible 
from  the  usual  statistical  data  series  on  aggregate  mortgage  lending  rates  since  some 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  tracker rates – mostly on restructured mortgages – are included in the standard definition for 
that  series).  Admittedly,  despite  this  widening  of  spreads  on  non-tracker  mortgages,  the 
banks  have  not  been  profitable.  Still,  it  is  reasonable  to  ask  whether,  having  under-priced 
lending so badly in the early years of the millennium, they could end up over-pricing it now. 
Ireland is not the only country to have been experiencing widening spreads. In the UK too 
they have moved up since the crisis and, for mortgages, are about as high as here. Spain 
and Italy are other large countries where spreads on small loans, including business loans 
widened appreciably following the crisis, though with some reversal more recently (Figure 3). 
  4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  So,  should  there  be  a  ceiling  on  interest  spreads?  Control  of  retail  interest  rates  by  the 
Central Bank is not provided for in legislation, and I believe it should remain so. This will not 
come  as  a  surprise  to  students  of  economics,  accustomed  to  understanding  the  problems 
that can be caused by preventing the emergence of a market-clearing price. But I think that 
there  is  an  important  political  economy  dimension  here.  If  the  local  banks  are  charging 
unnecessarily high interest rates, that will be an inducement for new entry into lending here, 
and that (reversing the trend of the past few years) would be very welcome and would have 
the effect of bringing both pricing and the quality of banking services to a much better place. 
In  contrast,  aggressive  official  interest  rate  spread  control  would  be  the  clearest  warning 
signal to would-be entrants that they might not be permitted to earn sufficient profits to justify 
the costs of entering. 
Enforcement 
Given that the SSM is overlaid on a tapestry of detailed national legislation, it follows that, 
when  it  comes  to  enforcing  the  banking  regulations  through  ex  post  administrative  actions 
such as fines – whether on banks (or other financial firms) as institutions, or on individuals 
responsible – this remains a national responsibility, and one which we approach with vigour. 
Our enforcement effort not only focuses on banking, but also on insurance, markets and of 
course,  the key  area  of  consumer  regulation.  For  the  past four  years  we  have  operated  a 
separate enforcement directorate at the Central Bank in order to ensure both that such work 
is given sufficient priority and that  it is separate from ongoing supervision. This is an area 
that  calls  for  painstaking  and  meticulous  work  to  build  cases  that  stand  up  to  challenge. 
Some  administrative  cases  have  been  in  preparation  for  years.  The  legal  environment  is 
such  that  the  burden  of  proof  is  very  much  on  us  and  it  is  incumbent  on  us  to  bring 
enforcement cases forward so that the credibility of the regulatory framework is maintained. 
Of course when it comes to criminal matters, investigation and prosecution of most of these 
are the responsibility of the Garda Síochána to whom we pass relevant information. 
Regulating the nonbank sector 
While, of all the Central Bank’s activities, banking attracts the lions-share of media coverage 
and public debate, and not surprisingly considering events of recent years, in actual fact, of 
the Central Bank staff working in financial regulation and supervision, only a fraction work on 
banks.  The  largest  group  supervise  regulated  non-bank  entities  operating  in  the  financial 
markets  notably  including  investment  funds,  for  which  Dublin  is  one  of  the  global  centres. 
Insurance  firms,  many  of  them  providing  services  mainly  to  international  customers,  are 
supervised  by  another  large  group.  The  supervision  of  insurance  firms  and  funds  call  for 
different  approaches  to  that  adopted  for  banks,  and  in  both  areas  extensive  and  complex 
legislation  has  recently  been  introduced  in  Europe  and  Worldwide.  The  goals  of  this 
legislation  are  clear  and  simple  –  for  example  to  ensure  that  insurance  companies  are 
adequately  reserved  for  the  risks  they  ensure,  and  that  they  do  not  have  an  incentive  to 
assume  risks  being  shed  by  banks,  and  to  ensure  that  investment  funds  state  clearly  to 
investors what they are getting into and are not subverted in the interests of the promoters at 
the expense of investors – but their application is far from simple. Indeed, many observers 
begin to worry that the new legislation – the number of new EU regulations or directives are 
being brought into effect in just a few years can certainly not be counted on the fingers of 
both  hands  –  has  grown  to  become  too  complex  to  achieve  its  goals  or  even  to  be  fully 
digested by regulator or regulated. This has created a challenge for us as an international 
financial centre, but it is one which we are rising to. For example, we have recently pioneered 
an approach that will regulate funds that seek to originate loans (as distinct from those which 
buy  and  sell  pre-existing  financial  assets),  thereby  providing  protection  to  the  investors  in 
such funds – shadow banks being brought out of the shadows, as one might say. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Advising the Government 
Despite  its  operational  independence  from  Government,  the  Central  Bank  is  part  of  the 
State’s  administrative  apparatus  and  one  of  its  statutory  goals  is  to  provide  economic 
analysis and comment. What kind of economic advice is the Bank providing to Government 
at present? With the lead in to the budget of course we are emphasising the importance of 
avoiding the mistake made in years gone by to assume as permanent revenue sources that 
are volatile (Figure 4). 
 Recent  output  and  revenue  surges  should  not  deflect  the  Government  from  continuing  to 
rebuild  the  financial  balance  sheet  of  the  State.  Revenue  from  better-than-expected  post-
crisis  asset  sales  in  particular  should  be  assigned  to  the  extent  possible  to  reducing  the 
national debt. In the previous three years the seal of approval from the Troika allowed the 
Government to take a longer time to bring the deficit under control. Now financial markets, 
still  a  major  determinant  of  Ireland’s  borrowing  costs,  will  look  closely  at  budgetary  trends 
and the Government will do well to convince them of its continued determination to adhere to 
the  medium-term  fiscal  goals  set  out  in  EU  law.  This  advice  meshes  indeed  with  the 
recommendations of the Irish Fiscal Advisory Council. 
Concluding remarks 
Even without considering numerous other important functions which I have not mentioned, it 
is  evident  that  the  activities  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland  remain  diverse  and  of  vital 
importance even though the crisis has abated. (Managing the wholesale payments system, 
printing – or minting – and processing the issue and recovery of euro banknotes and coins, 
managing  the  provision  of  Eurosystem  liquidity,  ensuring  the  good  preparedness  of  the 
deposit  guarantee  scheme  and  the  national  resolution  mechanism  for  credit  institutions, 
powering-up the new credit information register and investing the Central Bank’s portfolio of 
financial assets are among the factors which I have not mentioned.) 
In order to accomplish these tasks effectively we will continue to need an inflow of energetic 
and enthusiastic staff to join an organisation which is determined to continue reinventing its 
ways of working and delivering service to the nation and to the Eurosystem at large. Perhaps 
some of you in the audience today will be among them. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
