  Maja Kadievska-Vojnovik: Rules and regulation update 
Speech by Ms Maja Kadievska-Vojnovik, Vice-Governor of the National Bank of the Republic 
of  Macedonia,  at  the  Erste  Group  Bank  workshop  “Rules  and  regulation  update”,  Skopje, 
1 December 2014. 
 Dear Governor Bogov, 
Dear Guest Speakers from Erste Group Bank, 
Dear representatives from financial regulatory agencies, 
Dear colleagues, 
Please,  let  me  thank  you  Governor  Bogov  for  supporting  the  idea  of  organizing  such  an 
event that summarizes financial regulatory reform after six years of the global financial crisis 
and also I would like to give my appreciation to the guest lecturers from Erste Group Bank for 
their quick response to help us to better understand it. 
This workshop is distinctive, in my opinion, as it will point at numerous regulatory changes 
aimed at supporting the vision of a financial system that would be both globally integrated 
and adequately regulated over the medium-to-long-term. 
Why we are here today? 
Probably, some of you have already asked this question. Why? 
The  subject  and  the  presentations  of  today’s  workshop  are  of  great  importance,  having  in 
mind that, we, the Central Bank with its unique foreign reserves management function, and 
other institutional investors (banks, pension funds, insurance companies) that are supervised 
by the regulators participating in this workshop, all of us, are investors on the European and 
global financial markets. In that regard, understanding of the regulations that are changing 
the financial markets landscape is of greatest significance for each market participant. 
The second question raised today is: 
What were the reasons for undertaking steps for financial sector reform? 
The recent financial crisis served as a reminder that the impaired financial system can have 
a  significant  impact  on  the  functioning  of  the  overall  economy.  Moreover,  the  2007–08 
financial crises was, to a great extent, a result of the failure of public authorities in the United 
States  and  Europe to  adequately  monitor  and  address  systemic  risk.  By  comparison,  Asia 
and other parts of the world where memories of systemic financial crises were still fresh, had 
adopted  more  prudent  policies  and  practices,  and  were  less  impacted  by  the  subprime-
triggered  financial  shockwaves.  In  order  to  make  global  finance  more  stable,  the  2009 
G20 summits  in  London  and  Pittsburg  listed  commitments  on  financial  regulatory  reform, 
pushing the financial regulation to the forefront of the global economic cooperation agenda at 
the  level  of  political  principles,  which  had  until  then,  been  mainly  focused  on  trade  and 
macroeconomic policy. 
The items on regulation can themselves be divided into two subgroups. 
On  the  one  hand,  the  G20  decided  to  tighten  or  strengthen  the  regulatory  framework 
applying to entities or activities that had already been regulated before the crisis. Examples 
include: 
• A more demanding framework for the capital, leverage, and liquidity of banks, prepared by 
the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (BCBS)  and  known  as  the  Basel  III  Accord 
since its initial exposition in 2010; 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  • Special regulatory treatment of systemically important financial institutions (SIFIs), such as 
additional capital (or in the Basel jargon, “loss absorbency”) requirements; and 
• Additional disclosure obligations for banks. 
On the other hand, entities or activities that until 2008 were mostly outside of the scope of 
regulators were made subject to a comprehensive regulatory framework: 
• Over-The-Counter (OTC) Derivatives, 
• Executive compensation, 
• Credit rating agencies, 
• Hedge funds, “shadow banking” (i.e. entities and activities that are not regulated as banks, 
but present bank-like systemic risk profiles) and, more recently, 
• Financial benchmarks (following the detecting of fraud in the setting of LIBOR, the London 
Interbank Offered Rate, and other similar reference rates). 
All those initiatives that were envisaged by the G20 are translated into regulatory changes in 
US and Europe. 
In  the  US,  Dodd–Frank  Wall  Street  Reform  and  Consumer  Protection  Act  (or  known  as 
Dodd-Frank  Act)  implements  changes  that,  among  other  things,  affect  the  oversight  and 
supervision  of  financial  institutions.  The  Dodd-Frank  Act  creates  the  Financial  Stability 
Oversight  Council  to  oversee  financial  institutions.  Additionally,  it  provides  for  a  new 
resolution procedure for large financial companies, a creation of a new agency responsible 
for  implementing  and  enforcing  compliance  with  consumer  financial  laws,  introduces  more 
rigorous regulatory capital requirements, affects significant changes in the regulation of OTC 
derivatives, includes reform of the regulation of credit rating agencies, implements changes 
to  corporate  governance  and  executive  compensation  practices,  incorporates  the  Volcker 
Rule, requires registration of advisers to certain private funds, and affects significant changes 
in the securitization market. 
In  the  EU,  Markets  in  Financial  Instruments  Directive  MiFID  is  an  important  step  in  the 
biggest overhaul of financial markets regulation in the EU for a decade. However, the new 
regulatory framework consists of Directive (MiFID 2) and Regulation on markets in financial 
instruments (MiFIR). It is an integral part of the EU’s strategy to address the effects of the 
financial crisis, but at the same time aims to bring greater transparency to markets and to 
strengthen  investor  protection.  These  changes  are  a  key  for  restoring  the  trust  in  the  EU 
financial  markets.  In  reaction  to  the  global  financial  crisis,  the  EU  has  also  introduced  the 
European  Market  Infrastructure  Regulation  (EMIR)  that  initiates  a  reporting  obligation  for 
OTC  derivatives,  a  clearing  obligation  for  eligible  OTC  derivatives,  measures  to  reduce 
counterparty credit risk and operational risk for bilaterally cleared OTC derivatives, common 
rules  for  central  counterparties  (CCPs)  and  trade  repositories  (TRs),  and  rules  on  the 
establishment  of  interoperability  between  CCPs.  MiFID  2  and  EMIR  are  causing  many 
changes in the financial market infrastructure, but changes are also happening as a result of 
other  regulations  such  as  the  Central  Securities  Depositories  Regulation  and  Target  2 
Securities  project.  Some  of  them  will  change  market  practices  as  well,  not  only  financial 
infrastructure. 
To conclude, excessive risk taking and leveraging have been one of the main causes of the 
financial  crisis.  As  we  are  all  aware,  various  policy  initiatives  are  on  the  policy  agenda  to 
enable  effective  financial  services  reform.  A  sound,  stable  and  resilient  financial  sector 
capable  of  providing funding  to  the  real  economy  is  of  major  importance  for  growth  in  the 
medium and long term. Both the financial reform agenda (internationally coordinated by G20) 
and the unique project of creating a Banking Union with Single Supervisory and Resolution 
Mechanisms (SSM, SRM) and a single rulebook will change the set-up of financial markets. 
The  implementation  of  the  financial  sector  reforms  will  also  necessitate  a  vast  amount  of 
secondary legislation that may have a sizeable impact on the funding of the real economy. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  I  hope  that  you  will  enjoy  the  workshop  and  that  we  will  all  learn  much  from  the  very 
impressive array of speakers. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
