  Charles I Plosser: A longer-term view of the US economy and monetary 
policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Charles  I  Plosser,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, to the Charlotte Economics Club, Charlotte, North Carolina, 
3 December 2014. 
The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. 
 Highlights 
• 
  President Charles Plosser gives his views on the U.S. economy and discusses why 
it is important to take a longer-term view of economic data. 
President Plosser shares some thoughts about the stance of monetary policy and 
the  advantages  of  raising  rates  gradually  and  starting  sooner  rather  than  being 
forced to raise them abruptly later. 
President  Plosser  also  discusses  how  policy  rules  can  offer  useful  guideposts  for 
policymakers  and  the  public  in  assessing  and  communicating  the  stance  of 
monetary policy. 
Introduction 
Thank you for the invitation to be here today. The Charlotte Economics Club has welcomed 
many leading Federal Reserve voices to this podium over the years, including a number of 
my fellow Fed presidents. You have heard from President Jeff Lacker of the Richmond Fed, 
which  has  its  Charlotte  Branch  over  on  East  Trade  Street,  as  well  as  Presidents  Richard 
Fisher  of  Dallas  and  Dennis  Lockhart  of  Atlanta.  So  I  am  pleased  to  have  been  included 
among your distinguished guests. 
On November 16, the Federal Reserve observed the 100th anniversary of the opening of all 
12  Federal  Reserve  Banks  around  the  country  on  the  same  day.  These  institutions  along 
with the Board of Governors in Washington, D.C., comprise our nation’s decentralized central 
bank. This decentralized structure is one of the System’s great strengths. Not only does it 
promote  a  diversity  of  views,  but  it  also  helps  to  build  public  trust  and  preserve 
independence. However, it requires that I begin by reminding you that the views I express 
today are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve System or my 
colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). 
Your program chair, Professor Rob Roy McGregor, has spent a great deal of his academic 
career studying the workings of the FOMC – including the use of power by the Chair and the 
nature  of  consensus  building  and  dissent  within  the  Committee. Interestingly,  some  of  this 
work  has  been  coauthored  with  a  former  colleague  of mine  at  the  Philadelphia  Fed,  Todd 
Vermilyea, who now works at the Board of Governors. 
Today, I plan to talk about the importance of taking a longer-term view in setting monetary 
policy. We live in a 24-hour news cycle that focuses a lot of time and energy on analyzing the 
tea leaves from the daily onslaught of new economic data at our disposal. Yet, I believe it is a 
mistake for policymakers to focus too intently on the most recent numbers to justify a policy 
decision.  Our  data  are  always  noisy  and  often  subject  to  substantial  revision,  as  we  just 
witnessed  with  last  week’s  GDP  revisions  and  as  we  see  regularly  with  the  monthly 
employment report. Instead, we must focus our attention on the underlying trends and the 
likely path of the economy over the intermediate to longer-term horizon. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  One  reason  why  policymakers  must  think  long  term  is  that  the  effects  of  monetary  policy 
actions on inflation and employment may not be felt for many quarters and maybe years in 
the future. Thus, the near term path of the economy is unlikely to be altered in any significant 
way  by  today’s  policy  choices.  We  must  look  further  ahead  in  assessing  the  appropriate 
stance of monetary policy. Of course, there is a great deal of uncertainty about the future and 
that too has implications for how we should approach policy. 
I will begin with a brief overview of the economy as one policymaker sees it as we near the 
end of 2014. 
Economic conditions 
Over  the  past  year,  we  have  seen  encouraging  signs  in  the  economy.  The  most  recent 
estimate of annualized real GDP growth in the third quarter was 3.9 percent, which followed 
strong growth in the second quarter of 4.6 percent. Taking a longer view, growth from the 
third quarter of last year to this year was 2.4 percent. But this includes a negative 2.1 percent 
growth rate in the first quarter of 2014 that was a consequence of a severe winter and was 
largely  transitory  in  nature.  We  are  seeing  continued  strength  in  personal  consumption, 
especially  in  durable  goods,  as  well  as  business  fixed  investment,  which  marked  the 
strongest two quarter growth in investment by businesses in nearly three years. 
GDP growth has averaged 2.3 percent over the 21 quarters of the recovery since mid-2009. 
That is a half point below the 5-year growth rates measured during most of the 2000s before 
the recession, which is, in part, why this recovery is often seen as being moderate or modest 
from an historical perspective. 
Nonetheless,  we  have  seen  a  sustained  improvement  in  the  manufacturing  sector.  The 
November  reading  from  the  Philadelphia  Fed’s  Manufacturing  Business  Outlook  Survey 
indicated  very  strong  growth  in  manufacturing  activity.  Even  more  encouraging  are  the 
sustained  increases  we  have  witnessed  in  this  sector.  After  a  mediocre  performance  from 
mid-2011 to mid-2013, the index has now been positive for nearly 18 consecutive months, 
with  the  only  aberration  in  February  2014  during  the  depths  of  our severe  winter  weather. 
Our index is often viewed as a useful indicator of national manufacturing activity, and indeed 
the  national  ISM  manufacturing  index  has  also  shown  solid  performance  over  the  past 
18 months. 
The labor market has also strengthened over the year. Employers added jobs at an average 
rate of 229,000 per month in the first 10 months of the year, which is 18 percent higher than 
the  rate  in  2013,  and  it’s  the  highest  we  have  seen  at  any  point  in  the  recovery.  This 
acceleration in job growth has helped bring the unemployment rate down to 5.8 percent as of 
October, compared with 7.2 percent a year ago. 
Over the course of this recovery, the unemployment rate has fallen from a peak of 10 percent 
in October 2009 to 5.8 percent today. Other measures of unemployment have also declined. 
For example, the measure called U6, which includes marginally attached workers and those 
working  part  time  for  economic  reasons,  has  fallen  from  its  peak  of  17.2  percent  to 
11.5 percent. 
Inflation, for the moment, remains well contained. The personal consumption expenditures, 
or  PCE,  price  index,  the  measure  of  inflation  preferred  by  the  FOMC,  registered  a 
1.4 percent increase over the 12 months through October. It is running somewhat below the 
FOMC’s  stated  longer-term  target  of  2  percent,  but  it  remains  above  the  level  that  should 
stoke concerns of sustained deflation. 
Falling energy prices are generally good news for consumers and a favorable development 
for the economy going forward. In the short term, the decline in the relative price of energy 
will show up in lower headline inflation, but as energy prices stabilize, headline inflation will 
increase.  Policymakers  tend  to  look  through  such  volatile  and  transitory  price  changes  to 
assess  the  underlying  trend  in  inflation.  The  core  PCE  index,  which  excludes  food  and 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  energy, is a bit higher than the overall measure, increasing 1.6 percent over the 12 months 
through  October.  Other  measures  of  inflation,  including  those  that  attempt  to  reduce  the 
weight given to large outliers in any given month, all tend to suggest that inflation is running 
between 1.5 percent and 2 percent. Given the precision with which  we can measure such 
things, I find this outcome satisfactory. Nevertheless, I anticipate that the FOMC will conduct 
policy  over  time  in  such  a  manner  that  inflation  will  gradually  move  toward  the  Fed’s 
2 percent target. Private sector forecasters seem to share this view as the Philadelphia Fed’s 
most recent Survey of Professional Forecasters shows that long-term inflation expectations 
remain stable at 2 percent. 
Monetary policy 
In  my  discussion  of  the  economy,  I  have  emphasized  the  longer-run  path  of  the  recovery 
rather  than  the  month-to-month  fluctuations.  Viewed  in  this  context,  it  is  clear  that  the 
economy has come a long way since the recovery began in June 2009. To me, that means 
we  should  no  longer  be  conducting  monetary  policy  as  if  we  were  still  in  the  midst  of  a 
financial crisis or in the depths of a recession. 
The financial crisis was an extraordinary event, and much of the commentary on monetary 
policy has focused on the actions of central banks in response to the financial crisis. That is 
appropriate and understandable. Yet, there is another lesson to be learned from the past six 
years that I think is important to recognize. And that is how difficult it is for monetary policy to 
fine-tune  real  growth  in  the  economy.  Despite  the  FOMC’s  stated  desire  and  aggressive 
actions to accelerate the pace of the recovery, growth has proceeded at a moderate pace 
since  the  end  of  the  crisis.  Monetary  policy  has  simply  not  proved  to  be  the  panacea that 
many had hoped. As I have argued on a number of occasions, I believe we have come to 
expect too much from monetary policy. We would be better served by greater humility and 
lowered expectations of the potential for monetary policy to manage real economic growth 
and employment. 
Ten years ago, I suspect most commentators would have told you that six years of a near-
zero federal funds rate target and more than $3.5 trillion of long-term asset purchases by the 
Fed would likely produce an economic boom in the near term and would risk inflation in the 
longer term. Well, although we have experienced modest growth, we have not experienced a 
boom,  and  the  jury  remains  out  as  to  whether  inflation  will  materialize  as  a  consequence. 
Some argue that the absence of the boom is because the Fed didn’t do enough – more was 
needed to offset the constraint of the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates. Of course, 
there is an alternative hypothesis: Monetary policy was not capable of offsetting or mitigating 
the  sorts  of  real  challenges  the  economy  was  facing.  Distinguishing  between  these  two 
hypotheses will undoubtedly be the subject of intense research in the coming decades. After 
all,  economists  are  still  studying  the  policy  choices  and  their  effects  during  the  Great 
Depression eight decades ago. 
But let me turn our attention to how monetary policy should evolve going forward. I began my 
remarks by noting that monetary policy should focus on the intermediate to longer term and 
be less sensitive or reactive to short-run and transitory movements in the data. To that end, I 
see the economy continuing to improve with real growth averaging about 3 percent in 2015 
before  coming  back  down  to  its  long-term  trend  growth  rate  of  about  2.4  percent. 
Employment will continue to expand, and inflation will move closer to our 2 percent target. 
While people can disagree about the extent to which the labor market has healed, it is clear 
that  the  labor  market  is  in  much  better  shape  than  it  was  in  2009  when  unemployment 
reached  its  peak  of  10 percent. The economy has  come  a  long  way,  and  monetary  policy 
should reflect such progress. 
This progress suggests that monetary policy should begin to normalize. Keeping the funds 
rate  target  near  zero  when  inflation  is  close  to  our  goal  and  the  economy  is  near  full 
employment  is  both  unprecedented  and  risky  in  my  view.  Waiting  too  long  to  begin  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  process  of  raising  the  policy  rate  risks  facing  the  possibility  that  the  rate  may  have  to 
increase  rapidly  when  the  time  comes  and  that  could  prove  unnecessarily  disruptive.  And 
waiting could also risk a more rapid pickup in inflation. 
Of  course,  policymakers face  many  uncertainties,  and  so they  must  be prepared to  adjust 
policy as the underlying trends in inflation and the real economy evolve. So, how should a 
central  bank  best  inform  the  public  about  those  uncertainties  and  the  prospective  path  of 
policy? 
The appropriate way to communicate the future of policy is to describe in a general way a 
reaction function. That  is  to  describe  what  key  economic  variables  influence  the  setting of 
policy  and  to  give  a  sense  of  how  policy  will  change  in  response  to  changes  in  those 
variables. Over the past several  years, I have criticized policy messages that suggest that 
calendar time is a relevant metric for determining a policy action. We must avoid such date-
based forward guidance, whether it uses specific calendar dates or more vague references 
alluding to a “considerable period” of time. As policymakers, we do not know what the future 
holds, so forward guidance in this form cannot be very credible. 
Unfortunately, it is unlikely that policymakers will adopt a specific reaction function in the near 
term. Yet, there are numerous examples of such systematic approaches or reaction functions 
that can help us to gauge the stance of policy. Some of these reaction functions have been 
shown  to  be  robust  in  a  variety  of  circumstances  and  useful  in  describing  past  monetary 
policy behaviors. They can, I believe, provide useful guidelines for assessing the stance and 
the likely path of monetary policy. They can also be useful in communicating policy to the 
public.  I  frequently  consider  such  reaction  functions  as  I  think  about  policy.  These  are 
typically Taylor-like rules named for the Stanford University economist John Taylor who first 
proposed them in the early 1990s. These policy rules typically call for the targeted funds rate 
to respond to deviations of inflation from some desired target and to deviations of output from 
some  measure  of  potential  –  sometimes  referred  to  as  economic  “slack”  or  the  “gap.” 
Sometimes such gaps are translated into deviations from full employment. 
These policy rules can offer useful guideposts for policymakers and the public in assessing 
the  stance  of  monetary  policy,  and  communicating  more  about  such  guideposts  would 
enhance  transparency  and  help  make  policy  more  systematic.  Thus,  there  is  no  need  to 
mechanically  follow  any  particular  rule,  and  judgment  will  always  be  required.  Yet, 
policymakers and the public should be very cautious when they call for policy rates to deviate 
in  important  or  significant  ways  from  these  guideposts.  Making  such  judgments  should 
require  careful  analysis,  and  the  justification  for  deviating  from  such  guidelines  should  be 
clearly communicated to the markets and to the public. 
A monetary policy strategy such as I have just described could be communicated through a 
regular  Monetary  Policy  Report,  perhaps  published  quarterly.  The  report  would  offer  an 
opportunity to reinforce the underlying policy framework of the Committee and how it relates 
to current and expected economic conditions. 
Publishing  a  Monetary  Policy  Report  with  an  assessment  of  the  likely  near-term  path  of 
policy rates, in conjunction with its economic forecast, would also provide added discipline for 
policymakers to stick to a systematic, rule-like approach. Communication about that path, in 
turn, gives the public a much deeper understanding of the analytical approach that guides 
monetary policy, thus making policy more transparent and predictable. 
In the current environment, an assessment of a variety of these robust rules suggests that 
the funds rate target is no longer constrained by the zero lower bound. These rules indicate 
that liftoff of the funds rate target from zero should have already occurred or should occur in 
the very near future. It is important to point out that all of these rules recognize and take into 
account  the  fact  that  the  inflation  rate  remains  somewhat  below  the  FOMC’s  target  of 
2 percent. Nevertheless, they do not call for maintaining the funds rate target near zero. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  These  rules  are  helpful  because  they  not  only  suggest  when  liftoff  should  occur,  but  they 
offer  guidance  about  the  future  path  of  rate  changes,  given  the  likely  direction  of  the 
economy – that is, forecasts of inflation and employment “gaps.” Even more important is that 
if  the  forecasts  of  the  future  change,  these  guideposts  can  highlight  how  the  entire  policy 
path is likely to evolve. As such, they are capable of better aligning the public’s expectations 
of policy with those of the FOMC, making the conduct of monetary policy more accountable 
and more efficient. 
Conclusion 
In conclusion, the U.S. economy continues to recover at a moderate pace. Although we have 
not  witnessed  the  strong  bounce  back  from  the  depths  of  the  recession  that  some 
anticipated, the recovery has been somewhat remarkable in the steadiness with which it has 
progressed.  Labor  markets  continue  to  heal,  and  their  stronger-than-expected  recovery 
should  serve  to  underpin  continued  economic  expansion.  Consumer  balance  sheets  are 
much  improved,  and  individuals  have  regained  significant  fractions  of  the  wealth  they  lost 
during  the  crisis.  That  gives  me  additional  confidence  that  the  economy  is  now  operating 
fairly normally and that policy should reflect that normalization. 
Policy can also be made more transparent and effective by specifying more completely the 
variables that guide policy and the general way that one can expect policymakers to react to 
those  variables.  To  this  end,  I  believe  the  FOMC  should  move  forward  to  describe  in  a 
qualitative  way  its  reaction  function  and  then  communicate  our  actions  and  decisions  in 
terms of this reaction function. A detailed Monetary Policy Report could be a useful vehicle 
for  such  enhanced  communication  by  discussing  a  range  of  robust  policy  rules.  Placing 
policy choices in such a context will lead to a more systematic approach to policy and one 
that is more transparent and predictable. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
