Hiroshi Nakaso: The potential impact of large-scale monetary 
accommodation 
Remarks  by  Mr  Hiroshi  Nakaso,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  Paris 
Europlace Financial Forum, Tokyo, 25 November 2014. 
 Introduction 
It  is  a  great  honor  to  have  this  opportunity  to  speak  today  before  the  Paris  Europlace 
Financial Forum. 
In  my  remarks,  after  touching  on  the  latest  action  taken  by  the  Bank  of  Japan  to  expand 
quantitative  and  qualitative  monetary  easing,  dubbed  the  QQE,  I  would  like  to  share  my 
views on the potential impact of large-scale monetary accommodation on the functioning of 
financial markets, with a special focus on Japan. 
Monetary policy in major economies 
Let me begin with our monetary policy. 
In April last year, the Bank of Japan introduced the QQE to achieve the price stability target 
of 2 percent at the earliest possible time, with a time horizon of about two years. The main 
objectives of the QQE have been to dispel a view that took root among people over a long 
period of deflation that prices would not rise – in other words, a deflationary mindset – and to 
create a situation in which households and firms behave on the assumption that prices would 
moderately increase. Specifically, in terms of the policy transmission mechanism, we intend 
to raise inflation expectations through a strong and clear commitment  to achieve the price 
stability  target  of  2  percent,  and  at  the  same  time  to  exert  downward  pressure  across  the 
entire yield curve through massive purchases of government bonds. As a result, real interest 
rates  will  decline,  thereby  stimulating  such  private  demand  components  as  business  fixed 
investment,  private  consumption,  and  housing  investment.  The  upward  pressure  on  prices 
will  grow  stronger  as  demand  increases  and  the  output  gap  narrows  accordingly. Rises  in 
actual inflation rates will be translated into higher expected rates of inflation and thus lower 
real  interest  rates.  This  will  reinforce  the  virtuous  cycle  as  the  economy  is  provided  with 
additional stimulus. 
Since its inception, the QQE has been producing the intended effects, and Japan’s economy 
has steadily followed a path towards the achievement of the price stability target of 2 percent. 
In fact, the year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI) excluding fresh 
food,  which  stood  at  minus  0.5  percent  in  March  2013  immediately  before  introducing  the 
QQE, subsequently turned positive and moved up to reach above 1 percent by the end of 
last year. 
In recent months, however, a couple of developments on the price front have attracted our 
attention.  First,  the  decline  in  demand  following  the  consumption  tax  hike  has  been 
somewhat  protracted  in  durable  consumer  goods  including  automobiles,  as  well  as  in 
housing investment. Second, crude oil prices have declined substantially after the summer. 
These factors have contributed to slowing the CPI inflation rates, which had hovered in the 
range of 1.0–1.5 percent since the end of the last year, down to 1.0 percent in September. 
Of the two factors, the temporary weakness in demand associated with the consumption tax 
hike has already started to wane. Meanwhile, the decline in crude oil prices will have positive 
effects on economic activity and push up prices over the longer-run. Nevertheless, given the 
fact that Japan’s economy is currently in a transition process of converting the deflationary 
mindset,  prolongation  of  the  current  downward  pressure  on  prices,  albeit  temporarily,  was 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
1
  judged to run the risk of delaying the process. To prevent such risk from materializing and to 
maintain the improving momentum of expectation formation, we decided to take preemptive 
actions to expand the QQE at the Monetary Policy Meeting held on October 31 (Chart 1). 
Specifically, we decided to accelerate the pace of buildup in the monetary base by about 
10–20 trillion yen to “an annual increase of about 80 trillion yen.” In order to carry this out, 
we  will  increase  the  amount  outstanding  of  the  holdings  of  Japanese  government  bonds 
(JGBs) by about 30 trillion yen to “an annual increase of about 80 trillion yen.” At the same 
time, we decided to extend the average remaining maturity of the JGB purchases by about 
three  years  at  maximum  to  “about  7–10  years.”  The  purpose  of  the  measures  is  to  leave 
operational  flexibility  to  buy  JGBs  from  across  the  maturity  zones  and  thus  effectively 
compress  the  entire  yield  curve  in  line  with  market  conditions,  whereas  the  downward 
pressure  on  the  yield  curve  has  been  rather  uneven  thus  far,  with  substantial  declines  in 
rates on the shorter end while rates on the longer end remain relatively high. In addition, as 
for  exchange-traded  funds  (ETFs)  and  Japan  real  estate  investment  trusts  (J-REITs),  the 
increases in the amounts outstanding of the Bank’s holdings will be tripled in both cases. The 
latest decision to expand the QQE will further strengthen the policy transmission mechanism 
that I mentioned at the outset. The decision is also intended to demonstrate and confirm our 
strong and unequivocal commitment to achieve the price stability target. 
As  we  just  heard  from  Governor  Noyer,  the  European  Central  Bank  has  stepped  up  its 
monetary  easing.  And  in  the  United  States,  the  Federal  Reserve  concluded  its  asset 
purchase program but has maintained the view that the policy rate is likely to be kept at a 
near-zero level for a considerable time. 
The  unconventional  monetary  easing  measures,  taken  by  the  central  banks  to  address 
unprecedented challenges facing the economies, are often said to have had unintended, and 
even unfavorable, impacts on the functioning of financial markets. My quick response is that I 
do not fully agree. Although I do share the views that massive monetary easing would indeed 
have a considerable impact on the market and that central banks should be vigilant against 
market  developments,  thus  far  serious  impairment  of  the  market  function  has  not  been 
observed. In the rest of my remarks, I would like to elaborate on why I think this is the case 
by focusing on three topics: “search for yield” activities, negative interest rates, and market 
liquidity. 
“Search for yield” activities 
First I would like to address a frequently cited remark that unconventional monetary stimulus 
could  destabilize  financial  markets  and  the  economy  at  large  by  encouraging  “search  for 
yield”  activities  among  investors  and  thus  creating  financial  imbalances.  As  one  of  their 
transmission channels, unconventional monetary policy measures including the QQE aim to 
promote portfolio rebalancing by investors and thus push down the risk premium in prices of 
various asset classes. In this regard, one can say that a rise in asset prices and a decline in 
volatility are intended effects of the QQE. 
In this context, I would stress instead that we should be mindful of the risk that “search for 
yield” activities enter into a self-fulfilling cycle and destabilize the markets and the economy. 
The  combination  of  higher  prices  and  the  lower  volatility  of  an  asset  induces  investors  to 
overvalue liquidity of the asset and drive up prices. This could in turn invite another round of 
investment, raising asset prices in a self-fulfilling manner. In addition, if a rise in asset prices 
creates overly bullish expectations among non-financial entities such as the corporate and 
household sectors, it could trigger excessive risk-taking behavior in these sectors as well. 
Thus  far,  we  have  not  observed  signs  of  self-fulfilling,  overheated  price  movements  in 
Japan’s  financial  markets.  This  is  evidenced  by  occasional  price  adjustments  reflecting 
factors such as geopolitical events, changes in the outlook on global economies, and policy 
changes  in  major  economies.  We  also  regularly  check,  in  the  Financial  System  Report,  a 
“heat  map”  of  financial  activity  indexes  that  helps  us  to  gauge  the  macro  conditions  of 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  financial  activity  by  combining  a  host  of  indicators  in  both  the  financial  and  non-financial 
sectors  (Chart  2).  The  indexes,  with  few  parts  in  red,  suggest  that  currently  no  signs  of 
financial  imbalances  are  observed.  Having  said  this,  we  will  of  course  continue  looking 
carefully for any signs of overheating in the financial markets. 
Negative interest rates 
Another development attracting attention in Japan’s financial markets is seen in the negative 
interest  rates  of  some  financial  products.  The  rates  for  treasury  discount  bills  (T-Bills) 
declined  to  negative  territory  in  September  and  remained  there  for  most  of  the  time  since 
then (Chart 3). The payment of negative interest on securities sounds counter-intuitive and 
thus may prompt concern that Japan’s financial markets are suffering a serious malfunction. 
If we look into the details of each transaction, however, we can see plausible reasons why 
investors have accepted negative interest rates. 
Let  me  briefly  mention  a  few  cases  where  investors  would  buy  T-Bills  at  negative  interest 
rates.  Commercial  banks  have  an  incentive  to  hold  a  certain  amount  of  liquid  short-term 
assets  for  the  purpose  of  liquidity  and  duration  risk  management.  Among  various  types  of 
these  assets,  investors  often  prefer  T-Bills  because  they  are  not  only  eligible collateral  for 
borrowing from the Bank of Japan but also most suitable as collateral pledged against other 
money market and derivative transactions. Under the QQE, yields of liquid short-term assets 
have already approached zero across the board, and therefore even a small premium added 
to T-Bills could easily push their rates below zero. 
Foreign  investors  have  also  played  an  important  role  in  driving  yen  rates  into  negative 
territory.  Since  the  summer  of  2014,  U.S.  dollar  funding  rates  implied  in  foreign  exchange 
swaps have risen, as the net demand for dollars in the foreign exchange swap market has 
increased (Chart 3). This means that foreign investors with dollar cash liquidity can convert 
dollars into yen  via a foreign exchange swap contract and borrow yen  at a much cheaper 
rate.  Since  yen  money  market  rates  are  already  at  almost  zero,  the  yen  funding  cost  for 
these  investors  would  most  likely  turn  negative.  They  can  take  advantage  of  the  negative 
funding cost by investing in T-Bills even with negative rates. This investment strategy can still 
capture  a  reasonable  margin  if  the  yen  swap  costs  are  deeper  in  the  negative.  Market 
participants  attribute  higher  dollar  premium  to  both  demand  and  supply  factors.  On  the 
demand side, Japanese investors have shifted part of their portfolios into foreign currency-
denominated assets following the QQE, which has boosted demand for dollars in the foreign 
exchange  swap  market.  On  the  supply  side,  market  participants  point  out  that  the  lending 
attitudes of dollar providers have turned less accommodative ahead of the expected initiation 
of the Fed’s tightening. Furthermore, not a few participants attribute this development partly 
to stricter international financial regulations, but the validation of this claim requires further 
exploration. 
In sum, T-Bill rates have been pushed down to a negative level because they gather investor 
demand for a number of technical reasons, while yen short-term interest rates have already 
been  as  low  as  a  near-zero  level  across  the  board.  In  this  sense,  negative  interest  rates 
represent the very effect of powerful monetary easing under the QQE. 
Market liquidity 
Lastly, I would like to turn to the issue of market liquidity. As I pointed out, putting downward 
pressure on the yield curve by absorbing JGBs from the market is a factor comprising the 
core mechanism of the QQE. Therefore, it seems fairly natural for the QQE to have certain 
impacts  on  price  formulation  and  transactions  in  the  market.  Meanwhile,  since  the 
introduction of the QQE, market participants have often raised a concern that the massive 
purchase of JGBs under the QQE  will impair the functioning of the JGB  market. We have 
been aware that such concern has mounted following the recent expansion of the QQE. In 
what way should we address such concerns? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  A  complexity  in  this  topic  is  that  the  term  “market  liquidity”  could  be  used  differently 
depending on the context. Indeed, there is no established and exclusive definition of market 
liquidity.  However,  this  definition  by  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  appears  to  be 
widely  known  and  accepted:  “A  liquid  market  is  a  market  where  participants  can  rapidly 
execute large-volume transactions with a small impact on prices.” 
A  quick  look  at  a  few  indicators  along  this  line  gives  a  somewhat  encouraging  picture  of 
market liquidity. Transaction volume in JGB futures has been largely unchanged since the 
launch of the QQE (Chart 4). The ratio of daily price range to turnover, which approximates 
the  price  movement  per  transaction  during  the  day,  has  remained  stable  at  a  low  level, 
indicating there is just enough market liquidity (Chart 5). All in all, these indicators appear to 
suggest that activity in the JGB market has not been affected significantly by the QQE. 
Nonetheless,  there  are  a  number  of  reasons  why  we  cannot  be  sanguine  about  the 
functioning  of  the  JGB  market.  For  instance,  our  market  intelligence  has  found  episodes 
suggesting signs of deterioration in the functioning of the JGB and related money markets 
that  were  not  detected  from  statistical  data.  An  example  is  the  occasional  difficulty  in 
borrowing  on-the-run  JGB.  Besides,  not  a  few  participants  point  out  that  the  JGB  market 
functioning is undermined in the sense that the market has been overly focused on monetary 
policy as the factor driving prices instead of the outlook for the economy and inflation, which 
would  otherwise  be  the  fundamental  determinant.  This  implies  that  a  change  in  market 
expectations  in  the  future  course  of  monetary  policy  could  exert  a  stronger  impact  on  the 
markets. Although this is not an issue of market liquidity per se, it is certainly a factor that we 
should take into consideration when observing market developments. 
Against this background, the Bank of Japan has been engaged in intensive dialogue with a 
wide range of market participants to grasp the state of market functioning. As an effort along 
this line, we have just announced several initiatives to enhance this dialogue, including the 
introduction of a quarterly Bond Market Survey of market participants’ views on the functions 
of the bond market. We intend to publish the survey results. 
Concluding remarks 
The pursuit of unconventional monetary actions, that are meant to be “powerful” as Governor 
Noyer suggests, would inevitably boost the central bank’s presence in the financial markets 
and  create  a  resulting  tradeoff  between  the  intended  policy  consequences  and  the 
functioning of financial markets. To minimize the potential side effects on market functioning, 
the central bank should be committed to continuous dialogue with the market, so that it can 
share its views on its policy intention and its outlook for the economy and inflation, as well as 
accurately grasp participants’ views on market developments. The Bank of Japan has been, 
and will continue to be, committed to these efforts. 
Thank you very much for your kind attention. 
 
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    5
  6 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   7
