  Andreas Dombret: The marathon has only just begun – what will come 
after the stress test? 
Opening statement by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche 
Bundesbank,  at 
the  comprehensive 
assessment results, Frankfurt am Main, 26 October 2014. 
following  publication  of 
the  press  conference 
 Introduction – the marathon has only just begun 
1. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
What  we  have  just  completed  –  a  comprehensive  balance  sheet  assessment  and  a  tough 
stress test for the 130 largest banks in the euro area – can only be described as a tour de 
force. Dr Elke König has just presented the results of the exercise. 
I will now look ahead to the future. I will use the same metaphor which Dr König has already 
used, and which appears entirely appropriate here in Frankfurt today. 
While we are sitting here in this room, a couple of thousand people are still outside running 
the Frankfurt Marathon. A marathon is, without a doubt, an enormous challenge. And anyone 
who  intends  to  run  a  marathon  should  first  undergo  a  rigorous  health  check  to  find  out 
whether he or she will even be physically up to the task. 
The  comprehensive  assessment  was  an  extremely  thorough  check-up,  including  a 
demanding  “cardiac  stress  test”.  You  now  know  the  outcome:  Germany’s  large  banks  are 
robust enough to withstand even severe stress. 
This is certainly an encouraging result, as for the banks, the marathon is only just beginning. 
Competition is becoming tougher and more international; regulation is becoming stricter, and 
supervision  more  European;  in  addition,  the  economic  setting  is  challenging  –  think  “low-
interest-rate environment” – and technology is continuously evolving. 
Surviving  and  prevailing  under  these  conditions  is  akin  to  a  marathon.  In  addition, 
theoretically being able to withstand even severe stress will not automatically guarantee that 
the  runner  will  finish  the  race.  Even  though  he  or  she  may  be  in  very  good  shape  at  the 
starting line, the runner can still make many mistakes during the race. And, in future, there 
will be no more “sovereign paramedics” at the side of the road to help stumbling banks back 
on their feet. 
Profitability – competition is tough and international 
2. 
What the exercise conducted over the past 12 months has shown is that Germany’s largest 
banks  are  able  to  withstand  even  severe  stress.  That  will  certainly  help  them  to finish  the 
marathon – but will not  be enough to enable them to win  it. That aim will require not only 
resilience but also the ability to outrun the competition – over a very long distance. 
And  competition  in  the  banking  industry  is  becoming  increasingly  tougher  and  more 
international. Not only competition for customers, but also competition for investors. Global 
regulation  and  European  supervision  are  creating  an  international  “level  playing  field”  in 
which investors will put their funds where the returns are greatest. 
German banks are therefore increasingly being forced to face international competition. And 
they  are  not  performing  all  that  well.  In  the  current  issue  of  its  Global  Financial  Stability 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Report,  the  IMF  notes  that  return  on  equity  in  the  euro  area  is  low  compared  with  that  in 
other regions such as the United States or Asia.1 
German banks are underperforming the rest of Europe, too: in 2013 their return on equity, at 
1.26%,  and  return  on  assets,  at  0.06%,  were  both  below  the  European  average.  A  recent 
study has concluded that currently only 6% of Germany’s banks even earn enough to cover 
their cost of capital.2 
A  business  model  which  is  relatively  dependent  on  interest  income  is  the  main  culprit  for 
these  weak  earnings.  In  a  protracted  phase  of  very  low  interest  rates,  this  imposes  a 
particularly severe strain. At the same time, commission income and net trading income are 
insufficient to provide adequate compensation. 
Given these factors, German banks would be well advised to rethink their business models 
and to gear them towards the objective of sustainable profitability. However, the IMF sees 
Germany  as  being  more  towards  the  bottom  of  the  international  rankings  with  regard  to 
overhauling business models. 
There  is  yet  another  important  aspect  to  profitability:  if  the  circuit  is  clogged  with  runners, 
they  will  get  in  each  other’s  way.  Mergers  could  therefore  be  beneficial,  particularly  in  the 
German banking industry – the focus here should, of course, always remain on achieving a 
sustainable business model. 
To sum up: In the comprehensive assessment, German banks demonstrated that they are 
robust enough to withstand even severe stress but have to increase their profitability in order 
to cross the finishing line at the front of the pack. 
Stability – much progress already made but a good deal left to do 
3. 
However, investors are not only interested in banks’ profitability but also in their stability – 
and the same is true of us supervisors, of course. And when measuring a bank’s stability, 
capital is still the crucial factor. The stress test has shown that German banks are sufficiently 
capitalised  even  in  a  very  adverse  scenario  –  after  all,  the  German  banks  that  were 
examined were found to have a common equity tier 1 (CET1) capital ratio of 9.1% at the end 
of 2016 even in the adverse stress scenario. 
And we must not forget that this calculation is based on figures from the end of 2013. Since 
then, German banks have raised a total of €14.4 billion in CET1 capital. If this increase is 
taken into account in the stress test results, this gives the German banks that were examined 
a CET1 capital ratio of 9.94% as at the end of 2016. And that figure does not even include 
the capital measures taken in 2014 which do not count as CET1 capital. 
So the large German banks do not have any gaps in their risk-weighted capital ratios. Yet the 
markets  and  supervisors  are  also  interested  in  the  banks’  unweighted  capital  ratios,  of 
course. This metric, known as the “leverage ratio”, has improved among German banks over 
the  past  few  months.  Of  the  25  banks  that  were  examined,  a  total  of  20  already  fulfil  the 
minimum  leverage  ratio  requirement  of  3%  which  will  apply  from  2018  onwards  under  the 
Basel III regime. Even so, a cross-Europe comparison shows that German banks still have 
some catching-up to do. 
                                                
1 
2  Sinn,  W  and  Schmundt,  W  (2014),  Deutschlands  Banken  2014:  Jäger  des  verlorenen  Schatzes.  Bain  & 
International Monetary Fund (2014), Global Financial Stability Report, October 2014. Washington, DC. 
Company, Munich and Zurich. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Conclusion – after the stress test is before the stress test 
4. 
The markets look to the future, and banks need to do the same. None of the German banks 
should  rest  on  their  laurels  because  they  have  passed  the  stress  test  –  to  paraphrase  a 
common German saying, after the stress test is before the stress test. That applies, above 
all,  to  those  banks  which  only  just  made  the  grade.  The  markets  and  supervisors  will  be 
watching these banks particularly attentively in future. 
All in all, I consider the comprehensive assessment a success. It has helped to lift the veil of 
uncertainty that has surrounded the European banking system since the crisis. It has been a 
credible  process,  and  one  which  will  help  to  restore  confidence  in  the  banking  sector  and 
reassure the markets. 
But the comprehensive assessment is not the end of the road. The overall setting in which 
banks operate is changing, and they need to adapt – in Germany, Europe and around the 
world. 
Yet politicians must also play their part. The crisis has shown how dangerous an unstable 
banking system can be for the real economy. The most important step to address this issue 
is, of course, to improve regulation and supervision. That has been achieved. 
But especially in Europe it would be worthwhile to take measures to ease the real economy’s 
access to alternative sources of funding. Some initial ideas on a European capital markets 
union are already being discussed; let’s seize the opportunity to make these ideas a reality. 
So I should actually correct what I said at the beginning of my remarks. It isn’t just the banks 
which  are  now  standing  at  the starting  line  of  a  marathon  –  so  are  politicians.  And  it  is  in 
everyone’s interest to arrive safely and swiftly at the finishing line together. 
Thank you very much. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
