  Norman T L Chan: Removal of RMB conversion limit for Hong Kong 
residents 
Speech  by  Mr  Norman  T  L  Chan,  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority, 
Hong Kong, 12 November 2014. 
 I am glad to announce that the RMB conversion limit for Hong Kong residents of RMB20,000 
per day will no longer be applicable with effect from 17 November 2014. 
Under the new arrangement, banks will square their positions arising from RMB conversions 
conducted with Hong Kong residents in the offshore market instead of the onshore market. 
As a result, the prevailing conversion and other relevant restrictions for onshore conversion 
will hence be no longer applicable. The HKMA has just issued a circular to banks setting out 
the detailed arrangements. 
The  HKMA  has  had  many  rounds  of  discussions  with  the  banking  industry  and  Mainland 
authorities  on  relaxing  the  restrictions  on  RMB  currency  conversions  by  Hong  Kong 
residents. We consider that the best option is for RMB conversions by Hong Kong residents 
to be done in the offshore market instead of the onshore market. With the size of the offshore 
RMB  liquidity  pool  in  Hong  Kong  exceeding  RMB  1  trillion,  and  considering  the  scale  and 
depth  of  the  RMB  foreign  exchange  market,  we  do  not  foresee  any  problem  for  banks  to 
square their positions for Hong Kong residents’ RMB conversions in the offshore market. 
I  believe  that  after  the  removal  of  the  conversion  limit,  it  will  become  more  convenient  for 
Hong Kong residents to participate in Shanghai-Hong Kong Stock Connect and other RMB 
financial transactions. 
In  addition,  following  the  principle  that  offshore  RMB  businesses  should  be  conducted 
according  to  the  rules  and  practices  in  the  offshore  market,  the  prevailing  restrictions  on 
RMB cashnote conversions and banks’ RMB lending to Hong Kong residents will no longer 
be  applicable.  This  will  facilitate  the  launch  of  RMB  investment  products  by  financial 
institutions in Hong Kong, and raise the position of Hong Kong as an offshore RMB business 
centre to new heights. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
