  William C Dudley: US monetary policy and its global implications 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  Central  Bank  of  the  United  Arab  Emirates,  Abu  Dhabi, 
13 November 2014. 
 It is a pleasure to have the opportunity to speak with you here today. In my remarks, I will 
assess  the  outlook  for  the  U.S.  economy  and  the  progress  that  the  Federal  Reserve  has 
made  toward  its  dual  mandate  objectives  of  maximum  employment  in  the  context  of  price 
stability. I will argue that we are now closer to achieving these objectives. That is the reason 
why  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC)  ended  its  latest  Treasury  and  agency 
MBS asset purchase program last month. But we still have further to go. Although the U.S. 
labor  market  has  shown  substantial  improvement,  there  still  is  a  meaningful  gap  between 
where  we  are  and  full  employment.  Also,  inflation  continues  to  undershoot  the  FOMC’s 
2 percent objective. 
This argues for patience with respect to the timing of lift-off of the federal funds rate and the 
beginning  of  the  normalization  of  monetary  policy.  Although  patience  is  appropriate,  if  all 
goes well, I anticipate that we will begin to raise short-term rates sometime next year. That 
would  be  a  welcome  development,  because  it  would  indicate  that  the  U.S.  economy  has 
largely recovered from the damage caused by the housing boom and bust, and the financial 
crisis. 
However, we need to be mindful that this shift in policy most likely will be accompanied by 
some  degree  of  market  turbulence.  Moreover,  the  normalization  of  U.S.  monetary  policy 
could create significant challenges for those emerging market economies (EMEs) that have 
been  the  recipients  of  large  capital  inflows  in  recent  years.  This  leads  to  an  important 
question: what can the Federal Reserve do to address these risks? 
I  will  make  three  observations  about  the  potential  international  spillovers  from  normalizing 
U.S. monetary policy. First, what we may see in terms of market strains and macroeconomic 
adjustment  during  this  normalization  process  will  not  be  new.  Changes  in  Fed  policy,  and 
especially  the  tightening  of  monetary  policy,  have  often  created  challenges  for  countries 
abroad,  especially  EMEs.  Second,  these  EMEs,  as  a  group,  are  better  equipped  today  to 
handle those challenges than in the past. This reflects the fundamental improvements and 
stronger  policy  frameworks  that  many  of  these  countries  have  put  in  place  over  the  past 
15 years. Third, given the dollar’s role as the global reserve currency, the Federal Reserve 
has a special responsibility to manage U.S. monetary policy appropriately in order to promote 
global financial stability. 
As always, what I have to say today reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the 
FOMC or the Federal Reserve System.1  
The U.S. economic outlook and the implications for monetary policy 
Since the official end of the Great Recession more than five years ago, the U.S. economy 
has grown at a disappointing 2.3 percent annualized rate. Several times over that period, it 
appeared that growth was breaking out on the upside and forecasts were raised, but each 
time such hopes were disappointed. We are again at a similar junction. Over the past two 
quarters,  the  pace  of  economic  growth  has  picked  up.  In  particular,  real  GDP  rose  at  a 
                                                
1   Agria Sbordone, Thomas Klitgaard, Jonathan McCarthy and Joseph Tracy assisted in preparing this speech. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  3.5 percent  annual  rate  last  quarter,  and  is  widely  expected  to  grow  at  around  a  2½  to 
3 percent annual rate through the end of 2015. 
This  time,  however,  I  believe  that  we  are  less  likely  to  be  disappointed.  That  is  because 
several of the various “headwinds” that have impeded U.S. economic activity in recent years 
have subsided. This allows the improving underlying fundamentals to exert themselves more 
forcefully. For example, fiscal restraint, which had a significant impact on economic growth 
last year, has abated, and is likely to disappear altogether next year. Credit availability has 
also  improved,  reflecting  healthier  bank  balance  sheets  and  improving  job  and  income 
prospects  for  potential  borrowers.  In  addition,  the  excess  supply  of  housing  that  built  up 
during the boom of the previous decade has been worked off. 
This lessening of headwinds has allowed supportive financial market conditions spurred, in 
part, by very accommodative monetary policy to shine through. As a result, I expect that both 
consumption and business investment spending will strengthen over the next few quarters. 
On  the  consumer  side,  household  balance  sheets  are  now  healthier,  reflecting  higher 
aggregate  household  net  worth  relative  to  income  and  less  leverage.  Also,  sturdy 
employment gains and falling energy prices are boosting real income growth. Together with 
accommodative  financial  conditions,  this  should  lend  support  to  further  gains  in  consumer 
spending. 
Similarly,  despite  some  recent  market  turbulence,  conditions  on  the  business  side  are 
supportive  to  sustained  gains  in  investment.  Credit  to  businesses  is  generally  readily 
available, cash flows are strong and corporate balance sheets are healthy. 
The energy sector is another bright spot that has been supporting business investment and 
the U.S. economy. New extraction technologies have had a dramatic impact on this sector, 
with  natural  gas  production  up  15  percent  since  2010,  and  crude  oil  production  up  a 
remarkable 35 percent.2 Moreover, natural gas prices have fallen significantly in recent years 
and  are far  lower  than  those  in  most  other  industrialized  economies.  These  developments 
have dramatically boosted jobs and incomes in these industries, with beneficial spillovers to 
manufacturing competitiveness more generally. 
Of course, as with any forecast, there is some meaningful chance that growth will turn out to 
be  either  weaker  or  stronger  than  expected.  However,  I  believe  that  the  risks  around  this 
forecast are reasonably well balanced, and that the likelihood that growth will be substantially 
weaker  or  stronger  than  the  forecast  is  relatively  low.  The  subsiding  headwinds  that  I 
discussed  earlier  are  the  primary  reason  for  seeing  the  downside  risks  as  limited.  At  the 
same  time,  there  are  a  few  factors  that  suggest  that  there  is  a  relatively  low  likelihood  of 
growth ending up substantially above the forecast. 
Three considerations seem important for assessing the degree of upside risk to growth. First, 
the  upside  from  housing  is  likely  limited  compared  to  what  one  might  expect  under  more 
normal conditions. We have seen an impressive recovery of multi-family housing starts over 
the past few years. In contrast, starts of single-family homes remain at low levels despite the 
fact that home prices have risen substantially over the past two years and mortgage rates 
have remained low. A contributing factor is that mortgage lenders continue to be extremely 
risk  averse,  and  mortgage  credit  to  those  with  lower  credit  scores  is  still  significantly 
constrained. There is little on the horizon that would lead me to believe that this situation will 
change in a material way any time soon. Second, because motor vehicle sales are now close 
to their pre-recession levels, the future growth impetus from this cyclical sector probably will 
also  be  restrained.  Finally,  growth  in  the  rest  of  the  world  has  slowed  and  the  dollar  has 
appreciated somewhat. This will limit the growth in U.S. exports, and suggests that the trade 
                                                
2   See Table 1.2 in the U.S. Department of Energy’s Monthly Energy Review, October 2014. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  sector is unlikely to be a strong wind at the back of the U.S. economy over the next year or 
two. 
With  respect  to  prices,  inflation  has  been  running  somewhat  below  the  Federal  Reserve’s 
objective  of  a  2  percent  annualized  rate for  the  personal  consumption expenditures  (PCE) 
deflator.  For  example,  over  the  past  twelve  months,  the  overall  PCE  deflator  has  risen  by 
1.4 percent, and the core PCE deflator, which excludes food and energy, has increased by 
1.5 percent. Moreover, for the next few months, inflation is likely to moderate further as the 
impact  of  falling  gasoline  prices  and  the  firmer  dollar  feed  into  the  official  U.S.  inflation 
statistics. Thereafter, I  expect  that  inflation  will  begin  to move  back  towards  our  2  percent 
objective, pushed there as slack in the economy continues to diminish and pulled there by 
well-anchored inflation expectations. 
In assessing inflation expectations, I currently put more weight on survey-based measures of 
inflation expectations as opposed to market-based measures. Survey-based measures have 
been  generally  stable,  consistent  with  inflation  expectations  remaining  well-anchored. 
However, market-based measures, such as those based on breakeven inflation derived from 
the  difference  between  yields  on  nominal  versus  Treasury  Inflation-Protected  Securities 
(TIPS), have registered declines over the past few months, even on a 5-years forward basis. 
Research done by my staff suggests that much of this decline in market-based measures of 
inflation compensation reflects a fall in the inflation risk premium – that is, what investors are 
willing to pay to protect themselves against inflation risk. Adjusting for the fall in the inflation 
risk premium, inflation expectations appear to have declined much less than implied by TIPS 
inflation breakeven measures. 
So what does this assessment of the outlook imply for monetary policy? Since September 
2012, when the last program of asset purchases was announced, there has been substantial 
improvement in the labor market outlook. Because the asset purchase program had fulfilled 
the  FOMC’s  stated  objectives,  the  FOMC  decided  to  end  the  program  last  month.  At  the 
same time, it still is premature to begin to raise interest rates – there remains slack in the 
labor market and the inflation rate is still too low. Hence, the last FOMC statement states: 
“The Committee anticipates, based on its current assessment, that it likely will be appropriate 
to maintain the 0 to 1/4 percent target range for the federal funds rate for a considerable time 
following the end of its asset purchase program this month.” But this sentence should not 
be  viewed  as  an  iron-clad  commitment.  As  the  statement  goes  on  to  say:  “However,  if 
incoming  information  indicates  faster  progress  toward  the  Committee’s  employment  and 
inflation objectives than the Committee now expects, then increases in the target range for 
the federal funds rate are likely to occur sooner than currently anticipated. Conversely, if 
progress  proves  slower  than  expected,  then  increases  in  the  target  range  are  likely  to 
occur later than currently anticipated.” In other words, what the FOMC does going forward 
will depend on how the economy evolves, and how this affects the labor market and the 
inflation outlook. 
In  considering  the  appropriate  timing  of  lift-off,  there  are  three  important  reasons  to  be 
patient.  First,  the  Committee  is  still  undershooting  both  its  employment  and  inflation 
objectives. Unemployment is too high and inflation is too low. Thus, monetary policy needs to 
be very accommodative in order to close these gaps relative to the Committee’s objectives. 
Second, when interest rates are at the zero lower bound, the risks of tightening a bit too early 
seem considerably greater than the risks of tightening a bit too late. A premature tightening 
might lead to financial conditions that are too tight, resulting in a weaker economy and an 
aborted lift-off. This would be problematic in that it would harm the Fed’s credibility and, more 
importantly,  would  be  difficult  to  rectify.  The  U.S.  experience  during  the  Great  Depression 
and the Japanese experience over the past two decades illustrate the risks of raising interest 
rates  too  soon,  especially  when  inflation  is  running  below  the  central  bank’s  objective. 
Finally,  given  the  still  high  level  of  long-term  unemployment,  there  could  be  a  significant 
benefit to allowing the economy to run “slightly hot” for a while in order to get these people 
employed again. If they are not employed relatively soon, their job skills will erode further, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  reducing their long-term prospects for employment and, therefore, the productive capacity of 
the U.S. economy. 
All that said, I hope the economic outlook evolves so that it will be appropriate to begin to 
raise interest rates sometime next year. While raising interest rates is often portrayed as a 
difficult  task  for  central  bankers,  in  fact,  given  the  events  since  the  onset  of  the  financial 
crisis, it would be a development to be truly excited about. Raising interest rates would signal 
that  the  U.S.  economy  is  finally  getting  healthier,  and  that  the  Fed  is  getting  closer  to 
achieving  its  dual  mandate  objectives  of  maximum  employment  and  price  stability.  That 
would be very good news, even if it were to cause a bump or two in financial markets. 
Global implications of U.S. monetary policy normalization 
Let me now turn to the implication of U.S. policy normalization for foreign economies. Like 
other central banks, our monetary policy mandate has a domestic focus. Our monetary policy 
actions,  though,  often  have  global  implications  that  feed  back  into  the  U.S.  economy  and 
financial  markets,  and  we  need  to  always  keep  this  in  mind.  For  most  of  us,  the  market 
volatility  that  we  saw  in  the  spring  and  summer  of  2013  during  the  so-called  “taper 
tantrum” still remains fresh in our minds. EME financial markets were hit the hardest, with 
declines  in  equity  prices,  a  widening  in  sovereign  debt  spreads  and  a  sharp  increase  in 
foreign  exchange  rate  volatility.  In  the  U.S.,  we  saw  a  spike  in  Treasury  yields,  with  the 
10-year rate rising by more than 100 basis points from early May before peaking in early 
September. 
Most  commentary  about  the  catalyst  for  these  moves  has  focused  on  the  shift  in 
expectations with respect to U.S. monetary policy – and, in particular, to uncertainty about 
the timing and implications of Fed tapering. This focus seems generally right to me, although 
other factors also played a role. 
From one perspective, the unconventional nature of recent U.S. monetary policy adds little 
that is fundamentally new to the challenges that face EMEs. These policies simply represent 
a way of easing that was necessitated by hitting the zero lower bound on the federal funds 
rate.  Central  bankers  have  managed  differences  across  countries  in  cyclical  positions  and 
policy stances many times in the past. This time should not be fundamentally different. 
But,  from  another  perspective,  we  have  less  experience  operating  with  unconventional 
monetary  policy,  and  this  creates  more  potential  uncertainties.  These  uncertainties  put  a 
premium on keen listening skills on our part and clear communication among central bankers 
as well as between central bankers and market participants. In my view, an important fact is 
that our large scale asset purchase programs affect the size of term risk premia globally. This 
new  set  of  monetary  policies  affects  financial  asset  prices  in  a  different  way  compared  to 
changes in short-term interest rates, and we should be humble regarding what we claim to 
understand about this distinction. 
Looking ahead, it seems likely that markets will remain focused on vulnerabilities that they 
might  have  ignored  prior  to  the  taper  tantrum  in  2013.  The  greater  premium  on  strong 
fundamentals, policy coherence and predictability will likely remain. There will be no one right 
answer in managing the trade-offs that come with the changed environment, and adjustment 
will sometimes be difficult. We will undoubtedly  experience further bumps in the road. The 
renewed volatility we saw last month is evidence enough of that. Yet, I think we can remain 
generally  optimistic  about  the  prospects  for  adjustment  so  long  as  market  participants 
continue to appropriately discriminate across countries, rather than treating EMEs as a single 
group. 
Furthermore, many EMEs generally appear to be better equipped today to handle the Fed’s 
prospective  exit  from  its  exceptional  policy  accommodation  than  they  were  during  past 
tightening cycles. This reflects the fundamental reforms that EMEs have put in place over the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  past  15  years,  as  well  as  the  hard  lessons  learned  from  past  periods  of  market  stress. 
Among the positives are: 
• 
The  absence  of  pegged  exchange  rate  regimes  that  often  came  undone  violently 
during periods of acute stress; 
Improved debt service ratios and generally moderate external debt levels; 
Larger foreign exchange reserve cushions; 
Clearer and more coherent monetary policy frameworks, supporting what are now 
generally low to moderate inflation rates; 
Generally improved fiscal discipline; and 
Better  capitalized  banking  systems,  supported  by  strengthened  regulatory  and 
supervisory frameworks. 
  Of course, progress has not been uniform across EMEs, and more work remains to further 
strengthen  institutional  structures  in  some  countries.  In  particular,  vulnerabilities  remain  in 
several important EMEs, and some EMEs are now being hit by a sharp adverse turn in their 
terms  of  trade  due  to  the  recent  fall  in  global  commodity  prices.  Still,  the  fundamental 
improvements  I’ve  cited  leave  many  EMEs  better  positioned  than  in  the  past  to  weather 
those times in the cycle when the external environment becomes more difficult. 
The impact that changes in Fed policy can have beyond our borders has led to calls for us to 
do  more  to  internalize  those  impacts,  or  even  further,  to  internationally  coordinate 
policymaking. As I’ve already noted, we are mindful of the global effects of Fed policy, given 
the central place of U.S. markets in the global financial system and the dollar’s status as the 
global reserve currency. Accordingly, we seek to conduct policy transparently and based on 
clear principles. Promoting growth and stability in the U.S., I believe, is the most important 
contribution we can make to growth and stability worldwide. 
There is, of course, the argument that Fed policy has been too accommodative for too long, 
creating risks for financial stability worldwide. Here, I think it’s important to consider carefully 
the  counterfactual. Would  countries  beyond  our  borders  really  have  been  better  off  with  a 
weaker U.S. economy – an economy that might have required exceptional monetary policy 
accommodation for  a much  longer  period  of time?  The fundamental  issue  is  whether  U.S. 
monetary  policy  has  helped  support  our  dual  objectives  of  maximum  employment  in  the 
context  of  price  stability,  and  whether  this  support  is  consistent  with  a  healthy  global 
economy. 
Moreover, it is far from clear that explicitly coordinated policy would produce better outcomes 
for  the  global  economy  generally,  or  EMEs  specifically.  Central  banks  face  enough 
challenges in tailoring policies to their own domestic circumstances. I believe that it would be 
taking on too much to attempt to collectively fashion policy in reference to global conditions. 
Monetary  policy  meant  to  suit  everybody  is  likely  in  the  end  to  suit  nobody.  Similar 
considerations  underlie  the  widespread  move  in  the  emerging  world  away  from  fixed 
exchange rate regimes. Policymakers worldwide have learned that a framework capable of 
responding in a disciplined but flexible manner to changing domestic conditions works best 
over the long run. 
While  explicit  coordination  looks  neither  feasible  nor  desirable,  there  is  more  that  central 
banks  in  general,  and  the  Fed  in  particular,  could  do  to  be  better  global  stewards.  As  an 
example,  recent  events  demonstrate  the  importance  of  effective  Fed  communication.  It  is 
clear,  in  retrospect,  that  our  attempts  in  the  spring  of  2013  to  provide  guidance  about  the 
potential  timing  and  pace  of  tapering  confused  market  participants.  Market  participants 
seemed  to  conflate  the  prospective  tapering  of  asset  purchases  with  monetary  policy 
tightening, and pulled forward their expectations about the likely timing of liftoff and raised 
their  expected  paths  for  policy  rates.  Lately,  we  seem  to  have  done  better:  market 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  participants  now  seem  to  share  the  Committee’s  current  assessment  that  policy  rates  will 
likely  remain  exceptionally  low  for  a  considerable  period  of  time,  even  now  that  the  asset 
purchase program has been completed. 
As you know, we’ve taken a number of steps in recent years to increase transparency and 
improve  our  communications.  This  includes  regular  press  conferences  by  the  Fed  chair 
following FOMC meetings; the publishing of growth, inflation and short-term rate forecasts of 
FOMC  participants;  and  a  concerted  attempt to  lay  out  the  guideposts that  the  FOMC  will 
look at to assess progress toward our mandate. We are, though, still learning how to more 
effectively communicate, especially given our new and expanded set of policy instruments. 
A second area in which we can and must do better is safeguarding financial stability. Simply 
put, we failed to act both early enough and decisively enough to stem the credit excesses 
that spawned the financial crisis and the Great Recession. The U.S. was not alone in this 
shortcoming, but given our position in the global financial system, we especially should have 
done better. We’ve taken important steps through new legislative mandates and a broader 
effort  to  rethink  our  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework.  In  particular,  systemically 
important  banking  organizations  must  now  hold  amounts  of  capital  and  liquidity  that  are 
better aligned with their risk profiles, and the official sector is making progress in ensuring no 
financial firm will be too-big-to-fail. 
All of this remains very much a work in progress. But, these efforts should help us to avoid 
repeating  the  mistakes of  the  recent  past,  and  enable  us  to  take  a  more  proactive  stance 
toward mitigating potential future vulnerabilities. Of course, we at the Fed are not alone here. 
Since  the  recent  financial  crisis,  central  banks  worldwide  have  been  engaged  in  a  broad 
rethinking of how to better fulfill their mandates. 
Let me close with a final thought. The largest problems that countries create for others often 
emanate  from  getting  policy  wrong  domestically.  Recession  or  instability  at  home  is  often 
quickly  exported.  Equally  important, growth  and  stability  abroad  makes all  our  jobs  easier. 
This means that there are externalities in the work we do, so that more effective fulfillment of 
our  domestic  mandates  helps  to  bring  us  collectively  to  a  better  place.  Ensuring  global 
growth and stability is and will remain our joint and common endeavor. 
Thank you for your kind attention. 
 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
