  S S Mundra: Emerging contours of regulation and supervision in the 
Indian banking sector 
Special address by Mr S S Mundra, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
Investors’ Conference, organized by Axis Capital Limited, Mumbai, 13 November 2014. 
 1. 
Delegates to the conference, ladies and gentlemen! It is a pleasure to be here this 
morning to interact with you all. At the outset, I would like to thank Axis Capital Limited and 
especially Mr. Nilesh Shah, for inviting me to address the participants. 
During  2013–14,  amid  slow  growth  and  high  inflation,  the  Indian  economy  had  to 
2. 
contend with serious challenges to external stability emanating from an unsustainably high 
current  account  deficit  (CAD),  capital  outflows  and  consequent  exchange  rate  pressures. 
Joint efforts by the Reserve Bank and the Government helped stabilize the economy. With 
greater political stability, commitment to fiscal consolidation, strengthening of the monetary 
policy  framework  and  better  policy  implementation,  GDP  growth  is  expected  to  be  around 
5.5 per cent in 2014–15 from the sub-5 per cent growth in the preceding two years. 
3. 
As  you  are  aware,  based  on  the  recommendations  of  the  Expert  Committee  to 
Revise  and  Strengthen  the  Monetary  Policy  Framework  (Chairman:  Dr.  Urjit  R.  Patel)  in 
January 2014, Reserve Bank of India formally adopted a glide path for disinflation in terms of 
headline consumer prices, with target milestones of 8 per cent by January 2015 and 6 per 
cent  by  January  2016.  The  Reserve  Bank  anchored  this  change  by  tightening  monetary 
policy  in  the  January  2014  policy  review  and  maintained  this  tight  stance  in  subsequent 
policy  reviews  so  as  to  set  the  economy  firmly  on  a  disinflationary  path.  Since  then, 
inflationary pressures have fallen in a broad-based manner. This has been aided in part by 
measures taken by the Government to control the fiscal deficit and to augment food supply, 
disincentivise agricultural exports and reform agricultural marketing policies. 
4. 
I have been asked to speak on a subject of my choice. Let me take this opportunity 
to  dwell  on  some  current  as  well  as  emerging  themes  in  the  regulatory/supervisory 
landscape for the Indian Banking Sector and the financial sector in general. But before I get 
into  the  subject  proper,  let  me  give  a  broad  overview  of  RBI’s  current  areas  of  focus  for 
strengthening the Indian financial system. 
Five pillars of RBI’s developmental measures 
5. 
Those of you closely following Reserve Bank of India’s policies would have noticed 
that over the past few quarters our developmental measures have been focused on five key 
areas. These are: 
• 
• 
Strengthening the monetary policy framework 
Strengthening  banking  structure 
through  new  entrants,  branch  expansion, 
encouraging new varieties of banks and moving foreign banks into better regulated 
organisational forms 
Broadening  and  deepening  financial  markets  and  increasing  their  liquidity  and 
resilience so that they can help allocate and absorb the risks entailed in financing 
India’s growth 
Expanding  access  to  finance  to  small  and  medium  enterprises,  the  unorganised 
sector,  the  poor  and  underserved  areas  of  the  country  through  technology,  new 
business practices, and new organisational structures 
Improving the system’s ability to deal with corporate distress and financial institution 
distress by strengthening real and financial restructuring as well as debt recovery 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  6. 
While  RBI’s  developmental  and  regulatory  policies  continue  to  evolve  around  this 
five pillared approach, current efforts, in specific, are directed at certain important initiatives. 
These include strengthening and harmonisation of regulatory guidelines for non-bank finance 
companies,  rationalising  the  priority  sector  lending  guidelines,  measures  for  strengthening 
the  fraud  risk  management  system  and  resolution  of  fraud  cases  in  commercial  banks, 
designing a charter of customers’ rights, developing a framework for resolution of financial 
firms under distress and catalysing the state level coordination committee structure for better 
regulation, supervision and monitoring of the activities of firms indulging in promoting Ponzi 
schemes.  Thus,  on  the  whole,  RBI’s  regulatory  and  supervisory  resources  are  directed  at 
fostering a competitive, vibrant and sound financial system for meeting the financing needs 
of a growing economy. 
Issues in regulation/supervision 
A. 
7. 
Let me now turn to the issues and challenges in the regulation /supervision of banks 
in  India.  As  finance  professionals,  you  are  well  aware  that  the  performance  of  banks  is 
inextricably linked to the performance of the economy, more so in India where the financial 
sector is heavily dominated by the banks. Following the Global Financial Crisis, the standard 
setters  have  been  working  overtime  on  fixing  the  regulatory  loopholes  which  allowed  the 
financial  sector  to  underestimate  and  underprice  risks.  Regulatory  reforms  agenda  in  the 
banking  sector,  also  called  the  “Basel  III”  reforms  are  aimed  at  improving  the  banking 
sector’s  ability  to  absorb  shocks  arising from financial  and  economic  stress;  improving the 
risk management and governance framework and on strengthening the banks’ transparency 
and  disclosure  standards.  Steps  have  also  been  taken  to  address  the  concerns  around 
macro-prudential or system wide risks that can build up across the banking sector as well as 
the pro-cyclical amplification of these risks over time. 
8. 
Efforts  have  been  initiated  to  end  the  moral  hazards  associated  with  “Too-Big-to-
Fail”  by  requiring  the  global  systemically  important  banks  (G-SIBs)  to  hold  higher  loss 
absorbency  capital  and  to  improve  resolvability  upon  failure.  Focus  has  also  been  on 
strengthening  the  supervisory  effectiveness  and  disclosure  standards.  Reserve  Bank  is 
committed  to  carry  forward  banking  sector  reforms  by  adapting  the  best  international 
practices  to  country-specific  requirements  while  being  mindful  that  growth  dynamics  in 
Emerging Market Economies (EMEs) are different and there is a thin line between prudent 
regulation and excessive regulation. 
Risk based supervision 
9. 
In  the  domestic  context,  a  significant  shift  has  happened  in  the  approach  to 
supervision  of  commercial  banks  in  the  form  of  risk  based  supervision.  At  the  core  of 
supervisory monitoring under RBS is an assessment of the quality of a bank’s procedures for 
evaluating, monitoring and managing risk, and of the bank’s internal models for determining 
economic  capital.  The  success  of  the  risk  based  supervision  approach  is  incumbent  upon 
quality and integrity of data, skill levels and competency across the banks and regulators and 
above all, an orientation of the top management of the bank towards risk-oriented business 
activities and oversight function. I will touch upon some of these issues in the course of my 
address. Let me now turn specifically to some of the recent regulatory/supervisory measures 
initiated by the RBI: 
10. 
No  discussion  on  the  Indian  banking  system  these  days  is  complete  without  a 
discussion on the asset quality of the banking sector as well as the capital requirement of the 
public sector banks. Hence these are the first two issues which I would dwell upon. 
Asset quality 
i) 
11. 
The slowdown of the Indian economy in recent times has had its impact on the asset 
quality  of  the  banks.  The  overall  banking  system  in  India  is,  however,  quite  stable  and 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  resilient  though  there  are  some  specific  areas which  pose  challenge  to  the  regulators  and 
supervisors  and  need  continuous  monitoring.  The  level  of  gross  non-performing  advances 
(GNPAs)  as  a  percentage  of  total  gross  advances  for  the  entire  banking  system  is  at  an 
elevated  level  of  around  4  per  cent  while  the  net  non-performing  advances  (NNPAs)  as  a 
percentage of total net advances is around 2.2 per cent. The level of distressed assets is not 
uniform across bank groups. PSBs as a group, exhibit much larger GNPA and NNPA levels. 
While on an isolated basis, the asset quality is  not very distressing, if we  were to add the 
portfolio of restructured assets to the GNPA numbers this surely raises concerns. 
12. 
In line with the fifth pillar mentioned above, various steps have been taken by RBI to 
ensure  improvement  in  the  system’s  ability  to  deal  with  corporate  and  financial  institution 
distress. For effective NPA Management and to enable speedier and prompt recovery, RBI 
has  set  out  Guidelines  on  “Early  Recognition  of  Financial  Distress,  Prompt  Steps  for 
Resolution and Fair Recovery for Lenders: Framework for Revitalising Distressed Assets in 
the  Economy.  Detailed  Guidelines  on  formation  of  Joint  Lenders’  Forum  (JLF),  Corrective 
Action  Plan  (CAP),  “Refinancing  of  Project  Loans”,  “Sale  of  NPAs  by  Banks”  and  other 
regulatory measures were issued to banks, emphasizing inter-alia, the need to ensure that 
the  banking  system  recognises  financial  distress  early,  takes  prompt  steps  to  resolve  it 
through rectification, restructuring or recovery thereby ensuring that interests of lenders and 
investors are protected by setting in motion a corrective action plan which incentivizes early 
identification of problem cases, timely restructuring of accounts considered to be viable, and 
taking  prompt  steps  for  recovery  or  sale  of  unviable  accounts.  At  the  same  time,  the 
guidelines  provide  for  punitive  actions  on  lenders  in  the  form  of  accelerated  provisioning 
norms  if  they  fail  to  report  the  status  of  distressed  accounts  to  Central  Repository  of 
Information  on  Large  Credits  (CRILC)  or  if  JLFs  are  not  convened  within  the  stipulated 
timeframe etc. 
13. 
The CRILC has been created within RBI to collect, store and disseminate data on all 
borrowers’  credit  exposures  including  Special  Mention  Accounts  (SMA  0,  1  &  2)  having 
aggregate  fund-based  and  non-fund  based  exposure  of  Rs.  50  million  and  above.  The 
repository is expected to help in tracking and reviewing exposures/impairment of such large 
borrowers more effectively across banking institutions as also NBFCs so that timely remedial 
measures can be taken. 
14. 
A point that I wish to highlight here is that “Restructuring” per se is not necessarily a 
forbidden  word.  It  is  a  legitimate  financial  activity  practiced  the  world  over  to  help  the 
borrowers tide over short term problems. Policy and administrative reforms would establish 
that such forbearance was appropriate to preserve economic value in the system. It may get 
further help from easing commodity prices and growth returning in some parts of the globe. 
Our concern on restructuring is more around the fairness of the process. It should address 
the problem, not merely postpone it. Hence, RBI has set out clear guidelines that a second 
round of restructuring would lead to automatic classification of the asset as non-performing 
and call for a higher provisioning requirement. 
ii) 
Capital adequacy of banks 
15. 
There have been numerous discussions on the need and ability of the Indian banks 
to raise additional capital to support their business, going forward. I would not say that the 
concerns raised in this regard are entirely misplaced, especially for the public sector banks. 
The  need  to  shore  up  capital  adequacy  would  arise  on  account  of  pulls  from  several 
directions. These  include  need for  higher  provisioning  requirements  due  to  deterioration  in 
asset  quality,  phased  implementation  of  Basel  III  Capital  norms,  capital  required  to  cover 
additional risk areas under the risk based supervision framework as also the need to expand 
the business and meet the likelihood of higher credit demand going forward. Let me tell you 
that at present, the capital position of Indian banks is comfortable with all of them meeting 
the  extant  regulatory  requirement  comfortably.  The  capital  to  risk  weighted  assets  ratio 
(CRAR) for Indian banks under Basel III as at end March 2014 stood at a comfortable level of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  12.9 per cent. While the ratio for the PSBs was lower at around 11.38 per cent, the ratio in 
case of private sector and the foreign banks was in excess of 16 per cent. Going ahead, the 
capital position of the banks, especially the PSBs, is likely to come under some strain, both in 
terms  of  quantity  and  quality.  To  meet  minimum  capital  requirements,  capital  buffers, 
domestically  systemically  important  banks  (DSIBs)  surcharge  and  impact  of  increased 
stressed  assets, the Government’s  contribution to  the  equity  up  to  March  31,  2019,  would 
have  to  be  to  the  tune  of  two  lakh  forty  thousand  crore  rupees  at  the  existing  level  of  its 
shareholding in respective public sector banks. This requirement is independent of the risk 
based  capital  requirements  which  the  banks  might  need  under  the  RBS  process.  It  is, 
however, important to note that this requirement may come down if, going forward, the asset 
quality  improves  on  account  of  higher  growth  and  consequently,  higher  internal  retention. 
Notwithstanding  the  room  available  to  the  banks  to  meet  the  Basel  III  timeline,  the  banks 
have to look to generate more internal capital. With the emphasis on fiscal consolidation by 
the GOI, the leeway earlier available to the PSBs to approach the Govt. for additional capital 
will be limited and hence, one of the options for the Government could be to reduce its stake 
in some of the PSBs which presently ranges from 56.26 per cent to 88.63 per cent. 
Total loss-absorbing capacity (TLAC) for global systemic banks 
iii) 
16. 
Let me now come to a related issue which is being debated by the standard setting 
bodies.  You  might  have  already  read  in  the  newspapers  a  couple  of  days  back  about  the 
proposals being set out by the Financial Stability Board (FSB) to lay down a new minimum 
standard for “total loss-absorbing capacity” (TLAC) for the G-SIBs. The TLAC standards are 
meant to provide confidence to home and host authorities that the G-SIBs do have sufficient 
capacity  to  absorb  losses,  both  before  and  during  resolution  and  simultaneously  enable 
resolution authorities to implement a resolution strategy which would minimise any impact on 
financial stability and ensure the continuity of critical economic functions. 
17. 
While the TLAC regulations are meant to be applicable to G-SIBs, we would surely 
see  such  regulations  find  their  way  into  the  domestic  regulations  across  jurisdictions  over 
time. We have already seen regulations on the higher loss absorbency capital requirement 
and resolution regime for G-SIBs slowly being made applicable for the D-SIBs and hence, it 
can well be assumed that the international community would want the TLAC regulations to 
be  made  applicable  to  the  D-SIBs  in  all  jurisdictions  as  well  as  banks  with  overseas 
presence. We  have  expressed  our  reservations  on  the  likely  spillover  impact  of  the  TLAC 
proposals on the banks in the emerging markets economies (EMEs) with delirious impact for 
economic growth in EMEs and emphasised the need for ab initio addressing of the concerns 
of the EMEs during the consultation process. We have also emphasised that ownership of 
the banks should also have a bearing upon such requirements. 
Unhedged forex exposures 
iv) 
18. 
You  would  all  probably  recall  the  significant  volatility  experienced  in  currency 
markets around the globe, and more so, in the EMEs, at the mere mention of an exit from 
accommodative monetary policy by the FED Chairman, during May last year. Actual tapering 
of asset purchase programme by the FED and the recent announcement of a complete exit 
from the quantitative easing programme that has been in existence since 2008 has not had a 
very adverse impact on the rupee. However, notwithstanding the recent measures and policy 
buffers created since last year, it is highly likely that any reversal in the interest rate trend in 
the  US  would  lead  to  flight  of  capital  to  the  so-called  “source”  countries,  in  the  process, 
putting pressure on the domestic currency of the EMEs. 
19. 
The wild gyrations in the forex market has the potential to inflict significant stress in 
the  books  of  Indian  companies  who  have  borrowed  abroad  as  was  evident  during  the 
financial  crisis.  This  stress  eventually  hampers  their  debt  repayment  capability  to  the 
domestic lenders as well. It is precisely with this consideration that RBI has been advocating 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  a curb on the increasing tendency of the corporates to dollarize their debts without adequate 
mitigation. 
20. 
Our  inspection  of  banks’  books  has  highlighted  need  for  the  banks  to  have  more 
robust  policies  for  risk  mitigation  on  account  of  un-hedged  foreign  currency  exposure  of 
corporate  entities.  Inadequacies  of  data further complicate  the  impact  assessment  of  such 
exposures across the banking system. The banks have been advised to factor in this risk into 
their  policies/  pricing  decision  and  also  devise  means  for  sharing  of  information  on  such 
exposures amongst themselves. Regulatory guidelines have also been since issued outlining 
the capital and provisioning requirements for exposure to entities with significant unhedged 
forex exposures. 
Corporate governance 
v) 
21. 
Another  area  which  is  a  major  challenge,  especially  in  the  PSBs,  is  corporate 
governance. Some of the recent headline events have shown the PSBs in poor light. As a 
regulator and supervisor of banks, RBI has been putting a lot of emphasis on this aspect. 
The P J Nayak Committee appointed by RBI to review “Governance of Boards of Banks in 
India” has made certain significant recommendations like splitting the post of Chairman and 
Managing Director at PSBs, giving fixed five-year tenures for these posts, professionalising 
the  Boards  of  PSBs,  etc.  RBI  is  constantly  engaging  with  the  Government  for  the  early 
implementation  of  the  Committee’s  recommendations.  A  related  concern  is  the  impending 
vacuum likely to be created in the public sector banks, especially in the middle management 
level, due to large-scale retirement of officers in next 2–3 years. On our part, we have been 
sensitizing the bank managements to address the likely talent deficit that they would have to 
encounter more so on account of entry of new banks in the private sector space in the near 
term. 
Positives for the banking sector 
B. 
22. 
Let me now dwell upon several positives that hold out for the Indian banking sector. 
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  the  performance  of  the  Indian  banks  pretty  much  mirrors  the 
performance of the Indian economy. The piling up of distressed assets and consequent drop 
in profitability is, thus, largely a fallout of poor macroeconomic environment- both domestic 
and  global.  Going  forward,  a  sharp  uptick  in  “investment”  led  as  also  “consumption”  led 
demand  is  expected  in  the  economy.  The  banking  sector,  the  corporates  and  the 
administration have to cater to the diverse needs of two broader constituencies in the country 
i.e.  “India”  and  “Bharat”.  Towards  this  end,  they  might  have  to  adopt  different  strategies. 
However, there is no denying the fact that a whole host of opportunities are likely to emerge 
for the Indian banks in future. 
Economic recovery 
i) 
23. 
The Indian economy is poised for a gradual recovery. As growth picks up, domestic 
supply bottlenecks ease and the stalled projects come back on stream again, the outlook for 
both  manufacturing  and  services  sectors  would  brighten. With  a  stable Government  at  the 
Centre,  pace  of  economic  reforms  in  the  areas  of  industry,  services,  international  trade, 
labour  markets,  public  sector  management,  financial  markets  and  competition  are  likely  to 
improve  further,  which  would  help  improve  commercial  activity  levels  and  productivity, 
thereby  help  enhance  the  growth  potential.  As the  economy  recovers,  investment  demand 
and the need for credit will pick up which would boost banks’ performance and, to a great 
extent, address the issues of asset quality and internal generation of capital. 
Government’s focus on infrastructure 
ii) 
24. 
Attempts  to  de-clog  the  infrastructural  bottlenecks  through  accelerated  clearances 
and setting up of smart cities are likely to open up new avenues for banks. In order to make it 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  easier for the banks to extend long term loans to infrastructure sector with flexible structuring 
to  absorb  potential  adverse  impacts,  RBI  has  already  issued  enabling  guidelines.  This  will 
mitigate the asset-liability management (ALM) problems faced by banks in extending project 
loans to infrastructure and core industry sectors, and also ease the process of raising long-
term resources for project loans to infrastructure and affordable housing sectors. 
Retail demand 
iii) 
25. 
The impending turnaround in the Indian economy has the potential to provide a big 
leg-up  to  the  domestic  demand.  India’s  demographic  pattern  suggests  that  the  domestic 
consumption  demand  would  continue  to  grow  for  a  foreseeable  future.  In  the  absence  of 
corporate  demand,  many  of  the  banks  have  been  crowding  in  the  retail  space  trying  to 
capitalise on demand for housing, two-wheelers and four-wheelers, white goods and so on. 
This, however, raises concerns on credit absorption level in the sector. Though, the segment 
has  until  now  experienced  moderate  levels  of  impairment, going forward,  the  banks  would 
need  to  put  in  place  systems  and  processes  to  ensure  adequate  origination  &  monitoring 
standards and stand guard against formation of asset bubbles. Here again, the big potential 
would  lie  in  the  “greater  India”  where  banking  penetration  has  hitherto  been  inadequate. 
Meeting the funding needs for the life-cycle demand of this segment would be a sustainable 
business avenue for banks in the coming years. 
MSME sector 
iv) 
26. 
MSME sector plays a pivotal role in generating employment, increasing cross-border 
trade and fostering the spirit of entrepreneurship. In fact, it is being increasingly recognized 
by the policy makers that if India has to regain its high growth trajectory, it needs a vibrant 
MSME sector. 
27. 
Quite often, the sector complains about not having to only contend with higher cost 
of  borrowing  but  also  a  lack  of  availability  of  timely  credit.  In  this  context,  let  me  make  a 
couple  of  points.  The  interest  rate  on  lending  are  no  longer  administered  and  are  left  to 
market forces,  the  only  caveat  being  that  the  lending  has to  happen  above  the  base  rate. 
Second and more importantly, it needs to be realised that the alternate cost of borrowing for 
the  sector  would  be  much  higher  than  the  median  rate  of  12–14  %  which  the  MSME 
borrowers currently pay. On our part, we have  advised the banks to take into account the 
incentives  available  to  them  under  the  Credit  Guarantee  Fund  Trust  for  Micro  and  Small 
Enterprises (CGTMSE) scheme and assign zero risk weight for capital adequacy purpose for 
the portion of the loan guaranteed by the CGTMSE for such MSE borrowers. 
28. 
There are also issues around the unavailability of credit rating for first time MSME 
borrowers. In this context, the banks have been advised to formulate Board approved policy 
and  start  using  credit  scoring  models  in  their  evaluation  of  the  loan  proposals  of  MSE 
borrowers which works on the principles of attributes of similar borrowers rather than on past 
or future financials. 
29. 
Further, the  underlying objective  of the  proposed  issuance  of  small finance  banks 
licenses is to facilitate provision of credit to small and hitherto credit starved sections of the 
society, which has been relying on informal finance channels. 
licensing  of 
Differential licensing of banks 
RBI  has  announced 
v) 
30. 
the  private  sector. 
Simultaneously, issuance of guidelines for differentiated licences for small finance banks and 
payment banks are in the final stages. Possibility of continuous or “on-tap” licensing, setting 
up  of  wholesale  banks  and  conversion  of  large  urban  co-operative  banks  into  commercial 
banks were detailed in our consultation paper issued earlier. Discussions on these ideas are 
currently  underway  and  a  detailed  road  map  of  the  necessary  reforms  and  regulations  for 
freeing entry and making the licensing process more frequent will be issued in due course. 
two  new  banks 
in 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  While these possibilities encourage much optimism, they are simultaneously likely to place 
strain  on  our  supervisory  resources,  which  we  are  internally  trying  to  strengthen  and 
optimize.  As  these  banks  are  likely  to  cater  to  small  and  relatively  uninformed  borrowers, 
protection of consumer interest would also pose a big challenge. 
31. 
In conclusion, I would like to say that while challenges remain for the sector, a host 
of opportunities also await the Indian banks and they have to be geared up to seize these 
opportunities.  RBI’s  regulatory  and  supervisory  stance  is  oriented  towards  facilitating 
strengthening of the sector in terms of best practices, processes and structure. Neither over-
indulgence nor over caution are on our policy menu card. 
I once again thank the organizers for inviting me here today and wish the deliberations all 
success. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
