  Mario Draghi: Hearing at the Committee on Economic and Monetary 
Affairs of the European Parliament 
Introductory statement by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, for the 
Hearing at the Committee on Economic and  Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament, 
Brussels, 17 November 2014. 
 Mr Chairman, 
Honourable Members of the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure for me to be back again in this committee for the last hearing of 2014. This 
year has once again been a year of profound change for the euro area and for the Union as 
a whole. It was a year of legislative and institutional progress on many fronts, as 2014 saw 
the birth of banking union with the agreement of the Single Resolution Mechanism, the start 
of the Single Supervisory  Mechanism and the successful conclusion of the comprehensive 
assessment  of  banks’  balance  sheets.  And  it  was  indeed  a  challenging  year  for  monetary 
policy, which saw the ECB take a wide range of measures to respond to the risks emanating 
from an increasingly sobering economic outlook. 
You have chosen two topics for today’s hearing, the relationship of financial fragmentation 
and monetary policy as well as the Eurosystem’s collateral framework. I will touch on both 
these  issues,  but  let  me  first  run  you  through  our  current  assessment  of  the  economic 
outlook. 
the  same 
in  some  countries.  At 
Economic and monetary developments 
The euro area growth momentum has weakened over the summer months and most recent 
forecasts have been revised downwards. At the same time, our expectation for a moderate 
recovery in 2015 and 2016 remains in place. Demand should be supported by a number of 
factors.  Among  them  are  our  monetary  policy  measures  and  progress  made  in  fiscal 
consolidation  and  structural  reforms 
time,  high 
unemployment,  sizeable  unutilised  capacity,  and  the  still  ongoing  and  necessary  balance 
sheet adjustments are likely to dampen the recovery. 
Risks to the economic outlook continue to be on the downside. In particular, the weakening 
in the euro area’s growth momentum, alongside heightened geopolitical risks, could dampen 
confidence  and,  in  particular,  private  investment.  In  addition,  insufficient  progress  in 
structural  reforms  in  euro  area  countries  constitutes  a key  downward  risk to  the  economic 
outlook. 
Inflation  in  the  euro  area  remains  very  low.  In  October,  it  stood  at  0.4%.  We  expect  it  to 
remain  at  around  current  low  levels  over  the  coming  months,  before  increasing  gradually 
during 2015 and 2016. Looking forward, we closely monitor risks to price developments. 
The  latest  monetary  data  point  to  subdued  underlying  growth  in  broad  money.  Its  annual 
growth rate has increased moderately over recent months. It appears that the turning point in 
credit  growth  is  now  behind  us,  and  credit  growth  rates,  while  remaining  negative,  are 
gradually improving. 
Monetary policy and financial fragmentation 
Let  me  turn  to  financial  fragmentation,  the  first  topic  you  suggested  for  today’s  hearing. 
Fragmentation in various segments of the financial market has been a major obstacle to the 
smooth conduct and transmission of monetary policy, and ultimately to our ability to deliver 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  on  our  mandate.  Also  owing  to  determined  actions  the  ECB  has  taken,  fragmentation  has 
receded significantly since the height of the financial crisis. Unsecured money market rates 
are  trading  again  at  reasonable  spreads  over  their  secured  counterparts.  Sovereign  bond 
spreads in the euro area decreased significantly from their peaks in 2012. Together, these 
developments reflect the gradual return of confidence among investors in the euro area. 
Yet, we still face a situation where our very accommodative monetary policy stance does not 
sufficiently reach some final borrowers  in the euro area. This is because credit markets in 
some parts of the euro area are still impaired and show only timid signs of recovery. As a 
result, credit growth continues to contract and credit conditions – while having eased recently 
– remain overall tight from a historical perspective. Importantly, costs of bank funding have 
improved, but are still relatively high in some Member States. Where they are lower, they are 
not passed on in full to the real economy. 
The  monetary  policy  measures  decided  in  June  and  September  this  year,  the  Targeted 
Longer-term  Refinancing  Operations  and  the  purchase  programmes  for  asset-backed 
securities and covered bonds, are designed to overcome these obstacles. They will enhance 
the transmission of monetary policy, support the provision of credit to the euro area economy 
and, as a result, provide further monetary policy accommodation. We see early indications 
that our credit easing package is delivering tangible benefits. Since the beginning of June, 
forward money market rates have shown steep declines across the maturity spectrum. Now, 
the  forward  curve  consistently  lies  below  zero  over  a  two-year  horizon.  EONIA  is  not 
expected to exceed 25bps before well into 2018. The 3-month EURIBOR rate, which is an 
important conduit of monetary policy impulses to lending rates, dropped to all-time lows and 
now  stands  close  to  zero.  And  the  policy  decisions,  in  particular  those  announced  in 
September, triggered a compression of spreads across other asset classes, including ABS, 
covered bonds and sovereign bonds. But more time is needed for the full materialisation of 
the positive effects of the most recent set of measures. 
In this context, let me emphasise that we are committed to scale the total magnitude of our 
measures – lending operations as well as outright purchases – up to a size that can deliver 
the  intended  support  to  inflation  and  the  recovery  of  the  euro  area  economy.  All  these 
measures  will  have  a  sizeable  impact  on  our  balance  sheet,  which  we  expect  to  move 
towards its early 2012 dimension. This will ensure that our accommodative monetary policy 
stance will contribute to a gradual recovery and a return of inflation rates in the medium term 
to levels closer to our aim of below but close to 2%. 
Nonetheless, we need to remain alert to possible downside risks to our outlook for inflation, 
in  particular  against  the  background  of  a  weakening  growth  momentum  and  continued 
subdued  monetary  and  credit  dynamics.  We  therefore  need  to  closely  monitor  and 
continuously  assess  the  appropriateness  of  our  monetary  policy  stance.  If  necessary  to 
further  address  risks  of  too  prolonged  a  period  of  low  inflation,  the  Governing  Council  is 
unanimous  in  its  commitment  to  using  additional  unconventional  instruments  within  its 
mandate.  In  this  context,  we  have  also  tasked  relevant  ECB  staff  and  Eurosystem 
committees  with  the  timely  preparation  of  further  measures  to  be  implemented,  if  needed. 
Such measures could include further changes to the size and composition of the Eurosystem 
balance sheet, if warranted to achieve price stability over the medium term. 
Monetary  policy  alone  –  however  –  cannot  overcome  financial  fragmentation  in  the  euro 
area.  Fragmentation  across  national  borders  also  reflects  underlying  national  imbalances 
and institutional deficiencies. 
Overcoming these require determined structural reforms on the side of national governments 
to improve the business environment and setting incentives to invest, with the aim to boost 
productivity, create new jobs and raise the growth potential of the economy. 
Reducing financial fragmentation also requires tackling remaining shortcomings in economic 
and  financial  integration.  As  already  mentioned,  substantial  progress  has  been  made  this 
year.  Banking  union  should  now  be  completed 
the 
finalisation  of 
following 
the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Comprehensive Assessment and the SSM taking on supervisory responsibility. This means 
in particular completing the SRM, enhancing the borrowing capacity of the Single Resolution 
Fund and thereby delivering on the commitment to establish a credible backstop. 
Moreover, looking forward, a greater integration of financial markets – also referred to as a 
Capital  Markets  Union  (CMU)  –  would  be  warranted  to  further  reduce  fragmentation  of 
financial  markets,  improve  funding  to  SMEs,  enhance  the  transmission  of  the  ECB’s 
monetary  policy,  and  overall  benefit  economic  growth.  We  look  forward  to  the  detailed 
elements that the Commission will announce in the course of 2015 and I have no doubt that 
the European Parliament as co-legislator will again play a decisive role in this regard. 
The collateral framework of the Eurosystem 
Let me now say a few words on the second topic you have chosen, our collateral framework. 
Since  the  very  beginning,  the  Eurosystem  collateral  framework  had  been  designed  to 
achieve two goals at the same time: First to protect the Eurosystem from incurring losses, as 
it is explicitly required by the Statute of the ECB/ESCB; second to ensure that Eurosystem 
credit operations can be carried out smoothly by making sufficient collateral available. 
The  past  and  recent  experience  has  shown  that  such  a  dual  set-up  of  the  Eurosystem 
collateral framework has been indeed very effective. So far, the Eurosystem has never had 
to recognise a loss stemming from the Eurosystem credit operations. In the few cases where 
counterparties have defaulted, for instance in the case of a subsidiary of Lehman Brothers, 
the Eurosystem was able to fully cover its exposure by seizing the posted collateral. At the 
same  time,  the  collateral  framework  ensured  that  banks  were  able  to  obtain  sufficient 
amounts  of  central  bank  liquidity  throughout  the  crisis.  This  became  most  visible  in  the 
context of the two Very Long Term Refinancing Operations that the ECB conducted in 2011 
and 2012. In these operations banks obtained collateralised central bank liquidity in the order 
of EUR 524 billion within only 10 weeks. 
This basic set-up of the collateral framework has remained the same since the beginning of 
monetary  union;  the  three  constituent  parts  of  the  Eurosystem  collateral  framework, 
i.e. (i) the  counterparty  framework,  (ii)  the  basic  eligibility  criteria  for  underlying  assets  and 
(iii) the risk control measures, have remained largely unchanged. The Eurosystem maintains 
a  broad  counterparty  framework  and  its  eligibility  criteria  are  still  based  on  the  same 
principles  as  at  the  beginning.  This  shows  that  the  design  of  the  Eurosystem  collateral 
framework is in general very robust. 
However, some changes were necessary to guarantee a smooth implementation of monetary 
policy at times of financial market stress that led to a general reduction in access to market 
funding. A collateral framework must never act in a pro-cyclical manner: Restricting banks’ 
access  to  liquidity  in  a  crisis  –  for  instance,  by  introducing  more  restrictive  criteria  for 
collateral  –  might  pose  a  risk  not  to  only  to  the  most  vulnerable  banks,  but  to  the  whole 
financial system. Ultimately, this would increase the risk for the central bank’s balance sheet 
rather than protecting it. Hence, in order to enable that a wide range of the counterparties 
could  continue  participating  in  the  refinancing  operations,  the  Eurosystem  temporarily 
relaxed  some  of  the  eligibility  criteria  for  underlying  assets.  This  was  done  on  several 
occasions.  For  instance,  from  2008  to  2011  and  again  as  of  2012,  we  accepted  foreign 
denominated marketable assets. In 2012 we created the Additional Credit Claims framework. 
Credit  standards  have  been  changed  by  accepting  lower  rated  assets  compared  to  those 
accepted  at  the  beginning,  notably  for  ABS  that  fulfill  certain  criteria.  However,  these 
accommodative measures were coupled with a stronger-scrutinised counterparty framework 
and  with  more  stringent  risk  control  measures.  As  a  result,  the  total  amount  of  eligible 
collateral  increased.  Thus,  an  enhanced  participation  of  counterparties  in  the  refinancing 
operations was enabled, while at the same time the risks for the Eurosystem expanded only 
moderately. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  The Eurosystem collateral framework has been quite complex from the very beginning, not 
the least because of the variety of national frameworks preceding it. With the onset of the 
monetary union, the goal was to provide access to Eurosystem credit operations to a broad 
range  of  counterparties,  in  contrast  to  some  other  central  banks  which  rely  on  a  few 
counterparties.  Therefore,  the  collateral  framework  had  to  take  into  account  the  various 
national banking systems and financial markets. Some national central banks, for example, 
accepted  credit  claims  as  collateral,  while  others  did  not.  Some  countries  had  developed 
covered bond markets, while others only started to set up a respective covered bonds law 
later, and the same could be said for ABS. For a collateral framework, a common standard 
had  to  be  found  which  embraces  these  national  characteristics,  while  at  the  same  time 
ensuring  that  sufficient  collateral  is  available.  Several  of  the  measures  taken  in  the  crisis 
have added to this complexity. Therefore a challenge going forward is to make the collateral 
framework  simpler  and  more  transparent,  without  impacting  the  ability  of  counterparties  to 
access our refinancing operations. I am confident that we will achieve this. 
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
2014 has been a year of profound change. But what has been achieved so far is not enough. 
2015  needs  to  be  the  year  when  all  actors  in  the  euro  area,  governments  and  European 
institutions alike, will deploy a consistent common strategy to bring our economies back on 
track. Monetary policy alone will not be able to achieve this. This is why there is an urgent 
need  to  agree  on  concrete  short-term  commitments  for  structural  reforms  in  the  Member 
States, on a consequent application of the Stability and Growth Pact, on the aggregate fiscal 
stance for the euro area, on a strategy for investment, and to launch work on a long-term 
vision to further share sovereignty ensuring the sustainable and smooth functioning of EMU. 
On that note, I am looking forward to our discussion. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
