   Yuba Raj Khatiwada: SEACEN – enhancing collaboration with other global 
financial stakeholders 
Response address by Dr Yuba Raj Khatiwada, Governor of the Central Bank of Nepal and Chairman 
of  the  SEACEN  Board  of  Governors,  at  the  50th  SEACEN  Governors’  Conference,  Port  Moresby, 
Papua New Guinea, 20 November 2014. 
 Mr. Patrick Pruaitch, CMG MP, Minister for Treasury, Papua New Guinea   
Mr. Loi Bakani, Governor of Bank of Papua New Guinea 
Mr. Naoyuki Shinohara, Deputy Managing Director of International Monetary Fund  
My fellow Governors and heads of delegates 
Delegates and distinguished speakers  
Ladies and Gentlemen 
It  is my  great  pleasure to  be  here  and  address the  50th  SEACEN  Governors’  Conference.  As  the 
chairperson of the BOG, let me extend warm regards to every one of you. I would also like to extend 
my  sincere  gratitude  to  Mr.  Loi  Bakani,  Governor  of  Bank  of  Papua  New  Guinea  for  hosting  this 
important SEACEN event. I take this opportunity to express my sincere appreciation to Mr. Bakani 
and his entire team as well as the SEACEN Centre for the warm hospitality extended to the delegates 
and  also  for  the  excellent  arrangements  made  for  this  event.  The  colorful  reception  we  had  last 
evening will be highly memorable to all of us. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
While  addressing  this  august  gathering  at  the  Opening  Ceremony  amid  20  member  central  bank 
Governors  and  quite  a  few  associate  members,  I  am  reminded  of  the  first  SEACEN  Governors’ 
Conference which was held in 1966 in Bangkok with the participation of seven heads/representatives 
of the central banks. Since then, and with each Governor’s Conference, the participation has grown 
from  the  small  group  to  this  present  member  of  twenty,  reflecting  the  organization’s  vibrant  and 
dynamic growth. Today, I am happy to welcome officially the Hong Kong Monetary Authority as the 
newest member of the SEACEN. 
Fellow Governors, 
Each  Governor’s  Conference  is  based  on  a  topical  theme  which  is  discussed  by  participating 
heads/representatives  and  where  important  issues  are  raised,  and  these  discussions  have 
contributed  and  enriched  the  policy  debate  in  this  region.  I  am  happy  to  observe  that  this trend  is 
continuing  with  this  bi-centennial  Governors’  Conference  on  “Regional  Initiatives  in  the  Midst  of 
Vulnerabilities”. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The  theme  for  this  year’s  SEACEN  Governors’  Conference  is  indeed  timely.  The  theme 
acknowledges that in the integrated global economy the strategies of central banks are affected by 
the external economy where formulation of domestic policies has to be made in an environment of 
greater cross-border financial linkages. In this context I understand that this conference will focus on 
three particular areas: (1) reconciling domestic and cross- border considerations in the use of macro-
prudential and capital-flow-management tools; (2) steps to further the development of regional bond 
markets  and  their  implication  for  monetary  policy  strategies;  and  (3)  issues  and  challenges 
associated with increased integration of emerging market banking systems. In this regard SEACEN 
has an important role in enhancing cooperation and coordination of members for spurting regional 
initiatives for ameliorating perceived risks. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   Fellow Governors  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
In  the  last  several  years,  the  dynamism  of  SEACEN  is  self  evident.  It  has  been  successful  in 
discharging its aim by adjusting its strategic goals in the changing environment as well as enhancing 
collaboration  with  other  global  financial  stakeholders  in  general  and  IMF,  BIS,  Bank  of  England, 
Bundes  Bank  and  CEMLA  in  particular.  In  the  meantime,  while  I  gather  the  fresh  memory  of 
49th SEACEN  Governor’s  Conference  and  33rd  Board  of  Governors’  Meeting  held  in  Kathmandu 
which was successful with fellow Governors’ encouraging participation, I would also like to express 
my sincere thanks to all BOG members for their kind and constructive support during my tenure as 
the  SEACEN  Chair.  Finally,  allow  me  to  conclude  by  wishing  everyone  here  a  productive  and 
rewarding Conference and a successful Meeting of the Board of Governors. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
