  Louis Kasekende: Bank of Uganda’s role in monetary policy, regulation 
and financial sector development 
Remarks by Dr Louis Kasekende, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Uganda, at the opening 
ceremony  of  the  Colloquium  of  Judges  and  Magistrates  on  new  laws  and  commercial 
products in the financial sector, Kampala, 20 October 2014. 
 My Lord, the Deputy Chief Justice 
My Lords, the Honourable Judges 
Your Worships, the Magistrates 
The Chairman and Members of the Uganda Bankers Association (UBA) 
Ladies and Gentlemen. 
It  is  a  pleasure  and  honour  for  me  to  have  been  invited  to  make  a  few  remarks  at  this 
workshop for the judiciary and bankers. I would like to thank the organisers for once again 
inviting me to speak at such a distinguished forum. 
This forum serves as a platform for your Lordships and Worships together with the bankers 
to  discuss  issues  pertinent  to  the  financial  services  industry  and  to  enhance  your 
understanding of them. As is the case around the world, the industry in Uganda is evolving 
very rapidly, with new products coming on the market. 
Since  its  inauguration  in  1981,  the  Uganda  Bankers’  Association  has  become  the  primary 
forum for sharing knowledge and articulating the interests of the banking industry in Uganda. 
The  UBA  has  understood  the  importance  of  reaching  out  to  all  stakeholders  in  society, 
including  the  judiciary,  government,  parliamentarians,  the  business  community  and  the 
general public. 
In this address, I would like to share with you the strategy of the Bank of Uganda regarding 
the maintenance of financial stability. In particular, I will talk about the role of the central bank 
in the areas of monetary policy, regulation and financial sector development. 
The  global  financial  crisis  that  erupted  in  2008  prompted  a  re-thinking  by  central  banks 
around the globe of how they approach economic and financial stability. In particular, there 
has  been  a  recognition  in  the  advanced  economies  that  “light  touch  regulation”  allowed 
financial  institutions  too  much  leeway  to  take  reckless  risks.  Central  banks  have  also 
embraced the need for what is termed a macroprudential approach to analysing risks to the 
financial stability. 
Prior  to  the  financial  crisis,  the  attainment  of  low  and  stable  inflation  was  considered 
sufficient to ensure macroeconomic stability. It was thought that financial stability was the job 
of  prudential  regulation  and  that  monetary  policy  should  focus  on  inflation  and  output 
stabilization. However, it is now recognized that risks to financial stability can build up even 
when inflation is under control, for example risks which emanate from lending and asset price 
booms. 
Over  the  last  decade  new  entry  and  regional  economic  integration  have  combined to spur 
competition in the financial services industry in Uganda. Furthermore, banks are embracing 
information technology to offer innovative financial products, such as mobile money, as well 
as  improve  the  efficiency  of  their  operations.  Several  new  banking  products  are  on  the 
market. Innovation and growth in the banking market are essential for meeting the needs of 
consumers  and  businesses  for  financial  services,  but  they  also  generate  new  sources  of 
risks.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Traditionally credit risk was the major type of risk facing banks in Uganda. The adoption of IT 
increases the importance of operational risk, while the increasing integration of the Uganda 
financial sector into global financial markets, through cross border banking and capital flows, 
also  creates  new  sources  of  risk.  The  evolution  of  technology  has  made  possible  the 
issuance and innovation of many varied banking products including the VISA, MasterCard, 
online Banking, Mobile money and e-commerce. All these facilitate modern banking. IT is a 
key driver of new banking products like mobile money transfers. Today, IT innovations have 
influenced our ways of living in many fields including banking industry and we all benefit from 
the new technologies. However, the growth of IT investments and sophisticated products as 
well as advanced services in the banking industry comes with a concern on “security” and 
new risks which is the challenging key to propel the sustainability of such growth. 
What is the role of the central bank in the financial sector? The primary responsibility of the 
BoU is to regulate the financial sector. Regulation has two objectives. The first is to protect 
the interests of depositors. We do this by imposing prudential requirements on banks, under 
the  framework  of  the  Financial  Institutions  Act  (FIA),  2004  such  as  minimum  capital 
requirements and liquidity requirements and restrictions on risk taking such as limits on large 
loan and foreign exchange exposures. We also intervene in distressed banks, again under 
the  framework  of  the  FIA,  to  ensure  that  banks  do  not  collapse  with  insufficient  funds  to 
repay their deposits. The second objective of regulation is to preserve financial stability; to 
prevent financial crises.  
This also involves ensuring that banks comply with the prudential regulations in the FIA. But 
we are also intending to introduce additional regulatory measures, which are informed by the 
macroprudential approach that I mentioned earlier, which are aimed specifically at mitigating 
systemic  risks.  Lessons  learnt  from  the  past  crises  have  taught  and  reminded  us  not  to 
ignore what adverse effects may come afterwards. Admittedly, BoU is just catching up with 
IT  developments.  For  instance,  mobile  money  agents  are  known  to  illegally  hold  money 
intended  for  money  transfers.  This  introduces  a  new  challenge  for  BoU  to  re-examine  the 
concept and definition of a “deposit”. Do mobile money agents take “deposits”? What must 
be  done  to  ensure  that  they  do  not  illegally  take  deposits?  The  advances  in  technology 
demand  that  BoU  and  other  regulators  world-wide  re-examine  financial  regulations  to 
facilitate  the  innovations  in  the  banking  industry.  Central  bankers  should  put  the  risks  and 
“security”  concerns  as  a  key  priority  and  align  these  concerns  with  standard  setting  to 
promote the advancement of banking services. In addition, BoU needs to work in close co-
operation with other industry regulators like the Uganda Communications Commission who 
licence and regulate the telephone and mobile money companies. 
The  need  to  combat  financial  and  economic  crime  is  increasingly  changing  the  role  and 
mandate  of  the  Central  Bank  which  is  required  to  honour  various  Freeze  Order  Lists  and 
requests from International stakeholders like the US Embassy and local stakeholders like the 
Criminal Investigations Department (CIID) in Uganda.  
I hope that this workshop will prove stimulating and valuable to all who are participating. 
Thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
