  Elvira Nabiullina: Guidelines for the Single State Monetary Policy in 2015 
and for 2016 and 2017. 
Presentation by  Ms Elvira Nabiullina, Governor of the Bank of Russia, at a meeting of the 
Committee on the Budget and Taxes of the State Duma of the Russian Federation, Moscow, 
13 October 2014. 
 Accompanying slides can be found on the Bank Russia’s website: Slides (PDF). 
Dear colleagues, good afternoon! 
Today we present for discussion the draft Guidelines for the Single State Monetary Policy in 
2015 and for 2016 and 2017. This document was prepared in rather difficult conditions. The 
first factor is a slowdown in economic growth. The second is the volatility and tension in the 
foreign exchange and financial markets. And the third is a leap of inflation, which occurred 
recently. This all creates a rather complicated environment for developing the strategy of the 
guidelines for the monetary policy. 
We have prepared three scenarios. I suggest starting with the baseline scenario in slide 2. 
The  baseline  scenario  is  based  on  the  assumptions  of  a  steady  recovery  of  the  global 
economic growth, a slight decrease in oil prices, a gradual resolution of geopolitical problems 
and lifting during 2015 of most of the imposed mutual sanctions and restrictions. 
Nevertheless,  in  the  first  half  of  2015,  in  our  view,  factors  limiting  investment  activity  will 
remain,  and  investment  activity  is  one  of  the  key  elements  that  can  affect  the  trends  in 
economic growth. However, with the normalisation of the external economic environment and 
opening up of access to the global capital markets for Russian companies, the investment 
demand  will  gradually  recover.  Implementation  of  large  infrastructure  financing  projects, 
including  energy  export  project  in  the  framework  of  co-operation  with  China,  will  also 
contribute to the investment growth. According to our estimates, the decline in fixed capital 
investment will cease in 2015, and in 2016–2017 the investment growth rate will gradually 
pick up. 
The  restrictions  on  the  imports  of  certain  food  products  introduced  in  August  2014  will  be 
conducive for import substitution. The import growth rates will remain low in 2015. Against 
the backdrop of low growth in the world economy and in the external demand combined with 
a decline in energy prices, no significant increase in export growth is expected. 
The impact of these factors on export and import dynamics will result in a decrease of the 
current  account  surplus  to  $15  billion  in  2017,  whereas  the  private  capital  outflow  will  be 
gradually reducing. 
In the baseline scenario, we expect an acceleration of the GDP growth from 0.4% in 2014 
(these are our assessments for this year) to 1.0% in 2015, 1.9% in 2016 and 2.3% in 2017. 
At the same time, the inflation will gradually decrease to 4.5–5.0% in 2015 (I stress again, 
that these assessments are based on rather optimistic assumptions of the baseline scenario) 
and to 3.7–4.2% in 2016–2017. 
The consumer price growth will slow down together with the exhaustion of the effect of the 
external factors that played a prominent role in the first half and in the middle of this year; 
exchange rate dynamics is also expected to normalise. With the stabilisation and subsequent 
reduction  in  inflation  expectations  during  2015,  the  baseline  scenario  predicts  a  gradual 
easing  of  the  monetary  policy.  The  more  pronounced  the  downward  trend  in  inflation  and 
inflation  expectations  will  be,  the  more  accommodative  the  monetary  policy  may  become. 
(Slide 3) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  In addition to the baseline scenario, built on fairly optimistic assumptions, we have prepared 
two  more  alternative  scenarios,  number  II  and  III.  They  are  based  on  more  negative 
assumptions. 
Scenario  II  predicts  that  the  mutual  sanctions  and  trade  restrictions  will  remain  during  the 
whole period under review. This will lead to a certain increase in the capital outflows coupled 
with corresponding exchange rate dynamics. It should be noted that the ruble volatility, on 
the one hand, partially offsets the negative impact of external environment by maintaining the 
competitiveness of Russian producers and accelerating import substitution, however, on the 
other hand, it leads to enhanced inflationary pressures. Scenario II also assumes a possible 
increase in the tax burden. Due to the decision taken by the government on this issue, we 
plan to finalise this scenario. This scenario forecasts lower GDP growth rates compared with 
the baseline scenario (you can see it on the slide), and a slower decline in inflation. The level 
of 4.0% will be reached by 2017. 
In  addition  to  scenario  II,  scenario  III  assumes  a  more  significant  decline  in  oil  prices,  i.e. 
down to $87 per barrel in 2017. The GDP growth rate in this scenario slows down to less 
than  1%.  The  scenario  forecasts  the  use  of  the  Reserve  Fund  within  the  framework  of 
existing budget rules in order to stabilise the situation in the economy. As a result, the fiscal 
policy,  in  our  opinion,  will  make  a  more  pronounced  positive  contribution  to  the  aggregate 
demand dynamics. 
In scenarios II and III the reduction of inflation to the medium-term target of 4.0% will require 
more time than in the baseline scenario; we believe it possible to reach this level in 2017. 
According  to  the  forecast,  the  inflation  will  be  6–6.5%  in  2015,  4.5–5.0%  in  2016  and  
4.0–4.5% in 2017. 
In  both  alternative  scenarios,  the  Bank  of  Russia  will  focus  on  ensuring  financial  stability, 
preventing  the  reduction  of  confidence  in  the  domestic  financial  system  and  national 
currency. To do this, we will be ready to use additional tools, including non-standard ones 
that have not been applied earlier. 
Currently,  the  Bank  of  Russia  is  also  developing  the  so-called  stress  scenario  –  an 
emergency scenario, which implies a sharp and more significant drop in oil prices over the 
forecasted horizon. We consider the possibility of adding this scenario to the Guidelines at 
the next stage of the document finalisation. Even though we work on this scenario, we still 
believe  that  the  probability  of  its  realisation  is  not  feasible.  However,  in  our  opinion,  such 
scenario should also be analysed. (Slide 4) 
As today we are discussing the draft federal budget for the next three years, I would like to 
address separately the issue of comparing the baseline scenario of the Bank of Russia with 
the baseline scenario of the Russian  Ministry of Economic Development. Overall, they are 
similar  in  key  assumptions  and  projected  paths  of  changes  in  most  key  macroeconomic 
indicators. However, I would like to note that our baseline scenario is the most optimistic of 
the three scenarios, whereas the baseline scenario of the Ministry of Economic Development 
is the most pessimistic one. 
Projections are rather difficult to make in the conditions of high uncertainty. We should take 
this into account and understand that we forecast and build different scenarios on the basis 
of different assumptions. In the baseline forecast of the Ministry of Economic Development 
the price of Urals crude will be $100 per barrel during next three years. In the forecast of the 
Bank of Russia, we are assuming a steady decline in the average annual Urals crude price 
from $105 to $102 in 2017. Many may say that the level of $105 is not a proper starting point 
for a realistic forecast, because now the prices are lower. But oil prices are quite volatile and 
we are always inclined to make projections based on their current dynamics. I would like to 
remind  you  that  as  far  back  as  this  summer  the  oil  price  exceeded  $110.  Therefore  the 
baseline scenario is built on the basis of the average annual oil price in 2015, which will be 
slightly  below  the  average  price  in  2014.  Further  on,  we  project  a  gradual  downward 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  adjustment  of  the  average  annual  oil  price.  If  necessary,  we  shall  review  the  base 
assumptions of oil price before submitting the final draft of the document to the State Duma. 
Another difference of the forecast prepared by the Ministry of Economic Development is in 
the fact that its projected 2015 inflation is 5.0–6.0%, which is higher than the forecast of the 
Bank  of  Russia.  In  our  assumptions  we  expect  the  exhaustion  of  the  factors  that  have 
caused  the  rise  in  inflation  this  year,  and  in  the  baseline  scenario,  we  assume  that  the 
inflation will reach 4–4.5%. 
According to our estimates, the difference between the key parameters of the federal budget, 
calculated on the basis of the forecast of the Ministry of Economic Development (this is the 
way the draft budget is calculated) and the one calculated on the basis of the Bank of Russia 
forecast,  is  also  insignificant. The federal  budget  deficit  in  2015–2017  will  remain  low. We 
welcome the policy aimed at ensuring the sustainability of public finance, especially bearing 
in mind long-term risks which may be caused, firstly, by the demographic situation, secondly, 
by the escalation of pension system problems, and thirdly, by a possible fall in oil and gas 
revenues. These long-term risks are already in place, and, therefore, in our opinion, it is very 
important  to  maintain  a  conservative  approach  to  budgeting  process  over  a  longer-term 
horizon.  Besides,  it  is  necessary  to  continue  improving  the  efficiency  of  budget  spending, 
particularly  in  terms  of  investment  projects,  in  order  to  increase  the  share  of  expenditures 
that have a multiplication effect on the economic growth within the budget structure. It will 
also indirectly affect the monetary policy and the possibility of its easing. 
In our opinion, the Bank of Russia contributes to creating conditions for structural changes in 
the  economy  by  decreasing  inflation  and  keeping  it  at  a  consistently  low  level.  Firstly,  we 
need to bring the inflation to a low level, and secondly, we need to keep it there. 
In 2014, the Bank of Russia is completing the longstanding transition to the inflation targeting 
regime,  and  from  2015  it  plans  to  conduct  monetary  policy  within  the  framework  of  this 
regime. 
Why does the Bank of Russia pursue its previously set goals, in spite of the current difficult 
situation,  high  uncertainty  of  its  future  development  and  volatility  of  financial  and  foreign 
exchange markets? (Slide 5) 
The  first  and  perhaps  the  most  fundamental  reason  explaining  why  we  believe  that  the 
reduction  of  inflation  is  so  important  is  the  following.  According  to  public  opinion  polls,  for 
about 70% of Russians the inflation not only remains the number one problem, but it is even 
becoming more acute. On these slides you see that the value of all other parameters and of 
all other problems that worry the Russians is going down, while the significance of inflation 
goes up. This is, perhaps, one of the most disturbing factors. 
High  inflation  erodes  salaries  and  pensions,  depreciates  savings.  In  order  to  stop  people 
being afraid of saving, to make them confident of their financial future and able of conducting 
organised  savings  (organised  savings  create  conditions  for  long-term  investments  and, 
consequently, for economic growth), we believe that it is critically important to pursue a policy 
aimed at reducing the inflation. 
Now  there  are  many  concerns,  and  I  would  say  these  are  justified  concerns,  about  the 
problem of expensive loans in the Russian economy. It is true that interest rates on loans, 
especially for investment purposes, are high. But we should understand that, as a rule, it is 
the inflation that sets the lower limit for interest rates on deposits and loans. Why? Because 
neither households no businesses are inclined to bring their savings to banks, if the interest 
rate is not as high as the inflation. In turn, the banks, being financial intermediaries, do not 
provide loans at rates lower than the cost of funds raised from households and businesses. 
And our survey of banks showed that when banks are asked about the key rate, in particular, 
whether they are ready to reduce their corporate lending rates in case the Bank of Russia 
reduces  the  key  rate,  banks  respond  in  the  negative,  because  there  is  a  problem  of 
excessive outstanding borrowings of enterprises in some industries and another problem of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  high risks. And, of course, interest rates on loans can only be reduced after the reduction of 
inflation. However, this is not enough, it is important to conduct changes in the real sector 
itself, it is necessary to reduce the risks of borrowing in order to bring down lending rates. 
I need three minutes more, please... 
There  should  be  a  selection  of  efficient  projects,  competition for  efficient  projects,  and  the 
rates  reduction  based  on  lowered  inflation,  which  will  allow  the  financing  of  investment 
projects. (Slide 6) 
It is quite obvious that under the influence of unforeseen external factors the inflation will be 
higher  this  year  than  we  projected.  Unfortunately,  it  will  reach  8%,  but  we  have  all  the 
grounds and prerequisites for the inflation reduction in the medium run. 
Besides, we believe it is important to fix our inflation target for the medium term at 4.0%. In 
our view, this level corresponds to the state of the Russian economy: on the one hand, it is 
conducive to the necessary changes; on the other hand, it stimulates investment processes. 
On  slide  6  you  see  our  inflation  forecasts  for  different  scenarios.  I  will  not  dwell  on  them. 
(Slide 7) 
And on slide 7, if there is a desire, we may have a look at the international experience of 
formulating  inflation  targets,  and  determining  the  actual  target.  In  our  opinion,  the  inflation 
targets, that we set, are quite consistent with the international experience. 
The inflation targeting will allow us to steer the interest rates better. (Slide 8) 
Slide 8 shows that interest rate management within the framework of the inflation targeting 
regime  allows  creating  a  more  predictable  economic  environment  for  our  businesses.  The 
interest rate is now no longer extremely volatile in the money market and, therefore, allows 
the economy to operate in a more predictable environment. 
It should be noted, that we do not intend to reduce the inflation very fast, we will proceed 
from the situation in the economy, and will not create excessive pressure on the economic 
growth. The current economic slowdown, in our view, is a result of structural limitations. On 
the last slides (slides 9, 10, 11 and 12), there is some evidence to this, i.e. the structural 
limitations  constrain  the  economic  growth  and  the  top  priority  task  is  the  liquidation  of 
bottlenecks. 
I would like to say that the draft Guidelines are available on the official website of the Bank of 
Russia. We are now discussing the document with experts and analysts. It was reviewed at a 
Russian  Government  meeting.  Based  on  the  discussion  outcomes,  including  the  today’s 
discussion, we will be ready to finalise the document and submit it for consideration to the 
State Duma. 
Thank you very much for your attention! 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
