  Carlos da Silva Costa: Reviving markets in high quality securitisation in 
Europe 
Address  by  Mr  Carlos  da  Silva  Costa,  Governor  of  Banco  de  Portugal,  at  the  European 
Investment Bank/International Monetary Fund Meeting, Brussels, 23 October 2014. 
 Let me start by congratulating the EIB and the IMF for this initiative. It is very important to 
assure that the topics chosen for this workshop (SME Securitization and Distressed assets) 
be  at  the  forefront  of  policy  makers’  and  regulators’  concerns.  A  more  healthy  European 
financial system requires progress in these areas.  
Six years since the onset of the financial crisis in 2008, output levels in the EU are below 
those observed before the crisis. The same is true for employment and investment. Some 
countries have fared much worse than this average while adjusting their balance sheets and 
external  accounts;  that  has  been  accompanied  by  deleveraging  in  all  sectors,  along  with 
changes in relative prices vis-à-vis the rest of Europe in a low inflation environment. All this is 
taking  place  at  the  zero  lower  bound  on  the  nominal  interest  rate,  where  active  monetary 
policy can only be unconventional.  
The role of financial markets is crucial in this story. But the distinction of the direction of 
causality  is  difficult:  is  the  economy  weak  because  of  financial  markets  or  are  financial 
markets  weak  because  of  the  economy?  The  question  is  often  put  as:  is  the  problem 
supply  or  demand  for,  say,  credit?  If  the  problem  is  supply  we  know  for  sure  one  thing: 
fewer firms will have access to credit, some will be in trouble and will fail due to this fact; after 
many of these firms fail one can naturally state that there is no demand for credit. That is why 
it  is  so  important  to  take  care  of  supply  problems.  In  doing  so,  policy  mistakes  should  be 
avoided. It would be a mistake to simply state that a major policy target is to restart 
funding. That would be relatively easy to achieve, by the way: by funding expensive projects 
with  public  funds,  independently  of their quality.  It  would  also  be  a  mistake to try  to  boost 
artificially any specific financial instrument.  
Instead,  the  route  towards  a  better  financial  system  is  one  characterized  by  a  level 
playing field for all types of finance, with specific choices left to borrowers and savers. 
The  tax  system  should  also  not  discriminate,  i.e.,  it  should  treat  symmetrically  equity  and 
debt, so that firms decide on the funding source regardless of the tax advantage of one over 
the  other.  Creating  this  level  playing  field  will  most  likely  lead  to  a  more  balanced  and 
diversified  financial  system,  i.e.,  with  more  options  for  savers  and  borrowers.  This 
competitive  environment  is  key  to  maintaining  financial  markets  in  constant  improvement, 
characterized by innovation that responds to the insufficiencies of the existing instruments. 
Ideally, restrictions to the development of any type of finance should always be clearly 
justified on efficiency grounds.  
Along the way, the problems faced by the main source of funding in Europe (i.e., banks) 
should not be forgotten. Banks do not seem to have liquidity problems; enough steps have 
already  been  taken  by  the  Eurosystem  to  provide  liquidity,  in  such  a  way  that  a  typical 
balance  of  payment  crisis  was  avoided  in  several  countries.  But  investors  are  suspicious 
about the reported balance sheet of banks. Thus, the steps towards the banking union, 
the  major  leap  Europe  has  given  to  deepen  financial  integration,  including  the 
underway comprehensive assessment, must be credible. Losses should be recognized 
so as to definitely resolve the uncertainty and bring back investors. Once this is done overly 
cautious capital requirements ought to be relaxed.  
In Europe, banks’ assets account for the bulk of financial wealth. And it is expected 
that  banks  will  continue  for  a  long  time  to  be  the  most  important  intermediaries 
between  borrowers  and  savers.  In  fact,  it  is  not  easy  to  change  from  a  bank-based 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  economy to a capital market-based economy nor it is clear that this is the best thing to do. 
For instance, European firms will have to go through several changes before such shift (if 
any)  occurs,  namely  in  terms  of  size,  access  to  information,  transparency;  in  general  a 
different corporate culture will be necessary. Forcing a shift may be counterproductive. At 
the same time, more prudent transformation ratios (say, loans to deposits), coupled with a 
lower capacity of banks to attract savings would imply, at least in some countries, that the 
ability of banks to lend would decrease; but their willingness would not necessarily decrease, 
since they keep the advantaged standpoint to screen and monitor loans. This means that the 
implied  gap  might  be  filled  by  actors  (insurance  companies,  pension  funds)  with  greater 
capacity to attract savings although with limited capacity to lend directly. Securitisation of 
bank loans can be the privileged vehicle through which the gap is filled.  
Securitisation is also key when one thinks at impediments to capital relief and at tools 
to  decrease  the  perilous  geographical  concentration  of  assets  in  banks’  balance 
sheets. In fact, if the right incentives are given, securitisation markets are the best way to 
more rapidly guarantee that loans are available for capital markets to invest while decreasing 
the  home  bias  in  banks’  balance  sheets  and  ensure  that  credit  is  channeled  to  the  best 
projects at the minimum cost. That is, securitisation could also have a decisive role in the 
integration and deepening of European financial markets, by allowing the transfer of risk from 
the originator to investors of any type located in other jurisdictions, in the context of a still 
very fragmented banking sector, lacking for instance relevant pan-European banks.  
Securitisation is not the silver bullet but it can thus be seen as a seed instrument to 
reshape the European economy funding, whereby long‐term investors such as insurance 
companies, pension funds among other real money investors are given a more important role 
in  the  funding  of  the  economy,  while  preserving  the  clients/banks  relationship.  These  real 
money  investors  are  natural  investors  in  securitization  also  because  they  have  long-term 
liabilities that ought to be matched by long-term investments.  
However, it seems now clear that the changes in the regulatory treatment of ABS in the 
aftermath of the crisis, which were to a great extent a response to events in the US, 
may arguably have hindered the development of the European ABS market. These post-
crises regulatory proposed reforms (CRD IV and Solvency II) lead to a substantial increase 
of  the  capital  charges  for  investments  in  securitisations.  It  is worth mentioning  that  risk 
weighted assets calculated on ABS tranches can be several times the risk weighted 
assets of the constituting pool. Further, the due diligence process that must be put in 
place to invest in ABS represents a considerable burden. The common practice in the 
US of full derecognition of assets also led to regulatory changes with impact on the supply 
side, and may have been a main cause of depression in the European ABS market, which in 
many  cases  already  had  provisions  against  lack  of  “skin  in  the  game”.  The  new 
regulatory framework  also  made  it  harder for  originators to get  capital  relief  insofar  as  the 
conditions that must be met in order to qualify for a significant transfer of risk (a necessary 
condition to free-up capital) are now much more stringent.  
This  was  unfortunate  in  the  sense  that  the  contribution  of  this  class  of  securities  in 
alleviating systemic effects, which should warrant a more reasonable regulatory treatment, 
was overlooked; in at least two ways. First, ABS sales are, from an aggregate perspective, 
a better way for banks to deleverage vis-à-vis credit supply restrictions. In fact, if many banks 
deleverage  simultaneously  by  restricting  credit,  this  will  have  an  aggregate  impact  on  the 
total supply of credit, which might end up in a credit crunch. In contrast, deleveraging through 
securitisation does not mechanically induce a credit supply restriction, even if many banks do 
it  simultaneously.  In  fact,  deleveraging  through  securitisation  could  provide  banks  with 
enough funding and capital to enable them to increase lending, or, it could help transforming 
zombie  banks  into  active  players  in  the  economic  recovery.  Second,  there  is  considerable 
home  bias  in  the  loan  portfolio  of  banks  whereas  diversification  of  assets  and  reserves 
across  the  euro  area,  something  which  is  achievable  through  cross-border  purchases  of 
ABS, could act as an absorber of asymmetric shocks.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
All this suggests that the next regulatory steps could justifiably give a more favourable 
treatment to ABS. There seems to be a consensus among European authorities and market 
participants  that  simple,  standard  and  transparent  securitisations  should  have  a  beneficial 
regulatory treatment. Speed is now warranted, also given the recent ECB announcement of 
an ABS purchase programme, so as to decisively eradicate regulatory uncertainty.  
This  recent  ECB  announcement  on  the  launch  of  an  ABS  purchase  programme,  although 
decided taking into account monetary policy considerations, is also a game changer in the 
reactivation  of  the  ABS  market.  It  reduces  the  stigma  carried  from  the  aftermath  of  the 
financial  crisis  and  it  contributes  decisively  to  put  securitisation  in  the  policy  agenda.  The 
inclusion of mezzanine tranches in the programme can effectively result in capital relief for 
originators. Also, the existence of a European guarantee scheme (possibly using European 
funds  and  with  involvement  of  a  supranational  institution  like  the  EIB/EIF  group)  to  help 
originators achieve a significant risk transfer at an affordable price can be justified under the 
current adverse market conditions. It is also important to stress that the focus on ABS based 
on SME loans may be counterproductive. ABS based on residential mortgages represent 
the bulk of ABS issuance while capital relief associated with sales of these ABS has 
also the potential to generate new SME loans.  
The  above  steps  depend  on  us  as  policy-makers.  But  one  should  not  forget  what 
depends  less  on  us  but  can  have  a  great  impact  on  the  securitisation  market.  I  am 
talking  about  rating  agencies.  It  is  now  clear  that  rating  agencies’  models  failed  in  the 
recent  past  as  a  result of  wrongly  basing their  ratings  on  the  correlations  observed  during 
good times. In my opinion, the recent methodological changes, imposing stricter rating 
caps (above the rating of the sovereign), in particular for EMU countries, amount to 
treating  crisis  times  as  structural  changes  making  the  new  methodologies  based 
again on extreme assumptions. Thus, the error is the same, this time in the opposite 
direction.  
Policy-makers timely acknowledged the fragilities in the design of the EMU, identifying the 
most crucial reforms needed. These will increase the robustness of the euro area economies 
against  adverse  shocks.  Rating  agencies  do  not  fully  recognize  the  ongoing  process. 
Instead,  they  decide  to  change  their  procedures  exactly  at  the  moment in which the 
institutional  framework  of  the  EMU  is  responding  to  the  very  same  conditions  that 
motivated such move. In this regard, it is important to emphasize that EMU countries are 
about to be equipped with a banking union, which will contribute towards breaking the link 
between sovereigns and the banking/financial system. Further relevant institutional changes 
include the creation of the European stability mechanism, the Fiscal Compact, the new role 
of  the  ECB  in  eliminating  runs  on  sovereign  debt  (through  the  Outright  Monetary 
Transactions  programme)  and  a  comprehensive  set  of  EU  regulations  aimed  at  avoiding 
imbalances.  Therefore,  rating  agencies  are  moving 
fiscal  and  macroeconomic 
countercyclically with the EU institutional advances and risk becoming irrelevant.  
On the methodological side, it is quite obvious that imposing caps in ratings based on the 
sovereign  is  equivalent  to  constraining  the  results  of  whatever  quantitative  models  rating 
agencies  use.  This  is  arbitrary  and  reduces  the  information  conveyed  by  the  ratings  while 
leading to severe pricing distortions in assets across countries. Investors in capped securities 
will  require  a  premium  over  similar  but  higher-rated  securities  while  other  investors  are 
limited by regulation in their incentives to buy poorly rated securities. Additionally, it should 
in  countries  under  stress  have  performed 
be  mentioned 
considerably well even during the crisis. Indeed, ABS default rates have remained low in 
these countries and at levels comparable to non‐stressed jurisdictions (including the US).  
Thus, unless clients and regulators have (also) access to ratings without the cap, there 
should  be  minimal  regulatory  reliance  on  the  ratings.  In  any  case,  additional 
transparency  on  loans,  the  existence  of  reliable  credit  registers  or  credit  score  systems 
should  be  mentioned  as  instruments  to  help  market  participants  understanding  better  the 
that  ABS  originated 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  European ABS risk profile. Additionally, such information could even support entrants into the 
business of assessing credit risk, which currently lacks competition.  
Whereas  the  policy  conclusions  are  often  hard  to  come  about,  one  thing  seems  clear: 
Europe must avoid ending up with zombie banks as well as with zombie firms. Zombie banks 
and zombie firms have never been a characterization of a well-functioning financial system 
and  economy.  This  is  to  say  that  Europe  must  avoid  a  lost  decade;  this  is  to  say  that 
European policy-makers must be intelligent and fight causes instead of consequences. This 
is to say that Europe will be able to maintain its geo-economic and geopolitical influence.  
Thank you.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
