  David Rule: Regulatory reform, its possible market consequences and 
the case of securities financing 
Speech by Mr David Rule, Executive Director for Prudential Policy of the Bank of England, at 
the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Chicago  Annual  International  Banking  Conference,  Chicago, 
6 November 2014. 
 The  financial  crisis  revealed  fundamental  weaknesses  in  pre-crisis  bank  regulation.  The 
regulatory  response  internationally  has  been  broad  and  deep.  Whereas  before  the  crisis, 
regulators struggled to keep up with financial markets innovation, since the crisis banks have 
struggled to keep up with regulatory innovation. That may continue for another year or so as 
reforms  are  finalised  and  implemented.  But  the  broad  shape  of  the  new  bank  regulatory 
regime is now clear. 
And,  as  regulators,  we  should  prepare  for  a  period  in  which  market  innovation  is  likely  to 
increase  again  –  both  the  good  kind  that  improves  services  for  customers  and  the  more 
ambiguous kind in which firms adjust their activities in response to regulatory constraints. We 
need  to  follow  these  adjustments  closely  in  order  to  understand  the  overall  effect  of 
regulatory  change  on  banks  and  financial  stability,  and  to  identify,  and  where  appropriate 
address, any unintended consequences. I would like to use this time to explore some of the 
possible effects, and focus on securities financing transactions as one area where tougher 
regulation is both needed but might have wider consequences. 
The new structure of bank capital regulation will comprise three core elements: 
First, a foundation of loss absorbing capacity, designed to absorb losses when banks fail so 
that resolution can take place without taxpayer support or huge damage to financial systems 
and the wider economy. 
Second, a central structure of going concern capital requirements, with significant reforms to 
improve quality and quantity. 
And third, capital buffers forming a protective roof against rainy days, with higher buffers for 
systemically-important 
the  most  damage,  and 
macroprudential authorities able to increase buffers counter-cyclically when they see storm 
clouds gathering. 
In the UK, as in other jurisdictions, we will also use more than one approach to assess the 
robustness  of  this  structure  –  with  different  approaches  likely  to  bind  on  different  firms, 
depending on their business models, at different times. 
First, the internationally-harmonised Basel risk-weighted ratio, intended to be risk sensitive 
and,  in  our  view,  with  some  continuing  role  for  firms’  internal  models  where  we  can  be 
confident  that  they  make  use  of  firms’  internal  information  to  improve  risk  sensitivity  in  a 
robust way. That debate continues internationally. 
Second, the leverage ratio, which weights assets equally as a safeguard against errors in ex 
ante estimates of risk and prevents excessive balance sheet stretch. In the UK, the Financial 
Policy  Committee  (FPC)  has  recently  announced  its  plans  for  leverage  ratio  requirements 
and buffers.1 
And third stress testing, to assess capital against the impact of macro-economic scenarios of 
current concern to policymakers, in the UK modelled partly using firms’ internal models and 
firms,  whose  distress  would  do 
                                                
1  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/financialstability/Documents/fpc/fs_lrr.pdf.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  partly  our  models.  The  results  of  our  first  concurrent  stress  tests  of  major  UK  banks  and 
building societies will be announced next month. 
The new bank capital framework will cause banks to hold significantly more capital than the 
pre-crisis  regime.  Major  UK  bank  capital  requirements  and  buffers  have  increased  around 
seven-fold once you take account of tougher definitions of capital, regulatory adjustments to 
asset valuations and higher risk weights as well as the more obvious increases in headline 
ratio requirements and buffers. 
But,  to  use  the  language  of  micro-economics,  this  significant  change  in  regulatory  capital 
requirements  –  the  “relative  prices”  of  different  risks  –  will  lead  to  substitution  as  well  as 
income effects. Over time, banks will adjust their portfolios to changed capital requirements. 
The  overall  extent  to  which  banks  are  better  capitalised  and  the  financial  system  is  more 
stable will depend on the scale and nature of these adjustments. Any substitution effects are 
likely to be stronger if regulation is introduced inconsistently across countries. It is important 
that we continue to seek consistency in implementing internationally-agreed standards. 
One adjustment may be a shift in activity from banks to non-banks. That could be beneficial 
for  financial  stability:  for  example,  where  long-term  market-based  finance  provides  an 
alternative to bank credit. But we must be alert to the development of new forms of shadow 
banking,  meaning  substantial  maturity  transformation  and  leverage  outside  the  banking 
system. 
The  balance  of  activities  may  also  shift  between  banks.  The  post-crisis  reforms  include 
additional  capital  buffers  for  globally-systemically  important  banks  (G-SIBs),  and,  as  the 
Governor has said, the FSB is on track to present a proposal for an international standard on 
total  loss-absorbing  capacity  for  these  banks,  to  the  Brisbane  G20  summit  this  month.2 
These changes are intended to move G-SIBs further away from distress and to make orderly 
resolution possible if, nonetheless, they do fail. But it is possible that tougher regulation of 
G-SIBs  might  also  encourage  them  to  become  less  systemically-important  over  time, 
perhaps with some shift of activity to smaller banks. At this stage, it is too early to tell. And, in 
the  other  direction,  there  are  some  signs  that  higher  regulatory  requirements  might  be 
leading to greater concentration of activity amongst the largest firms in certain markets: for 
example long-term derivatives. That might be consistent with micro-economic theory, which 
suggests  that,  in  oligopolistic  markets  with  high  fixed  costs,  an  increase  in  marginal  costs 
due to higher regulatory capital requirements may tend to lead to a higher concentration of 
activity amongst the biggest players (Chart 1). Authorities will need to monitor these trends 
closely. 
Within the scope of their business models, individual banks are also likely to change their mix 
of activities in response to changing regulatory requirements. Regulators will need to be alert 
for pure regulatory arbitrage – seeking to change the form but not the economic substance of 
transactions in order to lower regulatory requirements. We have already seen, for example, 
transactions seeking to take credit risk in the form of derivatives rather than loans in order to 
lower the leverage exposure measure. 
More legitimately, banks might switch from activities for which risk weights have increased to 
activities  which carry lower risk weights (Chart 2). The leverage ratio will, however, set an 
effective floor on the ability of banks to improve their capital position by shifting into low risk-
weighted  assets,  providing  a  safeguard  against  uncertainties  around  our  estimates  of risk. 
Conversely, banks for which the leverage ratio is a binding requirement may have incentives 
to move into higher risk-weighted activities (Chart 3) but the risk-weighted ratio should limit 
the extent of any such risk shifting. In this way, the risk-weighted and leverage ratios should 
complement one another. It will be interesting to see how banks allocate capital in a world 
                                                
2  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2014/speech765.pdf. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  where they are subject to multiple capital constraints – risk-weighted, leverage and stress-
test-based. In principle, banks should allocate capital to individual business units based on 
the marginal capital requirements of those activities to the bank as a whole – so if a bank 
overall is constrained by risk-weighted capital requirements, it will allocate capital based on 
risk-weighted  assets  even  to  business  units  for  which  the  leverage  ratio  or  stress  test  is 
binding  on  an  individual  basis.  But  as  banks  move  closer  to  the  critical  point  at  which  the 
leverage ratio rather than the risk-weighted ratio becomes binding – an average risk weight 
of 35% based on a Tier 1 leverage ratio requirement of 3% and risk-weighted requirements 
and buffers of 8.5%3 – they will need to be increasingly mindful of both constraints. 
The banking system will be substantially better capitalised in future than it was pre-crisis. But 
regulators  will  need  to  follow  closely  how  banks  are  adapting  to  tougher  bank  capital 
standards and identify any adverse unintended consequences. Those might take the form, 
for  example,  of  loopholes  that  provide  an  opportunity  for  regulatory  arbitrage,  an 
unexpectedly  significant  impact  on  financial  markets  or  a  conflict  with  other  regulatory 
priorities, such as shifting derivatives markets towards central clearing. Where appropriate, 
we  will  need  a  snagging  process  to  review  and  adjust  through  the  international  regulatory 
bodies. 
Securities financing transactions 
One example of a market where tougher regulation was both needed but might have wider 
consequences is securities financing. 
Dealers  run  large  securities  financing  “matched  books”  in  which  they  borrow  cash  against 
securities,  lend  cash  against  securities,  borrow  securities  against  cash,  lend  securities 
against cash and borrow securities against other securities. At first hearing, that sounds like 
a rather pointless daisy chain. But securities financing markets are important (Chart 4). First, 
reverse repo transactions (short-term cash loans against high-quality bonds) provide money-
like  assets  for  risk-averse  wholesale  investors,  like  money  funds  and  sovereign  reserves 
managers. As Zoltan Poszar has shown, their demand for money, particularly in US dollars, 
far  outstrips  traditional  supply  in  the  form  of  insured  bank  deposits  or  Treasury  bills 
(Poszar 2014).  Securities  financing  markets  fill  the  gap.  Second,  acting  as  prime  brokers, 
dealers  finance  the  long  and  short  positions  of  leveraged  investors  such  as  hedge  funds. 
Third,  securities  financing  markets  facilitate  the  flow  of  high-quality  securities  from  their 
underlying beneficial owners, such as pension funds and insurance companies, to banks and 
dealers  which  increasingly  need  to  use  and  reuse  them  in  order  to  meet  regulatory 
requirements to collateralise their obligations: for example, to other banks and dealers and to 
central counterparty clearing houses. 
Securities financing markets may be important but the financial crisis demonstrated that they 
can also be fragile. Securities thought to be “safe” collateral, such as AAA-rated mortgage-
backed  securities  and  peripheral  European  sovereign  bonds,  became  “risky”  collateral. 
Haircuts on lending against those securities increased (Chart 5). Both the risk-averse money-
seeking  investors  and  the  leveraged  risk-seeking  investors  on  either  side  of  the  dealers’ 
balance  sheets  questioned  the  liquidity  and  solvency  of  many  of  those  dealers.  Maturities 
shortened  dramatically  until  most  transactions  were  at  overnight  maturities,  rolling  daily 
(Gorton  et  al,  2014).  Some  dealers  experienced  “runs”.  Financing  terms  for  leveraged 
investors tightened sharply, causing some to fire sale assets and adding to market instability. 
In  the  US,  the  market  infrastructure  was  flawed,  with  the  daily  unwind  of  tri-party  repo 
transactions relying on massive intra-day financing from private sector clearing banks. 
                                                
3  8.5% is the sum of the 6% minimum Tier 1 to risk-weighted assets ratio plus the 2.5% capital conservation 
buffer under Basel III. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  b. 
c. 
Since the crisis, regulators have addressed many of the underlying problems of excessive 
leverage and maturity transformation: 
a. 
Securities financing transactions are included in the internationally-agreed leverage 
exposure measure adopted by the Basel Committee4. Leverage ratio requirements 
will put prudent limits on the size of dealers’ matched books. 
They are also included in the Basel Committee’s measures to address liquidity risks. 
The recently-announced Net Stable Funding Ratio5 will require short-term secured 
loans to financial and non-financial borrowers to be backed by at least 10% stable 
funding. And supervisors can use the Liquidity Coverage Ratio6, as we have been 
doing for some time in the UK, to require dealers to hold liquid assets against prime 
brokerage risks such as withdrawal of cash margin by hedge fund clients. 
The  Financial  Stability  Board  has  agreed  minimum  haircuts7  in  order  to  limit  the 
leverage that non-banks can obtain through borrowing cash against private sector 
securities.  These  haircut  floors  have  deliberately  been  set  at  “backstop”  levels 
designed to prevent excess in times of market exuberance while allowing room for 
prudent firms to do their own risk management. 
The US authorities have taken steps to strengthen the tri-party infrastructure. 
d. 
The  reforms  are  not  yet  complete.  One  important  missing  ingredient  is  data  collection  to 
monitor  market  trends  more  closely.  For  example,  the  authorities  need  to  understand  the 
composition  of  the  collateral  being  used  across  key  financial  markets  in  order  to  identify 
concentrations. The financial crisis showed the risks associated with a market-wide margin 
call  when  widely-used  collateral  is  subject  to  an  unexpected  common  price  shock.  Data  is 
also  needed  to  track  the  terms  of  transactions,  including  maturity  and  haircuts.  One 
interesting idea is for regulators to run exercises in which they ask prime brokers to calculate 
portfolio  haircuts  against  archetypal  leveraged  portfolios.  The  aims  would  be  both  to  track 
any  loosening  in  market-wide  standards  over  time  and  to  spot  outlier  dealers  that  require 
lower haircuts than their competitors. 
These significant regulatory reforms will have consequences for the behaviour of dealers and 
investors in securities financing markets. Some market participants may seek ways around 
the  new  regulations:  for  example,  there  has  been  talking  about  dealers  “renting”  balance 
sheet from other market participants or establishing off-balance sheet financing vehicles. The 
flipsides of more resilient dealers and markets in periods of stress may well be less leverage, 
less  maturity  transformation  and  lower  dealer  inventories  in  more  normal  periods.  The 
balance is not easy to strike; we may need to readjust our approach as we learn. 
But the goal of these reforms is clear: to make securities financing markets resilient. Robust 
securities  financing  markets  should  help  to  stabilise  rather  than  destabilise  the  financial 
system  in  the  face  of  shocks.  The  reduction  in  dealer  inventories  has  attracted  a  lot  of 
comment, with questions about whether they will be willing and able to provide liquidity as 
market makers in falling markets on the same scale as in the past. But the role of dealers in 
providing stable financing to leveraged investors may be equally important. Those investors 
may be the most likely to see a market crash as a buying opportunity – but only if they are 
not over-leveraged and have access to borrowing from financially-sound dealers. Put another 
                                                
4  http://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs270.pdf. 
5  http://www.bis.org/bcbs/publ/d295.pdf. 
6  http://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs238.pdf. 
7 
In October 2014, the FSB published Strengthening Oversight and Regulation of Shadow Banking: Regulatory 
framework for haircuts on non-centrally cleared securities financing transactions (http://www.financialstability 
board.org/publications/r_141013a.pdf).  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  way, we want dealers and leveraged investors to be providers not demanders of liquidity in a 
crisis. 
References 
Gorton, G B, Metrick, A, & Xie, L (2014), The flight from maturity. No.  w20027. National 
Bureau of Economic Research, 2014. 
Poszar, Z (2014), ‘Shadow banking: the money view’, Office of Financial Research Working 
Paper No.14–04. 
Tirole, J (1988), The theory of industrial organization, MIT Press. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   Chart 1: Higher capital requirements and market concentration(a)
  
In an oligopolistic market, assume banks that invested first have a higher market share and 
are more profitable for a given level of costs than the banks that invested second. Higher 
capital  requirements  push  the  profits  of the  banks  with smaller market  shares  below the 
fixed cost, causing them to exit, while the profits of banks with larger market shares remain 
above  the  fixed  cost  and  they  remain  in  the  market.  The  market  becomes  more 
concentrated.  
Profit (excluding fixed cost) 
Higher capital requirements  
increase marginal costs 
Banks with large market share 
Banks with smaller market share 
Fixed 
cost 
Marginal cost 
 (a) The chart is drawn based on the Stackelberg-Spence-Dixit model described in chapter 8.2 in Tirole (1988). 
 
 
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Chart 2: A bank substitutes investment in a lower-risk-weighted asset for investment 
in a higher-risk-weighted asset when the risk weight for the higher-risk-weighted 
asset increases  
A bank chooses a portfolio of assets where its indifference curve is tangent to its risk-based 
capital constraint. An increase in the risk weight on the higher-risk-weighted assets relative 
to  the  risk  weight  on  the  lower-risk-weighted  assets  induces  a  bank  to  decrease  its 
investment in the higher-risk-weighted assets and increase its investment in the lower-risk-
weighted assets.  
Higher-risk-weight asset 
Increased risk weight on the higher-risk-weighted asset 
pivots the risk-based constraint inwards 
 Lower-risk-weight asset 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  Chart 3: A bank invests more in a higher-risk-weighted asset when facing a binding 
leverage ratio constraint as well as a risk-weighted capital ratio constraint  
A bank that faces only a risk-weighted capital constraint chooses a more highly leveraged 
portfolio  consisting  mainly  of  the  lower-risk-weight  asset.  The  introduction  of  the  leverage 
constraint means this portfolio choice is no longer available. Faced with both constraints, the 
bank switches to a portfolio with more investment in the higher-risk-weighted asset and less 
in  the  low-risk-weighted  asset.  But  the  risk-weighted  capital  constraint  limits  the  extent  of 
that switch.  
Higher-risk-weighted asset 
Leverage constraint 
The introduction of the 
leverage ratio leads a bank to 
increase investment in the 
higher-risk-weighted asset 
Risk-based constraint 
Lower-risk-weighted asset 
  Chart 4: Simplified summary of securities financing market 
 
 8 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Chart 5: Average haircuts on securities financing transactions 
This chart shows that haircuts increased during the crisis, especially for loans to non-banks 
against securities other than government securities. Data is based on responses to an FSB 
quantitative impact study by banks and dealers from a number of countries and uses actual 
transaction data. 
Source: Financial Stability Board.8 
 
Haircut 
Split by asset class of collateral and by counterparty type. 
                                                 
8  Details 
regarding 
r_141013b.pdf.  
this  dataset  are  available  at  http://www.financialstabilityboard.org/publications/ 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
