  Christopher Kent: Ageing and Australia’s economic outlook 
Address  by  Mr  Christopher  Kent,  Assistant  Governor  (Economic)  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of 
Australia,  to  the  Leading  Age  Services  Australia  (LASA)  National  Congress,  Adelaide, 
20 October 2014. 
 I thank Tim Atkin, Laura Berger-Thomson, David Jacobs, Sharon Lai and Melissa Watson for help in preparing 
these remarks.1  
Near-term outlook 
I’d like to thank Leading Age Services Australia for the opportunity to be here today. I want to 
focus on some implications of population ageing for the longer-term outlook. 
Before that, I’ll make two remarks about the near-term outlook. First, with inflation expected 
to remain consistent with the 2–3 per cent medium-term target, monetary policy is currently 
configured to support growth in demand. Low interest rates temporarily raise the disposable 
incomes of those with debt, but lower incomes for those reliant on interest-bearing assets. 
This is stimulatory nonetheless, in part because the household sector is a net debtor overall. 
Low interest rates also encourage expenditure to be brought forward, provide an incentive for 
savers to shift into riskier, higher-return assets, and push up asset prices, to the benefit of 
those that own housing and equities. 
A second point is that while monetary policy tends to focus on the outlook for the next few 
years – which is dominated by business cycle considerations – it is important for the Bank to 
account  for  longer-term  structural  changes.  For  example,  labour  force  participation  has 
declined  noticeably  over  recent  years.  Much  of  this  owes  to  the  usual  response  of 
discouraged  workers,  both  young  and  old,  to  subdued  labour  market  conditions.2  This 
discouraged worker effect is likely to unwind as conditions improve. But some of the decline 
also reflects the increasing effect of ageing on labour force participation. 
This  illustrates  the  point  that  to  understand  the  near-term  outlook  better,  we  need  to 
distinguish between shorter-term business cycle influences and longer-term structural forces. 
An increasingly important longer-term force is the ageing of the population, which is the focus 
of the rest of my presentation. 
Population ageing – its nature 
Population ageing is driven by three different forces. The first is the baby boom that followed 
the Second World War. The second is the drop in fertility rates thereafter. Combined, these 
two changes led to a “bulge” in the age distribution of the population (Graph 1). The early 
part of this cohort began to retire from around the turn of the century and the baby boom is 
 1   HILDA: The following Disclaimer applies to data obtained from the HILDA Survey.  
 
The Household, Income and Labour Dynamics in Australia (HILDA) Survey was initiated and is funded by the 
Australian Government Department of Social Services (DSS), and is managed by the Melbourne Institute of 
Applied Economic and Social Research (Melbourne Institute). The findings and views based on these data 
should not be attributed to either DSS or the Melbourne Institute. 
2   See  Kent,  C  (2014),  Cyclical  and  Structural  Changes  in  the  Labour  Market,  Address  on  Labour  Market 
Developments, hosted by The Wall Street Journal, Sydney, 16 June. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  increasingly putting downward pressure on the share of the population that is of (traditional) 
working age.3 
Graph 1 
 The  third  force  driving  population  ageing  is  rising  longevity.  Australians  born  today  can 
expect to live nearly 25 years longer than those born a hundred years ago. The increase in 
life expectancy has occurred throughout this period and appears to be ongoing. 
Population ageing – some challenges 
Conversations about ageing often focus on the challenges it poses. But it also provides us 
with numerous opportunities. Let’s first consider some of the challenges and assume for the 
moment that behaviours don’t respond to population ageing.4 
(Relatively) fewer workers 
If people were to retire at about the same age as in the past, population ageing would drive 
further falls in labour force participation rates over coming years. 
                                                
3   By itself, ageing is estimated to have subtracted from the labour force participation rate by between 0.1 and 
0.2  percentage  points  per  year  over  the past  decade  and a  half;  this  effect  has  picked up  a  little  in  recent 
years as baby boomers have begun to reach the age of 65 years. See Kent (2014) for details. 
4   These challenges, and possible responses to them, have been highlighted by the regular “Intergenerational 
Reports” since 2002, and by the Productivity Commission; see, for example, Productivity Commission (2013), 
“An  Ageing  Australia:  Preparing 
the  Future”,  Research  Paper,  November,  available  at: 
<http://pc.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0005/129749/ageing-australia.pdf>. 
for 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The resulting decline in the supply of labour (relative to the total population) would tend to put 
upward pressure on wages (at least pre-tax wages) and reduce the returns to capital.5 
The  pressures  on  the  labour  supply  will  be  felt  more  acutely  by  industries  that  rely  more 
heavily  on  labour.  Most  notably,  this  includes  services  industries,  such  as  aged  care  and 
health  care  (Graph  2).  There  is,  however,  likely  to  be  scope  for  labour  to  be  reallocated 
across  services  industries.  In  particular,  an  older  population  will  require  relatively  fewer 
workers to care for and educate children. 
Graph 2 
 More demand for services 
At the same time as labour will tend to be in shorter supply, larger shares of the population 
will need a degree of assistance and care. Indeed, demand can be expected to shift towards 
services (away from goods) given that services constitute a larger share of total consumption 
for older people than for the rest of the population (Graph 3).6 Much of this reflects spending 
on  health  care.  This  extra  demand  for  services  will  be  in  addition  to  that  associated  with 
rising wealth. People tend to spend an increasing share of their rising incomes on services in 
part because there are ultimately limits to the consumption of food, wearing of clothes and 
use of other goods. 
                                                
5   This discussion ignores the role of international capital mobility, but given that population ageing is a global 
phenomenon, the qualitative results of closed and open economy models will be comparable. 
6   To  gauge  the  true  extent  of  this  we  need  to  account  for  goods  and  services  that  people  purchase  for 
themselves directly, as well as those they obtain through the public provision of goods and services, which is 
what Graph 3 has done. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
 Graph 3 
  So, we can expect that ageing will lead to extra demand for services at the same time that it 
weighs on the supply of services (via declining labour force participation). More demand and 
less supply will push up the prices of services, relative to the prices of goods. This rise in the 
relative price of services has long been apparent for other reasons. One reason for this is 
that productivity growth has tended to be greater for goods than for services. That is, we’ve 
got better at producing more goods for a given level of inputs, more so than has been the 
case for services. Another reason is that the global integration of much of Asia over recent 
decades  has  brought  large  numbers  of  workers  into  the  production  of  traded  goods, 
increasing their supply and therefore pushing down the relative prices of goods. 
It is important for stronger wage growth, and an increase in the relative prices of services to 
occur. Such signals will encourage higher labour force participation than would otherwise be 
the case and bring forth the additional supply of services that we will want and need. 
Pressures on the public purse 
Population  ageing  will  place  the  public  purse  under  a  degree  of  pressure  in  a  number  of 
ways.  Public  revenues  will  face  downward  pressure  given  the  declining  share  of  the 
population paying income taxes.7 Public expenditure will tend to rise given the demands on 
public pensions and the fact that many of the types of services that older people require are 
provided by the public sector directly. 
Insufficient savings to fund retirement? 
We  are  becoming  wealthier  and,  through  compulsory  superannuation  and  other  means  of 
saving, we have gradually been building up private savings to fund retirement. But if we retire 
                                                
7   This relies on two reasonable assumptions. First, the fall in the labour-to-capital ratio is not completely offset in 
nominal terms by the increase in relative prices (wages vs returns to capital). Second, labour income is taxed 
at a higher rate than capital income. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  at  much  the  same  age  as  earlier  generations  had  been  used  to,  with  longer  lifespans  on 
average  we’ll  have  to  fund  quite  lengthy  periods  of  retirement.  Moreover,  this  will  be  an 
environment where there will already be considerable pressure on the public purse, for the 
reasons I have just noted. 
Insufficient risk-taking and innovation? 
One last challenge I want to raise relates to productivity growth. There is evidence that older 
people tend to be less willing to take on risks, including those associated with new business 
ventures,  developing  new  products  and  services,  and  pursuing  innovation  more  generally 
(Graph 4).8 For this reason, it is possible that ageing could weigh on productivity growth, and 
hence on our incomes and economic wellbeing.9 
Graph 4 
 Population ageing – opportunities to meet the challenges 
Focusing  only  on  the  challenges  would  leave  us  with  a  rather  gloomy  picture  of  ageing. 
Fortunately, individuals and economies tend to be responsive to these sorts of challenges. 
Allowing  relative  prices  to  change  and  enabling  individuals  and  businesses  to  alter  their 
behaviours  in  response  to  those  price  signals  is  a  critical  part  of  the  adjustment  process. 
Applying a little foresight will also be helpful. And the key point I would like to emphasise is 
that rising longevity provides us with a number of opportunities to meet these challenges. 
                                                
8   Older  people  are  more  likely  to  own  an  unincorporated  business,  although  this  may  merely  reflect  the 
operation  of  credit  constraints,  which  would  be  likely  to make  it more  difficult  for  younger  people  to  start  a 
business. 
9   See Lowe P (2013), “Demographics, Productivity and Innovation”, Speech to The Sydney Institute, Sydney, 
12 March. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Longer working lives 
Not only are we living longer, but life spans are also generally healthier than in the past.10 
Among other things, this provides the option of working productively later into life. Let me be 
clear though, extra years of work need not imply less years in retirement. (I’ll come back to 
this point in a minute). 
Also, many (though by no means all) jobs are less taxing on peoples’ bodies than in the past. 
This makes it easier to spend extra years of life in the work force, which is already happening 
to some extent. Many types of workers have been retiring a little bit later in life over recent 
years and participation rates among older people have been rising over a long period of time 
(Table 1 and Graph 5).11,  12 Not surprisingly though, this change is not generally evident for 
those with very taxing jobs, such as labourers who tend to retire several years earlier than 
other  workers.  Greater  opportunities  for  part-time  work  have  helped  to  contribute  to  rising 
participation rates among older people. Changing social norms more generally – particularly 
for women – have also made a contribution to rising labour force participation.  
                                                 
10   For  a  discussion  of  this  point  see  Productivity  Commission  (2013),  Kulish  M,  C  Kent  and  K  Smith  (2010), 
“Aging, Retirement, and Savings: A General Equilibrium Analysis”, B.E. Journal of Macroeconomics, vol. 10, 
no. 1, and the references therein. 
11   The recent cyclical weakness in the demand for labour seems to have put paid to the trend rise in participation 
rates among older members of the population seen over recent decades. But the response to rising longevity 
(and other forces) might reassert itself when demand for labour strengthens. See Kent (2014). 
12   There is a possibility that the changes over time shown in Table 1 were driven in part by a temporary response 
to the decline in wealth associated with the global financial crisis. That is, people who might have otherwise 
retired decided to stay on at work, and for others to re-enter the workforce, to make up for declines to wealth 
following declines in housing and equity prices following the financial crisis. However, patterns across different 
workers over the intervening years (including data for 2008 and 2010, not shown), combined with the longer-
term rise in participation of older ages in Graph 5 suggests that factors other than just the financial crisis have 
been responsible for later retirement. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Graph 5 
  A rise in wages – which I have suggested is in prospect over the longer term – would provide 
an  incentive  for  people  to  enter  and  remain  in  the  workforce.  Incentives  related  to  the 
provision of public pensions and the treatment of superannuation will also have a significant 
bearing on the labour force participation of older people.  
Higher savings 
It’s possible that we will choose to use longer lifespans in such a way that, on average, we’ll 
work some extra years and spend more years in retirement. It’s possible that we’ll increase 
the share of our lives in retirement. Indeed, that would make sense because as we become 
wealthier over time, we can enjoy the better things in life, including more leisure. In any case, 
we’ll probably want and need more savings to fund additional years spent in retirement.13 
One  way  to  do  this  is  to  save  more  during  each  year  that  we  work.  The  power  of 
compounding  returns  means  that  this  strategy  would  be  particularly  effective  if  we  do  so 
earlier on in our working lives. Working for longer is another option. Individuals can add to 
their  own  savings  during  extra  years  of  work,  and  delay  the  time  at  which  they  start  to 
drawdown  private  savings.  Also,  this  allows  them  to  make  further  contributions  to  public 
revenue (via income taxes) and delays any need they may have to draw on the public purse.  
If we manage to build up savings in preparation for ageing – as I’ve suggested we should – 
ultimately this can be used to fund investment. That is, more savings will support a rise in the 
stock  of  an  economy’s  productive  capital.  Even  if  that  extra  capital  is  not  put  to  work 
                                                
13   Some  modelling  work  I  did  with  colleagues  at  the  Bank  a  few  years  ago  showed  that,  under  plausible 
assumptions, an optimal response to ageing would see a rise in savings and a rise in the ratio of capital to 
labour; see Kulish M, C Kent and K Smith (2010) for details. More savings allow the capital stock to rise at the 
same time as the share of population working declines. People work more years of their lives, in part to help 
them  build  up  their  savings.  Nevertheless,  they  need  not  spend  a  greater  share  of  their  lives  working.  An 
additional reason to work for longer and save more is that the rise in the capital stock relative to labour implies 
a lower return to capital and higher wages paid to labour. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  providing  additional  services,  it  can  still  be  used  productively  in  more  capital  intensive 
industries. This would free up some labour to work in the services sector.14  
Education 
Longer  life  spans  provide  opportunities  and  incentives  to  gain  more  education  or  learn  a 
trade,  and  to  do  so  later  into  life.  This  result  is  relatively  straight  forward.  Education  and 
training, particularly beyond high school, are costly for the individual, in part because of the 
opportunity  cost  of  foregone  income.  A  longer  working  life  raises  the  life-time  returns  to 
advanced education and training, thereby providing the incentive to do more of it.  
Although other factors may be at work here, there is evidence that more people have been 
obtaining  qualifications  beyond  high  school  over  the  past  couple  of  decades  (Table  2).15 
Raising our human capital should help to make our economy more productive.  
 Risk taking 
As I have already discussed, a rise in the share of older people might reduce the extent of 
risk-taking and innovative behaviour in an economy. But that is not where this story ends. It 
is important to recognise that a decline in the share of people taking risks would raise the 
return to risk taking. A response of others to this incentive would help, in part, to offset the 
initial impetus to reduced risk-taking flowing from population ageing.  
It is also possible that longer life spans may make people more willing to take on risks at any 
given age. Why? Take the example of someone considering a new business venture. They 
might be more willing to do so knowing that they would have more productive years to take 
advantage of a successful business. Moreover, in the event of failure, they still have many 
productive years ahead to generate a decent income doing something else.16 They could use 
those years to pursue a safer option to generate a living, or even take on a different risky 
venture. In short, “40 may be the new 30” when it comes to comparing the willingness of the 
current generation to take on risk compared with those born only a few decades ago.  
                                                
14   For example, consider the case of an agrarian island economy facing the prospect of ageing. It would make 
sense for savings to rise allowing for the purchase of more farm equipment – say a tractor. This would enable 
some  younger  workers  to  be  freed  up  from  food  production  to  work  instead  providing  care  for  the  aged. 
Alternatively, some of those savings can be put to work offshore, with the income from that covering the cost 
of imported food and other goods, also allowing resident workers to shift into the provision of services. 
15   Other  factors  include  changes  in  education  policies  and  relatively  higher  returns  to  further  education  and 
training driven by the changing nature of jobs. The global integration of large economies with plentiful supplies 
of lower-skilled workers, such as China, is also likely to have played a role in lowering the relative returns to 
less-skilled labour. 
16   The same logic might lead to an increased willingness to borrow more and maintain debt later into life than 
was the norm for earlier, shorter-lived generations. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  A role for immigration? 
Is  there  room  to  counteract,  or  at  least  mitigate  population  ageing  pressures  through 
immigration?  At  the  margin  there  is,  since  the  median  age  of  new  immigrants  is  around 
25 years,  which  is  currently  about  10  years  less  than  the  median  age  of  the  average 
Australian.  But  this  effect  is  already  in  operation  given  the  significant  contribution  to 
Australia’s  population  growth  from  immigration  over  recent  years.  Also,  with  populations 
ageing globally, immigration cannot be a panacea for all economies.  
Conclusions 
In summary, ageing of the population will have an increasingly important bearing on various 
aspects  of  the  economic  outlook.  Among  other  things,  it  will  tend  to  weigh  on  growth  of 
economic  activity,  labour  force  participation  and  the  public  purse.  It  may  weigh  on 
productivity  growth  to  the  extent  that  it  leads  to less  risk-taking  and  innovation.  It  will  also 
lead to a rise in the demand for a range of services, including aged care.  
The economy will be best placed to handle these significant changes in factor and product 
markets if we are responsive to the resulting changes in relative prices and returns to factors 
of production. We’ll be even better placed if we can act with a degree of foresight.  
What  sort  of  responses  might  we  expect?  It  will  make  sense  for  a  combination  of  extra 
savings to be built up and for us to do what we can to raise participation rates, including by 
having  people  work  later  into  their  lives.  Extra  capital  from  the  rise  in  savings  can  be 
channelled into both goods and services, though it is likely that productive resources (labour 
and capital) will be required to shift towards the services sectors.  
While the challenges are relatively obvious, one aspect of ageing presents us with valuable 
opportunities. Rising longevity will provide us with the ability and willingness to work later into 
life,  without  necessarily  implying  a  change  in  the  share  of  our  lifetimes  we  spend  in 
retirement. This will allow us to bolster participation, savings and reduce the burden on the 
public purse. Recognising that on average we’ll enjoy longer lives, may also encourage a rise 
in  education  and  training.  We  may  also  become  more  willing  to  pursue  risky,  innovative 
business opportunities at any given age compared with what had been the norm for earlier 
generations.  Public  policies  have  an  obvious  role  to  play,  facilitating  these  adjustments 
where possible.  
The Reserve Bank can best contribute to the necessary adjustments to population ageing by 
maintaining low and stable inflation. This does two things. First, it encourages investors and 
businesses to focus on generating real returns rather than trying to avoid the effects of high 
inflation.  Second,  it  enables  changes  in  relative  prices  and  relative  returns  to  factors  of 
production to be observed more clearly than in a world where inflation is high and variable. 
And it is these price signals that will facilitate the necessary adjustments in behaviour.  
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
