  Takehiro Sato: Macroprudential policy and initiatives by the Bank of 
Japan 
Speech by Mr Takehiro Sato, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at the Japan 
Society, London, 12 November 2014. 
Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
 Introduction 
Thank you, Mr. Fraser, for your kind introduction. Distinguished guests and members of the 
Japan Society, I am truly honored to have this opportunity to speak to you. 
Today, I will talk mainly about the Bank of Japan’s initiatives on the prudential front, focusing 
on macroprudential policy rather than microprudential. 
Microprudential  policy  aims  to  ensure  the  financial  soundness  of  individual  financial 
institutions. By contrast, macroprudential policy  aims to ensure the stability of the financial 
system  as  a  whole  by  analyzing  and  assessing  risks  within  that  system  and  formulating, 
based  on  the  findings,  institutional  designs  and  policy  responses  to  mitigate  such  risks. 
Microprudential  measures  to  prevent  the  failure  of  individual  financial  institutions  are 
important  in  that they  can  address  signs  of  risk  that  will  threaten  the  stability  of  the  entire 
financial  system.  Based  on  the  efficacy  of  microprudential  measures,  macroprudential 
measures  focus  on  avoiding  a  situation  in  which  vulnerability  arising  from  the  interaction 
among  the  real  economy,  financial  markets,  and  financial  institutions  makes  the  entire 
financial system unstable. 
A  central  bank  conducts  monetary  policy  with  the  aim  of  achieving  price  stability,  and 
monetary policy is not directly aimed at ensuring financial system stability. However, as I will 
explain  later,  there  is  a  close  relationship  between  monetary  policy  and  financial  system 
stability.  Once the functioning  of  the financial  system  is  significantly  impaired following  the 
bursting of a bubble, the effects of monetary policy will be largely restrained. It is becoming 
clear  through  recent  studies  that  an  economic  trough  following  a  financial  crisis  tends  to 
become deeper and last longer than troughs arising from different situations.1 Taking that into 
account,  there  has  been  a  growing  tendency  worldwide  to  place  greater  emphasis  on 
macroprudential policy since the global financial crisis. The Bank of Japan has been placing 
emphasis  on  a  macroprudential  perspective  in  its  conduct  of monetary  policy  since  before 
the crisis. 
In today’s speech, I will share with you my views on the issues regarding the implementation 
of  macroprudential  measures,  and  then  elaborate  on  the  Bank’s  initiatives  on  the 
macroprudential  front.  Lastly,  I  will  touch  on  the  recent  conduct  of  monetary  policy  by  the 
Bank of Japan. 
Issues involved in implementing macroprudential measures 
I. 
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  macroprudential  policy  aims  to  ensure  the  stability  of  the  financial 
system  as  a  whole  by  analyzing  and  assessing  risks  within  that  system  and  formulating, 
based on the findings, institutional designs and policy responses to mitigate such risks, with 
particular  attention  paid to  the  interaction  among  the real  economy, financial  markets,  and 
financial institutions. In view of the experience of the global financial crisis, in addition to the 
                                                
1   For details, see Òscar, Schularick, and Taylor (2011). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  analysis  and  assessment  of  risks  in  the  overall  financial  system,  a  macroprudential 
perspective  has  been  actively  adopted  worldwide  in  institutional  designs  and  policy 
responses. 
For example, countercyclical capital buffers (CCBs) are to be introduced, as stipulated in the 
Basel  III  requirements.  They  aim  to  limit  financial  institutions’  excessive  risk  taking  by 
requiring an increase in their capital at the time of credit expansion. They also are expected 
to function as a buffer when losses are actually incurred. Other types of policy measures aim 
at  containing  systemic  risk  arising  from  credit  expansion  and  overheating  of  demand  by 
imposing  direct  regulations  on  credit  expansion  by  financial  institutions,  such  as  limits  on 
total credit supply, loan-to-value (LTV) caps, and debt-to-income (DTI) limits (Chart 1). Some 
countries  and  regions  have  already  introduced  those  measures  and  have  produced  policy 
effects.2 
In  Japan,  such  macroprudential  measures  were  taken  in  the  past.  One  example  is  the 
quantitative  ceiling  on  banks’  real  estate  loans,  which  was  set  in  1990  to  contain  the 
excessive growth in bank lending to the real estate sector by keeping the growth rate of such 
loans to a level equal to or below that of total bank lending. Regardless of how the ceiling 
was  categorized  at  that  time,  it  now  can  be  considered  a  macroprudential  measure.3  The 
measures  I  have  mentioned  so  far  are  regarded  as  typical  macroprudential  measures. 
However, other measures – that is, those which already have been implemented, such as 
on-site  examinations  and  inspections  of  individual  financial  institutions  and  oversight  of 
payment  and  settlement  systems  –  should  also  be  conducted,  taking  into  account  a 
macroprudential perspective, in cooperation with the relevant parties. 
Let  me  turn  to  the  issues  regarding  the  implementation  of  macroprudential  measures.  I 
believe there are three (Chart 2). First, it is important to implement – with appropriate timing 
–  policy  measures  that  are  considered  effective,  among  a  wide  range  of  choices,  in 
containing  financial  imbalances  that  have  been  identified  at  that  time.  In  that  regard,  an 
empirical study shows that a failure to get the timing right can push down the average level of 
economic activity and increase its volatility.4 It has been pointed out that the implementation 
of  the  quantitative  ceiling  on  banks’  real  estate  loans  in  1990  was  too  late  to  contain 
excessive hikes in land prices when it was necessary, and instead, once land prices turned 
to a decline, the policy implementation ended up accelerating the decline in land prices.5 To 
be sure, it is recognized that the timing of the implementation is of critical importance, but it 
seems that there is still not enough understanding as to how to identify financial imbalances, 
which  is  the  premise  of  such  implementation.  That  might  be  because  the  buildup  of 
imbalances that threatened the financial system and the ensuing collapse occurred through 
different mechanisms in each instance in the past. At any rate, it is a significant challenge to 
first gauge on a real-time basis whether the imbalances that could lead to systemic risk are 
emerging within the financial system, and then to judge the timing of policy implementation. 
Second, and related to the first issue, there is difficulty of communication to the public at the 
time of policy implementation. It is difficult to prove “in advance” the rightness of the policy 
authorities’ judgment about emerging signs of financial imbalances. The difficulty in noticing 
the  signs  of  financial  imbalances  with  certainty  at  the  same  time  suggests  the  difficulty  in 
persuasively  arguing  for  the  need  for  a  policy  response  to  such  signs.  Even  though  the 
financial authorities are able to judge, based on their analysis and experience, that signs of 
                                                
2   For example, a CCB framework has already been established in Switzerland, and loan-to-income (LTI) and 
LTV  caps  for  new  residential  mortgages  have  been  introduced  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  New  Zealand, 
respectively. 
3   For details, see Nelson and Tanaka (2014). 
4   For details, see Kawata et al. (2013). 
5   For details, see Bank for International Settlements (2012). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  financial  imbalances  are  clear,  they  might  be  unable  to  gain  sufficient  support  from 
stakeholders at an early stage regarding the need for a policy response. Or, if the authorities 
wait  until  the  buildup  of  financial  imbalances  becomes  clear  in  many  people’s  eyes,  the 
timing of policy implementation could be too late. 
At  one  point,  in  international  discussions  following  the  global  financial  crisis,  there  were 
divided  views.  One  view  was  that  it  was  necessary  to  identify  financial  imbalances  in 
advance as early as possible and address them. The other view was that it was difficult to 
identify such imbalances in advance, and therefore it was enough to address them after the 
bursting of a bubble actually occurred. That division suggests the difficulty in policy judgment 
and  communication  mentioned  in  the  first  and  second  issues.  At  present,  many  countries 
design  their  institutions  and  policy  frameworks  with  the  intent  to  work  to  identify  financial 
imbalances as early as possible and take action, although there is some degree of difference 
among countries. 
Third,  it  is  also  difficult  to  find  a  way  to  prevent  the  leakage  of  policy  effects.  Regulatory 
arbitrage is one example. Even though regulated banks reduce their lending in response to 
certain  measures,  policy  effects  could  be  offset  if  reduced  lending  amounts  are  provided 
instead by non-regulated financial institutions such as shadow banking institutions. The same 
was  true  for  Japan’s  quantitative  ceiling  on  banks’  real  estate  loans,  which  I  mentioned 
earlier. If regulations are to be imposed on a wide range of shadow banking institutions to 
minimize  the  leakage  of  policy  effects,  cooperation  among  several  other  authorities  is 
considered  to  be  necessary.  Without  full  cooperation,  policy  effects  might  be  diminished. 
There also could be a vicious cycle in which advancements in financial technology give rise 
to new financial products that are not subject to regulation. The authorities  will respond to 
that  by  expanding  the  scope  of regulation,  but other  new  products  will  still  emerge.  In  the 
future, it may become necessary to facilitate international regulatory coordination under free 
capital mobility. 
The Bank’s initiatives on the macroprudential front 
II. 
With  those  three  issues  in  mind,  I  will  now  elaborate  on  the  Bank’s  initiatives  on  the 
macroprudential  front.  In  Japan,  reflecting  the  emergence  of  the  asset  bubble  in  the  late 
1980s and its subsequent bursting, a number of measures were taken from the late 1990s to 
the early 2000s. Those measures include the establishment of the Financial Services Agency 
(FSA),  the  amendment  of  the  Bank  of  Japan  Act  with  a  clear  statement  of  its  on-site 
examinations,  and  the  formulation  of  a  crisis  management  framework.  At  present,  on  the 
basis  of  those,  the  FSA –  which  is  legally  authorized  to  conduct  industry-wide  supervision 
and  inspections  –  and  the  Bank  –  which  contributes  to  financial  system  stability,  such  as 
through the “lender of last resort” function – take the initiative in carrying out macroprudential 
policy.  They  fulfill  their  respective  functions  in  monitoring risks  and financial  imbalances  in 
the entire financial system. 
The Bank regularly releases the Financial System Report, which analyzes and assesses the 
stability and functioning of the financial system as a whole. The Bank began its release back 
in  2005,  before  the global financial  crisis  occurred.  Since then,  this semiannual  report  has 
been  released  to  convey  the  Bank’s  thinking  on  risks  and  issues  facing  Japan’s  entire 
financial system. Through this release, the Bank works to grasp risks in the financial system 
as a whole, and to share a common understanding with a wide range of participants in the 
system,  including  financial  institutions.  I  think  this  process  is  fundamental  to  identifying 
financial imbalances at an early stage and implementing, with appropriate timing, measures 
that  are  considered  to  be  effective  in  containing  risks.  In  relation  to  the  three  issues  I 
mentioned earlier, there are two key points. First, it is important to improve the quality of the 
assessment  of 
that  macroprudential  measures  can  be 
implemented  with  appropriate timing.  Second,  it  is  also  important to  increase the  scope  of 
analysis to cover not only banks but also the entire financial system. 
financial  developments  so 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  From  that  viewpoint,  the  results  of  various  analyses  are  set  out  in  the  Financial  System 
Report. As an example, let me introduce the Financial Activity Indexes (FAIXs) (Chart 3). The 
Bank  began  their  compilation  in  2012.  The  FAIXs  aim  to  detect,  as  early  as  possible, 
overheating  in  financial  activity  that  could  lead  to  systemic  risk.  They  are  a  selection  of 
14 financial indicators, such as the total credit-to-GDP ratio and the land prices to GDP ratio, 
and measure how far individual indicators deviate from their historical trends. The Financial 
System Report provides overheating or overcooling assessments of individual indicators in a 
“heat map” format,  where  red  shading  shows  that  the  indicator  in question  is  tilted  toward 
overheating,  blue  indicates  overcooling,  and  green  represents  everything  in  between. 
Through a comprehensive analysis and assessment of these indicators, the Bank works to 
gauge  the  accumulation  of  macro  financial  imbalances.  Of  course,  the  heat  map  is  not 
perfect. Let me offer the example of the total credit-to-GDP ratio, which is a typical indicator 
of the financial cycle (Chart 4). It is difficult to grasp the underlying trend of the ratio, given 
the overwhelming magnitude of the emergence and bursting of the asset bubble from the late 
1980s to early 1990s in Japan. The financial cycle is long and unstable, and the associated 
recovery  in  robustness  of  the  financial  system  requires  time.  Therefore,  for  this  kind  of 
financial  cycle  indicator,  it  is  ultimately  a  matter  of  judgment  as  to  how  long  the  deviation 
from  the  underlying  trend  should  be  accepted.  Although  there  are  such  issues  to  be 
considered, the FAIXs are a useful tool for gauging the buildup of financial imbalances. 
In  the  Financial  System  Report,  in  addition  to  presenting  the  FAIXs,  the  Bank  conducts 
macro  stress  testing  (Chart  5).  Through  such  testing,  it  aims  to  analyze  the  degree  of 
accumulation  of  risks  in  the  entire  financial  system  and  the  uneven  distribution  of  risks 
among  financial  institutions,  and  then  utilize  such  analysis  in  its  policy  judgment.  Macro 
stress testing assesses the degree of resilience of the financial system assuming that severe 
stress occurs in the real economy and financial markets. First, by devising stress scenarios, 
the testing enables to some extent assessment of how an unprecedented shock would affect 
the  entire  financial  system.  Second,  an  industry-wide  analysis  using  the  same  scenario 
enables  the  identification  of  an  uneven  distribution  of  risks  in  the  financial  system.  In 
conducting macro stress testing at the Bank, particular emphasis is placed on the importance 
of working to bring together economic analysis skills accumulated so far and data/knowledge 
obtained from individual financial institutions through the process of on-site examinations and 
off-site monitoring. For example, when assuming stress scenarios, the Bank focuses on risk 
factors that are considered to be the most important at that particular point in time. Before the 
Lehman shock, when the global economy overheated and newly established real estate firms 
actively developed real estate projects in Japan, the Bank conducted stress testing focusing 
on  credit  risk  in  lending  to  real  estate-related  sectors. When  concern  about  the  European 
sovereign debt crisis heightened, the Bank assessed its spillover impact by taking account of 
co-movements  in  domestic  and  international  financial  markets,  and  also  conducted  stress 
testing  against  foreign  currency  liquidity  risk  based  on  the  assumption  that  the  foreign 
currency funding markets had become dysfunctional. Most recently, the Bank has conducted 
an  analysis  by  assuming  scenarios  involving  an  economic  downturn  of  approximately  the 
same magnitude as that observed at the time of the Lehman shock and an approximately 
2 percentage point rise in long-term interest rates leading to an economic downturn. 
As noted, in the Financial System Report the Bank clarifies risks and challenges for Japan’s 
financial system by examining a number of indicators. It examines a wide range of indicators 
and conducts various analyses, and ultimately makes a discretionary judgment as to whether 
the  implementation  of  measures  is  indeed  necessary.  With  a  view  to  analyzing  and 
assessing  financial  system  stability  and  making  use  of  macroprudential  measures,  close 
cooperation between the FSA and the Bank is also important. In that regard, the two entities 
together established in June 2014 a task force with the aim of holding regular joint meetings 
to  exchange  views  on  financial  stability,  with  participants  including  the FSA  Commissioner 
and  the  Bank’s  Deputy  Governor.  The  FSA  and  the  Bank  have  been  exchanging  views 
frequently at various levels and maintaining close cooperation, and the meetings will further 
strengthen such cooperation. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The relation between monetary policy and macroprudential policy 
III. 
Now  let  me  turn  to  the  issue  of  how  much  a  central  bank  should  involve  itself  in 
macroprudential policy. As is the case here in the United Kingdom, having experienced the 
recent financial crisis, a central bank’s involvement in ensuring the stability of the financial 
system has strengthened globally. The Bank of Japan Act stipulates that the purpose of the 
Bank  is  to  carry  out  currency  and  monetary  control  as  well  as  to  contribute  to  the 
maintenance of the stability of the financial system, and therefore the Bank is responsible for 
taking care of both tasks equally (Chart 6). 
Looking  back,  the  following  two  cycles  have  often  synchronized:  the  cycle  of  economic 
activity, or the output gap, and the financial cycle – in other words, the buildup of financial 
imbalances and their collapse. That is because of a feedback loop in which changes in the 
output gap and changes in the financial cycle have reinforced each other, leading to larger 
changes  for  both.  In  Japan,  monetary  policy  and  macroprudential  policy  are  therefore 
considered to be complementary. The Bank’s activities on the macroprudential front are in 
line  with  its  mission  as  stipulated  in  the  Bank  of  Japan  Act,  just  like  its  microprudential 
activities, such as on-site examinations and off-site monitoring. Based on that, the Bank also 
allocates  considerable  management  resources  to  conduct  prudential  policy  that  aims  to 
ensure the stability of the financial system, as well as monetary policy that aims to maintain 
price stability. 
Even if monetary policy and macroprudential policy are considered to be complementary to 
each other in the long run, depending on the economic phase, there may be cases in which 
asset prices surge under low inflation. Therefore, in the short run, where there is a trade-off 
between price stability and financial system stability, the question over which one a central 
bank  should  place  greater  emphasis  on  when  taking  action  may  well  become  an  issue  of 
debate. One approach to that issue would be a policy framework based on a dictionary-like 
ordering. That is, as long as price stability – an objective of the highest priority – has been 
met, a central bank can pursue its other objectives. For example, in advanced economies in 
general,  where  prices  have  been  maintained  at  low  levels  as  a  trend,  financial  system 
stability is sometimes viewed as more important than price stability, which is considered to 
have been achieved already. That would sound reasonable, considering that a large-scale 
formation of financial imbalances and their collapse, just like the one observed before and 
after the Lehman shock, occurred when price stability had generally been maintained. On the 
other hand, in the case of Japan, since deflation persisted for a prolonged period, one might 
take the view that, for the time being, a higher priority should be placed on price stability than 
financial system stability. The background to this view could include the fact that risk-taking 
activities of financial institutions have been limited, even in a low-interest rate environment, 
and that a buildup of financial imbalances has not been observed so far. 
I would not reject that way of thinking, but I am personally uncomfortable with accepting the 
dichotomy between monetary policy for price stability and macroprudential policy for financial 
system stability. That is because the dichotomy is seemingly easy to understand, but it is not 
always  valid  in  every  circumstance.  Of  course,  there  are  cases  in  which  responses  are 
possible under such a dichotomy. However, let us assume a situation in which the financial 
cycle is not sufficiently contained, leading to a feedback loop in which changes in the output 
gap  and  changes  in  the  financial  cycle  reinforce  each  other.  In  that  case,  it  inevitably 
becomes necessary to make use of not only macroprudential policy but also monetary policy, 
which has far-reaching effects. As in the case of the policy responses made after the bursting 
of  the  bubble  economy  in  Japan,  if  monetary  policy  measures  are  taken  only  after 
fluctuations  in  the  financial  cycle  have  become  substantial,  there  is  a  risk  that  policy 
responses  will  become  extremely  difficult  to  implement  at  that  point.  Therefore,  what  is 
desirable for a central bank is to give a certain consideration not only to the output gap but 
also to containing the financial cycle when pursuing monetary policy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Based on that view, the Bank of Japan’s monetary policy is conducted within a framework in 
which the Bank examines various risk factors, including those related to financial imbalances, 
in addition to the assessment of the current developments and outlook for economic activity 
and prices, from the perspective of achieving sustainable growth with price stability. When 
too  much  priority  is  placed  on  short-term  price  stability,  there  is  a  risk  that  the  financial 
system will become unstable in the future, which in turn could undermine medium- to long-
term  price  stability.  On  the  other  hand,  when  too  much  emphasis  is  placed  on  financial 
system stability, confidence in a central bank’s efforts toward achieving price stability could 
deteriorate.  In  order  to  avoid  falling  into  such  situation,  a  central  bank  needs  to  conduct 
monetary policy in a balanced manner. 
The Bank’s recent conduct of monetary policy 
IV. 
Lastly, I will briefly touch on the Bank’s recent conduct of monetary policy. 
At the Monetary Policy Meeting (MPM) held on October 31, 2014, the Policy Board decided 
to expand quantitative and qualitative monetary easing (QQE). As I cast a dissenting vote on 
this decision, I may be in a delicate position to talk about this policy change. However, I take 
this  opportunity  to  explain  the  policy  decision  and  provide  my  views  to  the  best  possible 
extent. 
The Bank’s assessment is that Japan’s economy has continued to recover moderately as a 
trend, despite being affected by the consumption tax hike in April 2014, and is expected to 
continue to do so. Although weakness remains in exports, production, and some indicators 
relating to consumption, the mechanism for economic recovery has been steadily maintained 
on the back of the firm employment and income situation as well as resilient household and 
business sentiment. On the price front, somewhat weak developments in demand following 
the  consumption  tax  hike  and  a  substantial  decline  in  crude  oil  prices  have  been  exerting 
downward pressure recently. A temporary weakness in demand has already started to wane, 
and  the  decline  in  crude  oil  prices  will  have  positive  effects  on  economic  activity  from  a 
somewhat  longer-term  perspective  and  eventually  will  push  up  prices.  Nevertheless,  if  the 
current  downward  pressure  on  prices  remains, albeit  in  the  short term, there  is  a  risk that 
conversion of the deflationary mindset, which has so far been progressing steadily, might be 
delayed. To pre-empt manifestation of such risk and to maintain the improving momentum of 
expectation formation, the Bank judged it appropriate to expand QQE, with an aim of offering 
kind of insurance. 
Regarding the monetary base, the Bank will conduct money market operations so that it will 
increase at an annual pace of about 80 trillion yen. That is an addition of about 10–20 trillion 
yen  compared  with  the  past.  To  that  end,  the  Bank  will  purchase  Japanese  government 
bonds  (JGBs)  so  that  their  amount  outstanding  will  increase  at  an  annual  pace  of  about 
80 trillion  yen.  Compared  with  the  past,  it  is  an addition  of  about  30  trillion  yen. The  Bank 
also tripled the amount of some risk asset purchases, compared with the past (Chart 7). 
The effects of QQE have a tendency to become stronger in a cumulative manner with the 
progress in asset purchases by the Bank. Those effects have already become clearly evident 
in both the front and back ends of the yield curve, and are expected to strengthen further with 
the progress to be made in such purchases. 
With  regard  to  my  own  view  on  the  policy  decision  that  I  have  mentioned,  I  refrain  from 
providing  details  at  this  point,  as  the  minutes  of  the  MPM  have  not  been  released  at  this 
stage. However, as I have been presenting my personal views on the meaning of “achieving 
the price stability target of 2 percent” and of the time frame “as long as it is necessary for 
maintaining that target in a stable manner,” I take this opportunity to reconfirm them. 
The price stability target is set based on the consumer price index (CPI) for all items, but I do 
not think that QQE can be considered to have accomplished its mission simply when the rate 
of increase in the CPI reaches 2 percent on a year-on-year basis. The price stability that the 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Bank  aims  to  achieve  should  be  a  situation  in  which  prices  rise  with  an  improvement  in 
wages in a well-balanced manner, amid favorable overall economic conditions both in terms 
of the real economy and the asset market. To that end, it is important that people’s medium- 
to long-term inflation expectations – which are said to have consistently remained lower than 
those  in  other  leading  countries  –  be  raised  to  and  re-anchored  at  around  2  percent, 
comparable  to  the  level  in  the  United  States,  so  that  people’s  behavioral  pattern  will  be 
based on the assumption of around 2 percent inflation. 
Fortunately, people’s short-term inflation expectations appear to be rising on the whole from 
a somewhat longer-term perspective, in part because the year-on-year rate of increase in the 
core CPI, excluding the effects of the consumption tax hike, has continued to be stable at 
around  1¼  percent.  In  re-anchoring  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations,  it  is 
conceivable  that  people  revise  their  expectations  not  only  in  a  backward-looking  manner 
based on the rise in short-term inflation expectations, but also in a forward-looking manner 
considering, for example, developments in wage revision. In that regard, the result of wage 
revision  this  year  marked  an  important  step  toward  a  breakthrough  in  changing  people’s 
pessimistic  expectations  that  base  salaries  will  not  rise  under  deflation.  Regarding  wage 
negotiations next year, three-way discussions among the government, employers, and labor 
unions  are  taking  place  under  the  government’s  initiatives.  I  expect  that  they  will  lead  to 
actual  wage  increases  and  exert  a  positive  effect  on  the  formation  of  people’s  inflation 
expectations, 
inflation 
expectations. 
To be sure, the time frame for continuing QQE is based on the idea of forecast targeting – 
namely, as long as it is necessary for maintaining the target in a stable manner. The price 
stability target is expressed in terms of the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI for all 
items.  Considering  the  aim  behind  this,  I  think  it  will  remain  important  to  focus  on  the 
formation of people’s inflation expectations – as I have mentioned earlier – and to carefully 
examine future developments in a wide range of price indicators including those relating to 
wages.  It  should  be  noted  that  there  is  no  silver  bullet  for  estimating  people’s  medium-  to 
long-term  inflation  expectations  on  a  real-time  basis,  and  therefore  the  necessity  of 
continuing QQE should be judged by the Bank’s Policy Board at each MPM. 
Thank you. 
 
favorable  effects  on  medium- 
thereby  having 
long-term 
to 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
   8 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    9 
     10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
  for 
International  Settlements,  Committee  on 
References 
Bank 
the  Global  Financial  System, 
“Macroprudential  Instruments  and  Frameworks:  A  Stocktaking  of  Issues  and  Experiences,” 
CGFS Papers No. 38, 2010. 
——,  Committee  on  the  Global  Financial  System,  “Operationalising  the  Selection  and 
Application of Macroprudential Instruments,” CGFS Papers No. 48, 2012. 
Bank of Japan, Financial System Report, October 2014. 
——, “The Bank of Japan’s Initiatives on the Macroprudential Front,” October 2011. 
——,  Financial  System  and  Bank  Examination  Department,  “Nippon  Ginko  no  Makuro 
Sutoresu Tesuto: Shinyou Risuku Tesuto to Kinri Risuku Tesuto no Kaisetsu (Macro Stress 
Testing  at  the  Bank  of  Japan:  Stress  Testing  Focusing  on  Credit  Risk  and  Interest  Rate 
Risk),” BOJ Reports and Research Papers, August 2012 (available only in Japanese). 
Ishikawa,  Atsushi,  Koichiro  Kamada,  Kazutoshi  Kan,  Ryota  Kojima,  Yoshiyuki  Kurachi, 
Kentaro  Nasu,  and  Yuki  Teranishi,  “The  Financial  Activity  Index,”  Bank  of  Japan  Working 
Paper Series No. 12-E-4, 2012. 
Ito,  Yuichiro,  Tomiyuki  Kitamura,  Koji  Nakamura,  and  Takashi  Nakazawa,  “New  Financial 
Activity Indexes: Early Warning System for Financial Imbalances in Japan,” Bank of Japan 
Working Paper Series No. 14-E-7, 2014. 
Jordà,  Òscar,  Moritz  HP.  Schularick,  and  Alan  M.  Taylor,  “When  Credit  Bites  Back: 
Leverage, Business Cycles, and Crises,” NBER Working Paper No. 17621, 2011. 
Kawata,  Hiroshi,  Yoshiyuki  Kurachi,  Koji  Nakamura,  and  Yuki  Teranishi,  “Impact  of 
Macroprudential  Policy  Measures  on  Economic  Dynamics:  Simulation  Using  a  Financial 
Macro-Econometric Model,” Bank of Japan Working Paper Series No. 13-E-3, 2013. 
Kinefuchi, Hikaru, Mizuki Yanagisawa, Naoya Kikuta, and Kei Imakubo, “Makuropurudensu 
Seisaku  Shudan  wo  Meguru  Saikin  no  Giron  (Recent  Discussions  on  Macroprudential 
Measures),” Bank of Japan Review Series No. 12-J-13, 2012 (available only in Japanese). 
Kitamura,  Tomiyuki,  Satoko  Kojima,  Koji  Nakamura,  Kojiro  Takahashi,  and  Ikuo  Takei, 
“Macro Stress Testing at the Bank of Japan,” BOJ Reports and Research Papers, October 
2014. 
Nelson, Benjamin, and Misa Tanaka, “Dealing with a Banking Crisis: What Lessons Can Be 
Learned  from  Japan’s  Experience?”  Bank  of  England,  Bank  of  England  Quarterly  Bulletin, 
54 (1), 2014, pp. 36–48. 
Nishimura, Kiyohiko G., “Macro-Prudential Policy from an Asian Perspective,” remarks at the 
High-Level  Seminar  on  Macro-Prudential  Policies  co-sponsored  by  the  People’s  Bank  of 
China and the International Monetary Fund, Bank of Japan, 2010. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
