  Njuguna Ndung’u: Enhancing the quality of financial inclusion in Kenya 
Remarks  by  Professor  Njuguna  Ndung’u,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya,  at  the 
launch of MPESA Moneygram Partnership, Nairobi, 5 November 2014. 
 Mr. Bob Collymore – CEO Safaricom; 
Ms. Pam Patsley CEO – Moneygram International; 
Mr. Herve Chomel – Vice President Moneygram Africa; 
H.E. Robert Godec – US Ambassador to Kenya; 
Dignitaries; 
Distinguished Guests; 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
I  am  pleased  to  join  you  today  on  this  auspicious  launch  of  Safaricom  MPesa  and 
MoneyGram International Money Transfer Partnership. It is a great honour to be here with 
you  this  morning.  I  thank  the  CEO  and  Management  of  Safaricom  for  inviting  me  to  this 
occasion. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  I  recall  with  pleasure  back  in  2009  when  I  witnessed  the  first 
partnership in international money remittance between Safaricom and Western Union. This 
created a much needed avenue for the safety of remittances and efficiency through easily 
accessible channels. And today, we are gathered here to celebrate another milestone in the 
deepening of Kenya’s financial sector. The partnership between Safaricom and MoneyGram 
International is not only an opportunity for Safaricom to satisfy the needs of its customers but 
also  to  contribute  in  enhancing  the  quality  of  financial  inclusion.  I  commend  the  Board, 
Management  and  Staff  of  Safaricom  and  MoneyGram  International  for  their  decision  to 
operationalise this partnership. This partnership will benefit both parties through expansion of 
network of outlets. As I continually to encourage and advocate, it is such partnerships that 
discover market opportunities and allow further competition to enlarge the space. 
As everyone attending this launch is aware, Kenyans have spread their reach worldwide in 
both business and in practising their professions. Kenya being a small open economy, it has 
liberalised  its  markets  to  promote  and  enhance  growth.  These  professional  and  business 
people within and outside Kenya send substantial shares of their earnings to family members 
back home perhaps for consumption smoothing and investment. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  the  mobile  phone  financial  services  sector  in  Kenya  has 
experienced  phenomenal  growth  since  its  inception  in  2007. This  sector is  served  by  over 
120,000  agents  handling more  than  2.5  million  transactions  daily  valued  at  Ksh.6.3  billion. 
This partnership will expand opportunities for business and increase the global outreach to 
more  than  90  countries  and  interlink  more  than  20  million  customers  in  those  countries 
already  served  by  MoneyGram  International.  Innovations  and  partnerships  in  the  mobile 
phone  money  transfer  industry,  as  we  are  seeing  today,  have  given  impetus  to  access  to 
financial services to Kenyans. Besides the revolutionary impact on financial systems, mobile 
phone  technology  has  also  provided  access  to  services  for  the  previously  unbanked  and 
created thousands of job opportunities. The provision of remittance services is a potentially 
effective  method  by  which  service  providers  can  attract  the  unbanked  for  sending  or 
receiving  purposes.  In  this  regard,  it  is  an  emerging  market  leadership  platform  to  be 
consolidated for enhanced financial inclusion. 
Distinguished Guests: There has been tremendous growth in international remittances in 
recent  years,  a  trend  that  is  expected  to  continue  as  the  World  becomes  increasingly 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  interlinked. The World  Bank  estimated remittance flows  to  developing  countries  in  2013 to 
have amounted to USD414 billion, and projections to USD540 billion by 2016. 
In  Kenya,  the  annual  remittance  inflows  from  Kenyans  in  the  Diaspora,  officially  recorded 
from banks’ returns, rose from USD338 million in 2004 to USD1.3 billion in 2013. This is a 
commendable growth of more than 285%. These remittances, that are playing a vital role in 
supporting both consumption and investment needs of the recipients, have also become an 
important source of foreign exchange inflows to the country. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  the  Kenya  Government  recognizes  the  role  and  importance  of 
remittances in boosting economic development. In this regard, CBK has worked closely with 
stakeholders in the mobile phone money transfer industry in implementing regulatory reforms 
aimed at guiding the market to prosperity. The National Payment System Regulations 2014 
were  formulated  and  gazetted  to  guide  mobile  phone  money  transfers  within  the  country 
while the Money Remittance Regulations 2013 have been operationalized to introduce stand-
alone  money  remittance  providers  in  Kenya.  Previously  all  international  remittances  were 
made through commercial banks platforms. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  Despite  the  significant  progress  made  in  making  remittance 
services accessible and efficient in Kenya, as in the rest of the developing world, there are 
still some challenges that we need to address. Chief among these are the high transaction 
costs, integrity of the services and need for effective competition. The practice has been to 
charge a fee for transfer and fix the exchange rate for the amount to be received. However, 
the  question  remains  “How  do  we  provide  services  for  international  money  remittances  at 
competitive costs?” To address this, CBK has approved partnerships between local financial 
institutions and international money transfer operators, the latest being between Safaricom 
Mpesa and MoneyGram International Money Transfer. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, I have alluded to how sending and receiving of remittances is an 
important type of financial transaction to the country, for many people and their families. This 
fact engenders both a challenge and an opportunity. The challenge for us as regulators is to 
ensure  that  remitters  can  send  funds  to  their  recipients  conveniently,  safely,  and  at  a 
reasonable  cost.  The  opportunity,  primarily  for  mobile  phone  money  transfer  service 
providers and other mainstream financial institutions, is to find ways to leverage users’ need 
for  remittance  services  into  a  broader  relationship,  one  that  will  be  both  profitable  for  the 
service  provider  and  will  also  provide  remitters  and  their  families  greater  financial  access. 
This  will  increase  the  participants  in  the  money  remittance  market  considering  costs  are a 
major barrier to entry in any market. 
Lastly,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  as  we  enjoy  the  benefits  of  expanding  money  remittance 
business,  let  us  comply  with  the  Anti-Money  Laundering  and  Combating  the  Financing  of 
Terrorism requirements. I am sure that these transactions are easy to monitor on both ends. 
But the benefit is to discourage those who use the wallet or hand luggage to remit – since we 
cannot effectively monitor such. This will facilitate lowering of the country risk that we should 
take advantage of in reducing costs of money transfers. 
With these few remarks, Ladies and Gentlemen, it is now my distinct honour and pleasure to 
declare the Safaricom and Moneygram Money Transfer Partnership officially launched. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
