  
 
G Padmanabhan: Corporate sustainability a panacea for growth – values, 
convictions and actions 
Address by Mr G Padmanabhan, Executive Director of the Bank of India, at Bhawan’s Royal 
Institute of Management, Kochi, 17 October 2014. 
 Assistance provided by Smt. Nanda Sameer Dave, Smt. Vandana Khare and Shri V G Venkatachalapthy. Helpful 
comments  and  contributions  from  a  number  of  colleagues  are  gratefully  acknowledged.  Errors,  if  any,  are 
speaker’s own. 
Introduction 
1. 
Good morning to Dignitaries on the dais, members of faculty and my young friends 
in the audience. At the outset, my apologies for not being able to be physically present on 
this  occasion  on  account  of some  personal  exigencies.  I am thankful  to  the  organisers for 
having  agreed  to  my  thoughts  being  shared  in  absentia.  Thanks  to  my  colleague,  
Mr. C V George, General Manager and head of our Kochi office for readily agreeing to read 
out my address. 
2. 
In  the  year  1938,  Dr  K.  M.  Munshi  established  Bharatiya  Vidya  Bhawan  with  the 
motto  “Let  noble  thoughts  come  to  us  from  every  side”.  Bhawan’s  Royal  Institute  of 
Management  with  its  aim  of  providing  management  education  of  international  quality  has 
seamlessly woven this motto of Bharatiya Vidya Bhawan into its very fabric. Congratulations 
and  Best  wishes  to  the  Institute  in  its  march  towards  greater  heights  and  glory.  It  feels 
wonderful  to  be  addressing  a  group  of  young  management  students  and  the  faculty 
members. It takes me back down the memory lane when many years ago, I was a student 
like you though there is a world of difference the way we looked at the outside world then and 
now. There were no mobile phones, no Face book or Twitter, SMS was not in the dictionary 
and a mouse meant a rodent. 
3. 
In a few months’ time you all would be charting your own career paths some would 
join  the  main  stream  corporate  sector;  some  may  have  their  own  start-ups,  some  of  you 
could aspire to join the financial sector and even regulation. Going forward, your education 
here would equip and enrich you with enough knowledge and wisdom in the art of decision 
making. 
“Corporate sustainability a panacea for growth: values, convictions and actions” 
Appropriateness and relevance of the topic 
4. 
You have chosen a very interesting topic, but it led me to think whether there is any panacea 
for growth? Some of you must be aware that in Greek mythology, Panacea was the goddess 
of Universal remedy. She was said to have a poultice or potion with which she healed the 
sick. Hence, the term is also used figuratively as something intended to completely solve a 
large,  multi-faceted  problem.  Can  corporate  sustainability  aid  growth,  create  value  and 
actions on environmental protection? The unequivocal answer is YES. But at the same time, 
level of development of the country, poverty etc. also needs to be factored in while calibrating 
the  corporate  sustainability  action  commands.  Please  remember  that  a  company  is  an 
artificial  person  with  perpetual  existence.  The  society  trusts  it  to  exist  for  ever  to  serve 
posterity ad infinitum. The sustainability has therefore to balance the needs of the present 
with the needs of the future. Further, the shareholders constituting the company enjoy limited 
liability  just  because  the  society  has  undertaken  unlimited  liability.  The  sustainability  also 
requires arrangements to balance the concerns of limited liability of the shareholders with the 
unlimited liability of the society, state and the public. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The World Commission on Environment and Development (WCED), known as the 
5. 
Brundtland  Commission  report  defined 
the  corporate  sustainability  as  “Sustainable 
development is development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the 
ability  of  future  generations  to  meet  their  own  needs”.  The  sustainable  development  is 
critically  dependent  on  economic  growth,  environmental  protection,  and  social  equality. 
Poverty resolution, of course, proceeds in priority over all other actions. 
6. 
It is, in fact, an alternative to the traditional growth and profit-maximisation model. 
While  corporate  sustainability  recognizes  that  corporate  growth  and  profitability  are 
important, it also requires the corporation to pursue societal goals, specifically those relating 
to  sustainable  development  –  environmental  protection,  social  justice  and  equity,  and 
economic development. 
7. 
 The kind of changes that earlier took a century to happen are now seen within the 
span  of  a  decade.  Hence  the  concept  of  corporate  sustainability  is  becoming  increasingly 
vital. 
The what and why of corporate sustainability 
8. 
Sustainability is a basic commitment towards economic, environmental, social and 
governance  performance  –  a  strong  message  demonstrated  to  both  internal  and  external 
stake holders. Taking Tobin’s “Q” Theory as the proxy for firm value, a significantly positive 
relation  between  corporate  sustainability  and  its  market  value  is  found.  Moreover  there  is 
evidence to support that being sustainable causes a firm to increase its value. This is also 
proved  by  companies  with  remarkable  sustainable  development  strategies  and  reporting 
which are more often viewed by investors as being safe and stable for higher growth with a 
higher valuation in market pricing mechanism by financial markets. 
9. 
Corporate Sustainability adds the dimension of directionality to speed, converting it 
to the velocity required for long term success. It could be described as a business approach 
that  creates  long  term  shareholder  value  by  embracing  opportunities  and  managing  risks 
deriving from economic, environmental and social scenarios. 
10. 
• 
It is based on two guiding principles: 
Sustainable business practices are critical to the creation of long-term shareholder 
value in an increasingly resource-constrained world 
Sustainability factors represent opportunities and risks that competitive companies 
must address 
 Amul,  for  instance,  is  one  of  the  foremost  examples  of  corporate  sustainability  in  modern 
India.  By  working  towards  the  welfare  of  the  dairy  farmers,  bringing  about  the  white 
revolution and turning India from a milk deficit to a milk surplus country, taking care of the 
nutrition needs of the country, it has managed to address the needs of several stakeholders 
and  has  also  addressed  the  overarching  goals  of  social  justice  and  equity,  and  economic 
development. 
Recent trends in corporate sustainability 
Transparency 
• 
11. 
Just like technological change, transparency is an irreversible force. Reporting and 
disclosure  will  undoubtedly  continue  to  grow,  driven  by  ever-lower  barriers  to  information 
access,  higher  public  interest  and  regulatory  changes.  Already  over  5,000  corporations 
disclose  their  Environmental,  Social  and  Governance  factors  (ESG)  performance  on  an 
annual basis, and this number is bound to grow. 
• 
Trust 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  12. 
The  ever-growing  impact  of  business  on  society  indicates  that  citizens  and 
consumers  expect  corporate  power  to  be  exerted  responsibly.  As  people  grow  more 
skeptical,  self-organised  and  prone  to  challenging  authority,  the  corporate  community  will 
have to enhance efforts on building trust. This means being proactive and thorough in how a 
company views its responsibilities and impacts on society, and then showing how it manages 
operations accordingly. 
13. 
I am sure all of you have heard of Dr. Ela Bhatt and SEWA. She took the element of 
trust  and  transparency  in  corporate  accountability  to  another  dimension  when  SEWA 
withdrew the entire supply of a snack from the market, even to the extent of trying to track 
each  sold  packet,  because  they  had  discovered  that  one  of  the  ingredients  had  health 
hazards. 
Community participation 
• 
14. 
Industry is expected to do more in areas that used to be the exclusive domain of the 
public  sector  –  ranging  from  health  and  education,  to  community  investment  and 
environmental  stewardship.  Environmental  issues  are  a  good  example  of  this  blurred  line. 
Natural  resources  are  now  recognised  to  be  finite  and  under  stress.  What  was  once 
unthinkable is becoming reality: water and even air now come with price tags. 
Companies that collaborate with scientists, civil society and public regulators and show early 
on that they “really care” and will thus stand out ahead of others. 
Accessing new markets responsibly 
• 
15. 
With concepts like the Blue Ocean Strategy gaining ground and mere competition 
becoming  out-moded  businesses  are  moving  from  being  “resource  takers”  to  “market 
builders”. With  economic  growth  going  global,  foreign  direct  investment  is  becoming  more 
about building and gaining access to new markets and less about simply exploiting low-cost 
inputs.  Overcoming  barriers  to  growth,  such  as  civil  violence,  uneducated  workforce  and 
unsustainable sources of energy, water, minerals and soil is now an imperative in a manner 
that was never so before. 
Initiatives to engage companies 
• 
16. 
Initiatives, standards and consultancies for engaging in corporate sustainability are 
booming at national and global levels. The UN Global Compact, a strategic policy initiative 
for businesses by the United Nations, is engaging “with over 12,000 companies in more than 
145 countries on human rights, labour standards, environment and anti-corruption. In India 
too there is a growing awareness of the overarching responsibility of business which goes 
beyond mere profitability. 
17. 
Corporations around the world are increasingly recognizing that sustained growth of 
their organisation requires cooperation of all stakeholders, which requires adherence to the 
best  corporate  governance  practices.  In  this  regard,  the  management  needs  to  act  as 
trustees and prevent asymmetry of benefits between various sections of stakeholders. 
The four pillars of corporate sustainability 
18. 
Sustainable  development  –  Sustainable  development  is  a  broad,  concept  that 
balances  the  need for  economic growth  with  environmental  protection  and  social  equity.  It 
should  not  be  left  to  government  regulators  and  policy  makers  alone.  While  corporations 
have always been the engines for economic development, they need to be more proactive in 
balancing  this  drive  with  social  equity  and  environmental  protection,  partly  because  they 
have been the cause of some of the unsustainable conditions, but also because they have 
access to the resources necessary to address the problems. 
19. 
Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) – CSR deals with the role of business in 
society. Its basic premise is that corporate managers have an ethical obligation to consider 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  and address the needs of society, not just to act solely in the interests of the shareholders or 
their  own  self-interest.  In  fact  in  the  debate  on  CSR,  what  is  usually  in  question  is  not 
whether  corporate  managers  have  an  obligation  to  consider  the  needs  of  society,  but  the 
extent to which they should consider this need. CSR contributes to corporate sustainability 
by  providing  ethical  arguments  as  to  why  corporate  managers  should  work  towards 
sustainable development. Voluntarism and empathy on the part of lead to the success of any 
CSR  initiative. While the first  pillar  defines  the  vision  of  the  organisation,  CSR  defines the 
ethics of the organisation. But, CSR is not synonymous with sustainability. It is giving back to 
society a part of what it has taken from the society. Depending on the context, it can on rare 
occasions contribute negatively to sustainability. India is the only country which has explicit 
legal  provision  prescribing  CSR  for  companies  above  a  threshold.  The  concept  CSR  has 
been evolving and changing very fast if one has to look at amendment in the schedule as 
well as rules relating to CSR over the last six months. 
20. 
Stakeholder theory – The basic premise of stakeholder theory is that the stronger 
your relationships are with other external parties, the easier it will be to meet your corporate 
business objectives. 
21. 
The  crucial  part  for  any  organisation  would  be  to  identify  all  stakeholders,  their 
needs and prioritise these needs. One of the methods that could be used for this purpose 
and  has  been  found  to  be  quite  successful  is  the  Balanced  Scorecard  Method,  which 
integrates organisational goals and work flows with those of different groups of stakeholders. 
While  the  objectives  and  priorities  of  different  stakeholders  may  vary,  there  is  a  general 
agreement  on  areas  such  as  environmental  protection,  economic  stability,  across  many 
stakeholder groups. Few groups would argue against these goals, although they may debate 
the level of priority or urgency. 
22. 
The  third  pillar,  therefore,  defines  the  business  objects  of  the  organisation.  As  a 
strategic  management  concept  it  enables  contact  with  all  stakeholders  and  defines  the 
nature of relationship between the corporate and the stakeholders. 
23. 
The TATA group  of companies  has  been  working  towards  corporate  sustainability 
and  publishing  reports  for  several  years,  with  TATA  steel  taking  the  lead,  since  the  year 
2000–01. In the words of Cyrus Mistry, Chairman TATA Group, “Ultimately our very purpose 
is long-term stakeholder value creation”. Another company which merits attention is ITC Ltd. 
Their commercial model of moving over from being a cigarette company to a multi business 
conglomerate including agri business was a necessity on account not only because of high 
incidence of taxes on tobacco being levied by the Government but also due to the growing 
awareness among the general public towards the ill effects of smoking and the consequent 
move away from cigarettes. The company had to ensure that it survives – thus sustainability 
was the key – and to this end, they migrated towards edible oil production and marketing, 
with  the  thrust  on  sunflower  oil.  The  farmers  in  Andhra  were  migrated  from  cultivating 
tobacco to growing sunflower. ITC established e-choupals (a success story of IT usage of the 
rural masses) which guided the farmers on production and marketing of sunflower seeds to 
their benefit. This resulted in overall growth for the farming community as well, in addition to 
the significant growth of ITC which has now been sustained for more than a decade, and at 
the same time, conforming broadly to the pillars outlined earlier. 
24. 
Corporate  accountability  –  The  fourth  and  final  concept  underlying  corporate 
sustainability is corporate accountability. Accountability is the legal or ethical responsibility to 
provide  an  account  or  reckoning  of  the  actions  for  which  one  is  held  responsible. 
Accountability  differs  from  responsibility  in  that  the  latter  refers  to  one’s  duty  to  act  in  a 
certain way, whereas accountability refers to one’s duty to explain, justify, or report on his or 
her actions. 
25. 
I  shall  focus  a  little  more  on  the  fourth  pillar-  corporate  accountability.  Not  just 
because as a banker accountability looms large in my mind but also because as ex-CAG, 
Vinod  Rai  stated,  “Accountability  cannot  be  regulated  or  relegated  to  the  background  in 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  pursuit  of  power.  Every  institution  must  be  held  accountable.”  The  ever-growing  impact  of 
business  on  society  means  that  citizens  and  consumers  expect  corporate  power  to  be 
exerted  responsibly  and  the  corporate  needs  to  show  that  this  is  so,  which  is  where  the 
concept of accountability comes in. 
Explanation of corporate accountability 
26. 
In the corporate world, there are many different accountability relationships, but the 
relevant one in the context of corporate sustainability is the relationship between corporate 
management and stakeholders. This relationship is an extension of the traditional fiduciary 
model,  which  in  turn  is  based  on  agency  theory  and  agency  law,  wherein  corporate 
management is the “agent” and the stakeholders are the “principal”. This relationship can be 
viewed as a contract in which the principal entrusts the agent with resources and the agent is 
responsible for using those resources in the principal’s best interest. The agent is also held 
accountable by the principal for how those resources are used and the return on investment. 
27. 
All  of  you  must  be  following  the  latest  news.  It  is  full  of  stories  of  corporate  “dis-
accountability” (if I may coin a new word). So much so that judicial activism has taken on a 
new  meaning  in  our  country.  In  this  environment  some  sterling  corporates  have  set  new 
benchmarks of corporate accountability. While the act of withdrawing cars from the market 
after  discovering  manufacturing  defects  by  large  corporates  is  laudable,  such  an  act  by  a 
cash strapped organisation with a diverse and very poor and illiterate membership, like that 
of  SEWA,  with  far  lesser  staying  power,  shows  tremendous  commitment  towards 
accountability to stakeholders. 
28. 
Companies enter into contracts (both explicit and implicit) with various stakeholder 
groups as a matter of everyday business and these contractual arrangements can serve as 
the basis for accountability relationships. For example, companies that receive environmental 
permits and approvals from regulators to operate facilities are often held accountable by the 
regulators for whether the terms of the approval are being met. Proponents of social contract 
theory suggest that corporations are given a “license to operate” by society in exchange for 
good behaviour, (read judicious utilisation of resources) and as such the corporations should 
be accountable to society for their performance. 
29.  The  contribution  of  corporate  accountability  theory  to  corporate  sustainability  is  that  it 
helps  define  the  nature  of  the  relationship  between  corporate  managers  and  the  rest  of 
society.  It  also  sets  out  the  arguments  as  to  why  companies  should  report  on  their 
environmental,  social,  and  economic  performance,  not just financial  performance. In  1997, 
John  Elkington  of  the  UK  consultancy,  Sustain  Ability,  called  this  type  of  accounting  on 
environmental, social, and economic performance as “triple bottom line” reporting. 
30. 
An  example  of  this  kind  of  “triple  bottom  line”  reporting  would  be  Infosys  which 
voluntarily  made  all  disclosures  in  the  public  domain  leading  to  greater  corporate 
accountability after the Satyam scam. 
31. 
Let me talk about my own organisation for a while. While there is no prescription by 
any  authority  as  regards  balance  sheet  disclosures  by  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  as  a 
commitment towards transparency and building trust, our Annual Report (2013–14) has an 
entire chapter on the Central Bank’s vision for the coming year. 
32. 
The  RBI  is  one  of  the few  Central  Banks  across  the globe  which  has  taken  upon 
itself the mandate for developmental banking- be it financial inclusion, training of bankers to 
render better customer service and not only providing reporting software to banks but also 
training on how to use these packages for best output. Apart from these, several initiatives 
have been taken by the RBI in improving transparency, be it administration of interest rates 
in commercial deals or reporting in balance sheets. 
33. 
In addition to this the Bank has taken upon itself the corporate social responsibility 
of  financial  literacy  and  apart  from  its  core  functions,  each  major  department  of  the  Bank 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  the 
to  Stiglitz, 
financial  sector  has, 
undertakes  different  kinds  of  outreach  activities  towards  building  financial  literacy  in  the 
country’s  populace  –  from  Town  Hall  meetings  to  exhibitions  and  quiz  competitions.  The 
Banking Codes and Standards Board of India (BCSBI), is also an initiative of RBI towards 
accountability  by  the  entire  banking  system,  by  preparing,  developing,  promoting  and 
publishing  comprehensive  Codes  and  Standards  for  banks  and  for  providing  for  fair 
treatment to their customers as also to function as an independent and autonomous body to 
monitor and ensure that the Codes and Standards adopted by banks are adhered to, in letter 
and spirit, while delivering services to their customers. 
34. 
So  far  I  have  talked  about  the  corporate  sector  in  the  general  sense.  Being  a 
representative of the financial sector, that too, being a central banker, let me dwell a bit more 
about this sector. The financial sector is in a way different from the general corporate sector 
as the operation of balance sheet is different. An efficient financial sector is essential to a 
well-functioning  economy.  Therefore,  it  should  serve  in  improving  the  efficiency  of  the 
economy as well as increasing its productivity. In other words, it should be a means to the 
real  economy.  According 
in  general,  a  very 
straightforward  set  of  tasks:  Firstly,  it  has  to  allocate  capital,  i.e.  making  sure  that  capital 
goes to  areas  where  its  return  is  highest.  Secondly,  it  should  manage  risks  in  a  way  that, 
using the ability to absorb risk, it allows capital to go where higher return on investments can 
be  made.  Thirdly,  it  is  also  supposed  to  perform  these  tasks  efficiently  –  therefore,  at  a 
relatively low cost. 
35. 
It  is  now  imperative  to  ask  the  question  as  to  whether  the  laws  of  the  financial 
markets work towards sustainable development. Or is there any conflict? Let me now try to 
address that: 
36. 
Firstly, while sustainable development aims to increase the opportunities on a longer 
time horizon i.e., both present and future, the financial sector mainly strives for the short-term 
maximisation of financial profits and the return on investment. The pursuit of such a short-
term  objective  goes  against  the  basic  tenets  of  sustainable  development  which  aims  at 
assessing the impact of today’s decision making on the future generations. Where are the 
global banks of 80s and 90s today? Some of the large ones which survived are now facing 
reputational  risk  with  questions  being  raised  by  investors  and  regulators  on  money 
laundering  and  absence  of  governance  culture.  One  of  the  main  reasons  for  this  kind  of 
behaviour  is  that  investors  can  maximise  financial  return  on  their  investment  and  may  not 
directly be exposed to the consequences of their actions on the society or environment as a 
whole.  Insider  trading  and  colluding  with  corporate  customers  for  short  term  profits  on 
treasuries  have  down-sized  many  large financial  conglomerates  when  the  regulators  catch 
up with their pace. For example, Investors in petroleum companies can gain attractive short-
term returns from high oil prices. However, carbon emissions will have an impact on the long-
term health of the economy as well as the environment. But what about the role of the large 
merchant bankers and financial institutions who invested in these companies? 
37. 
Secondly, the indifference towards environment by the financial sector arises for two 
main reasons. First, as we have seen, it is only interested in the maximisation of financial 
profits  through  high  turnover  and  does  not  have  a  real  concern  in  the  quality  of  its 
investments  but  so  long  as  they  are  profitable  investments.  This  means  that  there  is  no 
ethical  consideration  of  investments,  or  no  consideration  of  “bad”  externalities  in  the 
calculation of financial profits. Further, accounting and reporting systems do not adequately 
convey potential environmental risks and therefore, financial markets are compelled to make 
decisions on exposures based on biased information. 
38. 
Thirdly,  though  financial  markets  are  supposed  to  help  to  manage  risks  and  deal 
with uncertainty, it is also true that higher turnover and enlarging risks leads to higher profits. 
As  a  result,  one  may  get  attracted  to  short-term  financial  profits  irrespective  of  the  risks 
associated with it and its effects on the real economy and society can be completely ignored; 
for  instance,  in  terms  of  job  loss,  company  closures  or  systemic  problems  to  the  whole 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  economy  like  what  happened  after  global  financial  crisis.  Therefore  unlike  corporates,  the 
financial sector is more prone to take higher risks. 
39. 
Fourthly,  this  sector  is  characterised  by  a  great  deal  of  sophistication  and 
specialisation and tests the players’ abilities for making investment decisions in a very short 
time  in  a  highly  competitive  environment.  Furthermore,  the  highly  complex  financial 
instruments also add to the information asymmetry and participative and informed decision 
making. 
How the international banking community is addressing the issue? 
40. 
The international banking industry has increased focus on sustainable development 
and  has  concerns  over  potential  environmental  liability  and  damage  to  reputation.  A  bank 
could  be  held  for  the  environmental  degradation  that  occurred  as  a  result  of  its  lending 
practices. Banks are held responsible for the environmental impacts associated with projects 
for  which  they  provided  funding.  American  banks  were  reportedly  the  first  to  consider  the 
implementation of environmental policies in relation to lender liability, including implementing 
some  form  of  assessment  of  environmental  factors  before  approving  commercial  loans.  In 
fact, the Multilateral funding agencies such as the International Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development and the International Finance Corporation have also played a significant role in 
the development of social lending and investment guidelines by focussing on: 
Development  and  integration  of  credit  risk  assessment  tools:  due  to  the 
a) 
potential liability issues associated with environmental risks, many large international banks 
have  adopted  lending  practices  which  involve  screening  credit  applications  based  on 
environmental criteria. 
environmental reporting and management guidelines: many initiatives regarding 
b) 
environmental  information  and  reporting  requirements  have  been  widely  supported  by  this 
sector including the UNEP Financial Initiative, the Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) and more 
recently,  the  environmental  management  and reporting guidelines  by  the  “Forge Group”  in 
the UK. 
Issue  of  climate  change:  Another  driver  that  has  influenced  how  the  credit  and 
c) 
lending sector responded to the issue of sustainable development has been that of climate 
change.  Banks  initial  interest  in  climate  change  was  prompted  by  a  need  to  better 
understand the implications for credit risk in their own lending activities, that is, the extent to 
which  companies’  profitability  and  asset  valuations  would  be  negatively  impacted  and 
therefore  impair  their  credit  risks.  However,  there  is  limited  evidence  to  show  that  lending 
terms have been tightened for companies exposed to carbon liabilities. 
41. 
So,  what  is  described  in  the  “good  governance”  framework  of  a  corporate  as 
“effective  and  efficient”  also  covers  the  sustainable  use  of  natural  resources  and  the 
protection  of  the  environment.  However,  for  the  financial  sector,  being  effective  and 
efficient  means  that  it  should  serve  the  economy  by  increasing  its  efficiency  and  its 
productivity  (hence  its  effectiveness).  Therefore  to  include  the  sustainable  development 
perspective  into  finance,  the  different  aspects  which  would  have  to  be  considered  are: 
(i) internalisation of externalities in the calculation of an investment (ii) assigning a long-term 
horizon to investments so as to safeguard the financial capital for the future; (iii) greater use 
of sustainability ratios, and (iv) a changing perspective on the connotation of financial profits. 
Concluding remarks 
42. 
For  business,  environmental,  social  and  governance  responsibilities  are  no  longer 
add-ons.  They  are  integral  to  success. While  the  great  majority  of  companies  have  yet  to 
commit  to  this  trajectory,  there  is  a  strong  upward  growth  curve  in  actively  engaged 
companies, with a vanguard taking serious action in all key markets. Companies that have 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  The growing feeling is that corporate sustainability has drawn a line in the sand, and 
been able to convert sustainability challenges into opportunities are the ones that are most 
likely to thrive. 
43. 
it’s best for business to get on the right side. 
44. 
become is permanent.” (Devdutta Pattnaik) 
45. 
I would like to conclude with a quote “What we possess is temporary, but what we 
The time has come for us to strive towards permanence! 
References 
1. Corporate Sustainability – What is it and where it comes from? Mel Wilson 
2. Georg Kell, Executive Director, UN Global Compact 
3. Corporate Sustainability Reports of TATA Steel and TCS 
4. The Role of Australia’s Financial Sector in Sustainability (PWC Report) 
5.  The  Financial  Sector  and  Sustainable  Development:  Logics,  principles  and  actors: 
Umberto Pisano, André Martinuzzi & Bernulf Bruckner 
6. GRI – G4 guidelines Part 1 Reporting: Ref www:global report.Org 
7. Corporate Sustainability Reporting – www.unep.org 
8. Principles for enhancing corporate governance – BIS Final Report – Oct 2010 
9. Handbook on Corporate Social Responsibility in India – CII 
10. Lord Adair Turner, BFS UK “A regulatory response to the Global Banking crisis” 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
