  Pentti Hakkarainen: Shadow banking – what kind of regulation for the 
(European) shadow banking system? 
Notes  by  Mr  Pentti  Hakkarainen,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Finland,  for  the  panel 
discussion at the SAFE Summer Academy 2014 “Shadow Banking: Evolution, Background, 
Perspectives”, Brussels, 3 September 2014. 
 A viable and well-functioning shadow banking system is beneficial for the real 
economy 
Before going to the actual topic of today’s panel and presenting some thoughts on regulation 
of the (European) shadow banking system, let me start with a few words on how I see the 
shadow banking system. I will not go too much into the details of the definition and coverage 
of the shadow banking system as it has been a topic of another discussion earlier today. Let 
me  just  say  that  it  is  very  important  to  have  a  clear  understanding  of  what  we  are  talking 
about and hence what we potentially try to regulate and supervise. 
I  would  like  to  highlight  that  I  see  many  benefits  in  a  viable  and  well-functioning  shadow 
banking  system.  Shadow  banking  is  a  modern,  sophisticated,  and  complementary  way  to 
share  risks  efficiently.  It  is  also  an  alternative  way  to  allocate  resources  in  the  economy 
outside the regular banking sector, upon which we here in Europe are particularly dependent. 
We may even be too dependent on banks according for example to the Advisory Scientific 
Committee  of  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board.1  Thus  it  is  important  to  revitalise  and 
strengthen alternative funding channels which can further support sustainable growth in the 
real economy. 
Competition with reputation rather than heavy regulation 
My short answer to the question expressed in the topic of this panel (What kind of regulation 
for the European shadow banking system) is that calls for regulation are justified. However, 
the shadow banking system should not be regulated in the same way as the regular banking 
sector. Let me elaborate on this view. 
First,  we  must  ensure  that  regular  banking  activities  and  shadow  banking  activities  should 
not  be  mixed  or  confused  with  each  other.  It  should  be  crystal  clear  for  investors  in  for 
example money market funds that they do not enjoy any coverage comparable to a deposit 
insurance system. Similarly, it should be clear to entities in the shadow banking system that 
they will not be supported by the government (the same applies to banks as failing banks will 
not be supported or bailed-out as the new recovery and resolution framework has been fully 
implemented) nor that they have access to the liquidity support of the central bank. If shadow 
banking entities were under similar regulation and supervision as regular banks, this might 
give  a  misleading  signal  to  the  market  that  they  implicitly  also  enjoy  a  similar  safety  net. 
Formal  surveillance  by  authorities  can  also  reduce  the  incentives  of  outsiders  to  monitor 
shadow banking entities. 
Shadow banking entities have to earn the trust of investors and counterparties on their own 
merits. They have to be able to compete independently by prudently managing the business 
and  maintaining  sufficient  buffers.  Appropriate  disclosure  of  information  and  sufficient 
transparency of operations enable efficient monitoring and are instrumental in building trust. 
                                                 
1   ESRB (2014) Is the EU overbanked? Reports of the Advisory Scientific Committee 4. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  Secondly,  in  spite  of  our  best  efforts,  supervisors  tend  to  follow  a  step  or  two  behind  the 
actions of those we supervise. This is the case also with regular banks, which operate in and 
adjust to a continuously changing environment. Still I would argue that the banking business 
is  more  stable.  Moreover,  there  are  more  similarities  across  regular  banks  than  there  are 
across the heterogeneous group of shadow banking entities, making regular banks easier to 
supervise. Thus regulating and supervising the shadow banking system might be particularly 
challenging, if not even impossible. A better option might be to make sure they have the right 
incentives to do their job well. 
Regulating systemically important shadow banking entities and the importance of 
separation between the regular banking and shadow banking system 
However,  there  are  some  exceptions  to  the  ideal  situation  I  have  tried  to  picture,  making 
more comprehensive and stricter regulation warranted. First of all if a shadow banking entity 
becomes  systemically  important  its  failure  may  have  devastating  effects  on  the  rest  of  the 
financial system and eventually on the real economy. As some risks are likely to shift to the 
shadow  banking  system  due  to  the  tighter  regulation  in  the  regular  banking  sector,  risk 
concentrations  may  very  well  be  built  up  in  the  shadow  banking  system.  There  is  an 
externality that calls for regulation. Here the US has taken the lead and already allows the 
authorities  to  ensure  that  the  perimeter  of  prudential  regulation  can  be  extended  as 
appropriate  to  cover  systemically  important  (and  significant)  shadow  banking  institutions.2 
This avenue is one option to be considered in Europe. 
Secondly, the systemic risk building up in the shadow banking system and the failure of a 
shadow banking entity should not cause contagion to the regular banking sector. Thus there 
is  a  need  to  regulate  and  supervise  the  link  between  the  regular  banking  sector  and  the 
shadow banking system. 
Much has already been done to this end. For example the Risk Retention Rule guarantees 
that an originator has a skin-in-the-game as it must keep a certain part of the risks at its own 
balance  sheet  and  thus  the  bank  will  measure  the  risk  of  the  link  to  the  shadow  banking 
system  appropriately.  Similarly  the  due  diligence  requirement  reduces  the  information 
asymmetry in securitisation structures and makes them more transparent. This facilitates the 
understanding of risks taken by regular banks in the shadow banking system. The objective 
of  the  proposed  Regulation  of  Money  Market  Funds  is  to  ensure  that  the  risk  of  MMFs  is 
properly accounted for by the investors among which regular banks are frequently found. The 
distinction between insured deposits and this important source of funding for shadow banking 
entities  is  clarified.  To  further  strengthen  the  securitisation  process  the  EU  Credit  Rating 
Agency (CRA) regulations improves the transparency and accountability of rating agencies. 
Finally, the capital requirements related to securitisations have been reformed to ensure that 
the parties involved in the process are sufficiently protected against potential shortcomings 
and failures. 
Also,  there  is  an  ongoing  discussion  on  reforming  the  structure  of  banks  in  the  European 
Union based on the work of the High-level Expert Group chaired by governor Liikanen, the 
member of which our panel chairman, prof. Jan Pieter Krahnen also was. Based on the final 
report of the Group, the Commission proposed Regulation on structural measures to improve 
the  resilience  of  EU  credit  institutions.  One  element  of  this  proposal  is  to  curb  the  link 
between banks and the shadow banking system, by imposing a ban not only on proprietary 
trading,  but  also  on  exposures  to  shadow  banking  entities  engaging  in  proprietary  trading 
                                                 
2   See for example the speech by Daniel Tarullo on “Shadow banking and systemic risk regulation” held at the 
Americans  for  Financial  Reform  and  Economic  Policy  Institute  Conference,  Washington  DC,  22  November 
2013. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  and exposures to hedge funds and entities sponsoring hedge funds. Similar rules are already 
implemented in the US through the Volcker-rule. 
In January 2014, the Commission also published a proposal on Regulating shadow banking 
system  transparency.  The  aim  is  to  improve  the  reporting  and  increase  the  efficiency  of 
supervision  on  securities  financing  transactions  so  that  the  links  to  the  banking  sector  are 
properly understood. Moreover, the proposed rules on how client assets can be reused as 
collateral  clarify  the  complex  chains  of  rehypothecation.  The  transparency  of  the  collateral 
chains,  in  which  both  regular  banks  and  shadow  banking  entities  are  involved,  is  also 
improved. During the financial crisis we learned that opacity and uncertainty about the extent 
of  rehypothecation  and 
in 
counterparties. 
involved  can  severely  undermine  confidence 
the  risks 
The ABS market in Europe 
Continuing on  the  development  of a  particular shadow  banking  activity,  I  would say  that  a 
step  towards  the  right  direction  has  been  taken  as  the  new  regulation  supports  the  ABS 
market  (or  securitisation  market  in  generally)  and  endeavors  to  ensure  growth,  while  for 
example the proposed regulation on structural reform in EU aims to better separate shadow 
banking  from  the  traditional  one.  Furthermore,  it  enhances  the  market  discipline,  which  in 
turn, provides a decent and solid ground for well-functioning shadow banking system. 
As the ECB Governing Council decided in June 2014 to “intensify preparatory work related to 
outright  purchases  in  the  ABS  market  (to  enhance  the  functioning  of  the  monetary  policy 
transmission  mechanism)”,  I  would  also  like  to  say  a  few  words  about  the  ABS  market  in 
Europe and its potential.3 
The current ABS market in Europe is small and impaired: public issuance of asset backed 
securities is minimal and the market is shrinking. It is unfortunate as the ABS-market has a 
good  potential  to  contribute  to  unlocking  the  Europe’s  credit  market,  by  offering  a  viable 
complementary funding source for the real economy, in particular for the SME sector. 
Considering the weakness of the securitisation market, it is obvious that the market is still 
suffering from the stigma it received when the global financial crisis erupted and the failures 
of  the  securitisation  market  were  uncovered.  The  market  suffers  from  a  reputation  as  a 
capital  arbitrage  tool  of  banks  that  turned  out  to  be  disastrous  for  financial  stability.  The 
stigma is persistent and mutual, even though the European ABS market performed relatively 
well during the crisis compared with the respective American one. 
Another  reason  behind  the  small  and  weak  European  securitisation  market  may  be  the 
heterogeneity of the European securitisation market, namely the differences in for example 
lending criteria, banking institutions, rating standards and default laws among the European 
countries.4  Diminishing  these  differences  would  enable  a  better-functioning  European 
securitisation market. Harmonising some standards and enhancing relevant data availability 
could  dispel  the  risk  that  banks  would  off-load  bad  parts  of  their  balance  sheets  with 
securitisation  activities.  Moreover,  common  rules  and  standards  would  support  the 
development  of  the  currently  very  fragmented  market  to  a  pan-European  one  in  a  single 
market spirit. 
Finally, considering the potential role of the ABS market in the monetary policy transmission 
mechanism, a central bank should avoid a situation in which it could become the only buyer 
                                                 
3   See also the joint paper by ECB and BoE “The impaired EU securitisation market: causes, roadblocks and 
how to deal with them”. 
4   An interesting discussion on alternative ways to develop the ABS-market in Europe can be found in the recent 
Bruegel Policy Contribution “Asset-backed securities: the key to unlocking Europe’s credit markets?”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  in  the  ABS  market.  It  is  thus  utterly  important  to  enhance  the  development  of  the  private 
market  in  ABS.  So  far  the  ABS  market  has  probably  played  a  minor  role  in  private  sector 
debt financing; its main driver may have been the collateral needs of banks. From the view 
point of regulation these facts should not be forgotten. It is desirable to make regulation such 
that it restricts neither the supply nor the demand side of the ABS market. 
Concluding remarks 
To conclude, I would like to highlight the following points. 
In principle, shadow banking system is beneficial, and one must be careful with its regulation. 
As  professor  Bengt  Holmström  has  reminded:  “Of  special  concern  is  the  tendency  to 
demonize or ban innovations that backfired, not because they were fundamentally wrong, but 
because  the  particular  implementation  was  flawed.  The  originate-and-distribute  model  and 
MBSs  [or  securitisation  in  generally]  will  certainly  have  an  important  place  in  the  future.”5 
Thus,  we  should  learn  from  the  fundamental  analyses  of  what  went  wrong  last  time,  and 
keep restoring the confidence to the securitisation market. 
Finally,  one  thing  that  should  be  kept  in  mind  is  a  possible  post-crisis  reinvention  of  the 
financial system that Andy Haldane, Chief Economist of Bank of England, talks about in his 
recent  publication.6  As  a  consequence  of  the  crisis,  some  part  of  financial  activities  will 
migrate  outside  the  banking  system,  inducing  the  shape  and  form  of  risk  itself  to  change. 
This  could  have  further  implications  for  stability  of  the  financial  system  and  the  broader 
economy.  Haldane  continues  that  as  risk  changes  its  composition,  not  its  quantum,  the 
financial  system  may  exhibit  a  new  strain  of  systemic  risk  that  is  even  more  related  to 
shadow banking entities. 
Therefore,  regulators  must  follow  intensively  the  development  of  the  post  crisis  financial 
system  that  might  result  in  new  type  of  systemic  risks,  and  be  ready  to  adjust  regulation 
accordingly in a proactive manner. 
 
                                                 
5   Bengt Holmström (201 ) Comment on “The panic of 2007” by Gorton subsequently published in 2009 as “The 
Subprime Panic” in the European Financial Management 15 (1). 
6   Andrew Haldane (2014) “Halfway up the stairs”, Central Banking Journal. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
