  Njuguna Ndung’u: The methodology of collection, compilation and 
analysis of international remittances statistics 
Remarks  by  Professor  Njuguna  Ndung’u,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya,  at  the 
regional course on “The methodology of collection, compilation and analysis of international 
remittances statistics”, Nairobi, 17 November 2014. 
 Dr. Sehliselo Mpofu, Director, Macroeconomic Management Programme – MEFMI; 
Distinguished Facilitators and MEFMI Staff; 
Delegates; 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
It is a privilege for me to join you on this important occasion of the official opening of this 
regional  course  on  “Methodology  for  Collection,  Compilation  and  Analysis  of 
International Remittances Statistics”. 
Allow me from the onset, to extend a cordial welcome to you all on behalf of the Government 
of Kenya. We are indeed honoured and happy to host this important activity here in Nairobi, 
Kenya. 
I would like also to extend a very special welcome to the delegation from MEFMI. We are 
honoured to host one of your capacity building events this year. As always this has attracted 
a  high  level  of  interest  and  attendance,  an  indication  of  the  perceived  need  to  bridge  the 
existing capacity gaps in the compilation of remittances statistics. 
Let  me  also  thank  the  distinguished  resource  persons,  Dr.  Emmanuel  Kumah,  who  was 
formally of the IMF Statistics Department, and Mr. Moris Mpofu from the Reserve Bank of 
Zimbabwe for accepting to bring their expertise to this course. I am confident that their vast 
knowledge  will  enable  them to  share  experiences  in  this critical  policy  area  and contribute 
immensely to the enhancement of skills in the MEFMI region. 
As you are all aware, international remittances have grown to become significantly important 
in  providing  foreign  exchange  and  financing.  They,  particularly,  support  millions  of  poor 
recipients.  We  cannot  therefore  afford  to  ignore  the  quality  of  data  for  such  an  important 
contributor to economic growth and development. 
Until  recently,  unlike  other  countries  with  significant  numbers  in  the  diaspora,  we  in  Africa 
have  paid  little  attention  to  the  role  of  remittances  in  our  development  thinking.  This  must 
now change. There is increasing awareness of the importance of these remittances due to 
the fact that, unlike other financial flows, remittances mostly go directly to households, either 
for investment or consumption smoothing. Therefore, they have important poverty alleviation 
benefits.  The  critical  questions  are  therefore  how  much  of  this  money  is  coming  into  our 
economies and through what channels? 
In  Kenya,  for  instance,  estimates  of  remittances  captured  only  from  formal  channels  that 
include commercial banks and other authorized international remittances service providers, 
have averaged USD118.2 million per month so far in 2014, from USD107.5 million per month 
in 2013. This places remittances as an important source of foreign exchange. Indeed they 
have grown exponentially in recent years to surpass some of the major traditional sources. 
In Sub-Saharan Africa, remittances have become one of the important enablers of economic 
growth and of poverty reduction. As such, remittances contributed up to 3% of GDP over the 
last  five  years  and  to  more  than  20%  of  international  flows.  For  example,  in  Nigeria, 
remittances account for more than a quarter of GDP, while in Lesotho they account for more 
than 20 percent of GDP. There are indications that international remittances to Africa exceed 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  USD30  billion  annually,  affect  25  million  recipient  households,  and  have  the  potential  to 
stimulate economic growth and reduce poverty. 
International remittance flows often exceed Foreign Direct Investment in Africa and account 
for more than twice as much as the world’s total Official Development Aid. 
In  this  regard,  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  capture  of  timely,  reliable,  accurate  and 
comprehensive  statistics  is  pivotal  to  the  region’s  macroeconomic  policy  management  and 
deliberate policy must be designed to attract more inflows from our compatriots abroad. It is 
therefore important to increase transparency and make it easier and more cost effective for 
remitters to use legitimate channels, particularly in our region. 
While  a  majority  of  developed  economies  are  largely  compliant  with  the  acceptable  best 
practices, many developing countries, including MEFMI member countries still have work to 
do, mainly due to inadequate technical capacity among some data compilers. 
Without an adequate pool of skilled personnel, our efforts to bridge the capacity gaps in data 
compilation in the region will be futile. The importance of regular capacity building activities, 
interactions  and  sharing  of  experiences  amongst  ourselves,  and  benchmarking 
to 
international best practice therefore, cannot be overemphasized. 
I  am  happy  to  note  that  this  course  will  make  an  important  contribution  to  improving  our 
understanding on how to collect, compile and analyse international remittances statistics in 
line  with  the  6th  Edition  of  IMF’s  Balance  of  Payments  Manual  (BPM  6)  and  the  IMF 
International Remittances Guide. This is indeed, in line with IMF’s and MEFMI’s mandate 
of imparting hands-on skills. 
I  therefore,  expect  the  course  to  bring  together  information  on  key  statistical  activities 
currently undertaken by the statistical organizations in our respective countries and to identify 
what more can be done to further improve the quality and timely availability of statistics in 
this area. 
May I urge you all to make the most out of this rare opportunity so that when you return to 
your respective institutions, you can take the lead in ensuring that our region benefits fully 
from  this  invaluable  initiative.  This,  however,  can  only  be  realized  through  individual 
commitment,  free  exchange  of  ideas,  sharing  of  experiences  and  a  good  sense  of  open-
mindedness among all participants. 
It is also my hope that strong networking links will emerge out of this course to foster a long-
run exchange of ideas and experiences among professionals in the region. Once we have 
the correct classification of data, then we can open another chapter of how to use it in policy 
making.  This  will  also  inform  us  on  how  to  target  the  diaspora  to  channel  investments  in 
specific areas – like Diaspora Bonds.  
As  I  conclude, I  appeal  to  you  to  take  some  time  out  of  your  densely  packed schedule  to 
enjoy the hospitality of Nairobi. Freely explore the boundless beauty of our country, sample 
local cuisine and explore the attractive tourism products on offer. 
It  is  now  my  singular  honour  to  declare  this  course  officially  open,  and  I  wish  you  fruitful 
discussions and a memorable stay in Nairobi. 
I thank you all for your attention. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
