  DeLisle Worrell: IFCs in a borderless digital economy 
Opening remarks by Dr DeLisle Worrell, Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados, at the 
conference “IFC’s in a Borderless Digital Economy”, Bridgetown, 11 September 2014. 
 Small  international  business  and  financial  centres  like  Barbados  make  it  possible  for 
international firms  to  increase their  competitiveness  in  international  commerce  and finance 
by  locating  aspects  of  their  business  in  subsidiaries  located  in  our  international  business 
centre.  That  is  because  Barbados  offers  financial,  accounting,  legal,  trading,  information, 
administrative, and other services that are up to international standards, at costs much lower 
than would be the case in the major financial centres of the world. In Barbados firms also find 
regulatory  standards  of  a  quality  that  are  attested  to  by  the  IMF, World  Bank,  OECD  and 
other  international  bodies.  Other  advantages  that  contribute  to  Barbados’  competitiveness 
include our institutional strength, social services, and technological readiness. 
During the course of today’s seminar our speakers will demonstrate that small international 
financial centres such as Barbados provide internationally comparable financial and business 
services  at  competitive  prices,  when  all  the  factors  that  affect  the  investment  decision  are 
taken into account. In this 21st century we live in a new world where production processes 
transcend  national  boundaries,  even  for  the  smallest  of  firms.  The  Chinese  internet  retail 
service company Alibaba, which is currently on a roadshow for what is expected to be among 
the largest Initial Public Offerings of its kind on international capital markets, advertises itself 
as  a  supplier  to  firms  as  much  as  to  households.  Because  of  telecommunications  it  is 
possible nowadays to provide the inputs into any firm’s production process from a variety of 
sources,  in  many  different  locations,  anywhere  in  the  world.  As  you  would  expect,  this 
benefits everyone: producers are able to secure materials, skills, finance and other inputs in 
the most cost effective manner, and consumers benefit because firms are able to offer best 
value for money as a result. 
Small IBFCs like Barbados enrich the options available to international companies in locating 
services  for  the  global  market,  so  they  may  offer  more  competitively  priced  goods  and 
services. Every IBFC has a unique mixture of characteristics which defines its comparative 
advantage, and the activities it will attract as a result. In Barbados’ case, a strong network of 
double  taxation  treaties  is  a  distinguishing  feature,  along  with  the  advantages  previously 
mentioned. 
The globalisation of business therefore offers exciting possibilities for all nations to increase 
the  competitiveness  of firms,  and  to  obtain goods  and  services  at  the  best  prices for their 
consumers.  In  this  global  mix,  IBFCs  like  Barbados  continue  to  play  a  vital  role,  for 
companies  whose  requirements  match  their  skill  sets  and  other  sources  of  comparative 
advantage.  However,  the  rapid  change  of  tastes  and  technology  does  create  challenges, 
dislocations and some losses. These must be taken care of, and the burdens of transition 
eased for persons affected. If not well managed, the disaffected may impede the progress of 
the international community.  
Major  international  dislocations  like  the Great  Recession  of  2008,  and  its  lingering  effects, 
fuel opposition to the globalisation of commerce. Many international commentators see the 
backlash  against  outsourcing,  the  growth  of  anti-immigration  sentiment  in  many  countries, 
burdensome rules and prescriptions on international commerce and finance, and the growing 
competition among countries for a share of tax on the profits of international companies – as 
unfortunate  setbacks  to  efficient  global  markets,  and  a  loss  to  everyone,  including  the 
protagonists of the protectionist policies. 
We must not be naïve. The globalisation process must be managed so that potential losers 
are compensated or helped to make a transition; the pace of change must be modulated so 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  that  local  cultures  and  traditions  are  respected  and  can  evolve,  and  people  must  not  feel 
overwhelmed.  Fairness  and  justice  must  prevail,  and  outrageous  extremes  of  wealth  and 
poverty must be addressed. These initiatives must be restored to the global agenda, if we 
are  to  turn  back  the  anti-globalisation  forces.  It’s  important  to  us,  because  IBFCs  are 
suffering from that backlash. 
But  we  know  that  the  forces  of  nationalism  and  autarchy  cannot  prevail.  Technology  is 
against them and economics is against them. Globalisation is unstoppable, and in the global 
economy Barbados and other IBFCs are carving out our special niches. We have suffered 
our  setbacks,  but  we  are  undeterred,  because  we  are  part  of  the  future  of  the  global 
economy, an economy where borders diminish in importance with every day that passes.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
