  Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: The role of the central bank in the post 
2015 era to promote local ownership of monetary and fiscal policies and 
processes 
Special address by Mr Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile, Governor of the Bank of Uganda, to 
the Tenth Annual Meeting of the African Science Academies, Kampala, 11 November 2014. 
 Introduction 
The theme of my address this afternoon is the role, responsibilities and governance of the 
central bank in a modern market oriented economy, such as that of Uganda. If Uganda is to 
create and implement a successful development agenda in 2015 and beyond, it must build 
strong  institutions  of  economic  governance.  Academics  and  economic  policy  makers  have 
learned  many  lessons  about  macroeconomic  policy  and  central  banking  over  the  last  fifty 
years, and these lessons have influenced radical changes in the practise of monetary policy 
and  the  governance  of  central  banks  around  the  world,  including  in  Uganda.  In  some 
important respects, including the operational independence of the central bank, the adoption 
of an inflation targeting monetary policy framework and risk based bank supervision, Uganda 
has been among the pioneers of radical reform in Africa. 
In  this  address  I  will  argue,  first,  that  central  banks  must  have  very  clear  and  transparent 
policy mandates, which are consistent with the policy tools that they have at their disposal. 
Without such mandates, which must command political consensus, central banks cannot be 
held to account for their performance. This requires that central banks must focus exclusively 
on monetary policy and bank regulation, and not undertake other roles which might create 
policy conflicts. Secondly, I will argue that central banks need operational independence to 
pursue  their  politically  determined  policy  goals.  I  will  explain  why  this  is  so  important  and 
what  it  means  in  practise.  Thirdly,  I  will  argue  that  policies  which  have  distributional 
implications are inherently political and, therefore, should not be the responsibility of a central 
bank;  instead  they  should  be  the  responsibility  of  the  relevant  government  ministry.  This 
principle requires a clear separation of monetary and fiscal policies.  
What is the proper role of a central bank? 
Central banks are institutions which have a monopoly on the issuance of fiat money; notes 
and coins which are legal tender within a given jurisdiction or set of jurisdictions. From this 
monopoly of the central bank is derived its two critical functions. First, the central bank can 
determine the quantity of money in circulation in the economy or, alternatively, set the price 
of this money, which is the interest rate. Determining the quantity or the price of money is the 
essence  of  monetary  policy.  No  other  type  of  institution  can  conduct  monetary  policy 
because no other institution has the monopoly on the issuance of legal tender. Secondly, the 
central bank’s monopoly of the issuance of legal tender means that it is the only institution 
which  is  able  to  carry  out  the  function  of  lender  of  last  resort  to  illiquid  banks,  which  is 
sometimes necessary to avert a banking crisis. From this function there arises the need to 
impose  prudential  regulation  on  banks,  because  in  the  absence  of  prudential  regulation  a 
bank which has access to lender of last resort facilities when it incurs financial distress does 
not  have  adequate  incentives  to  manage  itself  in  a  sound  manner.  All  countries  impose 
prudential regulation on banks and in most, but not all, countries this regulation is carried out 
by the central bank. 
Monetary policy is one of the three main tools of macroeconomic policy; the others are fiscal 
and  exchange  rate  policy.  Because  monetary  policy  affects  private  sector  expenditures, 
which constitutes the vast bulk of spending in a market economy (approximately 88 percent 
of total final expenditure in the Ugandan economy is by the private sector), it is particularly 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  important for macroeconomic stability. Sound monetary policy is a prerequisite for a stable 
macroeconomy, with low inflation, although it is not always sufficient in the absence of sound 
fiscal policy. 
It is also important to recognise what monetary policy can realistically achieve and  what it 
cannot. Monetary policy can influence the level of private sector spending in the economy, 
and  thereby  the  level  of  nominal  aggregate  demand;  it  is  a  tool  of  demand  management. 
Controlling  the  level  of  aggregate  demand  in  the  economy  is  crucial  for  the  control  of 
inflation, but it is much less relevant for the long term growth of the economy, because the 
latter depends on supply side factors, such as capital investment, the growth and education 
of  the  labour  force,  and  improvements  in  productivity.  The  supply  side  of  the  economy  is 
beyond the orbit of monetary policy and, as a consequence, it is not realistic to expect that 
monetary policy can shape the long run growth rate of the economy. For this, different types 
of policies are required, such as those which affect incentives for private investment or the 
quality  of  the  labour  force.  Fiscal  policy  is  far  more  important  for  the  supply  side  of  the 
economy than is monetary policy. 
What  does  this  mean for  the  mandate  of  the  central  bank?  The  central bank  should  have 
clearly  defined  policy  goals  which  it  can  realistically  be  expected  to  deliver,  given  the 
monetary policy tools it has at its disposal. That is why the BOU has, as its primary policy 
objective, the control of inflation. A well formulated and implemented monetary policy should 
be able to achieve a target for inflation, on average over a medium term horizon, although 
not in every single month over that horizon because prices are subject to short term shocks, 
such  as  those  caused  by  food  supply  shocks.  If  a  central  bank  is  given  a  clear  policy 
objective  to  control  inflation  over  the  medium  term,  it  is  then  relatively  straightforward  to 
judge its performance, by measuring the outcome against the policy objective, and thus to 
determine whether or not the central bank is doing a good job. The BOU aims to hold annual 
core inflation to a maximum of 5 percent over the medium term. The public should judge the 
BOU  on  how  well  it  performs  relative  to  its  target  for  inflation.  Over  the  last  24  months, 
annual  core  inflation  in  Uganda  has  averaged  4.8  percent;  hence  the  inflation  outturns 
indicate that the BOU’s monetary policy has been successful over this period.  
In  the  1960s  and  1970s,  central  banks  in  many  countries,  including  Uganda,  were  given 
multiple  objectives,  many  of  which  were  developmental  in  nature,  in  addition  to  their 
objectives for controlling inflation. Although the developmental objectives were not, per se, 
unwarranted,  pursuing  them  was  highly  problematic  for  central  banks  for  at  least  three 
reasons.  First,  as  I  have  already  explained,  monetary  policy  has  very  little  impact  on  the 
supply  side  of  the  economy  and,  therefore,  cannot  be  used  to  achieve  developmental 
objectives  such  as  raising  the  rate  of  capital  investment  or  long  term  economic  growth. 
Secondly,  there  was  a  conflict  between  some  of  the  developmental  objectives  and  that  of 
controlling inflation, with the result that the ability of monetary policy to control inflation was 
undermined. Thirdly, it is very difficult to evaluate the performance of a central bank which 
has  multiple  and  conflicting  policy  objectives,  and  thus  hold  it  accountable.  In  turn,  if  the 
central bank cannot be held to account for poor performance, it will not face strong incentives 
to deliver a good performance. 
Similar  principles  should  inform  the  role  of  the  central  bank  as  bank  regulator.  A  bank 
regulator  cannot  prevent  all  bank  failures,  but  provided  that  it  has  the  requisite  statutory 
authority,  which  is  usually  set  out  in  the  banking  laws,  it  is  reasonable  to  expect  the  bank 
regulator to supervise banks in a manner which both minimises bank failures and ensures 
that, if a bank does fail, it is subject to regulatory intervention before its losses erode all of its 
deposits. This is the essence of the prudential regulation of banks; the objectives of which 
are the avoidance of banking crises and the protection of depositors. These objectives are 
both  clear  and,  other  than  in  the  most  exceptional  of  circumstances,  achievable.  What  is 
problematic is to expect central banks to use their regulatory tools to achieve other objectives 
besides those of prudential regulation; for example attempting to direct the credit allocations 
of  banks.  As  with  monetary  policy,  this  will  create  conflicts  of  interest  which  are  likely  to 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  undermine  prudential  regulation  and  make  it  harder  to  evaluate  the  performance  of  the 
central bank and hold it to account. 
The operational independence of the central bank 
3. 
In  common  with  many  other  central  banks  around  the  world,  the  BOU  has  operational 
independence.  In  Uganda  this  independence  is  guaranteed  by  the  Constitution  which 
explicitly  states  that:  “in  performing  its  functions  the  Bank  of  Uganda  shall  conform  to  this 
constitution  but  shall  not  be  subject  to  the  direction  or  control  of  any  person  or  authority”. 
What does operational independence actually mean in the context of the central bank and 
why is it important?  
In essence operational independence pertains to the independence of the central bank to set 
its monetary policy instruments, such as the policy interest rate, free of any interference from 
other persons or authorities, such as ministries of finance. It does not mean that the central 
bank  is  free  to  set  its  own  policy  priorities  or  objectives.  Whether  or  not  the  central  bank 
should  prioritise  the  control  of  inflation  or  some  other  objective  is  an  inherently  political 
question which must be determined by a political organ. Often this will be determined by the 
legislature, with the policy objectives set out in legislation, as is the case in Uganda where 
the  Bank  of  Uganda  Act  specifies  the  functions  of  the  BOU  and  places  emphasis  on 
“achieving  and  maintaining  economic  stability”.  Within  the  specific  framework  of  politically 
determined policy objectives, a central bank with operational independence is free to set its 
policy instruments to best achieve those objectives. 
Operational independence is regarded as being of fundamental importance in the institutional 
governance of central banks because of the notion of the “time inconsistency” of economic 
policy making. This refers to the incentives that policymakers with short time horizons have 
to take decisions which may generate short term gains but at the expense of long term costs, 
and the recognition that rational private sector agents will understand the incentives facing 
these  policymakers  and  take  actions  which  will  circumscribe  any  short  term  gains  without 
necessarily mitigating the long term losses. 
Policymakers  with  short  term  horizons  include  politicians  seeking  election.  A  central  bank 
which is not independent of political interference would face pressure to pursue expansionary 
monetary policies which generate short term gains in output at the expense of higher inflation 
in  the  future.  Granting  operational  independence  to  the  central  bank  is,  therefore,  an 
institutional  mechanism  to  insulate  the  central  bank  from  pressures  to  undertake  actions 
which would have damaging long term consequences, and thus can deliver better monetary 
policy over the long term. 
Moreover,  monetary  policy  is  likely  to  have  more  credibility  with  the  private  sector  if  the 
central bank is insulated from political pressures. In turn, the greater credibility of monetary 
policy  means  that  the  private  sector  is  likely  to  take  a  more  optimistic  view  of  inflation 
prospects and, as expectations about inflation are to some degree self-fulfilling, this will help 
to bring about lower inflation.  
The separation of fiscal and monetary policy 
4. 
The  implementation  of  monetary  policy  and  bank  regulation  does  not,  in  general,  have 
significant distributional consequences. For example, an increase in the policy interest rate 
has macroeconomic affects but it does not usually favour one section of the population at the 
expense  of  another.  If  the  implementation  of  monetary  policy  and  bank  regulation  had 
significant  distributional  consequences,  the  operational  independence  of  the  central  bank 
would be much more problematic, because distributional issues should be determined in the 
domain of politics, not by technocrats alone. 
In  contrast,  fiscal  policy  is  intrinsically  distributional  in  its  consequences.  How  taxes  are 
raised and where government spends public resources does not have an equal impact on all 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  citizens.  Consequently  it  is  imperative,  in  a  democracy,  that  elected  politicians  are  closely 
involved in determining the details of fiscal policy. For example, in Uganda all government 
expenditures must be approved by Parliament, as must all public borrowing and all changes 
to tax policy. This principle is enunciated in the Ugandan Constitution. 
Given that fiscal policy has distributional consequences and requires Parliamentary approval 
if it is to command political legitimacy, it is imperative that the central bank is not expected to 
undertake policies which are quasi fiscal in nature, such as providing subsidised credit from 
its own resources to industries or firms which are regarded as priorities for development. If 
government  desires  to  pursue  such  policies,  they  should  be  implemented  through  the 
government  budget,  after  the  necessary  Parliamentary  approval  has  been  obtained.  It  is 
essential to maintain a strict separation between monetary and fiscal policies. 
Sound macroeconomic policy also requires the avoidance of “fiscal dominance”, which refers 
to government persistently borrowing from the central bank to finance its own budget deficits. 
Central bank financing of budget deficits creates money and thus is a source of inflationary 
pressure. Consequently, the ability of a central bank to achieve its targets for inflation will be 
undermined  if  it  also  has  to  finance  government  budget  deficits.  Sound  economic 
governance  requires  that  governments  fully  fund  their  borrowing  requirements  by  issuing 
debt  to  the  markets,  and  as  is  often  the  case  for  developing  countries,  by  mobilising 
concessional  external  finance.  This  is  a  second  reason  for  insisting  on  a  clear  separation 
between fiscal and monetary policy.  
Conclusion 
5. 
I  have  outlined  what  I  believe  are  the  essential  elements  of  an  institutional  framework  for 
central banking in the post 2015 era. These essential elements are: clear policy mandates for 
the central bank focused on monetary policy and bank regulation; a primary monetary policy 
objective of controlling inflation over the medium term, the operational independence of the 
central bank and a clear separation of monetary and fiscal policy. Over the last two decades, 
legislative, institutional and policy reforms have been implemented in Uganda which have put 
in  place  a  framework  which  incorporates  these  essential  elements,  although  we  still  have 
some  way  to  go  to  make  them  fully  effective.  I  am  confident,  therefore,  that  the  Bank  of 
Uganda is well placed to support Uganda’s development agenda beyond 2015. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
