  Karnit Flug: Challenges facing manufacturing and Bank of Israel’s policy 
to deal with them 
Remarks by Dr Karnit Flug, Governor of the Bank of Israel, at the Manufacturers’ Association 
Conference, Eilat, 21 November 2014. 
 I  was  asked  to  open  my  remarks  by  sharing  with  you  the  answer  to  the  question,  “What 
manufacturing means to me?” 
I spend a lot of time visiting manufacturing plants throughout Israel. Each time I make such a 
visit,  I  am  deeply  moved  by  the  industry  creativity,  initiative,  innovation  and  the  ability  to 
continue creating even during periods of missiles and sirens. Manufacturing for me is first of 
all an important source of employment and economic growth. Manufacturing operates in a 
changing  world,  and  in  order  to  continue  succeeding,  it  needs  to  adapt  to  changes  in  the 
global competition environment, in the financial environment, in the regulatory environment, 
and also to adjust to changes in the public discourse which, in recent years, has placed a 
heavier  emphasis  on  economics,  consumerism,  the  cost  of  living,  and  other  things.  It  is 
important  for  me  to  emphasize  that  in  order  for  manufacturing  to  success,  it  must  be 
profitable, since no one establishes a plant out of the goodness of their heart, and certainly 
not  over  the  long-term.  In  order  for  industry  to  succeed,  it  must  be  competitive,  and  its 
employees must enjoy the proper fruits of that success. The success of Israeli manufacturing 
is the success of the Israeli economy, and the success of us all. 
I would like to discuss the challenges facing manufacturing in the short term in a challenging 
global environment, and to outline how the Bank of Israel’s policy acts to encourage growth 
at this time. In the longer term as well, there are significant challenges facing us, including 
the need to increase productivity, so that manufacturing can compete in the global world. I 
will also discuss what policy is required in order to deal with these challenges. 
The short-term challenges, and the Bank of Israel’s policy to encourage growth 
In  recent  years,  growth  in  the  Israeli  economy  has  been  slowing,  in  parallel  with  the 
slowdown  in  growth  worldwide,  both  in  advanced  economies  and  in  emerging  economies. 
The decline in GDP during the third quarter is obviously also a result of Operation Protective 
Edge, and we can expect that the figures for the final quarter of the year will already show a 
return to the growth rates that have characterized the economy in recent years, of slightly 
below 3 percent. The main factor in the moderate growth is moderate global demand, which 
is reflected in a virtual standstill in global trade of goods – where Israel’s goods exports have 
been  even  lower  than  it  in  recent  years  –  and  a  moderate  increase  in  the  global  trade  of 
services, where the Israel’s services exports have grown more rapidly than it. 
The global slowdown, combined with global supply factors, are reflected in a decline in global 
commodities  prices,  particularly  oil,  and  together  with  the  slowdown  in  demand,  these  are 
reflected in a sharp decline in inflation in Israel. This was also affected, until recently, by the 
prolonged  appreciation  of  the  shekel,  which  eroded  the  competitive  ability  of  Israeli 
manufacturing. 
Against this background, the Bank of Israel acted both by continuously reducing the interest 
rate to a low level of 0.25 percent, and by intervening in the foreign exchange market, inter 
alia to offset the effect of natural gas production on the exchange rate. This policy, alongside 
the strengthening of the dollar worldwide, has generated a turnaround in the exchange rate 
since  the  last  two  interest  rate  reductions,  and  the  shekel  has  since  depreciated  by 
6.5 percent in terms of the nominal effective exchange rate, and by 12 percent against the 
dollar.  The  current  exchange  rate  certainly  makes  it  easier  for  Israeli  manufacturing  to 
compete in the challenging global environment. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  The long-term challenges: gaps in productivity and per captia GDP vis-à-vis the other 
advanced economies 
Per capita GDP in Israel is about 60 percent of what it is in the US, and about 87 percent of 
the OECD average. The gap has narrowed since the global financial crisis, since we bridged 
it with relative success, but over time it has remained in place. An assessment of the source 
of  the  gap shows  that  it  is  not  the result  of  employment  rates.  Employment  rates  in  Israel 
have constantly increased, while in most of the advanced economies, including the US, they 
declined, mainly following the crisis. As of today, the employment rate in Israel is higher than 
in the US, and higher than the average among advanced economies. 
In contrast, productivity in Israel, which is measured as product per hour of work, does not 
close the gap with the OECD countries, and the gap has even widened relative to the US. An 
assessment  of  the  gap  by  industry  indicates  that  export-oriented  industries,  which  was 
exposed  to  international  competition,  tend  to  have  higher  productivity  than  their  peers  in 
other  countries,  while  domestic-oriented  industries  (both  in  manufacturing  and  in  other 
industries)  have  lower  levels  of  productivity  than  the  same  industries  in  other  advanced 
economies.  Focusing  on  the  manufacturing  industries  indicates  that  productivity  in  these 
industries has increased relatively rapidly – reflecting, over time, the increase in the weight of 
high-productivity  industries  that  are  human  capital  and  physical  capital  intensive,  and  a 
decline in the share of low-technology manufacturing. Against this background, there was no 
long-term increase in employment in manufacturing. 
What are the main factors in the relatively low productivity of the business sector in 
Israel? 
The  first  factor  is  the  low  capital  inventory  per  employee,  which  reflects  a  low  rate  of 
investment in product compared to other advanced economies. Here too, there is obviously a 
gap  between  various  industries:  In  those  that  are  technology  intensive,  investment  grew 
relatively rapidly, and with it human capital and productivity, while in other industries – such 
as  agriculture,  trade  and  services,  and  low-technology  manufacturing –  where  most  of  the 
output is intended for the domestic market, investment is relatively low, which is reflected in a 
slight increase in labor productivity. 
Productivity is obviously also affected by the amount of innovation, which relies on research 
and development. The national expenditure on research and development in Israel is higher 
than in other countries, reflecting the relatively high weight of technology-intensive industries, 
which  are  obviously  also  research  and  development  intensive.  However,  over  time,  the 
government’s  share  of  investment  in  R&D  has  declined,  and  it  is  lower  than  in  other 
countries. 
There are naturally large differences between various industries in expenditure on research 
and development. However, we can see that internationally as well, the gaps in expenditure 
on innovation among the manufacturing sub-industries in Israel are particularly large. While 
the  communications  industry  and  the  medical  devices  industry  invest  much  more  in  R&D 
than their peers in the OECD (and we have also seen that productivity in these industries is 
higher  when  compared  internationally),  the  plastics  and  food  industries  invest  far  less,  in 
international comparisons as well. 
Alongside  low  investment  in  physical  capital  and  in  research  and  development,  the  low 
investment in professional training, and to a certain extent in technological education, is also 
prominent.  Effective  and  focused  professional  training  is  tremendously  important  for  the 
ability to provide manufacturing with the human capital it requires, and a public discourse is 
currently taking place regarding how to most appropriately provide this training. 
Another  factor  that  negatively  impacts  business  sector  productivity  is  the  business 
environment, as reflected in the World Bank’s Doing Business Index. According to this index, 
we fell two more places in the rankings in the past year, and since 2007, we have fallen from 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  26th place to 40th place in terms  of the business environment. The  decline in the ranking 
does not necessarily reflect an absolute worsening, but it certainly does reflect the fact that 
other  countries  have  focused  on  improving  their  business  environments,  while  we  have 
remained  behind.  In  a  competitive  world,  the  determining  factor  is  obviously  our  relative 
position. 
It is also clear that wages which, in a competitive environment are consistent over the long 
term with labor productivity, can rise over time only if we do what is required to accelerate 
increased productivity and to expand it to all industries. 
The policy required to cope with the long-term challenges 
In  view  of  the  weaknesses  that  I  have  mentioned,  which  stand  behind  the  fact  that  labor 
productivity  in  Israel  is  increasing  slowly  and  that  its  level  is  still  significantly  far  from  the 
forefront of the advanced economies, the directions that must be taken in order to accelerate 
and expand the increase in productivity are clear: 
 
It is worthwhile incentivizing and supporting the adoption of advanced technologies 
and  technological  improvements,  particularly  in  industries  that  are  typified  by  low 
technological  intensity,  whether  in  the  manufacturing  industry  or  in  the  services 
industries. 
Due to the continuing decline in the Chief Scientist’s budget as a share of the state 
budget and of GDP, and in view of the high return on such support to the economy, 
it is worthwhile diverting budgets to such activity, while also involving medium and 
low technology manufacturing. 
Professional training programs must be expanded, improved, and streamlined, with 
an emphasis on post-secondary frameworks. 
It is worthwhile expanding technological-scientific studies in the secondary schools, 
and  supporting  post-secondary 
in 
technological colleges. 
Achieving  the  required  improvements  in  the  business  environment,  while  focusing 
on the main points of weakness, concerning bureaucracy in the fields of construction 
and real estate, in the legal environment, and so forth, should not be abandoned. 
Infrastructure  reforms,  including  in  the  electricity  field  and  in  the  ports,  as  well  as 
connecting manufacturing to the natural gas infrastructure, should be advanced. 
technological  studies, 
including 
those 
     The implementation of a policy to improve manufacturing productivity in Israel is the 
key for manufacturing to remain strong and to provide quality employment for all parts 
of the population in all parts of the country. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
