  Yannis Stournaras: Global financial and economic crisis – challenges 
and prospects 
Speech by Mr Yannis Stournaras, Governor of the Bank of Greece, at the 2014 Multinational 
Finance Society Winter Conference “Global Financial and Economic Crisis: Challenges and 
Prospects”,  co-organized  by  the  Centre  of  Planning  and  Economic  Research  and  the 
Multinational Finance Society, Athens, 14 December 2014. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure to address such a distinguished audience, on a topic that unfortunately is not 
yet  history.  Governments  and  Central  Banks  certainly  managed  to  safeguard  financial 
stability  in  turbulent  times.  However,  certain  repercussions  of  the  crisis  have  not  yet  been 
fully  dealt  with  and  some  vulnerabilities  may  reappear.  In  this  sense,  looking  back  with  a 
critical view may help us understand the factors that put at risk the global economic recovery. 
The global financial and economic crisis that was triggered by a distortion in the U.S. sub-
prime  mortgage  market,  highlighted  serious  weaknesses  in  the  financial  regulatory 
frameworks  of  the  globalized  and  broadly  interrelated  national  markets.  As  a  result,  the 
validity of the theory of self-correcting market mechanisms has been strongly contested. 
Global financial crisis 
• 
   The roots of the global financial crisis can be traced back to both macroeconomic 
and  microeconomic  factors.  On  the  macro  level,  global  imbalances  for  over  a 
decade before the crisis resulted in ample liquidity in world financial markets and in 
low  interest  rates,  facilitating  high  levels  of  leverage,  excessive  dependence  on 
unsustainable short-term financing and weak risk management. 
At the same time, on the micro level, financial innovation and the investors’ “search 
for yield” led to the creation of complex financial instruments with an obscure credit 
risk  distribution.  The  originate-to-distribute  model,  according  to  which  loans  are 
traded  between  investors,  became  widespread  practice.  This  led,  in  effect,  to  a 
loosening  of  lending  criteria  and  facilitated  the  creation  of  the  aforementioned 
complex credit instruments. 
Over  time,  excessive  credit  risk  and  liquidity  accumulated  in  the  so-called 
“investment vehicles.” The placement of credit institutions in such vehicles was not 
recorded  on  their  balance  sheets,  and  as  a  result,  the  associated  risks  slipped 
through  the  cracks  of  internal  control  mechanisms.  Moreover,  the  opacity  and  the 
uncertain dispersion of risks of these instruments were further exacerbated by the 
rapid  growth  of  the  derivatives  market,  in  particular  of  derivatives  traded  outside 
regulated markets (“over the counter”). 
As  revealed  in  retrospect,  in  many  cases,  banks  and  investors  had  failed  to 
realistically  assess  the  nature  and  extent  of  risks.  The  high  degree  of  correlation 
between credit risk, market risk and refinancing risk had also failed to be properly 
assessed. As a result, the risks associated with certain credit instruments were not 
properly reflected in their price. When this was made evident in the US market for 
sub-prime mortgages in 2007, it led to a market-wide reassessment of financial risks 
and the collapse in the  market values of credit instruments. This, in turn, affected 
negatively  the  net  worth  and  profitability  of  banks  which  held  such  assets  in  their 
portfolios. The once believed “too big to fail” institutions rapidly became illiquid and 
insolvent. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
     In  order  to  rebalance  their  portfolios,  affected  banks  performed  widespread 
liquidations of their assets and attempted to raise capital in an attempt to strengthen 
their  capital  base.  Through  the  subsequent  fall  in  asset  prices  and  via  banks’ 
balance  sheet  cross-exposures,  the  crisis  quickly  spread  to  the  financial  system 
globally. The euro-area was similarly affected. 
Uncertainty  about  banks’  exposure  to  “toxic  assets”,  especially  in  Europe,  led  to 
mutual distrust between banks. As a result, the interbank market has been severely 
impaired  causing  liquidity  problems,  which  required  the  necessary  intervention  by 
monetary policy authorities. 
The crisis in the financial markets, aggravated by the pro-cyclicality of banks, where 
in times of economic downturn they tighten risk criteria and decrease lending, thus 
amplifying the contraction of the economy, quickly spread in the real economy, and 
economic conditions deteriorated globally. 
Euro-area crisis 
• 
The international financial crisis brought about the crisis in the euro area. However, 
here also, the roots of the crisis can be traced to the creation of serious imbalances. 
According to the theory of monetary integration, as it had developed by the time of 
the  inception  of  the  euro  in  1999,  it  was  thought  that  nominal  convergence  along 
with a single monetary policy would gradually promote real convergence. Banks had 
no  special  role  in  transmitting  financial  market  shocks  to  the  real  economy  or  in 
producing spillover effects across union members. 
However, monetary union has to go hand-in-hand with financial integration. Indeed, 
financial  integration  did  proceed  apace  with  increasing  capital  flows  among  the 
member-states  of  the  euro  area,  leading  to  increased  interdependence  between 
financial institutions and markets. 
Such interdependence is necessary for the smooth operation of the single monetary 
policy, because it facilitates the transmission of monetary policy throughout the euro 
area. 
The  prevailing  view  was  that  persistent  capital  flows  from  the  north  to  the  south, 
which  financed  the  current  account  deficits  of  the  south  during  the  early  years  of 
EMU, were an equilibrating force – capital moved from countries where the rate of 
return on investment was low to those where it was high. 
The elimination of exchange rate risk was interpreted by markets and institutions as 
an elimination of all risks. Credit risk was essentially ignored. 
With the outbreak of the global financial crisis in 2008 and the re-pricing of risk, the 
ample capital inflows to the EU periphery were suddenly reversed. 
This  sudden  reversal  led  to  a  negative  feedback  loop  between  banks  and  public 
finances, exacerbating the effects of financial instability on the real economy. 
In some countries, such as Spain, the sudden reversal led to a collapse in demand, 
a collapse in asset prices and bank distress. The bank distress then fed back into a 
fiscal and, ultimately, sovereign crisis. A similar narrative can be told for Ireland. In 
other  member-states,  such  as  Greece,  the  sudden  reversal  initially  affected  the 
refinancing  of  debt  and  subsequently  inflicted  damage  on  the  banking  system 
following the haircut of Greek government debt. 
As  a  result,  the  crisis  revealed  important  weaknesses  in  the  EU  architecture  and 
inadequacies in the implementation of the structures that had been put in place. 
         2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     First, the existing framework of economic governance was not sufficient to prevent 
the creation of imbalances. The Stability and Growth Pact was not properly enforced 
and there was no mechanism in place for monitoring external imbalances. 
Second, the increased interdependence between financial institutions and markets, 
which  was  the  result  of  the  monetary  union  and  the  ensuing  financial  integration, 
was not accompanied by a more unified regulatory framework. 
Third  the  link  between  financial  stability  and  the  financial  cycle  had  been  largely 
ignored. The architects of monetary union chose to keep financial sector supervision 
and regulation largely at the level of the nation state, with insufficient coordination of 
macro and micro-prudential supervision. 
Policy responses to the crisis 
• 
Monetary policy response 
• 
In this  unprecedented global  crisis, Governments,  Central  Banks  and  international 
organizations reacted with coordinated actions. These actions included first, direct 
monetary and fiscal interventions, aiming at enhancing liquidity to maintain system 
stability  and  support  the  economy;  second,  a  broader  mobilization  to  reshape  the 
global  financial  architecture  and  mitigate  the  magnitude  and  duration  of  future 
financial crises. 
Following the eruption of the crisis, it was understood that any kind of supervision 
should be exercised taking into account not only the behaviour of individual credit 
institutions  but  also  the  interconnections  and  interdependencies  between  financial 
institutions,  markets  and  economies.  The  increasing  degree  of  integration  of 
economies  and  financial  markets  required  more  coordinated  action  between 
supervisory and regulatory authorities worldwide, as well as continuous, timely and 
accurate  exchange  of  information  between  supervisory  authorities.  It  was  made 
clear that the new architecture of financial supervision required the strengthening of 
micro-prudential  and  macro-prudential  supervision.  Regulatory  and  supervisory 
efforts  focused  on  financial  stability  and  on  trying  to  limit  the  build-up  of  systemic 
risk. 
More specifically, as a first response to the global financial crisis, central banks were 
quick  to  put  in  place  measures  that  ensured  adequate  liquidity  in  the  financial 
system by facilitating access to central bank financing. 
Moreover, central banks largely adjusted their respective monetary policy stance to 
reflect  the  diminished  risks  for  price  stability.  The  size  of  interest  rate  reductions 
implemented by central banks pushed policy rates at historically low levels. 
The ECB initially reduced its interest rates by 50 basis points in a coordinated move 
with five other major central banks [Bank of Canada, Bank of England, the Federal 
Reserve,  Sveriges  Riksbank  and  the  Swiss  National  Bank]  in  October  2008.  This 
was followed by successive reductions in the interest rates, resulting in a cut in the 
main  refinancing  rate  by  325  basis  points  within  seven  months,  between  October 
2008 and May 2009. 
In addition, the ECB adopted temporary non-standard measures in order to reduce 
obstacles in monetary policy transmission and to address liquidity shortfalls in the 
interbank market. 
First,  the  ECB  switched  to  fixed-rate  tender  procedures  with  full  allotment  for  all 
refinancing  operations,  ensuring  unlimited  access  to  central  bank  liquidity  at  the 
main refinancing rate. 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
       Second, the ECB introduced longer-term refinancing operations (LTROs), initially at 
6-month maturities, then at one year and finally, at three year maturities, aiming at 
reducing  uncertainty  and  encouraging  banks  to  continue  to  provide  credit  to  the 
economy. 
Third, during the global turmoil the ECB temporarily provided liquidity in US dollars 
through currency arrangements with the Federal Reserve in order to provide banks 
with adequate funding in US dollars. 
Fourth, the ECB extended the eligibility of collateral that could be used for central 
bank financing, facilitating banks’ refinancing liquidity shortages caused by halts in 
interbank lending. 
Fifth,  the  ECB  introduced  in  May  2010  the  Securities  Markets  Programme.  By 
intervening in the secondary markets of public and private debt securities, the ECB 
could ensure depth and liquidity in dysfunctional market segments and restore the 
proper functioning of the monetary policy transmission mechanism. 
Finally, in September 2012, the ECB announced the Outright Monetary Transactions 
(OMT) initiative, essentially the intention to purchase, if necessary, securities of euro 
area  member-states  in  economic  adjustment  programmes  from  the  secondary 
market. Although not activated, the announcement of the initiative has contributed 
significantly  to  the  improvement  in  financial  market  conditions,  the  decline  in 
sovereign bond spreads and the gradual reversal of financial fragmentation. 
Changes in the EU architecture 
• 
With the outbreak of the euro area crisis, it was made clear that both imbalances in 
the real economy and in the financial sector are sources of financial instability. 
A more comprehensive policy framework was therefore necessary. 
In this context, improvements in the policy framework aimed at completing the EMU 
architecture  with  more  coordination  of  economic  policies,  sufficient  backstops  to 
address  liquidity  shortfalls  and,  last  but  not  least,  common  supervision  of  the 
financial sector. 
The Stability and Growth Pact was strengthened through a series of EU regulations 
in  2011  and  2013.  The  new  legislation  clearly  defined  debt  reduction  rules, 
sanctions in case of non-compliance and a new surveillance procedure monitoring 
the  emergence  of macroeconomic  imbalances. In  addition, fiscal  coordination  and 
surveillance was further strengthened through the ex-ante co-ordination of fiscal and 
structural policies of member states of the euro area. 
Moreover,  the  “Fiscal  Compact”,  agreed  by  the  euro  area  and  some  EU  member 
states,  in  March  2012  further  strengthened  fiscal  governance.  The  treaty,  which 
entered  into  force  at  the  beginning  of  2013,  requires  structural  deficits  limited  to 
0.5%  of  GDP  and  the  introduction  of  fiscal  rules  in  each  country’s  national 
legislation. 
Furthermore, the euro area, as well as some EU member states agreed in  March 
2011 on the “Euro Plus Pact”, a commitment to undertake additional reforms, on top 
of the EU-wide “Europe 2020” obligations, to promote competitiveness, employment 
and productivity. 
In the meanwhile, the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) provided financial 
assistance  to  sovereigns  which  faced  temporary  liquidity  shortfalls  caused  by  the 
impairments in the sovereign bonds markets. The EFSF was succeeded in 2012 by 
a permanent backstop mechanism, the European Stability Mechanism (ESM). 
     4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
          Finally, let me turn a bit more at length, to, perhaps the most ambitious EU initiative, 
the Banking Union, which was finalized during the Greek Presidency of the Council 
of the European Union in the first half of the current year. 
The Banking Union was initially agreed at the European Council of June 2012 in an 
effort to deepen Economic and Monetary Union. 
Five  years  after the  outbreak  of the  euro  area crisis,  it  is  important to understand 
why the interconnection between banks, the real economy and sovereigns were so 
strong in the euro area and why a banking union is necessary. 
First, the size of the banking sector in the EU, measured either in absolute terms or 
as  the  share  of  banks’  assets  in  GDP,  is  about  five  times  larger  than  in  the  US. 
These data underline the importance of banks as financial intermediaries in the EU. 
Firms in the euro area are much more reliant on bank credit compared to the US, 
where  capital  markets  play  a  much  more  important  role  in  the  financing  of 
investment. 
Second,  although  large  banks  in  the  euro  area  and  the  US  are  of  roughly  similar 
size, large banks’ balance sheets in the euro area represent a much larger share of 
any individual country’s GDP in the euro area. This implies that bank failures in the 
euro area can easily call into question state solvency. 
Third, euro area banks typically hold large volumes of national government bonds in 
their  portfolios,  making  them  more  vulnerable  to  sovereign  crises.  And  the  capital 
flows from the core to the periphery that characterized the early years of monetary 
union also led to the concentration of peripheral sovereign risk in the core. 
One  of  the  consequences  of  the  crisis  and  the  negative  feedback  loops  between 
banks  and  sovereigns  was  the  so-called  “Balkanization”  of  the  euro  area  banking 
system,  i.e.  the  retreat  of  banks  behind  national  borders.  As  a  result,  financial 
conditions  diverged  between  euro  area  member  states.  The  fragmentation  of 
financial markets deepens the gap between core and periphery, hinders the smooth 
transmission  of  the  common  monetary  policy  and  is  harmful  to  real  economic 
convergence. 
The  foregoing  analysis  clearly  highlights  the  need  for  a  centralized,  European 
responsibility for financial market and banking supervision; the establishment of the 
European Banking Union was perceived as a logical next step in the advancement 
of the Economic and Monetary Union. 
The three pillars of the Banking Union 
• 
  The  Banking  Union  is  built  on  three  pillars:  The  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism 
(SSM),  the  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  (SRM)  and  a  harmonised  system  of 
Deposit Guarantee Schemes. 
The  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  gives  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB) 
responsibility  for  supervision  over  banks  in  the  euro  area  and  the  EU  countries 
which participate in the banking union. This will ensure the application of a common 
supervisory model for all banks. 
As of November 2014, the ECB assumed the direct supervision of 120 significant 
banking  groups  which  represent  82%  (based  on  the  assets)  of  the  euro  area 
banking  sector.  For  all  other  3,500  banks  the  ECB  will  also  set  and  monitor  the 
supervisory standards and work closely with the national competent authorities on 
the  supervision  of  these  banks,  ensuring  a  level  playing  field  in  the  supervisory 
requirements to be met by banks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
          The ECB ensures a truly European supervision mechanism that is not prone to the 
protection  of  national  interests,  will  weaken  the  link  between  banks  and  national 
public finances and will take into account all risks to financial stability. 
A  necessary  complement  to  the  single  supervision  mechanism  is  the  resolution 
framework to deal with non-viable banks. 
The  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  constitutes  the  second  pillar  of  the  Banking 
Union.  Orderly  and  prompt  resolution  of  non-viable  banks  is  essential  in  order  to 
avoid costly rescues by sovereigns that may impact on their fiscal position. 
The  SRM  Regulation  creates  a  Single  Resolution  Board,  responsible  for  the 
resolution of banks in the euro area and in the participating Member States in order 
to ensure swift and effective resolution decisions, especially in the case of large and 
complex cross-border banking groups. 
From the 1st of January 2016 onwards, any resolution of a euro area bank will be 
decided within the context of the SRM. 
Resolution also needs a credible back-stop. This back-stop is provided by the Single 
Resolution Fund. The Fund will be financed via ex-ante and ex-post contributions by 
the banking sector, which will be gradually mutualised. The SRM will thereby reduce 
the link between domestic banks and their sovereigns and it will contribute to a level 
playing field for banks. The use of the SRF funds is conditional on the application of 
the bail-in tool, thus ensuring that shareholders and creditors are the first to carry 
the costs of a failing bank. 
A  prerequisite  of  the  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  is  the  Bank  Recovery  and 
Resolution Directive (BRRD), which provides for a complete framework for the crisis 
management of banks in the EU and lays out specific measures for bank recovery 
and resolution. 
The  third  pillar  of  the  Banking  Union  is  the  EU  harmonized  framework  for  the 
European deposit guarantee schemes, which includes certain provisions to ensure 
the establishment of sufficiently robust national deposit insurance systems in each 
Member State, and an appropriate degree of depositor protection in the European 
Union. 
Where we stand now 
• 
Since the outbreak of the euro area crisis, policy makers have managed to correct 
considerably the internal and external imbalances of the past. Significant structural 
reforms  and  fiscal  consolidation  efforts  have  taken  place  at  a  national  level.  As  a 
result,  since  2010,  the  euro  area  fiscal  deficit  has  improved  from  6.1  per  cent  of 
GDP to 2.9 per cent of GDP in 2013. 
Substantial  fiscal  adjustment  has  taken  place  particularly  in  member-states  with 
economic adjustment programmes. In Greece, the fiscal deficit was reduced by 13 
percentage points of GDP between 2009 and 2013, the largest fiscal consolidation 
recorded in history in such a short period. The primary budget deficit [10.2 as a per 
cent of GDP in 2009] turned into a surplus exceeding 1 per cent of GDP in 2013. 
The cyclically-corrected adjustment of the primary balance was close to 20 per cent 
of  GDP  at  the  same  period.  The  rest  of  the  programme  countries  have  also 
undertaken  substantial  adjustment  efforts.  What  makes  these  achievements 
especially impressive is that they have taken place in a contracting economy. 
Member-states  in  economic  adjustment  programmes  have  also  made  substantial 
progress 
their 
competitiveness.  Between  2008  and  2013,  the  current  account  balances  as  a 
towards  eliminating 
imbalances  and 
their  external 
improving 
  6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    percentage of GDP of Ireland, Portugal and Greece improved by between 10 and 16 
percentage  points.  Relative  unit  labour  costs  have  also  fallen  significantly,  since 
2008 (in Greece by over 20%). 
As a result, current account deficits in these countries have turned into surpluses in 
recent years. 
Substantial  structural  reforms  in  the  product  and  labour  markets  and  in  public 
administration  have  also  been  implemented  by  member-states  in  economic 
adjustment programmes, facilitating the gradual adjustment of euro area economies. 
Challenges and risks 
• 
Despite  the  considerable  progress  made  since  the  global  financial  crisis,  the 
economic  recovery  has  been  fairly  slow.  Global  GDP  growth  is  expected  to  be 
relatively low in 2014 for the third consecutive year. Meanwhile, the recovery in the 
EU has been sluggish and fragile, with low GDP growth and persistently high levels 
of unemployment, as noted by EU leaders in October. 
Political  and  geopolitical  risks  will  continue  to  negatively  affect  the recovery  going 
forward. 
However,  the  efforts  made  to  improve  the  institutional  framework  and  to  promote 
productivity  in  the  euro  area  have  also  created  favourable  conditions  for  a 
sustainable recovery. 
The ECB’s accommodative monetary policy stance and the non-standard measures 
it adopted have helped to preserve financial stability, which is a necessary condition 
for growth. 
The Comprehensive Assessment of banks’ balance sheets – which comprised the 
Asset Quality Review (AQR) and the stress test components – exposed the areas in 
the  banks  and  the  financial  system  that  need  improvement,  helped  banks  to 
strengthen their balance sheets, enhanced transparency and built public confidence 
in the banking sector. 
Growth  will  also  benefit  from  the  consequences  of  the  Banking  Union  for  the 
reversal of the fragmentation of EU financial markets, which was observed after the 
crisis.  This  reversal  is  necessary  to  create  the  conditions  for  further  integration. 
Through  common  supervision,  trust  among  cross-border  banks  will  increase, 
enabling  them  to  operate  more  efficiently  across  borders,  to  the  benefit  of 
consumers and firms. 
Moreover,  banking  union  may  reinforce  the  consolidation  dynamics  in  the  EU 
banking  system,  leading  to  a  restructuring  of  the  European  banking  sector,  while 
enhanced cross-border competition through integration in the retail banking sector 
will lead to better prices and services for the consumers. 
However,  key  challenges  remain.  A  key  characteristic  of  the  euro  area  economic 
recovery is the continuing decline in loans to the private sector. The recovery is so 
far “creditless” at both the euro area as a whole and, in many cases, in individual 
countries. 
Because the euro area economy is bank-based, bank lending is especially important 
for  companies  and,  in  particular,  for  SMEs,  which  produce  the  bulk  of  goods  and 
services and account for a large share of employment. 
Consequently, the on-going credit contraction raises the question: Can the recovery 
be sustained in the presence of negative loan growth? 
         BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
        Throughout the crisis, the Eurosystem has adopted both standard and non-standard 
monetary  policy  measures  with  the  objective  of  increasing  confidence  and  further 
restoring the smooth operation of the monetary transmission mechanism. The latest 
such  non-standard  measures,  the  targeted  longer-term  refinancing  operations 
(TLTROs),  the  purchase  of  asset-backed  securities  (ABSPP)  and  covered  bonds 
(CBPP3) and the intention to bring the ECB balance sheet at the level observed at 
the beginning of 2012, aim at bringing inflation at levels consistent with price stability 
and  support  lending  to  the  real  economy.  For  a  number  of  distressed  economies 
potential  lack  of  collateral  could  limit  the  usefulness  of  such  measures.  The  ECB 
and  the  respective  national  Central  Banks  are  paying  special  attention  to  this 
important issue. 
Overall, there is still work to be done. This is where the Banking Union again comes 
in. The banking union represents a crucial step towards restoring confidence in the 
banking sector. 
Restoring confidence in the banking sector will, in turn, greatly contribute to financial 
and economic stability in the future. Lower volatility in the real economy will have a 
positive  impact  on  economic  growth.  This  is  in  line  with  evidence  of  the  growth 
theory  literature  which  documents  a  negative  correlation  between  growth  and 
economic volatility. 
One lesson of the global financial crisis is that disruptions of financial intermediation 
play  an  important  role  in  business  cycle  fluctuations.  Credit  constraints  amplify 
economic fluctuations and banking crises contribute to the deepening of economic 
recessions. This is particularly true in bank-based economies, where capital markets 
are less developed. 
Eliminating the fragmentation of financial markets will loosen tight credit standards in 
the member states of the periphery, allowing banks to finance investment. Financing 
corporate investment is currently of outmost importance for economic growth both in 
the  euro  area  as  a  whole  and  in  the  periphery  countries,  which  have  suffered 
particularly from deep and prolonged recessions. Remarkably, private investment in 
the euro area has declined from 20% of GDP in 2008 to 16% of GDP in 2013. The 
decline was much more pronounced in periphery countries such as Greece, Spain 
and  Portugal,  where  private  investment  declined  by  between  6  and  9  percentage 
points of GDP. 
In  the  longer  term,  economic  growth  will  benefit  from  deeper  financial  integration 
and development. Financial market integration will boost long-term economic growth 
by  broadening  the  pool  of  available  funds  and  supporting  an  efficient  credit 
allocation process. This will contribute to a better allocation of physical resources in 
the economy, boosting in the long term total factor productivity and potential output. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Today  we  witness  a  containment  of  systemic  stress,  despite  intermittent  financial  market 
turbulence. And this is the result of the aforementioned coordinated actions. 
However, this should not make us complacent. The search for yield in a very low interest rate 
environment,  the  growing  use  of  leverage  in  the  non-bank  financial  sector,  the  persistent 
pressures  on  bank  profitability  in  a  weak  and  uneven  macroeconomic  recovery,  the  re-
emergence of sovereign debt sustainability concerns amid low nominal growth, the wavering 
policy determination for reforms, and the signs that some investors may underestimate the 
potential for losses and volatility going forward, are issues of major concern. 
The probability of a systemic threat is currently low but increased vigilance is required. In this 
environment,  macro-prudential  policies  need  to  ensure  that  financial  intermediaries  can 
withstand  a  potential  reversal  of  risk  premia,  while  at  the  same  time  further  initiatives  are 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  needed to monitor and assess vulnerabilities in the shadow banking sector. I believe that the 
lessons we have learned so far will prove valuable in addressing those potential risks and in 
safeguarding financial stability. 
Finally, and with reference to the Eurozone, we should not forget one of its most pronounced 
characteristics: that it is almost fully integrated in the monetary side, less so in the financial 
side despite recent progress, and much less so in the fiscal and economic sides. Until this 
asymmetry  is  eliminated  its  overall  economic  performance  will  tend  to  remain  below 
potential. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
