  Mario Draghi: ECB press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory statement by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, Naples, 
2 October 2014. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Vice-President  and  I  are  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  our 
press conference. I would like to thank Governor Visco for his kind hospitality and express 
our  special  gratitude  to  his  staff  for  the  excellent  organisation  of  today’s  meeting  of  the 
Governing Council. We will now report on the outcome of our meeting. 
Based  on  our  regular  economic  and  monetary  analyses,  and  in  line  with  our  forward 
guidance, we decided to keep the key ECB interest rates unchanged. Following up on the 
decisions of 4 September 2014, we also decided on the key operational details of both the 
asset-backed  securities  purchase  programme  and  the  new  covered  bond  purchase 
programme. 
This will allow us to start purchasing covered bonds and asset-backed securities (ABSs) in 
the fourth quarter of 2014, starting with covered bonds in the second half of October. The 
programmes will last for at least two years. Together with the series of targeted longer-term 
refinancing operations to be conducted until June 2016, these purchases will have a sizeable 
impact on our balance sheet. 
The new measures will support specific market segments that play a key role in the financing 
of  the  economy.  They  will  thereby  further  enhance  the  functioning  of  the  monetary  policy 
transmission  mechanism,  facilitate  credit  provision  to  the  broad  economy  and  generate 
positive  spillovers  to  other  markets.  Taking  into  account  the  overall  subdued  outlook  for 
inflation, the weakening in the euro area’s growth momentum over the recent past and the 
continued  subdued  monetary  and  credit  dynamics,  our  asset  purchases  should  ease  the 
monetary policy stance more broadly. They should also strengthen our forward guidance on 
the  key  ECB  interest  rates  and  reinforce  the  fact  that  there  are  significant  and  increasing 
differences in the monetary policy cycle between major advanced economies. 
Together with the monetary accommodation already in place, the determined implementation 
of  the  new  measures  will  underpin  the  firm  anchoring  of  medium  to  long-term  inflation 
expectations, in line with our aim of maintaining inflation rates below, but close to, 2%. As all 
our  measures  work  their  way  through  to  the  economy  they  will  contribute  to  a  return  of 
inflation rates to levels closer to our aim. Should it become necessary to further address risks 
of  too  prolonged  a  period  of  low  inflation,  the  Governing  Council  is  unanimous  in  its 
commitment to using additional unconventional instruments within its mandate. 
A  separate  press  release  will  provide  further  information  on  the  modalities  of  our  new 
purchase programmes for ABSs and covered bonds. It will be released at 3.30 p.m. 
Let  me  now  explain  our  assessment  in  greater detail,  starting  with  the  economic  analysis. 
Following  four  quarters  of  moderate  expansion,  euro  area  real  GDP  remained  unchanged 
between  the  first  and  second  quarter  of  this  year.  Survey  data  available  up  to  September 
confirm the weakening in the euro area’s growth momentum, while remaining consistent with 
a modest economic expansion in the second half of the year. Looking ahead to 2015, the 
outlook for a moderate recovery in the euro area remains in place, but the main factors and 
assumptions  shaping  this  assessment  need  to  be  monitored  closely.  Domestic  demand 
should  be  supported  by  our  monetary  policy  measures,  the  ongoing  improvements  in 
financial  conditions,  the  progress  made  in  fiscal  consolidation  and  structural  reforms,  and 
lower  energy  prices  supporting  real  disposable  income.  Furthermore,  demand  for  exports 
should benefit from the global recovery. At the same time, the recovery is likely to continue to 
be dampened by high unemployment, sizeable unutilised capacity, continued negative bank 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  loan growth to the private sector, and the necessary balance sheet adjustments in the public 
and private sectors. 
The  risks  surrounding the  economic  outlook for  the  euro  area remain  on  the  downside.  In 
particular, the recent weakening in the euro area’s growth momentum, alongside heightened 
geopolitical risks, could dampen confidence and, in particular, private investment. In addition, 
insufficient progress in structural reforms in euro area countries constitutes a key downward 
risk to the economic outlook. 
According  to  Eurostat’s  flash  estimate,  euro  area  annual  HICP  inflation  was  0.3%  in 
September  2014,  after 0.4%  in  August.  Compared  with  the  previous  month, this  reflects a 
stronger  decline  in  energy  prices  and  somewhat  lower  price  increases  in  most  other 
components  of  the  HICP.  On  the  basis  of  current  information,  annual  HICP  inflation  is 
expected to remain at low levels over the coming months, before increasing gradually during 
2015 and 2016. 
The  Governing  Council  will  continue  to  closely  monitor  the  risks  to  the  outlook  for  price 
developments  over  the  medium  term.  In  this  context,  we  will  focus  in  particular  on  the 
possible repercussions of dampened growth dynamics, geopolitical developments, exchange 
rate developments and the pass-through of our monetary policy measures. 
Turning  to  the  monetary  analysis,  data  for  August  2014  continue  to  point  to  subdued 
underlying growth in broad money (M3), with the annual growth rate increasing moderately to 
2.0%  in  August,  after  1.8%  in  July.  Annual  growth  in  M3  continues  to  be  supported  by  its 
most liquid components, with the narrow monetary aggregate M1 growing at an annual rate 
of 5.8% in August. 
The annual rate of change of loans to non-financial corporations (adjusted for loan sales and 
securitisation) remained negative at –2.0% in August, after –2.2% in the previous month. On 
average  over  recent  months,  net  redemptions  have  moderated  from  the  historically  high 
levels  recorded  a  year  ago.  Lending  to  non-financial  corporations  continues  to  reflect  the 
lagged relationship with the business cycle, credit risk, credit supply factors and the ongoing 
adjustment of financial and non-financial sector balance sheets. The annual growth rate of 
loans to households (adjusted for loan sales and securitisation) was 0.5% in August, broadly 
unchanged since the beginning of 2013. 
Against  the  background  of  weak  credit  growth,  the  ECB  is  now  close  to  finalising  the 
comprehensive  assessment  of  banks’  balance  sheets,  which  is  of  key  importance  to 
overcome credit supply constraints. 
To sum up, a cross-check of the outcome of the economic analysis with the signals coming 
from the monetary analysis confirms the recent decisions taken by the Governing Council to 
provide further monetary policy accommodation and to support lending to the real economy. 
Monetary  policy  is  focused  on  maintaining  price  stability  over  the  medium  term  and  its 
accommodative  stance  contributes  to  supporting  economic  activity.  However,  in  order  to 
strengthen investment activity, job creation and potential growth, other policy areas need to 
contribute  decisively.  In  particular,  the  legislation  and  implementation  of  structural  reforms 
clearly  need  to  gain  momentum  in  several  countries.  This  applies  to  product  and  labour 
markets  as  well  as  to  actions  to  improve  the  business  environment  for  firms.  As  regards 
fiscal policies, euro area countries should not unravel the progress already made and should 
proceed in line with the rules of the Stability and Growth Pact. This should be reflected in the 
draft budgetary plans for 2015 that governments will now deliver, in which they will address 
the  relevant  country-specific  recommendations.  The  Pact  should  remain  the  anchor  for 
confidence in sustainable public finances, and the existing flexibility within the rules should 
allow  governments  to  address  the  budgetary  costs  of  major  structural  reforms,  to  support 
demand  and  to  achieve  a  more  growth-friendly  composition  of  fiscal  policies.  A  full  and 
consistent implementation of the euro area’s existing fiscal and macroeconomic surveillance 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  framework is key to bringing down high public debt ratios, to raising potential growth and to 
increasing the euro area’s resilience to shocks. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
