  Mark Carney: The future of financial reform 
Speech by Mr Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of England and Chairman of the Financial 
Stability  Board,  at 
the  2014  Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore  Lecture,  Singapore, 
17 November 2014. 
Accompanying tables and charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
 Introduction 
It is now more than seven years since the first tremors of the earthquake that was to rock the 
financial system in 2008. 
After the blood of the crisis, years of sweat and toil from authorities across the globe, and not 
a few tears from the financial sector, the job of agreeing measures to fix the fault lines on 
which the financial system had been built is now substantially completed. 
The financial system today is vastly different from its pre-crisis self. That change didn’t “just 
happen”: it is the intended, positive result of the G20/FSB reform agenda. 
The  Brisbane  G20  Leaders’  summit  just  completed  was  a  landmark.  The  prudential 
requirements  and  supervisory  framework  for  banks  are  largely  settled.  There  will  be 
adjustments,  if  necessary,  but  from  a  prudential  perspective,  banks  now  know  what  they 
need to do. It is now a question of implementation. 
The result of the agreed reforms will be that: 
The system is safer. Banks were woefully undercapitalised – many of the largest banks were 
levered 40 to 50 times. They are now much more resilient. As banking systems around the 
globe implement fully the new framework, a system that was built precariously on sand will 
stand more firmly on rock. 
The  system  is  simpler.  Before  the  crisis,  risks  were  hidden  and  financing  chains  were 
fiendishly complex. Banks were complacent, building business models on the belief that “this 
time is different” and assuming markets would be continuous and deep. 
They were enthralled by models to the extent that every bank that failed or was rescued by 
the state reported on the eve of their collapse that it substantially exceeded the Basel risk-
weighted capital requirements. Now, disclosure standards have been significantly improved, 
contingent  exposures  are  on  the  balance  sheet,  essential  wholesale  markets  are  more 
reliable, and capital standards are more robust. 
The system is fairer. Banks were in receipt of large public subsidies. In Brisbane we reached 
a watershed in ending too big to fail, with agreements to take forward proposals on total loss 
absorbing capacity for globally systemic banks. Globally systemic banks that fail will in future 
be resolved without recourse to the taxpayer and without jeopardising financial stability. 
Does that mean the job of financial reform is complete? 
No.  Implementation  must  follow  agreement.  Our  perspective  cannot  be  only  to  look  back. 
Just avoiding the repeat of past failures is not a recipe for success. Agreeing to measures to 
fix the fault lines is necessary and important, but not sufficient. 
We must now consolidate our progress to build  a financial system that can deliver strong, 
sustainable and balanced growth for all economies: large or small; advanced or emerging; 
home to large financial institutions or host to them. 
Success would be a global financial system that maximises its full potential to ensure that: 
- 
The payments infrastructure is efficient and reliable; 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   Companies can access the working capital they need to operate; 
Liquid savings are transformed into long-term loans; 
Core  markets  function  continuously  to  allow  risks  to  be  diversified  and  managed; 
and 
Capital is allocated efficiently across the globe. 
- 
Achieving these ends requires a financial system supported by three pillars: diversity, trust 
and openness. Building these pillars should be the focus of the future reform agenda. 
A  diverse  system,  with  market-based  as  well  as  bank-based  finance,  can  best  support  a 
wide variety of investment from infrastructure to SMEs that is necessary to create the jobs 
our citizens deserve. 
A trusted system can retain its social licence to support the real economy in innovative and 
efficient ways. 
An open system can avoid the risk of Balkanised finance, which would reduce the efficiency 
with which savings are matched to investment and lead to a global misallocation of scarce 
capital.  
This  is  a  daunting  agenda  and  some  might feel  that,  having  apparently  reached  the  finish 
line,  the  race  has  been  extended.  Indeed  there  will  be  inevitable  calls  by  some  vested 
interests to turn back. 
To give in, to drop out, would be a tragedy. 
The prize for running the longer race is great. By fixing the fault lines that caused the last 
crisis we have created strong foundations for a truly global financial system that can benefit 
us  all.  Now  we  must  have  the  courage  to  seize  that  opportunity  and  build  on  those 
foundations. 
Today  I  will  refresh the case for financial  reform  and  set  out  what  I  believe  should  be  the 
drivers of the future reform agenda. But before turning to that next stage, allow me to take 
stock of the immense amount that has been accomplished since the crisis.1 
Completing the job of fixing the fault lines 
A safer financial system 
Banks  are  now  much  more  resilient.  They  have  more  capital,  more  liquidity  and  are  less 
susceptible to procyclical spirals. 
Capital requirements for banks are much higher, as are risk weights and the quality of bank 
capital. In all, new capital requirements are at least seven times the pre-crisis standards for 
most banks. For globally systemic banks, they are more than ten times.2 Large internationally 
active  banks  are  on  course  to  meet  the  new  requirements  4  years  ahead  of  the  2019 
deadline. Despite the scale of the changes, the aggregate shortfall of those banks that still 
have shortfalls was €15bn at end 2013, having been €115bn two years ago. 
It is just as clear that banks’ liquidity positions before the crisis were precarious. 
                                                
1   A detailed progress report is contained in the FSB Chair’s letter to G20 Leaders ahead of the Brisbane Summit. See FSB 
(2014b). 
2   Table 1 shows that the tightening in definitions of risk-weighted assets and capital under Basel III itself doubled effective 
capital requirements. The numerical requirements themselves have also more than tripled. Caruana (2012) describes these 
changes in some detail.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Now,  for  the  first  time,  global  standards  have  been  agreed  to  place  requirements  on  the 
liquid asset buffers banks must hold and on the extent of maturity transformation in which 
they can engage. 
The  rapid  contagion  during  the  crisis  showed  how  the  system  magnified  shocks.  Two 
particular fault lines made the system procyclical. 
First, banks were heavily exposed to movements in market prices and volatility around them, 
creating a cycle in which falls in prices caused banks to retrench and reduce their positions, 
leading to further falls in asset prices. 
That  issue  has  been  addressed  through  strengthening  regulatory  requirements  on  trading 
books – a move that has contributed to the share of banks’ assets accounted for by trading 
assets almost halving.3 
Second, banks and shadow banks were entwined in a dangerous funding spiral. Incredibly 
low  initial  margins  on  repo  transactions  facilitated  the  build-up  of  excessive  leverage  and 
maturity mismatches in shadow banks. The first wave of losses led banks to tighten margin 
requirements,  effectively  reducing  financing  available  to  the  non-bank  financial  system, 
causing those institutions to deleverage through asset sales, driving a death spiral of falling 
asset prices and rising margin requirements. 
Such  dynamics  have  now  been  mitigated  through  agreed  minimum  haircuts  for  securities 
financing transactions and the net stable funding ratio for banks. 
A simpler financial system 
As  the  crisis  highlighted,  opacity  hides  frailty. Why  was  subprime  not  contained?  How  did 
$200bn in credit losses ultimately cause well over $1trn in market losses? 
Because complexity obscured the link between ultimate creditor and debtor, it allowed false 
assumptions to develop that, when disabused, prompted panic. The mortgage originated by 
a bank was repackaged by a SIV, that financed it through ABCP, that was bought by a MMF, 
into which a retail investor placed their savings. It occurred to no one in the chain that the 
absence of a monitor would influence credit performance. 
The  whole  model  was  based  on  continual  rollover.  When  subprime  losses  exposed  the 
misalignment of incentives between loan originators and investors in asset-based securities, 
the whole system collapsed, imploding core funding markets for banks. 
Risks that had ostensibly been moved outside the banking system or diversified away were 
in fact just hiding and, when crisis struck, they came crashing back onto the balance sheets 
at the core of the system. 
This complexity is being addressed. 
To protect against risks that banks think are low but are in fact not, a global definition of a 
simple  leverage  ratio  has  been  agreed.  In  the  UK,  the  Bank  of  England  has  just 
recommended  powers  to  set  a  simple  leverage  ratio  for  domestically-regulated  banks, 
building  societies  and  investment  firms.  This  will  enhance  the  resilience  of  banks  against 
risks  that  are  hard  to  model.4  And  it  will  ensure  off-balance  sheet  exposures  are  properly 
capitalised. 
                                                
3  Table 2 shows that the risk weighting of trading book assets has more than doubled. Despite accounting for only 5% of 
overall risk weighted assets, trading assets contributed more than one third of the overall increase in RWAs resulting from 
new regulatory requirements. Banks have responded by shrinking trading books. Chart 2 shows that across all advanced 
economy SIFIs, the share of such assets on bank balance sheets has almost halved.  
4  Chart 2 shows that, for more than a decade before the crisis, average risk weights declined and, as they did so, banks 
increased leverage. This trend was central to the erosion of confidence in risk weightings. Since the crisis, average risk 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Retention  and  capital  requirements  for  securitisations  now  have  more  closely  aligned 
incentives  between  originators  and  investors.  New  requirements  for  money  market  funds 
have closed the gap between retail investors’ perceptions and their exposures. International 
standards  are  agreed  to  capture  properly  and  limit  off-balance  sheet  exposures.  And  the 
Basel Committee is developing the capital framework to ensure implicit offers of contingent 
support by banks, for example to their SIVs, will be properly capitalised. 
Interconnections  created  by  derivatives  are  being  reduced  and  made 
transparent. 
Requirements  are  being  imposed,  and  incentives  created,  for  banks  to  centrally  clear 
derivative trades, helping to replace the complex web of bilateral deals with a central model. 
Trade reporting and margining requirements are being strengthened. 
More broadly, overall disclosure has been enhanced on the key risks arising from business 
models, sources of funding, market risk measures and loan forbearance policies.5 
Through  such  initiatives,  complexity  and  obscurity  are  being  replaced  by  simplicity  and 
transparency. 
A fairer financial system 
That  goes  some  way  towards  increasing  the  effectiveness  of  market  discipline.  But  that 
discipline  will  never  be  felt  fully  if  markets  believe  that  creditors  and  shareholders  will  be 
bailed out in a crisis because banks are too big to fail. 
Expectation of bail out was validated comprehensively last time. The US authorities sought to 
make Lehman Brothers a test case of moral hazard. Instead, this exception proved the rule. 
AIG was rescued within twenty four hours. As Barney Frank observed, the free market lasted 
for a day. 
This “heads-I-win-tails-you-lose” environment for the world’s largest banks struck right at the 
heart of the sense of fairness in our societies. 
It simply had to be fixed. 
Tackling the rampant moral hazard at the core of the system has not been easy but, at the 
Brisbane Summit, G20 Leaders marked a watershed in our efforts. 
Many jurisdictions have in place statutory regimes to allow the resolution of failing banks. But 
until now, the potential use of those regimes on systemic and cross-border institutions has 
been in doubt. 
G20 Leaders endorsed two proposals that will allow global systemically-important banks to 
be resolved when they fail, without the need for taxpayer support and without disruption to 
the wider financial system or real economy. 
The  first  is  an  agreement,  catalysed  by  the  FSB,  between  ISDA  and  an  initial  group  of 
18 global derivatives dealers. 
This new Protocol prevents derivative contracts being terminated disruptively in the event of 
a bank entering resolution. 
It is a crucial step to closing off the risk that foreign counterparties take their money and run. 
Most jurisdictions already have legislation that achieves this nationally, but for global banks 
national  solutions  aren’t  sufficient.  This  new  agreement  fills  the  gap  by  extending  the 
                                                                                                                                                   
weights have stabilised and the increase in leverage has been unwound. The Bank of England’s proposals are set out in 
Bank of England Financial Policy Committee (2014c). 
5  Much of this has been driven by the FSB and the joint public-private Enhanced Disclosure Task Force. Across the major 
jurisdictions, the recommendations of the taskforce are more than half way towards full implementation. Banks in the UK 
have implemented 95% of the recommendations. The latest progress report is in Banziger et al (2014). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  approach across borders. Together with existing legislation that applies stays domestically, 
the ISDA agreement means that over 90% of the dealer banks’ OTC bilateral trading activity 
will be covered by either contractual or statutory stays. 
The second initiative is yet more significant. 
It is a proposal for a common international standard on the total loss absorbing capacity that 
globally systemic banks must have.6 
It will ensure that shareholders and creditors who benefit in the normal course of business 
also absorb losses when banks fail. 
It will establish a level playing field between global systemic banks, while taking into account 
differences in national resolution regimes. 
It will set clear roles for home and host regulators in a resolution. And it will give host nations 
the confidence that they won’t again be side-swiped by the failure of a large foreign bank. 
It  will  ensure  globally  systemic  banks  finally  have  the  quantum  of  total  loss  absorbing 
capacity that minimises the costs of an unsafe banking system. And, by removing the implicit 
subsidy that systemic banks have long enjoyed, it will re-establish market discipline. 
This  proposal  will  of  course  be  subject  to  public  consultation  and  comprehensive  impact 
assessments. 
Markets and rating agencies are already adjusting to the determination of authorities to end 
too big to fail. Credit ratings for globally systemic banks have been downgraded to reflect the 
much lower probability of state support. 
Market prices suggest the implied subsidy has been substantially reduced as the expectation 
of public bail-outs dies away.7 However, we have more to do in order to make cross-border 
resolution the only expected outcome in the event an institution fails. 
The  TLAC  standards  must  be  finalised  next  year  and  then  implemented  fully.  Resolution 
plans for individual firms must be finalised and legal and operational impediments removed. 
Arrangements for the funding of firms in resolution must be put in place. Legislation must be 
enacted  to  allow  regulators  to  give  effect  to  the  resolution  actions  of  authorities  in  other 
jurisdictions. 
And  the  solution  of  the  too  big  to  fail  problem  in  banks  must  be  broadened  to  include  all 
systemic institutions, including insurers and critical financial market infrastructures, through 
designation, more intensive supervision and standards for loss absorbing capacity. 
We  recognise  that  our  success  can  never  be  absolute.  Specifically,  we  can’t  expect  to 
insulate fully all institutions from all external shocks, however large. But we can change the 
system so that systemically important institutions, their shareholders and their creditors bear 
the cost of their own actions and the risks they take. 
The future of reform 
With a safer, simpler and fairer system in place, the FSB can begin to look ahead to how, 
collectively, we will engage in the next phase of reform and regulate and supervise the global 
system. 
                                                
6   Clear principles and a detailed indicative term sheet covering the necessary amount, type and location of loss absorbing 
capacity are now being consulted on. See FSB (2014a).  
7   Chart 3 shows the implicit subsidy to the top 4 UK banks. At the height of the crisis it reached almost £140bn per year but 
has now shrunk dramatically.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  The  foundations  are  laid.  The  next  stage  of  reform  should  build  a  system  that  serves 
households and businesses to its full potential. Such a system must be supported by pillars 
of diversity, trust and openness. 
Diverse 
Although banking remains the most important business by some margin, the increase in the 
relative  price  of  bank-based  intermediation  has  encouraged  a  shift  towards  market-based 
intermediation.  Virtually  all  net  credit  growth  since  the  crisis  has  been  in  bond  rather  than 
bank finance.8 
Non-bank financial sector assets have grown by 130% over the past decade and are now 
equivalent to 120% of global GDP.9 Managed properly, that represents a welcome increase 
in  diversity  within  the  global  financial  system.  If  banking  again  comes  under  stress,  these 
markets could act as a safety valve. 
For there to be diversity under adversity, the connection between banks and markets must 
be appropriately sized and durable. I noted how pre-crisis links meant that the collapse of 
subprime spilled over into the core of the system. The post-crisis connection must be wired 
differently, but not severed completely. 
Banks  are  needed  to  overcome  the  information  asymmetries  that  prevent  direct  market 
access for smaller borrowers. But with the right standards an appropriate boundary between 
banking  and  securitisation  can  be  drawn  and 
increased.  With 
securitisation  markets  effectively  closed,  even  in  Europe  where  loss  rates  on  consumer-
related securitisations were one twentieth of those in the US, smaller borrowers are not being 
served by market-based finance.10 
In response, the Bank of England and ECB are working to promote a sustainable model of 
securitisation that is Simple, Transparent and Comparable.11 In other words, one that allows 
banks  to  originate  and  distribute  assets  for  which  credit  assessment  can  be  most  readily 
performed  in  the  market.  Simple,  transparent  and  comparable  securitisations  will  support 
improved  calibration  of  risk  weights  and  retention  requirements  for  banks  and  prudential 
standards for insurers that Ravi Menon has advocated.12 
Greater reliance on market-based finance will need to be matched with measures to ensure 
its  resilience.  The  international  community  will  need  to  shift  focus  to  new  risks  and 
vulnerabilities,  many  of  which  will  emerge  outside  the  banking  system.  As  Deputy  Prime 
Minister Tharman Shanmugaratnam has noted, the safety of finance will depend “on whether 
we stay intensely alert to the risks of the future, including especially the risks we do not yet 
see or know, rather than focus only on preventing the last crisis from recurring.”13 
The  FSB  has  set  up  a  broad-based  network  for  information-sharing  and  reporting  on  the 
scale  of  shadow  banking  activity.  This  work  is  far  from  academic  because,  although  you 
wouldn’t  necessarily  know  from  a  reading  of  financial  market  indicators,  these  are  riskier 
financing  capacity 
                                                
8   Chart 4 shows that non-securitised loans continue to account for almost 30% of global financial assets. Corporate bonds 
and securitised loans account for only 7%. Chart 5 shows that in each of the US, UK and Europe, the period since the crisis 
has seen the stock of outstanding bonds move towards the stock of outstanding bank loans.  
9   See FSB (2014e). 
10   Chart  6  shows  the  post-crisis  collapse  in  European  securitisation  issuance,  which  has  been  particularly  concentrated  in 
residential mortgage-backed securities.  
11   Bank of England and ECB (2014) is a consultation paper on the development of such a model of securitisation. The EBA is 
also consulting on the same issue, see EBA (2014).  
12   Menon 2013. 
13   Shanmugaratnam (2013). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  times.  There  is  a  disconnect  between  developments  in  real  economies  and  the  degree  of 
financial risk taking. 
It  is  particularly  notable  how  the  search  for  yield  has  compressed  liquidity  premia  across 
markets. This is unlikely to be sustainable over the medium term because it exists against a 
backdrop  of  much-reduced  market-making  activity.14  Fundamentally,  liquidity  has  become 
more scarce in secondary fixed income markets. It just appears that it hasn’t. 
The reasons for the changes are clear however. New prudential requirements have reduced 
incentives  for  banks  to  warehouse  risk  positions.  Dealer  inventories  in  fixed  income  have 
declined  by  70%  since  the  pre-crisis  period,  while  the  stock  of  fixed  income  assets 
outstanding  has  doubled.  And  the  Value-at-Risk  in  banks’  trading  books  has  retreated  to 
2002 levels. The time to liquidate a given position is now seven times as long as in 2008, 
reflecting much smaller trade sizes in fixed income markets. 
In part the current liquidity illusion is a product of the risk asymmetries implied by the zero 
lower  bound  on  interest  rates,  excess  reserves  in  the  system,  and  perceived  central  bank 
reaction  functions.  However,  interest  rates  in  advanced  economies  won’t  remain  this  low 
forever. Once the process of normalisation begins or perhaps if market perceptions shift and 
it is expected to begin, a re-pricing can be expected. 
The orderliness of that transition is an open question. 
Certainly, conventional leverage and liquidity cycles – while dampened by reforms – can be 
expected  to  operate.  High  volatility,  combined  with  lower  prices,  will  tighten  financing 
conditions, forcing some asset sales, dampening prices and increasing volatility further. An 
overshoot is possible. 
Some have argued there is an additional risk arising from pricing and asset allocations based 
on an illusion of liquidity. This could lead to “redemption risk” as detailed by Hyun Shin and 
others.15 
Their  argument  begins  with  the  observation  that  much  of  the  shift  towards  market-based 
finance has been accompanied by an increase in assets under management. 
We know that almost half of the $70 trillion in managed assets globally are in funds that offer 
their  investors  redemption  at  short  notice.16  At  the  same  time,  funds  are  investing 
increasingly  in  higher-yielding,  less  liquid  assets.  One  example  of  this  has  been  the 
exponential growth in “liquid alternatives”, giving retail mutual fund investors access to hedge 
fund-like strategies.17 
The  compression  of  liquidity  risk  premia  suggests  that  investors  are  assuming  any  future 
withdrawals  from funds will  be  conducted  in  an  environment  of  continuous  market  liquidity 
and that the value of their fund holdings will not fall substantially when they exit. 
The risks to that assumption are in only one direction. 
The  dynamic  that  fund  under-performance  tends  to  be  punished  with  outflows  creates  the 
possibility  of  the  sorts  of  spirals  that  were  previously  associated  with  leveraged  investors. 
That potential procyclicality is reinforced by the selling of volatility-linked products by funds 
seeking to boost income through insuring tail risks. 
                                                
14   Chart 7 shows model-based estimates of liquidity premia across corporate bond markets. On these measures, premia have 
returned to their pre-crisis levels. 
15   Feroli, Kashyap, Schoenholtz, Shin (2014). 
16   Chart 10 shows the increasing share of “redeemable funds” in overall assets under management.  
17   Chart 11 shows the particularly sharp growth in assets under management in high-yield funds.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  Although they were short-lived, the bouts of market turmoil in the past year have illustrated 
how  there  can  be  sudden  and  sharp  outflows,  particularly  from  high-yield  and  emerging 
market funds, resulting in illiquidity in the markets for those instruments.18 
The  macroprudential  risk  is  that  any  revelation  that  continuous  liquidity  is  illusory  could 
generate potentially sharp changes in asset allocation. With net credit creation being largely 
reliant  on  bond  finance,  such  a  reallocation  could  generate  a  sharp  deterioration  in  credit 
conditions for corporates and the risk may be particularly pronounced for cross-border flows 
to emerging markets. 
But what, beyond talking about it, can be done about this risk? 
Managing  the  risks  in  markets  will  require  global  co-ordination.  The  FSB  provides  the 
platform for authorities to monitor, analyse and address risks in a timely way. It brings all the 
relevant bodies together to develop this substantial body of work. Anticipating and managing 
market risk channels will be core to the future financial reform agenda. 
This  point  is  relevant  to  work,  currently  underway,  to  develop  a  framework  for  identifying 
globally systemic non-bank non-insurer financial institutions. 
The fund management industry has become more concentrated, with the top 10 firms now 
accounting  for  almost  one  fifth  of  assets  under  management.  However,  size  will  not 
necessarily  be  the  best  indicator  of  systemic  importance.  It  seems  plausible  that  large 
unlevered  funds  with  little  maturity  mismatch  could  pose  few  systemic  risks.  At  the  same 
time,  smaller  funds  could  be  systemic  if  clusters  of  them  conduct  similar  activities  that  do 
pose risks. Those activities include concentrated investments in illiquid assets, the potential 
for large short-term redemptions, and leverage, whether financial or embedded. 
As such, there may be merit in this activity-based systemic risk assessment over and above 
a purelyfirm-focussed approach to systemic designation. 
Of course, identifying systemic firms is just the first step in managing risks to global stability. 
To  manage  those  risks,  authorities  can  do  more  to  work  with  market  intermediaries  to 
enhance transparency and understanding around secondary market liquidity. 
Securities  market  regulators  may  have  an  important  role  to  play  in  developing  globally-
consistent best practices in liquidity risk management and valuations. Liquidity buffers and 
redemption schemes should be assessed. And greater standardisation of debt securities will 
also need to be supported. 
The need to ensure resilience in the non-bank financial sector also raises questions about 
the  nature  of  central  bank  operations.  The  maintenance  of  an  effective  monetary 
transmission mechanism now requires backstops for both banks and markets. Bagehot will 
need  to  be  updated  for  the  21st  century,  with  central  banks  standing  ready  to  operate 
frequently, against a wide range of collateral and a broader range of counterparties. 
In short, diversity will reap rewards, but resilient diversity will require a significant programme 
of reform and alertness to new risks. 
Trusted 
The second pillar of the future of reform is to rebuild trust in finance. 
Trust between institutions, counterparties and investors is central to maintaining the ability of 
finance to function. 
Trust between regulators across jurisdictions is needed to maintain an open global system. 
                                                
18   Chart 12 shows the sudden and sharp reversals of flows into US high-yield bond funds and sets those flows in the context of 
funds’ liquidity buffers.  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  And  most  fundamentally,  trust  between  the  public  and  the  financial  system  is  needed  to 
maintain the social licence for finance to operate. 
It has been severely tested by: taxpayer bail-outs of systemic institutions; rewards perceived 
as  undeserved;  a  perception  that  clients  have  become  counterparties;  and  egregious 
examples of misconduct and rigging of markets. 
Without that licence, the door will be opened to a level of regulation that constrains the ability 
of  finance  to  innovate  and  support  growth  and  trade  efficiently.  The  licence  will  require 
consistent exemplary behaviour, and finance to have a clear sense of its purpose not as an 
end in itself, but as a means to promote investment, innovation, growth and prosperity. 
It is not merely that we should want to follow Churchill’s wish to see “finance less proud and 
industry more content”. 
We  want  to  see  industry  content  and  finance  taking  justifiable  pride  in  its  contribution  to 
society. 
That is far from straightforward when, even six years on from the crisis and public bailouts, 
triggers for public opprobrium are plentiful. Last week, the UK’s Financial Conduct Authority, 
US  CFTC  and  Swiss  FINMA  fined  six  banks  $3.3bn  for  misconduct  in  FX  markets: 
misconduct  that  went  on  long  after  banks  had  already  been  fined  for  abusing  interbank 
interest rate benchmarks. 
The  repeated  nature  of  these  fines  demonstrates  that  financial  penalties  alone  are  not 
sufficient to address the issues raised. Fundamental change is needed to institutional culture, 
to compensation arrangements and to markets.19 
As Bill Dudley and my colleague Minouche Shafik have argued, the succession of scandals 
mean it is simply untenable now to argue that the problem is one of a few bad apples. The 
issue is with the barrels in which they are stored.20 
Leaders and senior managers must be personally responsible for setting the cultural norms 
of their institutions. But in some parts of the financial sector the link between seniority and 
accountability had become blurred and, in some cases, severed. 
The public were rightly angered that so many of the leaders and senior managers who were 
responsible for sowing the seeds of the crisis and for allowing cultures to develop in which 
gross misconduct took place have walked away from their actions or inactions. 
In  the  UK,  Parliament  has  established  a  stronger  regulatory  framework  to  allocate 
responsibilities to individual executives and board members and to give regulators the tools 
to  hold  them  to  account.  The  excuse  of  having  delegated  a  responsibility  simply  will  not 
wash. 
The public bail outs and the fact that few of the consequences of scandal have been borne 
by those who were directly responsible revealed a great deal about the balance of risk and 
rewards for those who worked in in financial services. 
Compensation  schemes  overvalued  the  present  and  heavily  discounted  the  future, 
encouraging imprudent risk taking and short-termism. 
To align better incentives with the long-term interests of the firm – and, more broadly, society 
– major changes have been made. At the request of G20 Leaders, the FSB has developed 
principles and standards for sound compensation practices. 
                                                
19   Chart 13 shows the sharp increase since 2010 in the number of FICC-related misconduct fines. The number of fines levied 
on 12 November alone amount to almost three quarters of the number levied in 2013.  
20   See Dudley (2014) and Shafik (2014).  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  In  the  UK,  we  have  introduced  a  remuneration  code  prescribing  that  payment  of  bonuses 
must be deferred for a minimum of three years and, after payment, be exposed to clawback 
for up to seven years. Bonuses can be reduced – or clawed back – if evidence emerges of 
employee misconduct or failures of risk management. 
We  are  consulting  on  extending  deferral  periods,  widening  the  scope  for  groups  of 
employees  to  have  their  bonuses  reduced  where  there  are  more  pervasive  issues  of 
performance  or  risk  management,  and  considering  options  to  prevent  individuals  side-
stepping these rules. 
In an international labour market there is a particular role for international standards and co-
ordination to ensure a level playing field. It is unfortunate, for example, that new European 
rules to cap bonuses to half (or with shareholder approval, two-thirds) of total pay have the 
undesirable side effect of limiting the scope for remuneration to be cut back. This makes the 
case for additional reforms to ensure that the burden of excessive risk-taking and misconduct 
by staff can still be borne by those staff. 
Standards  may  need  to  be  developed  to  put  non-bonus  or  fixed  pay  at  risk.  That  could 
potentially be achieved through payment in instruments other than cash. Bill Dudley’s recent 
proposal for certain staff to be paid partly in “performance bonds” is worthy of investigation 
as a potentially elegant solution.21 
Senior manager accountability and new compensation structures will help to rebuild trust in 
financial institutions. In a diverse financial system, trust must also be rebuilt in markets. 
That  is  why  in  the  UK  in  June,  Chancellor  George  Osborne  and  I  launched  the  Fair  and 
Effective Markets Review.22 Far from seeking to constrain markets, the Review is seeking to 
restore  true  and  competitive  markets  with  open  access  to  all  and  competitive  prices. 
Behaviours  that  aim  to  undercut  market  mechanisms,  such  as  collusion,  the  misuse  of 
confidential  information,  or  the  manipulation  of  market  prices  and  benchmarks,  must  be 
stamped out. 
The Review has already recommended that further market benchmarks be brought within the 
scope of UK regulation, alongside a criminal charge for manipulation of such benchmarks. In 
that  respect  it  complements  the  FSB  work  to  reform  and  strengthen  benchmarks 
internationally.23 
The Review is now consulting widely before reporting next June. It is asking questions about 
deficiencies  in  two  major  areas:  market  structure  and  conduct.  The  Review  is  examining 
where  structures  exist  that  encourage  excessive  concentration,  raise  potential  conflicts  of 
interest or expose benchmarks to the potential for manipulation. And it is considering where 
voluntary codes of conduct seem inadequate, poorly understood or simply provide individuals 
with  justification  to  judge  their  actions  by  the  exact  letter  of  the  code  rather  than  by  more 
generally accepted norms. 
The  Review  will  explore  ways  to  improve  market  transparency,  competition  and  trading 
infrastructure.  Principles  of  fair  markets,  codes  of  conduct  for  specific  markets,  and  even 
regulatory  obligations  can  all  help.  There  must  be  clear  consequences  –  including 
professional ostracism – for failing to behave properly. 
In  global  markets,  these  are  not  things  that  any  country  can  achieve  on  its  own.  Global 
solutions are needed. That is where the FSB, working with IOSCO and others, can play a 
role  in  delivering  fair  and  effective  markets  on  the  global  stage  by  forging  international 
                                                
21   See Dudley (2014). 
22   See Bank of England (2014a). 
23   See FSB (2014c). 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  agreement  on  common  standards  and  structures  and  co-operation  between  authorities. 
International firms must play their part too. 
Only with such global action can we begin to move on decisively from the scandals of recent 
years to slowly rebuild slowly the trust of society in finance. 
We must build trust in other ways too, including the trust of financial markets in the safety 
and soundness of the firms operating in those same markets. Banks’ internal models proved 
woefully  inadequate  in  the  crisis,  and  there  remain  worryingly  large  differences  in  banks’ 
RWA  calculations  that  cannot  be  adequately  explained.  That  is  why  the  plan  the  Basel 
Committee  announced  earlier  this  month  to  address  these  differences  and  to  balance  the 
risk-sensitivity and complexity of capital calculations is so important. Of course, the leverage 
ratio will play an important as a simple backstop against overreliance on models and past 
statistical relationships. 
Open 
Trust  is  also  needed  in  a  wider  context:  trust  between  countries  in  their  supervisory  and 
regulatory frameworks so as to support an open and stable financial system. 
To  achieve  its  full  potential,  the  financial  system  must  remain  global.  Fragmentation  will 
reduce the efficiency with which savings are allocated to investments, and potentially lead to 
misallocation of capital on a global scale. All economies would be harmed by this, whether 
advanced, emerging or developing. 
This  is  a  real  risk.  Since  the  crisis,  measures  of  capital  market  integration  have  declined 
notably.24  A  clear  home  bias  remains  in  investment.  The  crisis  was  a  vivid  reminder  that 
openness must be built on the foundation of stability and trust in the foundations of the global 
financial system. 
For an open system, trust between authorities is therefore fundamental. 
Although markets and many financial institutions are global, regulation remains national or 
regional  and  concerns  about  spillovers  from  failures  of  foreign  institutions,  or  market 
contagion starting elsewhere, can prompt jurisdictions to safeguard themselves unilaterally. 
A  national  regulator’s  first  responsibility  is  to  do  its  utmost  to  ensure  the  safety  and 
soundness of its own jurisdiction. 
To avoid the Balkanisation of finance, each regulator must trust others to implement agreed 
common standards. In this regard, Singapore is a world leader. The IMF concluded its latest 
Article  IV  Report  noting  that  financial  regulation  and  supervision  here  is  “among  the  best 
globally and…a frontrunner in implementing global regulatory reforms”.25 
Trust  can  be  sustained  only  if  all  countries  follow  the  example  of  Singapore  to  implement 
standards  consistently,  fully  and  in  a  timely  way.  To  provide  confidence  that  full  and 
consistent  implementation  is  taking  place,  the  FSB  will  support  that  with  rigorous  and 
transparent peer reviews and implementation monitoring. 
We are providing clear and simple reporting, through the work chaired by Ravi Menon in our 
Standing Committee on Standards Implementation. In my letter to G20 Leaders last week, I 
provided  that  Committee’s  latest  findings  of  our  monitoring  process,  in  a  simple  summary 
with report card. 
                                                
24   Chart  14,  from  Haldane  (2014),  shows  the  correlation  between  national  savings  and  investment.  That  correlation  had 
reached zero just before the crisis, suggesting that the global financial system was fully integrated. However, this has now 
reversed sharply. Sapir and Wolff (2013) document the home bias in equity markets even within the euro area.  
25   IMF (2014b). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
  From  next  year,  the  FSB  will  further  enhance  this  reporting,  through  an  annual  reporting 
process on implementation. This will seek to highlight both shortcomings and good practice, 
and will seek to assess whether reform measures are having unintended effects and must 
therefore  be  adjusted.  The  FSB’s  work  will  include  focus  in  particular  on  the  effects  in 
emerging markets. When a robust analysis is completed, the FSB will be prepared to draw 
lessons from these reviews to refine the regulatory framework. 
Trust  also  requires  confidence  that  others  are  alert  to  new  risks.  Initiatives  to  collect  and 
share  data  are  important  –  whether  it  be  the  hub  built  at  the  BIS  for  sharing  data  on  the 
balance  sheets  of  cross-border  banks,  the  global  aggregation  of  trade  repository  data  in 
markets such as derivatives or repos, the global legal entity identifier, or enhanced operation 
of supervisory colleges and crisis management groups for systemic firms. 
Those are complemented by initiatives to share analysis, assessment of risks and tools to 
address  those  risks,  including  in  shadow  banking  and  other  forms  of  finance.  The  FSB 
provides  a  platform  for  this.  Through  shared  analysis,  authorities  can  build  confidence  in 
each other’s work and trust in the policy responses being applied. This must encompass not 
just major institutions but also emerging markets that act as hosts to global institutions and 
that depend on global markets. 
Building trust is a precondition for openness. It can also be drawn on to regulate the global 
system as efficiently as possible. 
Even with agreed common minimum standards, there will always be differences in national 
approaches to regulation. Such differences can be appropriate, reflecting different stages of 
development and different economic structures. 
Efficiency  in  regulating  global  institutions  and  markets  will  require  the  development  of 
approaches to defer to each other in the cross-border application of market regulations. The 
alternative  is  the  inefficient  imposition  of multiple  regulatory  regimes  on  the  same markets 
and institutions. 
In this regard, the way is being led in OTC derivatives regulation where progress has been 
made in establishing that regulators should defer to each other, based on an assessment of 
whether their regulatory regimes deliver similar outcomes. 
Urgency  is  needed  in  applying  that  principle  if  we  are  to  alleviate  reductions  in  market 
liquidity and FSB members should begin to consider whether and where more widespread 
adoption of flexible approaches to regulating could be exploited. 
The FSB is fully committed to supporting continued openness of the global system and  to 
pursuing  a  new  phase  of  global  financial  reform.  To  ready  itself  for  its  new  roles,  it  has 
agreed changes to the structure of its representation, strengthened the inclusiveness of its 
working procedures and taken steps to increase the transparency of its operations.26 
Currently emerging economies are on track, by the middle of the century, to account for the 
majority of G20 GDP and equity market capitalisation. It is essential that their increasingly 
important  role  in  the  global  economy  is  reflected  in  the  FSB  and  other  international 
organisations.  The  changes  we  have  made  to  increase  the  number  of  seats  held  by 
emerging  markets  will  allow  us  to  reflect  that  while  maintaining  effectiveness  in  decision 
making. 
                                                
26   FSB (2014d) reports on the changes to the structure of FSB representation.  
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  these  costs, 
financial  reform  alone  can 
The benefits of reform 
Having argued for the extension of the reform race, I am conscious of the risk of fatigue. But 
as  Ravi  Menon  argued  more  than  a  year  ago:  “it  is  imperative  that  we  press  on  with  the 
reform agenda and do not succumb to reform fatigue.”27 
Already we can hear some of the runners, particularly those at the back, making world-weary 
arguments that more reform will hurt jobs and growth, and even that financial crises are just 
something that happens every five to seven years. 
If that were true, we are due for another crisis about now. Does anyone find that acceptable? 
As the memory of the crisis fades, it will be ever more important to explain the benefits of 
reform to counter the fatalism. So let me take this opportunity to take stock of the benefits of 
reforms, both of those already agreed and of the next phase of reform I have outlined. 
While  we  all  recognise  that future  crises  can  never  be  ruled  out,  the  steps  taken  to make 
banks  safer  and  simpler  have  certainly  reduced  the  likely  frequency  and  severity  of future 
financial crises. In doing so, they have reduced the exorbitant costs of instability. 
The Basel Committee assessed in 2010 that the economic cost of the median financial crisis 
amounted, over time, to 60% of national income. With a 5% probability of a crisis each year, 
that is equivalent to annual costs of 3% of GDP. For the G20 as a whole that is $2trn. By 
eroding 
the 
G20 commitment to raise GDP by more than 2%. 
The Basel Committee found these costs to be minimised only if risk-weighted bank capital 
ratios  were  raised  above  15%.28  The  Basel  III  requirements  did  not  go  this  far,  in  part 
because  they  anticipated  the  additional  requirements  for  loss  absorbing  capacity  that 
G20 Leaders have just endorsed. 
Once implemented, the combined effects of the reforms will take the system much closer to 
the degree of safety needed to minimise the costs of financial crises. That authorities have 
reached this point in a measured way – allowing both equity and forms of debt to qualify as 
loss absorbing capacity – shows our sensitivity to the potential costs of greater safety. 
What are those costs? Three points are worth emphasising. 
First, the Basel Committee study judged that each 1% increase in capital ratios could reduce 
output  by  just  0.1%  as  higher  bank  funding  costs  were  passed  through  to  borrowers. 
However, even that small number seems an upper bound. It fails to take account of the fact 
that monetary policy can offset the impact of higher lending spreads on effective borrowing 
rates.29 
In  fact,  the  need  to  offset  the  impact  of  higher  lending  spreads  is  one  reason  why  some 
advanced  economy  central  banks,  such  as  the  Bank  of  England,  are  so  clear  now  that 
interest rate increases, when they come, will be gradual and limited. 
Second, the transitional costs of moving to higher capital requirements were found to be a 
little higher than the long-run costs. But that result depends on the starting position. Outside 
of financial booms, undercapitalised banking systems do not provide the credit needed for 
economic growth, regardless of capital requirements. 
therefore  more 
than  deliver 
                                                
27   Menon (2013). 
28   See Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2010a). 
29   See Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2010b). Furthermore, reforms to OTC derivative markets were found to have 
supplemented that by a further 0.1% of GDP. By making the system simpler, these reduce the probability of crises. See 
Macroeconomic Assessment Group on Derivatives (2013). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
  Where  banking  systems  have  raised  capital  and  restored  trust  in  their  creditworthiness, 
access to credit has returned. This central lesson from the US and the UK recoveries could 
not  be  clearer.  The  evidence  internationally  suggests  much  the  same.  With  the  possible 
exception  of  parts  of  the  euro  area,  lending  spreads  have  fallen  and  credit  volumes  have 
increased at the same time as capital has gone up. In other words, if anything, regulators 
may  have  significantly  overestimated  the  transitional  costs,  or  even  possibly  got  the  sign 
wrong. 
Third, although tighter regulatory requirements have caused bank balance sheets to shrink, 
that does not translate fully into reduced access to credit for real economy borrowers. As I 
said, some of the reduction in bank-based intermediation has been substituted with market-
based finance for the real economy. Moreover, as bank balance sheets have shrunk, and as 
they have rebalanced more towards traditional banking than trading, they have become more 
focussed on the real economy. 
In  short,  any  serious  look  at  the  experience  of  post-crisis  reform  shows  that  reform  and 
regulation support – not damage – long-term prosperity. 
Furthermore, the reforms have also brought benefits in terms of the distribution of the costs 
and benefits of finance. The removal of the implicit taxpayer subsidy transfers the costs of 
excessive risk taking to private creditors and away from the taxpayer. 
And by making resolution of failing institutions a real possibility and facilitating smooth exit, 
the reforms will also promote competition. Before the crisis, the largest and most systemic 
firms enjoyed the largest subsidies. Now, over time, the absence of that subsidy will create a 
level playing field, transferring the benefits of finance to customers and clients. 
These benefits will accrue slowly over time. Indeed, they may never be obvious to many who 
don’t recall a different world. That is why it is vital that our sons and daughters are taught not 
that financial crises are inevitable, but that they are both avoidable and tremendously costly 
for jobs, growth and prosperity. 
The lessons of the crisis need to be learned and handed down to future generations in order 
that the next phase of reform is sustained. 
Those  reforms  have  the  potential  to  make  finance  more  effective  in  serving  the  real 
economy. 
A more diverse financial system can be both more resilient and more effective. 
If it is structured correctly, each form of intermediation will not be subject to the same risks. 
Diversity also allows risks to be more closely aligned with risk-bearing capacity in the system. 
With scope for creditor preferences to be more closely matched with those of borrowers, the 
full potential of finance to intermediate can be exploited and the cost of finance for the real 
economy minimised. 
If we can succeed in safely and sustainably combining bank and market-based finance, the 
effectiveness of the system can be dramatically increased. Households and businesses can 
benefit  from  access  to  markets  while  the  advantage  of  banks  in  originating  loans  can 
continue to be exploited. 
A trusted financial system can be much more effective. Through cultural change, reforms to 
compensation  and  building  markets  that  are  transparently  fair,  finance  can  earn  the 
legitimacy  needed  to  operate  and  innovate  to  serve  customers  and  clients  in  the  real 
economy. 
The  literature  on  the  benefits  of  an open global  financial  system  is  admittedly  mixed.  The 
contradiction  between  this  conclusion  and  the  clear  and  overwhelming  benefits  of  trade 
integration is reconciled by the previous unsafe and potentially unstable nature of the global 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  system.  As  my  colleague  Andy  Haldane  observed  recently,  connectivity  can  serve  as  a 
shock-transmitter.30 A risky system cannot be an open system. 
The  renewal  of  globalised  finance  must  therefore  go  hand  in  hand  with  making  the global 
system  safer,  including  through  mutual  trust  and  cooperation  between  supervisors  and 
regulators.  How  can  we  expect  emerging  economies  to  participate  fully  in  an  open  global 
system without the confidence that they won’t again be side-swiped by the failure of a large 
foreign bank? 
That  confidence  is  growing  as  we  make  the  system  safer.  Consistent,  full  and  timely 
implementation of global standards is necessary to continue to build the cross-border trust on 
which an integrated system can be founded. Once the safety of the system is secured, the 
costs of openness will be contained. The road will be clear to secure the substantial benefits 
of openness in supporting trade and investment. 
Conclusion 
The  Brisbane  Summit  marked  the  point  at  which  the  post-crisis  system  of  prudential 
regulation was settled. 
That system, built on safer, simpler and fairer foundations than the one that led to disaster is 
able to serve households and businesses right across the globe. 
That we have reached this point is a triumph of the optimists over the world-weary arguments 
of the pessimists. The mutual trust and co-operation that has allowed authorities to get to this 
point is a vivid reminder of what can be achieved when countries work together. 
But as I said at the outset, just avoiding a repeat of past failures can’t be the height of our 
ambitions.  Having  built  that  level  of  co-operation  it  would  be  a  travesty  to  stop  at  the 
foundations. 
As I said in Washington three years ago: when bankers were pushing back against our core 
agenda, in no other aspect of human endeavour do men and women not strive to learn and 
improve.  So  onto  the  foundations  we  must  now  build  the  pillars  of  diversity,  trust  and 
openness  that  will  support  a  global  financial  system  serving  the  global  economy  to  its  full 
potential. 
Finance is a means to end. It is the real economy that delivers prosperity. 
The next phase of reform will give businesses and households the confidence that finance, 
far from being a threat to them, is here to serve them in their work to deliver prosperity. 
Reform should stop only when industry and society are content and finance justifiably proud. 
Thank you. 
 
                                                 
30   Haldane (2014). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
 Appendix 
 
 
 16 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   17 
    18 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   19 
     20 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  a 
a 
J 
(2012), 
resilient 
Building 
consultation 
commodities 
References 
Bank  of  England  (2014a),  How  fair  and  effective  are  the  fixed  income,  foreign  exchange 
and 
markets?, 
www.bankofengland.co.uk/markets/Documents/femr/consultation271014.pdf. 
Bank  of  England  (2014b),  The  Bank  of  England’s  Sterling  Monetary  Framework, 
www.bankofengland.co.uk/markets/Documents/money/publications/redbook.pdf. 
Bank of England Financial Policy Committee (2014c), The FPC’s review of the leverage 
ratio: 
paper, 
www.bankofengland.co.uk/financialstability/Documents/fpc/fs_cp.pdf. 
Banziger,  H,  Picot,  R  and  Stracke,  C  (2014),  Enhanced  Disclosure  Task  Force,  2014 
Progress Report, www.financialstabilityboard.org/wp-content/uploads/r_140930a.pdf. 
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2010a), Macroeconomic impact assessment of 
OTC derivatives regulatory reforms. 
Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (2010b),  Results  of  the  comprehensive 
quantitative impact study, www.bis.org/publ/bcbs186.pdf. 
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2010c), Assessing the Macroeconomic impact 
of the transition to stronger capital requirements. Macroeconomic impact assessment of OTC 
derivatives regulatory reforms, www.bis.org/publ/othp1220.pdf. 
Caruana, 
www.bis.org/speeches/sp120208.pdf. 
Dudley, W (2014) Enhancing financial stability by improving culture in the financial services 
industry, www.ny.frb.org/newsevents/speeches/2014/dud141020a.html. 
European  Banking  Authority  (2014), Simple,  Standard  and  Transparent  securitisations, 
www.eba.europa.eu/documents/10180/846157/EBA-DP-2014-
02+Discussion+Paper+on+simple+standard+and+transparent+securitisations.pdf. 
European  Central  Bank  and  Bank  of  England  (2014),  The  case  for  a  better  functioning 
securitisation  market 
Paper, 
Discussion 
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/news/2014/paper300514.pdf. 
Financial Policy Committee (2014), The FPC’s review of the leverage ratio: a consultation 
paper, www.bankofengland.co.uk/financialstability/Documents/fpc/fs_cp.pdf. 
FSB (2014a), Adequacy of loss-absorbing capacity of global systemically important banks in 
resolution: 
www.financialstabilityboard.org/wp-
content/uploads/TLAC-Condoc-6-Nov-2014-FINAL.pdf. 
FSB 
www.financialstabilityboard.org/2014/11/fsb-chairs-letter-to-g20-leaders-for-the-brisbane-
summit. 
FSB (2014c), Reforming major interest rate benchmarks, www.financialstabilityboard.org/wp-
content/uploads/r_140722.pdf. 
FSB (2014d), Report to the G20 Brisbane Summit on the FSB’s review of the structure of its 
representation, 
www.financialstabilityboard.org/2014/11/fsb-review-of-the-structure-of-its-
representation. 
FSB 
Monitoring 
http://www.financialstabilityboard.org/wp-content/uploads/pr_141030.pdf. 
Haldane, A (2014), Why institutions matter (more than ever), Managing global finance as a 
system www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2014/speech772.pdf. 
consultative 
document, 
European 
Banking 
Shadow 
Leaders, 
(2014b), 
financial 
(2014e) 
system, 
Report 
Global 
Union: 
2104, 
Letter 
Chair 
from 
FSB 
G20 
the 
to 
in 
A 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 21 
  for 
report, 
Global 
stability 
(2014a) 
economic 
(2014b),  Staff  Report 
IV  Consultation:  Singapore, 
IMF 
financial 
www.imf.org/external/pubs/FT/GFSR/2014/01/pdf/text.pdf. 
IMF 
the  2014  Article 
www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/scr/2014/cr14312.pdf. 
IOSCO (2014), A comparison and analysis of prudential standards in the securities sector, 
www.iosco.org/library/pubdocs/pdf/IOSCOPD438.pdf. 
Macroeconomic  Assessment  Group  on  Derivatives  (2013)  Macroeconomic  Impact 
Assessment of OTC derivatives regulatory reforms, http://www.bis.org/publ/othp20.pdf. 
Macroeconomic Assessment Group on Derivatives (2013), An assessment of the long-
term 
impacts 
requirements, 
www.bis.org/publ/bcbs173.pdf. 
Menon, R (2013), Global Regulatory Reform: What’s done, what to watch for, (Speech at the 
4th Pan-Asian Regulatory Summit 25/09/2013). 
Sapir, A, Wolff, G (2013), The neglected side of banking union: reshaping Europe’s financial 
system,  www.bruegel.org/publications/publication-detail/publication/792-the-neglected-side-
of-banking-union-reshaping-europes-financial-system/. 
Shafik, 
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2014/speech771.pdf. 
Shanmugaratnam, T (2013), Effective Regulation, (Interview with Reuters, July 2013) 
Shin, H, Feroli, M, Kashyap, A and Schoenholtz, K & Shin, H (2014) Market tantrums and 
monetary policy, (Chicago Booth Research Paper 14–09). 
effective, 
stronger 
markets 
liquidity 
Making 
(2014), 
capital 
and 
and 
fair 
M 
of 
22 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
