  Andreas Dombret: The future of the banking industry 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the 60th Kreditpolitische Tagung, Frankfurt am Main, 7 November 2014. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Mr Otto, ladies and gentlemen 
Thank  you  very  much  for  inviting  me  to  speak  here  at  the  60th  Kreditpolitische  Tagung.  I 
wish  to  begin  by  congratulating  you  on  this  landmark  birthday.  “The  future  of  the  banking 
industry” is the topic of today’s conference and also of my remarks. But please join me on a 
brief digression before we come to the topic of the banking industry. 
Have you ever heard of the US baseball player Yogi Berra? Yogi Berra is a household name 
in  the  United  States  –  not  just  for  his  achievements  as  a  ballplayer,  but  also  for  his 
aphorisms. One of these aphorisms referred to the future: he is supposed to have once said 
that:  “The  future  ain’t  what  it  used  to  be.”  With  respect  to  the  banking  industry,  probably 
nobody could have put it better. 
We have left behind us a severe crisis, which for most of us – myself included – was, and will 
hopefully remain a once-only event. This crisis set in motion a process which will change the 
financial  system  from  the  ground  up.  It  is  therefore  all  the  more  important  that  we  look 
towards  the future  and give  some  thought to  where  this  process  will  take  us. The topic  of 
today’s conference is thus entirely appropriate. 
I will confine my remarks to the viewpoint of supervisors and regulators, whereas the other 
speakers  will  probably  take  different  perspectives.  Regulation  and  supervision  form  the 
framework for the banking industry and its future – which is why I have chosen to focus on 
these factors. 
Banking regulation: considerably stricter 
2. 
Quite soon after the crisis broke out, initial steps were taken at the global level to improve 
banking regulation. 
Without going into further detail, let me mention two extremely decisive measures. One was 
that the capital rules were tightened. This is an appropriate step, since capital is still the most 
complete buffer a bank can hold to cover losses. For globally systemically important banks, 
we  even  went  a  step  further.  These  banks  now  have  to  hold  additional  loss-absorbing 
instruments above and beyond capital. 
Secondly we also – for the first time ever – adopted global liquidity standards alongside the 
new capital regime. This is also an appropriate step, for the recent crisis was driven strongly 
by liquidity problems. At the end of October, the Basel Committee published its final rules, 
which will place banks’ funding on a more stable basis. 
The regulatory reform will help make banks more stable. However, it entails effort and costs 
– something which particularly the banks themselves point out time and again. It is certainly 
true that tighter bank regulation is a cost factor. However, regulation is not an end in itself; it 
is there to prevent crises. So if we want to discuss the costs of regulation to banks, we also 
have to talk about the costs of crises to the taxpayer – and then I do believe indeed that the 
figures add up. 
The  regulatory  reform  will  undoubtedly  affect  the  future  of  the  banking  industry.  Though  it 
might  mean  more  time  and  effort  for  one  bank  or  another  in  the  short  run,  for  society  it 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  means  more  stability  in  the  long  run  –  which  will  also  benefit,  not  least,  the  banks 
themselves. 
Banking supervision: increasingly international 
3. 
However, regulation only defines the rules of the game. An additional element is needed – a 
referee to monitor compliance with the rules. 
In this regard, we in Europe set out into a new world three days ago. On 4 November, the 
ECB assumed responsibility for supervising the 120 largest banks in the euro area. These 
120  banks  represent  more  than  80%  of  the  euro-area  banking  system’s  total  assets.  This 
turned the ECB overnight into one of the world’s largest supervisory authorities. 
The  new  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM)  in  Europe  is  getting  to  the  root  of  three 
causes  of  the  recent  crisis.  For  it  enables  banks  to  be  supervised  at  a  consistently  high 
standard throughout the euro area; it allows cross-border problems to be handled better; and 
it  contributes  to  mitigating  the  influence  of  national  interests,  which  has  time  and  again 
hampered arm’s-length supervision. 
The step towards a European prudential supervisory regime certainly represented upheaval 
for the supervised banks. The supervisory culture will change: supervision will become more 
quantitative, and its perspective will change. Thus, in future the ECB will also inspect banks’ 
business models. While this is standard practice in countries such as the United States or the 
United  Kingdom,  it  is  a first for German  banks. It  will  certainly  not  be  easy,  but  it  is  worth 
trying. 
The SSM, however, will naturally follow the principle of proportionality: systemically important 
banks  and  banks  with  riskier  business  models  will  be  supervised  more  closely  than  small 
banks and banks with low-risk business models. 
The process of change associated with the SSM, by the way, will affect not only the banks 
but  also  us  as  supervisors.  However,  even  in  the  new  supervisory  world  order,  the 
Bundesbank and BaFin will still be closely involved in off-site supervision. 
The  SSM  will  give  national  supervisors  the  opportunity  to  acquire  new  experience,  which 
they can then transfer to supervision of the nearly 2,000 German banks for which national 
supervisors will remain responsible. The step towards an SSM for Europe will therefore affect 
all banks, and all banks will benefit. 
Competition: much tougher 
4. 
To sum up: we have improved regulation and supervision alike. This will make the future of 
the banking system more stable and less crisis-prone. 
However,  I  already  hinted  at  the  beginning  that  supervision  and  regulation  are  not  just for 
banks  but  particularly  for  society  at  large.  Within  the  regulatory  framework  and  under 
supervisors’ watchful eye, banks will have to look out for themselves in future, too. This is all 
the  more  so  as,  in  future,  sovereigns  will  no  longer  be  around  to  rescue  banks  in  an 
emergency with taxpayers’ money. This is due to the new “bail-in” rules for shareholders and 
creditors and to the new European resolution mechanism which will take effect in 2016. 
Regulatory reform is thus putting more “market” into the financial markets – and with markets 
also  comes  the  possibility  of  failure.  In  the  words  of  economist  Allan  Meltzer:  “Capitalism 
without failure is like religion without sin – it doesn’t work”. 
In future, it will be up to the banks themselves to hold their own in the market. And for this 
they  need  two  factors:  stability  and  profitability.  Regulation  and  supervision  can  at  least 
contribute to stability; however, banks themselves are responsible for profitability. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  the  results  of 
looking  beyond 
investors  and  supervisors  are,  of  course, 
Where does the German banking system stand with respect to stability and profitability? Not 
quite two weeks ago, the ECB published the results of the comprehensive assessment. In 
this exercise, the 130 most significant euro-area banks were subjected to a thorough health 
check – with regard to the quality of their assets as well as to their resilience to a possible 
economic downturn. 
The  exercise  identified capital  shortfalls  at  a  total  of  25  banks  in  Europe.  Twelve  of  these 
banks  already  closed  the  capital  shortfalls  this  year,  while  the  other  13  now  have  nine 
months to remedy their shortfalls. This should take place primarily through genuine capital 
increases, ie not by reducing their risk-weighted assets and especially not using public funds 
– a particularly important point, in my book. 
The  25  German  banks  passed  the  comprehensive  assessment,  with  one  exception.  The 
bank  that  failed  has  already  closed  the  identified  capital  shortfall,  however.  Incidentally,  a 
total of five German banks would have failed the test if the Basel III capital definitions which 
enter into force from 2018 had been applied. 
Like with any test, among those banks which passed the test, some passed with good marks 
and others only just scraped through. It is above all those banks which just barely passed 
which can expect to be monitored particularly closely in future – by supervisors and by the 
markets. Ultimately, however, for all banks, this is absolutely not the time for complacency. 
The real work is only just beginning. 
For 
the 
comprehensive assessment. Take, for example, the unweighted capital ratio, that is to say, 
banks’  leverage  ratio.  Despite  improvements  of  late,  it  is  still  well  below  the  European 
average – and this goes particularly for the large, internationally active German banks. There 
is thus a need to catch up. 
The  same  also  applies  to  German  banks’  profitability.  Competition  for  customers  and 
investors  will  become  much  tougher  in  future,  and  at  the  same  time  more  international. 
Global  regulation  and  European  supervision  will  level  the  playing  field  on  an  international 
scale.  German  banks  are  therefore  increasingly  being  forced  to  face  international 
competition.  And  an  international  comparison  shows  that  German  banks  do  indeed  have 
catching-up to do with respect to profitability. 
Their return on equity and return on assets were both well below the European average in 
2013. One driver of German banks’ sluggish earnings is that their business models depend 
relatively heavily on interest income. 
In a protracted period of low interest rates, this naturally weighs on earnings. In the first half 
of  this  year,  the  large  German  banks’  operating  income  was  down  roughly  8%  from  the 
previous year – a decline driven by falling net interest income. The problem we are dealing 
with  here  is  ultimately  structural:  one  can  see  that  interest  rate  margins  have  been  on  a 
continuous slide since the mid-1980s. This has been affecting, in particular, the major banks 
in Germany, including the Landesbanken. 
Therefore, in order to be ready for the future, banks should rethink their business models and 
orient them to sustainable profitability. The need to reorient business models is not specific to 
Germany:  however,  here,  too,  German  banks  are  performing  somewhat  below  par  by 
international  standards.  At  least  this  is  what  the  IMF  has  diagnosed  in  its  recent  Global 
Financial Stability Report. 
It  would  make  sense  for  the  banks  to  pursue  a  strategy  of  diversifying  sources  of  income 
and,  in  particular,  of  expanding  sources  of  non-interest  income.  The  good  news  is  that  in 
terms of costs, German banks are still performing relatively well by international standards. 
However, many areas remain where banks’ profitability could be enhanced indirectly. 
The branch networks of cooperative sector banks are still quite extensive. Although it serves 
to acquire and maintain customers, it is also a large cost component when compared with 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  competing direct banks. Although the total number of banks in Germany has already been 
declining for  some time,  the  German  banking market  continues  to  be  relatively  dense  and 
has room for consolidation. 
Against  this  background,  all  ideas  need  to  be  considered.  Mergers  must  not  be  off-limits, 
either  –  provided  these  are  between  strong  partners  and  preserve  sustainable  business 
models.  Incidentally,  as  I  mentioned  earlier,  supervisors  will  also  be  keeping  an  eye  on 
business  models.  However,  supervisors  are,  of  course,  not  the  better  bankers.  The  final 
decision on business models should ultimately be taken by those who are being paid to do it 
and ultimately bear the risk. 
Ladies and gentlemen, each bank has the power to shape its future. However, each bank is 
dependent  on  its  economic  environment.  At  the  outbreak  of  the  crisis,  US  banks  suffered 
much more greatly than European banks, but they then also made a much faster recovery. 
This  is  not  least  because  the  US  economy  also  stabilised  relatively  quickly.  Looking  at 
Europe,  politicians  are  now  called  upon  to  undertake  the  necessary  reforms:  reforms  for 
growth  and  reforms  for  stability.  For  only  in  a  healthy  economy  can  banks  generate 
sustainable profits. This has always been so, and it will always be that way in future. 
And the culture? 
5. 
However, not only are banks dependent on the economy – but also, of course, vice versa. A 
modern economy depends on a functioning banking system. 
I have spent the past 20 minutes talking about the challenges for the future – but the future is 
naturally also open to wishes, especially now with Christmas approaching. My greatest wish 
is for the banking industry to return to its inherent role: as a provider of services to the real 
economy. 
What  we  need  is  genuine  cultural  change  which  will  re-ingrain  this  image  in  the  minds  of 
bankers. A culture in which anything goes unless explicitly forbidden must not be allowed to 
be part of the future but should instead be banished to the past. We need a culture based on 
a quote from Seneca: “Shame may restrain what the law does not prohibit.” 
Of course it was, in the end, only a few black sheep who gave an entire industry a bad name. 
However, we need a culture that transcends short-term yields to look at the bigger picture. 
Banks have a responsibility to the economy and to society. Once they fulfil this responsibility, 
they will regain public confidence. 
Conclusion 
6. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  world  of  banks  is  changing.  In  my  remarks,  I  have  discussed 
various  factors  affecting  the  German  banking  industry’s  path  to  the  future.  These  include 
stricter regulation and European supervision, but also tougher competition. 
And it is not just competition within the banking market which is playing a role. Technological 
progress  is  also  creating  competition  entering  the  banking  market  from  without.  Take,  for 
instance,  new  electronic  payment  systems  or  crowdfunding.  These  are  putting  external 
pressure on banks’ traditional business models. Banks need to respond and to adapt their 
business models and IT systems to the new environment. 
It is ultimately up to the banking industry to decide how far they wish to go in this situation. I 
am convinced that German banks have  what it takes to prevail in future, as well, but they 
already have to begin today to address the challenges of tomorrow. We cannot regulate the 
banking industry’s path to a golden future; this is where banks must assume a great deal of 
individual responsibility. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Let  me  close  my  remarks  by  quoting,  alongside  Yogi  Berra,  another  famous  American: 
“Change is the law of life. And those who look only to the past or the present are certain to 
miss the future.” These words were spoken by John F Kennedy. 
Thank you very much! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
