  Daniel Mminele: South Africa’s monetary policy, developments, 
challenges and the road ahead 
Address by Mr Daniel Mminele, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 
South Africa Tomorrow Investor Conference, New York City, 8 October 2014. 
 Introduction 
Good  morning  Honourable  Minister  Nene,  Ambassador  Rasool,  the  SA  Consul-General  in 
New York, Mr Monyemangene, ladies and gentlemen. Thank you to the Johannesburg Stock 
Exchange, UBS and Standard Bank, and the South African National Treasury for organising 
this second South Africa Tomorrow Investor Conference and creating an opportunity for us to 
interact as policy makers, business leaders and investors. We meet at a time when global 
financial markets are increasingly focusing on the consequences of eventual monetary policy 
normalisation in the world’s major economies, and emerging countries with large and liquid 
financial markets, like South Africa, come under the spotlight once again. 
At the inaugural South Africa Tomorrow Conference last year, I was able to take stock of the 
major economic and financial market developments that had occurred in South Africa in the 
twenty  years  since  the  advent  of  democracy.  In  particular,  I  focused  on  the  recovery  in 
economic growth in the decade leading up to the 2008 financial crisis, the structural changes 
the economy has undergone, and the growth and deepening sophistication of our financial 
markets. Despite the challenges which the country is currently facing, these achievements, 
among which was the early establishment of macro-economic policy credibility, are still being 
built upon, and the National Development Plan (NDP) which  Minister Nene has just talked 
about  in  detail,  provides  a  framework  for  ensuring  further  progress  towards  a  more 
successful and fair economy. Yet at present, a lot of questions are being asked of policy in 
general and monetary policy in particular, and it is mostly on this latter point that I will focus 
my remarks today.  
SA’s monetary policy framework and post-crisis developments 
Last  year  I  pointed  out  that  the  flexible  inflation-targeting  framework  which  the  country 
adopted back in 2000 had delivered clear benefits, contributing to a decline in the level and 
volatility of both inflation and nominal interest rates. These benefits remain visible today. In 
particular, measures of inflation expectations – for example, as computed every quarter by 
the Bureau of Economic Research from the views of businesses, labour unions and financial 
analysts  –  appear  more  strongly  anchored  than  they  did  in  the  past.  Whereas  these 
expectations used to be adaptive, responding with a lag to the actual inflation cycle, they now 
display  a  greater  degree  of  stability,  albeit  currently  (and  of  some  concern  to  the  central 
bank) around the upper end of the 3,0 to 6,0 per cent inflation target range. 
On  balance,  it  is  probably  fair  to  say  that  the  greater  stability  in  inflation  and  inflation 
expectations generated over time by our policy framework has allowed the Reserve Bank to 
respond more flexibly to the shocks which South Africa has faced since the global financial 
crisis. These shocks did not require the use of “unconventional tools” of the type that several 
central banks in the developed world, but also in some parts of the emerging world, used at 
the  time.  The  solidity  of  South  Africa’s  banking  system  enabled  it  to  withstand  the  crisis 
without meaningful disruptions, and as a result, the central bank did not have to intervene in 
either the interbank or the FX markets to ensure their proper functioning and an adequate 
supply  of  liquidity.  Nonetheless,  South  African  growth  experienced  significant  headwinds 
post crisis, with GDP contracting by as much as 1.5 per cent, in real terms, in 2009. Thanks 
to a subsequent period of decelerating inflation, the South African Reserve Bank was able to 
respond with a cumulative reduction of 650 basis points in the repo rate between December 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  2008 and November 2010. A further 50 basis-point cut followed in July 2012, which brought 
the  repo  rate  to  a  thirty  year  low  of  5.0  per  cent  per  annum,  a  level  that  prevailed  until 
January of this year. 
As the nominal policy rate was being lowered, the real interest rate eventually moved into 
negative  territory,  when  compared  with  either  actual  inflation  or  broad-based  inflation 
expectations as measured by the Bureau of Economic Research’s surveys.  
These negative real rates helped cushion the impact of the recession on both the corporate 
and the household sectors, limiting the impact of weaker growth on business liquidations and 
enabling  households  to  gradually  reduce  their  leverage  ratio  without  dramatic  cutbacks  in 
consumption. Thus, the household debt-to-income ratio fell from a peak of 83.0 per cent in 
the first quarter of 2009 to 73.5 per cent in the second quarter of 2014, while real household 
consumption expenditure still grew by an annual average of 3.2 per cent over that period. 
Admittedly,  more  recently,  household  consumption  expenditure  has  come  under  pressure, 
with growth rates exhibiting a declining trend since the second quarter of 2013. 
Recent challenges and developments 
The  current  environment  in  which  South  Africa’s  monetary  policy  operates,  however,  has 
become  increasingly  more  complex  over  the  past  year  and  a  half,  owing  to  a  mix  of  both 
domestic  and  external  factors,  which  have  impacted  growth  and  inflation.  The  country 
currently  faces  a  mix  of  subdued  economic  growth  and  relatively  high  inflation,  with  risks 
skewed to the upside. In part, but not exclusively, because of supply constraints, including a 
lengthy  strike  in  the  platinum  mining  sector  and  delays  in  the  completion  of  new  power-
generating capacity, real GDP has stagnated in the first half of the current year. Real GDP 
contracted 0.6 per cent in seasonally-adjusted, annualized terms in the first quarter, and this 
was barely reversed in the second quarter. On a year-on-year basis, growth has slowed to 
1.0 per cent in the second quarter, the lowest reading since South Africa exited the recession 
at the end of 2009. 
At the same time, though, inflation has drifted gradually higher and breached the top end of 
the 3.0 – 6.0 per cent target range in April of this year. Part of this overshoot reflected above-
average inflation for petrol and foodstuffs, some of which fortunately is already moderating or 
likely to moderate in light of lower international agricultural prices or improved domestic crops 
since the beginning of the year. Nonetheless, underlying prices have also been picking up, 
and the Bank’s preferred measure of core inflation (excluding food, non-alcoholic beverages 
and petrol) has climbed to 5.8 per cent as of August 2014, following a sustained uptrend from 
a  low  of  3.0  per  cent  in  early  2011.  While  demand-driven  price  pressures  remain  largely 
absent,  amid  slowing  final  domestic  demand  growth  and  moderate  expansion  in  credit  to 
households, the marked and sustained depreciation in the rand’s exchange rate since early 
2011  has  clearly  contributed  to  the  upward  trend  in  core  consumer  prices,  which  is  of 
concern to the Monetary Policy Committee. 
Beyond the challenges posed by divergent trends in growth and inflation, the persistence of 
negative  short-term  real  interest  rates  is  not  desirable  from  a  longer-term  perspective,  as 
they  could  exacerbate  existing,  or  generate  new  imbalances  in  the  economy.  Beyond  the 
well-known  impact  that  negative  interest  rates  can  have  on  the  allocation  of  financial 
resources  to  different  sectors  of  the  economy,  or  on  the  price  of  financial  assets,  it  also 
important to point out their impact on the attractiveness of savings, especially in a country 
like  South  Africa,  where  the  low  level  of  domestic  savings  remains  a  factor  behind  the 
elevated structural current account deficit. 
All  in  all,  these  factors  have  led  the  Reserve  Bank  to  embark  on  a  gradual  policy 
normalisation  process,  though  one  that  remains  data-dependent,  as  it  acknowledges  the 
complex  factors  behind  the  price  outlook.  The  Bank  first  raised  the  repo  rate  by  50  basis 
points  in  January  2014,  a  decision  informed  by  a  significant  deterioration  in  the  inflation 
forecast (indicating the possibility of inflation being outside the target range for an extended 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  period), amid concerns that a sustained depreciation in the exchange rate of the rand would 
significantly  raise  the  risks  to  the  inflation  outlook.  Although  we  had  generally  observed  a 
lower level of pass-through when compared to previous episodes of currency depreciation, 
the extent and duration of the depreciating trend meant that the risk profile was worsening. 
Allow me to reiterate that while the Reserve Bank does not target a particular level or range 
of the exchange rate, we are nonetheless mindful of the potential negative consequences of 
accelerated  rand  depreciation  on  the  outlook  for  inflation,  as  well  as  broad  measures  of 
inflation  expectations.  The  January  rate  hike  was  followed  by  a  second  increase,  in  July 
2014,  of  25  basis  points,  bringing  the  policy  rate  to  its  current  level  of  5.75  per  cent  per 
annum. 
Before I leave this part of my speech which looked at recent challenges and developments, I 
thought, given  the  audience  of  today,  I  should  briefly  touch  on  the  decision  during  August 
2014, to place African Bank Limited (African Bank) under curatorship, even if I am digressing 
from the main focus of my speech (being monetary policy), to which I shall return in a few 
moments. 
After  an  extended  period  of  more  intensive  regulatory  monitoring  of  and  interaction  with 
African  Bank,  and  following  a  loss  of  confidence  by  its  shareholders  and  funders,  the 
Registrar of Banks placed African Bank under curatorship on 10 August 2014, as announced 
by  the  Governor.  Curatorship  was  the  most  suitable  legal  structure  while  the  enabling 
legislation  for  a  new  regulatory  framework,  which  will  include  provisions  dealing  with 
resolution, is still in the process of being finalised. Some of the support measures recently 
announced  as  part  of  the  resolution  package  for  African  Bank  were  informed  by  the 
principles contained in the Financial Stability Board’s Key Attributes for Effective Resolution 
Regimes, which are expected to feature in the new legislation. The decisive intervention led 
by  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank  helped  to  limit  the  risk  of  contagion  to  the  rest  of  the 
financial system. 
The  support  measures  announced,  which  are  currently  being  implemented  by  the  curator 
under the oversight of the Registrar of Banks, are intended to facilitate an orderly, structured, 
and fair approach to addressing the challenges at African Bank in an effort to secure a viable 
future on the basis of a transformed business model, while ensuring minimum disruption to 
our financial  and  credit  markets.  At  the  time  of curatorship,  African  bank’s  total  asset  size 
amounted to R58 billion, or 1.44 per cent of total banking sector assets. However, lessons 
from the financial crisis indicate that systemic risk should not only be defined with reference 
to the size of an institution, but also in relation to its “interconnectedness”, i.e. links to other 
banks, financial market participants and financial products. 
The proposed solutions were developed in a collaborative process between the public and 
private sector. The leadership and commitment shown by South African commercial banks 
and the Public Investment Corporation in underwriting the capital raising for the envisaged 
“good  bank”  bears  testimony  to  the  strong  underpinnings  of  our  banking  and  financial 
system,  the  resilience  of  which  will  be  enhanced  by  these  measures.  The  issues  around 
African Bank were unique to the business model of that bank, and it would be incorrect to 
deduce  any  fundamental  concerns  around  either  the  South  African  banking  system  or  the 
business  of  unsecured  lending. The  South  African  Reserve  Bank  wishes  to  reaffirm that it 
has no concerns about the quality of South Africa’s banking system, which continues to be 
robust and healthy, based on good levels of capitalisation, liquidity and profitability. 
What the road ahead could entail 
Where do we go from here? Based on the Bank’s projections for growth and inflation over 
the  coming  years,  and  of  the  uncertainties  that  surround  these  projections,  it  would  be 
reasonable to infer that a gradual, data-dependent, normalisation path remains appropriate. 
The  Bank’s  most  recent  inflation  forecast  indicates  that  CPI  inflation  may  have  peaked  at 
6.5 per  cent  in  the  second  quarter,  and  is  expected  to  average  6.2  per  cent  for  2014  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  5.7 per  cent  in  2015,  before  a  (marginal)  re-acceleration  to  an  average  of  5.8  per  cent  in 
2016, mainly reflecting the assumption of a faster increase in electricity prices. As indicated 
before, the MPC sees the risks to the headline inflation forecast skewed to the upside, with 
possible renewed pressure emanating from the exchange rate. Core inflation is expected to 
remain within the target range for its headline counterpart, reaching a peak of 5.8 per cent in 
the first quarter of 2015 before moderating to an average of 5.5 per cent in 2016. 
At the same time, real GDP growth, which the Bank projects to recover to 2.8 and 3.1 per 
cent,  respectively,  in  2015  and  2016  from  a  subdued  1.5  per  cent  in  the  current  year, 
probably  will  not  be  strong  enough  to  engineer  a  quick  disappearance  of  the  output  gap, 
notwithstanding uncertainties as to the actual pace of potential growth in the economy. Thus, 
the  persistence  of  slack  would  appear  to  reduce  the  likelihood  that  demand-driven  price 
pressures could emerge in South Africa within the near future. The key challenge remains 
implementing structural reforms that will help lift the potential growth of the economy. Many 
of  these  have  been  identified  in  the  National  Development  Plan  and  form  part  of 
Government’s infrastructure investment plans and other measures, such as those directed at 
enhancing education and skills, and supporting small and medium enterprises. 
Let  me  touch  on  some  of  the  risks  we  see  to  the  inflation  outlook. On  the  domestic front, 
wage settlements in several key sectors have been well above current and expected inflation 
rates, and there have been some worrying signs of an apparent de-linking of wage demands 
(as well as some actual settlements) from underlying inflation and productivity growth trends. 
On  the  external  front,  the  Bank  is  extremely  mindful  of  the  potential  vulnerability  of  the 
domestic capital markets, and the exchange rate, to shifts in international portfolio flows as 
monetary policy in some major economies, especially the US and the UK, eventually moves 
towards a more conventional stance. In an environment where South Africa’s current account 
deficit remains elevated and is only expected to narrow gradually over the next two years, 
the  risk  of  abrupt  swings  in  portfolio  flows  into  South  Africa’s  capital  markets  cannot  be 
under-estimated. 
Implications for South Africa of global financial developments 
The experience of the “taper tantrum”, as the episode which followed the first clear mention 
by the US Federal Reserve in May 2013, of the need to eventually wind down its open-ended 
asset purchases became to be known, illustrated the sensitivity of domestic financial markets 
to the global backdrop. Between the beginning of May 2013 and its lowest level at the end of 
January 2014, the rand’s nominal effective exchange rate depreciated by as much as 26 per 
cent,  while  over  the  same  period,  the  yield  on  the  benchmark  R186  government  bond 
increased by more than 230 basis points. Expectations of future policy action embedded in 
derivatives  like  the  forward  rate  agreements,  or  FRAs,  moved  in  sympathy,  with  the  FRA 
curve quickly pricing in not just an earlier but also a speedier pace of interest rate hikes by 
the Reserve Bank. 
Part of this selloff probably represented more a re-pricing of risk at longer maturities – i.e. a 
higher “term premium” – rather than changes in actual expectations of future policy rates. It 
was indeed striking to see how strong the correlation had become, during the taper tantrum 
episode, between the longer ends of government yield curves in South Africa and the United 
States,  and  this,  despite  the  meaningful  differences  in  economic  and  policy  fundamentals 
between  the  two  countries.  The  depth  of  domestic  capital  markets,  which  were  able  to 
absorb significant net sales of SA bonds by non-residents (R68 billion from the beginning of 
May  2013  up  to  the  end  of  last  week,  according  to  JSE  data)  also  played  a  part.  The 
renewed reduction in that “term premium” in major fixed-income markets in 2014, as policy 
guidance by the Federal Reserve seemed to reduce investors’ uncertainties as to the future 
path of US rates, probably was a key factor towards the renewed decline in South African 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
yields  and  the  relative  stabilisation  in  the  rand  since  the  end  of  January  up  until  August1. 
Certainly,  in  terms  of  communication,  central  banks  have  progressed  somewhat  over  the 
past  couple  of  years,  and  particularly  since  the  taper  tantrum,  the  associated  volatility  in 
financial markets related to monetary policy communication, has also declined. 
The  big question  remains,  however,  how  sustainable  is  the  recovery  that  we  are  currently 
experiencing?  Or  are  we  at  risk,  when  US  policy  rates  finally  rise  in  2015,  assuming  the 
median projections of both FOMC members and market participants prove to be correct, of a 
repeat of the market snapback that we witnessed in 2013? It is not possible to answer this 
question with a great degree of confidence, for even if we assume that US policy tightening is 
largely  “priced”  into  markets,  the  potential  for  a  renewed  rise  in  risk  premiums  exists, 
especially in light of the current low levels of implied volatility in a broad range of markets. 
Nevertheless,  several  factors  could  usher  in  a  different  scenario  from  that  of  the  “taper 
tantrum”. 
Admittedly, the more the US economy continues on its “healing” path following the shock of 
the  2008–09  global  financial  crisis,  the  more  eventual  policy  normalisation  becomes 
unavoidable,  and  the  less  likely  it  is  that  the  Federal  Reserve  would  delay  policy  action 
because  of,  say,  more  elevated  volatility  in  the  US  Treasury  market.  Nevertheless,  the 
Federal  Reserve  has  equally  made  it  clear  that  considerable  uncertainty  surrounds  its 
baseline economic outlook, and that it remained watchful of potential developments that may 
hinder the US economic recovery. In testimony to the Joint Economic Committee of the US 
Congress  on  7  May  2014,  Federal  Reserve  Chair  Janet  Yellen  referred  to  some  specific 
risks, indicating in particular that “one prominent risk is that adverse developments abroad, 
such  as  heightened  geopolitical  tensions  or  an  intensification  of  financial  stresses  in 
emerging market economies, could undermine confidence in the global economic recovery.” 
Therefore,  the  pessimists  among  market  participants  may  err  in  fearing  that  US  policy 
normalization will proceed irrespective of global developments, and in particular, of its effect 
on financial conditions in both the major developed and emerging economies.  
At  the  same  time,  the  global  economic  recovery  remains  highly  uneven,  and  this  has 
translated into a growing policy divergence between the major central banks. In particular, 
the  Eurozone  has  in  recent  quarters  experienced  a  renewed  loss  of  economic  momentum 
and  a  drift  in  inflation  rates  towards  very  low  levels,  which  have  prompted  the  European 
Central  Bank  to  provide  additional  accommodation,  first  in  the  form  of  targeted  long-term 
repo operations, and then via the announcement of a programme to acquire asset-backed 
securities  and  covered  bonds  on  the  central  bank’s  balance-sheet.  The  mix  of  lower 
Eurozone inflation and expectations of additional central bank liquidity appear to have been 
key  in  driving  Eurozone  government  bond  yields  lower  this  year;  and  in  turn,  this  may  be 
another  reason  why  yields  on  major  emerging  bond  markets,  like  South  Africa,  have  also 
trended lower. Provided, as the market consensus expects, that there is no quick reversal of 
current inflation and policy trends in the Eurozone, developments in that region may continue 
to dampen, in the future, the impact of US policy normalisation on flows into, and prices of, 
SA financial assets. 
Whatever the outcome and wherever we may find ourselves next year this time, I believe a 
lot of progress has been made by policy makers around the world, and particularly within the 
G20, where there is greater cooperation and greater awareness and efforts made towards 
understanding the impacts of policy actions across countries, in particular the spill overs and 
feedback loops and therefore how this might influence not only individual countries but also 
the  global  growth  trajectory.  Our  level  of  crisis  preparedness  has  also  been  enhanced 
through various global financial safety nets which have been strengthened since the crisis, 
                                                
1  Between the end of August and end September, the ZAR depreciated from 10.66 to 11.30 against the USD as 
strong  economic  data  from  the  US  resulted  in  the  market  pricing  in  the  possibility  of  a  more  aggressive 
monetary tightening by the Fed. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  not just in terms of the IMF toolkit, but also regional financial safety nets, and more recently, 
the BRICS Treaty on the Contingent Reserve Arrangement, which was signed by the BRICS 
countries at the Fortaleza Summit in July this year. 
We can also be optimistic about the efforts of the G20 to lift global growth and ensure that 
this growth is more balanced and sustainable. As you may know, the G20 is committed to 
developing new measures that aim to lift our collective GDP by more than 2 per cent by 2018 
above the trajectory implied by policies in place at the time of the St Petersburg Summit in 
2013.  We  have  been  working  hard  towards  this  goal  during  2014,  and  have  made  some 
headway in developing growth strategies that talk to this ambition. As indicated in the most 
recent communique in Cairns, preliminary analysis by international organisations such as the 
International Monetary Fund and the OECD indicates that measures committed to thus far by 
G20  countries  will  lift  our  collective  GDP  by  an  additional  1.8  per  cent  through  to  2018, 
including from important positive spill overs. We also continue to focus on the need for global 
rebalancing  and  appropriate  macroeconomic  policies  as  a  means  to  achieve  strong, 
sustainable  and  balanced  growth.  We  trust  that  by  the  time  of  the  Leaders’  Summit  in 
November,  additional  commitments  made  will  lift  this  number  to  2  per  cent.  Structural 
reforms  will  be  important  in  lifting  growth,  reducing  unemployment  and  enhancing  trade. 
These  commitments  will  not  just  end  there,  as  there  will  be  a  process  for  monitoring  and 
ensuring implementation. 
Conclusion 
To  summarise,  it  would  seem  that  South  African  monetary  policy  will  continue  to  face 
conflicting challenges, with respect to both the economic growth and the inflation outlook, in 
the  times  ahead.  A  global  economic  recovery  would  normally  improve  the  domestic 
economic  outlook  and  create  a  more  stable  backdrop  for  domestic  policy  normalization, 
however, it is at risk from the present lack of sustained economic upswing in regions like the 
Eurozone or Japan. Rising US policy rates risk complicating the financing of South Africa’s 
current account and placing pressure on the rand, however, this upside risk to inflation could 
be mitigated by the very consequences of slow growth in some of the world’s major regions, 
mainly the pursuit of stimulative monetary policies. 
These  conflicting  challenges,  and  the  uncertainties  that  surround  them,  call  for  particular 
vigilance on behalf of monetary policy-makers, and for a readiness to adapt one’s monetary 
stance  to  a  changing  macroeconomic  environment.  At  present,  the  Monetary  Policy 
Committee remains of the view that interest rates will have to normalise over time. While the 
balance is delicately poised with regard to the timing of any policy adjustments, and requires 
careful  judgement  to  avoid  pre-mature  action  in  the  wake  of  an  already  weak  economic 
growth  environment,  it  is  similarly  important  that  the  Bank,  in  following  a  forward-looking 
approach to monetary management, does not allow any doubting of its preparedness to act 
when necessary and in keeping with the commitment to its primary objective.  
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
