  Minouche Shafik: Making markets fair and effective 
Speech by Ms Minouche Shafik, Deputy Governor for Markets and Banking of the Bank of 
England, at the London School of Economics, London, 27 October 2014. 
Accompanying figures can be found at the end of the speech. 
 Making markets fair and effective 
It is a real pleasure to be giving my first speech as Deputy Governor of the Bank of England 
at  the  London School  of  Economics  (LSE).  It  resonates  on  so  many  fronts.  The  LSE  has 
produced many members of the Monetary Policy Committee, Deputy Governors and indeed 
Governors of the Bank of England as well as vast numbers of its staff over the years. I was 
taught macroeconomics at the LSE by Charlie Bean, one of my predecessors at the Bank as 
well as by my host this evening, Nick Stern, when I did the MSc in economics. And the topic 
of  my  speech  tonight  resonates  with  the  origins  of  the  LSE  as  an  institution  that  always 
sought to bring the best of academic thinking to the pressing problems of the day. 
As  you  will  no  doubt  realise  by  the  frequency  of  misconduct  stories  in  the  papers,  Fixed 
Income,  Currency  and  Commodity  (or  FICC)  markets  are  certainly  dealing  with  pressing 
problems. The Fair and Effective  Markets Review –  which I am leading along with my co-
chairs, Martin Wheatley from the Financial Conduct Authority and Charles Roxburgh from the 
Treasury – was set up to restore confidence in the operation of these markets. 
We don’t want to do this alone. That is why we have launched a consultation document today 
soliciting the views of anyone with an interest in FICC markets. The consultation is open for 
three months, and we will issue our final recommendations in June. In the meantime we want 
to work closely with: 
• 
Market participants – who have the primary responsibility for putting things right. We 
have enlisted the help of a panel of senior market practitioners to help launch and 
take forward the Review’s final recommendations.  
International  policymakers  and  regulators  –  because  these  markets  are  global  in 
scope, although a significant share of these markets is based in London. 
The  academic  community  –  with  which  we  are  actively  consulting  –  including  the 
audience here tonight.  
The general public - including companies and households, for whom, I will argue, 
these markets matter most of all.  
   In the rest of my speech I would like first to dismiss any notions you may have that Fixed 
Income, Currency and Commodity markets don’t affect your lives. Then I’ll talk about what 
went wrong in these markets and why, including a discussion of some of the markets’ key 
characteristics.  I’ll  then  outline  some  of  the  changes  that  are  already  under  way,  before 
finally asking what more needs to be done and outlining some of the questions our Review 
will be asking.  
Why Fixed Income, Currency and Commodity markets matter 
I want to start on a personal note. I was born in Egypt but left at a very young age when my 
family lost everything as a result of nationalisations under the Nasser government. It was a 
time  when  many  well-intentioned  people  thought  that  the  state  could  do  a  better  job  of 
allocating resources and managing economic activity than the market. That view was proven 
wrong. Perhaps as a result of that experience, I have spent large parts of my professional life 
thinking  about  the  relationship  between  the  state  and  the  market.  The  perspective  I  have 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  reached is that well-functioning markets are the key to prosperity, but that they must operate 
in ways that are fair and effective to sustain public support and confidence.  
By “fair and effective” I mean markets should allow their ultimate end users to invest, fund 
themselves, and transfer risk in a resilient and predictable way, on the basis of competitive 
prices.  They  should  offer  appropriately  open  access  and  transparency.  And  they  should 
operate according to clear standards of market practice and integrity. 
Why  should  you  care  about  Fixed  Income,  Currency  and  Commodity  (or  FICC)  markets? 
Firstly they are huge. Figure 1 gives you a sense of the scale – the global stock of bonds 
were worth about $100 trillion in 2013 – bigger than world GDP. So-called “over the counter” 
derivatives in FICC markets had a market value of around $18 trillion, with foreign exchange 
contracts being the largest (Figure 2). And the turnover in foreign exchange markets is over 
$5  trillion  on  a  typical  day.  That  means  that  the  value  of  trades  in  a  month,  in  this  single 
market,  is  roughly  equal  to  the  value  of  all  output  produced  by  every  worker  in  the  global 
economy in a year.    
These numbers are so big they may make these markets seem somewhat otherworldly to 
the  average  person.  But  in  reality  they  permeate  almost  all  of  our  economic  transactions. 
Fixed  income  (or  bond) markets  matter for  our savings  and  pensions.  They  matter for  the 
public finances and how much tax we have to pay. They affect the interest we pay on our 
debts. Currency and commodity markets affect the prices we pay when we go shopping, and 
the cost of changing money when we go on holiday. FICC markets also affect the ease with 
which employers can raise finance, which in turn affects their very viability, the level of their 
investment, and potentially the structure of our economy. Far from being otherworldly, these 
markets really matter to us all.   
The pall of misconduct in Fixed Income Currency and Commodity markets 
The shadow of the worst financial crisis in living memory has been significantly lengthened 
by  a  series  of  appalling  cases  of  misconduct  in  Fixed  Income,  Currency,  Commodity  and 
other markets. Details of these began to emerge relatively late in the crisis, but they have 
proved  surprisingly  prevalent  and  persistent.  And  they  have further  eroded  the trust  of  the 
general public in financial markets. Public outrage is based on the view that the rewards in 
finance are disproportionate and that the system is rigged. When people read of malpractice 
in  financial  markets,  of  trading  profits  being  claimed  through  manipulation,  collusion  or 
dishonesty, they naturally wonder if they are one of the people who have been wronged.  
In fixed income, employees in firms around the world attempted to manipulate Libor, Euribor 
and other similar measures of short-term borrowing costs in order to benefit themselves or 
some other part of their firm’s business. In the United States and elsewhere, firms structured 
the mortgages or other assets used to back securitised assets, or misrepresented the nature 
of  those  underlying  assets,  in  ways  inconsistent  with  the  interests  of  end  investors. 
Regulators  identified  systematic  attempts  to  mis-value  and  otherwise  engage  in  market 
misconduct  in  relation  to  large  scale  positions  in  credit  default  swaps.  In  commodities 
markets,  traders  were  found  trying  to  manipulate  physical  or  derivative  prices,  including 
those of gold, oil, lead, platinum, palladium and coffee. And investigations of further cases 
and criminal actions, in foreign exchange and other markets, remain ongoing. 
Some of the cases already brought by colleagues at the Financial Conduct Authority have 
resulted  in  the  publication  of  truly  shocking  evidence  about  the  behaviour  by  some 
individuals in these markets. What particularly struck me in reading some of that evidence 
was how casual their attitude appeared to be towards the abuses they perpetrated. In one 
example,  a  trader  mentioned  to  his  manager  that  he  had  asked  a  colleague  to  lower  the 
firm’s  Yen  Libor  submission,  adding  that  “every  little  helps…it’s  like  Tescos.”  Was  the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
manager  concerned?  Not  a  bit  of  it.  “Absolutely,  every  little  helps”,  he  replied.1  Some 
individuals seem to have enjoyed a perverse kind of prestige from their involvement in the 
process. One Libor submitter was told by a grateful trader for whom he had manipulated a 
submission that his “name will be written in golden letters” should he ever write a book on the 
business.2 
As somebody who believes in markets, I find this behaviour outrageous. 
How did this happen? 
How did this happen? Some academics I have spoken to think that part of the answer may 
lie  in  the  field  of  moral  psychology.3  That  view  suggests  that  initial  transgressions  occur 
because many decisions taken by those in financial markets are done by way of automatic, 
fast thinking – “System 1” thinking in the language of Nobel Prize winner Daniel Kahneman4. 
For participants to acknowledge that such actions are questionable would in fact require the 
activation  of  slower,  more  effortful  “System  2”  thinking.  The  initial  transgression  may  be 
small,  but  the  culmination  of  many  small  transgressions  can  result  in  a  set  of  behaviours 
which  would  normally  be  unacceptable  becoming  the  norm,  and  an  undesirable  culture 
becoming ingrained. This is a version of the old proverb that one bad apple spoils the whole 
barrel.  
But the initial argument that it is just the case of “a few bad apples” is no longer credible. 
Instead it seems that there were deep rooted problems in the nature of FICC markets that 
resulted in practices that would be unacceptable elsewhere. As the Archbishop of Canterbury 
put it at a recent panel on ethics and finance at the IMF: “bad business models can corrupt 
good people.” Perhaps there is something also wrong with the barrel? 
The characteristics of the Fixed Income Currency and Commodity markets 
So  what  are  the  distinctive  characteristics  of  FICC  markets,  and  how  might  they  have 
contributed to these problems? 
First and foremost, the FICC markets are notable for their heterogeneity. That reflects a key 
role of many FICC markets in providing bespoke instruments, tailored to meet the needs of 
investors and issuers. For example, while there are just under 2,500 publicly listed equities in 
the UK, there are over 11,000 different UK corporate bonds. In the US the disparity is even 
starker, with more than 36,000 bonds compared with just over 5,000 listed stocks.  
To  facilitate  such  heterogeneity,  many  FICC  markets  have  historically  been  built  around  a 
“market-making”  trading  model,  in  which  participants  trade  bilaterally  with  an  intermediary, 
rather than directly with  other investors. For example, in corporate bond markets a market 
maker will build up an inventory of different corporate bonds when there are net sales from 
end investors, and run it down when there are net purchases.  
An  important  advantage  of  the  market-making  system  is  that,  when  it  works  effectively,  it 
provides investors with continuous two way markets. Government and corporate borrowers 
can generally be confident that they will be able to borrow at a time, in a currency, and for a 
duration that suits them. Similarly, investors can feel confident that they will be able to trade 
smoothly in and out of sometimes large positions without unduly affecting the market price. 
                                                
1   http://www.fca.org.uk/your-fca/documents/final-notices/2014/lloyds-bank-plc-bank-of-scotland-plc.pdf 
2 
3  
4   Daniel Kahneman (2011), Thinking Fast and Slow, Macmillan. 
 http://www.fsa.gov.uk/static/pubs/final/barclays-jun12.pdf 
I am particularly grateful to Nicholas C. Barberis for this exposition. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  The  downside  of  the  heterogeneity  of  many  FICC  assets  is  that  the  market  in  specific 
instruments can sometimes be thin, and hence it may be difficult to gauge what a fair price is. 
Publicly  available  quotes  can  be  based  on  a  limited  number  of  small  transactions,  making 
them more vulnerable to manipulation.  
Another  characteristic  of  FICC  markets  is  that  they  tend  to  be  dominated  by  large 
professional counterparties. This means that most participants can be assumed to be highly 
knowledgeable about the products they trade, and capable of making educated investment 
decisions.  As  a  result  these  markets  have  historically  tended  to  work  primarily  on  the 
principle of caveat emptor – or “buyer beware.”  
In  legal  terms,  caveat  emptor  expresses  the  basic  principle  that  a  buyer  of  property 
purchases it at his or her own risk, and that — unless expressly agreed otherwise with the 
seller  —  there  is  no  guarantee  that  the  value  of  that  property  will  not  fall.  In  such 
circumstances, market participants should invest time and energy in looking after their own 
interests,  voting  with  their  feet  when  they  are  poorly  treated.  Such  market  discipline  has 
historically  always  been  thought  of  as  a  key  bulwark  against  widespread  abuse  in  FICC 
markets. However, caveat emptor has never meant “anything goes”, and certainly does not 
trump the obligation on a firm to act honestly, fairly and professionally.  
Change is happening 
The  structure  of  these  markets  is  already  changing,  and  recent  high  profile  enforcement 
actions have brought sharply renewed focus on conduct issues, particularly where they are 
seen as targeting individuals.  
The  FCA  has  a  “credible  deterrence”  enforcement  strategy,  and  recently  highlighted  its 
intention  to  pursue  a  more  proactive  approach to  wrongdoing  in  wholesale  markets.  Since 
2010 it has issued 15 final notices for misconduct in FICC markets and imposed more than 
£700 million in financial penalties. And it isn’t just the UK: the most high profile enforcement 
cases  to  date,  involving  the  manipulation  of  short-term  interest  rate  benchmarks,  have 
affected every major financial centre, including London, Singapore, Frankfurt and Tokyo, and 
have already resulted in global fines totalling nearly £4bn, by authorities in the United States, 
the United Kingdom and Europe. 
Good  progress  has  also  been  made  on  the  design  and  regulation  of  benchmarks.  In  the 
United  Kingdom,  the  design  and  administration  of  Libor  has  been  overhauled,  and  a  new 
regulatory  regime  was  introduced  in  2013,  following  the  Wheatley  Report.  In  August  this 
year, as its first act, the Fair and Effective Markets Review recommended to HM Treasury 
that this regime should be extended to cover a further seven major UK-based benchmarks: 
SONIA,  RONIA,  the  WM/Reuters  4pm  London  Fix,  ISDAFix,  the  London  Gold  Fixing,  the 
LMBA  Silver  Price  and  the  ICE  Brent  futures  contract.  The  International  Organisation  of 
Securities  Commissions  (IOSCO)  has  introduced  a  new  set  of  standards  for  benchmarks, 
and  the  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB)  has  produced  detailed  reports  on  the  priorities  for 
further reform of interest rate and foreign exchange benchmarks. 
A number of broader regulatory, market and firm level initiatives are also under way in this 
area. The second Markets in Financial Instruments Directive (MiFID 2) is expected to have a 
major  impact  on  the  structure  of  FICC  markets  across  Europe,  with  new  transparency 
measures expected to transform the way that they function. And the European Market Abuse 
Regulation  (MAR)  will  greatly  extend  the  coverage  of  market  abuse  provisions  over  FICC 
markets. Internationally, the programme of derivatives reform led by the G20 will see large 
sections  of  the  derivatives  market  moved  onto  organised  venues  for  the  first  time.  And 
foreign  exchange  committees  have  committed  to  developing  a  set  of  global  high-level 
principles on FX trading.  
Closer to home, there have also been a number of initiatives aimed at improving culture and 
behaviour  at  a  firm  and  individual  level,  including  the  UK  Parliamentary  Commission  on 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Banking Standards, the Banking Standards Review Council (BSRC), and widespread efforts 
by individual firms to strengthen internal controls. The introduction of malus, bonus clawback 
and the Senior Managers and Certification regime in the UK will strengthen accountability as 
well.  
Is it enough? 
This range of initiatives should make markets more fair and effective. But we need to make 
sure that taken together they add up to a comprehensive solution to fix the barrel and to get 
rid of the bad apples.  
A  primary  aim  of  our  Review  is  to  take  stock,  and  ask  whether  the  extent  of  regulatory, 
organisational  and  technological  change  since  the  crisis  will  be  sufficient  to  ensure  FICC 
markets are fair and effective in the future. Over the next three months, we want to hear from 
those  directly  active  in  those  markets,  from  the  companies  and  households  who  rely  on 
them, from academics, and from public authorities globally. 
Our approach will be explicitly forward looking. And we have no hidden agenda. Where we 
judge changes that are already under way to regulation, firm-level controls, market structure 
and technology are sufficient to restore fairness and effectiveness, we will say so. Where we 
do not, we will make recommendations on the most important priorities for change. 
A  defining  characteristic  of  our  Review  is  a  recognition  that  improving  fairness  and 
effectiveness is a shared responsibility between individuals, firms, the market as a whole and 
the  public  authorities.  As  I  said  at  the  outset,  we  believe  that  markets  –  when  they  work 
properly – are the best source of dynamism, prosperity and progress. So I expect that a key 
part of the Review’s final recommendations will consist of firm- and market-led initiatives.  
With  that  in  mind,  we  will  draw  on  input  from  an  independent  panel  of  senior  market 
practitioners, chaired by Elizabeth Corley of Allianz Global Investors, and bringing together 
senior  representatives  of  internationally  active  market  participants  and  investors,  market 
infrastructure  providers,  major  corporate  users  of  financial  markets,  and  independent 
members. The final recommendations of the Review will be made by me and my co-chairs 
with the support of the excellent team we have assembled. But we hope the Panel will help 
launch  and  take  forward  those  parts  of  the  final  recommendations  requiring  active  market 
ownership.  
Where  firm-led  solutions  are  not  enough  to  improve  fairness  and  effectiveness,  targeted 
interventions by the authorities will also be part of the Review’s toolkit.  
Where might the solutions lie? 
The scope of our consultation is potentially huge. So I want to say a few words about how we 
will  give  focus  to  our  work,  and  to  give  a  sense  of  the  questions  we  are  asking  in  our 
consultation document.  
The framework we will be using is shown in Figure 3. It divides up areas where the fairness 
and effectiveness of FICC markets may be deficient into six categories. Three of these relate 
to the structure of those markets: so-called market microstructure; competition and market 
discipline; and benchmarks. And three relate to conduct: standards of market practice; firm-
level responsibilities, governance and incentives; and surveillance and penalties. Let me say 
a little more about each in turn. 
Microstructure 
1.  
The first category relates to the microstructure of FICC markets – covering such things as 
the  arrangements  for  trading,  price  transparency,  market  access  and  the  range  of  asset 
types. As I noted earlier, many of the products in these markets are tailored to the specific 
needs of individual borrowers or investors. Although that may be good news for them, it does 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  mean  that  quite  a  number  of  FICC  markets  are  relatively  thin  and  lack  widespread 
transparency and are hence intrinsically more vulnerable to manipulation. So there may be a 
tradeoff between the benefits of customisation, and the costs in terms of weaker liquidity and 
potentially greater vulnerability to abuse.  
Regulatory  and  technological  change  is  already  leading  to  greater  standardisation  and 
transparency across many FICC markets. In the consultation document, we ask whether that 
process should go further, whether through industry-led standardisation, removing barriers to 
entry for new electronic trading platforms or utilities, or further transparency enhancements to 
practices such as new issue allocation. Or could imposing standardisation or transparency 
standards in excess of those already in place harm, rather than enhance, market functioning 
and risk transfer? Do practices such as ‘internalisation’ – where banks match off client orders 
internally – pose any challenges?  
Competition and market discipline 
2.  
The  second  structural  category  is  competition  and  market  discipline.  Concentration  in 
some FICC markets is relatively high both amongst intermediaries and amongst the major 
asset  managers,  and  has  risen  further  since  the  financial  crisis.  For  example,  the  top  six 
dealers account for over 60% of the UK interdealer FX market. In some cases, firms have 
also engaged in horizontal or vertical integration – raising potential conflicts of interest and 
concerns  about  information  asymmetries.  A  number  of  recent  misconduct  cases  have 
involved attempted collusion, abuse of market power or inadequate management or control 
of  conflicts.  The  ability  of  FICC  market  participants  to  exercise  market  discipline  against 
those engaging in misconduct may also have diminished somewhat in recent years.  
At the same time, the market maker system has delivered important benefits, including tight 
pricing  and  deep  and  near-continuous  liquidity  in  a  wide  range  of  market  conditions.  That 
model is now changing, as increased risk aversion and regulatory reforms designed to return 
the cost of liquidity and capital to more sustainable levels favour more agency-based trading 
models.  The  potential  diminution  of  liquidity  in  some  FICC  markets  has  been  raised  as  a 
concern by many investors and end-users.  
This is therefore a finely balanced issue for us to explore. How are competitive conditions 
likely to change, and what lessons can be learned from other markets, both in the financial 
sector  and  more  widely?  What  could  be  done  to  strengthen  market  discipline?  Is  there 
sufficient  awareness  of  the  scope  and  nature  of  the  authorities’  competition  powers?  And 
how best can conflicts of interest intrinsic to specific trading models be managed? 
Benchmarks 
3.  
The third category is benchmarks. There has already been substantial reform in this area, 
as  I  have  mentioned,  and  more  is  on  its  way.  The  question  we  ask  in  the  consultation 
document is whether this goes far enough. Could steps be taken to reduce or diversify the 
reliance  of  asset  managers  and  other  investors  on  benchmarks?  Are  there  additional 
changes  that  could  be  made  to  improve  their  design,  construction  and  governance? What 
further measures are required to ensure full compliance with IOSCO’s standards for better 
benchmarks?  And  how  can  the  regulatory  framework  provide  protections  to  market 
participants in other jurisdictions in a proportionate way? 
We  then  turn  to  the  three  conduct  categories.  As  I  mentioned  at  the  outset,  every  act  of 
misconduct starts with an individual’s decision – and that individual should be accountable 
for that decision. But that decision is also heavily shaped by the environment or “the barrel” 
that  individual  works  in  –  by  the  standards  or  norms  established  by  regulation,  market 
practice  and  firm-level  expectations;  by  the  extent  to  which  responsibilities  are  clearly 
allocated and governed; by the incentives that an individual is given, financial or otherwise; 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  by  the  perceived  probability  of  being  caught;  and  by  the  expected  penalty  if  he  or  she  is 
caught. The recent speeches by Bill Dudley5 and Dan Tarullo6 of the US Federal Reserve at 
a workshop on reforming culture and behaviour in the financial services industry set these 
issues out very nicely. 
Standards of market practice 
4.  
We start with standards or norms of market practice. On one view, the existing regulatory 
provisions and voluntary codes – and there are many of the latter – provide a sufficient guide 
to expectations of market practice. If that is the case, the main priority should be enforcement 
actions  against  those  who  are  in  breach,  and  a  parallel  process  of  ensuring  that  all  FICC 
market participants understand the implications of those provisions. The Review explores a 
number of ideas for deepening that education process and encouraging more of Kahneman’s 
“System 2” type thinking.  
A further question  is  whether there  is  a  need  to  supplement  existing rules  and  codes  with 
more specific market-wide guidance or rules on acceptable market practice on a global basis 
for  global  markets.  The  regulatory  perimeter  is  being  extended  in  Europe,  and  codes 
covering 
foreign  exchange  markets  are  being  updated.  Market  participants  have 
nevertheless identified a range of market practices to the Review where they believe further 
guidance would be helpful.  
Put  another  way,  is  there  more  that  we  need  to  do  to  embed  acceptable  behaviours  into 
participants’ rapid reaction “System 1” responses to situations of conflict? How can codes of 
conduct be given real ‘teeth’, whilst also remaining consistent with the many different national 
regulatory regimes and voluntary codes already in place? How can it be customised to the 
individual conditions in specific markets? How can it be couched in language that traders can 
immediately understand? And could it be owned by the industry – or does it ultimately need 
to be embedded in regulation, if necessary through an extension of the regulatory perimeter? 
Responsibility, governance and incentives 
5.  
The penultimate category in the table looks at how firms can ensure that standards, once set, 
are  adhered  to  –  through  appropriate  internal  responsibility,  governance  and  incentive 
mechanisms. It is clear that, in the run-up to the crisis, some firms active in FICC markets 
had allowed the culture on their trading floors to get out of control, combining weak controls 
with incentives focused heavily on short-term revenue performance. In such structures, focus 
on maintaining a firm’s reputation – normally a bulwark against misconduct – became heavily 
diluted, with some traders feeling greater loyalty to their desk or peers in the market than to 
their firm.  
A lot has happened in this field since the crisis. The better alignment of incentives has been 
a  key  plank  of  the  reform  agenda.  In  the  UK,  we  are  looking  to  introduce  strong  new 
accountability  measures  through  the  proposed  Senior  Managers  and  Certification  regime, 
and new powers to defer payment of bonuses, or where necessary even claw them back. 
Several banks have already moved to withhold bonuses or cut bonus pools as the result of 
recent  misconduct  cases  affecting  their  firms.  Such  moves  make  it  more  likely  that 
individuals will ultimately face the long-term consequences of their choices. 
But looking more broadly, the risk is that, as memories of recent enforcement cases fade, 
bad practices may re-emerge. Some say that may already be happening. We want to ask 
what more can be done to hardwire sounder approaches, including improved measures for 
appraising  performance,  promotion  and  advancement  of  individuals;  better  safeguards 
                                                
5   http://www.newyorkfed.org/newsevents/speeches/2014/dud141020a.html 
6   http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/tarullo20141020a.htm 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  against inappropriate staff moves; ways to strengthen the role of boards in the governance of 
FICC activities; and ways to strengthen the role of front line managers, the so-called first line 
of defence. 
Surveillance and penalties 
6.  
However successful we may be in introducing stronger standards, and incentivising people to 
follow  them,  attempted  misconduct  will  still  occur.  So  the  Review  also  wants  to  consider 
whether  more  needs  to  be  done  to  monitor  for,  and  where  it  is  found  punish, 
misconduct.  Firms  should  be  at  the  frontline  of  these  efforts.  Underdeveloped  monitoring 
systems and poor procedures for dealing with internal misconduct undoubtedly played a role 
in  recent  years.  Though  approaches  to  these  issues  have  since  improved,  the  Review  is 
keen to identify examples of best practice, and  ways in  which the authorities can catalyse 
further progress. Questions we raise include the scope for stronger firm-level whistleblowing 
regimes,  the  role  for  electronic  surveillance  tools,  penalties  imposed  by  firms  for  staff 
breaching  internal  guidelines  (and  ways  to  publicise  such  cases),  and  the  extent  to  which 
firms  can  punish  poor  behaviour  by  other  firms  by  shifting  business  and  reporting  such 
behaviour to the authorities.  
Conclusion 
Let me come to a conclusion.  
We  are  slowly  emerging  from the  worst  economic  crisis  in  living  memory.  Much  has  been 
done to strengthen the financial system since then: banks hold much more capital, they have 
more effective liquidity support, major progress has been made on ending Too Big To Fail on 
the global stage, and in the UK we have transformed the way that we regulate banks and 
how we set policy to deliver financial stability.  
But  some  of  the  benefits  of  these  advances  are  being  offset  by  a  long  tail  of  outrageous 
conduct cases. These are like salt rubbed into the wounds to public confidence in financial 
markets. This is in no one's interest. Many leaders in the financial industry and the majority of 
those who work in these markets are ashamed of this bad behaviour and want to find a way 
to put it comprehensively behind them. The fines alone have been sufficiently large to require 
substantial reshaping of firms’ businesses.  
I am confident we can find a way forward. I recall the story of when the Queen visited the 
LSE in November 2008 and asked the gathered assembly of eminent economists why had 
nobody noticed that a crisis was on its way? The reply came in the form of a letter from the 
British  Academy7.  Their  bottom  line  was  that  the  crisis  was  caused  by  “a  failure  of  the 
collective  imagination  of  many  bright  people,  both  in  this  country  and  internationally  to 
understand the risks to the system as a whole.” This is a moment when we need collective 
imagination – to imagine financial markets that are fair and effective and work in the interests 
of all of us.  
 
                                                 
7   http://www.britac.ac.uk/templates/asset-relay.cfm?frmAssetFileID=8285 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Figure 1: Global financial assets 
Corporate bonds
Financial companies' bonds
Government bonds
Nominal world GDP
US$ trillions
2000
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
 Figure 2: Market value of FICC derivatives contracts 
   120
100
80
60
40
20
0
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
 Figure 3: The Review Framework 
   10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
