Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Nurturing excellence in finance education 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central  bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  16th  Inter-Collegiate  Finance  Competition  of  the 
Financial Executives Institute of the Philippines, Manila, 20 October 2014. 
 Good afternoon everyone and congratulations to all the students and mentors who are part 
of the FINEX-JP Morgan Chase 16th Inter-Collegiate Finance Competition or ICFC. 
I learned that 100 teams from finance schools across the country competed to join the 20 
finalists this year. This year therefore had the highest school participation in ICFC’s 16-year 
history. 
That you made it here today tells us that the hours, weeks and months you have dedicated in 
preparation for this event have been time well spent. You stepped up the plate and accepted 
the challenge of being part of a team under the guidance of your mentor to represent your 
school and your locality. Your school, your parents and your friends must be proud of you. 
Well done! 
I am also happy to note there is fair geographical representation at ICFC: Mindanao has four 
teams in the finals; Visayas has three; NCR has five; and the rest of Luzon has eight. Indeed, 
we can say circles of excellence for finance education can be found across our country. 
I am also glad that ICFC maintains its cross-border linkages – the University of Guam is part 
of  today’s  competition.  This  is  one  way  of  preparing  our  students  to  develop  a  global 
perspective. 
Indeed, with ASEAN economic integration just around the corner, it is a must to develop not 
only  a  national  but  also  a  regional  and  global  mindset.  With  economic  integration,  market 
opportunities  expand  beyond  Philippine  borders  and  our  100  million  population  to  the 
10-nation  ASEAN  with  a  combined  population  of  over  600  million.  The  ability  to  transform 
these opportunities into reality  will go to those who are best prepared to meet competitive 
challenges. 
In this context, our finalists are already on the right track. I am positive you will succeed as 
professionals if you will continue to nurture the discipline, the drive to excel, the strong team 
spirit, the mental toughness, and grace under pressure that have brought you here. Indeed, 
many of the world’s greatest achievers could not have reached their level of success without 
learning how to stay calm under pressure and to sustain a particular psychological readiness 
and mental preparedness when the need arises. 
Equally important, it is necessary that you become exemplars of integrity and fairness. 
As  a  wise  man  once  said,  it  is  the  convergence  of  knowledge  and  proper  values  that 
improve the lives of many. 
Ladies and gentlemen, all of us know the importance of keeping the financial system in the 
pink of health since it affects the economy and the lives of the people as well. To give you an 
idea of the magnitudes involved, data as of June 2014 reveal that consolidated deposits in 
the banking system reached a record high of P7.9 trillion, as confidence in our banks remain 
strong. It is essential therefore to ensure that the people responsible for running the finances, 
whether of a single institution or the financial system as whole, meet the high standards of 
their job. 
In  the  Philippines,  development  policies  and  programs  have  led  to  over  15  years  of 
uninterrupted  economic  growth;  this  has  improved  the  lives  of  many  Filipinos.  However, 
we have to exert more effort as today, one out of four or over 20 million Filipinos still live 
in poverty. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
1 
This  is  the  reason  why  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  is  implementing  a  nationwide 
economic  and  financial  learning  program  that  provides  lessons  on  saving,  investing,  and 
money  management  for  students,  for  overseas  Filipinos  and  their  dependents,  for 
entrepreneurial  individuals  who  venture  into  microfinance,  and for  our  small-  and  medium-
scale entrepreneurs who are looking for credit to finance their business. We aim to provide 
an  equal  chance  for  our  people  to  gain  access  to  the  empowering  effects  of  financial 
education. 
When  empowered,  a  knowledgeable  citizenry  effectively  contributes  to  the  productive 
activities  that  drive  economic  growth  and  development.  Our  strategy  is  to  develop  an 
inclusive financial system that promotes inclusive growth. 
In this connection, the continuing program of FINEX to raise the quality of finance education 
across  the  country  through  its  mentoring  program  and  through  ICFC  are  steps  in  this 
direction. This is capacity building in different areas in our country for people who will man 
our financial system in the future. 
Indeed, we need highly capable financial people all over the country to manage banks and 
financial institutions that keep our economy growing. This is the reason why the BSP- FINEX 
partnership  endures.  In  fact,  this  is  the  seventh  year  that  ICFC  is  being  held  here  at  the 
Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas. 
I also acknowledge all the schools, teachers, students and parents who give importance to 
the  ICFC  through  their  active  and  dedicated  participation.  For  instance,  I  learned  that  not 
even typhoon Mario stopped the elimination rounds for the best finance teams. 
Equally  important,  we  value  the  agreement  of  the  schools  and  FINEX  to  include  ethical 
practices  and  social  responsibility  in  the  education  of  our  finance  students.  I  highlight  this 
point because the natural pursuit of fostering a healthy bottom line should always be within 
the parameters of ethical and social responsibility standards. 
At work, market practitioners, leaders of banks and financial institutions have the power and 
the  responsibility  to  strengthen  the  value  of  good  governance  among  their  employees  by 
walking their talk. For institutions to be able to stay in their respective businesses for the long 
haul  –  whether  they  are  private  or  government,  three  attributes  are  indispensable: 
excellence, integrity and good corporate governance. 
Indeed, excellence, integrity and good values should constantly be a part of our life wherever 
we are, whether we are at home, in school, or at work.  
Again, to the finalists in this 16th ICFC, I salute you for being the best that you can be. While 
prizes  go  to  those  who  top  this  competition,  in  my  book,  you  are  all  winners.  Serve  our 
country  and  our  people  well  by  developing  into  world-class  leaders  who  are  ethical  and 
socially-responsible. 
I also thank the organizers from FINEX, JPMorgan Chase and the other partners for making 
finance education and this annual ICFC a truly exciting event for our schools and students 
across the country. 
This event reminds me of what the late American President John F. Kennedy once said, and 
I quote: “Let us think of education as the means of developing our greatest abilities, because 
in each of us there is a private hope and dream, which, fulfilled, can be translated into benefit 
for everyone and greater strength for our nation.” 
Ladies and gentlemen, it is in this spirit that I ask that we continue to work together to nurture 
excellence in finance education.  
Hanggang  sa  muli!  Mabuhay  ang  ating  mahal  na  bansang  Pilipinas!  Mabuhay  po  tayong 
lahat! 
2 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
